THE DOCTRINES OF THE CHURCH; OR, METHODISM DISPLAYED, AND ENTHUSIASM DETECTED.

Recommended particularly to the Consideration of the MEMBERS of the PROTESTANT
EPISCOPAL CHURCH IN THE CITY OF NEW YORK.

BY A MEMBER.

NEW YORK: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR.

-- 1793. --

TO THE READER.
AN apology for the appearance of these sheets at the present period, may be
considered as needless by some, whilst others view them as an intrusion on the
public, and declare them ill-timed and unnecessary; but, to one who has the
real good and prosperity of the Church at heart, their appearance at this time
is deemed indispensibly requisite, when it is undeniably true, that "by far the
greater part of those who enter into the ministry, do not preach agreeably to
the articles which they have subscribed;" perhaps without knowing or duly
considering what are the doctrines of our excellent Church.

AND another inducement may be particularised, which arises from observation,
that many well-meaning persons, through want of instruction in these doctrines,
mistake the form of Godliness for Religion, and the works of the Law for the
Gospel of Christ, and stumble at the only way of life and salvation, to their
own misfortune, and the injury of Christianity.

IF inadvertency, or the proportionably less acquaintance which a layman may
naturally be supposed to have to those who minister in holy things, should
occasion a mistake, I plead it as my excuse: yet, if any thing material should
appear (which I do not expect) in opposition to the doctrines of our Church
herein declared, I shall unquestionably think it my duty to reply.

THE cause of Truth, and its candid, open abettors, have brought forward this
public testimony of attachment to the Church; and it is presented as a tribute
of good will toward all who profess themselves members of the same, in their
best and most important interests.

New York, Feb. 28, 1793.
THE DOCTRINES of the CHURCH, etc.
CHRISTIANITY is a pure, perfect, rational, consistent system; it is a
revelation worthy of the God of Truth and Wisdom to dispense; its doctrines
have a direct tendency to moralize the powers and faculties, and to ennoble and
dignify the human nature; it sets its true professors free from ridiculous
absurdities and enthusiastic delusions; for its divine Author taught no
doctrines, enjoined no precepts, but such as will bear the strictest scrutiny,
and must be owned, by every truly wise and judicious person, to be well adapted
and nicely calculated, at once to display the power and mercy of God, as well
as to enrich, consolate and make happy the mind of every true Christian.

But how an institution, thus wisely designed, ordered and established, should
be so greatly mistaken, so unhappily perverted, and so grossly misrepresented
at this day, is no less surprising than true; and therefore how much to be
deplored and lamented! But why is this? How must we account for the many
delusive tenets and destructive errors, which are industriously propagated by a
set of modern teachers, and readily embraced by so many professors of
Christianity? How! why, as the Papists mistakingly assert ignorance to be the
mother of devotion, we may truly say, ignorance is the parent of error, folly
and delusion. But to what kind of ignorance may we ascribe the mistakes of the
teachers, and the folly of the people in being thus deceived? Doubtless to an
ignorance of the word of God, the Holy Scriptures, which are the only sure
guide, the best standard, and the most certain criterion, whereby to discern
truth from falsehood, right from wrong; but through neglect of searching those
sacred pages, the poor people easily become a prey to every ignorant
enthusiastic preacher who comes in their way. Hence we see such a plentiful
production of novel doctrines, and such an abundant fruitfulness of extravagant
follies and destructive errors, which are so prevalent among us.

Men, brethren and fathers, see ye not what an inundation of error and
delusion has broken in upon us? Observe ye not the overflowings of immorality
and vice, which, like a torrent, is overspreading our land? Can ye be
unconcerned, when the dreadful effects, and baneful consequences are so visible
and evident? Alas! Virtue reclines her fainting head; Christianity has lost its
powerful influence upon its professors; and therefore the practice of morality
and good works is so much neglected, so little attended to. Surely it is too
plain to be denied, the true principles of the Gospel are forsaken. O ye
ministers! ye professed teachers and instructors of mankind! will ye not
attempt to stem the rapid torrent, which threatens to carry all before it?
There is no way left, but to retreat to the primitive doctrines of the Gospel,
the established principles of the Reformation. These, constantly insisted on
and powerfully inculcated, will, nay, these only can be attended with the happy
effects of reclaiming the people from error, rectifying their principles, and
effectually producing christian practices. As for you, my brethren, professors
of the same Gospel, let me entreat and conjure you, if you would be true
protestants, against the fallacy and deceit of the Church of Rome, as you would
desire to be proof against all doctrines of novelty, all erroneous principles,
all dangerous and delusive tenets; would you perceive and detect, so as to
beware of deceiving teachers, false prophets, hypocritical and pretended
ministers: in one word, are ye solicitous to come to the knowledge of the truth
as it is in Jesus, that ye may be saved? SEARCH THE SCRIPTURES; make this your
constant practice; for be assured, ye are in the utmost danger of being misled
and deceived, never more so than at present. On the one hand, by the proud,
self-presuming, God-resisting infidel; on the other, by the credulous,
unscriptural, unmeaning enthusiast. While the former is an open enemy to the
doctrines of the Gospel, totally rejects every article of the christian faith,
acts as far wide from the moralizing precepts of the Gospel, as from humility;
the latter, the enthusiast, deceives himself and others by his mere pretenses
to inspiration; professes to have received the gift of the Spirit, but gives no
evidences to ascertain the truth of it; makes solemn declarations of being
inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost to preach to you, and only pretends to pray to
God for spiritual operations, influences, and impressions; when after all, it
is plain to the eye of discerning reason, he means nothing but to make gain of
his pretensions to Godliness; for, contrary to his most solemn pretensions and
professions, he utterly denies any true, real, inward motive, operation, and
influence of the Spirit: and hence do such ministers bewilder, perplex, and
delude the ignorant and unwary, by teaching unsound, unscriptural doctrine.

Take heed to yourselves. Beware of such pretended teachers, for you are liable
to be led by such into a maze of antichristian errors, and a wilderness of
unscriptural perplexities; so that your danger, through their means, may not
easily be escaped, nor ever rectified. It is not a trifling affair I am now
addressing you about, but it is of the utmost concern, and of the greatest
importance: no less than your immortal souls are at stake -- nothing less than
an eternity depends upon your being wise unto salvation. For your sakes, and
from a regard to your safety, suffer me here to lay before you the truly
scriptural orthodox articles of the established Church of England, which, as
they are a kind of epitome, or abridgement of the Gospel, I shall select such
of them as may best serve our present purpose; namely, to try and examine
doctrines and teachers by, to detect error and discover truth. By these let us
determine our assent to, or dissent from such doctrines as are proposed to us,
and I am verily persuaded we shall escape error, avoid delusion, and be freed
from mistakes.

Perhaps a fond attachment to our excellent articles of the Church of England,
may influence me rather to fix on this form of sound words than any other of
human composition. Be it so; I am (I think) herein justified, forasmuch as
these articles are supported by, and built upon the Holy Scriptures: therefore
I am unconcerned what our modern teachers, and new-pretended divines think or
say of me; if they dislike, and are ashamed of our articles, I am not: for all
our Christian Bishops, (God bless them!) and all our Church Parsons, (Lord have
mercy on them!) they all own, or have owned them, and subscribed to them; yes,
and sworn to them also; and they are printed in our Common Prayer Books too;
They are omitted in the last American edition. A commencement, the result of
which I fear.
and for what use think ye but that we should read them, know them, be
instructed in them, and always abide by them? God grant, brethren, that we
may! for if we have any knowledge and experience of the great truths they
contain, vain will be all the artful attempts, subtle designs, and nefarious
stratagems of men destitute of the truth, to mislead, pervert, or delude us.

I shall now lay the articles before you -- make some strictures upon them, and
draw some applications from them as I go along. God give us a right judgment.
We begin with the doctrine of Original or Birth Sin, Art. IX.

Original sin stands not in the following of Adam, (as the Pelagians do
vainly talk) but it is the fault and corruption of the nature of every man,
that is gendered of the offspring of Adam, whereby man is far gone from
original righteousness, and is of his own nature inclined to evil.

This the Pelagians of old denied, and this the modern Pelagians, who pretend
to great knowledge, while ignorant of themselves, and strangers to the
corruption and depravity of their own hearts, disown. Though, at the same time,
they are standing monuments of the truth of this doctrine, and whether they
believe and confess it, or not, their outward actions plainly evince the
inhering power of original sin; their not seeing, not knowing, and not feeling
it, is one of the strongest proofs of their being under original blindness and
insensibility. And yet, many such as these truly set up for guides and teachers
of others. Know them, brethren; discern them you may, you ought; and such, for
your soul's sake avoid. Attend not to their sweet siren songs, lest you are
thereby lulled asleep upon the waves of destruction. Take these marks with you.
Judge of their doctrines by them: for our articles plainly declare the
miserable state and condition of every man that is born into the world; first,
in the loss of original righteousness, or the image of God; and secondly, as
possessed with a contrary image; therefore is he of his own nature inclined to
evil. Here behold the true picture of the so much boasted dignity of human
nature! Thus is man pointed out by the article; thus is man described by the
oracles of truth; and to this melancholy account does every Christian
subscribe, and every natural, unregenerate man's actions fully demonstrate.
Aye, but, say our new doctors and modern teachers, this is too dark a shade,
too sable a dress, too degrading to human nature; and therefore they tickle the
ears, please the pride, and flatter the vanity of men, with their unedifying,
unscriptural harangues, and false encomiums on the moral rectitude, virtue, and
dignity of man. But, brethren, would ye not avoid an unskilful quack in
surgery, who, instead of searching and probing a wound in order to procure the
soundness and health of the body, should slightly heal and skin over the parts
aggrieved, while putrefaction and rottenness are at the bottom, whereby the
life of the patient is destroyed? Quacks in divinity are much more to be
dreaded, inasmuch as the life of the soul is of infinitely more value than that
of the body. I have heard our true, staunch church ministers distinguish these
flatterers of human nature by the appellations of merit-mongers, velvet-mouthed
preachers, etc. Significant indeed! St. Paul describes such, as those who serve
not the Lord Jesus, but their own bellies, and with fine words and fair
speeches deceive the hearts of the simple: for as they don't preach agreeable
to the articles, so neither do they use scripture language, nor apostolic
diction, in their compositions. -- Our article next declares --

Therefore in every person born into the world, it deserves God's wrath and
damnation.

What a terrible harsh phrase is here? God's wrath and damnation! Ah, say our
newfangled teachers, our modern divines, we are not so uncharitable as to
suppose any person in the world deserving of God's wrath and damnation. -- What
a strange, unpolite, uncouth set of men were the compilers of these articles!

Say you so! pray let me observe, that however fashionable this doctrine may be
thought by some, however obsolete and harsh the expressions may seem to others
of our airy, fashionable preachers, truth it is; it is the doctrine of
scripture, and those venerable compilers spoke as the oracles of God. And is it
not better, far better, for sinners to hear and be made sensible of their
danger, and deserving of God's wrath and damnation, so as to escape it now by
flying to Jesus, the only refuge for sinners, than to be blinded by flattering
deceivers, till they fall a sacrifice to God's wrath and damnation in a
dreadful eternity hereafter? This you must assent to -- this you will not deny.

But our article further declares, "this infection of nature does remain, yea,
in them that are regenerated." Regenerated! how? By infant baptism only? No --
The regenerate do not rest on the outward and visible sign, but are made
partakers of the inward and spiritual grace also. By the quickening and
purifying operations of the Holy Spirit, a principle of spiritual life is
implanted in them; (and take this by the way, without experiencing this, infant
baptism will not, cannot profit any person to salvation: What says the good
Bishop Latimer on this subject? -- "EXCEPT A MAN BE BORN AGAIN" FROM ABOVE, "HE
CANNOT SEE THE KINGDOM OF GOD. He must have a regeneration. And what is this
regeneration? It is not to be christened in water, as THESE [i. e. the PAPISTS]
would have it. How is it to be expounded then? St. Peter shows, that one
place of scripture declares another. St. Peter says, AND WE BE BORN AGAIN.
How? NOT BY MORTAL SEED, BUT BY IMMORTAL. What is this immortal seed? BY THE
WORD OF THE LIVING GOD: by the word of God preached and opened. Thus comes in
our new birth -- This is a great commendation of this office of preaching. It
is God's instrument, whereby he works faith in our hearts."
) so that such, and such only, are sensible of the different lustings of the
flesh and of the Spirit; and though there is no condemnation to them that are
in Christ Jesus, united to him by a faith of divine operation, and are
sanctified by his Holy Spirit, "yet concupiscence and lust, says the article,
(that is, the inward desires and inclinations of the flesh) has the nature of
sin." Therefore all true believers are said to rejoice in Christ Jesus, and
have no confidence in the flesh. Phil. iii. 3.

But alas! in these days too many think, if the outward actions are somewhat
decent, moral and regular, there needs no thought or concern about inward
depravity and heart-wickedness. But what amazing horror and dread will seize on
such, when a heart-searching God shall discover before angels and men, the
hypocrisy, deceitfulness, and desperate wickedness of the heart, and to the
speechless condemnation of all miserable daubers and soul-deceivers! they will
then find the filthy rags of their own righteousness insufficient to screen
them from the wrath of the Lord, and they shall be forced to own (when too
late) that their inward parts were very wickedness, and therefore that they
stood in need of the righteousness of Christ to justify them, and the power of
his spirit to renew them in the spirit of their minds.

As the former article shows the wretchedness and sinfulness of our estate by
nature, the next (10) asserts the helplessness and insufficiency of our
condition.

The condition of man since the fall of Adam is such, that he cannot turn and
prepare himself by his own natural strength and good works, to faith and
calling upon God. Wherefore we have no power to do good works pleasant and
acceptable to God, without the grace of God by Christ preventing us, that we
may have a good will, and working with us when we have that good will.

Deceivers will come, says the scripture; we believe it, says our Church, and
therefore we establish articles at once to settle the judgment of our members,
and to guard them from erroneous novelty. And are not these deceivers already
come? Is not their name Legion? Do not ARMINIAN teachers swarm among us, who
tell us, that man has free will and power to turn and prepare himself, and to
do good works, as a condition to entitle himself to the merits of Christ, and
to recommend himself to the favor of God? Are not these the favorite
doctrines of this day? Don't we constantly hear such unscriptural,
antichristian tenets daily advanced, both from the pulpit, and the press?

Ask that reverend gentleman in BLACK, Sir, What must I do to be saved? And you
will find his answer as novel and as modish as the fashion of his clothes. He
is too polite to dictate the old scriptural answer, believe on the Lord Jesus,
but practice morality, and do good works, and you are safe. -- And, was you to
reply in the words of the article of our Church, Sir, I have no power to do
good works, pleasant and acceptable to God, without the grace of God by Christ
-- Don't teaze me, (would very probably be the reply) don't tire me with your
methodistical rant, and enthusiastical nonsense. -- Man's power, natural
ability, and free will, are his favorite themes, instead of free grace,
supernatural power, divine and spiritual assistance. Lord have mercy on the
sheep that are under the care of such a shepherd! Now, whatever honor and
respect is due to the ministers of Christ, how much soever we are to esteem
such highly in love for their works sake; yet our Savior points out to us, and
cautions us against blind guides and false teachers. To the law and to the
testimony then -- And if ministers speak not according to the sacred oracles of
truth, we may fairly conclude they have no light in them. Therefore it is our
greatest wisdom, to reject their doctrines as unscriptural and erroneous.

But, brethren, let me plainly and briefly apply myself to you on the two
foregoing articles. Do ye know yourselves? Are ye sensible of your real estate?
Are ye made acquainted with your true condition? Do ye know and feel your
misery and want as sinners? Are ye made sensible of your own weakness and
insufficiency to turn and prepare yourselves? Do you see your inclination and
proneness to all evil and sin, and your aversion and disaffection to all
holiness and godliness, and consequent need of a better righteousness than your
own to justify you in the sight of God? If you do not, have not thus seen
yourselves stripped of all good, and full of all evil, deserving God's wrath and
damnation, it is plain you are blind even unto this day; and further, have
never prayed in all your life. Nay, don't start; it is plain truth; you cannot,
you dare not deny it before God, and your own conscience; for prayer is a
breathing out the desires of the soul before God, under a sense of distress,
and the want of mercy, and an humble dependence on God for relief and redress.
But how could you pray to be delivered from sin, evil, and danger, when you
never saw it, never felt it, and was never sensible of it, and consequently
could have no desires to be delivered from it?

But you say you have gone to church, and prayed. That you have gone to church,
and repeated the solemn words of our excellent liturgy, is not denied; but even
then and there you offered the sacrifice of fools, and solemnly mocked God,
while you pretended to address and worship him; else how could you dare to tell
God you was a miserable sinner, desire him to have mercy upon you, tell him
there is no health in you, that you are tied and bound with the chain of your
sins, and that the remembrance of your sins is grievous unto you, and the
burden is intolerable, while you neither feel nor experience such a state?
Surely the most dreadful hypocrisy is this! the most fatal and dangerous
delusion possible!

But, if not only your heads are enlightened, and your judgments informed, but
your hearts also truly convicted and humbled before the Lord, with a view of
yourselves as described by our scripture articles; blessed knowledge! happy
sensibility! for this you are indebted to the divine grace and heavenly
teachings of the Holy Spirit, of whom you learn to cast away all human
confidence, all dependence on the arm of flesh only, and to fly to Christ for
help and succor -- with a Lord save, or we perish; for the heart of man, by
nature estranged and alienated from God and Christ, would try every other
means, and seek for salvation in any way, rather than accept it as a free gift
from Christ. To cast away all self-righteousness, is grievous to the heart in
its natural state of pride, and affection of independency; man would still be
as God, still work out, and merit for himself his own salvation; and he must be
driven to the last extremity, see the insufficiency of law and self, of
morality and works, before he can cast away all other confidence, and apply to
Jesus with a Lord save, or I perish. It is faith alone which can avail the
soul, and thus we must apply, if we would obtain the gift of God in Christ,
utterly renouncing all self-dependence, and perfectly assured, that he is able
and willing to save to the uttermost. These truly scriptural and experimental
sentences are extracted from the reverend and learned Mr. DODD'S sixth sermon
on the miracles. Do not these favor of METHODISM? Are not these tinctured with
the spirit of ENTHUSIASM? The world is of THIS opinion. They do say so; but
what then? We know THE FAITHFUL MINISTERS of Christ do not seek to PLEASE MEN,
but GOD. They will neither court the smiles, nor fear the frowns of the men of
this world; neither will they be so afraid of the faces of men as to be ashamed
of the Gospel of Christ; inasmuch as they, by happy experience, know it is the
power of God, to the salvation of their own souls: therefore, all such as KNOW
THE TRUTH, AS IT IS IN JESUS, will not shamefully retreat from, deny, or give
it up, but boldly preach IT; (...) will they BE BACKWARD TO DECLARE THE WHOLE
COUNSEL OF GOD, though, for so doing, the world is pleased to honor them so
far as to fix what they think is the most approbious name upon them, even that
of a METHODIST.
Yea, God, for Christ's sake, will enrich your souls, and comfort your spirits,
with the abundant consolations administered in the XIth Article; which runs
thus: --

We (all true believers) are accounted righteous before God, only for the merit
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, by faith, and not for our own works or
deservings; wherefore, that we are justified by FAITH ONLY, is a most wholesome
doctrine, and very full of comfort, as is more largely expressed in the Homily
of justification.

Here is true protestant, anti-romish doctrine. Blessed are the Ministers of
our Church that know and preach thus! Happy every soul that can set his seal to
the truth of these words! God will suffer no flesh to glory in his presence;
therefore, in the justification, pardon, and acceptance of a sinner, he will
magnify the riches of his free grace; for, to be justified freely, through the
redemption that is in Jesus Christ, and to be accounted righteous through the
righteousness of Jesus Christ only, is the only doctrine that can yield comfort
and consolation to penitent humble sinners, and glory and praise to the God of
Mercy and Grace. But no, say our modern theologists, it is by our own good
works and faith; Christ's blood, righteousness and merits, are not sufficient
of themselves to avert the wrath, procure the power, and recommend our persons
to the acceptance of God. Be astonished, O heavens! be amazed, O ye sons of
God! be confounded, O ye enemies of true righteousness! at the blindness,
vanity, and pride of relying on, or joining the imperfect works, and sullied
obedience of fallen man, with the perfect righteousness, all-atoning merits,
and all-sufficient sacrifice of the infinitely divine and holy Jesus! O how
long will ye thus pervert the ways of the Lord! How long will ye trample on the
precious blood, depreciate the only availing righteousness, and set at naught
the all-prevailing merits of the sinner's friend, the dear and loving Jesus! Be
filled, O my soul! be warmed, O my friends! with a holy indignation at the
daring insult, and impious affronts that are offered to Jesus, your Savior,
and your God, whose blood and righteousness is your only plea!

We don't preach justification by faith only, say the Papists. We are agreed
with you, say their confederates in error, our pretended protestant, but
seducing preachers. But why? because it tends to destroy good works; say both.
It is false, says our Church; we experience the contrary, say all its true
Christian members. But truly the Papists teachers are honest, upright men, when
compared with these modern deceivers: for it is the avowed tenet of their
Church, to deny and explode the doctrine of justification, by the imputed
righteousness of Jesus Christ through faith only -- but our only pretended
protestant teachers assent to it, in the articles of our Church, as a most
wholesome doctrine, and very full of godly comfort, and yet afterward publicly
preach and inveigh against it, and brand and stigmatize the CONTENDERS for this
scripture-truth, as a set of madmen, enthusiasts, and deceivers. Surprising
indeed is such a share of assurance! Amazing such want of modesty! Is this a
specimen of good works, reverend sirs? Alas! alas! where is common honesty,
candid judgment, and impartial determination fled? O how can such ministers
look on this article without being filled with shame and confusion of face! The
Scriptures are clear and express, that sinners are justified by the
righteousness of Jesus Christ, imputed to them through faith, and by no other
means; therefore this is a most WHOLESOME DOCTRINE. And the glorious company of
the Apostles, the noble army of Martyrs, and all true believers, in all ages,
have found, by happy experience, that this doctrine is also VERY FULL OF GODLY
COMFORT.

But does our Church depreciate good works, or deny their usefulness? No;
neither do any of its true ministers or members; they all assent to the
doctrines of the XIIth Article, that

Good works are the fruits of faith, and follow after justification (not go
before in order to procure justification) they cannot put away our sins, nor
endure the severity of God's judgment, yet are they pleasing and acceptable to
God in Christ, and do spring out necessarily of a true faith, inasmuch as by
them a lively faith may be as evidently known, as a tree by its fruit.

It is the device of the devil to urge, and it arises from ignorance of the
nature of true christian faith to object, that the doctrine of justification by
faith destroys the practice of morality and good works. Quite the contrary, for
it is the peculiar property of true christian faith to dispose us to holiness
of heart, and to the practice of morality and good works.

What a consistency of doctrine! What a harmony of divine truth! What a chain
of scripture-tenets do our excellent articles afford us! Thank God for ancient,
orthodox, christian compilers! From modern, heterodox, unchristian teachers,
good Lord deliver us! and let all our Church members say, Amen!

You see, brethren, that good works are the fruits of faith. Have you received
of God the gift of faith; faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby you are
justified? Are your consciences cleansed from the guilt, and delivered from the
condemnation of sin? And do you possess pardon and peace from God? Then I am
sure you must love God; and love is the most powerful and availing principle to
produce good works, pleasant and acceptable to God in Christ; for only in
Christ Jesus is it our works are accepted. The best works we can perform cannot
put away our sins, and endure the severity of God's judgment: But good works
spring out necessarily of a true faith: they are true marks and evidences of a
lively faith, as the fruitfulness of a tree is an unanswerable proof of the
life and soundness of the root. Hence we see by the plain sense of the
articles, that without faith in our Lord Jesus no good works can be produced;
and yet truly we find many, who pretend to be the only true orthodox teachers
of our Church, constantly exploding and vehemently denying the doctrine of
justification by faith only. Therefore it is a plain consequence and natural
deduction, that the only marks such give of their orthodoxy is, that they have
neither faith nor good works, notwithstanding all the noise they make about
good works. And this is more fully proved by Article XIII. which assures us,

All works done before the grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his Spirit,
are not pleasant to God, forasmuch as they spring not of faith in Jesus Christ;
neither do they make men meet to receive grace, or (as the school-authors say)
deserve grace of congruity; rather for that they are not done as God has
willed and commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they have the nature of
sin.

Here we see what works are not good, not pleasant in the sight of God, even
all such as do not flow from right principles, namely, the grace of Christ, the
inspiration of his Spirit, and faith. Ye pretended advocates for good works,
what say ye to this? Deceive not yourselves with specious pretenses; look to
your principles. As soon might we gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles,
as to find christian holiness and good works flowing from unchristian
principles.

The grace of Christ and the inspiration of the Spirit! -- Why, this is the
very mark and characteristic of an enthusiast, to talk of being inspired, say
our modern teachers. But be assured, it is the only principle of true christian
knowledge and christian practice: for the things of God knows no man, but by
the Spirit of God, and if any man has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
(...). Romans viii. 9. These are scriptural determinations. He is not a christian
who is not inspired by the Spirit of God; neither are any works pleasant and
acceptable to God, but what spring from INSPIRATION, says our Church.
INSPIRATION signifies a breathing inward: What! Why, the vitality, power and
graces of the Holy Spirit; and from this inward principle only, outward
actions, good and pleasant to God, and profitable to man, flow.

But, to avoid prolixity, I shall not enlarge, as I find I have much exceeded
my first intentions; but really our excellent articles afford such a field of
argument to support truth, and detect error, that they are pleasing and
delightful themes to dwell on; though I do not doubt but what I have advanced
is sufficient, in the judgment of ignorant and mere nominal Christians, to
determine me a Methodist and an Enthusiast. Reader, let me appeal to thee: Have
I strained one sentence of our articles from its natural sense and plain
meaning? Well, if for a steady adherence and firm attachment to the doctrines
of the Church of England, I am accounted Methodist, I am content; may I live
and die A CHURCH OF ENGLAND METHODIST. -- It is the scripture doctrines of our
Church I am contending for; which, whoever does, will most assuredly have the
appellation of Methodist.

But let me expostulate a little on this head with our pretended Churchmen. You
say, you profess the religion of the Church of England. I do the same: so far
we agree. I believe the doctrines of her articles, which are essential to
salvation, to be truly scriptural; therefore I own them, abide by them, and
contend for them. Do you do the same? I fear not. Herein do we differ. Let us
see; we will bring the matter to a short issue: a few words will determine the
point. I believe that man is very far gone from original righteousness, and is
of his own nature inclined to evil -- That original sin, in every person born
into this world, deserves GOD'S WRATH AND DAMNATION -- That every man by nature
is in this state, without power to turn and prepare himself, to do good works
acceptable to God. I believe, that it is only through the righteousness of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that any are accounted righteous before God --
That our own works and deservings have no hand at all in procuring God's
favor, no causal influence upon a sinner's justification in the sight of God;
but that we are justified, pardoned and accounted righteous through faith only,
as apprehending and applying the merits and righteousness of Jesus (...)
Savior. I believe good works to be the fruits of faith, and they are the
effects (not the cause) of justification; that our persons are justified before
our works can be accepted: and that till a person is justified by faith,
actually possessed of the grace of Christ, and really inspired by the Holy
Spirit, he does not, he cannot please God. I believe the inspiration of the
Holy Ghost as necessary to spiritual life, as breath is to natural life; for as
the body without breath is dead, so, whoever is not INSPIRED by the Spirit of
Christ, is dead to God, and the things of God.

Now, this is my religion, this is the religion of the Bible, the christian
religion, the protestant faith, the religion of the Church of England: Is it
yours? No; you say this is all madness, ENTHUSIASM! Very well; now you are at
liberty to choose your system of religion; but pretend no longer to be a
minister or member of the CHURCH; you have no right; for remember, you give up,
you deny, you explode her essential doctrines; and the very quintessence of
Christianity, the plain truths of the Bible you are pleased to treat with
contempt. The happy privileges which Christ has purchased for, and does enrich
all true Christians with, you are pleased to look on only as religious madness
and delusion. And yet, how amazingly inconsistent your principles! What a scene
of absurdity and contradiction is your practice! At church, in the words of our
Church prayers, you ask and beseech God to bestow those very blessings upon
you, which you only esteem as the flights of phrenzy, and term inexplicable
feelings, and the disorders of a distempered brain. Alas, Sir, where is that
sober reason and cool argument you pretend to? Where that candor of judgment
and just determination you talk of? Let who will be deceived, you are wrong:
your public profession and practice give full evidence against you; and by them
you are condemned.

What then, brethren, avails all your contending for the Church, and calling
yourselves members thereof? Do you value yourselves because you have not left
your parish church, changed your religion, and turned methodists? Poor deluded
professors! not changed your religion you say? Alas, you have your religion
still to seek: you only profess -- you know not what: you have only a name to
live, while you are dead, dead to God and to the things that make for eternal
peace. I wish you calmly to consider these things. May the Lord, in mercy to
your precious souls, open your eyes to see that hitherto you have assumed a
name, which in no wise belongs to you, and rested in the mere shadow and
profession of Christianity only; while you to this day remain utterly ignorant
of the truths of the Gospel in your understanding, and destitute of the
experience of any saving influences of them on your hearts and lives. Miserable
state! unhappy delusion! And yet, to treat with contempt persons who act a far
wiser and more consistent part than yourselves, is surely strange and absurd
indeed!

Would to God my friends, yea the worst enemies I have, would for their own
sakes lay these things to heart now. Then would they no longer fight against
and oppose the precious truths of the Gospel, which the glorious company of the
Apostles taught, and the noble army of Martyrs sealed with their blood; which
the Church still maintains, and every true Christian is happy in the experience
of. But whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, animated by these
considerations, I am in nothing terrified by adversaries; I am content, yea I
rejoice, that I am counted worthy to be a despised servant, and follower of a
despised Lord and Savior. To be owned and confessed by the King of Saints, the
Lord of Life and Glory, the Judge of quick and dead, and at a time too when the
eternal state of every soul is suspended upon the breath of his determination;
when those who have been ashamed of Christ denied him and his words -- are
calling for the rocks and mountains to fall upon them to cover them from
eternal and insupportable wrath; I say, then to be owned with approbation by
God, before angels, men, and devils; surely this thought is enough, and it
makes me ready to welcome reproach, and triumph in disgrace for Christ and his
Gospel's sake.

The being branded with the so much dreaded name of a METHODIST, is to me but
little. A Methodist! why, really, it is a simple, inoffensive name, and I don't
see any reason to be ashamed of it; for I have often thought, (and it is well
worth notice) that the world don't usually fix this appellation upon persons of
an openly wicked and scandalously sinful life. Hence a gaming, pleasure-taking,
playhouse-frequenting person, one who lives in debauchery and excess of
drinking, is sure to escape the name.

Nor has a minister that name given him, who (notwithstanding his solemn
declarations, subscriptions, and oaths to assent to and abide by the articles
of our Church) preaches contrary to them, contends for justification by works
instead of faith, is an enemy to the doctrine of imputed righteousness, and
from whose sermons you too seldom hear the name of Jesus, or the agency and
influence of the Holy Spirit, unless utterly to deny, inveigh against and
explode all spiritual inspiration and inward feelings: these, and such sort of
preachers escape the imputation of methodism.

Now, reader, what do thou think of such? I appeal to thee, to every honest
mind, to every unprejudiced judgment to determine whether a worse name does not
properly belong to them?

Well, since it is plain that to be in principle and practice contrary to the
ignorant, formal, sinful, antichristian ministers and professors of the age,
and to abide by and contend for the orthodox articles of our Church, are
thought sufficient to constitute a person a methodist; permit me, reader, here
to present thee with the just and plain description of what the world mean by a
methodist.

He is one whom God has chosen in Christ out of mankind, to deliver from curse
and damnation, and to bring, by Christ, to everlasting salvation: he is called
according to God's purpose, by his Spirit working in due season; he, through
grace, obeys the calling; he is justified freely; he is made a son of God by
adoption; he FEELS in himself the workings of the Spirit of Christ "FEELS in
himself the WORKINGS of the Spirit of Christ!" Would any one believe there are
such words in the articles of our Church, when such pains have been and NOW ARE
taken from our pulpits, to prove that all INWARD FEELINGS, all pretensions to
spiritual operations, are the effects of ENTHUSIASM, MADNESS, or DELUSION? And
yet, what is most amazing, these same persons have declared their assent and
consent to these very words, yea, have presented themselves for the ministry,
with the most solemn declaration of being INWARDLY MOVED BY THE HOLY GHOST to
take upon them that holy function. Strange effect of spiritual blindness!
affecting consequence of religious madness! As such persons are beyond the
reach of cool argument and solid reason, they are the real objects of pity and
compassion: May they be the subject of every pious and reasonable Christian's
prayer!
mortifying the works of the flesh, and his earthly members, and drawing up his
mind on high and heavenly things; he is made like the image of Christ, walks
religiously in good works, and at length by God's mercy attains everlasting
felicity.

O happy methodist! Blessed description! Those who choose to give a better are
at their liberty; for my part, I am tenaciously fond of our Church language,
and therefore have transcribed a part of the XVIIth Article.

Why, this is predestination indeed! Yes, my brethren; and with this and the
foregoing articles, the Litany and Public Offices of our Church do perfectly
harmonize, as I here instance:

"And make thy chosen people joyful." (Suffrages.)

O God, from whom all holy desires, all good counsels, and all just works do
proceed. (2d Collect at Evening Prayer.)

That it may please thee to illuminate all bishops, priests and deacons, with
true knowledge and understanding of thy word" -- "That it may please thee to
give us an heart to love and dread thee, and diligently to live after thy
commandments" -- "That it may please thee to give to all thy people increase of
grace, to hear meekly thy word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to
bring forth the fruits of the Spirit" -- That it may please thee to give us
true repentance. (Litany.)

From the Collects.
Almighty God, who made thy blessed Son to be circumcised and obedient to the
law for man. (Circumcision.)

O Lord God, who see that we put not our trust in any thing that we do!
(Sexogesima.)

Almighty God, who see that we have no power of ourselves to help ourselves.
(2d Sunday in Lent.)

-- That they who do lean only on the hope of thy heavenly grace. (5th Sunday
after Epiphany.)

By whose Spirit the whole body of the Church is governed and sanctified. (2d.
Coll. for Good Friday.)

Above all things, ye must give most humble and hearty thanks to God the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, for the redemption of the world by the
death and passion of our Savior Christ, both God and man; who did humble
himself even to the death upon the cross, for us miserable sinners, who lay in
darkness and the shadow of death, that he might make us the children of God,
and exalt us to everlasting life. (Communion.)

O Almighty God, who have knit together thine elect in one communion and
fellowship, in the mystical body of thy Son Christ our Lord. -- (Collect for
All Saints Day.)

-- Beseeching thee, that it may please thee of thy gracious goodness, shortly
to accomplish the number of thine elect, and to hasten thy kingdom. The
following places may be added to the above -- Collects for Ash Wednesday,
Easter Day, 2d Sunday after Easter, 4th Sunday after Easter, 5th Sunday after
Easter, Whitsunday, 9th Sunday after Trinity, 10th Sunday after Trinity, prayer
after that for all sorts and conditions of men.
(Burial Service.)

The Articles, Homilies and Liturgy, contain the genuine doctrines, and are the
standing confession of the faith of the Church of England. Bow. Review of the
Reformation.


We now perceive that the doctrine of Election is fairly deducible from the
Liturgy; let us see what the fathers say about it.

Archbishop Cranmer (who certainly had a principal hand in the reformation) in
the preface to his book against Bishop Gardener, writes thus: Our Savior
Christ, according to the will of his eternal Father, when the time thereof was
fully accomplished, taking our nature upon him, came into the world from the
high throne of his Father, to give light to them that were in darkness, and in
the shadow of death, and to preach and give pardon and full remission of sins
to all his elected.

Bishop Latimer, another of the reformers, is more express on this point. His
words will help to illustrate those of Cranmer. If thou art desirous to know
whether thou art chosen to everlasting life, begin with Christ, and learn to
know Christ; and try thyself whether thou art in the book of life or not.
(Sermon on Septuagesima.

In the same discourse he says, What need I to mortify my body with abstaining
from all sin and wickedness? I perceive God has chosen some, and some are
rejected: Now, if I be in the number of the chosen, I cannot be damned; but if
I be accounted among the condemned number, then I cannot be saved; for God's
judgments are immutable. Such foolish and wicked reasons some have, which bring
them either to carnal liberty, or to desperation. -- And in another discourse
he says, We read in the Acts of the Apostles, that when St. Paul had made a
long sermon at Antioch, there believed (says the Evangelist) as many as were
ordained to eternal life. With the which saying a great number of people have
been offended, and have said, We perceive that those only shall come to
believe, and so to everlasting life, which are chosen of God unto it; and
therefore it is no matter whatsoever we do; for if we be chosen to everlasting
life, we shall have it. -- And so they have opened a door to themselves of all
wickedness and carnal liberty, against the true meaning of the scripture.

That Dr. Ridley, another reformer, supposed redemption to be limited to a
certain number, the following passage clearly evinces: The death and passion of
Christ our Savior was, and is, the one, only, sufficient, and everlasting
availing Sacrifice, SATISFACTORY FOR ALL THE ELECT OF GOD, from Adam the first,
to the last that shall be born in the end of the world. See Fox, vol. iii. p.
440.

It may perhaps be unnecessary to inform the reader, that these, with Philpot,
Hooper, Bradford, Rogers, Saunders, and Tailor, among the ancients, were
martyrs -- were the same in opinion, and severally sealed the truths they
professed with their blood. Among the greatest of our modern ministers who
professed this doctrine, may be numbered Hervey, Roman, Newton, Berridge,
Foster, Scott, Whitefield, Coetlogan, and Jones. To this list a number, too
great particularly to name, might be added; but if the reader wishes a farther
confirmation, I refer him to Toplady's Historic Proof of the Calvinism of the
Church of England. 2 vols.


The doctrine of absolute predestination to life is at present little
understood -- It has been so grossly misrepresented, and loaded with such
horrid consequences, that by far the greater part of professing Christians will
not give it a patient hearing. The very mention of it will fill their hearts
with indignation, and their mouths with harsh expressions; which have been
received without consideration, and being repeated often, are supposed to be
true, and so pass for solid, conclusive arguments. What! would you make God the
author of sin? Can you suppose an infinitely merciful Being made so many
creatures to be damned? What does it signify then how we live? for if we are to
be damned we shall be damned, let us live ever so well; and if we are to be
saved we shall be saved, let us live ever so vilely. These, and the like
absurdities, are ever ready to be poured out against it. On the other hand, the
article says, They which be endued with so excellent a benefit of God, viz. of
being predestined to everlasting salvation, as vessels made to honor; they
be made like the image of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ; they walk
religiously in good works: So that they who are predestined to salvation, are
likewise predestined to holiness. The Apostle says, 'God has chosen us in
him (Christ), that we should be holy and without blame before him in love.'
Ephesians. i. 4. 'God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation, through
sanctification of the Spirit.' 2 Thessalonians. ii. 13. They therefore who do not walk
religiously in good works, deceive themselves, and wrest the scriptures to
their own destruction, if they suppose they are predestined to everlasting
life, chosen in Christ before the foundation of the world. And they who,
through faith in Christ, do walk religiously in good works, have not the least
reason to imagine they are not predestined, or shall be damned; because they
are walking in the way which God has appointed that all shall walk in, whom he
has chosen to everlasting salvation.

That there is an absolute, unconditional predestination of certain persons to
eternal life, is abundantly evident from the scriptures, and sufficiently
proved by the passages lately mentioned. It may not, however, be improper to
add a few more. 'To sit on my right hand and on my left is not mine to give;
but it shall be given to them of whom it is prepared of my father.' Matt. xx.
23. 'Fear not, little flock; for it is your father's good pleasure to give you
the kingdom.' Luke xii. 32. 'I give unto them eternal life; and they shall
never perish; neither shall any pluck them out of my hand.' John x. 28. 'Having
predestined us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself,
according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his
grace.' Ephesians. i. 5, 6. 'Who has saved us, and called us by an holy calling
not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace which
was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began.' 2 Timothy i. 9. 'God has
chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy.'
Ephesians. i. 4. 'As many as were ordained to eternal life believed.' Acts xiii. 48.

Indeed, if a proper attention be paid to the doctrines contained in the
articles, we shall find that these things must be so. -- For if we bring into
the world such a corrupt nature, as deserves God's wrath and damnation (Art.
IX.) -- if the condition of man after the fall is such that he cannot, in his
own strength, turn unto faith and calling upon God (Art. X.) -- if before we
are justified and made partakers of that grace, which will assuredly end in
eternal glory; all that we are apt to call good works, are not pleasant and
acceptable to God, do not make us meet to receive his grace, but have the
nature of sin." (Art. XIII.) -- How is it possible that any man should be
saved, unless God had ordained him to eternal life? But if God has
predestined some to eternal life and not others, is there not injustice with
him? By no means; for all have sinned and come short of the glory of God. The
depravity of our nature deserves God's wrath and damnation: so that if he had
left the whole human race to perish, there would have been no injustice in him,
for all deserved to perish. An instance of which vindictive, unrelenting
justice, we have in the case of the fallen angels -- Not one of those many
myriads of once glorious beings will be saved -- Not one of them ever had, or
will have the discovery of mercy made to him. Instead, therefore, of arraigning
the Almighty of severity or injustice in suffering perhaps the greater part of
mankind to perish in their sins; we should extol that mercy by which he has
predestined so many millions to eternal life, to the adoption of children, to
the praise of the glory of his grace; when he might justly have left them to
perish as well as others, since they had as justly deserved it.

This frightful doctrine then of predestination amounts to this: All mankind
are by nature children of wrath -- without strength -- enmity against God. The
Almighty, who foresaw this would be the consequence of the fall, decreed from
everlasting to deliver from curse and damnation those whom he has chosen in
Christ to everlasting salvation, and to leave the rest to perish in their sins.
When a king has subdued his rebellious subjects, he grants a free pardon to
some, and orders others for execution. Can you conceive he is guilty of
injustice in ordering some for death when they have deserved it? Are you not
rather inclined to commend his clemency in sparing some who have deserved to
die? Consider mankind as fallen in Adam, and the case is exactly parallel.
Unless you choose to look upon this as an exception, that of all who have heard
the Gospel of Christ, none will be found in the number of those who were not
predestined to eternal life, but such as have wilfully rejected the counsel
of God against themselves.

These four last sections are from a publication entitled, A Review of the
Doctrines of the Reformation, etc. by Thomas Bowman, M. A. The manner in which
he enumerates the several subjects treated of in the work, is remarkable, and
full to the present purpose in his own words: We may now perceive that the
reformers were Calvinists (as Bishop Burnet observed) in the sublapsarian
hypothesis -- That the Articles, Homilies, and Liturgy, are Calvinistical --
That the divines who succeeded the reformers, and their successors, were (...)
-- That for fifty years after the articles had received the parliamentary
sanction, (and almost ten years before they had been agreed upon in convocation
by the archbishops, bishops, and the clergy) the two universities, the
archbishops and bishops, and an ecclesiastical representative, unanimously
declared on all occasions, that Calvinism was the doctrine of the Church of
England -- That, for a long time after that period, whenever Arminianism showed
its head, it was publicly opposed and condemned by those in power, as being
contrary to the established religion -- and that, when some of our bishops
publicly countenanced it, they were resolutely opposed by parliament on that
account, and declared to be enemies to their country -- and moreover, an
archbishop was brought to the bar, condemned and executed, among other things,
for introducing Arminianism. We have seen likewise, that the plea that the
Church drew up the articles with such latitude, that persons of different
persuasions might subscribe them, is impossible to be true, and is even
contradicted by their title, which says, that they were agreed upon to avoid
diversities of opinion, and to establish consent touching true religion.

There is perhaps no occasion to proceed farther on this subject. By looking
back to what has been said, we may see the consistency of this doctrine -- how
agreeable it is to scripture, our articles, If we advert to the HOMILIES, we
shall find the same (...) ^^culcated. Can any now assert they "maintain no such
doctrine*"
and Liturgy! -- that the contrary may be said of the ARMINIAN tenets, which
are now held out for our belief, and so strenuously advocated by most of our
present ministers! -- and lastly, what pains were taken by government and
enthusiastic ministers to hinder the introduction of the latter into the Church.

Here is enthusiasm indeed! Tell me, ye blinded by prejudice, ye heated by
resentment, ye pretended ministers and members of our Church, tell, prove to
the world, if you can, wherein such ministers in the Church, as you are pleased
to term methodistical and enthusiastic, have departed from, or advanced any one
tenet, contrary to the articles of our Church! If they have, look them in the
face, and by the judgment and determination of the scripture and articles,
correct and refute them, and her true friends will applaud you.

But if not, how mean and despicable is it to attempt to load them with odium
and contempt behind their backs? Is it their crime to be so unpolite as to make
conscience of their oaths and subscriptions, and to preach and abide by the
excellent apostolic doctrines of our Church? Is it for their love to, and zeal
for the salvation of precious and immortal souls? Is it because the sheep know
their voice, and follow them as true shepherds, therefore do the hirelings
hate, contemn, and despise them? Weep, O my soul, in secret before the Lord, on
account of that opposition to the Gospel of Jesus, and unkindness to his
ministers! -- Rejoice, O my soul! Be thankful, O my fellow-sinners, to the
great shepherd and bishop of souls, in thus caring for, and sending forth these
best friends, truest sons, and most faithful ministers of our Church!

And blessed be the name of the Lord, for enduing them with that spirit of
boldness and constancy, whereby they declare the whole counsel of God, no man
making them afraid. I know, and am persuaded, all that love our Lord Jesus in
sincerity, will feel the warmth of zeal and fervent affection to all true
faithful ministers of Christ, and will, (as I do from my heart) honor,
reverence, and esteem them highly in love for their work's sake.

It matters very little to hear many crying out enthusiasm! Reader, notice that
man, he is parson of -- Church; and lest the people should be seduced and
deceived by hearing the doctrines of the Church of England preached, he appears
unwilling and indifferent to the true ministers of Christ, when they want to
make use of his pulpit; Perhaps from a spirit similar to this, the CANON made
at the late general convention in this city originated. This canon prohibits
any minister from preaching in any other parish than his own, except he first
obtains liberty from the minister, or if no minister, from the vestry of the
church in such parish or parochcial cure.
but on the contrary, permits those whose public and private carriage are
deemed indecent and unbecoming, repeatedly to ascend the sacred place, and to
preach doctrines which their practices deny, or to discuss subjects which are
altogether unscriptural, and of course unsuitable.

An Enthusiast! What is it? It is the cant-word of the day for the many-headed
monster, the bugbear of the times, thrown out in order to deter and affright
weak and inconsiderate people from arriving at a knowledge of the truths of
Christianity. Most of the true ministers of our Church are now called
enthusiasts. By this name they stand distinguished from lazy drones and
unedifying dry-vines. But, reader, when thou hear of a minister whom others
call an enthusiast, don't suffer this to prejudice thee against him; assure
thyself he is worth attending to; take my advice, if possible, hear him for
thyself* adve^^ to thy Bible, and attend to the articles of our Church, and if
thou have any relish for the truths of the (...), and the doctrines of the
other, I warrant thee thou will not be disappointed.

Ah! says a constant church-goer, I heard one of these preachers at our Church
lately, where he preached such a sermon about conversion, the new birth,
justification by faith in Jesus Christ, inspiration, and sanctification of the
Spirit, and a heap of such -- I know not what! -- aye, and he said downright,
that all unconverted people were in a state of damnation, and that nothing
could save them from hell, but believing on the Lord Jesus; he really turned
the parish upside down, for we are never used to such sort of doctrine; no, not
we. But in the afternoon, our parson preached a sermon against all such
doctrines, for he is an enemy to all such preachers and their principles; and
though he was but little more than a quarter of an hour in his sermon, yet he
paid them off about their inspiration and faith, etc. and made us all easy
again too: O, he is a pleasing man! He told us, We were in no danger of going to
hell, and that there was no fear of our being damned, for we are all very good
christians, if we but pay every one their own, and do as we would be done by.

Surely at this day, is that word fulfilled, THE PROPHETS PROPHESY FALSELY, AND
THE PEOPLE LOVE TO HAVE IT SO. For truly, reader, the preaching of too many who
call themselves ministers of our Church, is more like heathenish morality than
scriptural christianity.

If by an enthusiast is meant a deceiver, one that fancies himself and pretends
to be what in reality he is not; I declare to you, reader, I do not know a
worse sort of enthusiasm, nor a more dangerous set of enthusiasts and deceivers
(deceivers both of themselves and others; let common sense and right reason
determine the point) than those ministers, who solemnly profess to be inwardly
moved by the Holy Ghost; pretend to receive the gift of the Holy Spirit at
their ordination; assent, subscribe, and swear to the articles of our Church,
in which the necessity of inspirarion is so strongly insisted on; use the most
excellent form of our Church Liturgy; constantly pray to God for the
inspiration, guidance, and operations of the Holy Spirit: and yet after all
this, (O dreadful hypocrisy before God! O amazing soul delusion!) can jest,
jeer at, and ridicule all spiritual influences, and inward operations; and
contemn the honest, faithful ministers of our Church; for what? Why, only
because they preach consistent with the avowed tenets of that Church they
profess themselves ministers of, and plainly declare such doctrines as their
Articles, Homilies and Liturgy fully set forth. Surely an honest heathen would
blush at such behavior. No wonder such are so much despised and set at naught,
who make themselves by their absurdity so contemptible in the sight of men.

But it is urged against our truly reverend and Gospel Ministers, That they are
not content with the common and ordinary operations of the Spirit, but they
talk of and contend for the extraordinary and miraculous gifts of the Holy
Ghost; therefore they are enthusiasts. This is false; they neither expect, nor
see any necessity for the miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost: But they contend
(agreeable to scripture) for the promised inward gifts and graces of the Holy
Spirit, to enlighten, convince, convert, and make happy the true Christian, by
his indwelling witness and comfortable presence to the soul.

Neither are their pretensions to inspiration ungrounded and unwarranted, (as
some object) and therefore say they are enthusiasts. This kind of pretension
may be reduced to two sorts, for matter and for manner. For matter, when
persons pretend to inspiration of God for things contrary to scripture, which
God has given us as a standing rule to the world's end. But our ministers
pretend to no such inspiration; seeing they constantly inculcate the doctrines
of our Church which are agreeable to scripture: yea they preach such
inspiration only which the word of God promises to every true Christian.
Therefore they are not enthusiasts. -- For manner, when inspirations are
expected to exclude and supercede the use of reason, scripture, and all divine
ordinances. Such as pretend to these are proper enthusiasts. But other, our
faithful and orthodox ministers preach the rational scripture doctrines of the
Gospel only. They don't set up heathen morality instead of christian practices,
nor do they teach man's natural ability, to the exclusion of God's divine
grace, nor exalt the works and righteousness of sinful man, in order to
supercede and set at naught the meritorious sacrifice and righteousness of
Jesus Christ. No: but they insist on the reasonableness of being endued with
spiritual life, and spiritual power, in order to produce spiritual actions;
they scripturally teach, that faith, and every other good gift and grace is of
the Spirit's inspiration; and they therefore direct souls to diligent
attendance, and constant waiting on the ordinances, and to esteem them as
channels whereby God is usually pleased to inspire the soul with fresh supplies
of divine grace and spiritual influences. Therefore they are not enthusiasts.

By men of corrupt minds, destitute of the truth, all these ancient doctrines
of the Bible and our Church, are now deemed new doctrines; the preachers of
them are railed against as innovators, and some are bold to assert, that they
draw the people away from the Church and cause schism. A learned man of our
Church, Mr. Hales of Eaton (England) was wont to say schism and heresy are
theological scarecrows, that is, they are too frequently made use of to terrify
people without a cause. See Edward's Preacher, part 2.
-- If it be schism to attend the preaching of our avowed doctrines (contained
in the thirty-nine Articles) in another Church, I fear that to turn schismatic
is now the only way left of ever hearing them preached.

It is a common observation, that our churches are worse attended than most
others in the city; while, on the contrary, it (...) obvious (even to an
offense to some) that at whatever place of worship the faithful
Gospel Ministers preach, numerous and crowded congregations attend: And to what
may it justly be imputed? Truth is really a very desirable thing, and never
more so than when religion is concerned. The case is plainly this: When a
person is not content to take up his religion upon trust, but reads with
attention and discernment the word of God, compares the doctrines of our Church
with the Bible, and observes the great and fundamental truths therein
contained, either very seldom preached, not preached at all, or, what is worse,
openly inveighed against, denied, and exploded; CONVERSION has been
particularly ridiculed, and the doctrines of FREE GRACE disowned.
such as the insufficiency of works to justify the sinner; the merits and
righteousness of the Lord Jesus, and justification through the same by faith;
the necessity of inward holiness and sanctification by the Holy Spirit, etc. --
I say, when a person sees the weight and importance of these sacred truths, it
is the very delight of his soul to hear them preached; he abides by the
doctrines of the Church of England, not by profession merely, but through
principle chiefly. And it is easy to be accounted for that he takes some pains
to follow the voice of the Church, and to attend the sound of her doctrines at
other churches; and that he thinks it an unhappiness he cannot hear them
preached at his own.

Now, Doctor, you say it is wrong, and you blame people for going away from
their own parish churches; but is it not worse for you to forsake your own
Church doctrines? It Is true, there are many who forsake the stone walls and
buildings of their old churches: But why? For this good reason; because their
late ministers have departed from the truths of the Gospel, and the constituent
principles and established doctrines of our Articles, Homilies, and Liturgy;
and pray now who is in fault? Not those ministers who preach the doctrines of
the Church of England, those who have been the means more particularly of their
ability to distinguish between the pure and impure doctrines offered them, nor
those who are so attached to the same as to follow them; but those who drive
them away from their own parish churches by preaching contrary to the venerable
scripture truths, and cannot be content with the religion of their forefathers,
the doctrines of the reformation, but must broach some newfangled tenets; who
cry out peace! peace! when there is no peace, and preach only the poor, dry,
unavailing system of heathenish morality, instead of the lively, animating,
powerful, truly moralizing truths of the Gospel.

Therefore let Clericus, and his brethren, who are so often haranguing against
schism and separation, know, that the schism reverberates, and the charge of
separation recoils back upon themselves, while they are guilty of schism in
doctrine, and cause divisions in the Church by separating from the precious
truths, the avowed tenets of our excellent establishment. Say, are these
friends to the Church? rather, are they not its greatest enemies? Yes,
notwithstanding their pretended zeal for the Church, it is from such as these
that she is in danger. Of such ministers the judicious Dr. Edwards thus writes
in his Preacher, part 2. page 155 -- I know there is a great cry among some men
of late, that the Church is in danger, that it is falling, that it, ruin and
destruction are approaching. And I say so too: but not as these men understand
it: My meaning is, that our Church is in great jeopardy, by reason of the
present degeneracy in doctrines. The orthodox faith of the Church of England is
disrelished, its legally established articles are vilified, our old English
divinity is rejected, and all our old episcopal divines are disregarded. But
those very men who make that outcry about the Church's failing, are the
authors of this rejection and this disregard. THEY ARE THE MEN that renounce
the articles and determinations of our Church, and thereby she is apparently
endangered, and her ruin seems not to be far off. But in the sense they mean
it, (if they have any sense) it is a false alarm, and a groundless fear, and
the danger they talk of is imaginary.


But, there is one expedient, which, from my hearty zeal for our Church, and
warm affection to the Clergy, I would humbly recommend to them -- (O that they
may be influenced to put it in practice!) -- It is this, to preach constantly,
maintain steadily, and inculcate fervently the established doctrines of our
Church, the glorious truths of the reformation. Now, who would think there
could be any objection to this method? Nay, there can be none; and I am sure it
will be practiced by those who really believe their bibles, and have so much
conscience as to think solemn promises, oaths, and subscriptions are binding
and obligatory upon them.

O, may the Lord of the harvest increase the number of such faithful,
conscientious laborers! for from such a practice, what blessed effects would
follow! Ignorant professors would be instructed in the saving doctrines of the
Gospel; the true members of our Church would be established in the truth as it
is in Jesus, and preserved from being misled by error and perverted by
delusion; a glorious spirit of reformation would soon overspread our land, and
true religion, and the practice of morality and good works, would much more
abound.

O happy period! a time, how much to be desired! May the God of Truth and Power
hasten it for his mercy's sake!

FINIS.

