(...)


THE HISTORY OF SOUTH AMERICA. CONTAINING THE DISCOVERIES OF COLUMBUS, THE
CONQUEST OF MEXICO AND PERU, AND THE Other Transactions of the SPANIARDS IN THE
NEW WORLD.

BY THE REV. MR. COOPER.

Embellished with Copper plate Cuts.

BENNINGTON: PRINTED BY ANTHONY HASWELL, FOR ^^^^AS SPENCER, BOOKSELLER, MARKET
STREET, ALBANY.

PREFACE.
THE History of South America, like all other histories of newly discovered
countries, has been so interwoven with fable, as in some measure to deter the
youthful student from employing his time in the pursuit of Trifles; for in that
light fabulous histories must generally be considered.

The Spanish Adventurers to the New World were mostly illiterate men, whose
principal pursuits were gold and silver. On their return to their native state,
their representations were guided by interest and vanity; and, ashamed of
having made no observations on the rude arts, manufactures, and genius, of the
people they had conquered, they fabricated stories the most wild, romantic and
ridiculous, to which the Spanish writers of those days gave a helping hand.

The literary world is undoubtedly much obliged to the labor, genius, and
attention, of Dr. Robertson, whose extensive and polite connections enabled him
to procure information for his History of America, which few other individuals
could perhaps have obtained. We have therefore carefully consulted and followed
that work, by the assistance of which we may venture to say, that we have now
the pleasure of laying before our youthful Readers such an epitome of The
History of South America as may by no means be considered as fabulous, but as
founded on the most authentic materials and authorities.

CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. Origin of navigation -- Introduction of commerce. -- Rude sta^^ of
navigation among the ancients. State of navigation and commerce among the
Egyptians. Phenicians. Jews. Carthaginians. Greeks, and Romans. Discoveries of
the ancients by land. Imperfect state of Geography among the ancients. Commerce
preserved in the Eastern empire. Revival of commerce and navigation in Europe.
The crusades favorable to commerce. The invention of the mariner's compass.
First regular plan of discovery. The Portuguese double Cape Non. Discovery of
Porto Santo. Of Madeira. The Portuguese double Cape Bojador, and advance within
the tropics. The Cape de Verd Islands and the Azores discovered. The Portuguese
cross the line, They discover the Cape of Good Hope... P. 1. CHAP. II. Birth
and education of Columbus. He enters into the service of the Portuguese. He
forms the idea of a new Course to India. He applies to the Genoese. Then to
Portugal, and afterward to Spain. Proposes his plan to Henry VIII. of England.
His treaty with Spain. -- He sets sail on his voyage, -- His crews are filled
with alarms and apprehensions. -- Land discovered. -- First interview with the
natives. -- Columbus assumes the title of admiral and vice roy, -- He discovers
Cuba and Hispaniola. -- Loses one of his ships, -- His distresses, -- Resolves
to return to Europe, -- Arrives in Spain, and receives the highest marks of
honor. -- He sets sail on his second voyage, -- Builds the town of Isabella.
-- Discovers the island of Jamaica. -- The indians take arms against the
Spaniards. -- Columbus attacks and defeats them. -- He taxes them. -- Returns
to Spain -- He sets sail a third time -- He discovers Trinidad. -- Troubles at
St. Domingo. -- The Portuguese sail to the East Indies by the way of the Cape
of Good Hope. -- From whom the name of AMERICA was given to the New World. --
The Portuguese discover Brasil. -- Columbus, sent in chains to Spain. -- Is
there set at liberty. -- Sails a fourth time on discoveries -- Is wrecked on
the coast of Jamaica. -- Death of Columbus. 25 CHAP. III. ^^^te of the colony
in Hispaniola. -- New discoveries and settlements. -- Diego Columbus appointed
governor of Hispaniola -- Sets sail for that island. -- New discoveries made.
-- Attempts made to settle on the continent. -- Discovery of Florida.
Discoveries of Balboa, -- He enters the South Sea, -- And returns. -- Pedrarias
Davilla appointed governor of Darien. His bad conduct. -- Balboa publicly
executed, through the treachery and intrigues of Pedrarias, -- Further attempts
at discovery. -- The state of Hispaniola under Don Diego Columbus. -- Death of
Ferdinand, and acession of Charles the Fifth. New discoveries made toward the
West. Discovery of Yocatan. -- Are attacked by the indians, and defeat them. --
The Spaniards quit that place. -- Arrive at Campeachy. -- Meet with a defeat on
landing to take in water, and are forced to return to Cuba. -- Voyage of Juan
de Grijalva, -- He discovers New Spain. Touches at Tabasco, and then at
Guaxaca. -- Lands on the isle of Sacrifices, and then touches at St. Juan de
Ulua. 51 CHAP. IV. Vast extent of the New World. -- Its prodigious mountains.
-- Rivers and Lakes -- Temperature of the climate. -- Its original rude state
-- Its animals. -- Insects and reptiles. -- B^rds -- Soil. -- How was America
first peopled? -- Character and condition of the original Americans. The first
discoverers of the New World mostly illiterare men. The bodily constitution of
the South Americans. Their complexion. -- Have small appetites. None of them
deformed. State of their health and diseases. Power and qualities of their
minds. The active efforts of their minds few and languid. Domestic union. The
condition of the American women humiliating and miserable. -- Patenial
aff^^ction and f^lial duty. -- Mode of subsistence. Fishing, hunting, and
agriculture. The Americans divided into small communities. Had no notion of
property. Their method of carrying on war. Their dre^s and ornaments.
Habitations. Their arms, Domestic utensils and cookery. Their canoes. Id^as of
religion. Their phycians. Dancing, gaming, and drinking, their favorite
amusements. Destroy the aged and incurable. -- Their general character..... 76
CHAP. V. Velasquez makes prepara^ions for the invasion of New Spain. Ferdinando
Cortes undertakes the command of that expedition. His forces. Cortes sets sail
with his little armament. Arrives in Mexico. Rich presen^^ sent from Montezuma
to Cortes. -- Character of Montezuma. Cortes resigns his commission, and is
chosen by his officers and followers chief justice and captain general of the
new colony. He proceeds to Zimpoalla. -- From thence to Quiabistan. Builds a
town there, and forms alliances. Cortes destroys his own fleet. Advances into
the country. Concludes a peace with the Hascalans. Sets out for Mexico. The
Spaniards astonished at the distant view of that city. First interview between
Cortes and Montezuma. Dangerous situation of the Spaniards in Mexico. Montezuma
seized as a prisoner, and carried to the Spanish quarters. Montezuma's son, and
five of his officers, burnt alive by order of Cortes. The Mexican monarch
acknowledges himself to be a vassal of the king of Castile. A new Spanish
armament arrives at Mexico, fitted out by Velasquez to destroy Cortes. Cortes
attacks Narvaez in the night, defeats his forces, and takes him prisoner. The
greater part of the Spanish prisoners enter into the service of Cortes. The
Mexicans take up arms against the Spaniards. Montezuma slain by his own people,
Cortes abandons the city of Mexico The Mexicans defeat him Is reduced almost to
samins. -- The battle of Otumba. -- Cortes receives considerable
reinforcements. -- Builds and launches several brigantines on the lake. -- The
brigantines defeat the Mexican canoes on the lake. -- Attacks the city of
Mexico, Cortes defeated and wounded, forty of his men taken, and sac^^ficed to
the god of war. -- Cortes again attacks the city, and takes the emperor
prisoner. -- The Sp^^^ards much disappointed in their expectations of the
riches the conquest of this city would afford them. -- Cruel treatment of the
emperor -- The whole province of Mexico subdued by the Spaniards. -- The
straits of Magellan discovered. -- Death of Magellan. -- Cortes appointed
captain general and governor of New Spain -- Sets out for the court of Castile.
-- The reception he meets with there. -- Returns to New Spain, and discovers
California. Death of Cortes...... 103 CHAP. VI. First attempts to discover Peru
unsuccessful. -- Pizarro, Almagro, and Luque* undertake that business. --
Pizarro sets sail for Panama on his first expedition -- Experiences great
hardships. -- Discovers Peru. -- The Spaniards are surprised at the riches and
fertility of that country, -- Return to Panama -- Pizarro is sent to Spain,
where he gets himself appointed captain general, etc. of the new discoveries.
-- Pizarro sails on another expedition, and lands in Peru. Commences
hostilities. -- Limits of the Peruvian empire. -- A civil war rages in Peru at
the time of the arrival of the Spaniards. -- Pizarro turns that circumstance to
his advantage. -- State of his forces. -- Arrives at Caxamalca, --
Treacherously seizes on the person of the Inca. -- Massacre of the Peruvians --
Almagro arrives with reinforcements. -- Division of the immense ransom of the
Peruvian Inca, -- The Inca put to death. -- Pizarro leaves Caxamalca, and
marches to Cuzco. -- He takes possession of that capital, and seizes on immense
treasures. -- Pizarro sets out for Spain -- His reception there. -- Sets out on
his return to Peru. -- Settles differences there with his associate Almagro. --
Pizarro builds the city Lima, -- Almagro marches toward Chili. -- An
insurrection in Peru. The Peruvians besiege Cuzco. -- Engage Almagro, and are
defeated. -- Civil war among the Spaniards. -- Almagro defeated, tr^ed,
condemned, and executed. Progress of the Spanish arms. Chili conquered --
Treachery and ingratitude of Ore^lana Miserable condition of the followers of
Pizarro in consequence of that treachery. Francisco Pizarro murdered in his
Palace. Almagro proclaimed governor of the city. Vaca de Castro arrives at
Quito. and assumes the name of governor. Disputes between him and Almagro. The
emperor reforms the government of his American dominions. Sends over a
viceroy, who is killed in battle. Pedro de la Gasca sent out as President of
Peru. Gonzalo Pizarro assumes the government, opposes Gasca, is defeated,
tried, and put to death. -- Gasca sets out for Spain. His reception there......
136 CONCLUSION. Political institutions and national manners of the Mexicans and
Peruvians. Origin of the Mexican monarchy. The city of Mexico, when founded.
Splendor and power of their monarchs. Their wars. Funeral rites. Agriculture.
-- Temples, and other public buildings. -- Religion of the Mexicans. Peruvian
antiquity doubtful. Absolute power of their Incas. The silver mines of Po^osi.
The Peruvian wars conducted with humanity. Their improved state of agriculture.
Taste in their buildings. The Peruvians an unwarlike spirit.... 161
THE HISTORY OF SOUTH AMERICA.
CHAP. I.
So nice and complicated are the arts of navigation and ship-building, that
they require the ingenuity and experience of many succeeding ages, to bring
them to any tolerable degree of perfection. The raft or canoe, which at first
served ^o convey a savage over a river, that obs^^acted him in the chase, gave
rise to the invention of constructing a vessel capable of ^^^ving a number of
people in safety tood distant coast. Many efforts were made, many experiments
were tried, and much labor and invention employed, before this important
undertaking was accomplished.

In proportion as the art of navigation increased, men became more acquainted
with each other, and a commercial intercourse commenced between remote nations.
Men must have made some considerable advancements toward civilization, before
they acquired the idea of property, and ascertained it so perfectly, as to be
acquainted with the most simple of all contracts, that of exchanging by barter
one rude commodity for another. However, as soon as this important right was
established, and every individual felt, that ^e had an exclusive title to
possess or alienate whatever he had acquired by his own labor or dexterity,
the wants and ingenuity of his nature suggested to him, a new method of
encrea^ing his acquisitions and enjoyments, by disposing of what appeared to
him superfluous, in order to procure what was necessary or desirable in the
possession of others.

As navigation and commerce extended, so in course did the intercourse of
remote nations. The ambition of conquest or the necessity of procuring new
settlements, were no longer the sole motives of visiting distant lands. The
desire of gain became a new spur to activity, roused adventurers, and sent them
out on long voyages, in the pursuit of countries, whose produce or want might
increase that circulation, which nourishes and gives vigor to commerce. Trade
proved a great source of discovery, it opened unknown seas, it penetrated into
new regions, and contributed more than any other cause, to bring men acquainted
with the situation, the nature, and commodities of the different regions of the
earth.

The structure of the vessels used by the ancients was very rude and imperfect,
and their method of working them on the ocean was very defective. Though the
property of the magnet, by which it attracts iron, was well known to the
ancients, its more important and amazing virtue of pointing to the poles had
entirely escaped their observation. Destitute of this faithful guide, which now
conducts the pilot with so much certainty in the unbounded ocean, during the
darkness of night, or when the heavens are covered with clouds, the ancients
had no other method of regulating their course than by observing the sun and
stars. Their navigation was consequently uncertain and timid. They dared not
even to quit sight of land, but crept along the coast, exposed to all the
dangers, and retarded by all the obstructions anavoidable in holding such an
awkward course. An incredible length of time was requisite for performing
voyages, which are now finished in a short space. Even in the mildest climates,
and in the seas the least tempestuous, it was only during the summer months
that the ancients ventured out of their harbors, the remainder of the year
being ^^st in in^ctivity.

The Egyptrans, soon after the establishment of their monarchy, are reported to
have commence^^ trade between the Arabian Gulf, or Red Sea, and the western
coast of the great India continent. The commodities, which they imported from
the East were carried by land from the Arabian Gulf to the banks of the Nile,
and conveyed down that river to the Mediterranean; but the fertile ^oil and
mild climate of Egypt, producing all the necessaries and comforts of life, the
Egyptians, had no inducements to undertake long and hazardous voyages.

The Phenicians possessed a spirit more favorable to commerce and discovery
than the Egyptian^. They had not like the natives of Egyp^, any distinguishing
peculiarity in their manners and institutions: they were not addicted to any
singular and unsocial form of superstition and could mingle with other nations
without scruple or reluctance. The ^e^itory they possessed was neither large,
nor fer^le, and commerce was the only source from which they could derive
opulence or power. The trade, therefore, carried on by the Phenicians of Sidon
and Tyte was mote excensive and enterprising than that of any state in the
ancient world. In many of the places to which they resorted, they planted
colonies, and communicated to the rude inhabitants some knowledge of their arts
and improvements.

The Jews, encouraged by the riches they saw the Phenecians acquiring from
commerce seemed desirous to endeavor to partake of it. Solomon fitted out
fleets, which under the direction of Phenician pilots, sailed from the Red Sea
to Tarshish and Ophir; but the singular institution of the Jews, the observance
of which was enjoined by their Divine Legislator. with an intention of
preserving them a separate people, uninsected by idolatry, prevented their
being numbered among the nations, which contributed to improve navigation, or
to make any material or useful disoveries.

The Carthagenians caught the spirit of commerce from the Phenecians and Jews.
The commonwealth of Carthage applied to trade and naval assairs with the
greatest success. They extended their navigation chiefly toward the west and
north, and ^^^ted not only all the co^sts of Spain, but those of G^^l, and
penetrated at last into Britain. T^^y made con^^er^ble progress by land, into
the interior provinces of Africa, ^^^d w^^ some of them, and subjected o^^ers
^o (...). They sailed along the we^^^^ coast of that great continent, almost to
the tropi^k of Cancer, and placed several colonies, in order to civilize the
natives, and accustom them to commerce.

It is evident that the Phenicians, who instructed the Greeks in many useful
arts and sciences did not communitate to them that extensive knowledge of
navigation, which they themselves possessed; nor did the Romans imbibe that
commercial spirit and ardour for discovery, which distinguished their rivals
the Carthagenians. Though Greece be almost encompassed by the sea, which formed
many spacious bays and commodious harbors: though it be surrounded by a vast
number of fertile islands, yet, notwithstanding such a favorable situation,
which seemed to invite that ingenious people to apply themselves to navigation,
it was long before this art attained any degree of perfection among them. Even
at the time, when the Greeks engaged in the famous enterprise against Troy,
their knowledge in naval affairs seems not to have been much improved. Their
vessels were of inconsiderable burden and mostly without deeks. These had only
one mast, and they were strangers to the use of anchors. All their operations
in sailing were clumsy and unskilful.

The expedition of Alexander the Great into the East, considerably enlarged the
sphere of navigation and of geographical knowledge among the Greeks. He founded
a great city, which he called Alexandria, near one of the mouths of the river
Nile, that by the Mediterranean sea, and the neighborhood of the Arabian Gulf,
it might command the trade both of the East and West. This situation was chosen
with such discernment, that Alexandria soon became the chief commercial city in
the world.

The progress made by the Romans in navigation and discovery, was still more
inconsiderable than that of the Greeks. The genius of the Roman people, their
military education, and the spirit of their laws concurred to discourage them
from commerce and naval affairs. It was the necessity of opposing a formidable
rival, not the desire of extending trade, which first prompted them to aim at
maritime power.

As soon as the Romans acquired a taste for the luxuries of the East, the trade
with India through Egypt was pushed with new vigor, and carried on to greater
extent. By frequenting the Indian continent, navigators became acquainted with
the periodical course of the winds, which, in the ocean that separates Africa
from India, blow with little variation during one half of the year from the
East, and during the other half blow with equal steadiness from the West.
Encouraged by this observation, they abandoned their ancient slow and dangerous
course along the coast, and as soon as the western monsoon set in took their
departure from Ocelis, at the mouth of the Arabian Gulf, and stretched boldly
across the ocean. The uniform direction of the wind, supplying the place of the
compass, and rendering the guidance of the stars less necessary conducted them
to the port of Musiris, on the western shore of the Indian continent -- There
they took on board their cargo, and returning with the eastern monsoon,
finished their voyage to the Arabian Gulf within the year. This part of India,
now known by the name of the Malabar coast, seems to have been the utmost
limits of ancient navigation in that quarter of the globe.

The discovery of this new method of failing to India, is the most considerable
improvement in navigation made by the Romans during the continuance of their
power. In ancient times, the knowledge of remote countries was more frequently
acquired by land than by sea; and the Romans, from their particular dislike to
maritime affairs, may be said to have totally neglected the latter, though a
much more pre^^^ble way to make discoveries, being more ^^^y and expeditious.

If we reject fabulous and obscure accounts, if we closely abide by the light
and information of authentic history, without giving way to the conjectures of
fancy, or the dreams of etymologists, we must conclude, that the knowledge
which the ancients had acquired of the habitable globe was very confined and
superficial. In Europe, the extensive provinces in the eastern part of Germany
were little known to them. They were almost totally unacquainted with the vast
countries which are now subject to the kings of Denmark, Sweden, P^usia,
Poland, and the Russian empire. The more barren regions, which stretch within
the arctic circle were quite unexplored. In Africa, their researches did not
extend far beyond the provinces which border on the Mediterranean, and those
situated on the western shore of the Arabian Gulf. In Asia, they were
unacquained with all the fertile and delightful countries beyond the Ganges,
which furnish the most valuable commodities for the European commerce with
India; nor do they seem to have ever penetrated into those immense regions,
occupied by the wandering tribes, which they called by the general name of
Sycthians, and now possessed by Tartars of various denominations, and by the
Asiatic Russian subjects.

But however imperfect or inaccurate the geographical knowledge which the
Greeks and Romans had acquired may appear, in respect of the present improved
state of that science, their progress in discovery will seem considerable, and
the extent to which they carried navigation and commerce, must be considered as
great, when compared with the ignorance of early times. Geography continued to
improve under the Romans so long as they remained in their powerful state; But
when the barbarians broke in upon them, the consequence of luxury and
^fferninacy, the sciences then dwindled, and discoveries ceased to be made.

Constantinople, after the destruction of the Roman empire, though often
threatened by the fierce invaders, who spread desolation over the rest of
Europe, was so fortunate as to escape their destructive rage. The knowledge of
ancient arts and discovries were preserved in that city, a taste for splendor
and elegance still subsisted, the productions and luxuries of foreign countries
were in request, and commerce continued to flourish in Constantinople, when it
was almost extinct in every other part of Europe.

Much about the same time, a gleam of light and knowledge broke in upon the
East. The Arabians, having contracted some relish for the sciences of the
people whose empire they had contributed to overturn, translated the books of
several of the Greek philosophers into their own language. The study of
geography in course became an early object of attention to the Arabians: but
the acute and the ingenious people cultivated chiefly the speculative and
scientific parts of geography. In order to ascertain the figure and dimensions
of our earth, they applied the principles of geometry, they had recourse, to
astronomical observations, and employed experiments and operations, which
Europe, in more enlightened times, have eagerly adopted and imitated.

The calamities and desolation brought upon the western provinces of the Roman
empire by its barbarous conquerors, by degrees were forgotten, and in some
measure repaired. The rude tribes which settled there, acquiring insensibly
some idea of regular government, and some relish for the functions and comforts
of civil life. Europe awakened, in some degree, from its torpid and inactive
state, the first symptoms of which were discerned in Italy. The acquisition of
these roused industry, and gave motion and vigor to all the active powers of
the human mind: foreign commerce revived, navigation was attended to, and great
pains taken to improve it.

From that period, the commercial spirit of Italy became active and
enterprizing. Venice, Genoa, and Pisa, rose from inconsiderable towns, to be
populous and wealthy cities; their naval power increased, their vessels
frequented not only all the ports in the Mediterranean, but venturing sometimes
beyond the straits, visited the maritime towns of Spain, France, the Low
Countries, and England.

While the cities of Italy were thus advancing in their career of improvement,
an event happened, the most extraordinary perhaps in the history of mankind,
which, instead of obstructing the commercial progress of the Italians,
contributed to its increase. The martial spirit of the Enropeans, heightened
and inflamed by religious zeal, prompted them to attempt the deliverance of the
Holy Land from the dominion of infidels. Vast armies composed of all the
nations in Europe, moved toward Asia on this strange enterprise. The Genoese.
Pisans and Venetians furnished the transports to carry them thither, and
supphed them with provisions and military stores. Besides the immense sums
which they received on this account they obtained commercial privileges and
establishments. From these sources prodigious wealth flowed into the cities
above mentioned This was accompanied with a proportional increase of power, and
by the and of the Holy War, Venice, in particular, became a great maritime
state, pos^^ssing an extensive commerce and ample territories.

Communications being thus opened between Europe and the western provinces of
Asia, several persons were encouraged to advance far beyond the countries, in
which the crusaders carried on their operations, and to travel by land into the
more remote and opulent regions of the East. The wild fanaticisms, which seem
at that period to have mingled in all the schemes of individuals, no less than
in all the councils of nations, first incited men to enter upon these long and
dangerous excursions. They were afterward undertaken from prospects of
commercial advantage, or from motives of mere curiosity.

In the midst of this rising desire for discovery a very fortunate event took
place, which contributed more than all the efforts and ingenuity of preceding
ages to improve and extend navigation. That wonderful property of the magnet,
by which it communicates such virtue to a needle or slender rod of iron, as to
point toward the poles of the earth, was happily discovered. The use which
might be made of this in directing navigation, was immediately perceived. From
hence, that most valuable, but now familiar instrument, the mariners compass
was formed. As soon as navigators found by means of this, that at all seasons,
and in every place, they could discover the North and South with so much ease
and accuracy, it became no longer necessary to depend merely on the light of
the stars, and the observation of the seacoast They gradually abandoned their
ancient timid and lingering course along the shore, launched boldly into the
ocean, and relying on this new guide, could steer in the darkest night, and
under the most cloudy sky, with a security and precision hitherto unknown. The
compass may be said to have opened to man the dominion of the sea, and to have
put him in full possession of the earth, by enabling him to visit every part of
it.

About the year 1365, Providence seemed to have decreed, that at this period
men were to pass the limits within which they had been so long confined, and
open to themselves a more ample field, wherein to display their talents, their
enterprise, and courage. The first considerable efforts toward this were not
made by any of the more powerful states of Europe, or by those who had applied
to navigation with the greatest assiduity and success. The glory of taking the
lead in this bold attempt was reserved for the Portuguese, whose kingdom was
the smallest and least powerful of any in Europe. As the attempts of the
Portuguese to acquire the knowledge of those parts of the globe, with which
mankind were then unacquainted, not only improved and extended the art of
navigation, but roused such a spirit of curiosity and enterprise, as led to the
discovery of the New World, of which we are presently to give the instory.

Various circumstances urged the Portuguese to exert their activity in this new
direction, and enab^ed them to accomplish undertakings apparently superior to
the natural force of their monarchy. John I. King of Portugal, surnamed the
Bastard, having obtained secure possession of the crown, in the year 1411, soon
perceived, that it would be impossible to preserve public order, or domestic
tranquillity, without finding some employment for the restless spirit of his
subjects. With this view, he assembled a numerous fleet at Lisbon, composed of
all the ships he could fit out in his own kingdom, and of many hired from
foreigners. This great armament fitted out in 1412, was destined to attack the
Moors settled on the coasts of Barbary. While the fleet was equipping, a few
vessels were appointed to sail along the western shore of Africa, bounded by
the Atlantic ocean, and to discover the unknown countries situated there.

The particular situation of Portugal was an invitation to this new
undertaking, and the genius of the age being favorable to the execution of it,
it proved successful. The vessels sent on the discovery doubled the formidable
Cape Non, which had terminated the progress of former navigators, and proceeded
one hundred and sixty miles bevond it, to Cape Bojador. As its rocky cliffs,
which stretched a considerable way into the Atlantic, appeared more dreadful
than the promontory they had passed, the Portuguese commander was afraid to
attempt to sail round it, but returned to Lifbon, more satisfied with having
advanced so far, than ashamed of not having gone further.

Though this voyage was in itself inconsiderable, yet it increased the passion
for discovery, which began to show itself in Portugal. The fortunate issue of
the king's expedition against the Moors of Barbary, added strength to that
spirit in the nation, and pushed it on to new undertakings. In order to render
these successful, it was necessary, that they should be conducted by a person
who possessed abilities capable of discerning what was attainable, who enjoyed
leisure to form a regular system for prosecuting discovery, and who was
animated with ardour, that would persevere in spite of obstacles and repulses:
happil; for Portugal, she found all these qualities in Henry duke of Viseo, the
fourth son of King John. That prince, in his early youth having accompanied his
father in his expedition to Barbary, distinguished himself by many deeds of
valor. To the marshal spirit, which was the characteristic of every man of
noble birth at that period, he added all the accomplishment of a more
enlightened and polished age. He cultivated the arts and sciences, which were
then little known, and despised by persons of his exalted situation. He was
particularly fond of the study of geography, and he early acquired such a
knowledge of the habitable globe, as discovered the great probability of
finding new and opulent countries, by sailing along the coast of Africa.

The commencement of every new undertaking isusually attended with trifling
success. In the year 1418, he fitted out a single ship, and gave the command of
it to two gentlemen of his household, who offered themselves as volunteers to
conduct the enterprise. He instructed them to double Cape Bojador, and thence
to steer toward the south. They held their course along the shore, the mode of
navigation which still prevailed, when a sudden squall of wind arose, which
drove them out to sea, and, when they expected every moment to perish, it blew
thein on an unknown island, which, from their happy escape, they armed Porto
San^o. They instantly returned to Portugal with the news of their discovery,
and were received by Henry with the applause and honor due to fortunate
adventurers.

The next year Henry sent out three ships under the same commanders, in order
to make a settlement in Porto Santo. From this island they observed toward the
south a fixed spot in the horizon, like a small black cloud. They were by
degrees led to conjecture it might be land, and steering toward it, they
arrived at a considerable island, uninhabited and covered with wood, which on
that account they called Madeira. As it was Henry's principal object to render
his discoveries useful to his country, he immediately equiped a fleet to carry
a colony of Portuguese to these islands. He took care that they should be
furnished not only with the seeds, plants, and domestic animals common in
Europe, but, as he foresaw that the warmth of the climate and fertility of the
soil, would prove favorable to the rearing of other productions, he procured
slips of the vine from the island of Cyprus, the rich wines of which were then
in great request, and plants of the sugar cane from Sicily, into which it had
been recently introduced. -- These throve so prosperously in this new country,
that the advantage of their culture was immediately perceived, and the sugar
and wine of Madeira, soon became considerable articles of commerce, from which
the Portuguese derived great advantage.

These important successes gave a spur to the spirit of discovery, and induced
the Portuguese, instead of servilely creeping along the coast, to venture into
the open sea. They doubled Cape Bojador, in 1433, and advanced within the
tropics. In the course of a sew years they discovered the river Senegal, and
all the coast extending from Cape Blanco, to Cape de Verde.

The Portuguese had hitherto been guided in their discoveries, or encouraged to
attempt them, by the light and information they received from the works of the
ancient mathematicians and geographers; but when they began to enter the torrid
zone, the notions which prevailed among the ancients that the heat was so
intense as to render it insupportable, detered them, for some time, from
proceeding. However, notwithstanding these unfavorable appearances, in 1449 the
Portuguese discovered the Cape de Verde islands, which lie off the promontory
of that name, and soon after the isles called Azores. As the former of these
are above three hundred miles from the African coast, and the latter nine
hundred miles from any continent, it is evident that the Portuguese had made
great advances in the art of navigation.

The passion for discoveries received an unfortunate check by the death of
Prince Henry, whose superior knowledge had hitherto directed all the operations
of the discoverers and whose patronage had encouraged and protected them.
However notwithstanding all the advantages they derived from hence, the
Portuguese, during his life, did not advance, in their utmost progress toward
the south, within five degrees of the equinoctial line; and after their
continued exertions for half a century, hardly 1500 miles of the coast of
Africa was discovered.

The Portuguese in 1471, ventured to cross the line, and, to their
astonishment, found that region of the torid zone, which was supposed to be
scorched with intolerable heat, to the habitable, populous, and fertile.

Under the direction of John II. in 1484, a powerful fleet was fitted out,
which advanced above fifteen hundred miles beyond the line, and the Portuguese,
for the first time beheld a new heaven, and observed the stars of another
hemisphere.

By their constant intercourse with the people of Africa, they gradually
acquired some knowledge of those parts of that country, which they had not
visited. The information they received from the natives. added to what they had
observed in their own voyages, began to open prospects of a more extensive
nature. They sound, as they proceeded southward, that the continent of Africa,
instead of extending in breadth, according to the doctrine of Prolemy, appeared
sensibly to contract itself and to bend toward the east. This induced them to
give credit to the ancient Phenician voyages round Africa, which had long been
considered as fabulous, and gave them reason to hope, that by following the
same route, they might arrive at the East Indies, and engross that commerce,
which had so long contributed to enrich other powers.

In 1486, the conduct of a voyage for this purpose, the most dangerous and
difficult the Portuguese had ever embarked in, was entrusted to Barthelomew
Diaz, who stretched boldly toward the south, and proceeding beyond the utmost
limits to which his countrymen had hitherto advanced discovered near a thousand
miles of a newcountry. Neither the combined powers of violent tempests, and the
frequent mutinies of his crew, nor even the calamities of famine, which he
suffered from losing his store ship, could deter him from the pursuit of his
grand object. In spite of all, he at last discovered that lofty promontory
which bounds Africa to the south; but he did nothing more than discover it. The
violence of the winds, the shattered condition of his ships, and the turbulent
spirit of his sailors compelled him to return after a voyage of 16 months. The
king of Portugal, as he now entertained no doubt of having found the long
desired route to India, gave this promontory the name of the Cape of Good Hope.

These sanguine ideas of success were strengthened by the intelligence the king
received over land, in consequence of his embassy to Abyssinia. Covillam and
Payva, by the King's instructions, had repaired to Grand Cairo. From this city
they traveled in company with a caravan of Egyptian merchants, and embarking on
the Red Sea, arrived at Arden, in Arabia. There they separated; Payva sailed
directly toward Abyssinia; Covillam embarked for the East Indies, and having
visited Calecut, Goa, and other cities of the Malabar coast, returned to
Sofala, on the east side of Africa, and thence to Crand Cairo, which Payva and
be had fixed upon as their place of meeting. The former however was
unfortunately and cruelly murdered in Abyssinia: but Covillam found at Cairo
two Portuguese Jews, whom the King of Portugal had dispatched after them, in
order to receive an account of their proceedings, and to communicate to them
new instructions. By one of these Jews Covillam transmitted to Portugal a
journal of his proceedings by sea and land, his remarks upon the trade of
India, together with exact maps of the coast on which he had toutched; and from
what he himself had observed, as well as from the information of skillful
seamen in different countries, he concluded, that by sailing round Africa, a
passage might be found to the East Indies. The happy coincidence of Covillam's
report and opinion with the discoveries lately made by Diaz, left hardly any
shadow of doubt with respect to the possibility of failing from Europe.
However, the vast length of the voyage, and the furious storms, which Diaz had
encountered near the Cape of Good Hope, alarmed and intimidated the Portuguese
to such a degree, although they were become adventurous and skilful mariners,
that some time was requisite to prepare their minds for this dangerous and
extraordinary voyage.

Memorable Events recorded in this Chapter.
Introduction of commercial pursuits. Imperfections of navigation among the
ancients. Navigation and commerce of the Egyptians, Phenicians, Jews,
Carthagenians, Greeks, and Romans. The first regular plan of discovery formed
by the Portugue'e. The use of the mariners compass discovered about 1322. The
Portuguese double Cape Bojador about the year 1412. Attempts to discover a new
route to the East Indies. Voyage of Bartholomew Diaz, in 1486, who penetrated
as far as the Cape of Good Hope.
CHAP. II.
CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS, a subject of the republic of Genoa, was among the
foremost of those foreigners whom the fame of the discoveries made by the
Portuguese had allured into their service. Though neither the time nor place of
his birth are certainly known, yet it is on all hands agreed, that he was
descended from an honorable family reduced to indigence by misfortunes. As his
ancestors were accustomed to a seafaring life, Columbus became naturally fond
of it himself, and very early discovered those talents for that profession,
which plainly indicated the great man he was one day to be. He applied with
uncommon ardour to the study of the Latin tongue. geography, astronomy, and the
art of drawing. Thus qualified, in 1461, at the age of fourteen, he went to
sea, and began his career on that element, which conducted him to so much glory.

In 1467, he repaired to Lisbon, where many of his countrymen were settled.
They soon conceived such a favorable opinion of his merit and talents, that
they warmly solicited him to remain in their kingdom, where his naval skill and
experience could not fail of rendering him conspicuous.

To find out a passage by sea to the East Indies, was the great object in view
at that period. From the time that the Portuguese doubled Cape de Verde, this
was the point at which they aimed in all their navigations. The tediousness of
the course, which the Portuguese were pursuing, naturally led Columbus to
consider, whether a shorter and more direct passage to the East Indies, than
that projected by sailing round the African continent, might not be found out.
After revolving long and seriously every cir^umstance suggested by his superior
knowledge in the theory, as well as practice of navigation, after comparing
attentively the observations of modern pilots, with the hints and conjectures
of ancient authors, he at last concluded, that by sailing directly toward the
West, across the Atlantic ocean, new countries, which probably fomed a part of
the vast continent of India, must infallibly be discovered

Filled with these ideas, he laid his scheme before the senate of Genoa, and
making his country the first tender of his service, offered to fail under the
banners of the republic, in quest of the new regions he expected to discover,
but they inconsiderately rejected his proposal, as a dream of a chimerical
projector He then submitted his plan to the Portuguese, who endeavored to rob
him of the honor, by sending another person privately to pursue the same track
proposed be him; but the pilot, chosen to execute Columbus's plan, had neither
the genius not the fortitude of its author. Contrary winds arose, no sight of
approaching land appeared, his courage failed, and he returned to Lisbon,
execrating a plan, which he had not abilities to execute.

Columbus no sooner discovered this dishonorable treatment, than he instantly
quitted Portugal in disgust, and repaired to Spain about the close of the year
1484. Here he resolved to propose it in person to Ferdinand and Isabella, who
at that time governed the united kingdoms of Castile and Arragon. He also sent
his brother to England, to propose his plan to Henry VIII.

After a long succession of mortifying circumstances and disappointments,
Isabella was persuaded to send for Columbus to court. The cordial reception he
there met with from the queen, together with the near prospect of setting out
upon that voyage, which had so long been the object of his thoughts and wish,
soon effaced the remembrance of all that he had suffered in Spain, during eight
tedious years of solicitation and suspense. The negotiation now went forward
rapidly, and a treaty with Columbus was signed on the 17th of April, 1492.

The chief arti^les of it were, 1. Ferdinand and Isabella, as sovereigns of the
ocean, constituted Columbus their high admiral in all the seas, islands, and
continents, which should be discovered by his industry; and stipulated, that he
and his heirs should enjoy this office, with the same powers and prerogatives,
which belonged to the high admiral of Castile, within the limits of his
jurisdiction. 2. They appointed Columbus their viceroy in all the islands and
continents which he should discover: but if, for the better administration of
affairs, it should hereafter be necessary to establish a separate governor in
any of those countries, they authorized Columbus to name three persons, of whom
they would choose one for that office; and the dignity of viceroy, with all its
immunities, was likewise to be heredi^ary in the family of Columbus. 3. They
granted to Columbus and his heirs, for ever, the tenth of the free profits
accruing from the productions and commerce of the countries which he should
discover. 4. They declared, that if any controversy or law suit should arise
with respect to any merchantile transaction in the countries which should be
discovered, it should be determined by the sole authority of Columbus, or of
judges to be appointed by him. 5. They permitted Columbus to advance one eighth
part of what should be expended in pre^aring for the expedition, and in
^arrying on commerce with he countries which he should discover, and entitle
him, in return, to an eighth part of the profit.


Ferdinand, though his name appears conjoined with that or Isabella in this
transaction, refused to take any part in it as King of Arragon, his distrust of
Columbus being very violent.

After all the efforts of Isabella and Columbus, the armament was not suitable,
either to the dignity of the power who equipped it, or ^o the importance of the
service to which it was destined. It consisted of three vessels. The largest, a
ship of no considerable burden, was commanded by Columbus, as admiral, who gave
it the name or Santa Maria. Of the second, called the Pinta, Martin Pinzon was
captain, and his brother Francis pilot. The third, named the Nigna, was under
the command of Vincent Yanez Pinzon. These two were light vessels, hardly
superior in burden or force to large boats. The sum employed in the whole of
this equipment did not exceed 4000 l.

On the 3d day of August, 1492. Columbus set sail, a little before sunrise in
presence of a vast crowd of spectators, who sent up their supplications to
heaven for the prosperous issue of the voyage, which they wished rather than
expected. Columbus steered directly for the Canary Islands, from whence he
departed on the 6th of September. In the short run to the Canaries, the ships
were found to be so crazy and ill appointed, as to be very improper for a
navigation, which was expected to be both long and dangerous.

Columbus, on leaving the Canaries, held his course due west, left immediately
the usual track of navigation, and stretched into unfrequented and unknown
seas. By the 14th of September, the fleet was about two hundred leagues to the
West of the Canary islands, at a greater Ch^ance from land than any Spaniard
had been be ore that time. Columbus early discovered from the spirit of his
followers, that be must prepare to struggle, not only with the unavoidable
difficulties, which might be expected from the nature of his undertaking, but
with such as were likely to arise from the ignorance and timidity of the people
under his command. All the art and address he was master of was hardly
sufficient to quell the mutinous disposition of his sailors; who grew the more
turbulent, in proportion as their distance increased from home.

On the 11th of October, Columbus was so confident of being near land, that he
ordered the sails to be furled, and the ships to lie by, keeping strict watch,
lest they should be driven on shore in the night. During this interval of
suspense and expectation, no man shut his eyes, all kept upon deck, gazing
intently toward that quarter where they expected to discover the land, which
had been so long the object of their wishes. A little after midnight, the
joyful sound of land! land! was heard from the Pinta, which kept always ahead
of the other ships; but, having been so often deceived by fallacious
appearances, every man was now become slow of belief, and waited, in all the
anguish of uncertainty and impatience, for the return of day.

On the 12th of October, as soon as morning dawned, all doubts and fears were
dispelled. From every ship an island was seen about two leagues to the North,
whose flat and verdant fields, well stored with wood, and watered with many
rivulets, presented the aspect of a delightful country. The crew of the Pinta
instantly began the Te Deum, as a hymn of thanksgiving to God, and were joined
by those of the other ships, with tears of joy and transports of
congratulation. They then on their knees begged pardon of Columbus for the
mutinous spirit they had shown, acknowledged his superior abilities, and
promised implicit obedience to his will in suture.

The boats being manned and armed as soon as the sun arose, they rowed toward
the island with their colors displayed, warlike music, and other martial pomp.
As they approached the coast, they saw it covered with a multitude of people,
whom the novelty of the spectacle had drawn together, whose attitudes and
gestures expressed wonder and astonishment at the strange objects-before them.
He landed in a rich dress, with a sword in his hand. His men followed, and
kneeling down, they all kissed the ground which they had so long desired to
see. They then took solemn possession of the country for the crown of Castile
and Leon.

The dress of the Spaniards, the whiteness or their skins, their beards, their
arms, a^peared strange and surprising to the natives. The vast machines in
which they had traversed the ocean, that seemed to move upon the water with
wings, and uttered a dreadful sound resembling thunder, accompanied with
lightning and smoke, struck them with such tenor, that they began to ^onsider
them as children of the Sun, who had descended to visit mortals here below.

The Spaniards were no less surprised at the novelty of their situation. Every
herb, shrub, and tree, was different from those which flourished in Europe. The
inhabitants appeared in the simple innocence of nature, entirely naked. Their
black hair, long and uncurled, floated upon their shoulders, or was bound in
tresses round their Leads. They had no beards, and every part of their bodies
was perfectly smooth. Their complexion was of a dusky copper color, their
features singular, rather than disagreeable, and their aspect gentle and timid.
They were at first shy through fear, but soon be, came familiar with the
Spaniards, and with transports of joy received from them hawks bells, glass
beads, or other baubles, in return for which they gave such provisions as they
had, and some cotton yarn, the only commodity of value that they could produce.
Thus in the first interview between the inhabitants of the new and old worlds,
every thing was conducted amicably and to their mutual satisfaction.

Columbus now assumed the title and authority of admiral and viceroy, and
called the island he had discovered San Salvador. It is one of t^^^ ^^^^ge
luster of islands called the Lu^^ya (...) Bahama isles. It is situated above
good miles to the west of Gomera, from which the squadron ^ook its departure,
and only four degrees to the south of it.

It soon appeared evident to Columbus that this was but a poor plare, and
consequently not the object of his pursuit. But, conformably to his theory
concerning the discovery of those regions of Asia, which stretched toward the
east, he concluded that San Salvador was one of the ^s^es, which geographers
described as situated (...) the vast ocean adjacent to India; but he was herein
mistaken. Having observe^, that most of the people whom he had seen wore small
plates of gold, by way of ornament, in their nostrils, he eagerly enquired
where they got that precious metal. They pointed toward the south, and made
him comprehend by signs, that gold abounded in countries situated in that
quarter.

In consequence of this intelligence, he sailed to the southward and saw
several Islands. He touched at those of the largest, on which he bestowed the
names of St. Mary, Fernandina, and Isabella; but, as all his enquiries were
after gold, and none of them produced any, he made no stay in any of them. He
afterward discovered Cuba, and soon after fell in with Hispaniola.

Columbus, still intent on discovering the mines which yielded gold, sailed
from hence on the 24th of December, 1492. The great variety of business in
which he was engaged having prevented Columbus from taking any sleep for two
days, he retired at midnight to take some repose, having committed the helm to
the pilot, with strict injunction not to quit it for a moment. The pilot
dreading no danger, carelessly left the helm to an unexperienced cabin-boy, and
the ship, carried away by a current, was dashed against a rock. The violence of
the shock awaked Columbus. He ran up to the deck, where all was confusion and
despair, he alone retaining ^resence of mind. However all his endeavors were in
vain; the vessel opened near the keel, and filled so fast with water that its
loss was inevitable. The boats from the Nigna saved the crew, and the natives
in their canoes did every thing in their power to serve them, by whose
assistance they saved almost every thing that was valuable.

The distress of Columbus was at this time very great. The Pinta had failed
away from him, and he suspected was treacherously gone to Europe. There
remained but one vessel, and that the smallest and most crazy of the squadron,
to traverse such a vast oce^n, and carry so many men back to Europe. He
resolved therefore to leave a part of his crew on the island, that, by residing
there, they might learn the language of the natives, study their dispositions,
search for mines, and prepare for the commodious settlement of the colony, with
which he proposed to return. Having settled this business with his men and the
natives, he built a fort, and placed in it the guns saved out of his own ship.
He appointed thirty-eight of his people to remain on the island, under the
command of Diego de Arada, and furnished them with every thing requisite for
the subsistence or defense of the infant colony.

Having thus settled matters, he left Navidad on the 4th of January, 1493, and
stretching toward he east, discovered and gave names to most of the harbors on
the northern coast of the island. On t^^ ^^h he descried the Pin^a, and ^oon
(...) with her after an absence of six weeks. Pinzon endeavored to justify his
conduct, and though Columbus was by no means satisfied in his own mind, yet he
thought it prudent to dissemble at present, and accordingly received him again
into favor. Pinzon during his absence from the admiral, had visited several
harbors in the islands, had acquired some gold by traffic with the natives, but
had made no discovery of any importance.

Columbus now found it necessary, from the condition of his ships, and the
temper of his men, to return to Europe. Accordingly, on the 16th of January, he
directed his course toward the northeast, and soon lo^t sight of land. The
voyage was properous to the 14th of February, when he was overtaken by so
violent a storm, that all hopes of surviving it were given up At length
Providence interpose^ to save a life reserved for other purposes; and, after
experiencing a second storm almost as dreadful as the first, he arrived at the
Azores, then Lisbon, and reached pain on the 15th of March, in the port of
P^^es, seven months and eleven days from the time when he set out from thence
upon his voyage.

Columbus was received, on his ^anding with a^ ^^e honors due to his great
abilities; and Ferdinand and Isabella were no less astonished than delighted
with this unexpected event. Every mark of honor, that gratitude or admiration
could suggest, was conferred upon Columbus. Letters patent were issued,
confirming-to him and his heirs all the privileges contained in the
capitulation concluded at Santa Fe; his family was enobled, and the king,
queen, and courtiers, treated him as a person of the highest rank. But what
pleased him most was an order to equip, without delay, an armanent of such
force, as might enable him not only to take possession of the countries he had
already discovered, but to go in search of those more opulent regions, which he
still confidently expected to find.

Cautious as Ferdinand was, and averse to every thing new and adventurous,
preparations for a second expediton were carried on with a rapidity unusual in
Spain, and to an extent that would be deemed not inconsiderable in the present
age. The fleet consisted of seventeen ships, some of which were of good
burden. It had on board 1500 persons, among whom were many of noble families,
who had served in honorable stations.

Every thing being ready, Columbus set sail from the bay of Cadiz on the 25th
of September, 1493, and arrived at Hispaniola on the 22d of November. When he
appeared off Navidad, from the station in which he had left the thirty-eight
men under the command or Arada, he was astonished that none of them appeared,
and expected every moment to see them running with transports of joy to welcome
their countrymen. But he soon found, that the imprudent and licentious
behavior of his men had roused the resentment of the natives, who at last
destroyed them all and burned their fort.

He then traced out the plan of a town in a large plain, near a spacious bay,
and obliged every person to put his hand to a work on which their common safety
depended. This rising city, the first that the Europeans founded in the new
World, he named Isabella, in honor of his patroness the queen of Castile.

His followers loudly complained of being obliged to turn builders, where they
expected to meet with riches and luxuries. He therefore found it necessary to
proceed in quest of those golden shaddows. Having settled every thing
respecting the government of the new colony in his absence, he weighed anchor
on the 24th of April, 1494, with one ship and two small barks under his
^ommand. During a tedious voyage of full five months, he had a trial of almost
all the numerous hardships, to which persons of his profession are exposed,
without making any discovery of importance, except the island of Jamaica.

On his return to Hispaniola, he met with his brother Bartholomew at Isabella,
after an absence of near thirteen years, which gave him inexpressible joy. He
could not have arrived more seasonably, as the spaniards were not only
threatened with famine but even with an insurrection of the natives owing to
the shameful liberties the new settlers took with the women and property of the
Indians, who united their forces to drive these formidable invaders from the
settlements, of which they had violently taken possession

On the 24th of March, Columbus took the field with his little army, which
confessed only of 200 foot, twenty horse, and twenty large dogs; and how
strange soever it may seem to mention the ^^st as composing part of a military
force, they were no^ perhaps the least formidable and destructive of the whole,
when employed against naked and time Indians. If we may believe the Spanish
historians, the Indian army amounted to 100,000 men; but they were ignorant of
the arts of war, and had nothing but clubs and arrows for their defense.
Columbus attacked them during the night, and obtained an easy and bloody
victory. Many were killed, more taken prisoners, and reduced to servitude; and
so thoroughly were the ref^ intimidated, that they abandoned themselves to
despair, considering their enemies as invincible.

Columbus employed several months in marching through the island, and in
subjecting it to the Spanish government, without meeting with any opposition.
He imposed a tribute upon all the inhabitants above fourteen years of age. Each
person who lived in (...) ^istricts where gold was found, was ob^^ed to pay
quarterly as much gold dust as filled a hawk's bell^, from those in other parts
of the country, twenty pounds of cotton were demanded. This was the first
regular taxation of the Indians, and served as a precedent for exactions, still
more exorbitant. Such an imposition was extremely contrary to those maxims
which Columbus had hitherto inculcated, with respect to the mode of treating
them.

The condition of the Indians became insupportable, and they endeavored to
starve the Spaniards, by destroying all the produce of the earth, and then
retired to the mountains. This reduced the Spaniards to extreme (...) but they
received such seasonable sup^^^ of provisions from Europe, and found so many
resources in their ingenuity and industry, that they suffered no great loss of
men.

Columbus finding he had many enemies in the court of Spain, resolved to return
home in order to justify himself, leaving his brother Bartholomew as lieut.
governor, and Francis Roldon chief justice. He was received at court, on his
arrival, with so many marks of approbation, after having perfectly cleared up
his conduct, as made his enemies ashamed of themselves, and it was resolved to
send him on discoveries a third time.

After innumerable disappointments and delays, he sailed on his third voyage on
the 30th day of May, 1398. His squadron consisted of six ships only, of no
great burden, and but indifferently provided for so long and dangerous a
navigation.

He sailed in a different direction to what he had hitherto done, in order to
fall in with the coast of India. On the 1st of August, the man stationed in the
round top, surprised them with the joyful cry of land. They stood toward it
and discovered a considerable island, which the admiral called Trinid^d, a name
it still retains. He did not arrive at Hispaniola till the 30th of August, when
he found the affairs of the colony in such a situation as afforded him no
prospect of enjoying that repose, of which he stood so much in need.

Many revolutions had happened in that country during his absence. His brother,
the deputy governor, in consequence of the advice the admiral gave him before
his departure, had removed the colony from Isabella to a more commodious
station, on the opposite side of the island, and laid the foundation of St.
Domingo. The natives were soon after reduced to the Spanish yoke, which
appeared so oppressive to them, that they rose in their own defense, but were
easily conquered. At the same time, Roldon, whom Columbus had placed in a
station, which required him to be the guardian of order and tranquillity,
persuaded the colony to rise in arms.

Such was the distracted state of the colony when Columbus arrived at St.
Domingo, but his wisdom and moderation soon brought every thing to order.

While Columbus was thus engaged in the west, the spirit of discovery did not
languish in Portugal. Emmanuel, who inherited the enterprizing genius of his
predecessors, persisted in their grand scheme of opening a passage to the East
^ndies by the Cape of Good Hope, and soon after his accession to the throne he
equiped a squadron for that important voyage. He gave the command of it to
Vasco de Gama, a man of noble birth, possessed of virtue, prudence, and
courage, equal to the station. The squadron like all those sited out for
discovery in the infancy of navigation, was extremely feeble, consisting only
of three vessels, of neither burden nor force adequate to the service.

He set sail from Lisbon on the 9th of July, 1497, and standing toward the
South, had to struggle for four months with contrary winds, before he could
reach the Cape of Good Hope: Here their violence began to abate, and during an
interval of calm weather, in the latter end of November, Gama doubled that
formidable promontory, which had so long been the boundary of navigation, and
directed his course toward the northeast, along the African coast. He touched
at several ports, and after various adventures came to an anchor before the
city of M^leida. Gama now pursued his voyage with almost absolute certainty of
success, and under the conduct of a Mahome an pilot he arrived at Calecut, upon
the coast of Malabar, on the 22d of May, 1498.

What he beheld of the wealth, the populousness, the cultivation, the industry,
and arts of this highly civilized country, far exceeded any idea that he had
formed from the imperfect accounts which the Europeans had hitherto received of
it. But as he possessed neither sufficient force to attempt a settlement, nor
proper commodities with which he could carry on commerce of any consequence, he
hastened back to Portugal, with an account of his success in performing a
voyage the longest, as well as the most difficult, that had ever been made
since the first invention of navigation. He landed at Lisbon on the 14th of
September, 1499, two years, two months, and five days from the time he left
that port.

Amerigo Vespucci, a Florentine gentleman, having accompanied Ojeda in a voyage
to the new world, on his return transmited an account of his adventures and
discoveries to one of his countrymen, and laboring with the vanity of a
traveller to magnify his own exploits, he had the address and confidence to
frame his ^^^ative, so as to make it appear, that he had the glory of having
first discovered the continent in the new world. The country, of which Amerigo
was supposed to be discoverer, came gradually to be called by his name. By the
universal consent of nations, America is the name bestowed on this new quarter
of the globe. The bold pretensions of a fortunate impostor have robbed the
discoverer of the new world of a distinction which belonged to him. The name of
Amerigo has supplanted that of Columbus, and it is now too late to redress the
injury.

During the last year of the fourteenth century, Pedro Alvarez Cabral was
fitted out by the king of Portugal in order to carry on trade or attempt
conquests in India, to which place Gama had just shown them the way. In order
to avoid the coast of Africa, where he was certain of meeting with variable
breezes, or frequent calms, which might retard his voyage, Cabral stood out to
sea, and kept so far to the west, that, to his surprise, he found himself upon
the shore of an unknown country, in the tenth degree beyond the line. The
country with which he fell in belongs to that province in South America, now
known by the name of Brasil. He landed, and having formed a very high idea of
the fertility of the soil, and agreeableness of the climate, he took possession
of it for the crown of Portugal. and dispatched a ship to Lisbon with an
account of this event, which appeared to be no less important than it was
unexpected.

While the Spaniards and Portuguese were daily acquiring more enlarged ideas of
the extent and opulence of that quarter of the globe which Columbus had made
known to them, he himself, far from enjoying the tranquillity and honors, with
which his services should have been recompensed, was struggling with every
distress, in which the envy and malevolence of the people under his command, or
the ingratitude of the court which he served could involve him.

As soon as the court of Spain became prejudiced against Columbus, a fatal
resolution was taken. Francis de Bovadilla, a knight of Calatrava, was
appointed to repair to Hispaniola, with full powers to enquire into the conduct
of Columbus; and, if he should find the charge of maladministration proved, to
supercede him, and assume the government of the island, It was impossible to
escape when this preposterous commission, made it the interest the judge to
pronounce the person, whom he was sent to try, guilty of every charge. What
followed cannot at all appear surprising; Columbus was sent to Spain loaded
with chains. Fortunately, his voyage to Spain was extremely short, where he
arrived on the 23d of November, 1500.

As soon as Ferdinand and Isabella, were informed that Columbus was brought
home a prisoner, and in chains, they were ashamed of their conduct and dreaded
the censure of all Europe. They instantly issued orders to set Columbus at
liberty, invited him to court, and remited him money to enable him to appear
there in a manner suitable to his rank. On his appearance at court, the modest
manner in which he told his tale, and related his grievances, were felt by
every one, the new governor of Hispaniola was recalled, and Ovando was sent in
his room.

While the necessary steps were taking for securing the prosperity and welfare
of the colony which Columbus had planted, he himself was engaged in the
unpleasant employment of soliciting the favor of an ungrateful court, and
notwithstanding all his merit and services he solicited in vain. After
attending the court of Spain for near two years, as an humble suitor, he found
it impossible to remove Ferdinand's prejudices and apprehensions, and perceived
at length, that he labored in vain, when he urged a claim of justice or merit
with an interested, ungenerous, and unfeeling prince.

However, Columbus, at last, prevailed on the court of Spain to fit him out on
his fourth expedition, which they were persuaded to embark in, on the promised
hope of his finding out a shorter and safer route to the East Indies. He
accordingly sailed from Cadiz, on the 9th of May, 1502, with only four small
barks, the largest of which did not exceed seventy tons in burden. On his
arrival at Hispaniola, he met with the most ungenerous treatment from Ovando,
who would not suffer him to enter their harbors.

After various and fruitless attempts to discover a passage to the Indian
ocean, Columbus met with all the disasters to which navigation is exposed.
Furious hurricanes, with violent storms or thunder and lightning, threatened
his destruction, and at last drove him on the coast of Jamaica, where his
little crazy fleet was wrecked, on the 24th of June, 1503.

The distress of Columbus in this si^uation was truly lamentable, but his
genius rose above every thing. He supported Colum^^^ (...)
the insolence and cruelty of the inhabitants, the still more alarming mutiny
of his men, and the infamous conduct of the governor of Hispaniola, till some
ships appeared, when the Spaniards quited an island in which the unfeeling
jealousy of Ovando had suffered them to languish above a year.

On the 12th of September, 1504, he set sail for Spain with two ships, and his
ill fortune pursued him even in his passage home, being overtaken by a storm,
and with the greatest difficulty got back to Spain. On his arrival, he received
the fatal news of the death of his patroness Queen Isabella.

Columbus, disgusted with the ingratitude of a monarch, whom he had served with
such fidelity and success, exhausted with the fatigues and hardships he had
endured, and broken with the infirmities these brought upon him, ended his life
at Validolid, on the 20th of May 1506, in the 59th year of his age.

Memorable Events recorded in this chapter.
1492 Columbus sets out on his first voyage. 1492 Discovers the islands of Cuba
and Hispaniola. 1493 Columbus sets out on his second voyage. 1494 Discovers the
island of Jamaica. 1498 Third voyage of Columbus. 1498 He discovers the
continent of America. 1499 The Portuguese sail to the East Indies, by the way
of the Cape of Good Hope. 1499 On what account the name of America was given to
the New World. 1500 Columbus sent in chains to Spain. 1502 He sets out on his
fourth voyage. 1502 Searches in vain for a passage to the East Indies. 1503
Shipwrecked on the island of Jamaica. 1506 Death of Columbus.
CHAP. III.
THE colony of Hispaniola, before the death of Columbus, had gradually acquired
the form of a regular and prosperous state. The humane solicitude of Isabella
to protect the indians from oppression, and particularly the proclamation, by
which the Spaniards were prohibited to compel them to work, for some time, it
is true, retarded the progress of improvement. The natives considering every
exemption from toil as a supreme felicity, despised every allurement and reward
by which they were invited to labor. The Spaniards were not numerous enough,
either to work the mines or cultivate the soil, the distempers peculiar to the
climate having carried off great numbers.

In order to save the colony from ruin, Ovando ventured to relax the rigor of
some royal edicts that had been sent to him. He made a new distribution of the
indians among the Spaniards, and compelled them to labor for a stated time, in
digging the mines, or in cultivating the grounds; but in order to screne
himself from the imputation of having subjected them again to servitude, he
enjoined their masters to pay them a certain sum, as the price of their work.
But the indians, after enjoying respite from oppression, though during a short
interval, now found the yoke of bondage to be so galling, that they made
several attempts to vindicate their own liberty. However they were subdued as
often as they rose, and the treatment they received from Ovando was both cruel
and treacherous.

The attention of the Spaniards was so much engrossed by their operations in
the mines of Hispaniola, that the spirit of discovery languished for some time.
In 1508 Juan Ponce de Leon, who commanded under Ovando, in the eastern district
of Hispaniola, passed over to the island of St. Juan de Puerto Rico, which
Columbus had discovered in his second voyage, and penetrated into the interior
parts of the country. As he found the soil to be fertile, and expected, from
symptoms, as well as from the information of the inhabitants, to discover mines
of gold in the mountains, Ovando permited him to attempt making a settlement in
the island. In a few years, Puerto Rico was subjected to the Spanish
government, the natives were reduced to servitude, and being treated with the
same inconsiderate rigor as their neighbors in Hispaniola, the race of original
inhabitants worn out with fatigue and sufferings, was soon exterminated.

Sebastian de Ocampo, by the command of Ovando, sailed round Cuba, and first
discovered, with certainty, that this country, which Columbus once supposed to
be a part of the continent was only a large island.

This voyage round Cuba was one of the last occurrences under the
administration of Ovando. Ever since the death of Columbus, his son Don Diego
had been employed in soliciting Ferdinand to grant him the offices of Viceroy
and Admiral in the New World, together with all the other immunities and
profits which descended to him by inheritance, in consequence of the original
capitulation with his father. But if these dignities and revenues appeared so
considerable to Ferdinand, that, at the expense of being deemed unjust, as well
as ungrateful, he had wrested them from Columbus, it is not surprising that he
should be unwilling to confer them on his son. Accordingly Don Diego wasted two
years in incessant but fruitless importunity. Weary of this, he endeavored at
length to obtain, by a legal sentence, what he could not procure from the
favor of an interested monarch. He commenced a suit against Ferdinand before
the council which managed indian affairs, and that court with an integrity
which reflects honor upon its proceedings, decided against the king, and
confirmed all the privileges stipulated in the capitulation. Ferdinand still
showed his repugnance to do Diego justice, nor would he at last have done any
thing had he not been in a manner forced to it by a powerful party, raised in
consequence of the marriage of Don Diego with Donna Maria, daughter of Don
Ferdinand, great commendator of Leon, and brother of the Duke of Alva, a
nobleman of the first rank and nearly related to the king. The duke and his
family espoused so warmly the cause of their new ally, that Ferdinand could not
resist their solicitations.

In 1509, he recalled Ovando, and appointed Don Diego his successor, though
even in conferring this favor he could not conceal his jealousy; for he
allowed him to assume only the title of governor and not that of viceroy.

Don Diego immediately set off for Hispaniola, attended by his brother, his
uncle, his wife, whom the courtesy of the Spaniards honored with the title of
Vicequeen, and a numerous retinue of both sexes, born of good families. He
lived with a splendour and magnificence hitherto unknown in the new world, and
the family of Columbus seemed now to enjoy the honors and rewards due to his
inventive genius of which he himself had been cruelly defrauded. The colony
itself acquired new luster by the accession of so many inhabitants of a
different rank and character from most of those who had hitherto emigrated to
America, and many of the most illustrious families in the Spanish settlements
are descended from the persons who at that time accompanied Don Diego Columbus.

Juan Diaz de Solis, about this time set out in conjunction with Pinzon, upon
new discoveries. They sailed due south, toward the equinoxial line, which
Pinzon had formerly crossed, and advanced as far as the 40th degree of southern
latitude. They were astonished to find that the continent of America stretched
on the right hand, through all this vast extent of ocean. They landed in
different places, to taken possession in the name of their sovereign; but
though the country appeared to be extremely fertile and inviting, their force
was so small, having been fited out rather for discovery than making
settlements, that they left no colony behind them Their voyage however, served
to give the Spaniards more exalted and adequate ideas, with respect ta the
dimensions of the new world.

Private adventurers attempted to make settlements on the new continent; but
the loss of their ships by various accidents upon unknown coasts, the diseases
peculiar to a climate the most noxious in all America, the want of provisions,
unavoidable in a country imperfectly cultivated, dissentions among themselves,
and the incessant hostilities of the natives, involved them in a succession of
calamities, the bare recital of which would strike my readers with horror.

Notwithstanding the unfortunate issue of this expedition, the Spaniards were
not deterred from engaging in new schemes of a similar nature. Juan Ponce de
Leon, in 1512, fitted out three ships at his own expense, for a voyage of
discovery, and his reputation soon drew together a respectable body of
followers. He directed his course toward the Lucayo islands; and, after
touching at several of them, as well as of the Bahama isles, he stood to the
Southwest, and discovered a country hitherto unknown to the Spaniards, which he
called Florida, either because he fell in with it on Palm Sunday, or on account
of its gay and beautiful appearance. He attempted to land in different places,
but met with such vigorous opposition from the natives, who were fierce and
warlike, as convinced him, that an increase of force was requisite to effect a
settlement. Satisfied with having opened a communication with a new country, of
whose value and importance he concieved very sanguine hopes, he returned to
Puerto Rico, through the channel now known by the name of the Gulf of Florida.

Soon after the expedition to Florida, a discovery of much greater importance
was made in another part of America, Balboa, having been raised to the
government of the small colony at Santa Maria in Darien, made frequent inroads
into the adjacent country, and collected a considerable quantity of gold, which
abounded more in that part of the continent than in the islands. In one of
these excursions, the Spaniards contended with such eagerness about the
division of some gold, that they were at the point of proceeding to acts of
violence against one another. A young Indian prince, who was present,
astonished at the high value they set upon a thing, of which he did not discern
the use, tumbled the gold out of the balance with indignation, and, turning to
the Spaniards, "Why do you quarrel," (said he) "about such a trifle? If you are
to passionately fond of gold, as to abandon your own country, and to disturb
the tranquillity of distant nations for its sake, I will conduct you to a
region, where this metal, which seems to be the chief object of your admiration
and desire, is so common, that the meanest utensils are formed of it."

Balboa and his companions, transported with what they heard, eagerly enquired
where this happy country lay^ and how they might arrive at it. He informed
them, at the distance of six suns, that is, of six days journey toward the
South, they should discover another ocean, near to which this wealthy kingdom
was situated; but, if they intended to attack that powerful state, they must
assemble forces far superior in number and strength to what they were at
present. This was the first information which the Spaniards received concerning
the southern ocean, or the opulent and extensive country known afterward by
the name of Peru.

Balboa, having mustered all the forces he could, which amounted only to 190
men, set out on this important expedition on the first of September, 1513,
about the time that the periodical rains began to abate. Though their guides
had represented the breadth of the istmus to be only a journey of six days,
they had already spent twenty five in forcing their way through the woods and
mountains. Many of them were ready to sink under such fatigue in that sultry
climate, several were seized with the diseases peculiar to the country, and all
became impatient to reach the period of their labors and sufferings. At length
the indians assured them, that from the top of the next mountain they should
discover the ocean which was the object of their wishes. When with infinite
toil they had climbed up the greater part of that steep ascent, Balboa
commanded his men to halt and advanced alone to the summit, that he might be
the first who should enjoy such a spectacle which he had so long desired. As
soon as he beheld the South Sea stretching in endless prospect below him, he
fell on his knees, and lifting up his hands to heaven, returned thanks to God,
who had conducted him to a discovery, so beneficial to his country, and so
honorable to himself. His followers, observing his transports of joy, rushed
forward to join his wonder, exultation and gratitude. They held on their course
to the shore, with great alacrity, when Balboa advancing up to the middle in
the waves, with his buckler and sword, took possession of that ocean in the
name of the king his master, and vowed to defend it.

That part of the great Pacific or Southern ocean, which Balboa first
discovered, still retains the name of the Gulf of St. Michael, which he gave to
it, and is situated to the east of Panama. From several of the petty princes,
who governed in the districts adjacent to that gulf, he extorted provisions and
gold by force of arms; others sent them to him voluntarily. Together with the
acquisition of this wealth, which served to soothe and encourage his followers,
he received accounts which confirmed his sanguine hopes of future and more
extensive benefits from this expedition. All the people on the coasts of the
South Sea concurred in informing him, that there was a mighty and opulent
kingdom situated at a considerable distance toward the southeast, where gold
was found in plenty.

Though the information Balboa received from the people, on the coast, as well
as his own conjectures and hopes, made him extremely impatient to visit this
unknown country, his prudence restrained him from attempting to invade it with
a handful of men, exhausted by fatigue, and weakened by diseases. He determined
to lead back his followers to their settlement at Santa Maria in Darien, and to
return next season with a force more adequate to such an arduous enterprise. He
reached Santa Maria after an absence of four months, with greater glory and
more treasure, than the Spaniards ever had acquired in any former expedition in
the New World.

He took care to acquaint the court of Spain with the important discovery he
had made and demanded a reinforcment of a thousand men, in order to attempt the
conquest of that opulent country, concerning which he had received such
inviting intelligence.

The meannesses and jealousies of Ferdinand, and the advice of men around him
worse than himself, induced him to supercede Balboa, the most proper man he
could have employed, and to appoint Pedrarias Davila governor of Darien. He
gave him the command of fourteen stout vessels, and twelve hundred soldiers.
These were fitted out at the public expense, and granted with a liberality
unusual to Ferdinand.

Perdrarias reached the gulf at Darien without any remarkable accident in July,
1514; but his ill conduct, and base treatment of Balboa, stopped all
operations, and nearly ruined this flourishing colony. Both parties sent home
complaints to Spain against each other.

At length, Ferdinand, became sensible of his imprudence in superceeding the
most active and experienced officer he had in the New World, and, by way of
compensation to Balboa, he appointed him lieutenant governor of the countries
upon the South Sea, with very extensive privileges and authority, at the same
time ordering Pedrarias to support him in all his operations, and to consult
him on every measure which he himself pursued. Surely nothing could be more
ridiculous and absurd in Ferdinand than this conduct! Pedrarias now conceived
the most implacable hatred to Balboa, and, though he afterward seemed so far 1
conciled to him, as to give him his daughter in marriage, he soon found means
falsely to accuse him of high ^reason, had him tried, condemned, and publicly
executed in 1517. Pedrarias, notwithstanding the violence and injustice of his
proceedings, was not only screened from punishment by the powerful patronage of
the infamous bishop of Burgos, an inveterate enemy to real merit, but continued
in the government.

While matters were thus going forward in Darien, several important events
occurred with respect to the discovery, the conquest, and government of other
provinces in the New World. Ferdinand was so intent upon opening a
communication with the Molucca or Spice Islands by the west, that, in the year
1515, he fitted out two ships at his own expense, in order to attempt such a
voyage, and gave the command of them to Juan Diaz de Solis, who was deemed one
of the most skilful navigators in Spain. He stood along the coast of South
America, and on the first of January. 1516, he entered a river which he called
Janeiro, where an extensive commerce is now carried on. From thence he
proceeded to a spacious bay which he supposed to be the entrance into a strait
that communicated with the indian ocean; but upon advancing farther, he found
it to be the mouth of Rio de Plata, one of the vast rivers by which the
southern continent of America is watered. In endeavoring to make a descent in
this county, De Sollis and several of his crew were slain by the natives; who,
in sight of the ships, cut their bodies in pieces, roasted and devoured them.
Discouraged by the loss of their commander and terrified at this horrid
spectacle, the surviving Spaniards set sail for Europe, without aiming at any
further discovery. Though this attempt proved abortive it was not without
benefit: it turned the attention of ingenious men to this course of navigation,
and prepared the way for a more fortunate voyage.

While discoveries were thus going forward. Hispaniola continued as their
principal colony, and the seat of government. Don Diego Columbus wanted neither
inclination or abilities to have rendered the members of this colony, who were
most immediately under his direction, prosperous and happy; but he was
circumscribed in all his operations by the suspicious policy of Ferdinand, who
on every occasion, and under the most frivolous pretexts, retrenched his
privileges, and encouraged the treasurer, the judges, and other subordinate
officers, to counteract his measures, and to dispute his authority. In short,
Ferdinand's conduct was so ungenerous, as obliged Don Diego to quit Hispaniola,
and repair to Spain, in order to seek redress for his injuries

On the death of Ferdinand, in 1517, Charle^ V. took possession of the
government. Diego Velasquez, who conquered Cuba in the year 1511, still
retained the government of that island, as the deputy of Don Diego Columbus,
though he seldom acknowledged his superior, and aimed at rendering his own
authority altogether independent. Under his prudent administration, Cuba became
one of the most flourishing of the Spanish settlements. The fame of this drew
many persons from the other colonies, expecting there to find some permanent
establishment, or some employment for their activity As Cuba lay to the west of
all the islands possessed by the Spaniards, and as the ocean which stretches
beyond it toward that quarter, had not hitherto been explored, these
circumstances-naturally invited the inhabitants to attempt new discoveries.

An expedition for this purpose in which activity and resolution might conduct
to sudden wealth, was more suited to the genius of the age, than the patient
industry requisite in clearing ground, and manufacturing sugar. Hence it
happened, that several officers who had served under Pedrarias in Darien,
entered into an association to undertake a voyage of discovery. They persuaded
Francisco Hernandez Cordova an opulent planter in Cuba, and a man of great
courage, to join with them in the adventure, and chose him to be their
commander. Veias^^ez not only approved of the design, but assisted in carrying
it on.

Three small vessels were purchased, and furnished with every thing requisite
either for traffic or war. An hundred and ten men embarked on board them, and
sailed from St. Jago de Cuba on the 8th of February, 1517.

On the twenty-first day after their departure from St Jago, they saw land
which proved to be Cape Catoche, the eastern point of that large peninsula
projecting from the continent of America, which still retains its original name
of Yucatan. As they approached the shore, five canoes came off full of people
decently clad in cotton garments: an asto^^^^ing sight to the Spaniards, who
had found every other part of America possessed by native savages. Cordova
endeavored by small presents to gain the good will of these people. They,
though amazed at the strange objects now presented for the first time to their
view, invited the Spaniards to visit their habitations, with an appearance of
cordiality. They landed accordingly, and as they advanced into the country,
they observed with new wonder some large houses built with stone: but they soon
found, if the Yucatans had made progress in improvement beyond their
countrymen, they were likewise more artful and warlike. Though the indian chief
received Cordova with many tokens of friendship, he had posted a considerable
body of his subjects in ambush behind a thicket, who upon a signal given by
him, rushed out and attacked the Spaniards with great boldness, and with some
degree of martial order. At the first flight of their arrows, fifteen of the
Spaniards were wounded; but the indians were so terrified with the sudden
explosion of the fire arms, and so surprised at the execution done by them, by
the cross bows, and by the other weapons of their new enemies, that they
precipitately fled. Cordova immediately quitted a country where he had met with
so unwelcome a reception, carrying off two prisoners, with the ornaments of a
small temple which he plundered in making his retreat to his ship.

Cordova continued his course toward the west without losing sight of the
coast, and on the sixteenth day arrived at Campeachy. At this place the natives
received them more kindly; but the Spaniards were much surprised, that on all
the extensive coast along which they had sailed, they had not met with any
river. Their water beginning to fail, they advanced in hope of finding a
supply; and at length they discovered the mooth of a river.

Cordova landed all his troops in order to protect the sailors, whose business
it was to fill the casks; but the natives rushed upon them with such fury, and
in such numbers, that forty-seven of the Spaniards were killed upon the spot,
and one man only of the whole body escaped unhurt. -- Their commander though
wounded in twelve different places, directed the retreat with presence of mind
equal to the courage with which he had led them on in the engagement, and with
much difficulty they reached their ships. Having met with this terrible
repulse, nothing remained but to hasten back to Cuba with their shattered
forces. In their passage thither, they suffered the greatest distress from the
want of water, that men wounded and sickly, shut up in small vessels, and
exposed to the heat of the torrid zone, can be supposed to suffer. Some died on
their passage and Cordova their commander, soon after he landed at Cuba paid
the debt of nature.

Unfortunate as this expedition proved, it contributed rather to animate than
damp a spirit of enterpr^ze among the Spaniards. They had discovered an
extensive country, situated in the neighborhood of Cuba, fertile in appearance,
and possessed by a people far more refined than any they had hitherto met with
in America. Velasquez, through particular views of ambition and interest, not
only encouraged their ardor, but at his own expense futed out four ships for
the voyage. Two hundred and forty volunteers, among whom were several persons
of rank and fortune, embarked in this enterprise. The command of it was given
to Juan de Grijalva a young man of known merit and courage, with instructions
attentively to observe the nature of the countries which he should discover; to
barter for gold; and, if circumstances were inviting, to settle a colony in
some proper station. He sailed from St Jago de Cuba, on the 8th of April, 1518.

They held the same course as in the former voyage, and at last reached
Potonchan, where the last adventurers had been so roughly handled. The desire
of avenging their countrymen who had been slain there, concurred with their
ideas of good policy, in prompting them to land, that they might chastize the
Indians with such exemplary rigor, as would strike terror into all the people
round them; but, though they disimbarked all their troops and carried ashore
some field pieces, the Indians fought with such courage, that the Spaniards
with difficulty gained the victory: and were confirmed in their opinion, that
the inhabitants of this country would prove more formidadable enemies than any
they had met with in other parts of America.

From Potonchan, they continued their voyage ^owards the west, keeping as near
as possible to the shore, and casting anchor every evening, from the dread of
the dangerous accidents to which they might be exposed in an unknown sea.
During the day their eyes were turned continually toward land, with a mixture
of surprise and wonder at the beauty of the country, as well as the novelty of
the objects they beheld. Many villages were scattered along the coast, in which
they could distinguish houses of stone that appeared white and lofty at a
distance, One of the soldiers happening to remark, that this country resembled
Spain in its appearance. Grijalva, with universal applause, called it New
Spain, the name which still distinguishes this extensive and opulent province
of Spanish empire in America.

On the 9th of June, they landed in a river, which the natives called Tabasco,
and the fame of their victory at Potonchan having reached this place, the chief
not only received them amicably, but bestowed presents upon them of such value,
as confirmed the highest ideas, which the Spaniards had formed, with respect to
the wealth and fertility of the country* These ideas were raised still higher,
by what occurred at the place where they next touched. This was considerably to
the west of Tabasco, in the province since known by the name of Guaxaca. There
they were received with the respect due to superior beings. The people perfumed
them as they landed with gum copal, and presented to them as offerings the
choiceff delicacies of their country. They were extremely fond of trading with
their new visitants, and in six days he Spaniards obtained ornaments of gold,
of curious workmanship, to the value of fifteen thousand pesos, in exchange for
European toys of small price. The two prisoners, whom Cordavo had brought from
Yucatan, had hitherto served as interpreters: but as they were unacquainted
with the language of this country, the Spaniards learned from the natives by
signs, that they were the subjects of a great monarch, called Montezuma, whose
dominions extended over that and many other provinces.

Leaving this province, with which he had so much reason to be contented,
Grijalva continued his course toward the west. He landed on a small island,
which he named the Isle of Sacrifices, because there the Spaniards beheld the
horrid spectacle of human victims, which the barbarous superstitions of the
natives offered to their gods. He touched at another small island, which he
called St. Juan de Ulua.

From this place he dispatched Predo de Alverado, one of his officers, to
Velasquez, with a full account of the important discoveries he had made, and
with all the treasure that he had acquired by trafficking with the natives.
After the departure of Alverado, he himself, with the remaining vessels,
proceeded along the coast as far as the river Panuco, the country still
appearing to be well peopled, fertile and opulent.

It was the opinion of several of Grijalva's officers, that it was not enough
to have discovered those delightful regions, or to have performed, at their
different landing-places, the empty ceremony of taking possession of them for
the crown of Castile, and that their glory was incomplete, unless they planted
a colony in some proper station which might not only secure the Spanish nation
a footing in the country; but with the reinforcements they were certain of
receiving, might gradually subject the whole to the dominion of their
sovereign. However, the squadron had now been above six months at sea, the
great part of their provisions were exhausted, and what remained of their
stores so much corrupted by the heat of the climate, as to be almost unfit for
use; they had lost some men by death, and others were sickly; the country was
crowded with people, who seemed to be intelligent as well as brave, and they
were under the government of one powerful monarch, who could bring them to act
against their invaders with united force. To plant a colony under so many
corresponding difficulties, appeared a matter too hazardous to be attempted.
Though Grijalva was not without ambition and courage, yet he was destitute of
the superior abilities requisite to form and execute so extensive a plan. He
judged it more prudent to return to Cuba, having fulfilled the purpose of his
voyage, and accomplished every thing, which the armament he commanded enabled
him to perform. He returned to St. Jago de Cuba, on the 26th of October, from
whence he had sailed about six months, without having met with any material
accident.

As this was the longest, so it had been the most successful voyage the
Spaniards had hitherto made in the new world. They had discovered that Yucatan
was not an island as they had supposed, but part of the great continent of
America. From Potonchan they had pursued their course for many hundred miles
along a coast formerly unexplored, stretching at first toward the west and
then turning to the north. All the country they discovered appeared to be no
less valuable than extensive. As soon as Avarado reached Cuba, Velasquez,
transported with success so far beyond his most sanguine expectations,
immediately dispatched a person of confidence to carry this important
intelligence to Spain; to exhibit the rich productions of the countries which
had been discovered by his means; and to solicit such an increase of authority,
as might enable and encourage him to attempt the conquest of them. Without
waiting for the return of his messenger, or for the arrival of Grijalva, of
whom he was become so jealous or distrustful that he resolved no longer to
employ him, he began to prepare such a powerful armament, as might prove equal
to an enterprise of so much danger and importance. The little and mean
jealousies, which the Spaniards seem naturally to entertain of every man of
merit, is a very singular blemish in the character of that nation.

The expedition for which Velasquez was now preparing with so much ardour and
activity, had in its views conquests far beyond what the Spanish nation had
hitherto accomplished. It led them to the knowledge of a people, who, if
compared with those tribes of South America, and the West Indies, with whom
they were hitherto acquainted, were infinitely more civilized, and far better
acquainted with the arts of war and the sciences in general. Before we proceed
to the history of events extremely different from those we have already
related, it may not be improper to take a view of the state of the New World,
such as it was when first discovered, and to contemplate the policies and
manners of the rude uncultivated tribes, by whom the different parts of it were
occupied, and with whom the Spaniards at this time had intercourse. This shall
be the subject of our next chapter.

Memorable Events recorded in this Chapter.
1505 War with the American Indians. 1508 New discoveries and settlements. 1508
Diego Columbus appointed governor of Hispaniola. 1510 Cuba conquered. 1512
Florida discovered. 1513 The South Sea discovered. 1513 Pedrarias appointed
governor of Darien. 1517 Balboa executed by the order of the treacherous
Pedrarias. 1517 Death of Ferdinand, king of Spain; succeeded by Charles V. 1517
Yucatan discovered. 1518 Campeachy discoverd. 1518 Grijalva discovers New
Spain, Tobasco, Guaxaca, and St. Juan de Ulua.
CHAP. IV.
THE immense extent of the New World is a circumstance that strikes us with
wonder. America is remarkable, not only for its magnitude, but for its
position. It stretches from the northern polar circle to a high southern
latitude, above fifteen hundred miles beyond the furthest extremity of the old
continent on that side of the line. Next to its extent, the grandeur of the
objects which it presents to our view is most apt to strike the eye of an
observer. Nature seems to have carried on her operations upon a larger scale,
with a bolder hand, and to have distinguished the features of this country by a
peculiar magnificence. The mountains of America are much superior in height to
those in the other divisions of the globe. Even the plain of Quito, which may
be considered as the base of the Andes, is elevated farther above the sea, than
the top of the Pyrenees. From those lofty mountains descend rivers
proportionably large, with which the streams in the ancient continent are not
to be compared, either for length of course, or the vast body of water, which
they roll toward the ocean. Their lakes are no less conspicuous for grandeur
than their mountains and rivers. They may be properly termed island seas of
fresh water.

The temperature of the climate of America, and the different laws to which it
is subject with respect to the distribution of heat and cold, are marks which
particularly distinguish it from other parts of the earth. Throughout all these
vast regions, there were only two monarchies remarkable for extent of
territory, or distinguished by any progress in improvement. The rest of their
continent was possessed by small independent tribes, destitute of arts and
industry, and neither capable to correct the defects, nor desirous to meliorate
the condition of that part of the earth allotted to them for their habitation.
Countries, occupied by such people, were almost in the same state as if they
had been without inhabitants.

Notwithstanding the vast extent of America, and the variety of its climates,
the different species of animals peculiar to it are much fewer in proportion,
than those of the other hemisphere. In the islands, there are only four kinds
of quadrupeds known, the largest of which did not exceed the size of a rabbit.
On the continent, the variety was greater; and though the individuals of each
kind could not fail of multiplying exceedingly, when almost unmolested by men,
who were neither so numerous, nor so united in society, as to be formidable
enemies to the animal creation, yet the number of distinct species must be
considered as extremely small.

To the causes, which checked the growth and vigor of the more noble animals,
may be attributed the propagation and increase of reptiles and infects. The air
is often darkened with clouds of insects, and the ground covered with shocking
and noxious reptiles.

The American birds of the torrid zone, like those of the same climate in Asia
and Africa, are decked in plumage, which dazzles the eye with the beauty of its
colors; but nature, satisfied with clothing them in this gay dress, has denied
most of them that melody of sound, and variety of notes, which catch and
delight the ear. Let my youthful readers stop here, and pause for a while;
through all the conditions and circumstances of life, they will find, on
reflection, that the hand of Providence has distributed things more equally
than they are aware of, as well in the human, as in the feathered race.

In a continent so extensive as America, the nature of the soil must be
various. In each of its provinces, we find some distinguishing peculiarity, the
description of which belongs to those who write their particular history, and
would be an idle attempt to describe in this epitome.

How America was first peopled, by what course mankind migrated from one
continent to the other, and in what quarter it is most probable the
communication was first opened between them, are matters for which we have
little grounds to go upon beyond that of conjecture. The theories and
speculations of ingenious men, with respect to this subject, would fill many
volumns; but they are often so wild and chimerical, that it would be offering
an insult to the understanding of our readers, to attempt either to enumerate
or refute them, even provided the limits of this work would admit of it.

To enquire into the character and condition of the American nations, at the
time when they became known to the Europeans, deserves more attentive
consideration, than the enquiry concerning their original. The discovery of the
New World enlarged the sphere of contemplation, and presented nations to our
view in a state very rude and uncultivated.. The greater part of the
inhabitants were strangers to industry and labor, ignorant of arts, imperfectly
acquainted with the nature of property, and enjoying almost without restriction
or control the blessings which flowed spontaneously from the bounty of nature.
Among the small independent tribes of South America, their customs, manners and
institututions, were nearly similar, and so extremely rude, that the
denomination of savages may be applied to them all. The Spaniards who first
visited America, and who had opportunity of beholding its various tribes, while
entire and unsubdued, were far from possessing the qualities requisite for
observing the striking spectable presented to their view. Neither the age in
which they lived, nor the nation to which they belonged, had made such progress
in true science, as inspires enlarged and liberal sentiments. The conquerors of
the New World were mostly illiterate adventurers, destitute of all the ideas
which should have directed them in contemplating objects, so extremely
different from those with which they were acquainted. Surrounded continually
with danger, or struggling with hardships, they had little leisure, and less
capacity, for any speculative enquiry. Eager to take possession of a country of
such extent and opulence, and happy in finding it occupied by inhabitants so
incapable to defend it, they hastily pronounced them to be a wretched order of
men, formed merely for servitude; and were more employed in computing the
profits of their labor, than in enquiring into the operations of their minds,
or the reason of their customs and institutions.

The human body is less affected by climate than that of any other animal. Some
animals are confined to a particular region of the globe, and cannot exist
beyond it; while others though they may be brought to bear the injuries of a
foreign climate, cease to multiply when carried from their native air and soil.
Even such as seem capable of being naturalized in various climates, feel the
effect of every remove from their proper station, and gradually dwindle and
degenerate from the vigor and perfection peculiar to their species. Man is the
only living creature, whose frame is at once so hardy and so flexible, that he
can spread over the whole earth, become the inhabitant of every region, and
thrive and multiply under every climate, though not without some attending
inconveniences.

The complexion of the Americans is of a reddish brown, nearly resembling the
color of copper*Their persons are of a full size, extremely strait, and well
proportioned; but they are more remarkable for agility than strength*As the
external form of the Americans leads us to suspect that there is some natural
debility in their frame, the smallness of their appetite for ^^^d has been
mentioned by many authors as a confirmation of this suspicion. The quantity of
food which men consume varies according to the temperature of the climate in
which they live, the degree of activity which they exert, and the natural vigor
of their constitutions. Under the enervating heat of the torrid zone, and where
men pass their days in indolence and ease, they require less nourishment than
the active inhabitants of temperate or cold countries.

Notwithstanding the feeble make of the Americans, hardly any of them are
deformed, mutilated, or defective in any of their senses. All travelers have
been struck with this circumstance, and have celebrated the uniform symmetry
and perfection of their external figure.

In the simplicity of the savage state, when man is not oppressed with labor,
or enervated by luxury, or disquieted with care, we are apt to imagine that his
life will flow on almost untroubled by disease or suffering, until his days be
terminated in extreme old age, by the gradual decays of nature. We find,
accordingly, among the Americans, as well as among other rude people, persons,
whose decrepid and shrivelled forms seem to indicate on extraordinary length of
life; but as most of them are unacquainted with the art of numbering, and all
of them as forgetful of what is past, as they are improvident for what is to
come, it is impossible to ascertain their age with any degree of precision.

Whatever may be the situation in which man is placed he is born to ^uffer; and
his diseases in the savage state, though fewer in number, are, like those of
the animals whom he nearly resembles in his mode of life, more violent and more
fatal. If luxury engenders and nourishes distempers of one species, the rigor
and distress of savage life brings on those of another. As men in this state
are wonderfully improvident, and their means of subsistence precarious, they
often pass from extreme want to exuberant plenty, according to the vicissitudes
of fortune in the chase, or in consequence of the various degree of abundance,
with which the earth affords to them its productions in different seasons Their
inconsiderate glu^tony in the one situation, and their severe abstinence in the
other, are equally pernicious. The strength and vigor of savages are at some
seasons, impaired by what they suffer from scarcity of food; at others, they
are afflicted with disorders arising from indigestions and a superfluity of
gross aliment. These are so common, that they may be considered as the
unavoidable consequence of their mode of subsisting, and cut off considerable
numbers in the prime of life. There are other disorders, to which they are
continually exposed, owing to the inclemency of different seasons. In the
savage state hardships and fatigues violently assault the constitution, in
polished societies, intemperance undermines it. It is not easy to determine
which of them operates with most fatal effects, or tends most to abridge human
life.

The thoughts and attention of a savage are confined within the small circle of
objects, immediately conducive to his preservation or enjoyment. Every thing
beyond that is beneath his observations, or is entirely indifferent to him.
Like a mere animal, what is before his eyes interests and affects him; what is
out of sight or at a distance. makes little impression. They follow blindly the
impulse of the appetite they feel, but are entirely regardless of distant
consequences, and even of those removed in the least degree from immediate
apprehension.

The active efforts of their minds are few and languid. The desires of simple
nature are very limited, and where a favorable climate yields almost
spontaneously what suffices to gratify them, they scarcely stir the soul, or
excite any violent emotion. Hence the people of several tribes in America waste
their lives in a state of indolence.

To be free from occupation, seems to be all the enjoyment to which they
aspire. Such is their aversion to labor, that neither the hope of future good,
nor the apprehension of evil, can surmount it. They appear equally indifferent
to both, discovering little solicitude, and taking no precaution to avoid the
one, or to secure the other. The cravings of hunger may rouse them: but as they
devour with little distinction, whatever will appease its instinctive demands,
the exertions these occasion are of short duration.

Amongst the rudest tribes in America, a regular union between husband and wife
was universal, and the rights of marriage were understood and recognized. In
those districts where subsistence was scanty, and the difficulty of maintaining
a family was great the man confined himself to one wife. In warmer and more
fertile provinces, the facility of procuring food concurred with the influence
of climate, in inducing the inhabitants to increase the number of their wives.
In some countries, the marriage union subsisted during life; in others, the
impatience of the Americans under restraint of any species, together with their
natural levity and caprice, prompted them to dissolve it on very slight
pretexts, and often without assigning any cause.

The situation of the American women, in whatever light we consider them, was
equally humiliating and mi^erable. Among many people of America the marriage
contract is properly a purchase. The man buys his wife of her parents. Though
unacquainted with the use of money, or with such commerical transactions as
take place in more improved society, he knows how to give an equivalent for an
object he desires to possess. In some places, the suitor devotes his service
for a certain time to the parent of the maid whom he courts; in others, he
hunts for them occasionally, or assists in cultivating their fields, and
forming their canoes; in others, he offers presents of such things as are
deemed most valuable on account of their usefulness or rarity. In return for
these, he receives his wife; and this circumstance, added to the low estimation
of women among savages, leads him to consider her a female servant whom he has
a title to treat as an inferior. The condition of an American woman is so
peculiarly grievous, and their depression so complete, that servitude is a name
too mild to describe their wretched state. A wife, among most tribes, is no
better than a beast of burden, destined to every office of labor and fatigue.
While the men loiter out the day in sloth, or spend it in amusement, the women
are condemned to incessant toil. Tasks are imposed upon them without pity, and
services are received without complacence or grat^^de. Every circumstance
reminds women of this mortifying inferiority. They must approach their lords
with reverence, regard them as more exalted beings, and are not permited to eat
in their presence.

The Americans are not deficient in affection and attachment to their
offspring. They feel the power of this instinct in its full force, and as long
as their progeny continue feeble and helpless no people exceed them in
tenderness and care. In the simplicity of the savage state the affections of
parents, like the instinctive fondness of animals. ceases almost entirely as
soon as their offspring attain maturity. Little instruction fits them for that
mode of life to which they are desti^^^. The parents, as if their duty were
accomplished, when they have conducted their children through the helpless
years of infancy, leave them afterward at entire liberty. In an American but,
a father, a mother, and their posterity, live together like persons assembled
by accident, without seeming to feel the obligation of the duties mutually
arising from such connection.

Though the people of America may be all comprehendedr unde the general
denomination of savage, the advances they had made in the art of procuring to
themselves a certain and plentiful subsistence were very unequal. On the vast
plains of South America, m^n appears in one of the rudest (...) can exist,
several tribes depending entirely upon the bounty of nature for subsistence.
They discover no solicitude they employ little foresight, and scarc^^ (...) any
industry to secure what is necessary (...) their support. The roots which the
(...) produces spontaneously, the fruits the berries and the seeds, which they
gather in the woods together with lizards and other reptiles, which multiply
amazingly with the hea^ of the climate in a fat soil, moist^^ed by frequent
rains, supply them with food during some part of the year. At other times they
live upon fish; and nature seems to have indu^^ed the laziness of the South
American tribes by her liberalities in this way. The va^^ rivers of that part
of America abound with an infinite variety of delicate fish, and are so
numerous as to be caught with little trouble. None but tribes contigious to
great rivers can support themselves in this manner. The greater part of the
American nations, dispersed over the forests with which their country is
covered, do not procure subsistence with the same facility; but are obliged to
obtain it by hunting, which in many parts is their principal occupation, and
which requires strenuous exertions.

As game and fish are the principal food of the Americans, their agriculture is
neither extensive nor laborious. Their principal productions in this line are
maze, manioc, plaintain, potatoes, and pimento. All the fruits of their
industry, together with what their soil and climate produced spontaneously,
afforded them but a scanty maintenance. Though their demands for food were very
sparing, they hardly raised what was sufficient ^tor their own consumption.

In America, the word nation is not of the same import as in other parts of the
globe. It is applied to small societies, perhaps not exceeding two or three
hundred persons, but occupying provinces larger than some kingdoms in Europe.
In the provinces which border on the Oronoco, one may travel several hundred
miles, in different directions, without finding a single hut or observing the
footsteps of a human creature.

The Americans had no idea of property. As the animals on which the hunter
feeds are not bred under his inspection, nor nourished by his care, he can
claim no right to them while they run wild in the forest. The forests, or
hunting grounds, are deemed the property of the tribe, from which it has a
title to exclude every rival nation; but no individual arrogates a right to any
district of these, in preference to his fellow-citizen.

We shall now proceed to take a cursory view of their art of war. Savage
nations, in carrying on their public wars, are influenced by the same ideas,
and animated with the same spirit, as in prosecuting private vengeance. The
maxims by which they regulate their military operations, though extremely
different from those, which take place among more civilized and populous
nations, are well suited to their own political state, and the nature of the
country in which they act. They never take the field in numerous bodies, as it
would require a greater effort of foresight and industry, than is usual among
savages, to provide for their subsistence, during a march of some hundred miles
through dreary forests, or during a long voyage upon their lakes and rivers.

Their armies are not encumbered with baggage or military stores. Each warrior,
besides his arms, carries a mat and a small bag of pounded maize, and with
these he is completely equipped for any service. While at a distance from the
enemies frontier, they disperse through the woods, and support themselves with
the game they kill, and the fish they catch. The manner in which they attack
their enemies, the treatment of their prisoners, and the surprising fortitude
they show in bearing the most cruel tortures, being nearly the same among (...)
South American Indians as among the North we shall not here repeat what we have
already mentioned on that head in our ^^^ory of North America.

In the warmer and more mild climates of America, none of the rude tribes were
clothed. To most of them Nature had not even suggested any Idea of impropriety
of being altogether uncovered. As under a mild climate there was little need of
any defense from the injuries of the air, and their extreme indolence shunned
every species of labor to which it was not urged by absolute necessity, all
the inhabitants of the isles, and a considerable part of the people on the
continent, remained in this state of naked simplicity. Others were satisfied
with some slight covering, such as decency required; but though naked, they
were not unadorned. They fastened bits of gold or shells, or shining stones, to
their ears, their noses, and cheeks. They stained their skins with a great
variety of figures, and they spent much time, and submitted to great pain, in
ornamenting their persons in this fantastic manner.

In one part of their dress, which, at first sight appears the most singular
and capricious, the Americans have discovered considerable sagacity in
providing against the chief inconveniences of their climate, which is often
sultry, and moist to excess. All the different tribes, which remain unclothed,
are accustomed to anoint and rub their bodies with the grease of animals, with
viscous gums, and with oils of different kinds. By this they check that profuse
perspiration, which in the torrid zone, wastes the vigor of the frame, and
abridges the period of human life. By this too they provide a defense against
the extreme moisture during the rainy season. They likewise, at certain
seasons, emper paint of different colors with those unctious substances, and
bedaub themselves plentifully with that composition.

Sheathed with this impenetrable varnish their skins are not only protected
from the heat of the sun, but as all the innumerable tribes of infects have an
antipathy to the smell or taste of that mixture, they are delivered from their
teazing persecution, which amidst forests and marshes, especially in the warmer
regions, would have been wholly insupportable in a state of perfect nakedness.

Savage nations, being far from that state of improvement, in which the mode of
living is considered as a mark of distinction, and unacquainted with those
wants, which require a variety of accommodations, regulate the construction of
their houses according to their limited ideas of necessity. Some of the
American tribes were so extremely rude and had advanced so little beyond the
primeval simplicity of nature, that they had no houses at all. During the day,
they took shelter from the scorching rays of the sun under thick trees, and at
night they formed a shed with their branches and leaves. In the rainy seasons
they retired into caves, formed by the hand of nature or hallowed out by their
own industry. Others, who had no fixed abode, and roamed through the forest in
quest of game, sojourned in temporary huts, which they erected with little
labor, and abandoned without any concern.

Clubs made of heavy wood, stakes hard ened in the fire, lances whose heads
were armed with flint or the bone of some animal are weapons known to the
rudest nations. All these, however, were of use only in close encounter; but
men wished to annoy their enemies while at a distance, and the bow and arrow is
the most early invention for this purpose. The people in some provinces of
Chili, and those of Patagonia, toward the southern extremity of America, use a
weapon peculiar to themselves. They fasten stones about the size of a man's
fist to each end of a leather thong of eight feet in length, and swinging these
round their heads, throw them with such dexterity that they seldom miss the
object they aim at.

As their food and habitations are perfectly simple, their domestic utensils
are few and rude. Some of the southern tribes discovered the art of forming
vessels of earthern ware, and baking them in the sun so as they could endure
the fire. These vessels they used in preparing part of their provisions, and
this may be considered as a step toward refinement and luxury; for men in their
rudest state were not acquainted with any method of dressing their victuals,
but by roasting them on the fire, and among several tribes in America, this is
the only species of cookery yet known.

What appears to be the masterpiece of art among the savages of America is the
construction of their canoes. An Indian, shut up in his boat of whalebone,
covered with skins, can brave that stormy ocean, on which he is compelled to
depend for part of his subsistence. The inhabitants of the isles in South
America form their canoes by hallowing the trunk of a large tree, with infinite
labor, and though in appearance they are extremely awkward and unwieldy, they
paddle and steer them with such dexterity, that Europeans, well acquainted with
all the improvements in the science of navigation, have been astonished at the
rapidity of their motion, and the quickness of their evolutions.

With respect to their religion, even among those tribes, whose religious
system was more enlarged, and who had formed some conception of benevolent
beings, which delighted in conferring benefits, as well as of malicious powers
prone to inflict evil, superstition still appears as the offspring of fear, and
all its efforts were employed to avert calamities. They were persuaded that
their good deities, prompted by the benificence of their nature, would bestow
every blessing in their power, without solicitation or acknowledgement; and
their only anxiety was to sooth and deprecate the wrath of the powers, whom
they regarded as the enemies of mankind.

With respect to the immortality of the soul the sentiments of the Americans
were more united. The human mind, even when least improved and invigorated by
culture, shrinks from the thoughts of dissolution, and looks forward with hope
and expectation to a state of future existence. The most uncivilized savages of
America do not apprehend death as the extinction of being: all entertain hopes
of a future and more happy state, where they shall be for ever exempt from the
calamities, which embitter human life in its present condition. This future
state they conceive to be a delightful country blessed with perpetual spring,
whose forests abound with game, whose rivers swarm with fish, where famine is
never felt, and uninterrupted plenty shall be enjoyed without labor or toil.

As the diseases of men in the savage state are like those of the animal
creation, few but extremely violent, their impatience under what they suffer,
and solicitude for the recovery of health, soon inspired them with
extraordinary reverence for such as pretened to understand the nature of their
maladies, or to preserve them from their sudden and fatal effects. However
these ignorant pretenders being such utter stranger to the structure of the
human frame, as to know neither the causes of disorders, nor the manner in
which they were likely to terminate, superstition, frequently mingled with some
portion of craft, supplied what they wanted in knowledge. They imputed the
origin of diseases to supernatural influence, and advised or performed a
variety of superstitious rites, which they represented to be sufficient to
remove the most obstinate and dangerous disorders.

From the superstition and credulity of the Americans likewise proceeded their
faith in dreams, their observation of o^ men's, their attention to the chirping
of birds, and the cries of animals, all which they supposed to be indications
of future events; and if any one of their prognostics was deemed unfavorable,
they eagerly abandoned the object they had in pursuit.

Savage as the Americans were, they were not without their amusements; and of
these dancing appears to be the principal The war dance seems to be the most
striking, in which are represented all the maneuvers of an American campaign.
Their songs and dances are mostly solemn, and martial, they are connected with
some of the most serious and important affairs of life, and, having no relation
to love or gallantry, are seldom common to the two sexes, but executed by the
men and women apart.

The Americans are universally fond of gaming. Though they are at other times
so indifferent, phlegmatic, silent, and animated with so few desires, as soon
as they engage in play, they become rapacious, impatient, noisy, and almost
frantic with eagerness. Their furs, their domestic utensils, their clothes,
their arms, are staked at play and when all is lost, high as their sense of
independence is, in a wild emotion of hope or despair, they will often risk
their personal liberty upon a single bet. Among several tribes, such gaming
parties are frequently made, and become their most agreeable entertainment at
every great festival.

The same causes that contribute to render them fond of play, is the cause of
drunkenness among them. It seems to have been one of the first exertions of the
human ingenuity to discover some (...) ^omposition of an intoxicating quality;
and there is hardly any nation so rude, or so destitute of invention, as not to
have succeeded in this fatal research. The most barbarous of the American
tribes have been so unfortunate as to attain this art; and even those which are
deficient in knowledge as not to be acquainted with the method of giving an
inebriating strength to liquors by fermentation, can accomplish the same by
some other means.

It is customary with the American Indians, when their parents and other
relations become old, or labor under any distemper which the^ have not art
enough to cure, to put an end to their lives, in order to be relieved from the
burden of tending and supporting them. The same hardships and difficulty of
procuring subsistence, which prevent savages, in some cases, from rearing their
children, prompt them to destroy the aged and infirm. The declining state of
the one is as helpless as the infancy of the other; and the American thinks he
does nothing more than his duty, in easing his father or friend of a
burdensome life of pain and disease.

A hardness of heart and insensibility of feeling are remarkable in all savage
nations. Their minds, roused only by strong emotions, are little susceptible of
gentle, delicate, or tender affections. When any favor is done him, he neither
feels gratitude, nor thinks of making any return. The high idea of independence
among the Americans nourishes a sullen reserve, which keeps them at a distance
from each other.

A savage, frequently placed in situations of danger or distress, depending on
no one but himself, and wrapped up in his own thoughts and schemes, is a
serious and melancholy animal. The American, when not engaged in action, often
sits whole days in one posture, without opening his lips. When they engage in
war or the chase, they usually march in a line at some distance from each
other, and do not exchange a single word. Even in their canoes, the same
profound silence is observed; and nothing but intoxicating liquors or jolity
attending their dances, can at any rate render them in the least conversable.

We may attribute the refined cunning, with which they form and execute their
schemes, to the same causes. With the American Indians, war is a system of
craft, in which they trust for success to stratagem more than to open force,
and have their invention continually at work to cir^umvent and surprise their
enemies. The people of the rude tribes of America are remarkable for their
artifice and duplicity. The na^ives of Peru were employed above thirty years,
in forming the plan of an insurrection, which took place under the vice-royalty
of the Marquis de Villa Garcia; and though a great number of people of
different ranks, were let into the secret, yet not a syllable of it transpired
during all that period, no man betrayed his trust, or by an unguarded look, or
imprudent word, gave rise to any suspicion of what was meditating.

However, let us not suppose that the Americans were without their virtues,
among which fortitude and courage were remarkably conspicious. Accustomed as
the Indians are to continual alarms, they grow familiar with danger; courage
becomes an habitual virtue, resulting naturally from their situation, and
strengthened by constant exertions. They are naturally attached to the
community of which they are members. From the nature of their political union,
we should be led to suppose this tie to be very feeble; but each individual
freely and cheerfully undertakes the most perilous service, when the community
deems it necessary. They have a fierce and deeprooted antipathy to the enemies
of their country, and that zeal for the honor of their tribe, which prompts
them to brave danger in the pursuit of triumph, and to endure the most
exquisite torments, without a groan, that it may not be dishonored Far from
complaining of their own situation, or viewing that of men in a more improved
state with admiration or envy, they regard themselves as the standard of
excellence, as being the best entitled, as well as the most perfectly
qualified, to enjoy real happiness.

CHAP. V.
AMBITION and avarice united to induce Velasquez to prepare for the conquest of
New Spain, so that when Grijalva returned to Cuba, he sound the armament
destined to attempt the conquest of that rich country he had discovered, almost
complete and ready to sail. Velasquez knew not whom to entrust with the command
of this important expedition. Though he was of a most aspiring ambition, and not
destitute of talents for government, he possessed neither such courage, nor
such vigor and activity of mind, as to undertake in person the conduct of the
armament he was preparing. He meanly wished to find some person, who had
bravery and abilities equal to the undertaking, but would at^ribute all the
honor and glory to him. After some time searching for such a person, and
finding that no man of abilities would submit to such disgraceful terms, he at
last appo^ted Fernando Cortes to the command. Cortes was a man of noble blood,
but whose family was ^^moderate fortune: he was a good soldier, and every way
qualified for such an undertaking.

Though the governor had laid out considerable sums, and each adventurer had
exhausted his stock, or strained his credit, the poverty of the preparation was
such, as must astonish the present age, and bore no resemblance to an armament
destined for the conquest of a great empire. The fleet consisted of eleven
vessels, the largest of one hundred tons, which was dignified with the name of
Admiral; three of seventy or eighty tons and the rest small open barks. On
board of these were 617 men; of which 508 belonged to the land service, and 109
were seamen or artificers. As the use of firearms among the nations of Europe
was hitherto confined to a few battallions of regular disciplined infantry,
only thirteen soldiers were armed with muskets; thirty-two were cross-bow men,
and the rest had swords and spears. They had only sixteen horses and ten small
fieldpieces.

On the 10th of February, 1519, Cortes sailed with his small armament to attack
a most powerful monarch. He touched first at Cozumal, then at Tabasco, and on
the 2d of April arrived at St. Juan de U^ua in Mexico. As soon as they entered
the harbor, a boat came off to them, to know what was the intention of their
visit, and to offer them their assistance if needful. Cortes assured them, in
respectful terms, which he did by means of an interpreter, that he approached
their country with most friendly sentiments, and came to propose matters of
great importance to the welfare of their prince and his kingdom, which he would
unfold more fully, in person, to the governor and the general. Next morning,
without waiting for any answer, he landed his troops, his horses, and
artillery; and having chosen proper ground, began to erect huts for his men,
and fortify his camp.

The Mexicans treated the Spaniards with the greatest civility, but wished to
divert them from their intention of visiting the capital, where the emperor
Montezuma resided. For this purpose, they commenced a negotiation, by
introducing a train of a hundred Indians loaded with presents, sent from
Montezuma to Cortes. The magnificence of these were such as became a great
monarch, and far exceeded any idea the Spaniards had hitherto formed of his
wealth. They were placed upon mats spread on the ground, in such order as
showed them to the greatest advantage. Cortes and his officers viewed with
admiration the various manufactures of the country; cotton stuffs so fine, and
of such delicate texture, as to resemble silks; pictures of animals, trees and
other natural objects, formed with feathers of different colors, disposed and
mingled with such skill and elegance, as to rival the works of the pencil in
truth and beauty of imitation, but what more particularly attracted the
attention of the Spaniards, was the amazing quantity of unwrought gold and
silver, and the profusion of pearls and pre^ious stones, the produce of the
country.

These rich presents, instead of inducing the Spaniards to quit Mexico, made
them the more resolute to make a conquest of it. Cortes insisted on visiting
the king in his capital and declared he would not leave the island till that
was granted. Of all the princes who had swayed the Mexican scepter. Montezuma
was the most haughty, violent, and impatient of control. His subjects viewed
him with awe, and his enemies with terror. The former he governed with
unrelenting rigor, and the latter he reduced to awe by the power of his arms.
However though his power and tyranny kept his subjects and neighbors in awe,
yet he wanted those qualities of mind, which were necessary to intimidate and
subdue his new visitors.

Montezuma from the moment the Spaniards appeared on the coast, discovered
symptoms of timidity and embarrassment, Instead of taking such resolutions as
his power enabled him, he deliberated with an anxiety and hessitation that did
not escape the notice of the meanest of his courtiers. He spent his time in
fruitless negociations with the Spaniards, and thereby raised their courage and
consequence.

In the mean time, Cortes was watching the opportunity to throw off all
connections with Velasquez, whose natural jealousy had induced him to endeavor
to deprive Cortes of the command of the expedition before he sailed. He got the
confidence of the officers and soldiers, and, having assembled a council, he
resigned the commission he had received from Velasquez, and was immediately
chosen chief justice and captain general of the new colony.

Cortes owed much of his success to the Mexican gold, which he distributed with
a liberal hand among both friends and opponents, and thereby brought all to be
of one mind. Having thus settled every thing to the satisfaction of his army,
by engaging it to join him in disclaiming any dependence on the governor of
Cuba, he thought he might now venture to quit the camp, in which he had
hitherto remained, and advance into the country. To this he was en^ouraged by
an event no less fortunate than seasonable. He received a proffer of friendship
from the Cazique of Zimpoalla, a considerable town at no great distance. He
found by their message, that they were filled with such dread and hatred of
Montezuma, that nothing could be more acceptable to them, than a prospect of
deliverance from the oppressions under which they groaned. Cortes was highly
delighted to find, that the great empire he intended to attack was not united,
nor its sovereign beloved.

Some officers, whom Cortes had employed to survey the coast, having discovered
a village about forty miles to the northward, which, as well on account of the
fertility of the soil, as commo^iousness of the harbor, seemed to be a more
proper station for a settlement than that where he was encamped, he determined
to remove thither; Zimpoalla lay in his way, where the cazique welcomed him in
the manner he had reason to expect. He received Cortes with respect, almost
approaching to adoration, and like one to whom he looked up as a deliverer.
From the cazique he learned many particulars with respect to the character of
Montezuma, whom he represented as a tyrant, haughty, cruel and suspicious.
Cortes assured the cazique, that one great object of the spaniards in visiting
a country so remote from their own, was to redress grievances, and to relieve
the oppressed.

Having taken his leave of the cazique, he continued his march to Quiabis^an.
The spot his officers had chosen as a proper situation, appeared so well to
meet his approbation, that he immediately marked out ground for a town. The
houses to be erected were only huts; but these were to be surrounded with
fortifications, of sufficient strength to resist the assaults of an indian
army. Every one, even Cortes not excepted, gave an helping hand to the erecting
of fortifications, so essential to the preservation of every individual of the
colony. His next care was to form an alliance with the neighboring kings, whom
he taught to despise their emperor, by gradually inspiring them with an high
opinion of the Spaniards, as beings of a superior order, and irresistible in
arms.

Cortes perceiving that some of his men grew tired of their present pursuits,
and had even formed the plan of making their escape to Cuba in one of the
ships, saw no hopes of success, but in cutting off all possibility of retreat,
and reducing his men to the necessity of adopting the same resolutions with
which he himself was animated, either to conquer or perish. With this view he
determined to destroy his fleet and his address in pesuading his followers to
adopt his ideas, was not inferior to the boldness of the undertaking, With
universal consent the ships were drawn ashore, and after stripping them of
their sail, rigging, iron work, and whatever else might be of use, they were
broken in pieces. Thus from an effort of magnanimity, to which there is nothing
parallel in history, five hundred men voluntarily consented to be shut up in a
hostile country* filled with powerful and unknown nations; and having precluded
every means of escape left themselves without any resource but what their own
perseverance and valor could procure them, and on which every thing now
depended.

On the 16th of August, 1519, Cortes began his march from Zimpoalla, with 500
men, fifteen horse and six field pieces The remainder of his troops, consisting
chiefly of such as from age or infirmity were less fit for active service, he
left as a garrison in Villa Rica, under the command of Escalante, an officer of
merit, and warmly attached to the interest of Cortes.

The first war he engaged in was with the Hascalens, who advanced against him
with numerous armies, and attacked him in various forms, with a degree of
valor and perseverance to which the Spaniards had seen nothing equal in the
new world. The Hascalens, however were at last glad to sue for peace, seeing
their own people so dreadfully destroyed, while the Spaniards remained unhurt.
"If (said they to the Spaniards) you are divinities of a cruel and savage
nature, we present to you five slaves, that you may drink their blood and eat
their flesh. If you are mild deities, accept an offer of incense and variegated
plumes. If you are men, here is meat, and bread and fruit to nourish you." As
both parties were equally desirous of peace, matters were soon settled between
them. The Hascalens acknowledged themselves as dependent on the crown of
Castile; when Cortes took the republic under his protection, and promised to
secure them against every attempt of injury on their persons or property.

On the 13th of October, Cortes set out on his march for Mexico, accompanied by
six thousand Hascalens, so that he now appeared at the head of something like a
regular army. As the Spaniards descended from the mountains of Ch^^^^^. over
which the road lay, the vast plains of Mexico gradually unfolded itself to
their view. This prospect afforded one of the most striking and beautiful views
on the face of the earth; when they beheld fertile and cultived fields,
stretching beyond the reach of the human eye; when they saw a lake resembling
the sea in extent, encompassed with large towns, and beheld the capital city
rising upon an island in the center, adorned with its temples and turrets; the
prospect so far surpassed their most sanguine expectations, that some believed
the fancified descriptions of romance were realized, and that its enchanted
palaces and gilded domes were presented to their sight; others could hardly
persuade themselves, that this wonderful sight was any thing more than a dream.
As they proceeded their doubts were removed, but their amazement increased.

Cortes was almost at the gates of the capital before Montezuma had determined,
whether he should receive him as a friend, or oppose him as an enemy. On their
arrival near the city, about a thousand persons, who bore marks of distinction,
can ^^o^t to meet them, dressed in mantles of fine cotton and ardorned with
plumes. Each of these seperately passed Cortes* and paid the most submissive
obedience to him according to the mode of their country. They announced the
approach of Montezuma himself, and his harbingers soon after came in sight. Two
hundred persons in an uniform dress first appeared, ornamented with feathers,
proceeding two and two, barefooted, and in profound silence, with their eyes
fixed on the ground. A company of higher rank next followed, in their most
sumptuous ornaments; in the midst of whom was Montezuma, in a litter richly
ornamented with gold, and feathers of various colors. He was carried on the
shoulders of four of his principal favorites, while others supported a canopy
of curious workmanship over his head. Before him marched three officers with
rods of gold in their hands, which they lifted up on high at certain intervals,
when all the people immediately bowed their heads and hid their faces, as
unworthy to look on so great a monarch. As soon as he approached Cortes
dismounted, advanced toward him with officious haste, and in a respectful
posture. Montezuma immediately alighted from his chair, and leaning on the arms
of two of his near relations, approached with a slow and stately step, his
attendants covering the streets with cotton cloth, that he might not touch the
ground. Cortes accosted him with profound reverence, after the European
fashion; and Montezuma returned the salutation according to the mode of his
country, by touching the earth with his hand, and then kissing it. Montezuma
conducted Cortes to the quarters he had prepared for his reception, and
immediately took leave of him with a politeness not unworthy of a court more
refined. Nothing material passed at this first interview.

In the evening, Montezuma returned to visit his guests with the same pomp as
in their first interview. He told Cortes, that from what he had heard and seen
of him and his followers, he was convinced that they were the very persons,
whose appearance the Mexican traditions and prophecies taught them to expect,
in order to reform their constitutions and laws; that he had accordingly
received them not as strangers, but as relations of the same blood and
parentage, and desired that they might consider themselves as masters in his
dominions, for both himself and his subjects should be ready to comply with
their will, and even to prevent their wishes. The three subsequent days were
employed in viewing the city; the appearance of which, so far superior in the
order of its buildings, and the number of its inhabitants, to any place the
Spaniards had beheld in America, filled them with wonder and surprise.

Though the novelty of these objects amused the Spaniards, yet they were not
without their alarms on account of their safety. The allies of the Spaniards
assured Cortes, that the Mexican priests had, in the name of the gods,
counseled their sovereign to admit the Spaniards into the capital, that he
might cut them off there at one blow with perfect security.

Cortes very plainly perceived that his destruction was intended; it was
therefore necessary to extricate himself out of the difficulties, in which one
bold step had involved him, by venturing upon another still bolder. The
situation was trying but his mind was equal to it; and; after revolving the
matter with deep attention, he fixed upon a plan no less extraordinary th^n
daring. He de^ermined to seize Montezuma in his palace and carry him as a
prisoner to the Spanish quarters. The plan being properly settled between
Cortes and his officers, this powerful monarch was seized by a few strangers in
the midst of his capital, at noon day, and carried off as a prisoner, without
opposs^tion or bloodshed. History contains nothing parallel to this event,
either with respect to the temerity of the attempt, or the success of the
execution, and were not all the circumstances of this extraordinary transaction
authenticated by the most unquestionable evidence, they would appear so wild
and extravagant as to go far beyond the bounds of reason and probability.

On the 4th of December, 1519, Qualcopoca, the son of Montezuma, and five of
the principal officers who served under him, were brought prisoners to the
citidel, formally tried by a Spanish courtmartial, and, though they had acted
no other part than what became loyal subjects and brave men, they were
condemned to be burnt alive, which was immediately put in execution. The rigor
with which Cortes punished the unhappy persons, who first presumed to lay
violent hands upon his followers, seems to have made all the impressions he
desired. The spirit of Montezuma was not only overawed, but subdued. During six
months that Cortes remained in Mexico, the monarch continued in the Spanish
quarters, with the appearance of an entire satisfaction, and tranquillity, as i^
he had resided there, not from constraint, but through choice. His ministers
and officers attended him as usual, he took cognizance of all affairs, and
every order was issued in his name. The external aspect of government appearing
the same, and all its ancient forms being scrupulously observed, the people
were so little sensible of any change, that they obeyed the mandates of their
monarch with the same submissive reverence as ever. Thus, by the fortunate
temerity of Cortes in seizing Montezuma, the Spaniards at once secured to
themselves more extensive au^hority in the Mexican empire, than it was possible
to have acquired in a long course of time by open force; and they exercised
more absolute sway in the name of another, than they could have done in their
own.

Cortes, encouraged by so many instances of the monarch's tame submission to
his will ventured to put it to a proof still more trying. He urged Montezuma to
acknowledge himself a vassal of the king of Castile, to hold his crown of him
as superior, and to subject his dominions to the payment of an annual tribute.
With this requisition, the last and most humbling that can be made to one
possessed of sovereign authority, Montezuma was so obsequious as to comply. The
act of submission and homage was executed with all the formalities the
Spaniards were pleased to dictate.

The next attempt Cortes made was to alter their religion, which had such an
effect upon the Mexicans, that they determined to destroy the Spaniards if they
persisted in it; and even Montezuma himself had expressed his with to Cortes,
that he would think of returning home.

While things continued in this critical situation, Cortes, anxious about what
was past, uncertain with respect to the future, and much oppressed by the late
declaration of the Mexicans, he received an account of some ships having
appeared on the coast. He idly imagined that his messengers were returned from
Spain, and that the completion of all his hopes and wishes were at hand.
However a cou^ier soon brought certain information, that the armament was
fitted out by Ve^asquez, governor of Cuba, and instead of bringing the aid they
expected, threa^ened them with immediate destruction. This armament was
commanded by Pamphilo de Narvaez

Cortes was now greatly alarmed, as Narvaez seemed determined to ruin him,
having received orders from Velasquez to seize him and send him to Cuba in
irons. Cortes at first attempted to treat with his enemies; but finding that
impossible, he marched ag^ins^ them with an army infinitely inferior to
their's, and rushing upon them, in the night, obtained a complete victory.
Narvaez was wounded, taken prisoner, and put in irons.

This victory proved the more acceptable, as it was gained with little
bloodshed, only two soldiers being killed on the side of Cortes, and two
officers, with fifteen private men, of the adverse faction. Cortes treated the
vanquished not like enemies, but as countrymen and friends, and offered to send
them back immediately to Cuba, or to take them into his service, as partners in
his fortune, on equal terms with his own soldiers. The greater part of them
accepted the offer, and vied with each other in professions of fidelity and
attachment to a general, whose recent successes had given them such a striking
proof of his abilities. Thus, by a series of events no less fortunate than
uncommon, Cortes not only escaped from the destruction that seemed inevitable,
but, when he had least reason to expect it, was placed at the head of a
thousand resolute Spaniards.

While Cortes was engaged in this business, the Mexicans seized the opportunity
of his absence to take up arms, to which they had been more particularly urged
by the cruelty and treachery of Alvarado, whom Cortes had left in the city, in
order to take care of the royal prisoner and keep the natives in awe.

On the 24th of June, 1520, Cortes marched back to the city and took quiet
possession of his ancient station. However, being too much elated with his
success, he neglected to visit Montezuma, and embittered the insult by
expressions full of contempt for that unfortunate prince and his people. This
being rumoured about, they flew to arms in every quarter, and attacked the
Spaniards in their fortifications. Though the artillery pointed at their
numerous battallions, crowded together in narrow streets, swept off multitudes
at every discharge, though every blow of the Spanish weapons fell with mortal
effects upon their naked bodies, the violence of the assault by no means
abated. Fresh men rushed forward to occupy the places of the slain, and meeting
with the same fate, were succeeded by others no less intrepid and eager for
vengence. The utmost efforts and abilities of Cortes, seconded by the
disciplined valor of his troops, were hardly sufficient to defend the
fortifications of the Spaniards, into which the Mexicans had nearly forced
their way.

Cortes was now willing to try what effect the sight of ahe emperor would have
upon his subjects. He was recordingly brought on the ramparts, from whence he
addressed the Mexicans, exhorting them to peaceable measures, which so enraged
them, that he was soon wounded by two arrows, and the blow of a stone on his
temples brought him to the ground. The Spaniards carried him to his apartments;
but he was so broken and dejected by the severity of his fate, that he tore off
the bandage from his wounds, and soon expired.

Soon after the death of Montezuma, Cortes ^ound it absolutely necessary to
abandon the city. He attempted his retreat by night, but the Mexicans, who had
watched all his motions, fell upon him in his march and destroyed nearly one
half of his army. All the artillery, ammutition, and baggage, were lost, and
only a very small portion of the treasure they had amassed was saved. Many of
the soldiers, having so overloaded themselves with bars of gold as rendered
them unfit for action, and retarded their flight, fell ignominiously the
victims of their own inconsiderate avarice.

Cortes directed his march ^owards a rising ground at so^e little distance, and
having fortunately discovered a temple situated on an eminence, he took
possession of it. He there found not only the shelter for which he wished, but,
what was no less wanted, some provisions to refresh his men. On leaving this
place they marched for six days with little respite, and under continual
alarms, numerous bodies of the Mexicans hovering around them, and harrassing
them in front, rear, and flank, with great boldness. As the barren country
through which they passed, afforded hardly any provisions, they were reduced to
feed on berries, roots, and the stalks of green maize; and at the very time
that famine was depressing their spirits and wasting their strength, their
situation req^ired the most vigorous and unremitting e^^^tions of courage and
activity. Amidst th^^ complicated distresses, one circumstance supported and
animated the Spaniards. Their commander sustained this sad reverse of fortune
with unshaken magnanimity. His presence of mind never forsook him, his sagacity
foresaw every event, and his vigilance provided for it. He was foremost in
every danger, and endu^^^ every hardship with cheerfulne^^* His soldiers,
though despairing the^ (...), continued to follow him without ^^^ctance.

On the sixth day of their march, they reached the summit of an eminence, when
a spacious valley opened to their view, covered with a vast army, extending as
far as the eye could reach. The Mexicans, while with one body of their troops
they harrassed the Spaniards in their retreat, had assembled their principal
force on the other side of the lake, and posted it in the plain of Otumba,
through which they knew Cortes must pass. At the sight of this incredible
multitude, which they could survey at once from the rising ground, the
Spaniards were astonished, and even the boldest began to despair. Cortes,
however, without allowing leisure for their fears to acquire strength ^y
reflection, after reminding them, that nothing remained but to die or conquer,
led them immediately to the charge. The Mexicans with unusual fortitude, waited
their approach; but such was the superiority of the Spanish arms and dicipline,
that the impression of this small body was irresistible, and which ever way its
force was directed, it penetrated and dispersed the most numerous battalions.
-- However while these gave way in one quarter, a fresh supply of enemies
advanced from another, and the Spaniards, though successful in every attack,
were ready to sink under these repeated efforts, without seeing any end of
their toil, or any hope of victory.

Cortes now observed, that the gr^^^ standard of the empire, which was carried
before the Mexican gen* was advancing. He fortunately recollected to have
heard, that on the fate of it depended the event of every battle. He therefore
assembled a few of his bravest officers, whose horses were still capable of
service, and placing himself at their head, pushed forwards toward the
standard, with an impetuosity that bore down every thing before it. A chosen
body of nobles, who guarded the standard, made some resistance* but were soon
vanquished. Cortes, with a stroke of his lance, wounded the Mexican general,
and threw him to the ground. One of the Spanish officers alighting, finished
his life, and seized the imperial standard. The instant their leader fell, and
their standard, to which all directed their eyes, was no longer to be seen, an
universal panic struck the Mexican^, every ensign was lowered, each soldier
threw away his weapons, and every one made the best of his way to the
mountains. The Spaniards, who were not in a condition to pursue them, contented
themselves with collecting the spoils of the field, which were so valuable, as
to be some compensation for the wealth they had lost in the city of Mexico.

After this victory, Cortes dispatched an officer of confidence with four ships
of Narvaez's to Hispaniola and Jamaica, to engage adventurers, and to purchase
horses, gunpowder, and other military stores. As he knew it would be in vain to
attempt the reduction of Mexico, unless he could secure the command of the lake
he found means to procure materials for building twelve brigantines* so that
they might be carried thither in pieces, ready to be put together, and
launched, whenever he should want them.

While he was harrassed and perplexed with the mutinous disposition of his
troops, two ships arrived, with a supply of men and military stores, sent by
the governor of Cuba, not to assist Cortes, but with a view to complete his
ruin. His address, however, brought them over to his views. He now found his
army reinforced with 180 Spaniards, and twenty horses.

Soon after this four ships arrived at Vera Cruz from Hispaniola, with two
hundred soldiers, eighty horses, and two battering cann^n, and a considerable
supply of amn^^^^ion and arms.

On the 28th of April, 1521, all the Spanish troops, together with the
auxiliary Indians were drawn up on the banks of the Ganal; and with
extraordinary military pomp, heightened and rendered more solemn by the
celebration of the most sacred rights of religion, the brigantines were
launched. Cortes now determined on making an attack on the city of Mexico. --
The brigantines no sooner appeared before the city, than the lake was covered
with innumerable canoes, which made but a feeble resistance against these
vessels, manned by Europeans. The brigantines, with the utmost ease, broke
through their feeble opponents, overset many canoes, and dissipated the whole
armament with such slaughter, as convinced the Mexicans, that it was not in
their power to contend with the Spaniards on the watery element.

Cortes now determined to attack the city, and for this purpose he made all the
wise preparations an able general could do; but, owing to his orders not being
properly observed, he was at last repulsed, received some dangerous wounds and
would have been taken by the Mexicans, had not some Spanish officers rescued
him at the expense of their lives. Forty Spaniards fell alive into the hands of
the Mexicans, who sacrificed those unhappy victims, in the most cruel manner,
to their god of war.

However unpromising an aspect matters wore at present, Cortes had a mind that
rose above all difficulties. He soon found himself enabled to renew the attack
on the city of Mexico, in which he proved o fortunate, that he took the emperor
Guatimozin prisoner, who seemed worthy of a better fate. When the emperor was
conducted to Cortes, he appeared neither with the sullen fierceness of a
barbarian, nor with the dejection of a supplicant. "I have done (said he,
addressing himself to the Spanish general) what became a monarch. I have
defended my people to the last extremity. Nothing now remains but to die. Take
this dagger, (laying his hand on one which Cortes wore) plant it in my breast,
and put an end to a ^^te, which can no longer be of use."

As soon as the fate of this unfortunate sovereign was known, the Mexicans
ceased all resistance, and Cortes took possession of that small part of the
capital, which had not been destroyed during the siege. Thus terminated the
siege of Mexico, the most memorable event in the conquest of America. It lasted
twenty five days, of which hardly one passed without some singular effort on
the part of the besiegers or the besieged. The great abilities of Guatimozin,
the number of his troops, the peculiar si^uation of his capital, so far
counterbalanced the superiority of the Spaniards in arms and discipli^e, that
they must have relinquished the enterprise, had they trusted for success to
themselves alone; but Mexico was overtur^^d by its own tyranny, and the
jealousy (...) neighbors.

The Spaniards were no sooner masters of the city, than they set about seeking
for the profuse riches they expected it would produce; but they were herein
sadly disappointed. The soldiers could collect only an inconsiderable booty
amidst ruins and desolation, and this disappointment excited them almost to an
open rebellion against Cortes. Arguments, entreaties, and promises, were
employed in order to soothe them; but with so little effect. that Cortes, with
a view to check this growing spirit of discontent gave way to a deed. which
sl^^ns the glory of all his great actions. The unhappy monarch together with
his chief favorite, were given up to be tortured, in o^der to force from them a
discovery of the royal treasures, which it was supposed they had concealed.
Guatimozin bore whatever the refined cruelty of his tormentors could inflict
with the invincible fortitude of an American warrior. His fellow sufferer,
sinking under the violence of his anguish, turned his sorrowful eyes toward
his matter, which seemed to implore his permission to reveal all he knew; but
the high spirited prince, darting on him a look of authority, mingled with
scorn, checked ^m by asking, "Am I now reposing on a b^^ of flowers?" His
favorite felt the reproach, persevered in his dutiful silence, and expired.
Cortes was (...) ash^^med of (...), that he rescued the royal victim from the
hands of his torturers, and thereby prolonged a life devoted to future miseries.

The rate of the capital, as both parties had conjectured, decided that of the
empire, and the provinces submited, one after another, to the conquerors.
Cortes, being now more at leisure, began to form schemes of discovery, and to
complete the original plan of C^lumbus, by finding a passage to the F^st-Indies
by that quarter of the world they were in; but he did not then know that this
scheme had been undertaken and accomplished.

Ferdinand Magellan, a Portuguese gentlem^n, on the 10th of August, 1519,
sailed from Sevile with five ships, and after ^^^^hing at the Canaries, flood
directly South along the coast of America, and on the 1^th of January, 1520,
reached the river De la Pla^a* From hence he continued his course, after having
conquered the mutinous disp^sition of his crew, and at length discovered, near
the fifty-third degree of latitude, the mouth of a strait, into which he
entered, in spite of the m^rmurs and remonstrances of the people under his
command. After sailing twenty days in that winding dangerous channel, to which
he gave his own name, and where one of his ships deserted him, the great
Southern Ocean opened to his view, when he shed tears of joy and gratitude for
that happy discovery.

After enduring inexpressible hardships, from the want of provisions and other
necessaries on the 6th of March, 1521, they fell in with a cluster of small but
fertile islands, which afforded them refreshments in such abundance, that their
health was soon re-established. This extensive sea Magellan called the Pacific
Ocean which name i^still bears. He afterward discovered the Phillippine
islands, and was there killed by the barbarous natives.

John Sebastian del Cano prosecuted the expedition after the death of Magellan.
After visiting many of the smaller islands, scattered in the eastern part of
the Indian Ocean, they touched at the great island of Borneo, and at length
landed in Tidore, one of the Moloccas. He followed the course of the Portuguese
by the Cape of Good Hope, and after many disasters and sufferings, he arrived
at St. Lucar on the 7th of September, 1512, having failed round the globe in
the ^pace of three years and twenty eight (...).

But set us re^^^ (...) the transactions in New Spain A^^^^ (...) that Cortes
was acquiting sach^^ (...) ^o^ies for his native co^^^n, and (...) the way for
future (...) it (...) ^^^lur fate not only (...) ^^^^nis^on or authority from
the sovereign, whom he was serving with such successful zeal, but to be
regarded as an undutiful and seditious subjecs. The court of Spain sen a person
to supersede him, to seize his person, and confiscate his effects; but Cortes
triumphed over all his enemies, and was appointed Captain General and Governor
of New-Spain.

The jealousies and ingratitude of the court of Spain threw so many obstacles
in the way of Cortes, that his government became very uneasy to him, and the
court went so far as to send persons to enquire into his conduct, and to bring
him to justice, should his interested judges find him guilty. He resolved,
however, not to expose himself to the ignominy of a trial, in that country,
which had been the scene of his triumphs; and without waiting for the arrival
of his judges, to repair directly to Castile, and commit himself and his cause
to the justice and generosity of his King.

The Emperor Charles, having now nothing to apprehend from the designs of
Cortes, received him at Court like a person whom conscious innocence had
brought into the presence of his master, and who was entitled, by the eminence
of his services, to the highest marks of distinction and respect. The order of
St. Jago, the title of Marquis del Valle de Guaxaca, and the grant of a vast
territory in New Spain, were successively bestowed upon him.

Cortes returned to New-Spain; but his power was so cramped, that he found
himself in a very disagreeable situation. He formed schemes for new
discoveries, explored California, and surveyed the greater part of the Gulf
which separates it from New-Spain. On his return to his government be found
himself surrounded with so many enemies, that he determined once more to seek
redress in his native country.

On his arrival in Old Spain, the Emperor behaved to him with cold civility,
his ministers treated him sometimes with neglect, and sometimes with insolence.
His grievances received no redress, his claims were urged without effect, and
several years passed in fruitless applications to ministers and judges; an
occupation the most irksome and mortifying to a man of spirit. Cortes finished
his mortal career on the second day of December, 1547, in the sixty-second year
of his age, having experienced the same fate with that of all the persons who
distinguished themselves in the discovery or conquest of the New World: envied
by his cotemporaries, and ill requited by the courts he served, he has been
admired and celebrated by succeeding ages.

Remarkable Events recorded in this chapter.
1518 Cortes is sent by Velasquez to conquer New Spain. 1519 Lands his troops
in New Spain. 1519 Destroys his own fleet. 1519 Sets out for Mexico with his
little army. 1520 Montezuma acknowledges himself a vassal of Spain. 1520 Death
of the Emperor Montezuma. 1521 The conquest of all Mexico, followed by the
taking of the city. 1521 The Strait of Magellan discovered. 1528 Cortes
appointed Captain General and Governor of New Spain. 1536 Cortes discovers
California. 1540 Returns home and there dies.
CHAP. VI.
THE discovery of the Southern Ocean by Balboa excited a spirit of adventure in
the colonies of Darien and Panama, who sighed after the imaginary wealth of
those unknown regions. Several armaments were fitted out in 1523, in order to
explore and take possession of the countries to the East of Panama, but under
the conduct of leaders, whose talents and resources were unequal to the
attempt. The proved unsuccessful, and thereby damped the ardor of others.

Three persons settled in Panama, whose names were Francisco Pizarro. Diego de
Almagro and Hernando Luque, resolved to attempt the discovery of Peru,
notwithstanding the ill success of former adventurers. These three men were
destined to overturn one of the most extensive empires on the face of the
earth; though Pizarro was a bastard, with very little education; Almagro a
foundling; and Luque, a priest and schoolmaster at Panama.

Each engaged to employ his whole fortune in this adventure. Pizarro, being the
poorest of the three, undertook the department of the greatest fatigue and
danger, and to command in person the armament destined for the discovery.
Almagro was to conduct the supplies of provisions and reinforcement of troops,
of which Pizarro might stand in need. Luque was to remain at Panama to
negociate with the governor, and superintend whatever was carrying on for the
general good. As the spirit of enthusiasm uniformly accompanied that of
adventure in the New World, and by that strange union both acquired an increase
of force, this confederacy formed by ambition and avarice, was confirmed by the
most solemn act of religion. Luque celebrated mass, divided a consecrated host
into three, and reserving one part to himself, gave the other two to his
associates, of which they partook, and thus, in the name of the Prince of
Peace, ratified a contract, of which plunder and bloodsned were the principal
objects in view.

On the 14th of November, 1525, Pizarro set sail from Panama with a single
vessel of small burden, and 112 men. His vovage, however, was attended with
great difficulties and hardships. After remaining five months in the island of
Gorgona, noted for the most unhealthy climate in that region of America. A
vessel arrived from Panama. This transported them with such joy, that all their
former sufferings were forgotten. Their hopes revived, and Pizarro sound little
ciffienlty to indu^e not only his own followers, but also the crew of the
vessel from Panama, to resume his former scheme with no left ardor. Instead of
returning to Panama, they stood toward the South East, and more fortunate in
this than in any of their past efforts, on the twentieth day after their
departure from Gorgona, they discovered the coast of Peru.

After touching at several village on the coast, they ^anded at Tumbe^, a place
of some note, about three degrees south of the line, distinguished for its
stately temple, and a palace of the Incas, or sovereigus of the country. There
the Spaniards feasted their eves with the first view of the opulence and
civilization of the Peruvian empire. They beheld a country fully peopled and
cultivated with an appearance of regular industry; the natives decently
clothed, and possessed of ingenuity so far surpassing the other inhabitants of
the New World, as to have the use of tame and domestie aninals. But what
chiefly attracted their notice, was such a show of gold and silver not only in
the ornaments of their persons and temples, but in several vessels and utensils
for common use, formed of those precious metals as left no ^oom to doubt that
it abounded with profusion in the country. Pizarro and his companions, now
seemed to have attained the completion of their most sanguine hopes, and
fancied that all their wishes and dreams of rich domains, and inexhaustible
treasures, would soon be realized.

Pizarro, having explored the country as far as it was necessary to ascertain
the importance of the discovery, procured from the inhabitants some of their
Llamas, or same cattle, to which the Spaniards gave the name of sheep; some
vessels of gold and silver, as well as some specimens of their other works of
ingenuity; and two young men, whom he proposed to instruct in the Costilian
language, that they might serve as interpeters in the expedition he meditated.
With these he arrived at Panama, toward the close of the third year from the
time of his departure thence. No adventurer of the age suffered hardships or
encountered dangers which equal those to which he was exposed during this long
period.

On their arrival at Panama, Pizarro could not prevail on the governor
^^^assist him in the conquest of Peru; his ^^^^^es therefore sent him to Spain
to (...), where he managed matters more to his own interest than to theirs. On
the 26th of July, 1528, Pizarro was appointed governor, captain general, and
adelantado of the countries he had discovered and hoped to conquer, with
supreme authority, ^^il as well as military: thus he secured to himself
whatever his boundless ambition could desire.

After all the efforts of Pizarro and his associates, there small vessels, with
180 soldiers, 36 of whom were horsemen, composed the whole of the armament.
With this contemptible force, in February, 1531, Pizarro did not hesitate to
sail to invade a great empire.

He no sooner landed in Peru, than he began hostilities, by which imprudent
conduct his followers were exposed to famine, fatigue, and diseases of various
kinds. However they at lenght reached the province of Coaque; and having
surpised the principal settlement of the natives, they seized there, vessels
and ornaments of gold and silver to the amount of thirty thousand pesos, with
other booty of such value, as dispelled all their fears, and inspired the most
desponding with sanguine hopes.

The dominions of the sovereigns of Peru, at the time that the Spaniards
invaded them, extended in length, from north to south, above fifteen hundred
miles along the Pacific Ocean. Its breadth from east to west, was much less
considerable, being uniformly bounded by the vast ridge of the Andes,
stretching from its one extremity to the other.

Pizarro, soon after his landing in Peru, discovered that a civil war was
carrying on in that country. By these means he was permitted to pursue his
operations unmolested, and advanced to the center of a great ompire, before one
effort of its power was exerted to stop his career. The first complete
information the Spaniards received of this war, was by messengers from Huascar,
one of the contending parties, scut to Pizarro, in order to solicit his aid
against his opponent Atahualpa. Pizarro at once perceived the importance of
this intelligence and ^resaw so clearly all the advantages, which might be
derived from this divided state of the kingdom he had invaded, that without
waiting for the reinforcements he expected from Panama, he determined to push
forward, while intestine discord put it out of the power of the Peruvians to
attack him with their whole force, and while by taking part, as circumstances
should incline him, with one of the competitors, he might be enabled with
greater ease to crush them both.

Strange as it may appear, Pizarro marched into the heart of the country
attended by his followers, consisting only of 62 horsemen, and 102 foot
soldiers, of whom twenty were armed with cross bows, and three with muskets.
Pizarro in the course of as march, received an ambassador from the luca of
Caramalca, who brought him very valuable presents from that Prince, accompanied
with a prosser of alliance. Pizarro according to the usual artifice of his
country men in America promised every thing without meaning to fulfill any thing
but what his interest directed. In consequence of these declarations, the
Spaniards were permitted to march where they pleased.

On entering Caxamalca, Pizarro took possession of a large court, on one side
of which was a house, which the Spanish historians call a palace of the Inca,
and on the other a temple of the Sun, the whose surrounded with a strong
rampart or wall of earth. When he had posted his troops in this advantageous
situation, and had seen what profusion of riches the inca possessed, Pizarro
treacherously seized on his person, during the interview to which the monarch
had invited him. While the Inca was enpaged in conference with the Spaniards.
Pizarro gave the signal of assault. At once the martial music struck up, the
cannon and muskets began to fire, the horse fallied out fiercely to the charge,
and the infantry rushed on sword in hand. The Peruvians astonished at the
suddenness of the attack which they did not expect, and dismayed which the
destructive effect of fire arms, and the irresistible impression of the
cavalry, fled with universal consternation in eve^ quarter, without attempring
either to annoy the enemy, or to defend themselves. Pizarro at the head of his
followers, advanced directly toward the inca; and though his nobles crowded
around him with officious zeal, and fell in numbers at his feet, while they
vied one with another in sacrificing their own lives, that they might cover the
sacred person of their king, the Spaniards soon penetrated to the royal feat,
and Pizarro seizing the Inca by the arm, drag ged him to the ground, and
carried him as a prisoner to his quarters. The fate of the monarch precipitated
the flight of his followers. The Spaniards every where pursued them, and with a
deliberate unrelenting barbarity, continued to slaughter the wretched
Peruvians, who never attempted to resist. The carnage did not cease till the
close of the day put an end to it, when above four thousand Peruvians lay dead
on the spot. Not a single Spaniard fell, nor was any one wounded but Pizarro
himself, whose hand was slightly hurt.

The plunder the Spaniards acquired on this massacre, was far beyond every
thing they had formed in their minds of the wealth of Peru, and they were so
transported with the value of the acquisition as well as the greatness of their
success, that they passed the night in those extravagant exultations natural to
indigent adventurers on so sudden a change in their affairs.

The captive monarch could at first hardly believe what he saw to be real, and
the dejection into which he sunk was in proportion to the height of grandeur
from which he had fallen. However, the Inca soon discovered the ruling passion
of the Spaniards, and by applying to that made an attempt to recover his
liberty. He offered as a ransom what astonished the Spaniards, even after all
they now knew concerning the opulence of his kingdom. The apartment in which he
was confined was twenty-two feet in length, and sixteen in breadth; he
underoook to fill it with vessels of gold as high as he could reach. Pizarro
eagerly closed with this tempting proposal, and a line was drawn upon the wall
of the chamber, to mark the stipulated height to which the treasure was to
reach.

As fast as the gold was brought in, it was melted down, except some pieces of
curious fabric, which were reserved as a present for the emperor. After setting
apart the fifth due to the crown, and an hundred thousand pesos as a donative
to the soldiers, who were just arrived with Almagro, there remained 1,528,500
pesos to Pizarro and his followers. The festival of St. James, (July 25, 1513)
the patron saint of Spain, was the day chosen for the partition of this vast
sum. Though assembled to divide the spoils of an innnocent people procured by
deceit, extortion and cruelty, the transaction began with a solemn invocation
of the name of God, as if they could have expected the guidance of heaven in
distributing those wages of iniquity. In this distribution 8000 pesos, at that
time not inferior in effective value, to as many pounds herling of the present
century, fell to the share of each horseman, and half that sum to each foot
soldier. Pizarro, and his officers received their dividened in proportion to
their superior station,

The Inca having thus fulfilled his engagement, demanded his release; but the
treachery of the Spaniards induced them instead of setting him at liberty, to
put a period to his life. He was tried and condemned to be burnt alive. At last
the unfortunate prince consented to receive baptism, and was therefore indulged
with being strangled at the stake.

Pizarro, having by these cruel proceedings established his authority in
Caxamalca, no longer hesitated to advance toward Cuzco; and, having received
considerable reinforcements, he could venture, with little danger to penetrate
into the interior part of the country. The Peruvians had assembled some large
bodies of troops to oppose his progress, and several fierce encounters
happened; but they terminated like all the actions in America: a few Spaniards
were killed or wounded, and the natives were put to flight with incredible
slaughter. At length Pizarro forced his way to Cuzco, and took quiet possession
of the capital. The riches found there, even after all the natives had carried
off and concealed, either from a superstitious veneration for the ornaments of
their temples, or out of hatred to their rapacious conquerors, exceeded in
value what had been received as the Inca's ransom. However, as Pizarro's forces
were now more numerous, the common soldiers did not receive so much as they
expected, which proved a disappointment to their rapacity.

After all these conquests, Pizarro set out for his native country, and arrived
in Spain in 1534. The immense quantities of ^old and silver which he imported,
filled the kingdom with astonistment. Pizarro was received by the Emperor with
the attention due to the bearer of a present so rich, as to exceed any idea the
Spaniards had formed concerning the value of their acquisitions in America,
even after they had been ten years masters of Mexico. Pizarro was admitted into
the order of St. Jago. and, after getting his authority confirmed with new
powers and privileges, he set out on his return to Peru, accompanied by many
persons of higher rank than had yet served in that country. Almagro received
the honors he had so long desired: the title of Adelantado, or governor, was
conferred upon him, with jurisdiction over two hundred leagues of the country
streching beyond the forth (...) limits of the province allotted to Pizarro.

On his arival at Peru, he found Almagro in arms opposing his interest, and
endeavoring to do himself justice for the treacherous conduct of Pizarro, who
had engrossed himself all the honors and emoluments, which ought to have been
divided with his associate. However, matters were accommodated between them.
Their new agreement was confirmed with the same power of solemnities as the
first, and observed with as little fidelity.

Cuaco, the capital city of the Incas, was situated in a corner of the empire,
above four hundred miles from the sea, and much further from Quito, a province
of whose value he had formed an high ideas. No other settlement of the
Peruvians was so considerable as to merit the name of a town, or to allure the
Spaniards to fix their residence in it. Pizarro, in marching through the
country, had been struck with the beauty and fertility of the valley of Rimac,
one of the most extensive and best cultivated in Peru. There, on the bank of a
small river of the same name with the vale which it waters and enriches at the
distance of six miles from Callao, the most commodious harbor in the Pacific
Ocean, he founded a city, which he destined to be the capital of his
government. On the 18th of January, 1535, he gave it the name of C^ndad de los
Reyes, either from the circumstance of having laid the first stone, at that
season when the church celebrates the festival of the Three Kings, or as is
more probable, in honor of Juana and Charles, the^^ sovereigns of Castile. This
name it still retains among the Spaniards in all legal and formal deeds, but it
is better known to foreigners by that of Lima, a corruption of the ancient
appellation of the valley in which it is situated. Under his inspection, the
buildings advanced with such rapidity, that it soon assumed the form of a city,
which by a magnificient palace that he erected for himself, and by the stately
houses built by several of his officers, gave a strong proof of the grandeur it
was at last to acquire.

Almagro, as agreed on between him and Pizarro, set out for Chili; but on his
march, he met with so many hardships and difficulties, that many of his men
died with fatigue. They no sooner entered on the fertile plains of Chili, than
they met with new difficulties to encounter. They there sound a race of men
very different from the people of Peru, intrepid, hardy, independent, and in
their bodily constitution, as well as vigor of spirit, nearly resen^^ling the
warlike tribes in North America. Though filled with wonder at the first
appearance of the Spaniards, and still more astonished at the operation of
their ^^valry, and the effects of their firearms, the Chilese soon recovered
so far from their surprise, as not only to defend themselves with obstinacy,
but to attack their new enemies with more determined fierceness than any
American nation had hitherto discovered. The Spaniards, however, continued to
penetrate into the country, and collected some considerable quantities of gold,
when they were recalled to Peru by an unexpected event.

The Inca of Peru, having observed the inconsiderate security of the Spaniards
in dispersing their troops, and that only a handful of soldiers remained in
Cu^co, thought that the hap^y period was at length come for vindicating his own
rights, for avenging the wrongs of his country, and extirpating its oppressors.
The Inca, who was the prisoner of Pizarro, obtained permission from him to
attend a great festival, which was to be celebrated a few leagues from the
capital. Under pretext of that solemnity, the gre^^ men of the empire were
assemb^^^. As soon as the Inca joined them, the standard of war was erected,
and, in a short time, all the fighting men, form the confines of Quito to the
frontiers of Chili, were in arms. Many Spaniards, living securely on the
settlements allotted them, were massacred. Several detachments, as they marched
carelessly through a country which seemed to be tamely submissive to their
dominion, were out off to a man. The Spanish writers assert, that the Peruvian
army amounted to 200,000 men, and with this powerful army, and their Inca at
the head of it, they laid siege to ^uzco. During nine months they carried on
the siege with incessant ardour, and in various forms. The Inca, in spite of
the valor of the Spaniards, recovered possession of one half of his capital;
and, in their various efforts to drive him out of it, Pizarro lost one of his
brothers, and some other persons of note.

Almagro arrived at Cuzco in a critical moment. The Inca at first endeavored
to gain the friendship of Almagro; but after many fruitless overtures,
despairing of any cordial union with a Spaniard, he attacked him by surprise
with a numerous body of chosen troops. However, the Spanish discipline and
valor maintained their usual superiority. The Peruvians were repulsed with
such slaughter, that a great part of their army dispersed, and Almagro
proceeded to the gates of Cuzco without opposition.

The Spaniards had no sooner got rid of their Peruvian enemies, than they began
to quarrel among themselves, and the flame at last burst out into civil war.
Though countrymen and friends, the subjects of the same sovereign, each with the
royal standard displayed! and though they beheld the mountains that surrounded
the plain in which they were drawn up, covered with a vast multitude of
Indians, assembled to enjoy the spectacle of their mutual carnage, and prepared
to attack whatever party remained master of the field; so fell and implacable
was the rancour which had taken possession of every breast, that not one
pacific council, not a single overture toward accommodation, proceeded from
either side. Almagro was defeated and taken, tried by the Pizarros as guilty of
treason, and condemned and executed, in 1538.

However rapid the progress of the Spaniards had been in South America since
Pizarro landed in Peru, their avidity of dominion was not yet satisfied. The
officers to whom Ferdinand Pizarro gave the command of different detachments,
penetrated into several new provinces, and though some of them were exposed to
great hardships in the cold and barren regions of the Andes, and others
suffered distress not inferior amidst the woods and marshes of the plains, they
made discoveries, and conquests which not only extended their knowledge of the
country, but added considerably to the territories of Spain in the New World.
Pedro de Valdivia reassumed Almagro's scheme of invading Chili, and
notwithstanding the fortitude of the natives in defending their possessions,
made such progress in the conquest of the country, that he founded the city of
St. Jago, and gave a beginning to the establishment of the Spanish dominions in
that province.

Gonzalo Pizarro, whom his brother Francisco had made governor of Quito, had
entrusted one of his confidential officers, named Orellana, with an expedition
on discoveries, appointing a proper place where they were to meet; but this
young officer began to fancy himself independent, and, transported with the
predominant ^assion of the age, formed schemes of distinguishing himself as a
dis^overer, and treacherously abandoned his friend and employer.

It is impossible to describe the consternation of Pizarro, when he did not
find the bark at the confluence of the Napo and Maragnon, where he had ordered
Orellana to wait for him; but that treacherous servant, after having made some
discoveries, got back to Spain, and there magnified his wonderful exploits. In
the mean time, Pizarro was twelve hundred miles from Quito; and, in that long
march toward the capital, the Spaniards encountered hardships greater than
those they had endured in their progress outward, without the alluring hopes
that then foothed and animated them under their superings. Hunger compelled
them to feed on roots and berries, to eat all their dogs and horses, to devour
the most loathsome reptiles, and even to know the leather of their saddles and
sword belts. Four thousand Indians, and two hundred and ten Spaniards perished
in this wild and disa^^erous expedition, which continued near two years. Those
that got back to Qui^o were naked like savages, and so emaciated with famine,
or worn out with fatigue, that they had more the appearance of specter than
men.

Gonzalo Pizarro was not much more happy on his arrival at his government of
Quito, where he found every thing in a state little short of open rebellion
against his brother Francisco. The young Almagro, after the execution of his
father, never lost sight of taking revenge of Pizarro. He possessed all the
qualities which ca^tivate the affection of soldiers; he was of a graceful
appearance, dexterous at all martial exercises, bold, open and generous, he
seemed to be formed for command; and as his father, conscious of his own
inferiority from the total want of education, had been extremely attentive to
have him instructed in every science becoming a gentleman, the accomplishments
he had acquired heightened the respect of his followers, as they gave him
distinction and eminence among illiterate adventurers. In this young man the
Almagrians found a point of union which they wanted, and looking up to him as
their head, were ready to undertake any thing to promote his interest. Their
affection for Almagro was not the only incitement, being urged on by their own
distresses. Many of them, destitute of common necessaries, and weary of
loitering away life a burden to their chief, or to such of their associates as
had saved some remnant of their fortune from pillage and confiscation sighed
for an occasion to exert their activity and courage, and began to deliberate
how they might be avenged on the author of all their misery. Juan de Harrada,
an officer of great abilities, who had the charge of Almagro's education, took
the direction of their consultations, with all the zeal which this connection
inipired, and with all the authority which the ascendency that he was known to
have over the mind of his pupil gave him.

On Sunday, the 6th of June, 1541, at midnight, the season of tranquillity and
repose in all sul^ry climates, Harada, at the head of eighteen of the most
determined conspirators, sallied out of Almagro's house in complete armor, and
drawing their swords, hastily advanced toward Pizarro's house. Their
associates, warned of their motions by a signal, were in arms at different
stations to support them. -- Though Pizarro was usually surrounded by such a
numerous train of attendants, as suited the magnificence of the most opulent
subject of the age in which he lived, yet he was just risen from table, and
most of his domesties had retired to their own apartments, so that the
conspirators passed through the two outward courts of the palace unobserved.
They were at the botom of the staircase, before a page in waiting could give
the alarm to his master, who was conversing with a few friends in a large hall.
The governor, whose steady mind no form of danger could alter, starting up,
called for arms, and commanded Francisco de Chaves to make fast the door: but
that officer, who did not retain so much presence of mind as to obey this
prudent order, running to the top of the staircase, wildly asked the
conspirators what they meant, and whither they were going. Instead of
answering, they stabbed him to the heart, and burst into the hall. Some of the
persons who were there threw themselves from the windows, others attempted to
fly, and a few, drawing their swords, followed their leader into an inner
apartment. The conspirators, animated with having the object of their vengeance
now in view, rushed forward after them. Pizarro, with no other arms than his
sword and buckler, defended the entry, and supported by his half brother
Aleantara, and his little knot of friends, he maintained the unequal contest
with intrepidity worthy of his past exploits and with the vigor of a youthful
combatant. "Courage, (he cried) ^ompanions, we are yet enough to make those
traitors recent of their audacity." But the armor of the conspirators
protected them, while every thrust they made took effect. (...)
Alcantara fell dead at his brother's fee^^ and his other defenders were
mortally wounded. The governor, unable any longer to parry the many weapons
furiously aimed at him, received a deadly thrust full in the throat, sunk to
the ground and expired.

As soon as Pizarro was killed, the assassins ran out into the streets, and
waving their bloody swords, proclaimed the death of the tyrant. About two
hundred of their associates having joined them, they conducted young Almagro in
solemn procession through the city, and assembling the magistrates and
principal citizens, compelled them to acknowledge him as lawful successor to
his father in his government.

Matters were not properly settled, when the arrival of Vaco de Castro, who
atlumed the title of governor, threw every thing again into fresh confusion.
Castro and Almagro both took the field The former, knowing his strength to be
far superior to that of the enemy, he was impatient to determine the contest by
a battle. Nor did the followers of Almagro, who had no hopes of obtaining a
pardon for a crime so attrocious as the murder of the governor, decline that
mode of decision.

On the 16th of September, 1542, they met at Chupaz, about two hundred miles
from Cuzco, and fought with all the fierce animosity inspired by the violence
of civil rage, the rancour of private enmity, the eagerness of revenge, and the
last efforts of despair. Victory, after remaining long doubtful, declared at
last for Vaco de Castro. The carnage was great in proportion to the number of
combatants. Of 1400 men, the total amount of the armies on both sides, five
hundred lay dead on the field, and the number of the wounded was still greater.
Of the prisoners, Castro condemned some to death, others were banished Peru,
and Almagro being taken, was publicly beheaded.

The feelings of the emperor were exceedingly hurt at the recital of so many
actions shocking to humanity. He perceived, that relieving the Indians from
oppression was but one step toward rendering his possessions in the New World
a valuable acquisition, and would be of little avail, unless he could
circumscribe the power and usurpations of his own subjects there. With this
view, he formed a body of laws, containing many salutary appointments with
respect to the constitution and powers of the supreme council of the Indies;
concerning the station and jurisdiction of the royal audiences in different
parts of America; and the order of government, both ecclesiastical and civil.

Notwithstanding these regulations. Peru was hastening to the highest pitch of
anarchy and confusion. Castro however, by his wife and prudent measures, for
some time averted the storm. A viceroy was sent over by the emperor, and, ^oon
after his arrival in Peru, he was first imprisoned, and, after obtaining his
liberty, and raising an army to support his authority, was slain in battle. In
this critical situation, the emperor sent over Pedro de la Gasca as president
of Peru, who, by his moderation and good management, might have done great
things, had not Gonzalo Pizarro, supported by a strong party, assumed the
government of Peru. Gasca, perceiving that force must be employed in order to
accomplish the purpose of his mission, collected troops in all quarters.

On the 9th of April, 1548, as the two par^ies moved forward to the charge,
they exhibited a very singular appearance. In that of Pizarro, composed of men
enriched with the spoils of the most opulent country in America, every officer,
and almost all the private men, were clothed in stuffs of silk or brocade,
embroidered with gold and silver: and their horses, their arms, their
standards, were adorned with all the pride of military pomp. That of Gasca,
though not so splendid, exhibited what was no less striking He himself,
a^companied by the archbishop of Lima, the bishops of Quito and Cuzco, and a
great number of ecclesiastics, m^rching along the lines, blessed the men, and
encour aged them to a resolute discharge of their duty, which could not fail
that day of restoring Peru to peace and tranquillity.

When both armies were just ready to engage, several of Pizarro's principal
officers set spurs to their horses, and went over to Gasca, and many others
silently slipped away. Pizarro, seeing all irretrievably lost, cried out in
amazement to a few officers, who still faithfully adhered to him, "What remains
for us to do?" -- "Let us rus^ (replied one of them) upon the enemy's firme^^
battalion, and die like Romans" Pizarro, dejected with such a reverse of
fortune, had not spirit to follow this soldierly counsel, and, with a tameness
disgrace ul to his former fame, he furrendere^ (...) one of Gasca's offic^rs.
Gasca, happy in this bloodless victory, did not (...) with cruelty. Pizarro,
and a small number of the most distinguished or notorious offenders, were
capitally punished. Pizarro was beheaded on the day after he surrendered. He
submitted to his rate with a composed dignity, and seemed desirous to atone by
repentance for the crimes he had committed.

Pizarro was no sooner dead, than the malcontents in every quarter of Peru laid
down their arms, and tranquillity was soon restored. Gasca then endeavored to
find employment for the mutinous soldiers who had laid down their arms, which
he did by engaging them in the conquest of Chili. In order to reward his own
soldiers, he made a division of the country among them, without reserving the
smallest portion to himself.

Gasca, having now accomplished every object of his mission, and longing to
return again to a private station, committed the government of Peru to the
court of andience, and set out for Spain on the first of February, 1550.

There had been no remittance of the royal revenue for four years, owing to the
distracted state of the country. Gasca, however, on his return to Spain,
carried with him 1,300,000 pesos of public money, which the prudence and good
order of administration (...) him to save, after paying all the expenses of the
war. He was received in his native country with universal admiration and esteem
for his abilities and his virtues, both which were highly conspicuous. Without
army or flect, or public funds; with a train so simple, that only three
thousand ducats were expended in equiping him, he set out to oppose a
formidable rebellion. But the praise bestowed on his abilities were exceeded by
that which his virtues merited. After residing in a country where wealth
presented allurements, which had seduced every person who had hitherto
possessed power there, he ^etired from the trying station with integrity, not
only untainted but unsuspected. After distributing among his countrymen
possessions of greater extent and value that had ever been in the disposal of a
subject in any age or nation, he himself remained in his original state of
poverty and at ^he very time when he brought such a large recruit to the royal
treasury, he was obliged to apply by petition for a small sum to discharge some
petty debts, which he had contracted during the course of his services. Charles
was not insensible to such disinterested merit. Gasco was received by him with
the most distinguished marks of esteem, and being prom^ted to the bishopric of
Palenc^^, he (...) remainder of his days in the tranquillity of retirement,
respected by his country, honored by his sovereign, and beloved by all.

Memorable events recorded in this chapter.
1526 Pizarro discovers Peru. 1528 He is appointed governor of the newly
discovered countries. 1532 Massacre of the Peruvians by the Spaniards. 1533 The
Inca of Caxamalca tried, condemned and executed. 1534 Pizarro arrives in Spain.
1535 On his return to Peru, he builds Lima. 1535 Chili invaded by Almagro. 1536
Siege of Cuzco. 1538 Almagro tried, condemned, and executed. 1541 Pizarro
assassinated in his palace. 1546 Pedro de la Gasca appointed President of Peru.
1548 He suppresses the rebellion in Peru. 1550 Returns to Spain, and is made
Bishop of Palen^^a.
CONCLUSION.
HAVING now taken a review of the conquest of the two great empires of Mexico
and Peru, very little more seems worthy of notice in the History of South
America than to mention a sew circumstances relative to their political
institutions and national manners.

According to the account of the Mexicans themselves, their empire was not of
long continuance. They relate, that their country was originally possessed,
rather than peopled, by small independent tribes, whose manners and mode of
life resembled those of the rudest savages in South America. About a period
corresponding to the beginning of the tenth century in the Christian era,
several tribes moved in successive migrations from unknown regions toward the
north and north west, and settled in different provinces of Ana^^a^, the
ancient name of New Spain. These, more civilized than the original inhabitants,
began to form them to the arts of social life. At length, toward the
commencement of the thirteenth century, the Mexicans, a people more polished
than any of the former, advanced from the borders of the Californian gulf and
took possession of the plains adjacent to a great lake near the center of the
country. After residing there about fifty years they founded a town, since
distinguished by the name of Mexico, which from humble beginnings soon grew to
be the most considerable city in the New World. The Mexicans, long after they
were established in their new possessions, continued, like other martial tribes
in America, unacquainted with regal dominion; and were governed in peace, and
conducted in war, by such as were entitled to pre-eminence by their wisdom or
their valor. Among them, as in other states, whose power and territories
become extensive, the supreme authority centred at last in a single person: and
when the Spaniards under Cortes invaded the country, Montezuma was the ninth
monarch in order, who had swayed the Mexican sceptie, not by hereditary right,
but by election. Such is the traditional tale of the Mexicans concerning the
progress of their own empire, which, according to this account, must have been
but of short duration.

While the jurisdiction of the Mexican monarchs was limited, it is probable
that much ostentation was not exercised; but as their authority became more
extensive, the splendor of their government increased. It was in this last
state the Spaniards beheld it, and struck with the appearance of Montezuma's
court, they describe its pomp at great length, and with much admiration. The
number of his attendants, the order, the silence, and the reverence with which
they served him; the vast extent of his royal mansion, the variety of
apartments alloted to different officers, and the ostentation with which his
grandeur was displayed whenever he permitted his subjects to behold him, seem
to resemble the magnificence of the ancient monarchies in Asia, rather than the
simplicity of the infant states in the New World.

The Mexicans like the rude tribes among them, were incessantly engaged in war,
and the motives that prompted them to hostilities seem to have been the same.
They fought in order to gratify their vengeance, by shedding the blood of their
enemies. In battle, they were chiefly intent on taking prisoners, and it was by
the number of these that they estimated the glory of victory. No captives were
ever ransomed or spared: all were sacrificed without mercy, and their flesh
devoured with the same barbarous joy as among the fiercest savages. On some
occasions, it rose to even wilder excesses. Their principal warriors covered
themselves with the skins of the unhappy victims, and danced about the streets,
boasting of their own valor, and exulting over their enemies.

Their funeral rites were no less bloody than those of the most savage tribes.
On the death of any distinguished personage, especially of the emperor, several
of his attendants were chosen to accompany him to the other world, and these
unfortunate victims were put to death without mercy, and buried in the same
tomb.

Though the agriculture of the Mexicans was more extensive than that of the
roving tribes, who trusted chiefly to their bow for food, it seems not to have
supplied them with such subsistence as men require when engaged in efforts of
active industry. The Spaniards appear not to have been struck with any
superiority of the Mexicans over the other people of America in bodily vigor.
Both, according to their observation, were of such a feeble frame as to be
unable to endure fatigue, and the strength of one Spaniard exceeded that of
several indians. This they imputed to their scanty diet, on poor fare,
sufficient to preserve life, but not to give firmness to the constitution.

In Mexico, though the disposition of the houses was somewhat orderly, yet the
structure of the greater part of them was mean. Nor does the fabric of their
temples, and other public edifices, appear to have been such as entitled them
to the high praises bestowed upon them by many Spanish an^hors. The great
temple of Mexico, the most famous in New Spain, which has been represented as a
magnificent building, raised to such a height, that the ascent to it was by a
staircase of an hundred and fourteen steps, was a solid mass of earth of a
square form, faced partly with stone. Its base on each side extended ninety
feet, and decreasing gradually as it advanced in height, it terminated in a
quadrangle of about thirty feet, where were placed a inrine of the deity, and
two altars on which the victims were sacrificed. Greater skill and ingenuity
were displayed, if we may believe me Spanith historians, in the houses of the
emperor, and in those of the principal nobility. There some elegance of design
was visible, and a commodious arrangement of the apartments was attended to;
but if buildings corresponding to such descriptions had ever existed in the
Mexican cities, it is probable that some remains of them would sti^l be
visible. As only two centuries and an half have elapsed since the conquest of
New Spain, it seems altogether incredible, that in a period so short every
vestige of this boasted elegance and grandeur should have disappeared.

The Mexicans have be^n represented, perhaps, more ^arb^^ous than they really
were; their re^g^o^^ ^e^^ers, and the rives of their worship, are dei^^^bed as
w^^d and c^^el in an ex^^eme degree. The aspect of superstition in Mexico was
gloomy and frightful; its divini^ies were clothed with terror, and delighted
in vengeance. They were exhibited to the people under detestable forms, which
created horror. The figures of serpents, ^ygers, and other destructive animals,
decorated their temples. Feasts, mortifications, and penances, all rigid, and
many of them excruciating to an ex^eme degree, were the means employed to
appeal the wrath of their gods, and the Mexicans never approached their altars
without sprinkling them with blood drawn from their bodies; but of all
offerings, human sacrifices were deemed the most acceptable.

The empire of Peru boasts of an higher antiquity than that of Mexico.
According to the traditionary accounts collected by the Spaniards, it had
subsis^ed near four hundred years under twelve successive monarchs; but the
knowledge of their ancient story, which the Peruvians could communicate to
their conquerors, must have been both imperfect and uncertain. Like the other
American nations, they were totally unacquainted with the art of writing, and
destitute of the only means, by which the memory of past transactions can be
preserved with any degree of accuracy.

The authority of the Inca was unlimited and absolute, in the most extensive
meaning of the words. Whe^^ver the decrees of a prince are considered as the
commands of the divinity, it is not only an act of rebellion, but of impiety,
to dispute or oppose his will. Obedience becomes a duty of religion; and as it
would be profane to control a monarch under the guidance of heaven, and
presumptuous to advise him, nothing remains but to submit with implicit
respect. This must necessarily be the effect of every government established on
pretensions of intercourse with superior powers. Such accordingly was the blind
submission which the Peruvians yielded to their sovereign.

The Incas of Peru were immensely rich in gold and silver, long before they
knew any thing of the rich silver mines of Potosi, which were accidentally
discovered in the year 1545, by an indian, as he was clambering up the
mountains in pursuit of a Llama which had strayed from his flock. Soon after
the mines of Sacotecas in New Spain, little inferior to the other in value,
were opened. From that time successive discoveries have been made in both
colonies, and silver mines are now so numerous, that the working of them, and
of some few mines of gold in the province of Tierra Firm, and the new kingdom
of Grenada, has become the capital occupation o^ the Spaniards, and is reduced
into a system no less complicated than interesting.

(...)


To return: the wars in which the Incas engaged, were carried on with a spirit
very different from those of other American nations. They fought not like
savages, to destroy or extirminate, or, like the Mexicans, to glut bloodthirsly
divinities with human sacrifices. They conquered in order to reclaim and
civilize the vanquished, and to infuse the knowledge of their own institutions
and ar^s. Prisoners seem not to have been exposed to the insults and tortures
which were their lot in every other part of the new world. The Incas took the
people whom they subdued under their protection, and admitted them to a
participation of all the advantages enjoyed by their original subjects.

In Peru, agriculture, the art of primary necessity in social life, was more
extensive, and carried on with greater skill, than in any other part of
America. The Spaniards, in their progress through the country, were so full
supplied with provisions of every kind, that in the relation of their
adventures we meet with few of those dismal scenes of distress, occasioned by
famine, in which the conquerors of Mexico were so often involved. The quantity
of soil under cultivation was not left to the discretion of imdividuals, but
regulated by public authority, in proportion to the exigencies of the
community. Even the calamity of an unfruitful season was but little sol^; for
the product of t^^ lands consecrated to the sun, as well as those set apa^^ for
the Incas, being depo^^^ed in the public storehouses, it there remained as a
stated provision for times of scarcity.

The ingenuity of the Peruvians was also conspicuous in the construction of
their houses and public buildings. In the extensive plains which stretch along
the pacific ocean, where the sky is perpetually serene, and the climate mild,
their houses were very properly built only of slight materials; but in the
higher regions, where rain falls, where the vicissitudes of seasons are known,
and their rigor felt, houses were constructed with greater solidity. They were
generally of a square form, the walls about eight feet high, bu^t with bricks
hardened is the son, without any windows, and the door low and strait. Simple
as these structures were, and rude as the materials may seem to be, of which
they were formed, they were so curable, that many of them still subsist in
different parts of Peru, long after every monument that might have conveyed to
us any idea of the domestic state of the other American nations, has vanished
from the face of the earth. It was in the temples consecrated to the Sun, and
in the buildings destined for the residence of their monarchs, that the
Peruvians displayed the utmost extent of their art and contrivance. The
descriptions of them by some of the Spanish writers, who had an opportunity of
contemplating them, while, in some measure, entire, might have appeared highly
exaggerated, if the ruins which still remain did not vouch the truth of their
relations.

The ^uwa^lik^ spirit of the Peruvians was the most remarkable, as well as the
most fatal defect in their character. The greater part of the roda nations of
America opposed their invaders with the most undaunted for city, though with
little conduct or success. The Mer^cans maintained the struggle in defense of
their (...) with such persevering fortitude, that it was with ^^^i ^^ty they
triumph (...) over them. Peru was subd^^^ (...), und almost without resistance;
and the m^st favorable upper tuni^i^s of regaining their freedo^, and of
crashing their oppressors, were lost through the ^imi^lty of the people.

THE END.

