THE CELEBRATED SPEECH OF THE Hon. T. ERSKINE IN SUPPORT OF THE LIBERTY OF THE
PRESS. DELIVERED AT GUILDHALL, December 18, 1792. To which is prefixed, a
Preface by a Scotch Member of Parliament.

TAKEN IN SHORT HAND, BY GURNEY, THE PRINCIPAL SHORT HAND WRITER IN LONDON.

EDINBURGH, Printed: NEW YORK: REPRINTED BY JOHN BUEL, on WALL-STREET: SOLD BY
C. CLELAND, J. FELLOWS, AND THE PRINTER. M,DCC,XCIII.

INTRODUCTION.
OF all the extraordinary phenomenon which distinguish the present most
singular period, there is none more remarkable than the striking resemblance
which it bears in many points to that of the reformation. When the usurpations
of the Roman Pontiffs grew intolerable to princes and to nations, when virtue
and morality were trampled under the feet of depraved and abandoned clergy,
when honor, property, and even existence lay at the mercy of an infamous
priesthood, God graciously rescued mankind by permitting them to discover the
Art of Printing. Truth needs but to be known, to be followed; error vanishes
before the light; the publication of the Bible in the vulgar tongues of the
several countries of Europe, shook the Papal despotism to its foundations;
freed the several nations from its yoke, and mitigated the slavery of those who
still remained under its dominion. But these great events, so conducive to the
happiness and improvement of mankind, were not accomplished without the
severest struggles: the power that were, felt that their throne was built on
ignorance; that knowledge was their greatest enemy; and their grandest and most
persevering efforts were made to prevent its diffusion. Fortunately for the
world, every endeavor, to stifle the curiosity of man, only excites and
redoubles it; every check given to the desire of information, effectually
spreads it; and all the bulls of the Pope, and edicts of tyrants, which were
issued against the promulgation of the Holy Gospel, only served as so many
proclamations to the people to read them. I do not know by what fatality it
happens, but it certainly is true that the same jealousy of the increasing
knowledge of the people, which then agitated the Court of Rome with respect to
matters of religion, seems at present to pervade every Court in Europe with
respect to the nature and principles of civil government. If we can trust to
public report, in Spain, in Germany, in Russia, in Italy, books of certain
descriptions are strictly prohibited, and the severest punishments are
denounced against those who import or read them: they are nevertheless read;
for Voltaire used to say, that his works never sold so well as after they were
burnt by the hands of the common hangman. But the most astonishing circumstance
in this war against knowledge is, that the Liberty of the Press should have
found so many enemies in Great Britain. In that happy land, which owes its
boasted liberty and constitution, and all its consequent prosperity to freedom
of discussion; associations have been formed to stifle it, and as far as their
power can reach, to keep the great body of the people in utter darkness
regarding their civil rights.

There is a malignity in the principles and designs of these associations,
(which however, were begun and are continued under the patronage of a Cabinet
Minister,) that cannot be too much exposed and reprobated. They do not pretend
to be able to prevent the higher classes of the community from reading any
books they choose; but they set their faces against the instruction of the
poor. They advertise rewards, they subscribe money to prosecute the venders* or
purchasers of cheap publications on the topics of liberty: while, at the same
time, they expend considerable sums in disseminating every production which can
exalt the monarchical part of the constitution.

These considerations have been sufficient to induce me, to offer to the public
a cheap edition of the famous speech pronounced by the Hon. Thomas Erskine, on
the trial of the celebrated Thomas Pain, for publishing his work called "the
Rights of Man." It is fit that the glorious doctrines contained in this most
finished piece of oratory should be known to every man in these kingdoms; that
the people may know where to bestow their own admiration, and to point the
gratitude of their posterity

It is necessary, however, to remind our readers, that this speech is not a
defense of Mr. Paine's book; the orator carefully avoids giving the slightest
opinion of its doctrines, in which his Editor shall certainly imitate him. But,
in this sublime effort of the human genius, the genuine principles of social
union the real axioms of the British Constitution, the history of its
progressive improvement, and sensible decay, are delineated with a force and
beauty of expression that must delight and convince those who possess only the
gift of God to the poor as well as rich, I mean strong Common Sense; while they
cannot fail to captivate the warmest admiration of the deepest learning and
most refined taste. It ought to be a matter of national pride to the people of
Scotland, that Mr. Erskine is their countryman: They have been accustomed to
the most shining abilities in his family; in him they meet with transcendant
talents, uniformly devoted to the noblest purposes. He is the Lawyer of the
People and Constitution; against the encroachments of the executive government:
he is the defender of Juries, against the unwarrantable assumptions of Judges.
Wherever the strongest attacks are made against the liberty of the subject,
there you are sure to find him in the foremost rank, combating the monsters
like Hercules, and bearing down all before him by an irresistible torrent of
eloquence.

Such is the man whose speech is recommended to the perusal of his
fellow subjects, by the

EDINBURGH EDITOR.

THE CELEBRATED SPEECH OF THE HON. T. ERSKINE. IN SUPPORT OF THE LIBERTY OF THE
PRESS.
Gentlemen of the Jury,
THE Attorney General, in that part of his address which arose from a letter,
supposed to have been written to him from France, exhibited signs of strong
sensibility and emotion. I do not, I am sure, charge him with acting a part to
seduce you; on the contrary, I am persuaded from my own feelings, and from my
acquaintance with my friend from our childhood upwards, that he expressed
himself as he felt. But, gentlemen, if he felt those painful embarrassments,
think what mine must be: he can only feel for the august character whom he
represents in this place, as a subject for his sovereign, too far removed by
custom, and by law, from the intercourses which generate affections, to produce
any other sentiments than those that flow from a relation common to us all. But
it will be remembered, that I stand in the same relation Mr. Erskine is
Attorney General to the Prince of Wales.
toward another Great Person, more deeply implicated by this supposed letter;
who, not restrained from the cultivation of personal attachment by those
qualifications which must always secure them, has exalted my duty of a subject
to a Prince, into a warm and honest affection between man and man. Thus
circumstanced, I certainly should have been glad to have had an earlier
opportunity of knowing correctly the contents of this letter, and whether
(which I positively deny) it proceeded from the defendant. Coming thus suddenly
upon us, I see but too plainly the impression it has made upon you who are to
try the cause, and I feel its weight upon myself, who am to conduct it; but
this shall neither detach me from my duty, nor added to all the other
difficulties that thicken around me, enervate me, (if I can help it) in the
discharge of it.

Gentlemen, if the Attorney General is well founded in the commentaries he has
made to you upon this book which he prosecutes; if he is warranted by the law
of England, in repressing its circulation, through these realms, from the
illegal and dangerous matters contained in it; if that suppression be, as he
avows it, and as in common sense it must be, the sole object of the
prosecution, the public has great reason to lament that this letter should have
been at all brought into the service of the cause: it is no part of the charge
upon the record; it had no existence for months after the work was composed and
published; it was not even written, if written at all, till after he had been
at Dover, in a manner insultingly expelled from the country by the influence of
government, and had become the subject of another country. It cannot,
therefore, by any fair inference, even decypher the mind of the author when he
composed his work; still less can it affect the construction of the language in
which the work itself is written. The introduction of this letter at all is,
therefore, not only a departure from the charge, but a sort of dereliction of
the object of the prosecution, which is to condemn the book: for if the
condemnation of the author is to be obtained, not by the work itself, but by
collateral matter not even existing when it was written, nor known to its
various publishers throughout the kingdom, how can a verdict upon such grounds
condemn the work, or criminate other publishers, strangers to the collateral
manner on which the conviction may be obtained? I maintain, therefore, that
upon every principle of found policy, as it affects the interest of the crown,
and upon every rule of justice, as it affects the author of the Rights of Man,
the letter should be wholly dismissed from your consideration.

Gentlemen, the Attorney General has thought it necessary to inform you, that a
rumor had been spread, and had reached his ears, that he only carried on the
prosecution as a public prosecutor, but without the concurrence of his own
private judgment; and therefore to add the just weight of his own character to
his public duty, and to repel what he thinks a calumny, he tells you that he
should have deserved to have been driven from society, if he had not arraigned
the work and the author before you.

Here too we stand in situations very different. I have no doubt of the
existence of such a rumor, and of its having reached his ears, because he says
so; but for the narrow circle in which any rumor, personally implicating my
learned friend's character, has extended, I might appeal to the multitudes who
surround us, and ask, which of all them, except the few connected in office
with the crown, ever heard of its existence. But with regard to myself, every
man who hears me at this moment, nay, the whole People of England, have been
witnesses to the calumnious clamor, that by every art, has been raised and
kept up against me: In every place, where business or pleasure collect the
public together, day after day my name and character have been the topics of
injurious reflection. And for what? -- only for not having shrunk from the
discharge of a duty which no personal advantage recommended, and which a
thousand difficulties repelled. But, gentlemen, I have no complaint to make,
either against the printers of these libels, nor even against their authors;
the greater part of them, hurried perhaps away by honest prejudices, may have
believed they were serving their country by rendering me the object of its
suspicion and contempt; and if there have been amongst them others who have
mixed in it from personal malice and unkindness, I thank God I it can forgive
them also. -- Little indeed did they know me, who thought that such proceedings
would influence my conduct: I will forever, at all hazards, assert the dignity,
independence, and integrity of the ENGLISH BAR; without which, impartial
justice, the most valuable part of the English constitution can have no
existence. For, from the moment that any advocate can be permitted to say that
he will or will not stand between the crown and a subject arraigned in the
court where he daily sits to practice, from that moment the liberties of
England are at an end. If the advocate refuses to defend from what he may think
of the charge or of the defense, he assumes the character of the judge; nay, he
assumes it before the hour of judgment; and, in proportion to his rank and
reputation, puts the heavy influence of, perhaps, a mistaken opinion into the
scale against the accused, in whose favor the benevolent principle of English
law makes all presumptions, and, which commands the very Judge to be his
counsel.

Gentlemen, it is now my duty to address myself regularly, and without
digression to the defense. And the first thing which presents itself in the
discussion of a judicial subject, and indeed of every other, is to state
distinctly and with precision, what the question is, and (where prejudice and
misrepresentation have been exerted,) to distinguish it accurately from what it
is not. The question then is NOT whether the constitution of our fathers, under
which we live -- under which I present myself before you, and under which alone
you have any jurisdiction to hear me, -- be or be not preferable to the
constitution of America or France, or any other human constitution. For upon
what principal can a court, constituted by the authority of any government, and
administering a positive system of law under it, pronounce a decision against
the constitution which creates its authority; or the rule of action which its
jurisdiction is to enforce? The common sense of the most uninformed person must
revolt at such an absurd supposition.

I have no difficulty, therefore, in admitting, that if by accident some or all
of you were alienated in opinion and affectation from the forms and principles
of the English government, and were impressed with the value of that unmixed
representative constitution which this work recommends and inculcates, you
could not, on that account, acquit the defendant. Nay, to speak out plainly, I
freely admit, that even if you were avowed enemies to monarchy, and devoted to
republicanism, you would be nevertheless bound by your oaths, as a jury sworn
to administer English justice, to convict the author of the Rights of Man, if
it were brought home to your consciences, that he had exceeded those widely
extended bounds which the ancient wisdom and liberal policy of the English
constitution have allotted to the range of a free press. I freely concede to
this, because you have no jurisdiction to judge either the author or the work,
by any rule but by the English law, which is the source of your authority. But
having made this large concession, it follows, by a consequence so inevitable
as to be invulnerable to all argument or artifice, that if, on the other hand,
you should be impressed (which I know you to be) not only with a dutiful
regard, but with an enthusiasm, for the whole form and substance of your own
government; and though you should think that this work, in its circulation
amongst classes of men unequal to political researches, may tend to alienate
opinion, still you cannot, upon these grounds, without a similar breach of
duty, convict the defendant of a libel, unless he has clearly stepped beyond
that extended range of communication which the same ancient wisdom and liberal
policy of the British constitution has allotted for the liberty of the press.

Gentlemen, I admit, with the Attorney General, that in every case where a
court has to estimate the quality of a writing, the mind and intention of the
writer must be taken into account the bona, or male sides, as lawyers express
it, must be examined: for a writing may undoubtedly proceed from a motive, and
be directed to a purpose, not to be decyphered by the mere construction of the
thing written. But wherever a writing is arraigned as seditious or slanderous,
not upon its ordinary construction in language, nor from the necessary
consequences of its publication, under any circumstances and at all times, but
that the criminality springs from some extrinsic matter, not visible upon the
page itself, nor universally operative, but capable only of being connected
with it by evidence, so as to demonstrate the effect of the publication, and
the design of the publisher; such a writing, not libellous PER SE, cannot be
arraigned as the author's work is arraigned upon the record before the court. I
maintain without the hazard of contradiction, that the law of England
positively requires, for the security of the subject, that every charge of a
libel complicated with extrinsic facts and circumstances, dehors the writing,
must appear literally upon the record, that the defendant may know what crime
he is called upon to answer, and how to stand upon his defense. What crime is
it that the defendant comes to answer for today? What is the notice that I,
who am his counsel, have from this parchment of the crime alleged against him?
I come to defend his having written this book. The record states nothing else;
the charge of sedition in the introduction is notoriously paper and
pack-thread, and the innuendoes cannot enlarge the sense, or natural
construction of the text. The record does not state any one extrinsic fact or
circumstance, to render the work criminal, at one time more than another; it
states no peculiarity of time, season, or intention, not proveable from the
writing itself, which is the naked charge upon record. There is nothing
therefore which, upon any principle of English law, gives you any jurisdiction
beyond the construction of the work itself; and you cannot be justified in
finding it criminal because published at this time, unless it would have been a
criminal publication under any circumstances, or at any other time.

The law of England then, both in its forms and substance, being the only rule
by which the author or the work can be justified or condemned, and the charge
upon the record being the naked charge of a libel, the cause resolves itself
into a question of the deepest importance to us all, the nature and extent of
the liberty of the English Press.

But before I enter upon it, I wish to fulfill a duty to the defendant, which,
if I do not deceive myself, is at this moment peculiarly necessary to his
impartial trial. If an advocate entertains sentiments injurious to the defense
he is engaged in, he is not only justified but bound in duty to conceal them;
so, on the other hand, if his own genuine sentiments, or any thing connected
with his character or situation, can add strength to his professional
assistance, he is bound to throw them into the scale: in addressing myself,
therefore, to gentlemen not only zealous for the honor of English government,
but visibly indignant at any attack upon its principles, and who would,
perhaps, be impatient of arguments from a suspected quarter, I give my client
the benefit of declaring, that I am, and ever have been attached to the genuine
principles of the British government; -- and that, however the court or you may
reject the application, I defend him upon principles not only consistent with
its permanence and security, but, without the establishment of which, it never
could have had an existence.

The proposition which I mean to maintain as the basis of the liberty of the
press, and without which it is an empty sound, is this:

That every man, not intending to mislead and to confound, but seeking to
enlighten others with what his (...) reason and conscience, however (...),
dictate to him as truth, may address himself to the universal reason of a whole
nation, either upon the subject of governments in general, or upon that of our
own particular country: that he may analyze the principles of its constitution,
point out its errors and defects, examine and publish its corruptions, warn his
fellow-citizens against their ruinous consequences, and exert his whole
faculties in pointing out the most advantageous changes in establishments which
he considers to be radically defective, or sliding from their object by abuse.
All this, every subject of this country has a right to do, if he contemplates
only what he thinks its happiness, and but seeks to change the public mind by
the conviction which flows from reasonings dictated by conscience.

If, indeed, he writes what he does not think; If contemplating the misery of
others, he wickedly condemns what his own understanding approves; or, even
admitting his real disgust against the government or its corruptions, if he
calumniates living magistrates, or holds out to individuals, that they have a
right to run before the public mind in their conduct; that they may oppose by
contumacy or force, what private reason only disapproves; that they may disobey
the law, because their judgment condemns it; or resist the public will, because
they honestly wish to change it: he is then a criminal upon every principal of
rational policy, as well as upon the immemorial precedents of English justice;
because such a person seeks to disunite individuals from their duty to the
whole, and excites to overt acts of misconduct in a part of the community,
instead of endeavoring to change, by the impulse of reason, that universal
assent which, in this and in every country, constitutes the law for all.

I have therefore no difficulty in admitting that, if, upon an attentive
perusal of this work, it shall be found that the defendant has promulgated any
doctrines which tend to withdraw individuals from their subjection to the law
by which the whole nation consents to be governed; nay, if the direct contrary
shall not be found to be studiously inculcated -- if his book shall be found to
have warranted or excited that unfortunate criminal who appeared here yesterday
to endeavor to relieve himself from imprisonment, by the destruction of a
prison, while the law of imprisonment remained, or dictated to him the language
of defiance which ran through his whole defense -- if, throughout the whole
work, there shall be found any syllable or letter, which strikes at the
security of property, or which hints that any thing less than the whole nation
can constitute the law, or that the law, be it what it may, is not the
inexorable rule of action for every individual, I willingly yield him up to the
justice of the court.

Gentlemen, I say, in the name of Thomas Pain, and in his words as author of
the Rights of Man, as written in the very volume that is charged with seeking
the destruction of property.

The end of all political associations is, the preservation of the rights of
man, which rights are liberty, property, and security; that the nation is the
source of all sovereignty derived from it: the right of property being secured
and inviolable, no one ought to be deprived of it, except in cases of evident
public necessity, legally ascertained, and on condition of a previous just
indemnity.

These are undoubtedly the rights of man -- the rights for which all
governments are established -- and the only rights (...). Pain contends for;
but which he thinks (no matter whether right or wrong,) are better to be
secured by a republican constitution than by the forms of the English
government. He instructs me to admit that; when government is once constituted,
no individuals, without rebellion, can withdraw their obedience from it -- that
all attempts to excite then to it, are highly criminal, for the most obvious
reasons of policy and justice -- that nothing short of the will of whole people
can change or affect the rule by which a nation is to be governed -- and that
no private opinion, however honestly inimical to the forms or substance of the
law, can justify resistance to its authority, while it remains in force. The
author of the Rights of Man not only admits the truth of all this doctrine, but
he consents to be convicted, and I also consent for him, unless his work shall
be found studiously and painfully to inculcate these great principles of
government which it is charged to have been written to destroy. Let me not,
therefore, be suspected to be contending, that it is lawful to write a book
pointing out defects in the English government, and exciting individuals to
destroy its sanctions, and to refuse obedience. But, on the other hand, I do
contend, that it is lawful to address the English nation on these momentous
subjects, for had it not been for this unalienable right, (thanks be to God and
our fathers for establishing it,) how should we have had this constitution
which we so loudly boast of? If, in the march of the human mind, no man could
have gone before the establishments of the time he lived in, how could our
establishment, by reiterated changes, have become what it is? If no man could
have awakened the public mind to errors and abuses in our government, how could
it have passed on from stage to stage, through reformation and revolution, so
as to have arrived from barbarism to such a pitch of happiness and perfection
that the Attorney General considers it as profanation to touch it any further,
or to look for any future amendment.

In this manner power has reasoned in every age; government, in its own
estimation, has been at all times a system of perfection; but a free press has
examined and detected its errors, and the people have happily reformed them:
this freedom has alone made our government what it is, and alone can preserve
it; and therefore, under the banners of that freedom, today I stand up to
defend Thomas Pain. But how, alas! shall this task be accomplished? How may I
expect from you what human nature has not made man for the performance of? How
am I to address your reasons, or ask them to pause, amidst the torrent of
prejudice which has hurried away the public mind on the subject you are to
judge?

Was any Englishman ever so brought as a criminal before an English court of
justice? If I were to ask you, gentlemen of the jury, what is the choicest
fruit that grows upon the tree of English liberty, you would answer, security
under the law. If I were to ask the whole people of England, the return they
looked for at the hands of government, for the burdens under which they bend
to support it, I should still be answered, security under the law; or, in other
words, an impartial administration of justice. So sacred, therefore, has the
freedom of trial been ever held in England; so anxiously does justice guard
against every possible bias in her path, that if the public mind has been
locally agitated upon any subject in judgment, the form is either changed, or
the trial postponed. The circulation of any paper that brings, or which can be
supposed to bring, prejudice, or even well-founded knowledge, within the reach
of a British tribunal, on the spur of an occasion, is not only highly criminal,
but defeats itself, by leading to put off the trial which its object was to
pervert. On this principle, his Lordship will permit me to remind him, that on
the trial of the Dean of St. Asaph for a libel, or rather when he was brought
to trial, the circulation of books by a society favorable to his defense, was
held by the noble Lord, as Chief Justice of Chester, to be a reason for not
trying the cause; although they contained no matter relative to the Dean, nor
to the object of his trial; being only extracts from ancient authors of high
reputation, on the general rights of juries to consider the innocence as well
as the guilt of the accused; yet still, as the recollection of these rights was
pressed forward with a view to affect the proceedings, to guard the principle,
the proceedings were postponed.

Is the defendant then to be the only exception to these admirable provisions?
Is the English law to judge him, script of the armor with which its universal
justice encircles all others? Shall we, in the very act of judging him for
detracting from the English government, furnish him with ample matter for just
reprobation, instead of detraction? Has not his cause been prejudged through a
thousand channels? Has not the work before you been daily publicly reviled, and
his person held up to derision and reproach? Has not the public mind been
excited, by crying down the very phrase and idea of the Rights of Man? Nay,
have not associations of gentlemen, I speak it with regret, because I am
persuaded, from what I know of some of them, that they, amongst them at least,
thought they were serving the public; yet have they not, in utter contempt and
ignorance of that constitution of which they declare themselves to be the
guardians, published the grossest attacks upon the defendant? Have they not,
even while the cause has been standing here in the paper for immediate trial,
published a direct protest against the very work now before you, advertising in
the same paper, though under the general description of seditious papers, a
reward on the conviction of any person who should dare to sell the book itself,
to which their own publication was an answer?

The Attorney General has spoken of a forced circulation of this work; but how
have these prejudging papers been circulated? We all know how: they have been
thrown into our carriages in every street; they have met us at every turnpike;
and they lie in the areas of all our houses. To complete the triumph of
prejudice, that high tribunal, of which I have the honor to be a member, (my
learned friends know what I say to be true) has been drawn into this vortex of
slander; and some of its members, for I do not speak of the house itself, have
thrown the weight of their stations into the same scale.

By all means I maintain that this cause has been prejudged.

It may be said, that I have made no motion to put off the trial for these
causes, and that courts of themselves take no cognizance of what passes
elsewhere, without facts laid before them. Gentlemen, I know that I should have
had equal justice from that quarter, if I had brought myself within the rule.
But when should I have been better in the present aspect of things? And
therefore I only remind you of all these hardships, that you may recollect that
your judgment is to proceed upon that alone which meets you here, upon the
evidence in the cause, and not upon suggestions destructive of every principle
of justice.

Having disposed of these foreign prejudices, I hope you will as little regard
some arguments that have been offered to you in court. The letter which has
been so repeatedly pressed upon you, ought to dismiss even from your
recollection; I have already put it out of the question, as having been written
long subsequent to the book, and as being a libel on the King, which no part of
the information charges, and which may hereafter be prosecuted as a distinct
offense. I consider that letter besides, and indeed have always heard it
treated, as a forgery, contrived to injure the merits of the cause, and to
embarrass me personally in its defense. -- I have a right so to consider it,
because it is unsupported by any thing similar at an earlier period. The
defendant's whole deportment, previous to the publication, has been wholly
unexceptionable: he properly desired to be given up as the author of the book,
if any inquiry should take place concerning it; and he is not affected in
evidence, directly or indirectly, with any illegal or suspicious conduct; not
even with having uttered an indiscreet or taunting expression, nor with any one
matter or thing, inconsistent with the duty of the best subject in England. His
opinions indeed were adverse to our system; but I maintain that opinion is
free, and that conduct alone is amenable to the law.

You are next desired to judge of the author's mind and intention, by the modes
and extent of the circulation of his work. The first part of the Rights of Man,
Mr. Attorney General tells you, he did not prosecute, although it was in
circulation through the country for a year and a half together, because it
seems it circulated only amongst what he styles the judicious part of the
public, who possessed in their capacities and experience an antidote to the
poison; but that with regard to the second part now before you, its circulation
had been forced into every corner of society; had been printed and reprinted
for cheapness even upon whited brown paper, and had crept into the very
nurseries of children, as a wrapper for their sweetmeats.

In answer to this statement, which after all stands only upon Mr. Attorney
General's own assertion, unsupported by any kind of proof, (no witness having
proved the author's personal interference with the sale,) I still maintain,
that if he had the most anxiously promoted it, the question would remain
exactly the same: the question would still be, Whether at the time when Pain
composed his work, and promoted the most extensive purchase of it, he believed
or disbelieved what he had written, and whether he contemplated the happiness
or misery of the English nation, to which it is addressed; and whichever of
these intentions may be evidenced to your judgments upon reading the book
itself? I confess I am utterly at a loss to comprehend how a writer can be
supposed to mean something different from what he has written, by an anxiety
(common I believe to all authors,) that his work should be generally read.

Remember, I am not asking your opinions of the doctrines themselves, you have
given them already pretty visibly since I began to address you; but I shall
appeal not only to you, but to those who, without our leave, will hereafter
judge without appeal, of all that we are doing to day; Whether, upon the matter
which I hasten to lay before you, you can refuse in justice to pronounce, that,
from his education -- form the accidents and habits of his life -- from the
time and occasion of the publication -- from the circumstances attending it --
and from every line and letter of the work itself, and all his other writings,
before and even since, his conscience and understanding (no matter whether
erroneously or not) were deeply and solemly impressed with the matter contained
in his book, -- that he addressed it to the reason of the nation at large, and
not to the passions of individuals, and that in the issue of its influence, he
contemplated only what appeared to him (though it may not to us,) to be
interest and happiness of England, and of the whole human race? In drawing the
one or the other of these conclusions, the book stands first in order, and it
shall now speak for itself.

Gentlemen, the whole of it is evidence before you; the particular parts
arraigned have only been read by my consent, upon the presumption that, on
retiring from the court, you would carefully compare them with the context, and
all the parts with the whole viewed together. You cannot indeed do justice
without it. The most common letter, even in the ordinary course of business,
cannot be read in a cause to prove an obligation for twenty shillings, without
the whole being read, that the writer's meaning may be seen without deception.
But in a criminal charge of only four pages and a half, out of a work
containing nearly two hundred, you cannot, with even the appearance of common
justice, pronounce a judgment without the most deliberate and cautious
comparison. I observe that the noble and learned judge confirms me in this
observation. But if any given part of a work be legally explanatory of every
other part of it, the preface, a fortiori, is the most material; because the
preface is the author's own key to his writing: it is there that he takes the
reader by the hand, and introduces him to his subject: it is there that the
spirit and intention of the whole is laid before him by way of prologue. A
preface is meant by the author as a clue to ignorant or careless readers: the
author says by it, to every man who chooses to begin where he ought, Look at my
plan -- attend to my distinctions -- mark the purpose and limitations of the
matter I lay before you.

Let then the calumniators of Thomas Pain now attend to his preface, where, to
leave no excuse for ignorance or misrepresentation, he expresses himself thus:

I have differed from some professional gentlemen on the subject of
prosecutions, and I since find they are falling into my opinion, which I will
here state as sully, but as concisely as I can.

I will first put a case with respect to any law, and then compare it with a
government, or with what in England is, or has been, called a constitution.

It would be an act of despotism, or what in England is called arbitrary power,
to make a law to prohibit investigating the principles, good or bad, on which
such a law, or any other, is founded.

If a law be bad, it is one thing to oppose the practice of it, but it is quite
a different thing to expose its errors* to reason on its defects, and to show
cause why it should be repealed, or why another ought to be substituted in its
place. I have always held it an opinion (making it also my practice) that it is
better to obey a bad law, making use at the same time of every argument to show
its errors and procure its repeal, than forcibly to violate it; because the
precedent of breaking a bad law might weaken the force and lead to a
discretionary violation, of those which are good.

The case is the same with principles and forms of government, or to what are
called constitutions and the parts of which they are composed.

It is for the good of nations, and not for the emolument or aggrandisement of
particular individuals, that government ought to be established, and that
mankind are at the expense of supporting it. The defects of every government
and constitution, both as to principle and form, must, on a parity of
reasoning, be as open to discussion as the defects of a law, and it is a duty
which every man owes to society to point them out. When those defects, and the
means of remedying them are generally seen by a nation, that nation will reform
its government or its constitution in the one case, as the government repealed
or reformed the law in the other.

Gentleman, you must undoubtedly wish to deal with every man who comes before
you in judgment, as you would be dealt by yourselves; and surely you will not
lay it down today as a law to be binding hereafter even upon yourselves, that
if you should publish any opinion concerning the existing abuses in your
country's government, and point out to the whole public the means of amendment,
you are to be acquitted or convicted as any twelve men may happen to agree with
you in your opinions. Yet this is precisely what you are asked to do to
another: it is precisely the case before you. Mr. Pain expressly says, I obey
a law until it is repealed; obedience is not only my principle, but my
practice, since my disobedience of a law from thinking it bad, might apply to
justify another man in the disobedience of a good one; and thus individuals
would give the role for themselves, and not society for all.

Gentlemen, you will presently see that the same principle pervades the rest of
the work; and I am the more anxious to call your attention to it, however
repetition may tire you, because it unfolds the whole principles of my
argument; for, if you find a sentence in the whole book that invests any
individual, or any number of inviduals, or any community short of the whole
nation, with a power of changing any part of the law or constitution, I abandon
the cause -- YES, I freely abandon it, because I will not affront the majesty
of a court of justice by maintaining propositions which, even upon the surface
of them are false. Mr. Pain, page 162 -- 168, goes on thus:

When a nation changes its opinion and habits of thinking, it is no longer to
be governed as before; but it would not only be wrong, but bad policy, to
attempt by force what ought to be accomplished by reason. Rebellion consists in
forcibly opposing the general will of a nation, whether by a party or by a
government. There ought, therefore, to be, in every nation, a method of
occasionally ascertaining the state of public opinion with respect to
government.

There is, therefore, no power but the voluntary will of the people that has a
right to act in any (...) respecting a general reform; and by the same right
that two persons can confer on such a subject, a thousand may. The object in
all such preliminary proceedings is to find out what the general sense of a
nation is, and to be governed by it. If it prefer a bad or defective government
to a reform, or choose to pay ten times more taxes than there is occasion for,
it has a right so to do; and, so long as the majority do not impose conditions
on the minority different to what they impose themselves though there may be
much error, there is no injustice; neither will the error continue long. Reason
and discussion will soon bring things right, however wrong they may begin. By
such a process no tumult is to be apprehended. The poor, in all countries, are
naturally both peaceable and grateful in all reforms in which their interest
and happiness are included. It is only by neglecting and rejecting them that
they become tumultuous.

Gentlemen, these are the sentiments of the author of the Rights of Man; and,
whatever his opinions may be of the defects in our government, it never can
change our sentiments concerning it, if our sentiments are just; and a writing
can never be seditious in the sense of the English law, which states that the
government leans on the universal will for its support.

Gentlemen, this universal will is the best and securest title which his
Majesty and his family have to the throne of these kingdoms; and in proportion
to the wisdom of our institutions, the title must in common sense become the
stronger: so little idea, indeed, have I of any other, that in my place in
parliament, not a week ago, I considered it as the best way of expressing my
attachment to the constitution, as established at the Revolution, to declare,
(I believe in the presence of the heir-apparent of the crown, for whom I have
greatest personal zeal) that his Majesty reigned in England by choice and
consent, as the magistrate of the English people; not indeed a consent and
choice by personal election, like a king of Poland, the worst of all possible
constitution; but by the election of a family for great national objects, in
defiance of that hereditary right, which only becomes tyranny, in the sense of
Mr. Pain, when it claims to inherit a nation, instead of governing by their
consent, and continuing for its benefit.

Gentlemen, this sentiment has the advantage of Mr. Burke's high authority, who
says with great truth, in a letter to his constituents, Too little dependence
cannot be had at this time of day on names and prejudices: the eyes of mankind
are opened: and communities must be held together by a visible and solid
interest. I believe, Gentlemen of the Jury, that the Prince of Wales will
always render this title dear to the people. The Attorney General can only tell
you what he believes of him; I can tell you what I know, and what I am bound to
declare, since this Prince may be traduced and calumniated in every part of the
kingdom, without its coming often in question, till brought in to load a
defense with matter collateral to the charge. I therefore assert what the
Attorney General can only hope, that, whenever that Prince shall come to the
throne of this country (which I hope, but by the course of nature will never
happen,) be will make the constitution of Great Britain the foundation of all
his conduct.

Having now, Gentlemen, established the author's general intention by his own
introduction, which is the best and fairest exposition, let us next look at the
occasion which gave it birth.

The Attorney General, throughout the whole course of his address to you (I
knew it would be so) has avoided the most distant notice or hint of any
circumstance having led to the appearance of the author in the political world,
after a silence of so many years; he has not even pronounced or even glanced at
the name of Mr. Burke, but has left you to take it for granted that the
defendant volunteered this delicate and momentous subject; and that, without
being led to it by the provocation of political controversy, he had seized a
favorable moment to stigmatize, from mere malice, and against his own confirmed
opinions, the Constitution of this Country.

Gentleman, my learned friend knows too well my respect and value for him to
suppose that I am charging him with a wilful suppression; I know him to be
incapable of it; he knew it would come from me. He will permit me however, to
lament that it should have been left for me, at this late period of the cause,
to inform you, that, not only the work before you, but the First Part, of which
it is a natural continuation, were written avowedly, and upon the face of them.
IN ANSWER TO MR. BURKE. They were written besides under circumstances which I
shall hereafter explain, and in the course of which explanation I am have
occasion to cite a few passages from the works of that celebrated person. And I
shall speak of him with the highest respect: for, with whatever contempt he may
delight to look down upon my humble talents, however he may disparage the
principles which direct my public conduct, he shall never force me to forget
the regard which this country owes to him for the writings which he has left
upon record for the illumination of our most distant posterity. After the
gratitude which we owe to God for the divine gifts of reason and understanding,
our next thanks are due to those from the fountain of whose enlightened minds
they are fed and fructified. But pleading, as I do, the cause of freedom of
opinions, I shall not give offense by remarking that this great author has been
thought to have changed some of his; and, if Thomas Pain had not though so, I
should not now be addressing you, because the book which is my subject would
never have been written. Who is right and who is wrong, in the contention of
doctrines, I have repeatedly disclaimed to be the question; I can only say that
Mr. Pain may be right throughout, but Mr. Burke cannot -- Mr. Pain has been
uniform in his opinions, but Mr. Burke has not -- Mr. Burke can only be right
in part; but should Mr. Pain be even mistaken in the whole, still I am not
removed from the principle of his defense. My defense has nothing to do with
either the concealment or rectitude of his doctrines. I admit Mr. Pain to be a
republican: you shall soon see (...) one -- I do not seek to shade or qualify
his (...) constitution; I put my (...) doubtedly means to declare it to be
defective in it (...) and contaminated with abuses, which, in his (...) will
one day or other bring on the ruin of us all; it is (...) vain to mince the
matter; this is the scope of his work. But still, if it contains no attack upon
the King's Majesty, nor upon any other living magistrate; if it excites to no
resistance to magistracy, but, on the contrary, if it even inculcates, as it
does, obedience to government, then, whatever may be its defects, the question
continues as before, and ever must remain an unmixed question of the liberty of
the press. I therefore considered it as no breach of professional duty, nor
injurious to the cause I am defending, to express my own admiration of the real
principles of our constitution; a constitution which I hope never to see give
way to any other; a constitution which has been productive of various benefits,
and which will produce many more hereafter, if we have wisdom enough to pluck
up those weeds that grow in the richest soils, and amongst the brightest
flowers. I agree with the merchants of London, that the English government is
equal to the reformation of its own abuses; and, as an inhabitant of the city,
I would have signed their Declaration, if I had known, of my own knowledge, the
facts recited in its preamble. But abuses the English constitution
unquestionably has, which call loudly for reformation, the existence of which
has been the theme of our greatest statesmen, which have too plainly formed the
principles of the defendant, and created the very conjuncture which produced
his book.

Gentlemen, we all but too well remember the calamitous situation in which our
country stood but a few years ago; a situation which no man can look back upon,
without horror, nor feel himself safe from relapsing into again, while the
causes remain which produce it. The event I allude to, you must know to be the
American war, and the still existing causes of it, the corruptions of this
government. In those days it was not thought virtue by the patriots of England
to conceal their existence from the people; but then, as now, authority
condemned them as disaffected subjects, and defeated the ends they sought by
their promulgation.

Hear the opinion of Sir George Saville; not his speculative opinion concerning
the structure of our government in the abstract, but his opinion of the settled
abuses which prevailed in his own time, and which continue at this moment. But
first let me remind you who Sir George Saville was -- I fear we shall hardly
look upon his like again -- How shall I describe him to you? -- In my own words
I cannot. I was lately commended by Mr. Burke in the House of Commons, for
strengthening my own language by an appeal to Dr. Johnson. Were the honorable
gentleman present at this moment, he would no doubt doubly applaud my choice in
resorting to his own works for the description of Sir George Saville.

His fortune is among the largest; a fortune, which, wholly unincumbered as it
is, without one single charge from luxury, vanity, or excess, sinks under the
benevolence of its dispenser. This private benevolence, expanding itself into
patriotism, renders his whole being the estate of the public, in which he has
not reserved a peculium for himself of profit, diversion, or relaxation. During
the session, the first in, and the last out of the House of Commons; he passes
from the senate to the camp; and, seldom seeing the seat of his ancestors, he
is always in Parliament to serve his country, or, in the field to defend it.

It is impossible to ascribe to such a character any principle but patriotism,
when he expressed himself as follows:

I return to you baffled and dispirited, and I am sorry that truth obliges me
to add, with hardly a ray of hope of seeing any change in the miserable course
of public calamities.

On this melancholy day of account, in rendering up to you my trust, I deliver
to you your share of a country maimed and weakened; its treasures lavished and
misspent; its honors faded; and its conduct the laughing stock of Europe: our
nation in a manner without allies or friends, except such as we have hired to
destroy our fellow subjects, and to ravage a country, in which we once claimed
an invaluable share. I return to you some of your principal privileges
impeached and mangled. And lastly, I leave you, as I conceive, at this hour and
moment fully, effectually, and absolutely, under the discretion and power of a
military force, which is to act without waiting for the authority of the civil
magistrates.

Some have been accused of exaggerating the public misfortunes, nay, of having
endeavored to help forward the mischief, that they might afterward raise
discontents. I am willing to hope, that neither my temper, nor my situation of
life, will he thought naturally to urge me to promote misery, discord, or
confusion, or to exult in the subversion of order, or in the ruin of property.
I have no reason to contemplate with pleasure the poverty of our country, the
increase of our debts, and of our taxes; or the decay of our commerce. Trust
not, however to my report; reflect, compare, and judge for yourselves.

But, under all these disheartening circumstances, I could yet entertain a
cheerful hope, and undertake again the commission with alacrity, as well as
zeal, if I could see any effectual steps taken to remove the original cause of
the mischief -- 'Then would there be a hope'.

But, till the purity of the constituent body, and thereby that of the
representative, be restored, there is NONE.

I gladly embrace this most public opportunity of delivering my sentiments, not
only to all my constituents, but to those likewise not my constituents, whom
yet, in the large sense, I represent, and am faithfully to serve.

I look upon restoring election and representation in some degree (for I expect
no miracles) to their original purity, to be that, without which all other
efforts will be vain and ridiculous.

If something be not done, you may, indeed, retain the outward form of your
constitution, but not the power thereof.

Such were the words of that great good man, lost with those of many others of
his time and his fame, as far as power could hurt it, put in the shade along
with them. The consequences we have all seen and felt: America, from an
obedient affectionate colony, became an independent nation; and two millions of
people, nursed in the very lap or our monarchy, became the willing subjects of
a republican constitution.

Gentlemen, in that great and calamitous conflict, Mr. Burke and Mr. Pain
fought in the same field of reason together, but with very different successes.
Mr. Burke spoke to a parliament in England, such as Sir George Saville
describes it, that had no ears but for sounds that flattered its corruptions.
Mr. Pain, on the other hand, spoke TO A PEOPLE; reasoned with them, that they
were bound by no subjection to any sovereignty further than their own benefits
connected them; and by these powerful arguments prepared the minds of the
American people for that GLORIOUS, JUST, and HAPPY revolution.

Gentlemen, I have a right to distinguish it by that appellation, because I
aver that at this moment there is as sacred a regard to property, as inviolable
a security to all the rights of individuals, lower taxes, fewer grievances,
less to deplore, and more to admire, in the constitution of America, than that
of any other country under heaven. I wish indeed to except our own, but I
cannot even do that, till it shall be purged of those abuses, which, though
they obscure and deform the surface, have not as yet (thank God) destroyed the
vital parts.

(...), because out of a people consisting of near three millions, he alone did
not remain attached in opinion to monarchy. Remember, that all the blood which
was shed in America, and to which he was for years a melancholy and indignant
witness, was shed by the authority of the crown of Great Britain, under the
influence of its parliament, such as Sir George Saville has described it, and
such as Mr. Burke himself will be called upon by and by, in more glowing
colors to paint it. How then can it be wondered at, that Mr. Pain should
return to this country in his heart a republican? Was he not equally republican
when he wrote Common Sense? yet that volume has been sold without restraint or
prosecution in every shop in England ever since, and which nevertheless (I
appeal to the book, which I have in court, and which is in every body's hands)
contains every one principle of government, and every abuse in the British
constitution, which is to be found in the Rights of Man. Yet Mr. Burke himself
saw no reasons to be alarmed at its publication, nor to cry down its contents,
even when America, which was swayed by it, was in arms against the crown of
Great Britain. You shall hear his opinion of it, in his letter to the sheriffs
of Bristol, pages 33 and 34.

The court gazette accomplished what the abetters of independence had attempted
in vain. When that disingenuous compilation, and strange medley of railing and
flattery was adduced, as a proof of the united sentiments of the people of
Great Britain, there was a great change throughout all America. The tide of
popular affection which had still set toward the parent country, began
immediately to turn, and to flow with great rapidity in a contrary course. Far
from concealing these wild declarations of enmity, the author of the celebrated
pamphlet which prepared the minds of the people for independence, insists
largely on the multitude and the spirit of these addresses; and draws an
argument from them, which (if the fact were as he supposes) must be
irresistible. For I never knew a writer on the theory of government so partial
to authority, as not to allow that the hostile mind of the rulers to their
people, did fully justify a change of government; nor can any reason whatever
be given, why one people should voluntarily yield any degree of pre-eminence to
another, but on a supposition of great affection and benevolence toward them.
Unfortunately your rulers, trusting to other things, took no notice of this
great principle of connection.

But there is a time, it seems, for all things.

Gentlemen, the consequences of this mighty revolution are too notorious to
require illustration. No audience would sit to hear (what every body has seen
and felt,) the independence of America notoriously produced, not by remote and
circuitous effect, but directly and palpably, the revolutions which now agitate
Europe, and which portend such new changes over the face of the earth. Let
governors take warning. The revolution in France was the consequence of her
incurably corrupt and profligate government. God forbid that I should be
thought to lean, by this declaration, upon her unfortunate monarch, bending,
perhaps at this moment, under afflictions which my heart sinks within me to
think of; but, when I speak with detestation of the former politics of the
French court, I fasten as little of them upon that fallen and unhappy prince,
as I impute to our gracious sovereign the corruptions of our own government. I
desire, indeed, in the distinctest manner, to be understood that I mean to
speak of his Majesty, not only with that obedience and duty which I owe to him
as a subject, but with that justice which I think is due to him from all men
who examine his conduct either in public or private life.

Gentlemen, Mr. Pain happened to be in England when the French revolution took
place, and notwithstanding what he must be supposed and allowed from his
history to have felt upon such a subject, he remained wholly silent and
inactive. The people of this country too appeared to be indifferent spectators
of the animating scene. They saw, without visible emotion, despotism destroyed,
and the King of France, by his own consent, become the first magistrate of a
free people. Certainly, at least, it produced none of those effects which are
so deprecated by government at present; nor, most probably, ever would, if it
had not occurred to the celebrated person, whose name I must so often mention,
voluntarily to provoke the subject; a subject which, if dangerous to be
discussed, he should not have led to the discussion: for, surely, it is not to
be endured, that any private man is to publish a creed for a whole nation; to
tell us that we are not to think for ourselves -- to impose his own fetters
upon the human mind -- to dogmatise at discretion -- and that no man shall sit
down to answer him without being guilty of a libel. I assert, that if it be a
libel to mistake our constitution -- to support it by means that tend to
destroy it -- and to choose the most dangerous season for the interference, Mr.
Burke is that libeller; but not therefore the object of a criminal prosecution:
for, whilst I am defending the motives of one man, I have neither right nor
disposition to criminate the motives of another. All I contend for, is a fact
that cannot be controverted, viz. that this officious interference was the
origin of Mr. Paine's book. I put my cause upon its being the origin of it --
the avowed origin -- as will abundantly appear from the introduction and
preface to both parts, and throughout the whole body of the work; nay, from the
very work of Mr. Burke himself, to which both of them are answers.

Gentlemen, for the history of that celebrated work, I appeal to itself.

When the French revolution had arrived at some of its early stages, a few, and
but a few, persons (not to be named when compared with the nation) took a
visible interest in these mighty events; an interest well worthy of Englishmen.
They saw a pernicious system of government, which had led to cruel desolating
wars, and had been for ages the scourge of Great Britain, giving way to a
system which seemed to promise harmony and peace amongst the nations. They saw
this with virtuous and peaceable satisfaction: and a reverend divine Dr. PRICE.
, eminent for his eloquence, recollecting that the issues of life are in the
hands of God, saw no profaneness in mixing the subject with public
thanksgiving; reminding the people of this country of their own glorious
deliverance in former ages. It happened, also, that a society of gentlemen,
France being then a neutral nation, and her own monarch swearing almost daily
upon her altars to maintain the new constitution, thought they infringed no law
by sending a general congratulation. Their numbers, indeed, were very
inconsiderable; so much so, that Mr. Burke, with more truth than wisdom, begins
his volume with a sarcasm upon their insignificance.

Until very lately he had never heard of such a club. It certainly never
occupied a moment of his thoughts; nor, he believed, those of any person out of
their own set.

Why then make their proceedings the subject of alarm throughout England? There
had been no prosecution against them, nor any charge founded upon suspicion of
disaffection against any of their body. But Mr. Burke thought it was reserved
for his eloquence to whip these curs of faction to their kennels. How he has
succeeded, I appeal to all that has happened since the introduction of his
schism in the British empire, by giving to the king, whose title was questioned
by no man, a title which it is his Majesty's most solemn interest to disclaim.

After having, in his first work, lashed Dr. Price in a strain of eloquent
irony for considering the monarchy to be elective, which he could not but know
Dr. Price, in the literal sense of election, neither did or could possibly
consider it, Mr. Burke published a second treatise; in which, after reprinting
many passages from Mr. Paine's former work, he ridicules and denies the
supposed right of the people to change their governments, in the following
words:

"The French revolution," say they, (speaking of the English societies,) was
the act of the majority of the people; and if the majority of any other people,
the people of England, for instance, wish to make the same change, they have
the same right; just the same undoubtedly; that is, none at all.

And then, after speaking of the subserviency of will to duty, (in which I
agree with him,) he, in a substantive sentence, maintains the same doctrine;
thus:

The constitution of a country being once settled upon some compact, tacit or
expressed, there is no power existing of force to alter it, without, the breach
of the covenant, or the consent of all the parties. -- Such is the nature of a
contract.

So that if reason, or even revelation itself, were now to demonstrate to us,
that our constitution was mischievous in its effects; that, to use Mr. Attorney
General's expression, we had been insane for the many centuries we have
supported it; yet that still, if the king had not forfeited his title to the
crown, nor the lords their privileges, the universal voice of the whole people
of England could not build up a new government upon a legitimate basis.

Gentlemen, not to argue for the present against such a proposition, and
supposing it could, beyond all controversy, be maintained; for heaven's sake,
let wisdom never utter it! Let policy and prudence forever conceal it! If you
seek the stability of the English government, rather put the book of Mr. Pain,
which calls it bad into every hand in the kingdom, than doctrines which bid
human nature rebel even against that which is the best. Say to the people of
England, Look at your constitution, there it lies before you -- the work of
your pious fathers, handed down as a sacred deposit from generation to
generation, the result of wisdom and virtue, and its parts cemented together
with kindred blood. There are indeed a few spots upon its surface; but the same
principle which reared the structure, will brush them all away: yon may keep
it, or you may destroy it. To such an address what would be the answer? A
chorus of the nation -- Yes we will preserve it. But say to the same nation,
even of the very same constitution, It is yours, such as it is, for better or
for worse; it is strapped upon your backs, to carry it as beasts of burden,
and you have no jurisdiction to cast it off. Let this be your position, and you
instantly raise up (I appeal to every man's consciousness of his own nature) a
spirit of uneasiness and discontent. Yet it is the controversy alone, which
this useless and mischievous proposition stirred up, that has pointed most of
the passages arraigned before you, which it will be presently my duty to
explain.

But let the prudence of the argument be what it may, the argument itself is
untenable.

His Majesty undoubtedly was not elected to the throne. No man can be supposed
in the teeth of fact, to have contended it; but did not the people of England
elect King William, and break the hereditary succession? And does not his
Majesty's title grow out of that election? It is one of the charges against the
defendant, his having denied the parliament which called the Prince of Orange
to the throne to have been a legal convention of the whole people: and (...)
very foundation of that charge, that it was such a legal convention, and that
it was intended to be so? And if it was so, did not the people then confer the
crown upon King William without any regard to hereditary right? Did they not
cut off the Prince of Wales, who stood directly in the line of succession, and
who had incurred no personal forfeiture? Did they not give their deliverer an
estate in the crown totally new and unprecedented in the law or history of the
country? -- And, lastly, might they not, by the same authority, have given the
royal inheritance to the family of a stranger? Mr. Justice Blackstone, in his
Commentaries, in terms, asserts that they might; and ascribes their choice of
King William, and the subsequent limitations of the crown not to want of
jurisdiction, but to their true origin, to prudence and discretion in not
disturbing a valuable institution further than public safety and necessity
dictated.

The English government stands then on this public consent, the true root of
all governments. And I agree with Mr. Burke, that, while it is well
administered, it is not in the power of factions or libels to disturb it;
though, when ministers are in fault, they are sure to set down all disturbances
to these causes. This it most justly and eloquently exemplified in the Thoughts
on the Cause of the present Discontents, pages 5 and 6.

Ministers contend that no adequate provocation has been given for so spreading
a discontent, our affairs having been conducted throughout with remarkable
temper and consummate wisdom. The wicked industry of some libellers, joined to
the intrigues of a few disappointed politicians, have, in their opinion, been
able to produce this unnatural ferment in the nation.

Nothing, indeed can be more unnatural than the present convulsions of this
country, if the above account be a true one. I confess I shall assent to it
with great reluctance, and only on the compulsion of the clearest and firmest
proofs; because their account resolves itself into this short but discouraging
proposition, that we have a very good ministry, but that we are a very bad
people; that we set ourselves to bite the hand that feeds us; and, with a
malignant insanity, oppose the measures, and ungratefully vilify the persons of
those whose sole object is our own peace and prosperity, If a few puny
libellers, acting under a knot of factious politicians, without virtue, parts,
or character (for such they are constantly represented by these gentlemen,) are
sufficient to excite this disturbance, very perverse must be the disposition of
that people, amongst whom such a disturbance can be excited by such means.

He says true: never were serious disturbances excited by such means!

But to return to the argument. Let us now see how the rights of the people
stand upon authority, and whether this great source of government is not
maintained by persons on whom my friend will find it hard to fasten the
character of libellers.

I shall begin with the most modern author on the subject of government -- a
gentleman, whose work lies spread out before me, as it often does for my
delight and instruction in my leisure hours. I have also, by the favor of a
friend who sits near me in court, the honor of his personal acquaintance. He is
a man, perhaps more than any other, devoted to the real constitution of the
country, as will be found throughout his valuable work; and he is a person
besides, of great learning, which enabled him to infuse much useful knowledge
into my learned friend who introduced me to him Mr. LAW, King's counsel.
. I speak of Mr. Paley, Archdeacon of Carlisle, and of his work, entitled, The
Principles of Political and Moral Philosophy, in which he investigates the
first principles of all governments -- a discussion not thought dangerous till
lately: and I hope we shall soon get rid of this ridiculous panic.

Mr. Paley professes to think of governments what the Christian religion was
thought of by its first teachers: -- If it be of God it will stand; and he puts
the duties of obedience to them upon free will and moral duty. After dissenting
from Mr. Lock as to the origin of governments in compact, he says,

Wherefore, rejecting the intervention of compact as unfounded in its
principle, and dangerous in the application, we assign for the only ground of
the subjects, obligation, THE WILL OF GOD, AS COLLECTED FROM EXPEDIENCY.

The steps by which the argument proceeds are few and direct. -- 'It is the
will of God that happiness of human life be promoted:' -- this is the first
step, and the foundation, not only of this, but of every moral conclusion.
'Civil society conduces to that end:' -- this is the second proposition. 'Civil
societies cannot be upheld, unless in each, the interest of the whole society
be binding upon every part and member of it:' -- this is the third step, and
conducts us to the conclusion, namely, -- That so long as the interest of the
whole society requires it (that is, so long as the established government
cannot be resisted or changed without public inconveniency) it is the will of
God (which will universally determines our duty) that the established
government be obeyed,' -- and no longer.

But who shall judge of this? We answer 'Every man for himself.' In contentions
between the sovereign and the subject, the parties acknowledge no common
arbitrator; and it would be absurd to commit the decision to those whose
conduct has provoked the question and whose own interest, authority, and sat,
are immediately concerned in it. The danger of error and abuse is no objection
to the rule of expediency, because every other rule is liable to the same or
greater; and every rule that can be propounded upon the subject (like all rules
which appeal to, or bind the conscience) must, in the application, depend upon
private judgment. It may be observed, however, that it ought equally to be
accounted the exercise of a man's private judgment, whether he determines by
reasonings and conclusions of his own, or submits to be directed by the advice
of others provided he be free to choose his guide.

He then proceeds in a manner rather inconsistent with the principles
entertained by my learned friend in his opening to you: --

No usage, law, or authority whatever, is so binding that it need or ought to
be continued, when it may be changed with advantage to the community. The
family of the Prince -- the order of succession -- the prerogative of the crown
-- the form and parts of the legislature -- together with the respective
powers, office, duration, and mutual dependency of the several parts; are all
only so many laws, mutable, like other laws, whenever expediency requires,
cither by the ordinary act of the legislature, or, if the occasion deserve it,
BY THE INTERPOSITION OF THE PEOPLE.

No man can say that Mr. Paley intended to diffuse discontent by this
declaration. He must therefore be taken to think with me, that freedom and
affection, and the sense of advantages, are the best and the only supports of
government. On the same principle, he then goes on to say, -- These points are
wont to be approached with a kind of awe; they are represented to the mind as
principles of the constitution, settled by our ancestors, and being settled, to
be no more committed to innovation or debate; as foundations never to be
stirred; as the terms and conditions of the social compact, to which every
citizen of the state has engaged his fidelity, by virtue of a promise which he
cannot now recall. Such reasons have no place in our system.

Such are the sentiments of this excellent author, and there is no part of Mr.
Paine's work, from the one end of it to the other, that advances any other
proposition.

But the Attorney General will say, these are the grave speculative opinions of
a friend to the English Government whereas Mr. Pain is its professed enemy;
what then? the principle is, that every man, while he obeys the Laws, is to
think for himself, and to conduct himself as he thinks. The very ends of
society exact this license, and the policy of the law, in its provisions for
its security, has tacitly sanctioned it. The real fact is, that writings
against a free and well proportioned government, need not be guarded against by
laws. They cannot often exist, and never with effect. The just and awful
principles of society, are rarely brought forward, but when they are insulted
and denied, or abused in practice: Mr. Locke's Essay on Government, we owe to
Sir Robert Filmer, as we owe Mr. Paine's to Mr. Burke; and indeed, between the
arguments of Filmer and Burke, I see no essential difference; since it is not
worth disputing, whether a King exists by Divine right, or indissoluble Human
compact, if he exists whether we will or no: If his existence be without our
consent, and to continue without benefit, it matters not a farthing, whether
his title be from God or from Man.

That his title is from man, and from every generation of man, without regard
to the determination of former ones, hear from Mr. Lock, "All men" say they,
(i. e. Filmer and his adherents,) are born under government, and therefore they
cannot be at liberty to begin a new one. Every one is born a subject to his
father or his prince, and is therefore under the perpetual tie of subjection
and allegiance, It is plain, mankind never owned nor considered any such
natural subjection that they were born in, to one or to the other, that tied
them, without their own consents, to a subjection to them and their heirs.

It is true, that whatever engagements or premises any one has made for
himself, he is under the obligation of them, but cannot, by any compact
whatsoever, bind his children or posterity: for his son, when a men, being
altogether as free as the father, any act of the father can no more give away
the liberty of the son, than it can of any body else.

So much for Mr. Locke's opinion of the rights of mankind. Let us now examine
his ideas of the supposed danger of trusting them with them.

Perhaps it will be said, that the people being ignorant, and always
discontented, to lay the foundation of government in the unsteady opinion and
uncertain humor of the people, is to expose it to certain ruin: and no
government will be able long to subsist, if the people may set up a new
legislature, whenever they take offense at the old one. To this, I answer quite
the contrary: people are not so easily got out of their old forms, as some are
apt to suggest: they are hardly to be prevailed with to amend the acknowledged
faults in the frame they have been accustomed to; and if there be any original
defects, or adventitious ones introduced by time, or corruption, it is not an
easy thing to be changed, even when all the world sees there is an opportunity
for it. This slowness and aversion in the people to quit their old
constitutions, has in the many revolutions which have been seen in this
kingdom, in this and former ages, still kept us to, or, after some interval of
fruitless attempts, still brought us back again to our old legislative of king,
lords and commons: and whatever provocations have made the crown be taken from
some of our princes heads, they never carried the people so far as to place it
in another one.

Gentlemen, I wish I had strength to go on with all that is material, but I
have read enough, not only to maintain the true principles of government, but
to put to shame the narrow system of distrusting the people.

It may be said, that Mr. Lock went great lengths in his positions, to beat
down the contrary doctrine of divine right, which was then endangering the new
establishment. But that cannot be objected to David Hume, who maintains the
same doctrine; speaking of the Magna Charta in his history, vol ii. Page 88, he
says, It must be confessed, that the former articles of the great charter,
contain such mitigations and explanations of the foedal law, as are reasonable
and equitable; and that the latter involve all the chief outlines of a legal
governments, and provide for the equal distribution of justice and free
enjoyment of property; the great object for which political society was founded
by men, which the people have a perpetual and unalienable right to recall; and
which no time, nor precedent, nor statute, nor positive institution, ought to
deter them from keeping ever uppermost in their thoughts and attention.

These authorities are sufficient to rest on, yet I cannot omit Mr. Burke
himself, who is, if possible, still more distinct on the subject. Speaking, not
of the ancient people of England, but of colonies planted almost within our
memories, he says, If there be one fact in the world perfectly clear, it is
this; 'that the disposition of the people of America is wholly averse to any
other than a free government,' and this is indication enough to any honest
statesmen, how he ought to adapt whatever power he finds in his hands to their
case. If any ask me what a free government is, I answer, That it is what the
people think so; and that they, and not I, are the natural, lawful, and
competent judges of this matter. If they practically allow me a greater degree
of authority over them than is consistent with any correct ideas of perfect
freedom, I ought to thank them for so great a trust, and not to endeavor to
prove from thence, that they have reasoned amiss, and that having gone so far,
by analogy, they must hereafter have no enjoyment but by my pleasure.

Gentlemen, I am sorry to feel my time considerably consumed before I am
arrived at what I conceive to be the material subject of your consideration.
For all that I have been stating now is only to show, that there is not that
novelty in the opinions of the defendant, that should lead you to think that he
does not bona fide entertain them, much less when connected with the history of
his life, which I therefore brought in review before you. But still the great
question remains unargued. Had he a right to promulgate these opinions?
Gentlemen, if he entertained them, I shall argue that he had; and although my
arguments upon the Liberty of the Press may not today be honored with your or
the court's approbation, I shall retire not at all disheartened, consoling
myself with the reflection, that a season may arrive for their reception. The
most essential freedoms of mankind have been but slowly and gradually received,
and so very late, indeed do some of them come to maturity, that notwithstanding
the Attorney General tells you that the very question I am now agitating is
most peculiarly for your consideration, as a Jury, under our ancient
constitution, yet I must remind both you and him, that your jurisdiction to
consider and deal with it at all in judgment, is but a year old. When, before
that late period, I ventured to maintain this very right of a Jury over the
question of libel under the same ancient constitution; (I do not mean before my
Lord, for the matter was gone to rest in the courts, at least long before he
came to sit where he does.) But when, before a noble and reverend Magistrate of
the most exalted understanding, and of the most uncorrupted integrity, to give
effect to it. Earl MANSFIELD.
I had occasion to maintain it, he treated me, not with disregard indeed, for
of that his nature was incapable, but he put me aside with indulgence, as you
do a child while it is lisping its prattle out of season; and if this cause had
been tried then, instead of now, the defendant must have been instantly
convicted on the proof of the publication, whatever you might have thought of
his case; yet I have lived to see it resolved, by an almost unanimous vote of
the whole Parliament of England, that I had along been in the right. If this be
not an awful lesson of caution concerning opinions, where are such lessons to
be read?

Gentlemen, I have insisted, at great length, upon the origin of government
being in the consent of the people, and detailed the authorities which you have
heard upon the subject, because, I consider it to be not only a support, but,
indeed, the only foundation of the Liberty of the Press. If Mr. Burke be right,
in his principles of government, I admit that the Press, in my sense of its
freedom, ought not to be free, nor free in any sense at all; and that all
addresses to the people upon the subject of government, and all speculations of
amendment, of what kind or nature soever, are illegal and criminal: for, if the
people have, without possible recall, delegated all their authorities, they have
no jurisdiction to act, and therefore none to think, upon such subjects, and it
is a libel to arraign Government or any of its acts, before those that have no
jurisdiction to correct them. But on the other hand, as it is a settled rule in
the law of England, that the subject may always address a competent
jurisdiction on every matter within it, no legal argument can shake the freedom
of the press in my sense of it, I am supported in my doctrines concerning the
great unalienable rights of the people, to change or to reform their
governments.

Gentlemen, it is because the Liberty of the Press resolves itself into this
great issue, that it has been in every time and country, the last liberty which
subjects have been able to wrest from power. -- Other liberties are held under
governments, but the liberty of opinion keeps governments themselves in due
subjection to their duties. This has produced the martyrdom of truth in every
age, and the world has only purged itself from ignorance with the innocent
blood of those who have enlightened it.

Gentlemen, my strength and time are wasted, and I can only make this
melancholy history pass like a shadow before you.

I shall begin with the grand type and example.

The universal God of nature, -- the Savior of mankind, the Fountain of all
light, who came to pluck the world from eternal darkness, expired upon a cross
the scoff of infidel scorn; and his blessed Apostles followed him in the train
of martyrs. When he came in the flesh, he might have come like the Mohammedan
prophet, as a powerful sovereign, and propagated that religion with an
unconquerable sword, which even now, after the lapse of ages, is but slowly
moving under the influence of reason, over the face of the earth: But such a
process would have been inconsistent with his mission, which was to confound
the pride, and to establish the universal rights of men; he came therefore in
that lowly state which is represented in the Gospel, and preached his
consolations to the poor.

When the foundation of this religion was discovered to be invulnerable and
immortal, we find political power taking the church into partnership; thus
began the corruptions both of religion and civil power, and, hand in hand
together, what havoc have they not made in the world; ruling by ignorance and
the persecution of truth; but this very persecution only hastened the revival
of letters and liberty, which was to destroy the one and raise up the other.
Nay, you will find, that in the exact proportion that knowledge and learning
have been beat down and fettered, they have destroyed the governments that
bound them. The court of Star Chamber, the first restriction of the press of
England, was erected, previous to all the great changes in the constitution.
From that moment no man could legally write without an imprimatur from the
state; but truth and freedom found their way with greater force through secret
channels, and the unhappy Charles, unwarned by a free-press, was brought to an
ignominious death.

When men can freely communicate their thoughts and their sufferings, real, or
imaginary, their passions spend themselves in air, like gunpowder scattered
upon the surface; but pent up by terrors, they work unseen, like subterraneous
fire, burst forth in earthquake, and destroy every thing in their course. Let
reason be opposed to reason, and argument to argument, and every good
Government will be safe.

The usurper, Cromwell, pursued the same system of restraint in support of his
Government, and the end of it speedily followed.

At the restoration of Charles the Second, the Star Chamber Ordnance of 1637,
was worked up into an Act of Parliament, and was followed up during that reign,
and the short one that followed it, by the most sanguinary prosecutions; but
what fact in history is more notorious, than that this blind and contemptible
policy prepared and hastened on the Revolution. At that great era these
cobwebs were all brushed away: The freedom of the Press was regenerated, and
the country, ruled by its affections, has since enjoyed a century of
tranquillity and glory. -- Thus I have maintained, by English history, that in
proportion as the press has bean free, English government has been secure.

Gentlemen, I will now support the same important truth by every great
authorities. Upon a subject of this kind resort cannot be had to law cases. The
ancient law of England knew nothing of such libels; they began, and should have
ended, with the Star Chamber. What writings are slanderous of individuals, must
be looked for where these prosecutions are recorded; but upon general subjects
we must go to general writers. If, indeed, I were to refer to obscure authors,
I might be answered, that my very authorities were libels, instead of
justifications or examples; but this cannot be said with effect of great men,
whose works are classics in our language, taught in our schools, and printed
under the eye of government.

Gentlemen, I shall begin with the poet Milton, a great authority in all
learning. -- It may be said, indeed, he was a republican, but that would only
prove that republicanism is not incompatible with virtue; it may be said too,
that the work which I cite was written against previous licensing, which is not
contended for today. But, in my opinion, if every work is to be adjudged a
libel, which is adverse to the wishes of government, or to the opinions of
those who may try it, the revival of a licencer would be a security to the
public: For, if I present my book to a magistrate appointed by law, if he
rejects it, I have only to forbear from the publication, and in the forbearance
I am safe; and he too is answerable to law for the abuse of his authority. But,
upon the argument of today, a man must print at his peril, without any guide
to the principles of judgment, upon which his work may be afterward prosecuted
and condemned. Milton's argument therefore applies, and was meant to apply, to
every interruption to writing, which, while they oppress the individual,
endanger the state.

We have them not, says Milton, that can be heard of, from any ancient state,
or policy, or church, nor by any statute left us by our ancestors, elder or
later, nor from the modern custom of any reformed city, or church abroad; but
from the most antichristian council, and the most tyrannous inquisition that
ever existed. Till then, books were ever as freely admitted into the world as
any other birth; the issue of the brain was no more stifled than the issue of
the womb.

To the pure, all things are pure: not only meats and drinks, but all kind of
knowledge whether good or evil; the knowledge cannot defile nor consequently
the books, if the will and conscience be not defiled.

Bad books serve in many respects to discover, to confute, to forewarn, and to
illustrate. Whereof, what better witness can we expect I should produce, than
one of your own now sitting in Parliament, the chief of learned men reputed in
this land, Mr. Seldom; whose volume of natural and national laws, proves, not
only by great authorities brought together, but by exquisite reasons and
theorems almost mathematically demonstrative, that all opinions, yea errors,
known, read, and collated, are of main service and assistance toward the speedy
attainment of what is truest.

Opinions and understanding are not such wares as to be monopolized and traded
in by tickets and statutes, and standards. We must not think to make a staple
commodity of all the knowledge in the land, to mark and license it like our
broad cloth and our woolpacks.

Nor is it to the common people less than a reproach; for if we be so jealous
over them that we cannot trust them with an English pamphlet, what do we but
censure them for a giddy, vicious, and ungrounded people; in such a sick and
weak estate of faith and discretion, as to be able to take nothing down, but
through the pipe of a licenser. That this is care or love of them we cannot
pretend.

Those corruptions which it seeks to prevent, break in faster at doors which
cannot be shut.

To prevent men thinking and acting for themselves, by restraints on the press,
is like to the exploits of that gallant man, who, thought to pound up the
crows, by shutting his park gate.

This obstructing violence meets for the most part with an event, utterly
opposite to the end which it drives at: instead of suppressing books, it raises
them and invests them with a reputation: the punishment of wits enhances their
authority, says the Viscount St. Albans'; and a forbidden writing is thought
to be a certain spark of truth, that flies up in the face of them who seek to
tread it out.

He then adverts to his visit to the famous Galileo, whom he found and visited
in the inquisition, for not thinking in astronomy with the Franciscan and
Dominican Monks. And what event ought more deeply to interest and affect us.
The very laws of nature were to bend under the rod of a licenser; this
illustrious astronomer ended his life within the bars of a prison, because, in
seeing the phases of Venus through his newly-invented telescope, he pronounced,
that she shone with borrowed light, and from the Sun as the center of the
universe. This was the mighty crime, the placing the sun in the center: that
sun which now inhabits it upon the foundation of mathematical truth, which
enables us to traverse the pathless ocean, and to carry our line and rule
amongst other worlds: which but for Galileo we had never known, perhaps even to
the recesses of an infinite and immortal God.

Milton then, in his most eloquent address to the Parliament, puts the liberty
of the press on its true and most honorable foundation; Believe it, Lords and
Commons, they who counsel ye to such a suppressing of books, do as good as bid
you suppress yourselves; and I will soon show how.

If it be desired to know the immediate cause of all this free writing and free
speaking, there cannot be assigned a truer than your own mild, and free and
humane government; it is the liberty, Lords and Commons, which your own
valorous and happy counsels have purchased us; liberty which is the nurse of
all great wits: this is that which has rarefied and enlightened our spirits
like the influence of heaven; this is that which has enfranchised, enlarged,
and lifted up our apprehensions, degrees above themselves. Ye cannot make us
now less capable, less knowing, less eagerly pursuing the truth, unless ye
first make yourselves, that made us so, less the lovers, less the founders of
our true liberty. We can grow ignorant again, brutish, formal, and slavish, as
ye found us; but you then must first become that which ye cannot be,
oppressive, arbitrary, and tyrannous, as they were from whom ye have freed us.
That our hearts are now more capacious, our thoughts now more erected to the
search and expectation of greatest and exactest things, is the issue of your
own virtue propagated in us. Give me the liberty to know, to utter, and to
argue freely, according to conscience above all liberties.

Gentlemen, I will now refer you to another author, whose opinion you may think
more in point, as having lived in our own times, and as holding the highest
monarchical principles of government. I speak of Mr. Hume, who, nevertheless,
considers, that this liberty of the press extends not only to abstract
speculation, but to keep the public on their gourd against all the acts of
their government.

After showing the advantages of a monarchy to public freedom, provided it is
duty controlled and watched by the popular part of the constitution, he says,
These principles account for the great liberty of the press in these kingdoms,
beyond what is indulged in any other government. It is apprehended, that
arbitrary power would steal in upon us, were we not careful to prevent its
progress, and were there not an easy method of conveying the alarm from one end
of the kingdom to the other. The spirit of the people must frequently be
roused, in order to curb the ambition of the court; and the dread of rousing
this spirit must be employed to prevent that ambition. Nothing is so effectual
to this purpose as the liberty of the press, by which all the learning, wit,
and genius of the nation, may be employed on the side of freedom, and every one
be animated to its defense. AS LONG, THEREFORE, AS THE REPUBLICAN PART OF OUR
GOVERNMENT CAN MAINTAIN ITSELF AGAINST THE MONARCHICAL, IT WILL NATURALLY BE
CAREFUL TO KEEP THE PRESS OPEN, AS OF IMPORTANCE TO ITS OWN PRESERVATION.

There is another authority co-temporary with the last, a splendid speaker in
the upper House of Parliament, and who held during most of his time, high
offices under the King; I speak of the Earl of Chesterfield, who those expressed
himself in the House of Lords: -- One of the greatest blessings, my Lords, we
enjoy, is Liberty; but every good in this life has its alloy of evil --
Licentiousness is the alloy of Liberty, it is --.

Lord Kenyon. Doctor Johnson claims to pluck that feather from Lord
Chesterfield's wing; he speak, I believe, of the eye of the political body.


Mr. Erskine. Gentlemen, I have heard it said, that Lord Chesterfield borrowed
that which I was just about to state, and which his Lordship has anticipated.


Lord Kenyon. That very speech which did Lord Chesterfield so much honor, is
supposed to have been written by Doctor Johnson.


Mr. Erskine. Gentlemen, I believe it was so, and I am much obliged to his
Lordship for giving me a far higher authority for my doctrine. For though Lord
Chesterfield was a man of great ingenuity and wit, he was undoubtedly far
inferior in learning and in monarchical opinion, to the celebrated writer to
whom my Lord has now delivered the work by his authority. Doctor Johnson then
says, One of the greatest blessings we enjoy, one of the greatest blessings a
people, my Lords, can enjoy, is Liberty; but every good in this life has its
alloy of evil: Licentiousness is the alloy of Liberty: It is an ebullition, an
excrescence; it is a speck upon the eye of the political body, which I can
never touch but with a gentle, with a trembling hand, lest I destroy the body,
lest I injure the eye upon which it is apt to appear.


There is such a connection between licentiousness and liberty, that it is not
easy to correct the one without dangerously wounding the other; it is extremely
hard to distinguish the true limit between them; like a changeable silk, we can
easily see there are two different colors, but we cannot easily discover where
the one ends, or where the other begins.

I confess, I cannot help agreeing with this learned author. The danger of
touching the press is the difficulty of marking its limits. My learned friend,
who has just gone out of court, has drawn no line, and unfolded no principle.
He has not told us, if this book is condemned, what book may be written. If I
may not write against the existence of a monarchy, and recommend a republic,
may I write against any part of the Government? May I say that we should be
better without a House of Lords, or a House of Commons, or a Court of Chancery,
or any other given part of our establishment? Or if, as has been hinted, a work
may become libellous for stating even legal matter with sarcastic phrase, the
difficulty becomes the greater, and the liberty of the press more impossible to
define.

The same author pursuing the subject and speaking of the fall of Roman
liberty, says, But this sort of liberty came soon after to be called
licentiousness; for we are told that Augustus, after having established his
empire, restored order in Rome by restraining licentiousness. God forbid we
should in this country have order restored or licentiousness restrained, at so
dear a rate as the People of Rome paid for it to Augustus.

Let us consider, my Lords, that arbitrary power has seldom or never been
introduced into any country at once. It must be introduced by slow degrees, and
as it were step by step, lest the people should see its approach. The barriers
and fences of the people's liberty must be plucked up one by one, and some
plausible pretenses must be found for removing, or hood-winking one after
another, those sentries who are posted by the constitution of a free country,
for warning the people of their danger. When these preparatory steps are once
made, the people then, indeed, with regret, see slavery and arbitrary power
making long strides over their land; but it will be too late to think of
preventing or avoiding the impending ruin.

The stage, my Lords, and the press, are two of our out-sentries; if we remove
them, if we hood-wink them, if we throw them in fetters, the enemy may surprise
us.

Gentlemen, this subject was still more lately put in the justest and the most
forcible light by a noble person high in the Magistracy; and whose mind is not
at all tuned to the introduction of disorder by improper popular excesses; I
mean Lord Loughborough, Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas. I believe I
can answer the correctness of my note, which I shall follow up with the opinion
of another member of the Lord's House of Parliament; the present Earl Stanhope;
or rather, I shall take Lord Stanhope first, as his Lordship introduces the
subject by adverting to this argument of Lord Loughborough's. "If," says his
Lordship, our boasted liberty of the press, were to consist only in the liberty
to write in praise of the Constitution, this is a liberty enjoyed under many
arbitrary governments. I suppose it would not be deemed quite an unpardonable
offense, even by the Empress of Russia, if any man were to take into his head
to write a panegyric upon the Russian form of Government. Such a liberty as
that might therefore properly be termed the Russian. Liberty of the Press. But,
the English Liberty of the Press is of a very different description: for, by
the law of England, it is not prohibited to publish speculative works upon the
Constitution, whether they contain praise or censure. --

[Lord Stanhope's defense of the Libel Bill.]

You see therefore, as far as the general principles go, I am supported by the
opinion of Lord Stanhope, for otherwise the noble Lord has written a libel
himself, by exciting other people to write whatever they may think, be it good
or evil, of the constitution of the country. As to the other high authority,
Lord Loughborough, I will read what applies to this subject -- "Every man,"
said Lord Loughborough, may publish at his discretion his opinions concerning
forms and systems of Government.

If they be wise and enlightening, the world will gain by them; if they be weak
and absurd, they will be laughed at and forgotten; and, if they be bona fide,
they cannot be criminal, however erroneous. On the other hand, the purpose and
the direction may give a different turn to writings whose common construction
is harmless or even meritorious. Suppose men, assembled in disturbance of the
peace, to pull down mills or turn-pikes, or to do any other mischief, and that
a mischievous person should disperse among them an excitation to the planned
mischief known to both writer and reader, To your tents, O Israel; that
publication would be criminal. But how criminal? Not as a libel, not as an
abstract writing, but as an act; and the act being the crime, it must be stated
as a fact extrinsic on the record: for, otherwise, a Court of Error could have
no jurisdiction but over the natural construction of the writing; nor would the
defendant have any notice of such matter at the trial, without a charge on the
record. To give the Jury cognizance of any matter beyond the construction of
the writing, the averment should be in the case as I have instanced, that
certain persons were, as I have described, assembled; and that the publisher,
intending to execute these persons so assembled, wrote so and so. Here the
crime is complete, and consists in an overt act of wickedness evidenced by a
writing.

In answer to all these authorities, the Attorney General may say, that, if Mr.
Pain had written his observations with the views of those high persons and
under other circumstances, he would be protected and acquitted: to which I can
only answer, that no facts or circumstances attending his work, are either
charged or proved; that you have no jurisdiction whatever but over the natural
construction of the work before you, and that I am therefore brought without a
flaw in the deduction to the passages which are the particular subject of
complaint.

Gentlemen, I am not unmindful how long I have already trespassed upon your
patience; and, recollecting the nature of the human mind, and how much, for a
thousand reasons, I have to struggle against at this moment, I shall not be
disconcerted if any of you should appear anxious to retire from the pain of
hearing me farther. It has been said, that my vanity has forwarded my zeal in
this cause; but I might appeal even to the authors of those paragraphs, whether
a situation ever existed which vanity would have been fonder to fly from -- the
task of speaking against every known prepossession; with every countenance, as
it were, planted and lifted up against me. But I stand at this bar to give to a
criminal arraigned before it, the defense which the law of the country entitles
him to. If any of my arguments be indecent, or unfit for the Court to hear, the
noble judge presides to interrupt them: If all, or any of them, are capable of
an answer, they will be answered: Or, if they be so unfounded in your own
minds, who are to judge of them as not to call for refutation, your verdict in
a moment will overthrow all that has been said -- We shall then have all
discharged our duties -- It is yours to judge, but mine only to address your
judgments.

When my Lord and I were Counsel for Lord George Gordon in 1781, it was not
considered by that Jury, nor imputed to us by any body, that we were contending
for the privileges of over-awing the House of Commons, or recommending the
conflagration of this city: I am doing the same duty now, which MY LORD AND I
then did in concert together; and, whatever may become of the cause, I expect
to be heard: conscious that no just obloquy can be, or will (in the end) be
cast upon me for having done my duty in the manner I have endeavored to
perform it.

Gentlemen, I come now to observe on the passages selected by the information;
and with regard to the first, I shall dispose of it in a moment.

All Hereditary government is in its nature tyranny. An hereditable crown, or
an hereditable throne, or by what other fanciful name such things may be
called, have no other significant explanation than that mankind are hereditable
property. To inherit a government is to inherit the people, as if they were
flocks and herds.

And is it to be endured, says the Attorney General, that the people of this
country are to be told that they are driven like oxen or sheep? Certainly not.
I am of opinion that a more dangerous doctrine cannot be instilled into the
people of England. But who instills such a doctrine? I deny it is instilled by
Pain. For when he mantains that hereditary monarchy inherits a people like
flocks and herds, it is clear from the context (which is kept out of view,)
that he is combating the proposition in Mr. Burke's book, which asserts, that
the hereditary monarchy of England is fastened upon the people of England by
indissoluble compact. Mr. Pain, on the contrary, asserts the King of England
to be the magistrate of the people, existing by their consent, which is utterly
incompatible with their being driven like herds. His argument, therefore, is
this, and it retorts on his adversary: he says, such a King as you represent
the King of England to be, inheriting the people by virtue of conquest, or of
some compact, which, having once existed, cannot be dissolved while the
original terms of it are kept, is an inheritance like flocks and herds. But I
deny that to be the King of England's title, he is the magistrate of the
people, and that title I respect. It is to your own imaginary King of England
therefore, and not to his Majesty, that your unfounded inuendos apply. It is
the monarchs of Russia and Prussia, and all governments fastened upon unwilling
subjects by hereditary indefeasible titles that are stigmatized by Pain as
inheriting the people like flocks. The sentence, therefore, must either be
taken in the pure abstract, and then it is not only merely speculative, but the
application of it to our own government fails altogether, or it must be taken
connected with the matter which constitutes the application, and then it is Mr.
Burke's King of England, and not his Majesty, whose title is denied.

I pass therefore to the next passage, which appears to be an extraordinary
selection. It is taken at a leap from page 21 to page 47, and breaks in at the
words, "This Convention." The sentence selected stands thus, This convention
met at Philadelphia, in May 1787, of which General Washington was elected
president. He was not at that time conected with any of the state governments,
or with Congress. He delivered up his commission when the war ended, and since
then had lived a private citizen.

The convention went deeply into all the subjects: and having after a variety
of debate and investigation, agreed among themselves upon the several parts of
a federal constitution, the next question was, the manner of giving it
authority and practice.

For this purpose, they did not, like a cabal of courtiers, send for a Dutch
Stadtholder, or a German Elector; but they referred the whole matter to the
sense and interest of the country.

This sentence standing by itself, may appear to be a mere sarcasm on King
William, upon those who affected the Revolution; and upon the revolution
itself, without any reasoning or deduction: But when the context and sequel are
looked at and compared, it will appear to be a serious historical comparison
between the Revolution effected in England in 1688, and the late one in America
when she established her independence; and no man can doubt that his judgment
on that comparison was sincere. But where is the libel on the constitution? For
whether King William was brought over here by the sincerest and justest motives
of the whole people of England, each man acting for himself, or through the
motives and agencies imputed by the defendant, it signifies not one farthing at
this time of day to the establishment itself. Blackstone warns us not to fix
our obedience or affection to the government on the motives of our ancestors,
or the rectitude of their reasonings, but to be satisfied that it is
established. This is safe reasoning, and for my own part, I should not be
differently affected to the constitution of my country, which my own
understanding approved, whether angels or demons had given it birth.

Do any of you love the reformation the less because Henry the Eighth was the
author of it? Or because lust and poverty and not religion, were his motives.
He had squandered the treasures of his father, and he preferred Anne Bullen to
his Queen; these were the causes which produced it. What then! does that affect
the purity of our reformed religion, undermine its establishment, or shake the
King's title as prince of the country, to the exclusion of those who held by
the religion it had abolished? Will the Attorney General affirm, that I could
be convicted of a libel for a whole volume of asperity against Henry the
Eighth, merely because he effected the reformation; and if not, why against
King William, who effected the Revolution? Where is the line to be drawn? Is
one, two, or three centuries to be the statute of limitation? But do not our
own historians detail this very cabal of courtiers, from the records of our own
country? If you will turn to Hume's history, volume the eighth, page 188, etc.
etc. you will find that he states at great length, the whole detail of
intrigues which paved the way for the Revolution, and the interested coalition
of parties which gave it effect.

But what of all this, concerning the motives of parties, which is recorded by
Hume. The question is, What is the thing brought about, -- Not HOW it was
brought about. If it stands, as Blackstone argues it, upon the consent of our
ancestors, followed up by our own, no individual can withdraw his obedience. If
he dislikes the establishment, let him seek elsewhere for another; I am not
contending for uncontrolled conduct, but for freedom of opinion.

With regard to what has been stated of the Edwards and Henrys, and the other
princes under which the author can only discover "restrictions on power, but
nothing of a constitution:" surely my friend is not in earnest when he selects
that as a libel.

Pain insists that there was no constitution under these princes, and that
English liberty was obtained from usurped power by the struggles of the people.
SO SAY I. And I think it for the honor and advantage of the country that it
should be known.

Was these any freedom after the original establishment of the Normans by
conquest? Was not the MAGNA CHARTA wrested from John by open force of arms at
Runny-mead? Was it not again re-enacted whilst menacing arms were in the hands
of the people? Were not its stipulations broken through, and two-and-forty
times re-enacted by Parliament, upon the firm demand of the people in the
following reigns? I protest it fills me with astonishment to hear these truths
brought in question.

I was formerly called upon under the discipline of a college to mantain them,
and was rewarded for being thought to have successfully maintained that our
present constitution was by no means a remnant of Saxon liberty, nor any other
institution of liberty, but the pure consequence of the oppression of the
Norman tenures, which spreading the spirit of freedom from one end of the
kingdom to another, enabled our brave fathers, inch by inch, not to re-conquer,
but for the first time to obtain those privileges which are the unalienable
inheritance of all mankind.

But why do we speak of the Edwards and Henrys when Hume himself expressly
says, notwithstanding all we have heard to day of the antiquity of our
constitution, that our monarchy was nearly absolute till the middle of last
century. I have his book in court, and will read it to you. It is his essay on
the Liberty of the Press, vol. I, page 15.

All absolute Governments, and such in a great measure was England, till the
middle of last century. notwithstanding the numerous panegyrics on ANCIENT
English Liberty, must very much depend on the administration.

This is Hume's opinion; the conclusion of a grave historian from all that he
finds recorded as the materials for history: and shall it be said that Mr.
Pain is to be punished for writing today what was before written by another,
who is now a distinguished classic in the language? All the verdicts in the
world will not make that palateable to an impartial public, or to posterity.

The next passage arraigned is this: p. 56. The attention of the government of
England, (for I rather chase to call it by this name, than the English
government) appears since its political connection with Germany, to have been
so completely engrossed and absorbed by foreign affairs, and the means of
raising taxes, that it seems to exist for no other purposes. Domestic concerns
are neglected; and with respect to regular law, there is scarcely such a thing.

That the government of this country has, in consequence of its connection with
the continent, and the continental wars which it has occasioned, been
continually loaded with grievous taxes no man can dispute; and I appeal to your
justice, whether this subject has not been, for years together, the constant
topic of unreproved declamation and grumbling?

As to what he says with regard to there hardly being such a thing as regular
law, he speaks in the abstract of the complexity of our system; but does not
arraign the administration of justice in its practice. But with regard to
criticism and strictures on the general system, it has been echoed over and
over again by various authors; and even from the pulpits of our country, that
the law of the land is mainly defective, devoid of regularity and precision,
and overloaded with a variety of expensive and unnecessary forms. I have a
Sermon in Court written during the American war, by a person of great eloquence
and piety, part of which I will read to you on this subject, in which he looks
forward to an exemption from the intolerable grievances of our old legal system
in the infant establishment of the New World.

It may be in the purposes of Providence, on you western shores, to raise the
bulwark of a purer reformation than ever Britain patronised; to found a less
burdensome, more auspicious, stable, and incorruptible government than ever
Britain has enjoyed; and to establish there a system of law more just and
simple in its principles, less intricate, dubious and dilatory in its
proceedings, more mild and equitable in its sanctions, more easy and more
certain in its execution; wherein no man can err through ignorance of what
concerns him, or want justice through poverty or weakness, or escape it by
legal artifice, or civil privileges, or interposing power; wherein the rule of
conduct shall not be hidden or disguised in the language of principles and
customs that died with the barbarism which gave them birth; wherein hasty
formulas shall not dissipate the reverence that is due to the tribunals and
transactions of justice: wherein obsolete prescripts shall not pervert, nor
entangle, nor impede the administration of it, nor in any instance expose it to
derision or disregard; wherein misrepresentation shall have no share in
deciding upon right and truth; and under which no man shall grow greatly the
wages of chicanery, or thrive by the quarrels that are ruinous to his
employers.

This is ten times stronger than Mr. Pain; but who ever thought of prosecuting
Mr. Cappe?

In various other instances you will find defects in our jurisprudence pointed
out and lamented, and not seldom by persons called upon by their situations to
deliver the law in the seat of magistracy: therefore the author's general
observation does not appear to be that species of attack upon the magistracy of
the country, as to fall within the description of a libel.

With respect to the two Houses of Parliament, I believe I shall be able to
show you that the very person who introduced this controversy, and who
certainly is considered by those who now administer the government, as a man
usefully devoted to maintain the constitution of the country in the present
crisis, has himself made remarks upon these assemblies; that upon comparison
you will think more severe than those which are the subject of the Attorney
General's animadversion. The passage in Mr. Pain runs thus:

With respect to the two Houses, of which the English Parliament is composed,
they appear to be effectually influenced into one, and, as a legislature, to
have no temper of its own. The minister, whoever he at any time may be, touches
it as with an opium wand, and it sleeps obedience.

But if we look at the distinct abilities of the two Houses, the difference
will appear so great, as to show the inconsistency of placing power where there
can be no certainty of the judgment to use it. Wretched as the state of
representation is in England, it is manhood compared with what is called the
House of Lords; and so little is this nicknamed House regarded, that the
people scarcely inquire at any time what it is doing. It appears also to be
most under influence, and the furtherst removed from the general interest of
the nation.

The conclusion of the sentence, and which was meant by Pain as evidence of
the previous assertion, the Attorney General has omitted in the information,
and in his speech, it is this: In the debate on engaging in the Russian and
Turkish war, the majority in the House of Peers in favor of it was upwards of
ninety, when in the other House, which is more than double its numbers, the
majority was sixty-three.

The terms, however, in which Mr. Bruke speaks of the House of Lords, are still
more expressive. It is something more than a century ago, since we voted the
House of Lords useless. They have now voted themselves so, and the whole hope
of reformation (speaking of the House of Commons) "is cast upon us." This
sentiment, Mr. Burke not only expressed in his place in parliament, where no
man can call him to an account; but it has been since, repeatedly printed
amongst his other valuable works. And his opinion of BOTH THE HOUSES OF
PARLIAMENT, which I am about to read to you, was originally published as a
pamphlet, and applied to the settled habitual abuses of these high assemblies.
Remember I do not use them as argumenta ad hominem, or ad individiam against
the author, for if I did, it could be no defense of Mr. Pain. But I use them
as high authority, the work Mr. BURKE'S thoughts on the cause of the present
discontents, published in 1775.
having been the just foundation of substantial and lasting reputation. Would
to God that any part of it were capable of being denied or doubted.

Against the being of parliament I am satisfied no designs have ever been
entertained since the Revolution. Every one must perceive that it it strongly
the interest of the Court to have some second cause interposed between the
ministers and the people. The gentlemen of the House of Commons have an
interest equally strong, in sustaining the part of that intermediate cause.
However they may hire out the usufruct of their voices, they never will part
with the sea and inheritance. Accordingly those who have been of the most known
devotion to the will and pleasure of a court, have at the same time been most
forward in asserting an high authority in the House of Commons. When they knew
who were to use that authority, and how it was to be employed, they thought it
never could be carried too far. It must be always the wish of an
unconstitutional statesman, that an House of Commons, who are entirely
dependent upon him, should have every right of the people dependent upon their
pleasure. FOR IT WAS DISCOVERED THAT THE FORMS OF A FREE, AND THE ENDS OF AN
ARBITRARY GOVERNMENT, WERE THINGS NOT ALTOGETHER INCOMPATIBLE.

The power of the crown, almost dead and rotten as Prerogative has grown up
anew, with much more strength and far less odium, under the name of influence.
An influence which operates without noise and violence; which converts the very
antagonist into the instrument of power; which contains in itself a perpetual
principle of growth and renovation; and which the distresses and the prosperity
of the country equally tend to augment, was an admirable substitute for a
prerogative, that being only the offspring of antiquated prejudices, had
molded in its original slamina irresistible principles of decay and
dissolution. The ignorance of the people is a bottom but for a temporary
system; but the interest of active men in the state is a foundation perpetual
and infallible.

Mr. Burke therefore, in page 66, speaking of the same court party, says:

Parliament was indeed the great object of all these politics, the end at which
they aimed, as well as the INSTRUMENT by which they were to operate.

And pursuing the subject in p. 70, proceeds as follows:

They who will not conform their conduct to the public good, and cannot support
it by the prerogative of the crown, have adopted a new plan. They have totally
abandoned the shattered and old fashioned fortress of prerogative, and made a
lodgment in the strong hold of parliament itself. If they have any evil design
to which there is no ordinary legal power commensurate, they bring it into
parliament. There the whole is executed from the beginning to the end. And the
power of obtaining their object absolute; and the safety in the proceeding
perfect; no rules to confine, nor after reckonings to terrify. For parliament
cannot with any great propriety punish others for things in which they
themselves have been ACCOMPLICES. Thus its control upon the executory power is
lost; because it is made to partake in every considerable act of government,
and impeachment, that great guardian of the purity of the Constitution, is in
danger of being lost even to the idea of it.

Until this time, the opinion of the people, through the power of an Assembly,
still in some sort popular, led to the greatest honors and emoluments in the
gift of the crown. Now the principle is reversed; and the favor of the court is
the only sure way of obtaining and holding those honors which ought to be IN
THE DISPOSAL OF THE PEOPLE.

Mr. Burke, in page 100, observes with great truth, that the mischiefs he
complained of, did not at all arise from the monarchy, but from the parliament,
and that it was the duty of the people to look to it. He says, The distempers
of monarchy were the great subjects of apprehension and redress, in the last
century; in this, the distempers of parliament.

Not the distempers of parliament in this year or the last, but in this
century, i. e. its settled habitual distemper. It is not in parliament alone
that the remedy for parliamentary disorders can be completed; and hardly indeed
can it begin there. Until a confidence in government is re-established, the
people ought to be excited to a more strict and detailed attention to the
conduct of their representatives. Standards for judging more systematically
upon their their conduct ought to be settled in the meetings of counties and
corporations, and frequent and correct lists of the voters in all important
questions ought to be procured.

By such means something may be done, since it may appear who those are, that
by an indiscriminate support of all administrations, have totally banished all
integrity and confidence out of public proceedings; have confounded the best
men with the worst; and weakened and dissolved, instead of strengthening and
compacting the general frame of government.

I wish it was possible to read the whole of this most important volume -- but
the consequences of these truths contained in it were all eloquently summed up
by the author in his speech upon the reform of the household.

But what I confess was uppermost with me, what I bent the whole course of my
mind to, was the reduction of that corrupt influence which is itself the
perennial spring of all prodigality and disorder; which loads us more than
millions of debt; which takes away vigor from our arms; wisdom from our
councils; and every shadow of authority and credit from the most venerable
parts of our constitution.

The same important truths were held out to the whole public, upon a still
later occasion, by the person now at the head of his Majesty's councils; and so
high (as it appears) in the confidence of the nation. He, not in the abstract
like the author before you, but upon the spur of the occasion, and in the teeth
of what had been just declared in the House of Commons, came to, and acted upon
resolutions which are contained in this book. Mr. ERSKINE took up a book
Resolutions pointed to the purification of a parliament, dangerously corrupted
into the very state described by Mr. Pain. Remember here too, that I impute no
censure to Mr. Pit. It was the most brilliant passage in his life, and I
should have thought his life a better one, if he had continued uniform in the
support of opinions, which it is said he has not changed, and which certainly
have had nothing to change them. But at all events, I have a right to make use
of the authority of his splendid talents and situation, not merely to protect
the defendant, but the public, and to resist the precedent. That what one man
may do in England with approbation and glory, shall conduct another man to a
pillory or a prison.

It was the abuses pointed out by the man before you, that led that Right Hon.
Gentleman to associate with many others of high rank, under the banners of the
Duke of Richmond, whose name stands at the head of the list; and to pass
various public resolutions, concerning the absolute necessity of purifying the
House of Commons; and we collect the plan from a preamble entered in the book,
Whereas the life, liberty and property of every man is or may be affected by
the law of the land in which he lives, and every man is bound to pay obedience
to the same.

And whereas, by the constitution of this kingdom, the right of making laws is
vested in three estates, of King, Lords, and Commons, in parliament assembled,
and the consent of all the three said estates, comprehending the whole
community, is necessary to make laws to bind the whole community. And whereas
the House of Commons represents all the Commons of the realm, and the consent
of the House of Commons binds the consent of all the Commons of the realm, and
in all cases on which the legislature is competent to decide.

And whereas no man is, or can be actually represented, who has not a vote in
the election of his representative.

And whereas it is the right of every commoner of this realm (infants, persons
of insane mind, and criminals incapacitated by law, only excepted) to have a
vote in the election of the representative who is to give his consent to the
making of laws by which he is to be bound.

And whereas the number of persons who are suffered to vote for electing the
members of the House of Commons, do not at this time amount to one-sixth part
of the whole commons of this realm, whereby far the greater part of the said
Commons are deprived of their right to elect their representatives; and the
consent of the majority of the whole community to the passing of laws, is given
by persons whom they have not delegated for such purposes; and the majority of
the said community, and to which the said majority have not in fact consented
by themselves or by their representatives.

And whereas the state of election of members of the House of Commons, has in
process of time so grossly deviated from its simple and natural principle of
representation and equality, that in several places, the members are returned
by the property of one man; that the smallest boroughs send as many members as
the largest counties, and that a majority of the representatives of the whole
nation are chosen by a number of votes not exceeding twelve thousand.

These with many others, were published, not as abstract, speculative writings,
but within a few days after the House of Commons had declared that no such
rights existed, and that no alteration was necessary in the representation. It
was then that they met at the Thatched House, and published their opinions and
resolutions to the country at large. -- Were any of them prosecuted for these
proceedings? Certainly not, (for they were legal proceedings.) But I desire you
as men of honor and truth, to compare all this with Mr. Paine's expression of
the Minister's touching Parliament with his opiate wand, and let equal justice
be done -- that is all I ask -- let all be punished or none -- do not let Mr.
Pain be held out to the contempt of the public upon the score of his
observations on parliament, while others are enjoying all the sweets which
attend a supposed attachment to their country, who have said the same things,
and reduced their opinions to practice.

But now every man is to be cried down for such opinions. I observed that my
learned friend significantly raised his voice in naming Mr. Horn Took, as if
to connect him with Pain, or Pain with him. This is exactly the same course
of justice; for after all he said nothing of Mr. Took. What could he have
said, but that he was a subscriber with the great names, I have read in these
proceedings which they have thought fit to desert.

Gentlemen, let others hold their opinions, and change them at their pleasure;
I shall ever maintain it to be the dearest privilege of the people of Great
Britian to watch over every thing that affects their good government, either in
the system, or in the practice; and that for this purpose the press must be
free. It has always been so, and much evil has been corrected by it. -- If
government finds itself annoyed by it, let it examine its own conduct, and it
will find the cause, -- let it amend it, and it will find the remedy.

Gentlemen, I am no friend to sarcasms in the discussion of grave subjects, but
you must take writers according to the view of the mind at the moment; Mr.
Burke as often as any body indulges in it; -- hear his reason in his speech on
reform, for not taking away the salaries from Lords who attend upon the British
Court. "You would," "said he," have the court deserted by all the nobility of
"the kingdom.

Sir, the most serious mischiefs would follow from such a desertion. Kings are
naturally lovers of low company; they are so elevated above all the rest of
mankind, that they must look upon all their subjects as on a level: they are
rather apt to hate than to love their nobility, on account of the occasional
resistance to their will, which will be made by their virtue, their petulance,
or their pride. It must indeed be admitted, that many of the nobility are as
perfectly willing to act the part of flatterers, tale-bearers, parasites,
pimps, and buffoons, as any of the lowest and vilest of mankind can possibly
be. But they are not properly qualified for this object of their ambition. The
want of a regular education, and early habits, with some lurking remains of
their dignity, will never permit them to become a match for an Italian eunuch,
a mountebank, a fiddler, a player, or any regular practitioner of that tribe.
The Roman emperors, almost from the beginning, threw themselves into such
hands; and the mischief increased every day, till its decline, and its final
ruin. It is, therefore, of very great importance (provided the thing is not
overdone,) to contrive such an establishment as must, almost whether a prince
will or not, bring into daily and hourly offices about his person, a great
number of his first nobility; and it is rather an useful prejudice that gives
them a pride in such a servitude though they are not much the better for a
court, a court will be much the better for them. I have, therefore, not
attempted to reform any of the offices of honor about the King's person.

What is this but saying, that a king is an animal so incurably addicted to low
company, as generally to bring on by it the ruin of nations; but nevertheless,
he is to be kept as a necessary evil, and his propensities bridled by
surrounding him with a parcel of miscreants still worse if possible, but better
than those he would choose for himself. This therefore, if taken by itself,
would be a most abominable and libellous sarcasm on kings and nobility: but
look at the whole speech, and you observe a great system of regulation: and no
man, I believe, ever doubted Mr. Burke's attachment to monarchy. To judge,
therefore, of any part of a writing, the whole must be read.

With the same view I mean to read to you the beginning of Harrington's Oceana:
but it is impossible to name this well known author without exposing to just
contempt and ridicule the ignorant or profligate misrepresentations which are
vomited forth upon the public, to bear down every man as desperately wicked,
who in any age or country has countenanced a republic, for the mean purpose of
prejudging this trial.

[Mr. Erskine took up a book, but laid it down again without reading from it,
saying something to the gentleman who sat near him, in a low voice, which I did
not hear.]

Is this the way to support the English constitution? Are these the means by
which Englishmen are to be taught to cherish it? I say, if the man upon trial
were stained with blood instead of ink, -- if he were covered over with crimes
which human nature would start at the naming of, the means employed against him
would not be the less disgraceful.

For this notable purpose then, Harrington, not above a week ago, was handed
out to us as a low, obscure wretch, involved in the murder of the monarch, and
the destruction of the monarchy, and as addressing his despicable works at the
shrine of an usurper. Yet this very Harrington, this low blackguard, was
descended (you may see his pedigree at the Herald's office for six pence,) from
eight Dukes, three Marquisses, seventy Earls, twenty-seven Viscounts, and
thirty-six Barons, sixteen of whom were Knights of the Garter; a descent which
I think would save a man from disgrace in any of the circles of Germany. But
what was he besides? -- A blood-stained ruffian! Oh brutal ignorance of the
history of the country! He was the most affectionate servant of Charles the
first, from whom he never concealed his opinions; for it is observed by Wood,
that the King greatly affected his company; but when they happened to talk of a
commonwealth, he would scarcely endure it. -- "I know not," says Toland, which
most to commend; the King for trusting an honest man, though a republican; or
Harrington for owning his principles while he served a king.

But did his opinions affect his conduct? -- Let history again answer. -- He
preserved his fidelity to his unhappy Prince to the very last, after all his
fawning courtiers had left him to his enraged subjects. He staid with him while
a prisoner in the Isle of Wight: came up by stealth to follow the fortunes of
his Monarch and master; even hid himself in the boot of the coach when he was
conveyed to Windsor; and ending as he began, fell into his arms and fainted on
the scaffold.

After Charles's death, the Oceana was written, and, as if it were written from
justice and affection to his memory: for it breathes the same noble and
spirited regard, and asserts that it was not Charles that brought on the
destruction of the monarchy, but the feeble and ill-constituted nature of
monarchy itself.

But the book was a flattery to Cromwell. -- Once more and finally, let history
decide.

It was seized by the Usurper as a libel, and the way it was recovered is
remarkable. I mention it to show, that Cromwell was a wise man in himself, and
knew on what governments must stand for their support.

Harrington waited on his daughter to beg for his book, and on entering her
apartment, snatched up her child and ran away. On her following him with
surprise and terror, he turned to her and said, I know what you feel as a
mother, feel then for me; your father has got my child: meaning the Oceana. The
Oceana was afterward restored on her petition; Cromwell answering with the
sagacity of a sound politician, Let him have his book; if my government is made
to stand, it has nothing to fear from paper shot. -- He said true. -- No good
government will ever be battered by paper shot. Montesquieu says, that, In a
free nation, it matters not whether individuals reason well or ill; it is
sufficient that they do reason. Truth arises from the collision, and from hence
springs liberty, which is a security from the effect of reasoning. The Attorney
General read extracts from Mr. Adams's answer to this book. Let others do like
Mr. Adams: I am not insisting on the infallibility of Mr. Paine's doctrines: If
they are erroneous, let them be answered, and truth will spring from the
collision.

A disposition in a nation to this species of controversy, is no proof of
sedition or degeneracy, but quite the reverse, as is mentioned by Milton, (I
omitted to cite the passage with the others,) who in speaking of this subject,
rises into that inexpressibly sublime style of writing, wholly peculiar to
himself. He was indeed no plagiary from any thing human: he looked up for light
and expression, as he himself wonderfully describes it, by devout prayer to
that Great Being who is the source of all utterance and knowledge; and who
sends out his seraphim with the hallowed fire of his altars to touch and
purify the lips of whom he pleases. -- "When the cheerfulness of the people,"
says this mighty poet, is so sprightly up, as that it has not only wherewith to
guard well its own freedom and safety, but to spare, and to bestow upon the
solidest and sublimest points of controversy and new invention, it betokens us
not degenerated nor drooping to a fatal decay, but casting off the old and
wrinkled skin of corruption to outlive these pangs, and wax young again,
entering the glorious ways of truth and prosperous virtue, destined to become
great and honorable in these latter ages. Methinks I see, in my mind, a noble
and puissant nation rousing herself, like a strong man, after sleep, and
shaking her invincible locks: methinks I see her as an eagle muing her mighty
youth, and kindling her undazzled eyes at the full midday beam; purging and
unscaling her long-abused sight at the fountain itself of heavenly radiance;
while the whole noise of timorous and flocking birds, with those also that love
the twilight, flutter about, amazed at what she means, and in their envious
gabble, would prognosticate a year of sects and schisms.

Gentlemen, what Milton only saw in his mighty imagination, I see in fact; what
he expected, but which never came to pass, I see now fulfilling: methinks I see
this noble and puissant nation, not degenerated and drooping to a fatal decay,
but casting off the wrinkled skin of corruption to put on again the vigor of
her youth.

And it is, because others as well as myself, see this that we have all this
uproar. France and its constitution are the mere pretenses. It is, because
Britons begin to recollect the inheritance of their own constitution, left them
by their ancestors: It is because they are awakened to the corruptions which
have fallen upon its most valuable parts, that forsooth the nation is in danger
of being destroyed by a single pamphlet.

Gentlemen, I have marked the course of this alarm: It began with the
renovation of those exertions for the public, which the authors of the alarm
had themselves originated and deserted; and they become louder and louder when
they saw these principles avowed and supported by my admirable and excellent
friend Mr. Fox; the most eminently honest and enlightened statesman that
history brings us acquainted with: a man whom to name is to honor, but whom, in
attempting adequately to describe, I must sly to Mr. Burke, my constant refuge
when eloquence is necessary: a man, who, to relieve the sufferings of the most
distant nation, put to the hazard his ease, his security; his interest, his
power, even his darling popularity for the benefit of a people whom he had
never seen. How much more then for the inhabitants of his native country: yet
this is the man who has been censured and disavowed in the manner we have
lately seen.

Gentlemen, I have but a few more words to trouble you with: I take my leave of
you with declaring, that all this freedom which I have been endeavoring to
assert, is no more than the freedom which belongs to our own inbred
constitution: I have not asked you to acquit Mr. Pain upon any new lights, or
upon any principle but the law, which you are sworn to administer: My great
object has been to inculcate, that wisdom and policy, which are the parents of
the law of Great Britain, forbid this jealous eye over her subjects; and that,
on the contrary, they cry aloud in the language of the poet, employed by Lord
Chatham on the memorable subject of America, unfortunately without effect: "Be
to their faults a little blind,
"Be to their virtues very kind;
"Let all their thoughts be unconfined,
"And clap your padlock on the mind."


Engage them by their affections, convince their reason, and they will be loyal
from the only principle that can make loyalty sincere, vigorous, or rational, a
conviction that it is their truest interest, and that their form of government
is for their common good. Constraint is the natural parent of resistance, and a
pregnant proof, that reason is not on the side of those who use it. You must
all remember, Gentlemen, Lucian's pleasant story; Jupiter and a countryman were
walking together, conversing with great freedom and familiarity upon the
subject of heaven and earth. The countryman listened with attention and
acquiescence, while Jupiter strove only to convince him; but happening to hint
a doubt, Jupiter turned hastily round and threatened him with his thunder. --
"Ah! ha!" says the countryman, now Jupiter, I know that you are wrong; you're
always wrong when you appeal to your thunder.

This is the case with me -- I can reason with the people of England, but I
cannot fight against the thunder of authority.

Gentlemen, this is my defense for free opinions. With regard to myself, I am,
and ever have been, obedient and affectionate to the law: to that rule of
action, as long as I exist, I shall ever give my voice and my conduct; but I
shall ever do as I have done today, maintain the dignity of my high
profession, and perform, as I understand them, all its important duties.

[Mr. Attorney General arose immediately to reply to Mr. Erskine, when Mr.
Campbell (the foreman of the Jury) said, -- my Lord, I am authorized by the
Jury here, to inform the Attorney General, that a reply is not necessary for
them, unless the Attorney General wishes to make it, or your Lordship. -- Mr.
Attorney General sat down, and the Jury gave in their verdict, -- Guilty.]

THE END.

