TRIAL OF LOUIS XVI. LATE KING OF FRANCE; BY THE NATIONAL CONVENTION, At
several adjourned sittings.

TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH.

PHILADELPHIA: FROM THE PRESS OF JOHN PARKER, No. 259, NORTH SECOND-STREET.
M,DCC,XCIII.

ALTHOUGH a considerable part of the following pages has already appeared in
the public papers, yet the editor has thought proper to insert the whole of the
proceedings against the unfortunate Louis, from his first examination, until
final sentence was pronounced against him. -- It has been faithfully translated
from the CHRONIQUE DE PARIS, a work edited by several members of the National
Convention, and it is hoped that it will be found interesting, and worthy the
attention of Americans, who, as well as Europeans, have had their eyes fixed on
that great tribunal, whose deliberations have astonished the whole world.

Philad. March 25, 1793.
TRIAL OF LOUIS XVI.
ON the 11th of December, 1792, about one o'clock, the mayor and secretary went
up into the apartment of the late king, and said to him, "I am charged to
declare to you, that the Convention wait for you at their bar, and I am
appointed to conduct you." The secretary then read these words, "Decree of the
National Convention, of the 6th of December: Art. 5. Louis Capet shall be
brought to the bar of the National Convention on Tuesday the 11th, to answer
the questions which shall be put to him by the president." This being done, the
mayor asked him if he would go down, he appeared to hesitate a little, and
said, "My name is not Louis Capet; my ancestors bore that name, but I never was
called so; it is however like all the treatment I have experienced these four
months past by force. This morning my son has been separated from me; it was an
enjoyment of which they have deprived me. I have been expecting you these three
hours

The mayor, without making any answer, invited him again to go down, which he
determined at length to do. Being in the carriage, which was lined with thick
cushions, in order to be musket proof, he kept silence all the way, till the
carriage was stopped by some misunderstanding among the guards who escorted him
on the Boulevards.

He arrived at the Convention about two o'clock. He did not seem at all
troubled. The mayor and attorney general were on each side of him; behind him
were Santerre, Berruyer and other officers.

The sitting of the Convention commenced by reading the act of accusation
against Louis XVI, which was presented by Barbaroux in the name of the
commission of twenty one. It contained an enumeration of the principal charges
made against the unfortunate monarch; and each charge was followed by a list of
the pieces on which the proofs are to be founded. When it was read, several new
charges were proposed by several of the members, and some which appeared to
have little weight, or to be ill founded, were expunged.

The famous Marat voluntarily became the defender of Louis, by requesting that
all those charges alluding to crimes committed before his acceptance of the
constitution, should be omitted in the act of accusation. He spoke also of the
amnesty which followed the acceptance, but the Convention paid no attention to
his observations.

The Convention decreed, that the act of accusation should serve as the ground
of those questions which were to be put to the king, and that after each
question the president should say to him, What have you to answer? The
president was also authorized to propose such questions as might arise from the
king's answers, and to make him sit down at the bar.

Barrere, the president, informed the Convention that Louis was at the door,
and requested the representatives of the people to assume a dignity worthy of
the grandeur of their functions. He reminded them, that they formed a tribunal
on which the eyes of Europe were fixed, and whose sentence would be judged by
posterity. He forbade them to show any signs either of approbation or
disapprobation, and desired them to remember the coolness and silent dignity
with which they received the king after his return from Varennes.

At half past two Santerre informed the Convention that Louis was arrived, and
was waiting the orders of the assembly.

The president gave the order to introduce him. A most profound silence reigned
in the hall. Louis appeared at the bar, attended by two municipal officers.

When Louis appeared at the bar, the president mentioned to him the decree by
which the Convention established a tribunal to try him. Maillie, one of the
secretaries, read the act of accusation, charge by charge, and at each the
president asked the king what he had to say in his own defense. Louis contented
himself with giving answers to each question in a few words, he made no speech,
and did not, like Charles J. of England, deny the authority of the Convention
to try him. He asked for copies of the act of accusation, of the pieces which
are to serve as proofs, and of his own examination, of which the following is a
true copy; he also requested that he might be allowed counsel.

EXAMINATION.
President. -- Louis! the French nation accuses you. The national assembly
decreed on the 3d of December that you should be tried by them; and on the 6th,
that you should be brought to the bar, to hear the accusation read, and to give
your answers.


Accusation. Louis, the French people accuse you of having plotted and formed a
multitude of conspiracies to establish tyranny in destroying liberty. On the
10th of June, 1789, you made an attack on the sovereignty of the nation, by
suspending their representatives, and by expelling them with violence from the
place of their meeting.


Ans. There then existed no law.


Acc. On the 23d you surrounded the representatives of the people with troops;
you presented a declaration ordering them to cease their meetings and separate.


Ans. The answer to the last charge will apply to this.


Acc. You ordered an army to march against the citizens of Paris, to shed their
blood, and you did not dismiss that army till the revolution had been effected.


Ans. I had at that time a right to order troops to march according to my will.
It never was my intention to cause the effusion of blood.


Acc. You suffered the national cockade to be trampled under foot before your
eyes, and the white cockade to be worn. You constantly rejected the
constitution.


Ans. As to the decrees, I made the observations I then thought I ought to
mark; as to the cockade, the charge is false.


Acc. You took an oath at the federation of the 14th of July, which you did not
keep: you seduced Mirabeau to cause an insurrection in the departments.


Ans. I do not remember all that passed then, but I know that the whole was
prior to the acceptance of the constitution.


Acc. You distributed money to the Fauxbourg St. Antoine, that the people might
favor your escape.


Ans. This accusation is absurd; I ever took a pleasure in giving money to the
people: there was nothing in my conduct that had the appearance of a plot for a
counter-revotion.


Acc. Was it not in consequence of the same project that you feigned an
indisposition, to facilitate your retreat to St. Cloud.


Ans. No.


Acc. You swore to maintain the constitution, and on the 21st of June you
attempted to escape with a false passport, and ordered your ministers to sign
no act of the legislature.


Ans. I do not remember what passed at that time; but for my journey to
Varennes, I refer to the answers I made to the deputies of the constituent
assembly, who accompanied me on my return.


Acc. You coalesced with La Fayette; you hired writers of journals, and spent
considerable sums of money to overthrow the constitution.


Ans. I recollect writing one letter to Fayette, but have no recollection of
the rest.


Acc. You favored the rebellion at Arles.


Ans. The ministers did all that, and the assembly proposed ministers to me I
knew nothing of.


Acc. You made no attempts to stifle the plots of counter revolution, which
were manifested in several parts of the republic.


Ans. I was not apprised of those things, I was informed of nothing; besides,
it would require time for me to answer all these questions.


Acc. You paid your former body-guards at Coblentz, and you sent considerable
sums to Rochefort and to your brothers.


Ans. I ceased to give them any thing as soon as they passed the Rhine.


Acc. You refused your sanction to a decree for forming a camp near Paris; --
you ordered them to be stopped in their march; the army was incomplete, you
ordered no recruiting.


Ans. I presented at the time the statement to the assembly, if they were
mistaken it is not my fault.


Acc. You threw confusion and disorder in the army.


Ans. I cannot answer this accusation.


Acc. Why did you defer so long to inform the legislative body, that 50,000
Prussians were marching against France?


Ans. My diplomatic correspondance was carried on by the ministers, therefore
it is not my fault.


Acc. You suffered our navy to go to ruin; all the officers emigrated; there is
scarcely one left for the service.


Acc. I did not send away those officers.


Acc. The state was torn by the factions of the fanatic priests; you showed
yourself openly their protector, and manifested a design of recovering your
former power.


Ans. I cannot answer that, having no knowledge of it.


Acc. The legislative assembly passed a decree against the factious priests,
you suspended its execution.


Ans. I had a right to do so.


Acc. There was in Paris clandestine associations to operate a counter
revolution, paid by the civil list.


Ans. I have no knowledge of these facts; the project of a counter revolution
never entered my head.


Acc. Who were the members of the constituent assembly you endeavored to
corrupt.


Ans. I never endeavored to corrupt any.


Acc. On the 10th of August you passed in review the Swiss troops at 5 o'clock
in the morning, and on that day they fired on the people.


Ans. The constituted authorities were assembled at the castle; I had demanded
a deputation to proceed with me to the legislative assembly: when I saw they
did not come, I repaired thither with all my family.


Acc. Why, some days before the 10th of August, did you order all the ports of
the Swiss guards at the Thuilleries to be doubled?


Ans. The castle was threatened; as I was one of the constituent authorities, I
had a right to defend myself.


The president then asked Louis if he had any thing further to say.

Louis -- I beg the assembly to give me communication of the act of accusation;
I should desire to examine it minutely: -- I should also wish to have a counsel.

Marat showed him all the papers one after another; -- among the papers signed
by his own hand, he acknowledged but a very few.

The president asked him why he caused a hole to be made in the wall of his
apartment, and to be covered over with an iron door.

He answered, that he had no knowledge of this.

The president told him that the assembly permitted him to retire.

Louis, on retiring, said, I have desired to have a counsel.

The assembly then decreed, that the desire of Louis to have a counsel should
be granted.

After his interrogatory he was conducted into the Conference-Hall, and
accepted a bit of bread, observing that he had not broken his fast. He was then
conducted home in the same manner he had been taken to the Convention, and
arrived at his apartment at half past six.

On the 26th of the same month, the president informed the Convention that
Louis and his defenders were ready to appear at the bar, and gave orders for
their admission.

Louis then entered, accompanied by Mess. Malesherbes, Trouchet (Mr. Target
having refused being counsel for the unfortunate monarch) and Deseze, his
counselors; by the mayor of Paris, and the commandant of the National Guards.

The president informed Louis, that the Convention had decreed, that he should
be heard definitively that day.

Louis told him that Mr. Deseze would read his

DEFENSE.
Citizens, representatives of the nation:

THE moment is at length arrived, in which Louis, accused in the name of the
French nation, and surrounded by the counsel which humanity and the laws have
granted him, is about to present his justification. Even by the silence which
surrounds me, I am informed that the day of justice has succeeded to the era
of prejudice.

The misfortunes of kings are somewhat more tenderly impressive, and more
sacred, than the misfortunes of other men; even he, who but lately filled the
most brilliant throne in the universe, must excite a more powerful interest.
You have called him among you; he is come, calmly, with dignity, strong in his
innocence, supported by the testimony of his whole life. He has revealed to you
even his thoughts, in discussing, without preparation, without examination,
accusations which he could not foresee, making, if I may so say, an extempore
defense.

Louis could only say that he was innocent; I come to prove it to you, I bring
the demonstrations. I could wish this space were so enlarged that the multitude
of citizens, who have received the most baneful impressions to the prejudice of
Louis, should now feel those of a different tendency. Louis knows that Europe
expects with anxiety the sentence you are now to pass. He knows that posterity
will some day examine it; -- he knows it, but he considers only his
cotemporaries. With him we forget posterity, and view only the present moment.

Had I judges only to answer, I would content myself with saying, that since
the nation has abolished royalty, there can be no sentence to pronounce against
Louis; but I speak to the people. I have to examine the affair under two points
of view, that in which Louis was placed before his acceptance, and that in
which he stands since his acceptance of the constitution.

In entering on this business, I first meet with the decree which pronounces
that Louis shall be tried by the constitution. Apparently the legislators, said
Louis, cannot bring forward this inviolability. What then have you done by your
decree? you have constituted yourselves judges of the accusation which you make
yourselves.

You have decreed, that Louis shall be heard. If then he ought to be heard, he
has the right to defend himself. It does not depend on the judge to
circumscribe the means* the convention shall weigh them when he shall have
brought them forward. If Louis be mistaken, let them refute his errors.

Nations are sovereign: they are free to give themselves such forms of
government as they please. I will not dispute this principle; and it is not
forgotten that the efforts of one of the advocates of Louis contributed to
insert this principle in the constitution. But the nation cannot itself
exercise sovereignty, it is necessary the exercise of it should be delegated.

In 1789 the nation desired a monarchial government; a monarchial government
required the inviolability of its chief; it was necessary that he should
impress that respect which renders amiable the obedience that the law commands.
The character of this inviolability has been discussed, it has been pretended
that it was not a contract of reciprocity, but this delegation was a contract
so long as it was not revoked. It is a mandate if you please, but the mandatory
could not submit to other conditions and other penalties than those imposed in
the mandate.

I open the constitution at Chapter II. of royalty, and I see that the person
of the king is inviolable; there is no exception, no modification, but there
are circumstances in which we lose the character of inviolability.

This is the first case.

Art. V. of Section I. Chap. 2. of Title 3. "If the king have not made oath, or
if, after having made it, he retract it, he shall be considered as having
abdicated royalty."

The nation here imposes on the king the duty of taking an oath: to retract his
oath is a crime against the nation. The nation has foreseen this crime, and has
enacted its penalty; it is not a dethronement -- the word is not pronounced
once, it is only a supposition, that the king shall be presumed to have
abdicated royalty. You see that the constitution creates no tribunal, that it
does not speak of trial, and that it mentions no word of dethronement.

But without retracting his oath, he could betray it; he might favor hostile
and criminal enterprises against the state -- the constitution has again
foreseen this case.

Art. VI. "If the king put himself at the head of an army, and direct its force
against the nation; or if he do not oppose, by a formal act, any such
enterprise, which may be executed in his name, he shall be considered as having
abdicated royalty."

I desire that you will weigh well the character of the offense* provided
against by this article. There cannot exist one more criminal. It supposes all
the machinations, all the perfidies, all the treasons, every horror, every
scourge, every calamity of a bloody and intestine war, and yet what does the
constitution pronounce? The presumption of having abdicated royalty.

Art. VII. "If the king, being gone out of the kingdom, does not return after
the invitation made to him by the legislative body."

What does the constitution pronuunce again? The presumption of his having
abdicated royalty.

Article VIII. says, "that after the express or legal abdication, the king
shall be tried as other citizens for all crimes committed posterior to his
abdication." It results then that the king had a particular existence
absolutely different from that of other citizens; and from whence did he derive
this particular privileged existence, if not from the law, which had impressed
upon him the character of inviolability, which he could not lose, but by his
express and legal abdication. And it is from the most attrocious crime that a
king can commit against a nation, that it supposes him returned to the
citizens. In other respects the law is perfectly equal between the legislative
body and the king: -- the legislative body might also betray the nation, it
might seize the national sovereignty; the nation had a right to pronounce a
penalty against the deputies, and yet none has been pronounced.

Louis is accused, he is accused in the name of the nation, he is accused of
various crimes. But these crimes are provided for by the constitutional act,
and then the penalty ought to be applied -- or they are not, and then there
exists no penalty applicable to them.

I go farther, I say that they are provided against, the constitution has
foreseen the most atrocious of them all, that of a criminal war against the
nation. In whatever manner this article may be understood, the crimes are
there, they are there. -- Well! the law declares only a presumption of the
abdication of royalty. I well know, that now the nation has abolished kingly
power, the penalty can be no longer applied -- but could it change the fate of
Louis? Has he not the right to say, "when the constitution was accepted, I was
the prisoner of the nation, why did you not try me? You have abolished royalty,
I do not contest your right. But because you have abolished royalty, will you
punish me, and because you know no law you can apply to me, will you create one
for the purpose -- for me alone? You have all the powers, doubtlessly: but one
power you have not, that of being unjust.

It has been said that Louis was: be tried as an enemy. But is he not a cruel
enemy who would put himself at the head of an army against the nation.

It has been said he was only inviolable for individual citizens. According to
this principle, the representatives of the people would no longer be inviolable
to the people for every thing they have done, said, or written, during their
session? I read in Rousseau -- "Where I see neither the law which prosecutes,
nor the law which condemns, I will not appeal to the general will, for the
general will cannot pronounce, as a general will, on any man, nor on any facts."

If you deprive Louis of the right of inviolability as a king, you cannot
deprive him of the right of trial as a citizen. And in the last case, I demand
of you where are all the forms of preservation? Where are the juries, those
hostages for the lives and honor of citizens? I demand where is the proportion
of suffrages which the law has so wisely established? Where is the silent
ballot, which incloses in the same urn the opinion and the conscience of the
judge? I speak to you with the plainness of a freeman. I look among you for
judges, I see none but accusers. You will pronounce upon Louis, and you have
accused him! You will pronounce upon Louis, and you have declared your wish
respecting him! You will pronounce upon Louis, and your opinions are spread
over Europe!

I shall here take the act of accusation -- I observe you go back to the 20th
of July, 1789. I go back also. But how could you accuse him of having wished at
this era to dissolve the assembly. Do you forget, that it was he who convened
it? Do you forget, that for more than 150 years, princes, more zealous than him
of their authority, had constantly resisted their convocation? Do you forget,
that without him, without the numerous sacrifices to which he consented, you
would not be deliberating here this day on the interests of the state? He is
reproached with having drawn troops round Paris, but I could say that these
troops were intended for the protection of Paris against disturbers. I had
occasion to see the order when I was employed to defend the commandant of these
troops, whom the nation did not hesitate to acquit.

I will not speak here of the memorial in which Talon is mentioned as acting a
part against the revolution, nor the papers annexed to this memorial. If I had
to defend an ordinary client, I would say, that a citizen can never be tried
upon papers found by the invasion of his house, without being previously
inventoried or sealed.

The house of Louis was invaded, his chests broken, his drawers forced; no seal
was put on his effects, and inventories made; his papers may have been
scattered, and those lost which should reply to what were brought against him.

The letters of a dead man are quoted, but are the letters of a person deceased
proof? It is said that these letters speak of money distributed: but if this
fact, which they do not explain, be true, should it be true that they have
extorted from his sensibility, from his benificence, sums greater or less, is
it not well known with what an unfortunate facility kings are circumvented and
deceived. The copy of a letter to Mirabeau and La Fayette is spoken of, but the
letter is not sent. Mirabeau and La Fayette were at the same time, the most
popular men, they both loved the constitution; in this scheme the good of the
state was the only aim.

He was reproached for his letter to Bouille; here there is not even occasion
for him to justify himself -- the National Assembly had voted thanks for the
conduct of Bouille.

You have reproached him with the assemblies of people on the 28th February,
but popular rumors had drawn to the palace men of warm tempers, and Louis had
ordered them to quit their arms.

You have accused him of the massacres at the Champ de Mars; but do you then
forget that the unhappy prince was suspended from his powers, a prisoner
guarded in sight.

The nation has decreed a republic, but this was not the form of government the
nation then wished. Did not the legislative assembly itself declare against the
republic in the month of July last? If Louis had then betrayed the interests of
the nation, or abused its confidence, you might complain -- you might sigh over
the lot of kings, but you could not try him.

I have not yet pronounced the word which must annihilate all this chain of
accusation. I have not said, that since all these events Louis has accepted the
constitution. -- The constitution was the compact between the people and the
king -- all mists were then dispelled -- the past was forgot.

Let us examine what he has done since this acceptance.

The act of accusation comprehends both the facts which he was not charged to
answer personally, and the facts personal to him. The constitution had not
required on the part the king a warranty for his agents. It had, on the other
hand ordained the responsibility of ministers. No one has a right at present to
accuse the king and his ministers of the same acts.

Louis had been accused of having suffered the National Assembly to remain
ignorant of the convention of Pilnitz. But this convention was a secret treaty
between the emperor and the king of Prussia.

There was no reason of state which could render it a law to ministers to make
known to an assembly, whose deliberations are public, an act which was not so.

You have reproached the unfortunate prince with having retarded a month the
sending a decree relative to Avignon; this, citizens, was one of the heads of
accusation against the minister Delissart. He had himself announced that his
justification, which he was preparing in prison, would leave no doubt of his
innocence. And could you, after his death bring the same accusation against the
king?

You have reproached him with the troubles of Nismes, of Jales. Is it then for
the king to be answerable for all the commotions inseparable from so great a
revolution?

A letter of Witgenstein has been constituted a crime; all that he could do,
was to give him no place after his recall. The government of Corsica has been
spoken of, but he never had it. It has been said he had a commission in the
northern army, it is impossible that La Fayette had demanded it, but the letter
which gave him the commission remained in the war-office.

He has been reproached with the account drawn up by Narbonne. I will answer
with one word only -- when Narbonne quitted the ministry, the legislative
assembly decreed that Narbonne took with him the regret and confidence of the
nation.

He has been reproached with the surrender of Longwy -- the inhabitants were
guilty. The surrender of Verdun -- Who then was it that appointed the
celebrated commander* who chose rather to die than surrender, if it were not
Louis*

He is reproached with having retained the Swiss guards, contrary to the
constitution, which forbad it.

Hear the facts: a decree had declared that the king should be requested to
present a new formation of his regiment of Swiss guards, and nevertheless the
assembly had ordained that it should be continued as temporarily kept up until
the era of its formation. On the third of July the assembly ordered the
departure of three battalions of this regiment. On the 17th the assembly
received a letter from d'Affry, remonstrating against the decree, and claiming
the capitulations. A new decree, ordering the departure of the two battalions,
and d'Affry placed between the capitulations and the decree, adresses and
remonstrances to the assembly -- they pass to the order of the day, and the
battalions quit Paris.

I now proceed to such facts as may be thought to concern him personally. He
was at first attacked for not having sanctioned the decree on the priests, and
on the camp of Paris. I could say that the constitution granted him a sanction
absolutely free, and that should he be mistaken, they could not attribute his
error to him as a crime. But if a great number of citizens appeared to support
this last decree, a greater number seemed to resist it; he thought it prudent
to refuse his sanction: but at the same time, by a wise measure he ordered the
camp at Soissons, and this camp was more useful to our armies than that of
Paris would have been.

His letter to the bishop of Clermont is opposed to him: but it was an opinion
purely religious, and anterior to his acceptance of the constitution; and when
he accepted it, he did not think it free from spots, as even in the acceptance
itself, legal reforms appear.

He is reprobated with having paid his guard; but the assembly in ordering it
to be disbanded, had said it should be formed anew; it became therefore his
justice and humanity to pay it till it should be recomposed.

He has been reproached with having given assistance to the emigrants -- with
having protected by his ambassadors the coalition of powers. He has been
reproached with his keeping a resident at the court of Vienna. I answer, that
he constantly opposed the efforts of the emigrants -- I will quote a fact: he
is informed by his resident, of an attempt made by the emigrants to obtain arms
and ammunition at Frankfort, and of the refusal of the magistrate of Frankfort,
He ordered his resident to thank the magistrate of Frankfort, and to invite him
to persist in his refusal.

I will venture to say, there is not a single emigrant who has received
assistance from him. He supplied the expenses of his nephews, the eldest was
fourteen, the second only eleven. There existed no law which fixed the age at
which emigration was a crime -- the Convention has made one -- his nephews were
without resources: was it necessary that he should smother the sentiments of
humanity? Because he was a king, should he cease to be a relation? He has made
presents to the gouvernante of his children; but she had been gouvernante of
his children, and had left France since 1789. Choiseul Beauprie has been in
Italy since 1790, and has never borne arms against France. He has given
assistance to Rochefort, but Rochefort was not an emigrant. He is reproached
with having remitted money to Bouille -- the letter of Bouille says; Given to
Monsieur, the king's brother, by his order. The truth is, that he never
remitted pecuniary assistance to Monsieur, and the order there spoken of was
that of Monsieur, not that of the king. All that he did was to be security for
his other brother in a sum of 400,000 livres, but it was in 1789, and he was
induced to this step by the motive of humanity.

He is reproached with the maneuvers of Dumoustier at the court of Berlin; but
Dumostier was not his agent, he was the agent of the princes, his brothers.

A letter from Choiseul Gouffier is also opposed to him. It was thought that
because he was the ambassador of Louis, they might impute to him the plans of
Choiseul Gouffier, but the letter itself of this ambassador proves that it was
but three days after his recall, and on account of his recall, that he had
formed an intrigue against the national ambassador who replaced him. It was
Choiseul who wrote, who acted, who spoke of his services to the princes, the
king's brothers, and the note proves that the king had no relation with him.

I come now to the reproaches of subordination of several members of the
legislative assembly. This plan reduced the liquidation of the offices ten
millions, it discharged the national bank, and charged the civil list with the
interest of this sum. A corruption which turns to the profit of personal
interest may be conceived: but a caption that leaves us all the shame, and
secures to others all the profit is scarcely to be imagined -- the fact is, and
it results from the papers communicated to the king, that it was he alone who
prevented the plan of a decree from being laid before the assembly, and that he
expressed his anger and indignation at it.

A reproach has been made against him which has excited the indignation of the
people, and which must in fact appear a heavy charge; he has been accused of
having paid his gardes du-corps at Coblentz. I must confess that this
accusation made an afflicting impression upon me, I even suspected his good
faith, the papers appeared to me decisive. I now come to make a due reparation
in the eyes of Europe. All the papers relate to the month of October, 1791;
hear what the administrator of the civil list writes to the treasurer in the
month of November -- "The intention of his majesty is to continue the pay of
his gardes-du corpse till they are replaced, but his majesty means that the
amount of this shall not be delivered in a total to the etat major, but to
every individual at the bank of the civil list upon his own receipt, and his
certificate of residence within the kingdom."

All the papers have been made as public as possible, he has been denounced to
France, to all Europe; all these heads of accusation have been printed, and the
paper, which alone answers all these accusations, has been the only one unknown
-- this ought to be with the other papers. By what strange fatality is it not
found there? he has at length obtained, after much trouble an authentic copy of
this letter from the office: he produces it to the eyes of Europe.

I come, lastly, to that disastrous day, the 10th of August. If we had believed
that he had committed the crimes imputed to him, you would not see us at this
bar lending him the assistance of our courageous veracity. All your successes
since that day should permit you to be generous -- I demand only that you be
just; he feared that his palace would be invaded, he kept up the most exact
correspondence with the popular auauthorities, in short the people are there,
the procureur syndic reads, with regret doubtless, the Vth article of the law
which orders to repel force by force, the gunners, as their only answer,
discharge their cannon before him.

Then the procureur syndic invites him to come to the assembly -- he comes --
an hour afterward our misfortunes commence; how did the battle begin? I know
not, history perhaps will be equally ignorant of it

He is reproached with having passed his troops in review -- well then reproach
the mayor for having visited the post -- was he not a constituted authority?
was not his authority a deposit in his hands, to which the law forbid him to
suffer the least attack? I know it has been said, that he had excited the
insurrection, to gain the end of his plan, but who is now ignorant that this
insurrection had been planned, ripened; that it had its agents, its council,
its directory? who knows not that there had been signed acts and treaties on
this subject.

Within this hall has been contested the glories of the 10th of August. I do
not come to dispute the glory; but since it has been proved that this day was
meditated, how can it be attributed as a crime to him? and you accuse him, and
will pronounce sentence against him! against him who never yet gave a
sanguinary order; against him who at Varennes, rather chose to return a
captive, than expose the life of a single man! against him, who, on the 20th of
June, refused every kind of assistance, and preferred to remain alone,
surrounded by the people.

Hear history say, that Louis, exalted 20 years upon the throne, gave an
example of morals, justice, and economy, He abolished servitude in his
dominions; the people wished for liberty -- he gave it them. -- The glory
cannot be disputed to him, that he has ever anticipated the desires of the
people -- I stop -- history shall finish -- Think that history shall pass a
sentence on your judgment.

When Mr. Deseze had sat down, the unfortunate Louis arose with much emotion,
and addressed the Convention in these words: -- "Citizens, you have heard the
manner and matter of my defense. I pledge myself that the statement of my
counsel is true in every respect. Perhaps this is the last time I shall address
you; but be that as it may, and decide as you think proper, my conscience does
not reproach me. I feel inexpressibly hurt by one of your charges, viz. that I
wished to shed the blood of the people; and to have it said that I excited the
horrible insurrection of the 10th of August. My soul is weighed down to the
earth with the calumny, that I ever had any intention to cause the blood of the
citizens to be spilt."

The president then presented him a note, and begged to be informed whether he
knew the handwriting.

Louis. No.


President. Do you recollect these five keys?


Louis. I cannot say that I do. I remember some placed at the Feuillans, but I
cannot say that these are the same.


The president asked him if he had any thing more to say in his defense.

He having answered in the negative, was permitted to retire, which he did,
attended by his counsel.

As soon as he was gone, Manuel requested that the defense of Louis, as well as
his accusation, should lay on the table, that every part of his defense should
be printed and distributed among the members of the Convention, and sent to all
the departments. It was also decreed, that the defense should be signed by the
king himself and counsel.

The remaining part of this day, and the two following, the Convention was
occupied in hearing the opinions of the several members. Some were for passing
sentence of death immediately: others were for referring the sentence to the
primary assemblies: others, again, were for banishing him for ever, and making
it death for him to return.

On the 5th of January, 1793, the Convention received a letter from the king's
counsel, containing some observations on a charge made againg the king by one
of the members of the Convention, of having constantly kept two ministers, one
ostensible, the other private; and for having, in consequence of this secret
ministry, sent Hayman to Prussia. They asserted, that the king, at the time he
projected his journey to Montmedi, had transmitted to Bouille the sum of
993,000 livres, of which he was to give an account after his return to Paris.
Bouille having retired to Luxembourg, the king's brother, who went thither
also, finding himself without resources, took from Bouille the sum of 670,000
livres. It was from this sum that the princes took 3,400 livres for the expense
of Hayman's journey to Prussia, on the king's service. This exception was in
consequence of a very extraordinary affectation in the princes, when they
formed sentiments or entered into negociations with foreign powers. Louis could
not prevent his brothers from abusing his name; and in a denunciation made to
the national assembly on the 31st of March, in the king's name, by the minister
Dumourier, of a treaty between the princes and Hohenloe, Dumourier was
particularly charged to testify to the assembly how much the king was afflicted
and distressed an account of this step. On the 5th of July he denounced a loan
of eight millions, negociated for the princes, in Holland, by one
Harel-la-Verter. They concluded by this remark; that had there existed a secret
ministry, some proofs would have been among the papers found at the
Thuilleries, when the palace was attacked, as the king was in the habit of
preserving all his papers.

On the 14th, the Convention adopted the three following questions, proposed by
the president: 1. Is Louis guilty or not guilty of high treason; and of
attempts against the general safety of the state? 2. Shall the appeal to the
people take place? 3. What punishment shall he suffer?


The next day it was decreed, that the sense of the Convention should be taken
on each question, by a nominal call: and one of the secretaries having read the
first question, and having finished the call, the president declared, that of
735 voters, 693 had voted in the affirmative, and therefore pronounced Louis
Capet guilty of high treason and attempts against the general safety of the
state.

The second question was then put, and there appeared a majority of 280 against
an appeal. The president then rose, and said, The National Convention does
decree, that the sentence which it shall pronounce upon Louis Capet shall not
be referred to the appeal of the people.

On the 16th the Convention took up the third proposition; when, after a very
long debate, the president rose and announced, that of 720 votes, 366 were for
death. In consequence of which, he declared in the name of the Convention, that
the punishment which they pronounced against Louis Capet was -- death.

On the 19th the Convention passed the following decree unanimously: --

1. The executive council shall be summoned to meet at 11 o'clock tomorrow
morning, and a copy of the decree which pronounces sentence against Louis shall
be delivered them.

2. The executive council shall be charged to notify this decree to Louis in
the course of the day; to cause it to be executed within twenty-four hours
after it has been notified to him; to take every measure of safety and police
which to them shall appear necessary during the execution; to be careful that
no insult be offered to his remains, and to give an account of their diligence
to the Convention.

3 The mayor and municipal officers of Paris shall be enjoined to suffer Louis
to communicate freely with his family, and to have with him such priests as he
may desire in his last moments.

On the 20th the minister of justice informed the Convention, that the
executive council had been summoned, and had assembled early in the morning, in
order to execute the decree relative to Louis Capet. The council had called the
mayor, the department, the commandant-general, and public accuser to their
assistance. Having concerted with these the measures of execution, the minister
of justice, president of the executive council, a member of council, the
secretary, and two members of the department, went together to the temple about
2 o'clock, and being introduced to Louis, the president of the executive
council told him, that they were charged to notify to him the extract from the
minutes of the Convention, dated the 15th, 17th and 19th of January, which the
secretary then read.

Louis presented them with a written paper, signed with his own hand. They
answered that they would deliberate thereon; and having retired, resolved that
it should be submitted to the Convention.

The following is a copy of the paper given by Louis to the president of the
executive council.

I demand a delay of three days, in order to make the necessary preparations to
appear in the presence of God -- I demand for that purpose to send for and see
freely the person whom I shall name -- the person whom I demand is, M.
Escheavaux de Formont; he lodges at No. 483, rue de Bacq.

I demand to be freed from that perpetual inspection, which the council general
has established over me for some months.

I demand in this interval, to be able to see my family as often as I shall
request, and without witness.

I would request, that the National Convention would immediately proceed to
deliberate on the fate of my family, and permit them to retire freely, wherever
they think proper.

I recommend to the nation all the persons who were attached to me -- there are
many of them who have expended all their fortunes to purchase places under the
new government, and who, having now lost their sole dependence, must be in
circumstances of want. Among my pensioners were many aged and indigent persons,
who had no other means of support except the pension which I gave them.

LOUIS.
Temple, 20th January, 1793.

After this paper was read, the Convention decreed that there was no room to
deliberate thereon, having anticipated the greater part of the requests, in the
decree of the day before.

On the 20th, at 5 o'clock in the afternoon, the unfortunate Louis took leave
of his family.

THE EXECUTION.
On the 21st, conformably to the arrangements made by the executive council,
Louis was put to death at the Place de la Revolution, heretofore Place de Louis
XV.

Twenty-five citizens of known principles, well armed, acquainted with the
manual exercise, and having each 16 rounds of shot, were chosen from each
section to form a guard of 1200 men, who accompanied the unfortunate monarch to
the place of execution.

Strong detachments from the different legions were posted in the streets
through which the royal prisoner was to pass, and also in all the avenues
leading to the Place de la Revolution, to prevent any confusion, and each
section had a body in reserve, ready to move at moment's warning, to maintain
public order, should any attempt be made to disturb it.

Cannon were also distributed in every quarter, where it was thought they could
be any way serviceable, had events made it necessary to have employed them.

Between eight and nine o'clock in the morning, Louis proceeded from his
apartments in the Temple, and got into the Mayor's carriage, who accompanied
him, as did also M. Edgworth, or de Formont, an Irish priest, whom he requested
might attend him. Louis was dressed in a brown great coat, white waistcoat,
black breeches and stockings; his hair was dressed.

The procession commanded by M. Santerre, proceeded along the Boulevard, to the
Place de la Revolution. One hundred Gendarmes on horseback formed an advanced
guard to the procession. The rear guard was composed of one hundred national
guards from the military school. Various reserves of cavalry lined the
procession, and patroled the the out-skirts of the city.

The unfortunate monarch arrived at the foot of the scaffold at twenty minutes
past ten. He mounted the scaffold with firmness and dignity -- and appeared
desirous to address the people. Drums and trumpets gave the signal, and at
twenty-two minutes past ten his head was severed from his body. The Place de la
Revolution was so strongly guarded by troops, that no person was suffered to
pass after the king had entered it, those however who had previously entered
and got near enough to the scaffold, notwithstanding the noise of drums and
trumpets, heard him plainly pronounce these words -- "Citizens, I forgive my
enemies, and I die innocent!"

Louis, on mounting the scaffold, instantly took off his great coat and
unfastened his shirt collar. His hair had been clubbed up close like an abbe,
that no indignity might be offered him, or that it should occasion delay by
hanging loose. The executioner went up to tie his arms, which the king recoiled
at; but it was soon done -- The executioner then took a large pair of scissars
to cut off his hair, at which the king appeared very much mortified, and said,
"I have put all right." His hair, however, was cut off.

When the executioner showed his head to the people, cries of "Vive la nation!
Vive la Republic!" were heard on all sides.

His body was transported to the parish church of La Magdelane, where it was
interred without any insult being offered to it, between the persons who lost
their lives during the illuminations on account of his marriage, and the Swiss
who fell on the 10th of August.

Louis, before his departure from the Temple, delivered to the Commissioners of
the Council General, who were upon the guard, his latter will, two copies of
which he had written on the 25th of December last.

Thus perished in the 40th year of his age, Louis XVI. once the generous friend
and ally of the United States, but who, by the infernal machinations of a
wicked ministry, incurred the hatred of his nation. -- A dreadful example to
those princes who trample on the sacred "Rights of Man."

Copy of the last will of Louis XVI.
In the name of the Holy Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Amen.

I, Louis the XVI. king of France, having been for better than four months
detained with my family in the tower of the temple of Paris, by those who were
my subjects, and deprived of all communication, even with my family since the
11th instant, besides being involved in a process of which it is impossible to
know the event, in consequence of the passions of men who can allege no good
pretext for their conduct, and who have no motive that can be supported by any
existing law -- thus circumstanced, without any person present but God to
witness my sorrows, to whom I may have recourse, I DO DECLARE here in his
presence, this to be my last will and determination.

I recommend my soul to God my Creator, whom I beseech to receive it in mercy
and not to judge it as it deserves, but through the merits of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who offered himself a sacrifice to God his Father, for all men, however
unworthy they may be, and I the unworthiest of them all.

I die in union with our Holy Mother, the Catholic Apostolic and Roman church,
which holds its powers by uninterrupted succession from St. Peter to whom Jesus
Christ had confided it.

I firmly believe and confess all that is contained in the creed, the
commandments of God, and of the church, the sacraments and mysteries, such as
they are and always were taught by the Catholic church.

I never pretended to judge of the different modes of explaining the tenets
which divide the church of Jesus Christ, but have conformed myself to them, and
always will do so whilst God shall spare my life; to the decisions which
ecclesiastic superiors give and may give according to the principles of Jesus
Christ.

I pity, with all my heart, those of my brethren who may live in error, I do
not pretend to judge them, but I love them all in Jesus Christ, according to
the precepts of Christian charity.

I devoutly pray to God to forgive my sins having previously scrupulously
confessed and repented of them, not having been able to avail myself of the
assistance of a Catholic priest, I pray to God that he may receive this
confession which I have made, and especially my profound repentance which I
feel for having signed, although contrary to my inclination, any acts which may
have disagreed with the faith or discipline of the holy Catholic church to
which I have ever adhered with all my heart.

I pray to God to receive my firm resolution, if he preserves my life, to avail
myself of the first opportunity of the ministry of a Catholic priest, in order
to accuse myself of all my sins, and to receive the sacrament of penance.

I beg pardon of all those whom I may inadvertently have injured, for I do not
remember to have deliberately offended any one, and also I beg pardon of all to
whom I may have set any bad example, and I hope they will forgive me, if they
think they have been injured thereby.

I beseech all charitable persons, that they unite their prayers with mine, in
order to obtain a pardon from God for my sins. I forgive with all heart, all
those who have acted as my enemies without my having given cause, and I pray to
God to pardon them as well as those who by a false or misguided zeal have done
me great injury.

I recommend to God my wife and children, my sister, my aunts, my brothers, and
all those allied to me by blood, or in any other manner, every other possible
connection. I particularly pray to God to look down in mercy on my wife my
children and sister, who have suffered with me so long, and that he will
support them with his grace, in case they should lose me, and that I should be
taken from this transitory world.

I recommend my children to my wife, of whose maternal tenderness I never have
doubted, and I recommend to her to educate them in the principles of
christianity and moral honesty, and that she may teach them to look upon the
splendour of this world in case they should be condemned to it as upon dangerous
and transient good, and I hope she may lay before their view only the
principles of solid and everlasting glory.

I beseech my sister to preserve her attachment to my children, which she has
always shown, and that she will act the part of a mother in case they should be
so unhappy as to lose their own.

I beseech my wife to pardon all that she has suffered in consequence of her
attachment to me; as well as for any disgust I may have occasioned her since
our union: likewise, I declare that I do not reproach her with any thing,
though she herself might think that she has something to repent of.

I also earnestly request from my children, that after performing their duties
to God, which ought always to be their first consideration, they will ever be
united and obedient to their mother and grateful for all the carefulness and
sorrows she way suffer for their sake, and remembrance of me. I request that
they may look on my sister as their mother.

I recommend to my son, if ever he should be so unhappy as to be a king, that
he must think it his duty to devote himself entirely to promote the happiness
of his fellow citizens, and to bury in oblivion all rancour and resentment, and
especially every thing which respects the injuries and abuses inflicted on me.
He cannot make the people happy, without conforming to the laws of the country;
but at the same time to consider, that a king cannot make himself respected,
nor do the good he would wish, unless he be inverted with sufficient authority,
otherwise he will be obstructed in his operations, and not inspiring any
respect, he will be more prejudicial than useful to his country.

I recommend to my son to take care of all those persons who have shown
affection for me, whenever his circumstances will permit, and he should
consider it as a sacred debt, which I have contracted with the children and
relations of those who died on account of their attachments to me, and
consequently with those who are unhappy for my sake. I know that several
persons who were attached to me, have not done by me as they ought to have
done, and who have even shown themselves ungrateful. I forgive them however:
as, in times of trouble and effervesence, persons are not always masters of
themselves, and I request of my son, in case opportunity serves, that he will
remember that they are unhappy.

I could wish to testify at this moment my sincere gratitude to all those who
have shown me a true and disinterested attachment toward me: if on the one
side I felt very sensibly the ingratitude and disloyalty of those men to whom I
had never done any thing but loading them with benefits, as well as their
friends; on the other side I have had the consolation to witness the affection
and disinterested friendship which several persons have shown me. I beg they
will receive my thanks, because in the present situation of things I would be
afraid of exposing them should I speak more explicitly. I recommend them,
however, especially to my son, that he may acknowledge them if ever it is in
his power.

I should, notwithstanding, think that I am calumniating the sentiments of the
nation, if I did not recommend expressly to my son Messieurs Chamilly and Hue,
whom the sincere affection they bore me, has induced to shut themselves up in
this melancholy abode, and who have run the risque of becoming the unhappy
victims of their attachment; I also recommend Clery, my valet-de-chambre, to
whom much praise is due for the trouble he has had with me, and as he has been
with me to the last moment, I request the gentlemen of the municipality to give
him my clothes, my books, my watch, my purse, and the remainder of the effects
that are deposited with the common council.

I also freely forgive all those who guarded me, for the ill treatments and
hardships which they have thought proper to put upon me.

I have found some feeling and compassionate minds, who, I wish may enjoy that
tranquillity to which their way of thinking entitles them.

I request Messrs. Malesherbes, Trouchet, and Deseze, to receive here, my most
sincere thanks, and the expression of my sensibility for all the fatigues and
labors which they have gone through for my sake.

I conclude with declaring in the presence of God, and on the point of
appearing before him, that I am innocent of the crimes that are imputed to me.

Done by dupl^ in the tower of the temple, the 25th December, 1792.

LOUIS.


