AN EARNEST CALL: OCCASIONED BY THE ALARMING PESTILENTIAL CONTAGION.

ADDRESSED TO THE Inhabitants of Philadelphia.

Shall a trumpet be blown in the city, and the people not be afraid? shall
there be evil in a city, and the Lord has not done it?

I have smitten you with blasting and mildew, and I have sent among you the
pestilence, yet ye have not returned unto me, says the Lord.

AMOS. Et calcanda s^m^l via lethi. HORACE. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JONES,
HOFF and DERRICK, NO. 8, NORTH FIFTH-STREET.

M,DCC,XCIII.

AN EARNEST CALL: ADDRESSED TO THE Inhabitants of Philadelphia.
EVERY effort to support and strengthen the Christian cause, to inculcate the
amiable principles of virtue and morality, to disseminate the glad tidings of
salvation through a glorious Mediator, to impress upon the degenerate and
careless sinner, sensations of the vast and inconceivably important realities
of a judgment to come, and a never-ending eternity of happiness or misery. --
Such attempts deserve the encouragement and patronage of all good members of
society, all those who are anxious to preserve the tranquillity and well-being
of their country. For righteousness will prove an impenetrable barrier in
securing the permanency of a government; whilst every species of vice must tend
to enervate, debilitate, and finally sap the foundation of the wisest
constitution. For the Almighty will be a canopy and safeguard to his faithful
servants.

UPON the candor of my readers, and my own conscious rectitude, I must depend
for the reception of this Publication: at least I shall enjoy the inward
satisfaction of contributing mercy mite, to rouse mankind from their stupor,
and promote the cause of Christianity. And I can assure my readers that I am
not instigated to this undertaking, by selfish motives; but am directed for the
good of souls, and the glory of God. Should it in any degree answer the much
desired purpose, I shall be amply compensated for my labors.

GRANT, O thou inexhaustible Fountain of all good, thy enlightening,
enfluencing, all-prevailing grace, to make my pen like that of a ready writer;
in awakening, convincing and converting those, who have never participated of
the ineffable riches of divine grace and pardoning love, which flow incessantly
from the right hand of the immaculate Jesus! O that I may experience that sweet
complacence and serenity -- that clearness of perception -- and that divine
illumination, from the immutable Source of perfection, which are necessary for
all those who engage in thy service! Suffer no fascinating allurements of
worldly objects to draw me aside, or the seducing wiles of the devil to pervert
my pen from the simplicity and purity of the unerring Word of Truth. O thou
whose wisdom never degenerates into craft, justice into severity, or mercy into
weakness! direct my mind in this undertaking! Without thy blessing I can do
nothing; every effort will be as the sounding brass or tinkling cymbal: but
under the auspecious influence of thy spirit, I trust thy kingdom may be
advanced -- thy church militant more and more established, and that many
precious souls may taste the pure, unsullied joys, that flow from thee! Grant
this, for thy dear Son's sake.

I MUST beg leave to premise, that I shall sedulously wave all disputation on
the controverted points of Christianity. It is far from my intentions to engage
as a champion in the vindication of any jarring opinions of scholastic
divinity; which perhaps is not worth the contention, or not at all necessary to
salvation. Neither intrude upon the "septical subtilties" of Deists: nor shall
I perplex myself or readers, with the deep researches of metaphysical
disquisition. I shall submit such lucubrations to those who are more
penetrating, or consider them of more consequence than myself: for I have long
entertained the opinion, that controversies have a very pernicious effect; and
are generally creative of animosity, envy, hatred, and the very passions that
are the most unlike those inculcated, by the meek and lowly Jesus. Scripture
expressly commands to avoid all vain contentions. How is it possible for
Christians, to reconcile that implacable spirit of bitterness and acrimony,
with which controversies are maintained? So high is the resentment of the
opponents sometimes raised, that they catch with avidity at any clue, however
weak or opposite to truth, to extend the controversy, interlarded with
scurrility and abuse. And disputants are generally predetermined not to
acquiesce in the opinion advanced against their own, however sanctioned by
truth, or guided by reason. -- Disputes sow the seeds of hatred and
malevolence, and finally terminate in open rupture! And it is a lamentable
fact, that good men sometimes greatly err in this. Is it not devoutly to be
wished, that all jarring opinions and dissentions could forever cease? And is
it not fervently to be desired, that the followers of Jesus of every
denomination, should join together in an amicable league of harmonious love? Is
not every Christian constrained to exclaim, "Accelerate O God, that glorious
period, when peace, uninterrupted, triumphant peace! shall reign on earth! when
the kingdom of this world, shall become the kingdom of God and his Christ! and
antichrist no more be suffered to diffuse his baneful seed." Are not all
Christians desirous of attaining the same haven? Do not their desires
inseparably center there? Why then should one say, "I am of Paul," another, "I
am of Apollos," since Jesus Christ is all in all, and through his name alone
can we be saved. Do we invariably observe his affectionate mandate, "Love one
another?" Can we do this and at the same time foster the wormwood of gall and
bitterness in our bosoms?

THERE was never perhaps a more gloomy season, never a period more pregnant
with calamities, and "big with death," in the city of Philadelphia, than the
present. Her streets are become desolate, and the goodly prospect, is quite
reversed! Was there ever a time that called with a more audible voice, for a
sudden, sincere and unreserved reformation? The wrath of the Almighty seems
inflamed against this City -- his wrath impregnated with death! -- His fiery
indignation scatters terror around! -- The light of his countenance is hidden
from us -- his long suffering patience is at length exhausted -- his mercies
slighted -- his gospel despised! At length the sword of his indignation, the
sharp two edged sword of wrath is unsheathed. And his vindictive justice must
be satisfied. His thunders armed with triple horror and vengeful fire, sleep no
more; but hang impending over our guilty heads, replete with mortality. "Yet
the reed, the brittle reed, just sinking, may recommend us to the Rock of ages!"

I KNOW there are many who attribute this awful Contagion to natural causes,
and ridicule the idea of a supernatural agent: but I conceive, we may clearly
trace the finger of God in our chastisement. Although his ways are a great deep
to mortals, and sometimes dark and inscrutable to finite intelligences; yet
here his wonder-working wisdom is manifest, and those who are dispassionate,
and not wholly blinded by the god of this world, may behold omnipotent
vengeance carried on. -- Let any one of my readers lay his hand upon his heart,
and ask his conscience if he has not contributed his share in provoking the
wrath of almighty God: if after an impartial examination he receives an
acquital; I salute him as a thrice happy soul! and pronounce, that he need not
tremble at the approach of any pestilential disease, however deadly, nor death
itself with all its frightful apparatus!

THE present afflicting season most strikingly depicts, the amazing folly, and
fatal delusion of those whose affections are inordinately attached to the
fluctuating, unstable enjoyments of a vain world. These solemn seens of
mortality will lead us to reflect, that there is no permanency in any worldly
pleasure. How soon, alas! do all the gilded baubles vanish, (in which we have
placed such durable gratification) and leave nothing to satisfy the famishing
soul! The earth and all the fullness thereof, with all the blandishments of time
and sense, can never be a sufficient value to attach the rational, immortal
mind! This transitory state can never bound its seize, it ardently pants
for the celestial joys of a kingdom whose builder and maker is God.

DEATH, is truly an all-eloquent preacher, it convinces powerfully, when all
arguments have been wielded to no purpose -- it points and says, "Be ye also
ready!" -- for in such an hour as ye know not, the fatal arrow will receive its
irresistible mandate! Nay often attacks those who are hugging themselves,
saying, "I will enjoy the fruits of my labor and lay up wealth for future
grandeur -- soul, soul, take thy rest." Fatal security! fool! -- to imagine
thyself safe, when death is even now approaching toward thee with rapid
strides, like a "staunch murderer, steady to his purpose:" and perhaps in a few
hours all thy braggart hopes will be included in a mouldering coffin of
inanimate clay: -- Death's subtle seed within,
Sly treacherous minor, working in the dark,
Smiled at thy well concerted scheme, and beckond,
A worm to riot on a rose so sweet,
Unfaded as it fell! a moments prey! --
Dr. YOUNG.

THE dear parent leaves the world, unmindful of his tender offspring, suffused
in tears! "The beloved spouse perishes in the embraces of her husband. -- Death
shows no pity, he relents not at her parting sighs, nor at the fervor of her
supplications one hour!" "Now he hurls his dart at the poor peasant, and now
launches it at the monarch on his throne:" they indiscriminately mingle with
the silent (...) and fall unresisting victims to the unerring stroke.

THE express declaration of inspiration must convince every believer, that
judgments are often inflicted upon rebellious and gainsaying generations, as a
chastisement for their departure from him. If we turn to the sacred volume, we
shall find this invariably the case, in God's dealings with the old world,
whenever they apostatized, the scourges of his rod pursued them. -- I do not
expect to convince those who sacrilegiously deny the divine origin of the
Scripture, of this sacred truth: the power of omnipotence alone, will strike
conviction into obstinate unbelieving souls; yet God is not a man that he
should change, he is the same immutably, perfect being, that he then was, and
we are equally the objects of his care. Sin caused the utter destruction of the
ante-deluvians. Their primeval rectitude was transformed, and they were
immersed in every species of licentiousness, pride and corruption. The Almighty
beheld it afar off, and sent his avenging ministers of wrath to destroy them.
And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every
immagination of the heart was evil continually. And it repented the Lord that
he had made man on the earth. And God said I will destroy man whom I have
created. Genesis vi. 5, 6, 7.
Thus was his indignation signally and terribly manifested in their
destruction. And thus will it be with all those who persevere in abusing his
mercies, and contumeliously rejecting the son of his love! -- Wickedness caused
the destruction and overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah. And the Lord said, because
the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is very great, and because their sins are very
grievous, etc. Genesis xviii. 20.
Many parallel instances in Scripture might be produced, were it necessary.

AH Sirs! suffer yourselves no longer to be deceived by the god of this world.
Our iniquities have provoked Jehovah's avenging wrath, they pierce the vaulted
skies with a voice more extensive than the innocent blood of Abel, shed by a
brother! -- Are we not crucifying afresh the blessed Jesus, by our ingratitude
and perverseness? Is he not frequently wounded in the house of his friends, and
put to open shame! And is there nothing reprehensible in such conduct? nothing
to provoke the omnipotent Godhead? Are we not far more guilty than Cain, in our
obstinate rejecting of one, who ought to be infinitely more precious to us than
the dearest brother? One who has already lavished, and is still able to bestow
greater remunerations and blessings, than all earthly relatives! And this
glorious reversion is beneficently proffered to us, without money, or without
price -- our acceptance and obedience is all that is requied. Permit me to ask,
if you have highly estimated such invaluable benefits? Have you returned any
part of that love, that transcendant love, with which he has loved you? Have
you bowed the knee of unfeigned humility and thankfulness, to this infinite
lover? Has his condescending goodness constrained you to receive him in a vital
union, by the living covenant of faith; and to cry out with believing Thomas,
My Lord and my God! Perhaps you have never yet meditated, never yet revolved in
your mind the plenitude of his love to a ruined race! Perhaps you have
frequently treated with contempt, those who appeared concerned for the
salvation of your soul! Poor deluded mortal! you are entirely unacquainted with
the intrinsic excellence of spiritual things! or the worth of your immortal
soul: Which must blaze on for ages, when the sun,
Fair trasitory creature of a day,
Is lost in night.
Mrs. BAR^AULD. Do you from henceforth seriously determine you will serve the
Lord? Glorious resolution! and worthy the highest aspiration of an immortal
soul! -- Persevere, let me beseech you persevere in this resolve -- let no
obstructions, no impediments, hinder your pressing forward to the mark of your
high calling in Christ Jesus. Let no consideration draw your feet aside, or
retard your course -- relax not for a moment in your pursuit! Remember it is a
diadem of unfading luster you are in pursuit of; this will animate you in the
Christian warfare. In a short space, all material difficulties will insensibly
vanish away, and a life of holiness will appear as the dilutable source of
happiness. At last the rugged precipices, and the rocky ascents of life, shall
fly before you like a transient meteor! All trouble and anguish shall forever
cease, and the fullness of joy spread its plumes around you with refulgent
glory! Hail happy mansions of the blessed! And all hail thrice happy inhabitant
of these regions! You have changed the filthy garments of your own
righteousness, and made them white in the blood of the LAMB! You shall be
presented "like the king's daughter, all glorious within, and all your rament
of wrought gold!"

SUFFER me at this place to delineate, and point out the most crying sins, that
have provoked our God to anger; that by a speedy return, we may prevail upon
him to rebuke the disorder, and say; "Hitherto shall thou go -- and no
farther." For these things will I visit them, says the Lord God!

HIS threatenings have been ^^^^ally fulfilled in all ages -- though he may wait
long, and endure much -- his indignation will at last break forth, and where
shall men hide from his avenging hand?

How shall I enter upon the ^able catalogue of our innumerable transgressions,
which are like mountains piled upon mountains. How are we fallen from an orb
not our own, and accumulated repeated sins of omission and commission? How is
the gold changed! and the most fine gold become dim! -- Shall I not declare the
whole counsel of God, without any palliatives to lull the soul into a more
carnal security? The wound must first be made, the incision must be submitted
to, however painful and excruciating the operation may be, before the sovereign
balm of Gilead can be applied.

PROFANE swearing has of late shed its baneful contagion, in a most alarming
degree in this city; notwithstanding the most solemn and repeated prohibitions
against such a God-provoking sin. "Swear not at all," says the inspired penman:
and again. "Take not the name of the Lord thy God in vain." Our streets are
replete with the most horrid imprecations of blasphemies. The great, holy and
immaculate name, which archangels pronounce with the most profound veneration,
is used upon the most vile and trifling occasions, with all the attendant
aggravations that a genius fertile in wickedness could invent. The most
ridiculous tales receive the sanction of numerous attestations of this kind.
How shocking, how affrontive must this be to the Divine Majesty of heaven? He
who could with an inconsiderable exertion of omnipotence, crush the impious
authors, and plunge them into the abyss of eternal, never ending despair! How
heart-rending must such pictures of degenerate mortality, be to the Christian!
How sincerely must he lament over the fatal mistakes and depravity of his
fellow mortals? He retires under the pressure of affliction to his closet, and
with a torrent of commiserating tears, exclaims in some such language as this;
Pity, heavenly Father, those creatures who have made themselves so exceedingly
sinful and obnoxious to thee! -- O turn them from such awful profligacy --
picture their folly in all its odious deformity. -- Turn, O turn them from
eternal death! Lord thy children mourn incessantly for them -- hear the united
prayers of thy servants, and finally, Father forgive them, for they know not
what they do. -- Swearers cannot have the least shadow of vindication, to plead
an extenuation of their wickedness. Some vices may afford a brutal pleasure to
gratify; but this sin does not even admit of this poor palliation. No man is
born of a swearing constitution, nor can it be of the least conceivable
advantage. What then is the wonderful inducement to it? what valuable end can
the swearer propose to himself? It requires not the least exertion of genius to
make a perfect adept in this accomplishment; and this is obvious that the most
illiterate of mankind excel in swearing. It is pathetically to be lamented,
that men of consequence should indulge themselves in so pernicious and
illiberal a practice. I am clearly of opinion, did such persons give themselves
the trouble of deliberating upon the probable termination of it, a regard for
their country; mere political motives would effectually deter rulers, from
setting so destructive a precedent before the governed. It must inevitably tend
to invalidate the validity of oaths, upon which in a great measure depends the
firmness of the constitution. This naturally assists in the introduction of
perjury; from which crimes of the most enormous magnitude naturally flow. But
what shall I say to the fluttering, giddy herd of profligates and libertines,
on this head? What effect can I hope to have on such who seldom peruse any
books, exclusive of plays, romances, etc. who would consider it an intolerable
piece of drudgery, at being compelled to read a dull performance on
Christianity. With gilded plumage, an audacious effrontery of countenance, and
a well-timed oath (as they express it,) they impose upon the undiscerning and
illiterate, as persons of profound importance, and as a proper pattern for
imitation: when alas! they are rendering themselves obnoxious to the
displeasure of their heavenly Father. Their wisdom is at best but low cunning,
for they degrade themselves by vices, unworthy the character of Christians,
unworthy the image they ought represent, and unworthy of men. Strip such
mortals of their borrowed plumes, their blushing honors -- investigate them
through a right medium, and they will appear objects of pity rather than envy:
"For a follower of Jesus should view vice with detestation, whilst he looks
upon the vicious, with the tenderness of a pitying angel." M^^ter.


SWEARING then, can be used for no other purpose than to show a brutal courage,
in greatly daring to disobey the Lord of glory, and defy his power; in fighting
against the supreme majesty of heaven, and speaking more irreverently of the
King of kings, than they dare of a petty prince. Is it not a very alarming
presage of a still greater judgment, when children are heard lisping out oaths
before they can speak intelligibly! when comparative infants make the streets
resound with oaths and execrations? This would alone, convince us of our
depravity and wickedness; and that this is strictly consonant with veracity,
all who have the organs of hearing will jointly bear testimony. Is there any
one who has a spark of genuine piety in his heart, but must be touched with the
most sensible and agonizing grief, at the afflicting sight? O ye parents, have
ye no commiseration for your children? If so, what do such scenes exhibit to
your imaginations? Is the idea delightful that your children improve in
prophanity? Can you consider it a valuable acquisition? You doubtless answer in
the negative. Well, do you practice the probable means to stop them in their
mad career? Do you frequently and solemnly animadvert upon this wicked
practice? Do you inculcate an abhorrence of it, and enforce the precepts by
your own example? without which it is madness to expect any instruction can be
influential. Do you pour out the effusions of your hearts before the throne of
grace, with, and for your offspring? Alas! (...) have great reason to fear that
such precautions are not sufficiently attended to, or at least too slightly
touched upon. I believe it is not at all uncharitable to pronounce, that such
parents are the bitterest and most implacable enemies to their children, who
suffer such practices to pass by unnoticed, and unregarded. I dread to think of
the natural consequences resulting from inattention to the morals of youth.
Suffer me for a moment to trace it beyoud the grave -- At the great and solemn
day of retribution, you may expect to see those very children whom you love
with such a foolish fondness, accusing you before God, of being accessory to
their everlasting misery -- of ruining their souls and rendering them
completely unhappy forever!

THE violation of the Sabbath is another flagrant and glaring offense, against
the Almighty and his express command; "Remember the Sabbath to keep it holy."
It is notorious and needs no confirmation, that the holy day is perverted by
many, and perverted for answering the most unjustifiable purposes. Else, whence
so much visiting, unnecessary rambling (not to mention greater enormities) on
this sacred day! Do not the ways of Zion mourn for this? Are not the attibutes
of the Deity shamefully and irreverently treated by this practice? And is not
God incensed at the violation of so plain and declarative a commandment? Are
not public houses Taverns, tippling houses, etc.
filled with idlers on this day? Does not inebriety and intoxication frequently
succeed; and then all kinds of execrations reverberate from unhallowed lips?
And more shameful still, the sacred day is sometimes employed in rattling the
dice, or "detaching and arranging painted paste-boards." Ah Sirs! you are
sporting on a tremendous precipice, which may dash you and all your full-blown
hopes on the rock of never never ending despair and woe! Ye are voluntarily
disposing of your eternal all, for momentary delusive gratifications, for gay
visionary dreams of pleasure. That mandate of devoting one day in seven to rest
and devotion, is a perfectly reasonable as well as necessary command. It is a
truly benevolent ordination, and worthy the sapience of the divine author. And
how ungrateful is it to repine at the appointment, so just and good in itself?
How exceedingly culpable are those, who treat it with indifference.

O LET me conjure you to strive to avert the present and future judgments, by a
sudden reformation in hallowing and keeping holy this day. Do not vainly
imagine that God will hold you guiltless if, in defiance to this, his most
reasonable mandate, you knowingly transgress the Sabbath of the Lord. Alas! if
you neglect this admonition, the time swiftly approaches, when you would give
worlds to purchase the probationary term of a few Sabbaths. When you stand upon
the verge of death; when conviction has seized you, and your deplorable
situation puts on the most affrightful aspect. Every reflection at this
dreadful period will tend to aggravate your woe -- not the least glimpse of
hope remains -- horrible amazement, and wild despair glares around -- O how you
execrate your folly for mispending your invaluable time -- disregarding
Sabbaths, and spurning at Christianity. Alas! all this can avail nothing.

O THEN for God's sake, and for your own sakes, for the time to come, hallow
the Sabbath Day. Let your penitential tears ascend to the throne of purity,
acceptable and well pleasing sacrifices -- Earnestly entreat your heavenly
Father that he would stop the growing sin of Sabbath breaking. Such devotional
exercises on this holy day, will be attended with the divine blessing -- and
the spirit of all grace will animate those who conscientiously practice prayer,
thanksgiving and praise on this day.

FAMILY prayer is a duty incumbent upon all who are parents, masters or
guardians over families. What is deprecated upon prayerless communities? Pour
out thy wrath upon those families who call not upon my name. Jer. x. 25.
And yet this great duty is shamefully neglected, and frequently treated with
contempt and ridicule. And when it is performed at all, have we not cause to
lament of the cold and inanimate manner which attends it? Where shall we
observe that propriety, that decency of behavior which is requisite on such
occasions? Is it not greatly to be apprehended, that the whole mind is not
entirely engrossed by heavenly aspirations? and that worldly objects have too
great a share in the affections? To a considerate mind, prayer ought to be
esteemed the most invaluable privilege, that mortals can enjoy: by this sweet
intercourse, a vital communion is maintained between God and the soul -- O how
precious are such seasons! how is the whole soul drawn out toward the fountain
of grace. We are admitted by prayer into his presence, and participate of his
pardoning love and condescending goodness. By prayer we rise toward perfection,
and become more inseparably connected to our heavenly Father. I am persuaded,
that by this means we attain to what Mr. Addison beautifully speaks of --
"There is not in my opinion, a more pleasing and triumphant consideration in
religion, than this, of the perpetual progress which the soul makes toward the
perfection of its nature, without ever arriving at a period." This noble
attainment is gained by prayer. -- Supposing an earthly monarch to issue a
proclamation throughout his dominions, that on a day appointed his subjects
should assemble around his throne, and whatsoever demands they would make, he
promised to grant. If at the day appointed they universally appear, and instead
of making known there requests, they fall asleep in his presence -- would not
his majesty be highly offended and punish their neglect? How much more then our
heavenly Father, who is willing to bestow such unspeakably precious gifts.
Nothing then can excuse any person from joining in the exercise of public or
private prayer.

How beautiful it is, when houses are made vocal with the grateful incense of
prayer and praise! How sweetly are the devout aspirations of the sincere heart
wafted on the silvered wings of the dove, to the holy of holies; and return
with tenfold blessings, like the fructifying moisture of the spring, on the
petitioners head! he receives the anticipation and foretaste of the joys of
heaven -- the radiant glory of the cherubim, seraphim, and all the celestial
choir of beatific spirits, appear with unsullied robes of purest white to his
rapt imagination! they inraptured touch their golden harps, and the trembling
music floats around -- The Christian beholds in fancy the face of the LAMB! --
"He sees the display of paradisiacal innocence, the lofty, the resplendant
traces of the son of GOD! This fills him with silent extacy, he is too highly
blessed to be afraid of man: elevated by a flaming ardor, his eye is serene,
filled with the irresistible fire of awful virtue." Thus Christians sometimes
enjoy communion with GOD, which is better felt than described.

PRIDE is a sin fearfully prevailing among us at this period. Its pernicious
and distructive tendency is sufficiently realized, and acknowledged by all. All
agree in decrying the turpitude of it; and sometimes the most arrogant
repudiate it with a greater degree of inveterancy than the really humble of
heart. The devil makes use of pride as the chief instrument of our undoing.
Every precaution is necessary to conquer this truly formidable enemy. Be not
high minded, but fear, says the apostle. We ought to keep a strict centinal, in
order to guard every avenue of the human heart, and repulse the fascinating
enemy, opposing force to force. Its baneful influence infuses itself into every
faculty of the soul, and rankles in each vein. Vulnus alit venis et coeco
carpiter igni. VIRG.
A writer observes, "That pride is a rank weed, and generally takes root in a
barren soil." From this passion naturally flows many other hateful and
discordant vices, degrading to the rational nature, and dishonoring to the
Deity. It impels the mind to grasp at unwarrantable seize, and produces
an unceasing solicitude.

Pride still is aiming at the blessed abodes,
Men would be angels, angels would be Gods!
To define pride in all its different positions, windings and eccentricities,
is perhaps a task impossible to be performed. It operates extremely different
in different persons; and sometimes rankles at the heart of apparent humility.
Shall we continue to foster a serpent in our bosoms, that thief like infixes
its barbed stings into our hearts, and by poisoning the fountain, renders the
streams noxious and impure? Is not pride its own ceaseless tormentor? The pomp
and spledour of the great, excites this passion. We struggle with ambitious and
aspiring hope. "The glowing pencil of fancy, dipped in her own creative ideas,"
pictures to the mind permanet happiness in delusive, vanishing trifles!

Do the scenes at this period continually exhibited before us, furnish matter
for pride and ostentation? Do charnel houses and graves inspire that mad
principle? Does the gauzy mantle of death excite your arrogance? Do Cypress
weeds, and mournful funeral obsequies serve to inflame your ambition! Do not
such distressing scenes rather level your pride prostrate with the dust? and
awaken your whole souls in anxious solicitude for your safety? If neither the
long suffering goodness of God, nor his fierce judgments have any effect --
think for once, you hear your deceased friends and relations who have departed
before you, addressing you form their everlasting habitations: "Prepare,
prepare for eternity, ye frail short-lived mortals -- ye dear neighborers to
the world of spirits -- ye borderers on heaven and hell, make ready -- loosen
your hearts from earth, and all that it contains -- weigh anchor, and prepare
to launch into the boundless ocean of eternity, which is now within your ken,
and roars within your hearing!"

THE pride of man revolts at the humiliating doctrine of the cross. Proud
assuming man, immediately takes the alarm when a crucified, despised "Jesus of
Nazareth," is held up as a proper example for their imitation. They flee from
the Rock of safety, to the contaminated garments of their own carnal
righteousness. They thus hang unconscious of danger, over a tremendous gulf,
suspended by a scarce percepible thread! -- Perhaps the pride of the human
heart, cannot be exerted in any point of vice, more destructive to itself, than
in this dangerous rejection, of all that is salutary to the soul. It is this I
fear that ruins many precious souls. Thus "The empty pageant of a day fondly
rolls along;" exulting in his boasted strength and self-sufficiency: he bestows
not a thought on futurity, and rides on fortunes passing gale in triumph. But
beware giddy mortal, left like the fabled Isarus whilst soaring aloft, the
invisible archer precipitates thy fall, and plunges thee where hope can never
come. What have thou that thou did not receive? Whence then are such
ambitious thoughts? Do thou imagine thy pampered body will survive the wreck
of matter? Did the armipotent Caesar fall at last? Did the Macedonian Madman,
after conquering the world and despoiling nations, extend his conquests beyond
the period of threescore years and ten? Have the purpled tyrants of the earth,
"arrayed in armor and blood, and riding in triumph over thousands who fall by
their ensanguined sword," Sherlock.
evaded the irresistible arrow of death? If not, drop the preposterous mask;
pride is not for poor degenerate man -- humility is man truest interest, and
the only prop against the revolutions of frail mortality!

From purity of heart all pleasure springs,
And from an humble spirit all our peace!
Dr. YOUNG. HUMAN nature subdued by religion, brought under the control of the
sanctifying spirit of grace, is sweetly constrained to exercise benevolence and
humanity to all mankind; whom he now considers as his brethren. This is the
peculiar prerogative of divine illumination; that it excites to charity, and
diffuses philanthropy -- vain and worse than vain, are all pretentions to
Christianity without this, which is the essence, the foundation of all
religion. Religion was founded upon love -- and so far as we act according to
this powerful principle, so much the nearer resemblance we obtain to the
Founder of salvation. To show our holiness in the most conspicuous light, we
must comfort the distressed, bind up the broken heart, raise the drooping,
desponding mind, and exert ourselves to render society more happy. What avail
our prayers, our pompous professions, or our bearing the name of Christ, if we
send the hungry from our doors, refuse to comfort and relieve the naked
traveller, and turn a deaf ear to the cries of the widow and fatherless -- Ah
Sirs! whoever you are, think not that you are Christians, not attending to a
duty, without which, you are worse than infidels. It is much to be feared there
are many who have all the externals of religion, whose hearts are insensible to
the soft ties of humanity -- persons who despise their neighbors, and stand
contemptuously aloof, saying, I am holier than thou! Search your own hearts --
search the Scriptures, and see if you stand unimpeached by the Ordeal. Divine
grace never gives the spirit of persecution or uncharitableness -- it is
meekness, love, charity and every social virtue; whilst unenlightened by a
divine spark, from the Rock of ages, the soul is immured in a baneful prison;
but touched with a coal from the sacred altar, all nature changes its
appearance; like a bird which having escaped from its prison, conscious of
having regained its liberty, towers aloft, and joyous skims through the
cleaving air -- so the human soul when illuminated by the Spirit of grace.

THE necessity of regeneration or a change from above, is abundantly evident
from reason, as well as from revelation. A knowledge of our evil and corrupt
hearts ought to convince us of this -- yet alas! unless awakened by an
invisible agency, we shall still remain in a maze of darkness. "Not all the
angels in heaven, nor the doctors on earth, can convince us of this, till
Christ shall be pleased to convince us that we are poor, frail, erring, vile
and despicable creatures; subjected to innumerable lapses and infirmities;
sickness, passions and crosses; griefs, agonies and death -- When this is
effectually done, the whole of the business is done -- We shall call for and
catch at a Savior, in the sensibility of our want of him. When we come thus
ladened with our sins to him, he will in no wise cast us out; but he will take
us as Noah took the wearied dove into the ark; he will receive us within the
vale of his own temple of rest," and encircle us in the arms of everlasting
beatitude!

THE Almighty has been pleased to extend his afflicting arm over this city: yet
he has scourged us for our good. His chastisements are like that of a father
to a beloved son, in order to reclaim, and turn him from the broad way of
destruction. For though he causes sorrow, yet he will have compassion,
according to the multitude of his tender mercies. Our crimes had provoked him,
and he sent forth his ministers of wrath. We saw his correction -- we beheld
his frowns, and we ought to acknowledge his superintending care, with fear and
trembling. Our God cannot rejoice in the sufferings of mortals, and he would
not have created this life a vale of tears, were it not absolutely requisite
that mortality should endure temporary evil, in order to be conducted into that
world of unceasing joy, where God will wipe all tears from our eyes. Therefore,
God saw and commiserated our fallen, miserable state; he beheld, and by a
kindly reverse, determined to turn all the evils of corrupt and fallen nature
to our endless benefit, and everduring felicity. He therefore in compassion for
us, instituted disease, pain, affliction, distress and judgments, as monitors
and ministers to effect our convictions of the depravity of our natures, and
absolute need of a Savior. This is the great end to be accomplished, and if we
are so happy as to be warned by this calamity, of our latter end -- we shall
have reason to rejoice throughout eternity, that we were thus afflicted. The
bright Morning-Sar, the Lamb of God, slain from the foundation of the world,
will (upon our sincere repentance) be our portion forever. Then when the ^ail
of our frail mortal bodies is removed, we shall behold the "same blessed body,
which for the redemption of commiserated sinners, went through the shameful and
bloody process of scourges, thorns, spittings and buffeting; which hung six
agonizing hours on the cross; which descended into the grave -- even this body,
shall shine forth in ineffable beauty and beatitude; in essentially
communicative grace and glory; through the height, and through the depth,
through the length and through the breadth, beaming wide beyond the universe,
from infinity to infinity." Thus we shall behold him arrayed in glory, no more
like the despised God-man on earth. He will then welcome his faithful servants
into celestial mansions of love and joy. Then you will rejoice with unspeakable
complacency, that you have surmounted the barriers that opposed your progress,
(...) impeded your warfare; that you are ^^^^^ered from the rocks and
quicksands of a dangerous voyage through life, and escaped from the snares of
the enemy of mankind. O glorious abode! where sin and misery are never
permitted to enter -- where glory forever dwells, and where our Savior becomes
our all in all!

FAITHFUL and persevering Christians are truly an ornament of society -- they
put forth the luster of the Christian religion, and shine more conspicuous in a
time of danger, and an hour of darkness -- they prove the sincerity of their
professions, by their boldly suffering in their Masters service -- and enduring
all things to render themselves more conformable to the image of their divine
Master, who had not a place to lay his head. I should injure my own feelings
should I neglect this opportunity, of publicly expressing my approbation of the
conduct of the Rev. Mr. Pilmore, through the whole course of the alarming
contagion in this city. That intrepid fortitude and unvarying perseverance,
which has so highly distinguished him, merits our respect and gratitude. His
affectionate, fervent and pathetic addresses from the desk, clearly evinces his
concern for precious souls, and his resignation to the Divine will. Ever
attentive to his abundant labors in the ministry, his activity and his
extensive abilities, renders him a laborer that needs not to be ashamed. The
envenomed tongue of envy and malevolence must shortly lie dumb and acknowledge
the attractions of superior virtue and religion.

PERSONS who have peculiarly felt the weight of the distressing season, by some
affecting bereavement; are thrice miserable if they are not brought to reflect
seriously upon their own exit. For this purpose did God in his love afflict
you. Perhaps your affections were inordinately attached to your deceased
relatives -- it is possible that your God was neglected on the account. Now if
you made the right application, two most important ends would be answered: that
of detaching your thoughts from the creature, and directing them to the
Creator, God blessed forever more! And by exhibiting mortality before you in
the image of death, shows you as in a mirror, that you also are mortal, and
must shortly follow. Again, the Almighty wounds but to heal more effectually,
more savingly; and when you seem shrouded in a cloud of impenetrable darkness,
and encompassed about with many sorrows, when all nature wears a lowering
aspect, and the light of his countenance seems hid from you; he is then working
greater things for you than you can conceive: in short, he is preparing a crown
of immortal glory for you. He is not more merciful in his favous than his
punishments. Since it is evident that prosperity renders us fargetful of our
benefactor; and adversity, by pointing out the instability of all created
enjoyments: forces us to seek for more permanent possessions in the embraces of
the great Bridegroom. He graciously interfered, and removed the stumbling
blocks ou^ of your way, in order to draw you to that Rock of ages, whose
habitation is without end, and whose glo^^ fills immensity of space. Learn from
hence to say with Psalmist, My flesh and my heart fails, but God is the
strength of my heart, and my portion forever.

THE late lamented and revered Licius and his amiable consort, long dived in
connubial felicity, far transcending the lot commonly assigned to humanity. The
soul of Licius was harmony -- with the most amiable and tender sensibility, and
formed highly susceptible of tender and ennobling emotions. He was remarked,
and estimated for his probity, undistinguished honesty, and undissembled
sincerity. Taught by his divine Master, he looked upon the great family of
mankind with love, and exercised his talents in comforting, and aiding the
indigent and distressed. His chief happiness however consisted in domestic,
innocent amusements. He loved his wise with the most ardent, though temperate
passion; that is, his regards were not tumultuous and ^ounding professions, but
reduced to a calm and unruffled sunshine. She answered his affection, and
nothing appeared wanting for the completion of their happiness on earth. Yet
alas! vain, unstable, mutable state of transitory things! how short, and how
uncertain are all created enjoyments! His avocations called him to a distant
part of the continent; and he left his family after recommending them to the
protection of their heavenly Father. Immediately after his departure, the
pestilential contagion made its appearance in the city. Licius received
accounts of the deadly malady; he prayed fervently for the preservation of his
partner and little ones; and left them in the hands of him who formed their
mortal bodies. He however, accelerates his return, and with a mixture of hope
and fear; as he advanced toward his habitation, he heard the sound of mourning
and lamentation. And upon entering the door, was met by a coffin and mourners
-- His daughter was no more -- the prevailing contagion had cut her off, in the
bloom of youth! He supported this sight with the fortitude that becomes a
Christian; and hurried to see if his still dearer Naomi was safe -- he hastened
to her apartment; when, O heart-rending idea, the dear partner of his life was
laid upon her bed, pale and breathless -- a lump of inanimate clay! Such a
trial was for a moment too much for his gentle nature -- his fortitude forsook
him -- his knees trembled beneath him -- a deathlike paleness overspread his
countenance, and he fell almost deprived of all sensation upon the floor -- On
recovering, the tears involuntarily streamed from his eyes, and his heart was
rent with distressing convulsions -- he cried out, she is gone! -- the dear
soother of my sorrows is gone! -- never -- never -- more to return. Why, O why
was life so pleasant, so delectable to me -- it plunges me still deeper into
exquisite misery! Yet what shall I say? forgive, O Father in heaven, forgive
the repinings of thy poor afflicted servant -- I will no more murmur, no more
complain -- Thy will, thy righteous will O God! be done. Sink me still deeper
if it be thy pleasure, afflict me through life with the rod of justice; but
^^lly, O thou Savior of man snatch me, take me (...) thyself -- encircle me
forever in the immensity of thy love, thy heavenly consolation!

I AM fearful that those who were absent in the distressing season of our
calamities; and did not observe the afflictions of mortality, will not be
suitably impressed with the awful and mournful desolation; nor lay to heart,
that judgments are sent to rouse the sleepy and secure. Let me entreat you
Sirs, not to slight the admonition of a kind and gracious God. Return not to
rioting, revelling, and mispending that time which ought to be inestimably
precious in your eyes, by employing it in securing your best interest, your
glory and immortality! The precious light of his glorious countenance is now
again beaming upon us -- The clouds are fast scattering, and health may soon
again bless this city. But oh! avert a second judgment, which may prove more
grievous than the first. Live like pilgrims and strangers on earth -- turn from
the allurements of vice, and fly for assistance to the Rock of ages. Follow not
the dulcet voice of the destructive Siren, which sounds to allure, and
allures but to destroy. Give no ground to the enemy of your souls; but trust in
humble resignation upon him, who gives grace for grace. Sold you neglect so
great salvation, proffered to your free acceptance: should you despise his
warnings, his invitations and providence -- should neither his loving kindness
nor his fierce judgments have any effect upon your hearts, grown obdurate a^^
hardened beyond expression, your condemnation will be just and equitable, you
must stand speechless and dumb before the mercy seat. The lip of unimpeached
justice must pronounce your doom -- the Savior that hung suspended on the
cross for your salvation, even he, will change his smiles into an angry
countenance of terror. And oh! how inconceivably dreadful will this exhibition
appear, to the dismayed soul of the affrighted sinner -- no advocate, no
intercessor, the sweet, the mediatorial hour is past and all is darkness,
terror and eternal death! -- But oh! whilst the precious season of grace is
still present, incessently supplicate and implore for pardon and reconciliation
-- The angels and the spirits of just men made perfect will hail your return,
from darkness to light, from misery to happiness consummate. When dislodged
from this clayey tabernacle, when raised from the clod of the valley, glory and
beautitude will burst upon us from the face of the once despised, though now
exalted Emanuel! "The invisible Godhead will then become visible; the infinite,
circumscribed; the unapproachable, accessable; and the incomprehensible,
comprehended; within the humanity of the Prince of peace. Then will his cross
be exalted for an ensign to the circling, bending, and worshipping universe; his
wreath of thorns will kindle all nature with the dartings and castings forth of
its corruscations, and his reed of mockery will become the scepter of unlimited
domination -- Indissolubly united to the celestial choir, and rising from glory
to glory, and a blessing rising on blessings, through an ever beginning to a
never ending eternity!"

FINIS.

