SERMONS ON THE RELIGIOUS EDUCATION OF CHILDREN.

BY PHILIP DODDRIDGE, D. D.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY WILLIAM YOUNG, NO 52, SECOND-STREET, THE CORNER OF
CHESNUT-STREET. M,DCC,XCIII.

Extracts from D. SOME'S recommendatory Preface to the following Sermons.
"THE neglect of the rising generation, which so generally prevails, ought,
surely, to awaken our serious concern for it; and I persuade myself, that the
present attempt will be welcome to all who are duly impressed with that
concern; for, so far as I am capable of judging, it is well adapted to answer
its intended purposes.

"As the subject of these sermons is no matter of controversy, but plain and
important duty, one would hope, they will not fall under the severe censure of
any. At least I am fully persuaded that humble and serious christians, whose
chief concern is to know, and do their duty, will find agreeable entertainment
and much profitable instruction, in the perusal of them."

Just Published, By WILLIAM YOUNG, ( Price, neatly bound, 4 s8.)

SERMONS TO YOUNG PERSONS.

By P. DODDRIDGE D. D.

Also, will be published, TEN SERMONS ON REGENERATION.

By the same Author.

SERMONS, etc.
SERMON I. ON THE EDUCATION OF CHILDREN.
PROVE. xxii. 6. Train up a Child in the way he should go; and when he is old,
he will not depart from it.


IT is a most amiable and instructive part of the character which Isaiah draws
of the great Shepherd of the church, that he should gather the lambs with his
arm, and carry them in his bosom: A representation abundantly answered by the
tender care which our Redeemer expressed for the weakest of his disciples; and
beautifully illu^^^^ted by the endearing condescension, w^^^ which he embraced
and blessed little infants. Nor is it foreign to the present purpose to
observe, that when he recommends to Peter the care of his flock, as the most
important and acceptable evidence of his sincere affection to his person, he
varies the phrase; in one place, saying, feed my sheep, and in the other, feed
my lambs. Perhaps it might be intended in part to intimate, that the care of a
gospel-minister, who would in the most agreeable manner approve his love to his
master, should extend itself to the rising generation, as well as to those of a
maturer age, and more considerable standing in the church. It is in obedience
to his authority, and from a regard to his interest; that I am now entering on
the work of catechizing, which I shall introduce with some practical
discourses, on the education of children, the subject which is now before us.

I persuade myself, that you, my friends, will not be displeased to hear, that
I intend to handle it at large, and to make it the employment of more than a
single Sabbath. A little reflection may convince you, that I could hardly offer
any thing to your consideration of greater importance; and that, humanly
speaking, there is nothi^^ in which the comfort of families, the ^^^^^^rity of
nations, the salvation of so^^ (...) interest of a Redeemer, and the (...) GOD,
is more apparently and intimately concerned.

I very readily allow, that no human endeavors, either of ministers or
parents, can ever be effectual to bring one soul to the saving knowledge of GOD
in CHRIST, without the cooperating and transforming influences of the Blessed
Spirit: Yet you well know, and I hope you seriously consider, that this does
not in the least weaken our obligation to the most diligent use of proper
means. The great GOD has stated rules of operation in the world of grace, as
well as of nature; and though he is not limited to them, it is arrogant, and
may be destructive, to expect that he should deviate from them in favor of us
or our's.

We live not by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth
of GOD: and were he determined to continue your lives, or the lives of your
children, he could no doubt feed or support you by miracle: Yet you think
yourselves obliged to a prudent care for your daily bread, and justly conclude
that were you to neglect to administer it to your infant off^pring, you would
be chargeable with (...) murder before GOD and man; nor (...) you think of
pleading it as any ex^^^^ that you referred them to a miraculous, divine care,
whilst you left them destitute of any human supplies. Such a plea would only
add impiety to cruelty, and greatly aggravate the crime it attempted to
palliate. As absurd would it be for us, to flatter ourselves with a hope that
our children should be taught of GOD, and regenerated and sanctified by the
influences of his grace, if we neglect that prudent and religious care in their
education, which it is my business this day to describe and recommend, and
which Solomon urges in the words of my text: Train up a child in the way in
which he should go; and when he is old, he will not depart from it.

I need not offer you many critical remarks on so plain and intelligible a
passage. You will easily observe, that it consists of an important advice,
addressed to the parents and governors of children. Train up a child in the way
he should go; and also of a weighty reason by which it is enforced, and when he
is old, he will not depart from it.

The general sense is undoubtedly retained in our translation, as it commonly
is: but here, as in many other places, something of the original energy and
beauty is lost.

The Hebrew word, which we rend^^ train up, does sometimes signify, in (...)
general, to initiate into some science or discipline; and very frequently, to
apply any new thing to the use for which it was intended. It is e^pecially used
of sacred things, which were solemnly dedicated, or set apart to the service of
GOD: And perhaps it may here be intended to intimate, that a due care is to be
taken in the education of children, from a principle of religion, as well as of
prudence and humanity; and that our instructions should lead them to the
knowledge of GOD, and be adapted to form them for his service, as well as to
engage them to personal and social virtue.

It is added, that a child should be trained up in the way in which he should
go; which seems to be more exactly rendered by others, at the entrance or from
the beginning of his way, to express the early care which ought to be taken to
prevent the prevalency of irregular habits, by endeavoring, from the first
dawning of reason, to direct it aright, and to infuse into the tender
unpractised mind, the important maxim of wisdom and goodness.

To encourage us to this care, the Wise Man assures us, that we may reasonably
expect the most happy consequence from it: That if the young traveller be thus
directed to set out well in the journey of life, th^^^ is a fair prospect that
he will go on to its most distant stages with increasing honor and happiness.
-- Train up a child in the way he should go; and when he is old, he will not
depart from it.

I shall endeavor to illustrate and enforce this important advice in the
following method, which appears to me the most natural, and for that reason the
most eligible.

I. I shall more particularly mark out the way in which children are to be
trained up.

II. Offer some plain and serious considerations to awaken you to this pious
and necessary care.

III. Direct to the manner in which the attempt is to be made, and the
precautions which are to be used in order to render it effectual. And then,

IV. I will conclude the whole with a more particular application, suited to
your different characters, relations, and circumstances of life.

I am very sensible, that it is a very delicate as well as important subject,
which is now before me; I have therefore thought myself obliged more
attentively to weigh what has occurred to my own meditations, more diligently
to consult the sentiments of others, and above all, more earnestly to seek
those divine influences, without which I know, I am unequal to the easiest
task* but in dependence on which, I cheerfully attempt one of the most
difficult. The result of the whole I humbly offer to your candid examination;
not pretending at any time to dictate in an authoritative manner, and least of
all on such an occasion as this; but rather speaking as to wise men, who are
themselves to judge what I say. -- May the divine assistance and blessing
attend us in all!

First, I am to describe the way in which children are to be trained up.

Our translation, as I have told you, though not very literal, is agreeable to
the sense of the original, The way in which the child should go. And
undoubtedly this is no other, than the good old way; the way of serious
practical religion: The way which GOD has in his word marked out for us; the
way which all the children of God have trodden in every succeeding age; the
way, the only way, in which we and our's can find rest to our souls.

But it is not proper to leave the matter thus generally explained. I would
therefore more particularly observe -- that it is the way of piety toward GOD
-- and of fairly in our Lord JESUS CHRIST; -- the way of obedience to parents,
and of benevolence to all -- the way of diligence, and of integrity; the way of
humility, and of self-denial. I am persuaded, that each of these particulars
will deserve your serious attention and regard.

1. Children should undoubtedly be trained up in the way of piety and devotion
toward GOD.

This, as you well know, is the sum and the foundation of every thing truly
good. The fear of the LORD is the beginning of wisdom. The Psalmist therefore
invites children to him, with the promise of instructing them in it; Come, ye
children, hearken unto me, and I will teach you the fear of the LORD. And it is
certain, some right notions of the supreme Being must be implanted in the minds
of children, before there can be a reasonable foundation for teaching them
those doctrines which peculiarly relate to CHRIST under the character of the
Mediator; for he who comes unto GOD (by him) must believe that he is, and that
he is the rewarder of them who diligently seek him.

The proof of the Being of GOD, and some of those attributes of the divine
nature in which we are most concerned, depends on such easy principles, that I
cannot but think, the weakest mind might enter into it. A child will easily
apprehend, that a^ every house is built by some man, and there can be no work
without an author; so he that built all things is GOD. And from this obvious
idea of GOD, as the maker of all, we may naturally represent him as very great
and very good, that they may be taught at once to reverence and love him.

It is of great importance, that children early imbibe an awe of GOD, and an
humble veneration for his perfections and glories. He ought therefore to be
represented to them as the great LORD OF ALL; and when we take occasion to
mention to them other invisible agents, whether Angels or devils, we should, as
Dr. Watts has most judiciously observed, always represent them as entirely
under the government and control of GOD, that no sentiments of admiration of
good spirits, or terror of the bad, may distract their tender minds, or
infringe on those regards which are the incommunicable prerogative of the GREAT
SUPREME.

There should be a peculiar caution, that when we teach these infant tongues to
pronounce that great and terrible name, THE LORD OUR GOD, they may not learn to
t^^^ it in vain; but may use it with a becoming solemnity, as remembering that
we and they are but dust and ashes before him. When I hear the little creatures
speaking of "the great GOD, the blessed GOD, the glorious GOD," as I sometimes
do, it gives me a sensible pleasure, and I consider it as a probable proof of
great wisdom and piety, in those who have the charge of their education.

Yet great care should be taken not to confine our discourses to these awful
views, least the dread of GOD should so fall upon them, as that his
excellencies should make them afraid to approach him. We should describe him,
as not only the greatest, but the best of beings. We should teach them to know
him by the most encouraging name of the LORD, the LORD GOD, merciful and
gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for
thousands, and forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin. We should represent
him as the universal, kind, indulgent parent, who loves his creatures, and by
all proper methods provides for their happiness. And we should particularly
represent his goodness to them; with what more than parental tenderness, he
watched round their cradles; with what compassion he heard their feeble cries,
before their infant thoughts could form themselves into prayer^* We should tell
them that they live every m^ment on GOD; and that all our affection for them,
is no more than he puts into our hearts; and all our power to help them, no
more than he lodges in our hands.

We should also solemnly remind them, that in a very little while their spirits
are to return to this GOD; that as he is now always with them, and knows every
thing they do, or speak, or think, so he will bring every work into judgment,
and make them for ever happy or miserable, as they on the whole are found
obedient or rebellious. And here the most lively and pathetic descriptions,
which the scriptures give us, of heaven and of hell, should be laid before
them, and urged on their consideration.

When such a foundation is laid, in the belief of the being and providence of
GOD, and of a future state both of rewards and punishments, children should be
instructed in the duty they owe to GOD, and should be particularly taught to
pray to him and to praise him. It would be best of all, if from a deep sense of
his perfections, and their own necessities, they could be engaged to breath out
their souls before him in words of their own, were they ever so weak and
broken. Yet you will readily allow, that till this can be expected, it may be
very proper to teach them some form of prayer and thanksgiving, consisting of
such plain scriptures, or other familiar expressions, as may best suit their
circumstances and understandings. If the Lord's Prayer be taught them, as a
form, I hope you will consider how comprehensive the expressions are; how fast
the ideas rise and vary; and consequently how necessary it is, that it be
frequently and largely explained to them; lest the repetition of it degenerate
into a mere ceremony, as I fear it does among many, who are perhaps most
zealous for its use.

But what I have said, on this head, of piety and devotion, must be considered
in an inseparable connection with what I am to add under the next.

2. Children must be trained up in the way of faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.

You know, my friends, and I hope many of you know it to the daily joy of your
souls, that CHRIST is the way, the truth, and the life; and that it is by him
we have boldness and access with confidence to a GOD, who might otherwise
appear as a consuming fire. It is therefore of great importance to lead
children betimes into the knowledge of CHRIST, which is, no doubt, a
considerable part of that nurture and admonition of the Lord, which the Apostle
recommends, and was perhaps what he principally intended by those words.

We should therefore teach them betimes, that the first parents of the human
race, most ungratefully rebelled against GOD, and subjected themselves and all
their offspring to his wrath and curse. The awful consequences of this should
be opened at large, and we should labor to convince them, that they have made
themselves liable to the divine displeasure (that dreadful thing!) by their own
personal guilt; and thus by the knowledge of the law should we make way for the
gospel, the joyful news of deliverance by CHRIST.

In unfolding this, great care ought to be taken that we do not fill their
minds with an aversion to one Sacred Person, while we endeavor to attract
their regards to another. The FATHER is not to be represented as severe, and
almost inexorable; hardly prevailed upon by the intercession of his
compassionate SON to entertain thoughts of mercy and forgiveness. Far from
that, we should speak of him as the overflowing fountain of goodness, whose eye
pitied us in our helpless distress, whose almighty arm was stretched out for
our rescue, whose eternal counsels of wisdom and love formed that important
scheme to which we owe all our hopes. I have often had occasion to show you at
large, that this is the scripture doctrine; our children should be early taught
it, and taught what that scheme was, so far as their understandings can receive
it, and our's can explain it. We should often repeat it to them, that GOD is so
holy, and yet so gracious, that rather than he would on the one hand destroy
man, or on the other leave sin unpunished, he made his own son a sacrifice for
it, appointing him to be humbled, that we might be exalted, to die, that we
might live.

We should also represent to them (with holy wonder and joy) how readily the
Lord Jesus consented to procure our deliverance in so expensive a way. How
cheerfully he said, Lo, I come! I delight to do thy will, O my GOD! To enhance
the value of this amazing love, we should endeavor, according to our weak
capacities, to teach them who this compassionate Redeemer is; to represent
something of his glories as the eternal SON of GOD, and the great Lord of
angels and men. We should instruct them in his amazing condescension in laying
aside these glories, that he might become a little, weak, helpless child, and
afterward an afflicted* sorrowful man. We should lead them into the knowledge
of those circumstances of the history of Jesus, which may have the greatest
tendency to strike their minds, and to impress them with an early sense of
gratitude and love to him. We should tell them, how poor he made himself, that
he might enrich us; how diligently he went about doing good; how willingly he
preached the gospel to the lowest of the people. And we should especially tell
them how kind he was to little children, and how he chid his disciples when
they would have hindered them from being brought to him: It is expressly said,
JESUS was much displeased, and said, suffer little children to come unto me,
and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of GOD. A tender circumstance!
which perhaps was recorded (in part at least) for this very reason, that
children in succeeding ages might be impressed and affected with it.

Through these scenes of his life we should lead them on to his death: We
should show how easily he could have delivered himself (of which he gave so
sensible an evidence, in striking down by one word, those who came to apprehend
him;) and yet how patiently he submitted to the most cruel injuries, to be
scourged and spit upon, to be crowned with thorns, and to bear the cross. We
should show them, how this innocent, holy, divine person was brought as a lamb
to the slaughter; and while they were piercing him with nails, instead of
loading them with curses, he prayed for them, saying, Father, forgive them, for
they know not what they do, And when their little hearts are awed and melted
with so strange a story, we should tell them, it was thus he groaned, and bled,
and died for us, and often remind them of their own concern in what was then
transacted.

We should lead on their thoughts to the glorious views of Christ's
resurrection and ascension; and tell them with what adorable goodness he still
remembers his people in the midst of his exaltation; pleading the cause of
sinful creatures, and employing his interest in the court of heaven, to procure
life and glory for all who believe in him, and love him.

We should then go on to instruct them in those particulars of obedience, by
which the sincerity of our faith and our love is to be approved; at the same
time reminding them of their own weakness, and telling them how GOD helps us,
by sending his holy SPIRIT to dwell in our hearts, to furnish us for every good
word and work. An important lesson, without attending to which our instruction
will be vain, and their hearing will likewise be vain!

3. Children should be trained up in the way of obedience to their parents.

This is a command which GOD recommended from Mount Sinai, by annexing to it a
particular promise of long life; a blessing which young persons greatly desire.
The Apostle therefore observes, that it is the first commandment with promise,
i. e. a command eminently remarkable for the manner in which the promise is
adjoined. And it is certainly a wise constitution of Providence, that gives so
much to parental authority, especially while children are in their younger
years, their minds being then incapable of judging and acting for themselves in
matters of importance. Children should therefore be early taught and convinced
by scripture, that GOD has committed them into the hands of their parents; and
consequently that reverence and obedience to their parents, is a part of the
duty they owe to GOD, and disobedience to them, is rebellion against him. And
parents should by no means indulge their children in a direct and resolute
opposition to their will in matters of greater or smaller moment; remembering,
that a child left to himself, brings his parents to shame, and himself to ruin;
and with regard to subjection, as well as affection, it is good for a man to
bear the yoke in his youth.

4. Children should be trained up in the way of benevolence and kindness to all.

The great Apostle tells us that love is the fulfilling of the law, and that
all those branches of it, which relate to our neighbor, are comprehended in
that one word, love. This love therefore we should endeavor to teach them; and
we shall find, that in many instances it will be a law to itself; and guide
them right in many particular actions, the obligations to which may depend on
principles of equity, which lie far beyond the reach of their feeble
understandings. There is hardly an instruction relating to our duty more
happily adapted to the capacity of children, than that golden law (so important
to all of the maturest age) Whatsoever ye would that others should do unto you,
do ye so unto them. This rule we should teach them, and by this should examine
their actions. From their cradles we should often inculcate it upon them, that
a great deal of religion consists in doing good; that the wisdom from above is
full of mercy and good fruits; and that every christian should do good unto all
as he has opportunity.

That such instructions may be welcome to them, we should endeavor, by all
prudent methods, to soften their hearts to sentiments of humanity and
tenderness, and guard against every thing that would have a contrary tendency.
We should remove from them as much as possible, all kinds of cruel and bloody
spectacles, and should carefully discourage any thing barbarous in their
treatment of brute creatures; by no means allowing them to sport themselves in
the death or pain of domestic animals, but rather teaching them to treat the
poor creatures kindly, and take care of them; the contrary to which is a most
detestable sign of a savage and malignant disposition. The merciful man
regards the life of his beast.

We should likewise take care to teach them the odiousness and folly of a
selfish temper, and encourage them in a willingness to impart to others, what
is agreeable and entertaining to themselves: Especially we should endeavor to
form them to sentiments of compassion for the poor. We should show them where
GOD has said, Blessed is the man that considers the poor, the LORD will
remember him in the day of trouble. He that has pity upon the poor, lends to
the LORD and that which he has given, will he pay him again. And we should
show them by our own practices, that we verily believe these promises to be
true, and important. It might not be improper sometimes to make our children
the messengers, by which we send some small supply to the indigent and
distressed; and if they discover a disposition to give something out of the
little stock we allow them to call their own, we should joyfully encourage it,
and should take care that they never lose by their charity, but that in a
prudent manner we abundantly repay it. It is hardly to be imagined that
children thus brought up should, in the advance of life, prove injurious and
oppressive; they will rather be the ornaments of religion, and blessings to the
world, and probably will be in the number of the last whom Providence will
suffer to want.

5. Children should be trained up in the way of diligence.

This should undoubtedly be our care, if we have any regard to the welfare
either of their bodies or their souls. In whatever station of life they may at
length be fixed, it is certain there is little prospect of their acquitting
themselves with usefulness, honor and advantage, without a close and resolute
application; whereas the wisest of princes and of men has said, See thou a
man diligent in his business? he shall stand before kings, he shall not stand
before mean men. And it is evident that a diligent prosecution of business
keeps one out of the way of a thousand temptations, which idleness seems to
invite, leading a man into numberless instances of vice and folly, because he
has nothing else to do.

A prudent and religious parent will therefore be concerned, that his children
may not early contract so pernicious a habit, nor enter upon life, like persons
who have no business in it, but to crowd the stage, and stand in the way of
those who are better employed. -- Instead of suffering them to saunter about
from place to place (as abundance of young people do, to no imaginable purpose
of usefulness, or even of entertainment) he would quickly assign them some
employment for their time: An employment so moderated, and so diversified, as
not to overwhelm and fatigue their tender spirits; yet sufficient to keep them
wakeful and active. Nor is this so difficult as so many imagine; for children
are a busy kind of creatures, naturally fond of learning new things, and trying
and showing what they can do. So that, I am persuaded, were perfect inactivity
to be imposed on them as a penance but for one hour, they would be heartily
weary of it, and would be glad to seek their refuge from it, in almost any
business you would think fit to employ them about.

Thus should they be disciplined in their infant years, should early be taught
the value of time, and early accustomed to improve it, till they grow fit for
some calling in life; in which they should at length be placed with this
important maxim deeply engraven upon their minds, "That full employ in whatever
service they are fixed, is a thing by no means to be dreaded, but on the
contrary, greatly to be desired."

I shall conclude this head with the mentioning of a very remarkable law
amongst the Athenians, which ordained, "That those who had been brought up to
no employment by their parents, should not be obliged to keep them, if they
came to want in their old age; which all other (legitimate) children were."

6. Children should be trained up in the way of integrity.

Simplicity and godly sincerity is not only a very amiable, but an essential
part of the christian character; and we are every one of us indispensibly
obliged to prove ourselves Israelites indeed, in whom there is no allowed
guile. And this is a circumstance which will peculiarly require our regard in
the education of our children, and of all young persons under our care.

It is very melancholy to observe, how soon the artifices and deceits of
corrupt nature begin to discover themselves. In this respect we are
transgressors from the womb, and go astray almost as soon as we are born,
speaking lies. Great care therefore should be taken to form the minds of
children to a love for truth and candor, and a sense of the meanness as well as
the guilt of a lie. We should be cautious that we do not expose them to any
temptations of this kind, either by unreasonable severities, on account of
little faults, or by hasty surprises, when enquiring into any matter of fact,
which it may seem their interest to disguise by a falsehood: And when we find
them guilty of a known and deliberate lie, we should express our horror of it,
not only by a present reproof or correction, but by such a conduct toward them
for some time afterward, as may plainly show them how greatly we are amazed,
grieved, and displeased. When so solemn a business is made of the first faults
of this kind, it may be a mean of preventing many more.

I will further add, that we ought not only thus severely to animadvert upon a
direct lie, but likewise, in a proper degree, to discourage all kinds of
equivocations and double meanings, and those little tricks and artifices, by
which they may endeavor to impose on each other, or on those who are older
than themselves. We should often inculcate upon them that excellent scripture,
He that walks uprightly walks surely; but he that perverteth his way, (that
twists and distorts it with the perplexities of artifice and deceit) shall (at
length) be known. Be showing them every day, how easy, how pleasant, how
honorable, and how advantageous it is to maintain a fair, open, honest temper;
and on the other hand, what folly there is in cunning and dishonesty in all its
forms; and how certain it is, that by studying and practicing it, they take the
readiest way to make themselves obnoxious and useless, infamous and odious.
Above all, should we remind them, that the righteous LORD loved righteousness,
and his favorable countenance beholds the upright; but lying lips are such an
abomination to him, that he expressly declares, All liars shall have their part
in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone.

7. Children should be trained up in the way of humility.

This is a grace which our Lord particularly invites us to learn of him, and
most frequently recommends to us; well knowing that without it, so humbling a
scheme as he came to introduce, would never meet with a welcome reception. And
with regard to the present life, it is a most lovely ornament, which engages
universal esteem and affection; so that before honor is humility: On the whole
we find, He that exalts himself is abased, and he that humbles himself is
exalted, both by GOD and man.

A regard therefore to the ease, honor and happiness of our children, should
engage us to an early endeavor of checking that pride, which was the first
sin, and the ruin of our natures; and diffuses itself so wide, and sinks so
deep, into all who draw their original from degenerate Adam. We should teach
them to express humility and modesty in their converse with all.

They should be taught to treat their superiors with peculiar respect, and
should at proper seasons be accustomed to silence and reserve before them.
Hence they will learn in some degree the government of the tongue; a branch of
wisdom, which, in the advance of life, will be of great importance to the quiet
of others, and to their own comfort and reputation.

Nor should they be allowed to assume airs of insolence toward their equals;
but rather be taught to yield, to oblige, and to give up their right for the
sake of peace. To this purpose I cannot but think it desirable, that they
should be generally accustomed to treat each other with those forms of civility
and complaisance, which are usual among well-bred people in their rank of life.
I know these things are mere trifles in themselves, yet they are the out-guards
of humanity and friendship, and effectually prevent many a rude attack, which,
taking its rise from some little circumstances, may nevertheless be attended
with fatal consequences. I thought it proper to mention this here, because (as
Scougal very justly and elegantly expresses it) "These modes are the shadows of
humility, and seem intended to show our regard for others, and the low thoughts
we have of ourselves."

I shall only add farther, that it is great imprudence and unkindness to
children, to indulge them in a haughty and imperious behavior toward those
who are most their inferiors. They should be made to understand, that the
servants of the family are not their servants, nor to be under their government
and control. I the rather insist upon this, because I have generally observed,
that where young people have been permitted to tyrannize over persons in the
lowest circumstances of life, the humor has shamefully grown upon them, till
it has diffused insolence and arrogance through their behavior to all about
them.

Lastly, Children should be trained up in the way of self-denial.

As without something of this temper we can never follow CHRIST, or expect to
be owned by him as his disciples; so neither indeed can we pass comfortably
through the world. For whatever unexperienced youth may dream, a great many
distasteful and mortifying circumstances will occur in life, which will unhinge
our minds almost every hour, if we cannot manage, and in many instances deny
our appetites, our passions, and our humors. We should therefore endeavor to
teach our children this important lesson betimes; and if we succeed in our
care, we shall leave them abundantly richer and happier, in this rule and
possession of their own spirits, than the most plentiful estates, or the most
unlimited power over others could make them.

When a rational creature becomes the slave of appetite, he sinks beneath the
dignity of the human nature, as well as the sanctity of the christian
profession. It is therefore observable that when the Apostle mentions the three
grand branches of practical religion, he puts sobriety in the front; perhaps to
intimate, that where that is neglected, the other cannot be suitably regarded.
The Grace of God, (i. e. the gospel) teaches us to live soberly, righteously,
and godly. Children therefore, as well as young men, should be exhorted to be
soberminded: -- And they should be taught it by early self-denial. It is
certain, that if their own appetite and taste were to determine the kind and
quantity of their food, many of them would quickly destroy their constitutions,
and perpaps their lives; since they have often the greatest desire for those
things which are the most improper. -- And it seems justly observed by a very
wise man, (who was himself a melancholy instance of it) That the fondness of
mothers for their children, in letting them eat and drink what they will, lays
a foundation for most of those calamities in human life, which proceed from
bodily indisposition. Nay, I will add, that it is the part of wisdom and love,
not only to deny what would be unwholesome, but to guard against indulging them
in too great a nicety either of food or dress, people of sense cannot but see,
if they would please to consider it, that to know how to fare plainly, and
sometimes a little hardly, carries a man with ease and pleasure through many
circumstances of life, which to luxury and delicacy would be almost intolerable.

The government of the passions is another branch of self-denial, to which
children should early be habituated; and so much the rather because, in an age
when reason is so weak, the passions are apt to appear with peculiar force and
violence. A prudent care should therefore be taken to repress the exorbitances
of them. -- For which purpose, it is of great importance, that they never be
suffered to carry any point, by obstinacy, noise and clamor, which is indeed
to bestow a reward on a fault which deserves a severe reprimand. Nay, I will
venture to add, that though it be very inhuman to take pleasure in making them
uneasy by needless mortifications, yet when they are eagerly and intemperately
desirous of a trifle, they ought, for that very reason, sometimes to be denied
it, to teach them more moderation for the future. And if by such methods, they
gradually learn to conquer their little humors and fancies, they learn no
inconsiderable branch of true fortitude and wisdom. I cannot express this
better, than in the words of Mr. Lock, in his excellent treatise on the
subject before us; He that has found out the way to keep a child's spirit easy,
active and free, and yet at the same time to restrain him from many things
which he has a mind to, and draw him to things uneasy to him, has got the true
secret of education.

I have sometimes been surprised to see, how far a sense of honor and praise
has carried some children of a generous temper in a long and resolute course of
self denial. But undoubtedly, the noblest principle of all is a sense of
religion. Happy would it indeed be, if they were led to see, that there is but
very little in this kind of gratifications and indulgences; that the world
itself is but a poor empty trifle; and that the great thing a rational creature
should be concerned about, is to please GOD, and get well to heaven. May divine
grace teach us this important lesson for ourselves, that we may transmit it
with the greater advantage to our children! AMEN.

SERMON II. ON THE EDUCATION OF CHILDREN.
PROVE. xxii. 6. Train up a Child in the way he should go; and when he is old,
he will not depart from it.


IT is certainly a very pleasing reflection to every faithful minister of the
gospel, that the cause, in which he is engaged, is the most benevolent, as well
as the most religious; subserving the glory of GOD, by promoting the happiness
of mankind. It must be a great satisfaction to a man of integrity and humanity,
to think that it is not his business to dazzle and confound his hearers with
the artifices of speech, to give the appearances of truth to falsehood, and
importance to trifles, but to teach them to weigh things in an impartial
balance, and by the words of truth and soberness, to lead them into the paths
of wisdom and goodness.

This is a satisfaction which I peculiarly find this day, while I am urging you
to that religious care in the education of children, which I have at large
opened in the former discourse. And it is a circumstance of additional
pleasure, that I (...) pleading the cause of the weak and ^^^pless; of little
tender creatures, who are incapable of pleading for themselves, and know not
how much their interest is concerned. Nor am I without a secret hope, that if
the Divine Spirit favor us with his assistance, some who are yet unborn may
have eternal reason to rejoice in the fruits of what you are now to hear, AMEN.

Having already endeavored to describe the way in which children are to be
trained up; I now proceed,

Secondly, To propose some arguments to engage parents to this pious care.

And here I would entreat you distinctly to consider, that the attempt itself
is pleasant; you have great reason to hope it may be successful; and that
success is of the highest importance.

I. The attempt itself is pleasant.

I speak not merely of the pleasure arising from the consciousness of
discharging present duty, and a probable view of future success; such a
satisfaction may attend those actions, which are in themselves most painful and
mortifying. But I refer to the entertainment immediately flowing (...) the
employment itself, when rightly (...) aged. This is undoubtedly one of (...)
ways of wisdom, which are ways o^ ^^^^^antness, as well as a path, which (...)
^ts consequences is peace and happiness: It is a commandment, in keeping of
which there is a great reward.

The GOD of nature has wisely annexed a secret, unutterable delight, to all our
regular cares for the improvement of our rising offspring. We rejoice to see
our tender plants flourish, to observe how the stock strengthens, and the
blossoms and the leaves successively unfold. We trace, with a gradually
advancing pleasure, their easy smiles, the first efforts of speech on their
stammering tongues, and the dawning of reason in their feeble minds. It is a
delightful office to cultivate and assist opening nature, to lead the young
strangers into a new world, and to infuse the principles of any useful kind of
knowledge which their age may admit, and their circumstances require. But when
we attempt to raise their thoughts to the great FATHER OF SPIRITS, to present
them, as in the arms of faith, to JESUS the compassionate shepherd, and teach
them to inquire after him; when we endeavor to instruct them in the principles
of divine truth, and form them to senti^^^^ of prudence, integrity and
generosi^^ (...) find a pleasure superior to w^^^ any (...) ^abour for their
improvement can (...)

(...) this occasion, my friends, I persuade myself, I may appeal to the
repeated experience of many among you. Do you not find, that the sweetest
truths of christianity, which are your hope and your joy in this house (...)
your pilgrimage, are peculiarly sweet when you talk them over with your
children? Do you not find, that your instructions and admonitions to them
return into your own bosom with a rich increase of edification and refreshment?
Thus while you are watering these domestic plantations, you are watered also
yourselves; and from these holy converses with your children, you rise to more
endearing communion with your heavenly Father: GOD by by his spirit visiting
your souls in the midst of those pious cares, and giving you immediate comfort
and strength, as a token of his gracious acceptance, and perhaps as a pledge of
future success. This leads me to urge the religious education of children.

II. By the probability there is, that it will be attended with such success,
as to be ^he means of making them wise and good.

This i^ the argument urged by Sol^^^^ in the text, Train up a child in the
(...) which he should go; and when he (...) will not depart from it. Being ^a^
^ed into the right way, he will (...) it with increasing pleasure; so that
(...) ^egard to the prosperity of the soul, a^^ (...) as of the body, his path
will be like the morning light which shines m^^^ and more unto the perfect day.

It is true, this assertion is to be understood with some limitation, as
expressing the probability, rather than the certainty of the success; otherwise
experien^e would contradict it in some melancholy instances. Would to GOD there
were none untractable under the most pious and prudent methods of education;
none, who like deaf adders stop their cars against the voice of the most
skilful charmers, and have been accustomed to do it from their infancy! Would
to GOD there were none of those, who appeared to set out well, and seemed eager
in inquiring the way to ^or with their faces thitherward, who have forgotten
the guides of their youth, and the covenant of their GOD, and are to this day
wandering in the paths of the destroyer, if they are no^ already fallen in
them! But do you thro^ by every medicine, which some have use^ without being
recovered by it; or declin^ (...) profession, of which there are some (...) ^o
not thrive? What remedy must (...) take? what calling must you then (...) The
application is obvious. It w^^^d ^e folly to pretend to maintain, that
r^^^^ious education will certainly maintain its end; but let me entreat you to
consider, that it is in its own nature a very rational m^^^^d -- that it is the
method which GOD has appointed, and a method which in many instances has been
found successful. Attend seriously to these remarks, and then judge whether
prudence and conscience will not oblige you to pursue it.

1. The religious education of children is a very rational method of engaging
them to walk in the way in which they should go.

There is the most evident advantage attending our early attempts of this kind,
that we shall find the mind more open and disengaged, not tainted with all
those corrupt principles, nor enslaved to those irregular habits, which they
would probably imbibe and contract in the advance of age. Though the paper on
which we would write the knowledge of GOD be not entirely fair, it is clear of
many a foul inscription and deep blot, with which it would soon be covered.
Though the garden, in which we would plant the fruits of holiness, be not free
from weeds, yet many of them are but (as it were) in the invisible seed, and
the rest are not grown up to that luxuriant size, which we must expect, if due
cultivation be omitted or delayed.

It is a farther advantage which deserves to be mentioned here, that infancy
and childhood is the most impressible age; and as principles are then most
easily admitted, so they are most firmly retained. The ancients, those
judicious observers of human nature, as well as many modern writers, are full
of this remark in their discourses on education, and illustrate it by a great
many beautiful allusions which are well known.

The new vessel takes a lasting tincture from the liquor which is first poured
in: The soft clay is easily fashioned into what form you please: The young
plant may be bent with a gentle hand; and the characters engraved on the tender
bark, grow deeper and larger on the advancing (...). It will be our wisdom then
to (...) these golden opportunities; and so much the rather, as it is certain
they will either be improved or perverted; and that if they are not pressed
into the service of religion, they will be employed as dangerous artillery
against it.

But you will say, "With all these advantageous circumstances we cannot infuse
grace into the hearts of our children; and after all our precautions, corrupt
nature will prevent us and fix a wrong bias on the mind, before we can attempt
to direct it aright." A mournful, but too evident truth! which, far from
denying or suppressing, I would often declare and inculcate; and the rather
now, as it greatly confirms my argument. Are the influences of a degenerate
nature unavoidably so strong, and will you suffer them to be confirmed by these
additional advantages? Do you apprehend, that, running with the footmen, you
shall be in danger of fainting; and do you for that very reason choose to
contend with the horsemen? You cannot, sure, in the face of so much reason and
scripture, urge this as an excuse against making any attempts at all of this
kind; and how then is it an apology for the neglect of those, which are, (other
things being equal) the most rational and easy? But the trifling plea is more
evidently silenced, by observing,

2. The religious education of children is a method which GOD has appointed;
and this greatly increases the probability of its success.

I assuredly know (and may GOD more deeply engrave it in our hearts!) that with
regard to your labors as well as our's, Neither is he that planteth any thing,
nor he that waters, but GOD that gives the increase. But consider, I beseech
you, how that increase is to be hoped for: Is it in the omission, or in the use
of prescribed means? I urge it on your consciences, my friends, that religious
education is an ordinance of GOD, which, therefore, you may reasonably hope he
will honor with a blessing. And you might as justly expect, that your souls
should flourish in an unnecessary absence from the table and house of the LORD,
or an habitual neglect of reading and prayer; as that your children should grow
up for GOD, while you fail in your endeavors to engage them in his service. I
repeat it again, religious education is an ordinance of GOD. And is it a work
of labor and difficulty to prove the assertion? Which of you does not know,
that christian parents are solemnly charged to bring up their children in the
nurture and admonition of the LORD; and that even under the Mosaic economy,
GOD urged it on his people in a very affecting manner? Surely you must have
observed, how strictly GOD charges it upon the Jews to take all opportunities
to this purpose, occasional as well as stated. These words, says he, which I
command thee this day, shall be in thine heart; and thou shall teach them
diligently to thy children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in thine
house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when
thou risest up. And elsewhere, thou shall teach them to thy sons, and thy sons
sons. Plainly recommending a care of more remote, as well as immediate
descendants of grandchildren, as well as children. Thus when GOD established a
testimony in Jacob, and appointed a law in Israel, he commanded the fathers,
that they should make them known unto their children; that the generation to
come might know them, even the children that should be born, that they should
arise and declare them to their children; that so religion might be transmitted
to every rising age. You cannot be ignorant of such passages as these, which
need no comment to explain them, and consequently you cannot but know, that the
religious education of children is a divine institution, as well as in itself a
most rational attempt: After which you will not wonder to hear,

3. That it has in fact been attended with very happy success.

We acknowledge that the great GOD does not confine himself to work by this
way; and that he sometimes displays his sovereignty in visibly turning out of
it. We acknowledge, that he sometimes leaves those who have been, as it were,
born and brought up in his family, to forsake it in a very scandalous manner;
while he seems to go into the territories of satan; into ignorant, carnal,
profane families, and takes from thence persons, whom he erects as trophies of
free, surprising, and (as Mr. How justly expresses it) "unaccountable grace."
But you well know, that these are more rare and uncommon cases: And though some
of you, my friends, are (and I hope never will forget it) happy instances of
the singular divine goodness; yet most of you, as I apprehend, were trained up
in the knowledge of GOD, and are living monuments of the success which has
attended the care of parents, or masters in this particular. The greater part
of those, who have of late been admitted to your communion, have, to my certain
knowledge, mentioned it with thankfulness; and I rejoice to think, how many of
the rising generation among us (if even a child may be known by his doings) are
like to increase the number, and give us an encouraging hope that they will at
length be set as olive plants around the LORD'S table, as well as yours. I
persuade myself it is so elsewhere, and think I may pronounce it with some
confidence, that the families of GOD'S children are generally speaking the
nurseries of his church. Solomon, no doubt, had observed, that a good education
had generally been successful, or we could by no means account for the remark
in the text; and a very accurate writer of our own age and nation has carried
it so far as to say, "That of all the men we meet with, nine parts in the ten
are what they are, good or bad, useful or not, according to their education."

I hope you are by this time convinced, that, humanly speaking, there is great
probability that religious education may be the effectual means of promoting
serious piety in the rising age; which was the second argument by which I was
to recommend it: An argument, which may be greatly strengthened, by observing,

III. That the success, which we may so reasonably expect, is a matter of very
high importance.

It is of evident importance, to the honor of GOD, and the support of religion
-- to the present and future happiness of our children -- and to your own
comfort both in life and death. Weighty and comprehensive thoughts! which I
shall briefly touch, and to which I beg you will renew your attention.

1. The honor of GOD, and interest of a Redeemer, is greatly concerned in the
behavior of your children; and consequently in your care of their education,
which is like to have so great an influence upon it.

We live in a dying world. Our fathers, where are they? Sleeping in the dust,
as we must shortly be. We are sure, that in a little, a very little while,
these places must know us no more: And when we are mouldering in the house of
silence, who must fill our places in the house of GOD? Who must rise up in our
stead for the support of religion among those who succeed us? From whom can it
be expected, but from our children? Yet how can we expect it from these, in the
neglect of a method, which comes recommended by so many advantageous
circumstances? "Yes," you will perhaps be ready to say, "GOD will take care of
his own cause, and almighty grace will do what we have not attempted, because
we knew that we could not accomplish it." Almighty grace can indeed do it; and
almighty power can of these stones, on which we tread, raise up children to
Abraham. But show me your warrant from the word of GOD for expecting it, either
in the one case, or in the other. You will possibly answer, "He has promised to
be ever with his church, and that the gates of hell shall not prevail against
it; but that one generation shall arise and declare his might^ works unto
another, and that the kingdom of his son shall continue as long as the sun and
moon endure." Blessed be his name for these encouraging promises, which shall,
no doubt, be accomplished. But where has he engaged, that this kingdom shall
always continue among us? Such passages as these will no more prove, that the
gospel shall never be removed from Great Britain, than they would once have
proved, that it should never be taken away from Pergamos or Thyatira, or any
other of the Asian churches, which have so many ages ago been given up to
desolation.

Now let me entreat you for a few moments, to dwell upon that thought; what if
the gospel should be lost from among your descendants! what if in the age of
these little ones, or the next who shall succeed to their's, the house of the
LORD should be forsaken, and his table abandoned? What if the ministry should
be grown into disuse, or the servants of CHRIST in it should have nothing to
do, but to bear a fruitless testimony against an unbelieving generation, till
(when their hearts are broken with so sad an office) the gospel here die with
them, and religion be buried in their graves? Is it a thought easily to be
supported by a true Israelite, that the ark of the LORD should thus be lost,
and GOD should write upon us Ichabod, the sad memorials of a departed glory!

It would surely be peculiarly melancholy, that religion should die in the
hands of those who were the children of the kingdom. And were not yours so? In
this respect, my friends, permit me to say, that I am a witness among some of
you. When you have offered your children to baptism, you have delivered them
into my hands, with an express declaration of your sincere desire, that they
might be devoted to GOD; and have received them again with a solemn charge and
promise to bring them up for him, if their lives should be continued. And as
for those of you, who do not practice this institution, I doubt not, but many
of you are equally faithful in dedicating your infant offspring to GOD. Is it
not then reasonable to expect from both, that they should be brought up as a
seed to serve him? And from whom may we hope it, if not from you? If you have
experienced the power of divine grace upon your own souls, and have ta^^ed that
the LORD is gracious, methinks it should awaken a holy zeal to spread the sweet
savor of his name and word wherever you come: You should labor to the utmost
for the advancement of his gospel among all your acquaintance, and even among
strangers; how much more in your own families, among those whom you have from
him, among those whom you have so solemnly given back to him.

2. The character of your children, and consequently your care in their
education, is of the most evident importance, to their present and future
happiness.

I need not employ a great deal of time in proving the truth of the assertion.
As christians you must undoubtedly own, that godliness is profitable to all
things, having the promise of the life which now is, as well as of that which
is to come. If your children, through the divine blessing on your holy care,
become truly religious, they will not only be preserved from those follies and
crimes, which stain the honor, and ruin the substance of families, but they
will secure a fair reputation; they will take the most probable method to make
life truly comfortable; they will be entitled to the paternal care and blessing
of GOD; and to crown all will be heirs of eternal glory with him; And what
could your most prudent, faithful, tender love wi^h for them as a greater, or
indeed a comparable good? On the other hand, (...) they prove vi^iou^ and
profane (which in so degenerate an age it is very probable they may, if they
have no religious principle to secure them) what can you expect but their
infamy and misery in this world, and their eternal destruction in the next?

One would imagine, that such consid^rations as these should very deeply
impress the heart of a parent; and if they were alone, should be sufficient to
gain the cause. You, who have so tender a regard to all their temporal
concerns; you, who rise early and sit up late, that you may advance their
fortunes, that you may furnish them with those dubious and uncertain
possessions, which may be blessings or curses, as they are improved or abused?
can you bear to think, that they may be for ever poor and miserable? Surely, it
should cut you to the heart to look on a child and reflect, "here is an heir of
eternal misery: Alas! what am I doing for him? Preparing an estate? Contriving
for his present convenience or grandeur?" Vain, wretched, preposterous care!
which, to use a very plain simile, is but like employing yourselves in trimming
and adorning its clothes, while the child itself were fallen into the fire, and
would be in danger of being destroyed, if not immediately plucked out. Hasten
to do it with an earnestness answerable to the extremity of the case, and so
much the rather, as the danger is in part owing to you.

I will not say, how far your personal mistakes in conduct may have been a
snare and a temptation, to your children; nor can I pretend to determine it.
But I am confident of this, that they have derived from you a corrupt and
degenerate nature. Through your veins the original infection, which tainted the
first authors of our race, has flowed down to them. And is not this an
affecting thought? and ought it not to quicken you to attempt their relief?

Dr. Tillotson sets this in a very moving light: "When a man has by treason
tainted his blood and forfeited his estate, with what grief and regret does he
look on his children, and think of the injury he has done to them by his fault:
and how solicitous is he before he dies to petition the king for favor to his
children! How earnestly does he charge his friends to be careful of them, and
kind to them!" We are those traitors. Our children have derived from us a
tainted blood, a forfeited Inheritance. How tenderly should we pity them! How
solicitously should we exert ourselves to prevent their ruin! Mr. Flavel
expresses the thought still more pathetically. "Should I bring the plague into
my family, and live to see all my poor children lie dying by the walls of my
house; if I had not the heart of a tiger, such a sight would melt my very
soul." And surely, I may add, were there a sovereign antidote at hand, perhaps
an antidote I had myself used, should I not direct them to it, and urge them to
try it, I should be still more savage and criminal. The application ^s easy:
The LORD deeply impress it on your souls, that your dear children may not die
eternally of the malignant plague they have taken from you!

This is one consideration, which should certainly add a great deal of weight
to the argument I am now upon. I will conclude the head with the mention of
another: I mean, the peculiar advantages which you their parents have for
addressing yourselves to them. You, who have known them from their infancy, are
best acquainted with their temper, and manner of thinking; you, who are daily
with them, may watch the most tender moments, the most favorable opportunities
of pleading with them; your melting affection for them, will suggest the most
endearing sentiments and words on such occasions: Their obligations to you, and
love for you, will probably dispose them to attend with the greater pleasure to
what you may say; or your authority over them, your power of correction, and a
sense of their dependence upon you in life, may prevent much of that opposition
and contempt, which from perverse tempers, others might expect, especially if
they were not supported by your concurrence, in their attempts to instruct and
reform your children.

On the whole then, since your obligations and your encouragements to attempt
the work are so peculiar, I may reasonably hope you will allow its due weight
to this second consideration, that the character and conduct of your children,
and consequently your care in their education, is of the highest importance to
their present and future happiness. I add, once more,

3. It is of great moment to your own comfort, both in life and death.

Solomon often repeats the substance of that re^^^^: (...) wise son makes a
glad father, but ^ ^^^lish son is an heaviness to his mother. And the justice
of it in both its branches is very apparent. Let me engage you seriously to
reflect upon it, as a most awakening inducement, to the discharge of the
important duty I am recommending.

If you have reason to hope that your labors are not in vain, but that your
children are become truly religious; it must greatly increase your satisfaction
in them, that they are dear to you, not only in the bands of the flesh, but in
those of the LORD. You will not only be secure of their dutiful and grateful
behavior to you, but will have the pleasure of seeing them grow up in their
different stations, to prospects of usefulness in the church, and in the world.
Should Providence spare you to the advance of age, they will be a comfort and
honor to your declining years. You will, as it were, enjoy a second youth in
their vigor and usefulness; nay, a sense of their piety and goodness will
undoubtedly be a reviving cordial to you in your dying moments. A delightful
thought will it indeed be! "I am going to take my leave of the world, and my
scene of service is over; but I leave those behind me, who will appear for GOD
in my stead, and act perhaps, with greater fidelity and zeal, for the support
of religion in a degenerate age. I leave my dear children destitute indeed of
my counsel and help, perhaps in no ab^^^ant affluence of worldly enjoyments;
but I leave them under the guardian care of my Father and their Father, of my
GOD and their GOD. I must soon be separated from them, and the distance between
us must soon be as great, as between earth and heaven: But as I leave them
under the best guidance in the wilderness, so I have a joyful persuasion they
will soon follow me into the celestial Canaan. Yet a little while, and I, and
my dear offspring shall appear together before the throne of GOD; and I shall
stand forth with transport, and say, Behold, here am I, and the children which
my GOD has graciously given me. Then will the blessedness on which I now enter,
be multiplied upon me, by the sight of every child that has a share in it.
"Now, LORD, suffer thou thy servant to depart in peace, since thou have
directed, not only mine eyes, but theirs, to thy salvation."

But if you see these dear little ones, grow up for the destroyer; if you see
those, whose infant days have given you so many tender pleasures, and so many
fond hopes, deviating from the paths of duty and happiness, how deeply will it
pierce you! You now look upon them w^^h a soft complacency, and say, "These are
they, who shall comfort us under our labors and our sorrows." But alas! my
friends, if this be the case, "These are they, who will increase your labors,
and aggravate your sorrows; that will hasten upon you the infirmities of age,
or crush you the faster under the weight of them, until they have brought down
your hoary hairs, with anguish, to the grave." Little do they or you think how
much agony and distress you may endure, from what you will see, and what you
will fear concerning them. How many slighted admonitions, how many deluded
hopes, how many anxious days, how many restless nights, will concur, to make
the evening of life gloomy! And at length, when GOD gives you a dismission from
a world, which the folly and wickedness of your children has so long
imbittered, how painful will the separation be; when you have the prospect of
seeing them but once more, and that at the tribunal of GOD, where the best you
can expect (in their present circumstance) is to rise up in judgment against
them, and to bear an awful testimony, which shall draw down upon them
aggravated damnation!

And let me plainly tell you, that if in these last moments, conscience should
also accuse you of the neglect of duty, and testify that your own sorrow, and
your children's ruin, is in part chargeable upon that, it will be a dreadful
ingredient in this bitter cup, and may greatly darken, if not entirely suppress
those hopes with regard to yourselves, which alone could support you in this
mournful scene. I am fully persuaded, that if you knew the weight with which
these things will sit upon your mind, in the immediate views of the eternal
world, you would not suffer every trifling difficulty, or little care, to deter
you from the discharge of those duties, which are so necessary to prevent these
galling reflections.

To conclude: Let me entreat you seriously to weigh the united force of those
arguments, which I have now been urging to excite your diligence in this
momentuous care of training up your children in the way in which they should
go. Consider how pleasant the attempt is: Consider how fair a probability there
is that it may prosper, as it is in itself a very rational method, as it is a
method GOD has appointed, and a method which he has crowned with singular
success: Consider how important that success is, to the honor of GOD, and
interest of religion, to the temporal and eternal h^^piness of your children;
and finally, your own comfort, both in life and death.

On the whole, I well know, and I am persuaded, Sirs, that you yourselves are
convinced, that whatsoever can be opposed to such considerations as these, when
laid in an impartial balance, it is altogether lighter than vanity. I do
therefore seriously appeal to those convictions of your consciences, as in the
sight of GOD: And if from this time at least, the education of children among
you be neglected, or regarded only as a light care, GOD is witness, and you
yourselves are witnesses, that it is not for want of being plainly instructed
in your duty, or seriously urged to the performance of it.

SERMON III. ON THE EDUCATION OF CHILDREN.
PROVE. XXII. 6. Train up a Child in the way he should go; and when he is old,
he will not depart from it.


THOSE of you, who have made any observation on human life, must certainly
know, that if we desire to be agreeable and useful in it, we must rega^d not
only the quality, but the manner of our actions; and that while we are in the
pursuit of any important end, we must not only attend to those actions which do
immediately refer to it, but must watch over the whole of our conduct; that we
may preserve a consistency in the several parts of it. Otherwise we shall spoil
the beauty and acceptance of many an honest, and, perhaps in the main, prudent
attempt; or by a train of unthought of consequences, shall demolish with the
one hand, what we are laboring to build up with the other.

This is a remark which w^ shall have frequent occasion to recollect (...) it
is of peculiar importance in the (...) of education. It is therefore ne^ that
having before described the way in which children are to be trained up, and
urged you to a diligent application to the duty, I now proceed,

Thirdly, To offer some advice for your assistance in this attempt, of leading
children into, and conducting them in this way.

These will relate -- partly to the manner in which the attempt is to be made
-- and partly to the precautions necessary for rendering it effectual: Which
are, as you see, matters of distinct consideration, though comprehended under
the general head of directions.

I. As to the manner in which the attempt is to be made.

And here it is evident, it should be done plainly, seriously, tenderly and
patiently.

1. Children are to be instructed plainly: In the plainest things, and by the
plainest words.

They are to be taught the plainest things in religion in the first place. And
it is a pleasing reflection on this occasion, that according to the abundant
goodness and condescension of the great GOD, those things which are the most
necessary are the plainest. Just as in the world of nature, those kinds of
food, which are most wholesome and nourishing, are also the most common. We
should show our grateful sense of the divine goodness in this particular, by
our care to imitate it; and should see to it, that when the necessities of our
children require bread, we do not give them a stone, or chaff; as we should do,
if we were to distract their feeble minds with a variety of human schemes, and
doubtful disputations. The more abstruse and mysterious truths of the gospel
are gradually to be unfolded, as they are exhibited in the oracles of GOD, and
to be taught in the language of the spirit; according to the excellent advice
of the great Dr. Owen, "making scripture phraseology our rule and pattern in
the declaration of spiritual things. But we must not begin here. We must feed
them with milk while they are babes, and reserve the strong meat for a maturer
age. Take the most obvious and vital truths of christianity. Tell them, that
they are creatures, and sinful creatures; that by sin they have displeased a
holy GOD; and that they must be pardoned, and sanctified, and accepted in
CHRIST, or must perish for ever. Show them the difference between sin and
holiness; between a state of nature and of grace. Show them, that they are
hastening on to death and judgment, and so must enter on heaven or hell, and
dwell for ever in the one or the other. Such kind of lessons will probably turn
to the best account, both to them and you. I know it is a very easy thing to
inflame the warm, ignorant minds of children with an eager zeal for
distinguishing forms, or distinguishing phrases; and to make them violent in
the interest of a party, before they know any thing of common christianity. But
if we thus sow the wind, we shall probably reap the whirlwind; venting
ourselves, and transfusing into them, a wrath of man, which never works, but
often greatly obstructs the righteousness of GOD. Blessed be GOD, this is not
the fault of you, my friends, of this congregation. I would mention it with
great thankfulness, as both your happiness and mine, that so far as I can
judge, it is the sincere milk of the word that you desire. Let it be your care
to draw it out for the nourishment of your children's souls, as their
understandings and capacities will permit them to take it in.

And while you are teaching them the plainest things, endeavor to do it in the
plainest words. It is the gracious method which GOD uses with us, who speaks to
us of heavenly things in language, not fully expressive of the sublimity and
grandeur of the subject, but rather suited to our feeble apprehensions. Thus
our LORD taught his disciples, as they were able to bear it; and used easy and
familiar similitudes, taken from the most obvious occurrences in life, to
illustrate matters of the highest importance. A most instructive example! Such
condescension should we use, in training up those committed to our care, and
should examine whether we take their understandings along with us, as we go on:
Otherwise we are speaking in an unknown tongue; and as the Apostle expresses
it, are barbarians unto them, be our language ever so grateful, elegant or
pathetic.

Give me leave to add, for the conclusion of this head, that though it is to be
taken for granted, that children in their earliest infancy are to be engaged to
what is good, and to be restrained from evil, chiefly by a view to rewards and
punishments, more immediate or remote, or by some natural workings of a
benevolent affection, which are by all means to be cherished and cultivated;
yet, as they may grow up to greater ripeness of understanding, something
farther is to be attempted. It must then be our care, to set before them in the
strongest light, the natural beauties of holiness, and deformities of sin; and
likewise to propose, in the easiest and most familiar way, the evidences of the
truth of christianity, that they may be fortified against those temptations to
infidelity, with which the present age does so unhappily abound. The external
evidences of it are by no means to be slighted, such as the credibility of the
gospel history, the accomplishment of prophecies, the unity of design carried
on by so many different persons in distant ages and countries, its amazing and
even miraculous propagations in the world; all which, with many other
considerations to the same purpose, are very judiciously handled in a variety
of excellent writings of our own age: of which I know not any more suited to
your use, than Mr. Bennet's discourses on the inspiration of scripture, which I
therefore recommend to your attentive perusal; and with them Dr. Watts' sermons
on the inward witness to the truth of christianity, from its efficacious
tendency to promote holiness: This appears to me the noblest evidence of all,
and will to those who have actually experienced it, be an anchor of the soul
both sure and stead fast.

2. Children should be instructed in a very serious manner.

There is an unhappy proneness in our degenerate natures to trifle with the
things of GOD; and the giddiness of childhood is peculiarly subject to it.
Great care should therefore be taken, that we do not encourage such an humor,
nor teach them by our levity or indolence in the manner of our instruction, to
take the awful name of GOD in vain, while they are speaking of him, or to him.
For this purpose we must labor with our own hearts, to work them to a deep and
serious sense of the truth and importance of what we say: This will give us an
unaffected solemnity in speaking, which will probably command the attention,
and impress the hearts of our children. Endeavor to preserve on your own
spirit, an habitual awe of the great and blessed GOD, the LORD of heaven and
earth: that when you speak of him to those little creatures, they may evidently
see the indications of the humblest veneration and reverence, and so may learn
to fear him from their youth. When you speak of CHRIST, let your souls be
bowing to him as the son of GOD, through whom alone you and yours can obtain
pardon and life; and let them be overflowing with love to him, for his
unutterable and inconceivable grace. And when you remind them of death,
judgment and eternity, consider yourselves and them as dying creatures: Think
in how few months, or weeks, or days, your lips may be silent in the dust, or
they may be for ever removed beyond the reach of your instructions; and plead
with them in as earnest and importunate a manner, as if the salvation of their
immortal souls depended on the effect of the present address. Again,

3. Children should be instructed in a very tender and affectionate manner.

We should take care to let them see, that we do not desire to terrify and
amaze them, to lead them into unnecessary severities, or to deprive them of any
innocent pleasures; that what we say is not dictated by an ostentation of our
wisdom and authority; but that it all proceeds from a hearty love to them, and
an earnest desire of their happiness. Study therefore to address them in the
most endearing language, as well as with the softest and sweetest arguments.
Endeavor, according to the practice of Solomon, to find out acceptable words.
And if tears should arise while you are speaking do not suppress them. There is
a language in them, which may perhaps affect beyond words. A weeping parent is
both an awful and a melting sight.

Endeavor therefore to look upon your children in such a view, as may be most
likely to awaken these tender sentiments. Consider them as creatures, whom you
(as instruments) have brought into being, tainted with innate corruption,
surrounded with snares, and on the whole, in such apparent danger, that if not
snatched as brands out of the burning, they must perish for ever. And that your
hearts may be further mollified, and that you may be formed to the most gentle
and moving manner of address, let me entreat you to study the scripture in this
view, and to observe the condescending and endearing forms in which the blessed
GOD speaks to us there. Observe them for yourselves, and point them out to your
children. Tell them, how kindly he has demanded, how graciously he has
encouraged their services; while he says, Remember now thy Creator in the days
of thy youth; and elsewhere, I love them that love me, and those that seek me
early shall find me. Tell them that the Lord JESUS CHRIST has invited them to
come to him; for he has said, Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest: Him that comes unto me I will in no wise cast
out: And whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely. Such
scriptures as these should be often repeated to them, and should be early
inculcated on their memory, with an attempt, as far as possible, to let them
into the spirit and force of them.

Nor will it be improper sometimes to set before them, how much you have done,
how much you are ready to do for them; how many anxious thoughts you entertain,
how many servent prayers you offer on their account. Thus Lemuel's mother
addressed him, What, my son? and what, the son of my womb? and what, the son of
my vows? As if she had said, My dear child, for whom I have borne so much, for
whom I have prayed so earnestly; in what words shall I address thee, to express
what my heart feels on thy account? How shall I speak my affectionate
overflowing concern for thy happiness both for time and eternity? So Solomon
pleads, My son, if thine heart be wise, my heart shall rejoice, even mine: As
if he should say, "Think how much is comprehended in that argument, that a
parent's happiness is in a great measure to be determined by thy character and
conduct." And the apostle Paul lays open his heart to the Gallatians in those
prophetic words, My little children of whom I travail in birth again, until
CHRIST be formed in you. Yet these were comparatively, strangers to him. And
should not you, my friends, feel, should not you express an equal tenderness
for those who are indeed parts of yourselves? But further,

4. Children should be instructed patiently.

You know, when the husbandman has committed the seed to the ground, he
patiently expects the fruits of his labors. So must ministers do, when
instructing their people: So must parents do, when instructing their children.
You must not imagine, my friends, that a plentiful harvest will spring up in a
day. The growth of nature is slow, and by insensible degrees: Nor are you to
wonder, if advances in knowledge and grace be still flower. Be upon your guard
therefore against fretfulness and impatience. Your children will forget what
you have once taught them; repeat it a second time; and if they forget it the
second time, repeat it the third. It is thus the great GOD deals with you; and
you have daily reason to rejoice that he does. He knows the frailty and
weakness of your minds, and therefore acts by a rule, which seems to be laid
down with a peculiar regard to the very point I am urging: Whom shall he teach
knowledge, and whom shall he make to understand doctrine? them that are weaned
from the milk, and drawn from the breasts? For precept must be upon precept,
precept upon precept, and line upon line, line upon line; here a little and
there a little: As if he should have said, "GOD has treated you like little
children, who must have the same short easy lesson repeated again and again."
And is it not indeed thus with regard to you? Does not the patience and
condescension of your heavenly Father send to you his ministers, Sabbath after
Sabbath, frequently inculcating the same things, that what you have forgot may
be brought to mind again? Thus should you do by those committed to your care.

Be teaching them every Sabbath: That is remarkably a good day for the purpose.
Then you have leisure for it; then you have particular advantage to pursue the
work; then you are furnished with some new matter by what you have heard in
public; and I would hope your spirits are then quickened by it, so that you can
speak out of the abundance of your heart; and you may, by discoursing with them
on what has been addressed to you, receive the impression on your own souls.

I add, be teaching them every day, by occasional discourses, when you have not
an opportunity of doing it by stated addresses. Drop a word for GOD every day,
and often in a day. You will probably find your account in it, and your
children theirs. A sudden glance of thought toward GOD in the midst of the
world, is often a great refreshment to the christian; and a sudden turn to
something serious and spiritual in conversation, is frequently very edifying to
others. It strikes the memory and the heart, and is, perhaps, as a nail fixed
in a sure place, when many a solemn admonition, and many an elaborate sermon is
lost. It is with pleasure that I frequently hear good christians speaking of
such occasional hints, which have been dropped by saints of the former
generation: Those transient passages, which the pious parents might forget in a
few moments, their children have distinctly remembered for many future years,
and repeated for their own edification, and I might add for mine. Let this
therefore be an encouragement to you; and in this respect, in the morning sow
this precious seed, and in the evening withhold not your hand, since you know
not whether shall prosper, or whether both shall be alike good.

Once more, let me entreat you to repeat your pious instructions and
admonitions, even though your children should grow up to years of maturity,
without appearing to profit by them. Say not, that you can teach them no more
than they already know; or, that you can try no new method which you have not
already attempted. You see, that in our assemblies, GOD often brings back souls
to himself by setting home on the conscience truths, which, with regard to the
speculative part of them, they know as well as their teachers; and adds a
divine efficacy to those institutions, which, for a long succession of years,
they had attended in vain. Be not therefore weary in well-doing; but let
patience, in this instance, have its perfect work.

Thus let your children be instructed plainly, seriously, tenderly, and
patiently; I wave some other particulars, which I might have added to these,
concerning the manner of instructing them, because I apprehend they will more
properly fall under the second branch of these directions: Where I am further
to advise you,

II. As to the precautions you must use, if you desire that these attempts in
the religious education of your children may be attended with success.

Here I would particularly advise, that a prudent care be taken to keep up your
authority over them, and at the same time to engage their affections to you;
that you be solicitous to keep them out of the way of temptation; that you
confirm your admonitions by a suitable example; that you cheerfully accept of
proper assistances in this important attempt; and that you humbly and
constantly look up to GOD for his blessing on all.

1. If we desire to succeed in our attempts for the religious education of our
children, we must take care to keep up our authority over them.

To this purpose, we must avoid, not only what is grossly vicious and criminal
(which will more properly be mentioned under a following head) but also those
little levities and follies which might make us appear contemptible to them.
Whatever liberties we may take with those who are our equals in age and
station, a more exact decorum is to be preserved before our children. Thus we
are to reverence them, if we desire they should reverence us; for, as Dr.
Tillotson very justly observes, "There is a certain freedom of conversation,
which is only proper among equals in age and quality, which if we use before
our superiors, we seem to despise them; and if we do it before our inferiors,
we teach them to despise us."

I will not insist on this hint, which your own prudence must accommodate to
particular circumstances; but shall here introduce the mention of correction,
which in some cases may be absolutely necessary to the support of parental
authority, especially where admonitions and counsels are slighted.

You know, that the scriptures expressly require it on proper occasions; and
Solomon, in particular, enlarges on the head. and suggests some important
thoughts with regard to it. Foolishness (says he) is bound up in the heart of a
child, but the rod of correction shall drive it far from him. Nay, he speaks of
it as a matter in which life is concerned, even the life of the soul: Withhold
not correction from a child; for if thou beat him with the rod, he shall not
die: Thou shall beat him with the rod, and shall deliver his soul from hell.
And is it kindness, or cruelty, in a parent, to spare the flesh to the hazard
of the soul? Parents are therefore exhorted to an early care in this respect,
lest vicious habits growing inveterate should render the attempt vain or
hurtful; and they are cautioned against that foolish tenderness, which would
lead them to regard the tears of a child, rather than his truest and highest
interest. Correct thy son while there is hope, and let not thy soul spare for
his crying: He that spares the rod, hates his son; but he that loves him,
chasteneth him betimes. Nor can we imagine a more lively commentary on the
words than the melancholy story of Eli, who, though he was a very eminent saint
in a degenerate age, yet erred here, and by a fatal indulgence brought ruin, as
well as infamy, on himself and his family. He reproved the abominable
wickedness of his sons; but did not make use of those severe methods, which in
such a case the authority of a parent might have warranted, and the office of a
judge did undoubtedly require. Observe the sentence which GOD pronounced
against him for it, and which he executed upon him in a very awful manner. The
LORD said unto Samuel, Behold, I will do a thing in Israel, at which both the
ears of every one that hears it shall tingle: In that day I will perform
against Eli all things which I have spoken concerning his house; when I begin,
I will also make an end. For I have told him that I will judge his house for
ever, for the iniquity which he knows; because his sons made themselves vile,
and he restrained them not: And therefore I have sworn unto the house of Eli,
that the iniquity of Eli's house shall not be purged with sacrifice nor
offering for ever. Take heed, I entreat you, as you love your children, as you
love yourselves, that it may not be said of you, that yours have made
themselves vile, and you have neglected to restrain them. Let mothers, in
particular take heed, that they do not, as it were, smother their children in
their embraces; as a French author smartly expresses it. And let me remind you
all particularly to be cautious, that the arms of one parent, be not a refuge
to the children from the resentment of the other. Both should appear to act in
concert, or the authority of the one will be despised, and probably the
indulgence of the other abused, and the mutual affection of both endangered.

I cannot say, that I enlarge on this subject with pleasure; but how could I
have answered for the omission of what is so copiously and so pathetically
inculcated in the sacred writings? It is indeed probable, that the rugged and
servile temper of the generality of the Jewish nation, might render a severe
discipline peculiarly necessary for their children; yet I fear, there are few
of our families, where every thing of this kind can safely be neglected. But
after all, I would by no means drive matters to extremities; and therefore
cannot persuade myself to dismiss the head without a caution or two. Take heed,
that your corrections be not too frequent, or too severe -- and that they be
not given in an unbecoming manner.

If your corrections be too frequent, it will probably spoil much of the
success. Your children, like iron, will harden under repeated strokes; and that
ingenious shame will be gradually worn off, which adds the greatest sting to
what they suffer from a parent's hand. And there will be this farther
inconvenience attending it, that there will not be a due difference made,
between great and small faults. The laws of Draco the Athenian, were justly
rejected, because they punished all crimes alike, and made the stealing of an
apple capital, as well as the murder of a citizen. You, on the contrary, should
let your children see, that you know how to distinguish between indiscretion
and wickedness; and should yourselves appear most displeased, where you have
reason to believe GOD is so.

Nor should your corrections at any time be too severe. It is prettily said by
Dr. Tillotson on this occasion, "That whips are not the cords of a man:" They
should be used in a family, only (as the sword in the republic) as the last
remedy when all others have been tried in vain; and then should be so used, as
that we may appear to imitate the compassion of our heavenly Father, who does
not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men.

Which leads me to add, that we should be greatly cautious, that correction be
not inflicted in an unbecoming manner: and it always is so, when it is given in
a passion. A parent's correcting his child should be regarded as an act of
domestic justice, which therefore should be administered with a due solemnity
and decorum; and to behave otherwise on the occasion, is almost as great an
indecency, as for a judge to pass sentence in a rage. It is injurious to
ourselves, as it tends to spoil our own temper; for peevishness and passion
will grow upon us, by being indulged toward those who dare not oppose them:
And it is on many accounts injurious to our children. Solomon intimates, that
correction and instruction should be joined, when he says, The rod and reproof
give wisdom. But what ^o^m is there for the still voice of wisdom to be heard
in a storm of fury? If your children see, that you act calmly and mildly; if
they read parental tenderness in your heart, through an awful frown on your
brow; if they perceive that correction is your strange work, a violence which
you offer to yourselves from a principle of duty to GOD and affection to them;
they must be obdurate indeed, if they do not receive it with reverence and
love; for this is both a venerable and an amiable character. But if once they
imagine, that you chastise them merely to vent your passion, and gratify your
resentment, they will secretly despise, and perhaps hate you for it: In that
instance at least, they will look upon you as their enemies, and may, by a
continued course of such severities, contract such an aversion, not only to
you, but to all that you recommend to them. Thus you may lose your authority
and your influence, by the very method you take to support it, and may turn a
wholesome, though bitter medicine, into poison. But I hope and trust, that your
humanity and your prudence will concur to prevent so fatal an abuse.

2. If you desire success in your attempts for the education of your children,
you must be careful to secure their affection to you.

Our LORD observes, that if any man love him, he will keep his word; and the
assertion is applicable to the present case: The more your children love you,
the more will they regard your i^^^ructions and admonitions. GOD has indeed
made it their duty to love you, and the most indispensible laws of gratitude
require it: yet since so many children are evidently wanting in filial
affection, it is certain that all this may not secure it in yours, unless you
add a tender obliging behavior to all the other benefits you have conferred
upon them. I observed under a former head, that you should address them in an
affectionate manner when discoursing on religious subjects; but now I add, that
you should carry the temper through life, and be daily endeavoring to render
yourselves amiable to them. The Apostle cautions parents that they should not
provoke their children to wrath, if they would bring them up in the nurture and
admonition of the LORD: On the contrary, you should put on the kindest looks,
you should use the most endearing and condescending language; you should
overlook many little failings, and express a high complacency in what is really
regular and laudable in their behavior. And though you must sometimes over
rule their desires, when impatiently eager, yet far from delighting generally
to cross them, you should rather study their inclinations, that you may
surprise them with unexpected favors. Thus will they learn quietly to refer
themselves to your care, and will more easily submit to mortification and
denial, when it is not made necessary by clamourous and impetuous demands. On
the whole, you should endeavor to behave so, as that your children may love
your company, and of choice be much in it; which will preserve them from
innumerable snares, and may furnish you with many opportunities of forming
their temper and behavior by imperceptible degrees, to what may be decent,
amiable and excellent.

If you manage these things with prudence, you need not fear, that such
condescensions, as I have now recommended, will impair your authority; far from
that, they will rather establish it. The superiority of your parental character
may be maintained in the midst of these indulgences; and when it is thus
attempered, it is most likely to produce that mixture of reverence and love, by
which the obedience of a child is to be distinguished from that of a slave.

3. You must be solicitous to keep your children out of the way of temptation,
if you would see the success of your care in their education.

If you are not on your guard here, you will probably throw down what you have
built, and build up that which you have been endeavoring to destroy. An early
care must be taken to keep them from the occasions, and the very appearances of
evil. We would not venture their infant steps on the brink of a precipice on
which grown persons, who know how to adjust the poise of their bodies, may walk
without extreme danger. More hazardous might it be, to allow them to trifle
with temptations, and boldly to venture to the utmost limits of that which is
lawful. An early tenderness of conscience may be a great preservative; and the
excess of strictness (though no excess be desirable,) may prove much safer than
an excess of liberty.

Bad company is undoubtedly one of the most formidable and pernicious
entanglements. By forming friendships with persons of a vicious character, many
a hopeful youth has learnt their ways, and found a fatal snare to his soul. You
should be very watchful to prevent their contracting such dangerous
friendships; and where you discover any thing of that kind, should endeavor,
by all gentle and endearing methods, to draw them off from them; but if they
still persist, you must resolve to cut the knot you cannot untie, and let your
children know, they must either renounce their associates, or their parents.
One resolute step of this kind might have prevented the ruin of multitudes, who
have fallen a sacrifice to the importunities of wicked companions, and the weak
indulgence of imprudent parents, who have contented themselves with blaming,
what they ought strenuously to have redressed.

All bad company is, in this respect, formidable; but that is most evidently
so, which is to be found at home. Great care ought therefore to be taken, that
you admit none into your families, who may debauch the tender minds of your
children, by pernicious opinions, or by vicious practices. This is a caution
which should be particularly remembered, in the case of servants. Take heed you
do not bring into your families such as may diffuse infection through the souls
of your dear offspring. It is a thousand times better to put up with some
inconveniences and disadvantages, when you have reason to believe a servant
fears GOD, and will from a principle of conscience be faithful in watching over
your children, and in seconding your religious care in their education; than to
prefer such, as while they are, perhaps, managing your temporal affairs
something better, may pervert your children to the service of the devil. I
fear, some parents little think, how much secret mischief these base creatures
are doing. And it is very possible, that if some of you recollect what you may
have observed among the companions of your childhood, you may find instances of
this nature, which riper years have since given you opportunity to discover.
See to it therefore, that you be diligently on your guard here.

Again: If you send your children to places of education, be greatly cautious
in your choice of them. Dearly will you purchase the greatest advantages for
learning, at the expense of those of a religious nature. And I will turn out of
my way to add, that schoolmasters and tutors will have a dreadful account to
give, if they are not faithfully and tenderly solicitous for the souls of those
committed to their care. The LORD pardon our many defects here, and quicken us
to greater diligence and zeal! -- But to return:

Give me leave only to add, that it is of the highest importance, if you would
not have all your labor in the education of your children lost, that you
should be greatly cautious with regard to their settlement in the world.
Apprenticeships and marriages, into irreligious families, have been the known
sources of innumerable evils. They, who have exposed the souls of their
children to apparent danger, for the sake of some secular advantages, have
often lived to see them drawn aside to practices ruinous to their temporal, as
well as their eternal interests. Thus their own iniquity has remarkably
corrected them: And I heartily pray that the GOD of this world may never be
permitted thus to blind your eyes; but that you, my friends, may learn, from
the calamities of other families, that wholesome lesson, which, if you neglect
it, others may perhaps hereafter learn from the ruin of yours.

4. See to it, that you confirm your admonitions by a suitable example, if you
desire on the whole that they should prove useful to your children.

A consciousness of the irregularity of our own be^^viour, in any remarkable
instances which may fall under their observation, will probably abate much of
that force and authority with which we might otherwise address them. When we
know they may justly retort upon us, at least in their minds, those words of
the apostle, thou that teach another, teach thou not thyself? Surely a
sense of guilt and of shame must either entirely silence us, or at least impair
that freedom and confidence, with which we might otherwise have exhorted or
rebuked.

Or had we so much composure and assurance, as to put on all the forms of
innocence and virtue, could we expect regard, when our actions contradicted our
discourses, or hope they should reverence instructions, which their teachers
themselves appear to despise? It is in the general true, that there is a
silent, but powerful oratory in example, beyond the force of the most elegant
and expressive words; and the example of parents has often a particular weight
with their children; which seems to be alluded to in that exhortation of St.
Paul, Be ye followers (or imitators) of God, as dear children. So that on the
whole, as a very celebrated writer well expresses it, "To give children good
instruction, and a bad example, is but beckoning to them with the hand to show
them the way to heaven, while we take them by the hand and lead them in the way
to hell." We should therefore most heartily concur in David's resolution, as
ever we hope our families should be religious and happy: I will behave myself
wisely in a perfect way; I will walk within my house with a perfect heart.

5. Cheerfully accept of all proper assistances in the education of your
children, if you desire it may succeed well.

It will be your wisdom to accept of the assistance, which may be offered,
either from books or friends. Books may in this respect be very useful to you;
the book of GOD above all; both to furnish you with materials for this great
work, and to instruct you in the manner of performing it. Other writings may be
subservient to this purpose. Wise and pious treatises on the subject of
education may be read with great pleasure and advantage; and you may receive
singular assistance from those catechisms, and prayers, and songs for children,
with which most of your families are now furnished, through the condescension
of one valuable friend in writing them, and the generosity of another in
bestowing them upon us. I hope you will express your thankfulness to both, by a
diligent care to use them; and I persuade myself, that you and yours may
abundantly find your account in them; for while the language is so plain and
easy, that even an infant may understand it, you will often find not only a
propriety, but a strength and sublimity in the sentiments, which may be
improving to persons of advanced capacities. There is much of that milk, by
which strong men may be entertained and nourished.

I add, that in this important work, you should gladly embrace the assistance
of pious and prudent friends. I can by no means approve that Lacedemonian law,
which gave every citizen a power of correcting his neighbor's children, and
made it infamous for the parent to complain of it: Yet we must all allow, that
considering the great importance of education, a concern for the happiness of
families and the public, will require a mutual watchfulness over each other in
this respect: Nor is there any imaginable reason to exclude this from the
number of those heads on which we are to admonish one another, and to consider
each other to provoke unto good works.

Nothing seems more evident than this; and one would suppose, that persons, who
are acquainted with human nature, should suspect, that self-love might work
under this form, and that they might be a little blinded by a partial affection
to their offspring. Such a reflection might engage them at least patiently, or
rather thankfully, to hear the sentiments, and receive the admonitions of their
friends on this head. But instead of this, there is in many people a kind of
parental pride, (if I may be allowed the expression) which seldom fails to
exert itself on such an occasion. They are so confident in their own way, and
do so majesterially despise the opinion of others, that one would almost
imagine, they took it for granted, that with every child nature had given to
the parent a certain stock of infallible wisdom for the management of it; or
that, if they thought otherwise, they rather chose their children should be
ruined by their own conduct, than saved by any foreign advice. If this
arrogance only rendered the parents ridiculous, one should not need to be
greatly concerned about it; especially as their high complacency in themselves
would make them easy, whatever others might think or say of them: But when we
consider the unhappy consequences it may produce, with regard to the temper and
conduct of the rising generation, it will appear a very serious evil, well
worthy a particular mention, and a particular care to guard against it.

As for the assistance of ministers in this work of education, I persuade
myself you will be so wise as thankfully to embrace it, both in public and
private; and let me urge you to improve it to the utmost. Accustom your
children to an early constancy and seriousness in attending divine ordinances,
and be often yourselves inquiring, and give us leave sometimes to inquire how
they advance in acquaintance with religion, and in love to it. And more
particularly let them attend to our catechetical lectures, which are peculiarly
intended for their service.

I bless GOD, I have seen the happy effects of this exercise, both in the
places where I was educated whilst a child, and in those where I was formerly
fixed; and as I am now introducing it among you, with an intention to continue
it as long as I am capable of public service, I promise myself your most happy
concurrence in it. I will not at large insist on the advantages which may
attend it. You easily see, that it will be an engagement to the children to
learn those excellent summaries of divine truth, when their progress in them i^
so often examined; By repeating it themselves, and hearing it rehearsed by
others, it will be more deeply fixed upon their memories: The exposition of it
in a plain and familiar manner may much improve their understandings in the
doctrines and duties of religion: And I will add, you who are parents may, by
attending on these occasions, possibly learn something as to the way of opening
and explaining things, which you may successfully practice at home. In
consequence of all, we may hope, that, by the divine blessing, some good
impressions may be made on the minds of children. And when they find a minister
willing to take pains to instruct them; when they hear him seriously and
tenderly pleading with them, and pleading with GOD for them, it may much engage
their affections to him, and so promote his usefulness among them, in other
ordinances, and in future years. And give me leave to say upon this head, that
as no wise and good minister will think it beneath him, to desire the affection
of the children of his congregation; so it is the duty of parents to cherish in
their offspring, sentiments of respect and love to all the faithful ministers
of CHRIST, and especially toward those who statedly labor among them.
Whatever mistakes you may discover in our conduct, or whatever deficiencies in
our public ministrations, you should study to conceal them from the notice of
your children; lest they should grow up in contempt of those, whose services
might otherwise be highly advantageous to them.

6. Lastly, Be earnest in prayer to GOD for his blessing on your attempts in
the education of your children, if you desire to see them successful.

This I would leave with you as my last advice? and though I have had frequent
occasion to hint at it before, I would now more particularly urge it on your
attentive regard. GOD is the author of every good and every perfect gift; it is
He who has formed the mind and the tongue, and who teaches man knowledge and
address. On him therefore must you fix your dependence, to teach you so to
conceive of divine things, and so to express your conceptions of them, as may
be most suited to the capacities, the dispositions, and the circumstances of
your children; and to him you must look to teach them to profit by all, by his
almighty grace to open their ear unto discipline, and to bow their heart unto
understanding.

A heathen poet could teach the Romans, in a form of public and solemn
devotion, to look up to heaven for influences from thence, to form their youth
to the love and practice of virtue. Surely you, my friends, are under much
greater obligations to do it, and that in a christian manner; earnestly
entreating the GOD of grace, to send down on your rising offspring the
effusions of that blessed spirit, which was purchased by the blood of CHRIST,
and is deposited in his compassionate hand. If you have tasted that the LORD is
gracious, you are daily living on those supplies; let it be your constant
errand at the throne of grace, to plead for your children there. Wrestle with
GOD in secret, for the life of their souls, and for those regenerating
influences on which it depends; and in those family devotions, which I hope you
dare not neglect, let the little ones, from their earliest infancy, have a
share in your remembrance. You may humbly hope, that He, by whose encouragement
and command you pray, will not suffer these supplications to be like water
spilt upon the ground: and, in the nature of things, it may tend to make
serious impressions on the minds of your children, to hear their own case
mentioned in prayer, and may dispose them with greater regard, to attend on
what you say to them, when they find you so frequently, so solemnly, and so
tenderly pleading with GOD for them.

Doubt not that every faithful minister of CHRIST will most heartily concur
with you, in so great and necessary a request. May GOD return to our united
addresses an answer of peace! May he pour out his spirit on our seed, and his
blessing on our offspring, that they may grow up before him as willows by the
water courses; that they may be to their parents for a comfort, to the church
for a support, and to our GOD for a name and a praise! AMEN.

SERMON IV. ON THE EDUCATION OF CHILDREN.
PROVE. xxii. 6. Train up a Child in the way he should go; and when he is old,
he will not depart from it.


IN treating on this subject of education, I have all along endeavored,
according to my usual manner, to make my discourses as practical as I could.
While I was describing and recommending the way, and offering my advices, with
regard to the manner of conducting children into it, most of what I said under
those generals was an application to you. I have therefore left myself the less
to do here; yet I was not willing to conclude my discourses on a subject, which
it is probable I shall never so largely resume, without

Fourthly, a particular address to my hearers, according to your different
relations, and characters in life.

This I promised as my fourth and last general, and I enter on it without
farther preface; humbly begging, that GOD, who has so intimate an access to all
our hearts, would enable me to speak in the most awakening and edifying manner;
and that he would by his blessed spirit, apply it to your consciences, that it
may be as a nail fastened in a sure place; that hearing and knowing these
things for yourselves, you may hear and know them for your good.

I would here particularly address myself -- first to parents, then to children
-- and in the last place, to those young persons who are grown up to years of
maturity, but not yet fixed in families of their own.

I. Let me address my discourse to those of you who are parents; whether you
have been negligent of the duties I have now been urging, or through grace have
been careful in the discharge of them.

1. To those who have been grossly negligent in this important care.

I have here one advantage not common to every subject; I mean, that the guilty
will immediately know themselves. When we apply ourselves in general to
unconverted sinners, ignorance of the nature of true religion, a neglect of
conversing with your own souls, or the insinuating prejudices of self-love, may
disguise the true state of the case, and teach people to speak peace to
themselves, under the most awful denunciations of wrath and vengeance. But
here, one would imagine, that the recollection of a few moments might be
sufficient to determine the case; because the question relates to past fact,
and that not merely to one particular action, but to a long train and
succession of labors and attempts.

Now let your consciences witness, whether I am guilty of a breach of charity,
when I take it for granted, that there are some among you who have been, and
are, very negligent of the duty I have now been enforcing? You have probably
contented yourselves with teaching your children to read, and setting them to
learn, like parrots, a prayer, and, perhaps too, a catechism and a creed. But I
appeal to your consciences. Have you from the very day of their birth to this
time, ever spent one hour in seriously instructing them in the knowledge of
GOD, and endeavoring to form them to his fear and service; in setting before
them the misery of their natural condition, and urging them to apply to CHRIST
for life and salvation; in representing the solemnities of death, and judgment,
and the eternal world, and urging an immediate and diligent preparation for
them? Where is the time, where the place, that can witness, that you have been
pouring out your souls before GOD on their account, and wrestling with him for
their lives, as knowing they must perish for ever, without the righteousness of
his SON, and the grace of his SPIRIT? Where, or when, have you thus prayed with
them, or for them? What sermon have you heard, what scripture have you read,
with this thought, "This will I carry to my children, and communicate to them
as the food of their souls?" I fear there are several of you who have been so
far from doing it, that you have hardly ever seriously thought of it as a thing
to be done.

And I would ask, Why have you not thought of it, and why have you not done it?
Are these creatures that you have produced like the other animals of your
houses or your field, mere animated systems of flesh and blood, made to take a
turn in life for a few days and months, and then to sink into everlasting
forgetfulness? Or are ^^^y rational and immortal creatures, that must exist for
ever in heaven, or in hell? This is not a matter of doubt with you; and yet you
behave, as if the very contrary to what you believe were evident, certain
truth. In short, it is the most barbarous part you act, and more like that of
an enemy than a parent.

It is not that you are insensible of the workings of parental tenderness. No,
far from that: it may perhaps sometimes rise to a weak and criminal dotage: yet
I repeat it again, you are acting an hostile and barbarous part. You are
greatly solicitous for their temporal happiness. For this you labor and watch;
for this you deny yourselves many an enjoyment, and subject yourselves to many
an uneasy circumstance: But, alas! Sirs, where is the real friendship of all
this, while the precious soul is neglected? Your children are born with a
corrupted nature, perverted by sinful examples, ignorant of GOD, in a state of
growing enmity to him, and, in consequence of all, exposed to his wrath and
curse, and in the way to everlasting ruin. In the mean time it is your great
care, that they may pass through this precarious, momentary life, in ease and
pleasure, perhaps in abundance and grandeur; that is, in such circumstances, as
will probably lull them into a forgetfulness of their danger, until there be no
more hope. How cruel a kindness!

It brings to my mind the account which an ancient writer gives of the old
Carthagenians, which I can never recollect without great emotion. He is
speaking of that diabolical custom which so long prevailed among them, of
offering their children to a detestable idol, which was formed in such a manner
that an infant put into his hands, which were stretched out to receive it,
would immediately fall into a gulf of fire. He adds a circumstance, which one
cannot mention without horror; that the mothers, who with their own hands
presented the little innocents, thought it an unfortunate omen that the victim
should be offered weeping; and therefore used a great many fond artifices to
divert it, that soothed by the kisses and caresses of a parent, it might smile
in the dreadful moment in which it was to be given up to the idol. Pardon me,
my friends; such is your parental care and love; such your concern for the
present ease and prosperity of your children, while their souls are neglected:
A fond solicitude, that they may pass smiling into the hands of the destroyer!

You know, with what just severity GOD reckoned with the Israelites for their
abominable wickedness, in taking his sons and his daughters (for so he calls
the children of his professing people) and sacrificing them to be devoured: And
can you suppose, he will take no notice of the unnatural neglect of yours? Not
to endeavor to save, is to destroy; and is it a little guilt, when an immortal
soul is in question? You probably remember those terrible words in Ezekiel;
(may they be deeply inscribed on the hearts of all whom they concern!) Son of
man, I have made thee a watchman to the house of Israel, therefore hear thou
the word from my mouth, and give them warning from me? and if thou speak not
to warn the wicked from his wicked way, to save his life, the same wicked man
shall die in his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thine hand. If ever
you read this passage with attention, you must own it is exceedingly awful, and
must be ready to say, "The LORD be merciful to ministers! they have a solemn
account to give." Indeed they have; and we thank you, if you ever bestow a
compassionate thought and prayer upon us. But permit me to remind you, and
though it be our case, it is not our's alone; you have likewise your share in
it. Your children are much more immediately committed to your care, than you
and they are committed to our's; and, by a parity of reason, if they perish in
their iniquities, while you neglect to give them warning, their blood will be
required at your hand.

And when GOD comes to make inquisition for that blood, how will you be able to
endure it? That awful day will open upon on you, and the tribunal of GOD, in
all its terrors, will stand unveiled before you. Give me leave to direct your
eyes to it in this distant prospect, while there is yet room to mitigate those
terrors. If you go on in this cruel negligence of the souls of your children,
how will you dare to meet them at that judgment seat? How will you be able to
answer the great FATHER of spirits, when expostulating with you on account of
his offspring, as well as yours, who have been betrayed and ruined by your
neglect? "Inhumane creatures," (may HE justly say) "to whom should I have
committed the care of them, rather than to you? Did they not, by my
appointment, derive their being from you? Did I not implant in your hearts the
natural affections of parents toward them? And to increase the obligation, did
they not pass through the tender scenes of infancy and childhood in your arms,
and under your eye? If you had no compassion for their perishing souls, if you
would exert no efforts for their deliverance and salvation. from whom could
those compassions, those efforts have been expected? But wherein did they
appear? Behold the book of my remembrance, the records of thy life, thrown open
before thee: Where is the memorial of one hour spent in holy instruction, or in
fervent prayer with them, or for them? Can I approve, can I acquit you on such
a review? Or shall I not rather visit for these things, and shall not my soul
be avenged for such a conduct as this?"

And your children -- will they be silent on the occasion? Did Adam, in the
distress and amazement of his soul, when in the presence of his Judge, accuse
Eve his wife, so lately taken from his side, and committed to his protection,
and still, no doubt, appearing lovely in the midst of sorrow? and will your
children in that terrible day spare you? You may rather expect, they will
labor to the utmost to aggravate a crime which costs them so dear, that so
they may, if possible, alleviate their own guilt, or if not, indulge their
revenge. "O GOD," (may they perhaps then cry out in the most piercing accents
of indignation and despair) "thou art righteous in the sentence thou passest
upon us, and we justly die for our own iniquity. We have destroyed ourselves.
But will thou not remember, that our ruin is in part chargeable here? Had these
our parents been faithful to thee, and to us, it had perhaps been prevented.
Had our infancy been formed by religious instruction, we might not have grown
up to wickedness; we might not, in the advance of life, have despised thy word,
and trampled on thy son; but might this day have been owned by thee as thy
children, and have risen to that inheritance of light and glory, which we now
behold at this unapproachable distance. Oh! cursed be the father who begat us;
cursed the wombs that bare us; cursed the paps that gave us suck! Remember us,
O LORD, whilst thou art judging them; and let us have this one wretched
comfort, in the midst of all our agonies, that it is not with impunity that
they have betrayed our souls!"

This is indeed shocking and diabolical language; and for that very reason, it
is so much the more probable on so dreadful an occasion. And give me leave to
ask you one question, my friends, and I will conclude the head. If your
children were thus crying out against you in the bitterness of their souls,
could you attempt to silence them, by reminding them of the care which you took
of temporal affairs, or of the riches and grandeur in which you left them on
earth? Nay, could you have the heart so much as to mention such a trifle? And
if you could not, then, in the name of GOD, Sirs, how do you satisfy yourselves
to confine all your thoughts and labors to that, which, by your own
confession, will neither secure your children from everlasting destruction, nor
give them one moment's relief in the review, when they are falling into it?

I will make no apology for the plainness, and earnestness, which I have used.
Eternal interests are at stake, and the whole tenor of scripture supports me in
what I say. I had rather you should be alarmed with hearing these things from
me now, than tormented with hearing them in another manner from your children,
and from GOD at last. If you please to take proper measures for preventing the
danger, I have told you the way at large: If you do not, I hope I may say, "I
am in this respect clear from your blood, and the blood of yours, who may
perish by your means: Look you to it."

But it is high time that I proceed in my address, and apply myself,

2. To those parents, who have been careful to discharge the duty, we have so
copiously described and enforced.

I cannot suppose, that any of us would pretend to maintain, that in this, or
any other branch of duty, we have acted up to the utmost extent and perfection
of our rule. I hope an humble sense of the deficiencies of all the best of our
services, is frequently leading us to the believing views of a better
righteousness than our own, in which alone we can dare to appear before a holy
GOD, and answer the demands of his perfect law. Nevertheless, it is surely
allowable to rejoice in the testimony of our conscience, with regard to the
regularity of our own behavior, so far as it is conformable to reason and
scripture; and it is an important duty, thankfully to own those influences of
sanctifying and strengthening grace, by which we are what we are.

It is with great pleasure I recollect the reason I have to believe, that many
of you, christians, who hear me this day, are in the main, conscientiously
practicing these duties; and that some of you were doing it long before I was
capable of exhorting and directing you. Acknowledge the singular goodness of
GOD, by which you have been excited to them, and furnished for them.

More especially have you reason to adore it, if through grace you can say,
with regard to the present success, what you may certainly say, as to the
future recompense. that your labor in the LORD is not in vain. Let GOD have
the glory of his own work. I persuade myself, you understand the gospel too
well, to ascribe it to the prudence of your own conduct, to the strength of
your reasoning, or to the warmth and tenderness of your address. Whatever of
these advantages you have possessed, were derived from GOD; and your very care
for your offspring is, (as the apostle expresses it in a like case) the earnest
care which GOD has put into your hearts. But it was not this care, or these
advantages alone, that produced so happy an effect. In vain had your doctrine
from day to day dropped as the rain, and distilled as the dew, in the most
gentle and insinuating manner; in vain had the precious seed of the word been
sown with unwearied diligence, and watered with tears too; had not GOD
commanded the operations of his blessed spirit to come down, as a more
efficacions rain, as more fruitful showers to water their hearts. Oh! be not
insensible of the favor. Your own souls might to this very day, have been a
barren wilderness, a land of drought, an habitation of devils; and behold, not
only they, but your families too, are like a field, like a garden, which the
LORD has blessed. GOD might have cut you off many years ago, for your neglect
of his covenant, or your breaches of it; and behold, he is establishing it, not
only with you, but your seed after you, for an everlasting covenant. Methinks
your hearts should overflow with gratitude and holy joy, while you dwell on
such reflections as these. This should ^dd a relish to all the pleasure you
find in conversing with your children: This should quicken you to a farther
diligence in cultivating those graces, which you have the satisfaction to see
already implanted: This should reconcile you to all the afflictions, with which
Providence may exercise, either you or them: This should support you in the
view of a separation, either by your own death, or theirs; since you have so
comfortable a hope, that if they are removed they will go to a heavenly Father,
and that if they are left behind you, they will be safe and happy under his
care, until you meet in a better world, where you will be for ever to each
other a mutual glory and joy.

But I cannot congratulate you on this occasion, without the danger of adding
affliction to the afflicted parents, whose circumstances, alas! are far
different from yours. I fear, my friends, that there are some among you, who
look round you, and look forwards, with far different prospects; some who are,
with bleeding hearts, borrowing the complaint, which we who are ministers of
the gospel, so frequently breathe forth, We have labored in vain, and spent
our strength for naught." "Oh!" (may you perhaps add) "that it were only in
vain! those dear children, which we early devoted to GOD in baptism, which we
endeavored to educate in the knowledge and fear of the LORD, the children of
our hopes, the children of our prayers, are unfruitful unto all our
cultivation, or, it may be, visibly turned aside from the good ways in which
they were trained up; as if they had known them only to reject and affront
them: So that, we have reason to fear, that all we have done, as it is an
aggravation of their guilt, will be a proportional aggravation of their ruin."

It is indeed a very pitiable case. We owe you our compassions, and we owe you
our prayers; but permit us to intermix our consolations and our admonitions.
You have at least delivered your own souls; and as you participate in the
sorrows of faithful ministers, you may share in their comforts too; and say
with them, though the objects of our compassionate care be not gathered, yet
shall we be glorified, for our work is with the LORD, and our reward with our
GOD. Go on therefore in the midst of all your discouragements, and, in this
respect, be not weary in well-doing. Take heed of such a despair, as would cut
the sinews of future endeavors. If your child were laboring under any bodily
distemper, you would be very unwilling that the physicians should quite give
him over, and try no farther medicines: You would follow them, and say, "can
nothing more be done? Is there not the least glimmering of hope?" Alas! my
friends, a child given up by a pious parent, is, to a believing eye, a much
more melancholy sight, than a parent given over by the physicians. Excuse me
then, if I follow you with the question, "Can nothing more be done? Is there
not the least glimmering of hope?" Who told you, that the sentence of
condemnation is sealed, while you are sure it is not executed. Is the danger
extreme? Let your efforts be so much the more zealous, your admonitions so much
the more frequent and serious, your prayers so much the more earnest and
importunate. And on the whole (to allude to the words of David, on a much lower
occasion) Who can tell whether GOD will be gracious to you, that the child may
live? And the sad apprehensions which you now entertain, may only serve to
increase the joy with which you shall then say, This my son was dead, and is
alive again, he was lost and is found.

II. I would address myself to children: To you, the dear lambs of the flock,
whom I look upon as no contemptible part of my charge. I have been speaking for
you a great while, and now give me leave to speak to you; and pray do you
endeavor, for a few minutes, to mind every word that I say.

You see, it is your parents' duty to bring you up for GOD. The great GOD of
heaven and earth has been pleased to give his express command, that you should
be trained up in the way in which you should go, even in the nurture and
admonition of the LORD. It is the wonderful goodness of GOD to give such a
charge; and methinks you should be affected with it, and should be inquiring
what you should do in return.

Now there are three things, which I would ask of every one of you, in return
for this gracious notice which the great GOD has taken of you children; and I
am sure, if you love your own souls, you will not deny me any of them. -- Be
willing to learn the things of GOD; pray for them who teach you; and see to it,
you do not learn them in vain. Listen diligently, that you may understand and
remember each of these.

1. Be willing to learn the things of GOD.

The things of GOD are very delightful, and they are very useful: and, whatever
you may think of it, your life depends on your acquaintance with them, So
CHRIST, himself says, this is life eternal, that they may know thee the only
true GOD, and JESUS CHRIST, whom thou have sent (John xvii. 3.) Therefore, you
children, should not think much of the labor of learning these things. Oh! far
from that, you should be every day upon your knees, begging GOD that you may be
taught to know him, and to know CHRIST. GOD has done a great deal more for you,
than he has for many others. You might have been born in a place, where you
never would have seen a Bible in all your lives; where you would never have
heard the name of CHRIST, where you might never have been instructed in the
nature of duty and sin, nor have been told of the world beyond the grave; and
so would probably have fallen into Hell, before you had known there was such a
place. And the great GOD has ordered matters so, that you are born under the
light of the gospel, and have such plain and such excellent instructions, that
you may know more of divine things in your infancy, than the wise men among the
heathen did, when they were old and grey-headed, and had spent all their lives
in study. And will you be so ungrateful, as not to be willing to learn, when
such provision is made for your instruction? GOD forbid! Shall GOD give you his
word, and your parents, and ministers employ their time, and their pains, to
teach you the meaning of it, and will you refuse to attend to it? That were
foolish, and wicked indeed. I hope much better things of you. That is my first
advice: Be willing to learn. I add,

2. Pray for those who are to teach you.

I would hope, you little creatures, dare not live without prayer. I hope GOD,
who sees in secret, sees many of you o^ your knees every morning and eve^^
^^^^ing, asking a blessing from him as your heavenly Father. Now let me entreat
you, that at such times you would pray for those who instruct you in divine
things; pray that GOD would bless them for it, and pray that he would help them
in it. In praying thus for us, you do indeed pray for yourselves. There is a
gracious promise to the people of GOD: And they shall be all taught of GOD:
(John vi. 45.) Pray, that it may be fulfilled. Pray, that GOD would teach us to
teach you; else we shall attempt it to a very little purpose. Pray for your
parents, and pray for your ministers.

Pray for your parents: That GOD would help them to instruct you in such a
manner as they have now been directed: That they may do it plainly, so that you
may be able to understand what they say; and seriously, that you may be brought
to an holy awe of GOD; and tenderly, that you may be engaged to love GOD and
his word, and CHRIST and his ways; and pray, that your parents may be stirred
up to do it frequently, to give you line upon line, and precept upon precept,
that you may be put in mind of what you are so ready to forget.

And let me desire you, my dear charge, when you pray for your parents, to pray
for your ministers too. I declare it again in the most public manner, it is my
earnest desire that children would pray for me. And I verily believe, every
faithful minister of CHRIST would join with me in such a request. We do not, we
dare not, despise the prayer of one of these little ones. Far from that, I am
persuaded it would greatly revive and encourage us, and we should hope GOD had
some singular mercy in store for us, and his people, if we were sure the
children of the congregation were every day, praying for a blessing on our
labors.

3. Take heed that you do not learn in vain.

The great truths which you are taught from the word of GOD, are not intended
merely to fill your heads with notions, but to make your hearts and lives more
holy. You know the way to your father's house every step of it, but that would
never carry you home, if you would not go in it. No more will it signify to
know the way to heaven, unless we walk in it. If you know these things, says
the Lord JESUS CHRIST himself, happy are ye if ye do them. And I may add, that
if ye do them not, it had been happier for you, if you had never known them.
Dear children, consider it; it is but a little while, and you must die: And
when those active bodies of yours are become cold, mouldering clay, the great
GOD of heaven and earth will call your souls to his judgment seat. As sure as
you are now in this house, you will shortly, very shortly, be standing before
his awful throne. Then he will examine, to what purpose you have heard so many
religious instructions, so many good lessons. Then he will examine, whether you
have feared, loved and served him, and received the Lord JESUS into your
hearts, as your Savior and your King; whether you have chosen sin or holiness
for your way, earth or heaven for your portion. And if it be found, that you
have lived without thought, and without prayer, without any regard to the eye
of GOD always upon you, and the word of GOD always before you, it will be a
most lamentable case. You will have reason to wish, you had never heard of
these things at all; for he has said, The servant that knew his LORD'S will,
and did it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. Even while I am speaking to
you, death is coming on; perhaps his scythe may cut you down, while you are but
coming up as flowers. I speak to you thus plainly and earnestly, because I do
not know but you may be in eternity before another LORD'S day. Oh! pray
earnestly, that GOD would give you his grace to fit you for glory; and that all
of you may be so blessed, that you may be made wise to salvation by it. The
LORD grant that it may!

And I have one thing to tell you for your encouragement, and then I have done
with you for this time. How young soever you are, and how broken soever your
prayers may be, the great and glorious LORD of angels and men, will be willing
to hear what you say. You may be sure to be welcome to the throne of grace. The
Lord JESUS CHRIST, when he was upon earth, was very angry with those who would
have hindered little children from coming to him: He said, Suffer little
children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of
GOD. And CHRIST is as compassionate now, as ever he was. Go to him as you may
humbly hope, he will, as it were, take you up in his arms and bless you. He has
said it, and I hope you will never forget it; I love them that love me, and
they that seek me early shall find me. Oh! that I were but as sure, that every
child in this assembly would go and ask a blessing from CHRIST, as I am that
our dear LORD is willing to bestow it! But to draw to a conclusion,

III. I shall address myself to those young persons who are grown up to years
of maturity, under the advantages of a religious education, and are not yet
fixed in families of their own.

I hope, that many of you have been sensible of the value of those
opportunities you have enjoyed, and by divine grace have been enabled to
improve them well; yet I must add, that I fear, there are others among you, who
have unhappily neglected and abused them. I must apply myself distinctly to
each of you.

1. To those young persons, who have neglected and abused the advantages of a
religious education.

I confess, there are hardly any to whom I speak with so little pleasure,
because I have seldom less reason to hope I shall succeed. What shall I say to
you? What can I say, that you have not often heard, and often despised? One is
almost tempted, in such a circumstance, to turn reasonings and expostulations
into upbraidings; and even to adopt those too passionate words of Moses, "Hear
now, ye rebels, you that have grown up in the knowledge, and yet the contempt
of divine things; you that have disappointed the hopes, and slighted the
admonitions of your pious parents, and so have broken their spirits, and, it
may be, their hearts too, and have brought down their hoary hairs with sorrow
to the grave. One way or another you have perhaps silenced them. But is it a
small thing to you, that you have thus wearied men, and will you attempt to
weary your GOD also? Can you dare to hope, that you shall at last carry those
proud thoughtless heads triumphant over all the terrors of his word?" You
imagine it a very happy circumstance, that you have got loose ^^^m those
mortifying lessons, and uneasy restraints, you were once under. But really,
when one seriously considers whither these liberties lead you, and where they
will probably end, a just resentment of your ingratitude is almost disarmed,
and indignation is converted into pity.

Alas! Sinners, the way of all transgressors is hard; but yours is peculiarly
so. You, to whom I am now addressing, are in the morning of your days, and it
is not to be supposed, that the impressions of a good education are yet
entirely effaced. What future years may do, I know not; but hitherto I persuade
myself, you have frequently your reflections, and your convictions; convictions
which have force enough to torment you, though not to reform you; to plant
thorns in the paths of sin, though not to reduce you to those of duty. But if
you feel nothing of this remorse and anxiety, such a dead calm is then more
dreadful than the fiercest storm and tumult of thought: A sad indication, that
your course in wickedness has been exceeding swift; indeed so swift, that it is
probable it may not be long. Oh that it might immediately be stopped by divine
grace, rather than by the vengeance you have so much reason to fear!

At least be engaged to pause in it for a few moments, and let reason and
conscience be permitted to speak. How is it that you make yourselves, I will
not say entirely, but tolerably easy? Is it by the disbelief of christianity?
Do you secretly suspect, that the gospel is but a cunningly-devised fable? Yet
even that supicion is not enough. Let me rather ask, "Are you so confident it
is so, that you will venture to stake even the life of your souls upon its
falsehood?" If you were come to such a confidence, yet it is amazing to me, how,
even on the principles of natural religion alone, persons in your circumstances
can make themselves easy. Can any of the libertines of the present age, who
believe a GOD, imagine that he is altogether such an one as themselves? Can
they flatter themselves so far as to hope, that they, in the ways of
negligence, profaneness and debauchery, are like to meet with a more favorable
treatment from him, than those pious parents whose principles they deride? or
that this loose and irregular course will end better, than that life of prayer
and self-denial, of faith and love, of spirituality and heavenly-mindedness,
which they discerned in them? Few are so abandoned, even of common sense, as to
think this!

But these are more distant concerns. I bless GOD, this kind of infidelity is
not in fashion here. You assent to the gospel as true, and therefore must know,
that GOD, who observes and records your conduct now, will bring you into
judgment for it another day. And if you go on thus, how will you stand in that
judgment? What will you plead? On what will you repose the confidence of your
souls, that will not prove a broken reed, which will go up into your hand, and
pierce you deep, in proportion to the stress you lay upon it? While you behave
like a generation of vipers, think not to say within yourselves, We have
Abraham for our father. Think not to plead a relation to the religious parents,
whose GOD and whose ways you have forsaken. Think not to plead an early
dedication to him in the baptismal covenant, which you have broken, despised,
and in fact renounced. Think not to plead that external profession, which you
have so shamefully contradicted, and even by wearing it, dishonored. You will
see the weakness of such pleas as these, and will not dare to trifle with that
awful tribunal, so far as to mention them there. And when you are yourselves
thus silent and confounded, who will appear as an advocate in your favor? Your
parents were often presenting their supplications and intercessions for you
before the throne of grace, but there will be no room to present them before
the throne of justice: Nor will they have any inclination to do it. All the
springs of natural fondness will be dried up; they will no longer regard you as
their children, when they see you in the accursed number of the enemies of
their GOD.

And when you are thus disowned by your parents, and disowned by GOD, whither
will you cause your shame and your terror to go? You, who have had so many
privileges, and so many opportunities, perhaps I may add, so many fond
presumptuous hopes too, how will you bear to see multitudes coming from carnal
and profane families, to share with your parents in the inheritance of glory,
from which you are excluded? You, who were the children of the kingdom; whose
remorse therefore must be the more cutting: whose condemnation therefore must
be the more weighty! Observe in how strong and lively a view, our LORD has
represented this awful thought, in words, which, though immediately addressed
to the unbelieving Jews, are remarkably applicable to you: There shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob
(your pious ancestors) in the kingdom of GOD, and you yourselves thrust out:
And many shall come from the North, and the South, and the East, and the West,
and shall sit down with them in the kingdom of GOD; but the children of the
kingdom shall be cast out into utter darkness.

But through the divine forbearance you are not yet shut out. There is still
hope even for you, if you will now return to the GOD of your fathers, from
whom, by these aggravated transgressions, you have so deeply revolted. Let me
once more then tenderly entreat you, and solemnly charge you, by the
consolation of the living, and by the memory of the pious dead, by your present
comforts, by your future hopes, by the nearly approaching solemnities of death
and judgment, by the mercies of GOD, and by the blood of a Redeemer, that you
consider and show yourselves men; that you set yourselves, as it were,
attentively to read over the characters inscribed on your memories and
understandings in the course of a religious education; that you hearken to the
voice of conscience repeating those admonitions, and to the voice of the
blessed GOD, as speaking in his word to confirm them; and finally, that you
apply to him in a most importunate manner, for those victorious influences of
his spirit, which are able to mollify and to transform these hearts of stone,
and to raise even you from so low a depth of degeneracy and danger, to the
character and happiness of the genuine children of Abraham. GOD forbid, that I
should sin against your souls, and my own, in ceasing to pray that it may be
so! And now,

2. I shall conclude all with an address to those young persons who have been,
through grace, engaged to a becoming improvement of the religious education
they have enjoyed.

I have the pleasure of being well assured, that there are many such among you:
Many who are now the joy of ministers and parents, and the hope of the church
for succeeding years. Let me entreat you, my dear brethren and friends, that
you daily acknowledge the divine goodness, in favoring you with such
advantages; and, what is still more valuable, in giving you a heart to prize
and improve them.

Think how different your circumstances might have been. Providence might have
cast your lot in some distant age or country, where the true GOD had been
unknown, where your early steps had been guided to the groves and temples of
detestable idols, and you might possibly have been taught to consecrate lust or
murder by the name of devotion. Or you might have been educated in popish
darkness, where the scripture would have been to you as a sealed book, and you
would have seen christianity polluted with idolatrous rites, on some accounts
more inexcusable than those of the heathen, and adulterated with the most
absurd and pernicious errors. There the mistaken piety of your parents might
have proved a dangerous snare, whilst it had infused a blind, and perhaps a
cruel zeal, and a proud, furious opposition to all the methods of better
information.

Nay, even here, in a protestant country, is it not too evident, there are many
families in which, had you been born and educated, you had sat as in darkness
and the shadow of death, though in the land of light and the valley of vision?
Your infant-tongue had been formed to the language of hell, and exercised in
curses and oaths, rather than in prayer. You had early been taught to deride
every appearance of serious godliness; and all the irregular propensities of
nature had been strengthened by examples of wickedness, which might have been
sufficient to corrupt innocence itself. When you consider the wide difference
between these circumstances and your own, surely whatever your portion of
worldly possessions may be, you have reason to lift up your heads to heaven
with wonder and gratitude, and to say, The lines are fallen to us in pleasant
places, yea, we have a goodly heritage.

Nor is this all: There are many around you, who have shared in such advantages
as these, and have sinfully abused them, to the dishonor of GOD, to the grief
of their parents, and to their own danger, and perhaps their ruin. And why are
not you in that wretched number, or who makes thee to differ from them? Why
are not your hearts barred against the entrance of a Redeemer, but because the
LORD has opened them? Why were not all the good instructions which have been
given to you, like seed sown upon a rock: but because GOD gave the increase.
Adore the riches of this distinguishing grace.

And let me earnestly exhort you, that you be careful still farther to improve
it. Give me leave to say, that these fair openings of early seriousness, do
naturally raise a very high expectation of eminent advances in religion. Let it
be your humble and diligent care, that these expectations be answered: That
your goodness may not be like the morning cloud, or the early dew, which soon
goes away; but rather like the dawning light, which shines brighter and
brighter until the perfect day.

Whilst Providence continues these holy parents, to whom you have been so
highly indebted, let it be your constant care, by all the most cheerful returns
of duty and gratitude, to express your regard to them* and your sense of so
great an obligation. And I will add, let it be your care, to hand down to
future ages those important advantages you have received from them.

One generation passes away, and another generation comes. It is highly
probable, that in a few years, numbers of you will be conducted into new
relations; and we please ourselves with the hope, that you will carry religion
and happiness into rising families. Let not those hopes be disappointed. When
GOD fixes you in houses of your own, let it be your first concern to erect
there such domestic altars, as those at which you have worshipped with such
holy pleasure, and sensible tokens of divine acceptance. Let the sacred
treasure of divine knowledge which has been deposited with you, be faithfully
delivered down to your descendants; that they, in their turn, may arise with
the same pious zeal, to transmit it to another generation, that shall be born
of them.

And may divine grace, that inexhaustible spring of the most valuable
blessings, sweetly flow on to add efficacy to all, that real vital religion may
be the glory and joy of every succeeding age; until this earth (which is but a
place of education for the children of GOD, during their minority) shall pass
away to make room for a far nobler scene and state of existence; where pious
parents and their religious offspring shall for ever enjoy the most delightful
society, inhabiting the palace of our heavenly Father, and surrounding the
throne of our glorified Redeemer! AMEN.

FINIS.
EXTRACTS from an Address to the PUBLIC, March, 1792.
"IN this country where opinions are every where freely circulated upon all
subjects, and where there is a great diversity of sentiments respecting
religion; it is of the utmost consequence to the cause of truth, to promote a
taste for reading the works of judicious and practical writers upon the
important doctrines of the gospel.

"Many books, remarkable for their evangelical principles, and experimental
method of treating religious subjects, have been published by the learned and
pious reformers of their church, and their successors in the ministry, which,
although some of them are obsolete in the language, and not very fashionable in
the arrangement of the several parts, contain those peculiar doctrines of
grace, those scriptural truths, which have been frequently blessed with a
divine influence.

"We are happy to find, that the demand for these seems to increase of late, in
various and distant parts of this country; and that, by the laudable exertions
of some of the printers in America, who have published a great variety of
practical works, and several editions of the Bible, this demand is likely to be
supplied with convenience to the people, and on as reasonable terms as they can
be imported from Europe. We, therefore, take the liberty to recommend the
following books, published in this country, to the esteem and perusal of our
countrymen, both on patriotic and religious principles; and hope they will
prove of eminent usefulness to the pious of all denominations, who may be able
to procure them."

Beattie's Evidences of Religion. Boston's Fourfold State, Doddridge's Rise and
Progress. -- 's Sermons on Religious Education. Dickinson's Familiar Letters.
Davies's Sermons, Edwards on Redemption. -- on the Freedom of the Will. -- on
Original Sin. -- on the Religious Affections. Gib's Contemplations on the
Covenants. Guthrie's Trial of a saving Interest in Christ. Hervey's
Meditations. Newton's (Rector of St. Mary, London) works. Oliphant's
Sacramental Catechism. Shorter Catechism explained by Fisher and Erskine. The
Christian Remembrancer. The Christian Parent. Willison on the Sabbath. --
Afflicted Man's Companion. -- Explanation of the Catechism. We would further
beg leave to recommend a few of the practical writers, whose works have not yet
been re-published here: Such as, Baxter's Saint's Rest: Abridged by Fawcet.
Boston on the Covenant. Bennet's Christian Oratory. Bellamy's True Religion
delineated. Brown's Metaphors. Durham's Unsearchable Riches of Christ.
Doddridge's ten Sermons on Regeneration. Flavel's Works. Hervey's Dialogues.
Halyburton's Memoirs. -- great concern. Jenk's Submission to the Righteousness
of God. M'Laurin's Sermons. M'Ewen on the Types. Owen on Redemption. -- on the
Glory of Christ. -- on Communion. -- on Prayer. -- on Indwelling Sin. -- on
Spiritual Mindedness. Reynold's on Reconciliation. Scougal's Life of God in the
Soul of Man. Willison's Sacramental Advices and Meditations. Witherspoon's
Sermons and practical Essays.
JOHN EWING, D. D. Pastor of the 1st Presbyterian Church Philadelphia; and
Provost of the University. JAMES SPROAT, D. D. Collegiate Minister of the 2nd
Presbyterian Church, Philadelphia. ROBERT SMITH, D. D. Minister of the Gospel,
Piquea. ASHBEL GREEN, D. D. Collegiate Minister of the 2nd Presbyterian Church,
Philadelphia. JOHN B. SMITH, A. M. Minister of the 3d Presbyterian Church,
Philadelphia.



