Mr. GREENE'S FAREWELL DISCOURSE, DELIVERED AT MEDWAY MARCH 17th, 1793.

A FAREWELL DISCOURSE TO THE FIRST CHURCH AND SOCIETY IN MEDWAY. DELIVERED
MARCH 17th, 1793. BY BENJAMIN GREEN, A. M. LATE PASTOR OF SAID CHURCH.
PUBLISHED AT THE DESIRE OF MANY OF THE HEARERS.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY THOMAS AND JOHN FLEET.

To SUBSCRIBERS,
AS the Author is sensible that the feelings of the moment, rather than any
merit in the performance, urged you to request a copy of the following
Discourses for the press; so he can truly say, that to gratify your wishes, is
the most that he proposes to himself, in consenting to have them published. --
He wrote them in great haste, without the least expectation that they ever
would be enquired after; but, at your desire, he gives them to the world; from
which he has yet something to hope, but nothing to apprehend. --

A FAREWELL DISCOURSE.
WITH a heart deeply impressed, with a serious belief in the divine originality
of the christian dispensation: Awed, as in the presence of the dread Sovereign
of the universe: to whose penetrating eye the secrets of all hearts are
disclosed: And sensibly affected, by the solemnity of the present occasion: I
shall address you, my christian friends, in the undaunted, though truly
pathetic language of the great Apostle Paul to the Ephesians.

But none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto myself, so
that I might finish my course with joy, and the ministry which I have received
of the Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of the grace of God.

And now, behold, I know that ye all, among whom I have gone preaching the
kingdom of God, shall see my face no more.

Wherefore I take you to record this day, that I am pure from the blood of all
men.

For I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God.

And now, brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which
is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which
are sanctified.

ACTS XXth chap. 24,25,26,27th, and 32d verses. IF any considerations were
sufficient to control the angry passions and blind prejudices of mankind; to
subdue the enmity of the human heart; to calm the raging tumults of the
troubled breast; and cause the wrath of man to give place to the tender
feelings, and kind affections of friendship and brotherly love: surely they
must be those, which are suggested by that pure and holy religion, which
originated in the infinite wisdom, and boundless goodness of the Almighty. --
Which was published to a fallen world, by Jehovah's firstborn; recommended to
human observation in his own perfect example: Which is still urged upon mankind
by the life and conversation of every faithful disclple of Jesus Christ; And by
the powerful, though silent pleadings of the holy Spirit; And which has for its
only objects, the glory of the ever blessed God, and the felicity of his
intelligent offspring.

It is the design of christianity, to make men benevolent and good here; that
they may be happy and glorious hereafter. To accomplish this all-gracious
design, the Son of God, for a time, forsook his Father's bosom; and descended
from his throne, in the highest heavens, to the humiliating situation of a man
despised upon earth. To every indignity, that the blind malice of an abandoned
world could invent, he willingly submitted. Knowing that to teach and instruct
mankind by his example and doctrines; and by his sufferings and death to redeem
and save them; were the great and important purposes to be gained by his
mission; he patiently received the full vials of divine wrath, which were
prepared for him.

With an uniform submission to his Father's will, and with a single aim to the
glory of the Godhead, in the salvation of sinners; he steadily pursued the
thorny path, which led through every species of suffering and abuse, from his
manger to his cross. "He was despised and rejected of men, he was indeed, a man
of sorrow and acquainted with grief." Yet mark his deportment! "He was
oppressed and he was afflicted; yet he opened not his mouth. He was brought as
a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he
opened not his mouth. When he was reviled, he reviled not again. When he
suffered he threatened not; but committed himself to him that judges
righteously." And when nailed to the accursed tree; amidst the insults of an
unfeeling multitude; as he bowed his sacred head in death, his spotless soul
ascended to the throne of grace, with this servent supplication, for those who
spilt his blood. Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.

Such, my friends, was the Master whom the Apostle was miraculously called to
serve. And such were the examples in patience and resignation, which were
proposed for his imitation. (...) ministry which he had received of the (...)
was to testify the gospel of the grace (...).

This certainly is a sacred, and a most important trust. Sufficient to exercise
the distinguished abilities, and to justify the zeal of this truly great man,
and faithful disciple of Christ.

Next to his divine Master, perhaps no individual has ever done more, to
promote the dignity and happiness of human nature, than the Apostle Paul. And
excepting Christ, perhaps no one ever met with more ungrateful returns for all
his services and his sufferings than he did. His history, commencing with his
conversion to christianity, is filled with a series of surprising exertions in
the cause of Christ; And with affecting representations of the cruel and
barbarous treatment he suffered from those, whose eternal interest he
endeavored to promote, at the expense of every worldly consideration. He does
himself the justice to say, that he is in nothing a whit behind the chiefest
Apostles. Are they ministers of Christ (said he) I am more: in labors more
abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths often. Of
the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one. Thrice was I beaten with
rods, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day I have
been in the deep: In journeying often, in perils of waters; in perils of
robbers, in perils by mine own countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in perils
in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils
amongst false brethren. In weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, in
hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness.

These were the rewards which an ungrateful world had to bestow upon one of the
brightest ornaments of human nature. Upon one of the most faithful and
deserving of the sons of men. These were the evidences which St. Paul produced
of his Apostleship. Therefore (said he) I take pleasure infirmities, in
reproaches, in distresses, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for
Christ's sake: for when I am weak, then am I strong. And truly (added he) the
signs of an Apostle were wrought among you in all patience.

Our context exhibits a truly interesting and an affecting scene. Let us
accompany, in our imaginations, this holy man, on his journey through various
parts of Asia, dispensing the glad tidings of salvation by a Redeemer; and
saluting the several churches, which he had been instrumental in forming in the
name and under the authority of his divine Master, until he arrived at Ephesus.
There behold him in the midst of his beloved church, whom by the
instrumentality of his preaching, the grace of God had converted to the
christian faith. To whom the felt himself attached by every tender and
endearing sentiment. For whom he had been willing to spend and be spent, that
he might bring them to Christ. And whom he had now assembled, for the purpose
of bidding a final farewell. And of commending them to God and the word of his
grace. See with what confidence he appeals to the consciences of those who best
knew him, whether he had not discharged with fidelity the duties of his
Apostleship. "Ye know (said he) from the first day that I came into Asia, after
what manner I have been with you at all seasons, serving the Lord with all
humility of mind, and with many tears and temptations, which befell me by the
lying in wait of the Jews; and how I kept back nothing that was profitable unto
you, but have showed you, and have taught you publicly, and from house to
house: Testifying both to the Jews and also to the Greeks, repentance toward
God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.

Though as a disciple of the crucified Jesus, no discouragements, however
great, were sufficient to dissuade the Apostle from his determined purpose; or
even to check his resolution to serve the cause in which his whole sold was
engaged. Yet as a man, he could not but feel the injuries he had sustained, and
the ungrateful returns, which had been made by some of his barbarous and
unfeeling countrymen, to his most vigorous exertions to promote the real
happiness of his fellow mortals. And therefore, in this last public address to
his beloved brethren in Christ, he could not help adverting to them And by past
experience taught, he looks forward in expectation of farther trials and
afflictions from the malice and hatred of those, who are opposed to the
interest of the Redeemer's kingdom; and the discipline of that holy religion,
whose mild and benevolent precepts discountenance the angry passions of the
human heart, and requires that hatred and revenge should give place to the
grateful emotions of love, charity, mutual forbearance, forgiveness and
compassion: Of that religion, which is not armed with vengeance, to destory the
humble penitent; But is ever ready to drop the tear of condolence over the
unhappy; and to guide the unwary step into the paths of peace and truth: Of
that religion, which has for its objects, the glory of the Deity, and the
honor, and the happiness of all mankind; Which inspires each individual of its
sincere votaries, with such ardent and diffusive benevolence, as shall draw
forth his soul to the great Father of all, in this devout address.

" Teach me to feel another's woe,
" To hide the faults I see;
" That mercy I to others show,
" That mercy show to me," --
And now (says the Apostle) behold, I go bound in spirit unto Jerusalem, not
knowing the things that shall befall me there. Save that the holy Ghost
witnesses in every city, saying, that bonds and afflictions abide me. But
while the Apostle anticipates the evils and dangers attendant on the discharge
of his ministry, he nobly rises superior to all his apprehensions; And fired
with an heroic ardor, he sets danger, and even death, in open desiance. But
none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto myself, so that
I might finish my course with joy, and the ministry which I have received of
the Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of the grace of God.

O happy Apostle! Who would not wish to emulate thy resolution, who has a clear
prospect of the rewards that will crown fidelity, in the immediate presence,
and under the almighty protection of thy God? Above the reach of envy; and
where the rage of persections can never harm thee! Thou have fulfilled the
ministry, which thou did receive of thy blessed Master: Thou have faithfully
testified to a deluded, misjudging world the gospel of the grace of God. And
thou have finished thy course with joy. For in the near prospect of death;
while on the confines of the eternal world, thou wast able to look back with
satisfaction on thy past life. And rejoicing in thy prospects of future glory,
thou wast able to say, I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my
departure is at hand. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I
have kept the faith: Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous judge shall give me at that day.

But although the Apostle Paul has finished his course, and is now at rest in
the abodes of bliss; yet the cause, which he so successfully plead, is not
brought to a final issue. Nor will it be, until all the wandering tribes of
Adam's race are brought home to their father's house. Until the children of men
shall be persuaded to seek one common interest; and be united in one happy
family. Until the ferocity of the lion shall give place to the Inoffensiveness
of the lamb; and the leopard shall lie down with the kid. When the envy of
Ephraim shall depart, and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off. When
Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim. When the earth
shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea; and
when there shall be nothing to hurt or destroy in all his holy mountain. An
consummation this, devoutly to be wished.

In the mean time, the King of Zion continues to send his Ambassadors to the
children of men; and the religion of the Redeemer, has this day an advocate in
every honest heart.

The faithful ministers of the gospel, are the successors of St. Paul in the
serviee of the same Master. Like him they must expect to encounter innumerable
difficulties; and like him, they must resolve, relying on divine grace, to
surmount them all. And, in opposition to the passions and the prejudices of
ungodly men, they must determine faithfully to discharge the duties of their
important, and very difficult station.

But alas! how few of those who take upon them the sacred office of the
ministry, can affirm with the confidence of the Apostle, that they have not in
any thing been deficient? Ministers are but men: subject to like passions with
their fellow mortals: and exposed to all the frailties and infirmities of human
nature. Perfection is not attainable by them; nor ought it to be expected from
them. It is true, however, that the sacred office which they sustain, places
them in an elevated point of view. They are therefore, under peculiar
obligations to use the utmost circumspection in their conversation and
deportment; and to cause their light so to shine before men, that others,
seeing their good works, may a glorify their heavenly Father. Those who are
constituted sacred guides to a benighted world, should be careful to have those
rays of divine wisdom and knowledge, which have been communicated to them, from
the father of lights, dissuse their benign influence, on all around them. The
ministry which they have received of the Lord, should always hold the first
place in their thoughts; and whatever discouragements may avait them, in the
execution of their important trust, they ought never to despair. But to testify
the gospel of the grace of God in their lives and in their preaching, should
always be their single aim. Although enemies should persecute, and friends
betray them. Though they should be made the scorn and derision of the mad
multitude. Though poverty and ruin, destruction and death should stare them in
the face; yet none of these things should move them, neither should their lives
be dear unto themselves, when set in competition with their faith* But with a
firm reliance on divine support; and with unshaken confidence in him, in whose
cause they are engaged: they should not shun to declare the whole counsel of
God, though all the powers of darkness should arise in opposition to it.
Animated by the pleasing consideration, that in thus doing, they may finish
their course with joy; they will rise above the fear of every disasterous event
in this life; and look forward to the hour of death in grateful expectation.

But it must be confessed, that the work of a gospel minister, is difficult and
arduous, as well as infinitely important. Our adorable Savior, having redeemed
our fallen race, from the ruins of apostasy, by his own sufferings and death;
not only exhibited in his own character, that temper and conduct, which his
disciples should imitate: but established his church under special ordinances;
and published that system of faith and morals, through which he would have the
children of men qualified for the heavenly world. And that mankind might be
instructed in the knowledge of the divine will; and be persuaded to embrace
him, as the only mediator, through whom they may become reconciled to their
offended Maker, receive the pardon of all their sins, and obtain the final and
everlasting salvation of their souls: he was graciously pleased to ordain and
appoint a succession of gospel teachers; who should bear rule in his church;
administer the ordinances of his gospel; impress the seals of his covenant;
solemnly warn and exhort in his name; preach him, in his person, character and
offices; and declare the whole counsel of God, to the conviction and conversion
of sinners, and to the edification, comfort and establishment of the saints. It
is therefore the indispensible duty of a gospel minister to watch, that he may
be instrumental in saving souls. Great will be his reward, if he is faithful in
the discharge of his duty; and solemn will be the account, which he must give
to his divine Master if he is not. While exposed to the wicked and malicious
dispositions of mankind, he has to conflict with many temptations to forsake
Christ, and to abandon his cause: but they are all confined to the present term
of his existence: while he has many great and precious promises, to encourage
him to persevere in his attachment to the truth, and the interests of his
Redeemer, which shall have their full accomplishment in the eternal world.

Although the word faithfully preached, will prove the savor of life unto life,
unto all them who hear and obey it; and a favor of death unto death, to those
who disregard it: yet the doctrines of grace and salvation by Christ; which it
is the indispensible duty of a gospel minister to preach; are so extremely
ungrateful to a great part of mankind; that the preacher is too often made the
object of their unrighteous resentment.

The most examplary life, and unblemished character, are not always secure from
the shafts of malice and detraction. With the bitterest inveteracy the hardened
Jews persecuted the holy Lamb of God; and abused him with every term of
reproach, with which their ingenuity could furnish them. And when (while they
inhumanly sought his life) our Lord said unto them, many good works have I
showed you from my Father, for which of these works do ye stone me? They made
him this unfeeling reply. For a good work we stone thee not, but for blasphemy,
and because that thou being a man, make thyself God. Implying that he was an
infamous impostor, endeavoring to practice upon the credulity of the
multitude. And if these things were done in a green tree, what can we expect in
a dry? If men have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more will
they call those of his household? If he, who is the brightness of the Father's
glory, and the express image of his person, could not pass through this
censorious world, without meeting the bitterest reproaches of those whom he
died to save, his frail and imperfect disciples cannot reasonably expect any
thing better.

The most faithful servant of Jesus Christ that ever existed, falls infinitely
short of his blessed Master. Even the most vigilant and circumspect of those
who sustain the sacred office of the gospel ministry have not only abundant
occasion to humble themselves before God, on account of their numberless
imperfections; but they likewise frequently stand in need of the candor and
charity of their fellow men -- Of those to whom it is their duty to come, in
the name of the Lord, declaring his hatred of all unrighteousness. For who can
say, I have made my heart clean; I am free from transgression? Could that
divine and heavenly principle which suffers long and is kind, which vaunteth
not itself, and rejoiceth not in iniquity; could that cardinal virtue, which is
the basis of all true religion, maintain the place it merits in the hearts of
men, they would be merciless only to those errors and imperfections which they
find in themselves. But unhappily for the peace, the harmony and security of
those who should be distinguished for the exercise of all the christain
virtues, they are generally the most quicksighted in discerning, and the most
severe in censuring the faults of others, who need the thickest veil to conceal
their own.

But so long as the mild and gentle spirit of christianity shall warm the
hearts of the wise and good; so long, shall the humble and sincere, though
imperfect servant of Jesus Christ, find a place in their esteem. Wherever he
goes, their best wishes will attend him; and their devout and servent prayers
will be, that God may protect and bless him.

Virtuous friendship is an exalted passion. It is the key that opens to all the
social affections. It is the secret and delicate, though firm and inseparable
ligament that unites congenial souls; and constitutes the tenderest attachments
that nature knows. It seeks not its own aggrandizement, but the happiness of
others. It sets no bounds to its kind and beneficent offices. It begins in
virtuous souls upon earth, and will be consummated in heaven.

The full force of this divine passion the Apostle Paul felt for his beloved
Church at Ephesus; and in their breasts it met a generous return. It was this
that cemented their mutual affections, and rendered the thoughts of their
separation so extremely painful.

But perfect happiness has not place below the skies. Even the joys of virtuous
friendship are embittered, by the sad recollection, that the objects of our
fondest affections must soon be parted from us.

Behold, the ship is already launched; the breeze arises, and the canvass
swells; the moment, the affecting moment, is arrived, when Paul must take his
last farewell of his Ephesian friends. His soul, which had maintained its
firmness through all his sufferings, and nobly rose superior to all the dangers
with which he was threatened, is now subdued by love. I see his virtuous
conflict, with all the tender passions; while I hear him say, Now behold, I
know that ye all, among whom I have gone preaching the kingdom of God, shall
see my face no more.

And while I speak of his attachment to his beloved Church, methinks I feel my
heart glow, with the same exalted passion for those, of whom I shall, this day,
publicly take my leave. But, as on parting with his friends, Paul recommended
them to God, and the word of his grace: So, after his example, and by your
indulgence, I wish to take my leave of you, my friends, this afternoon. --

PART II.
AS the offices and duties of an evangelical teacher are solemn and sacred, so
the connection that subsists between him and the church and people to whom he
has statedly administered the ordinances, and dispensed the doctrines of the
gospel, is tender, interesting and important. They are equally interested in
all religious truths; they are accountable to the same Lord, for their fidelity
to each other; for their fidelity to Christ, and to the interests of his
kingdom.

The day is not far distant, when every servant of the Lord Jesus must give an
account of his stewardship; and when all those who have been favored with the
means of grace must appear before the tribunal of Jehovah, and show how they
have improved under them. Then if he, to whom has been entrusted the ministry
of the gospel of the grace of God, shall be found to have been faithful to his
sacred, trust, and to the all-important cause in which he has been employed: If
it shall then appear, that he has not shunned to declare the whole counsel of
God; and that he is pure from the blood of all; he shall then be owned;
approved and honored by his divine Master, who is his final judge. And an
unfading crown of glory in the heavens shall reward him for all his services
and his sufferings upon earth. Notwithstanding, while in this state of trial
and discipline, he may be (as his master was before him) despised and rejected
of men, and regarded by short-sighted mortals, as one who is stricken, smitten
of God and afflicted; and persecuted by their relentless rage even unto strange
cities.

Happy is that minister of Christ, whose life has uniformly corresponded with
the gospel he has preached. And happy is that people who have realized the
worth of such a faithful servant of their ascended Lord, and obeyed the
precepts of the gospel which he has inculcated. They may look on death without
one distressing apprehension. And with unspeakable satisfaction, they can
anticipate that solemn moment, when they shall again unite at the impartial bar
of their righteous Judges; receive his applaudit, and accompany each other to
those blessed abodes where all virtuous friends shall meet, and part no more
through the unmeasurable ages of an endless eternity. Such a minister was the
apostle Paul, and such were those who composed his church at Ephesus. And
therefore, while he bids them a long farewell, expecting never more to see them
upon earth; he can confidently affirm, that he is pure from the blood of all
men. And that he has not shunned to declare unto them all the counsel of God.
This great Apostle is an example to his successors in sufferings and in
patience; in word, in charity, in faith and in purity. But there are but few
however of his successors, who do not fall short of the example he has set
them. The height of their pretentions in general is, that they have endeavored
to walk worthy of their high and holy vocation; and that they have not
willingly shunned to declare all the counsel of God.

This, my friends, is the most that I pretend to. Many are the imperfections of
my life, and great is my need of pardoning mercy, and renovating grace. With a
submissive temper of mind, I would notice the dispensations of divine
providence toward me. And I would ascribe righteousness to my Maker, under all
his dealings with me. I would cultivate and cherish the temper of the meek and
lowly Jesus, in which he said to the Roman governor, "Thou could have no
power at all against me, expect it were given thee from above." And of holy
David, when under his severest trials and afflications, "Let Shimei curse, for
the Lord has bidden him." But my friends, I can with confidence appeal to the
God who knows my heart, to witness the sincerity of my desires, to serve him
with fidelity, in the gospel of his Son. And that I have not, knowingly, kept
back any thing that was profitable unto you, through the fear of man; or under
the apprehension of incurring the displeasure of those, who do not conceive of
some of the doctrines of the gospel in the same light with myself. It has been
my uniform endeavor, to urge upon you all, the necessity and the infinite
importance of attending on the means of grace, and the institutions of our holy
religion; to hold up to your view the moral sentiments and the practical duties
of christianity; and to testify to all, whatever their speculative opinions
might be, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. And
if I cannot say with the confidence of the Apostle in the text, that I have not
shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God; yet I can say, with as much
sincerity as he felt, that I have not designedly neglected it. And if the most
ardent wishes for your present peace and prosperity, and for your future and
eternal glory and happiness, will justify the assertion, I can say, that I am
pure from the blood of all men. I have wished and prayed for your good, but I
have never had in my heart to injure any individual of you. And though my
services and my sufferings, my prayers and my tears, may not be felt or
acknowledged by my fellow men; yet I have the heart-animating satisfaction of
reflecting with holy Job, "that my witness is in heaven, and that my record is
on high." With him, "I know that my Redeemer lives."

Many, my friends, have been the evils with which I have been called to
encounter, from my first entering upon the work of the gospel in this place.
The envenomed tongue of the most malicious slander has been employed to wound
my fame; my most studious exertions to assert and maintain, what I have
received as the truths of the gospel, have been despised by some as the warm
effusions of an heretical brain. And my firm adherence to an incumbent duty has
been construed into obstinacy, and imputed to the want of an obliging
dispostion. Sincere in my concessions, and sanguine in my expectations, I have
been betrayed in my confidence; and seen all my sairest prospects in a moment
blasted. And now, shall I say that none of these things move me? and that
neither do I count my life dear unto myself? Yes, I will truly say it, if I may
but finish my course with joy, and the ministry which I have received of the
Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of the grace of God.

My brethren, I have not unfriendly passion to gratify. I have no disposition
to revenge upon the most unfeeling of my enemies. I will not even say of them
(as St. Paul said of Alexander the copper-smith) they have done me much evil,
the Lord reward them according to their works. No, but I will leave them with
their God, and pray for the salvation of their souls. I have no doubt, but that
many who have taken a part in afflicting me, have been led to it through
misinformation, or the want of proper attention, or by the influence of bad
advisers; which therefore, I can freely overlook, and heartily forgive.

This world, my friends, is not our home, and when compared with the glories
that are to be revealed, its interests are not worth contending for. We are
designed for another state of existence. this life is but the dawn of that
eternal day, to which we are as yet scarcely awakened. We enter upon this stage
of mortality in a promiscuous order; we here form various connexions which must
be all of short duration. Disaster or death soon disunites us for a time; but
we part, soon to meet again.

You and I, my friends, have been connected under the most interesting and
important of all relations; it is now dissolved. Perhaps this is the last time
we shall ever behold each others faces upon earth. This is undoubtedly the last
time you will ever hear my voice from this sacred desk. But, my friends, we
soon shall meet again; at the moment of our separation, we are all hastening,
as fast as the wings of time can carry us, to unite with a whole assembled
world, before the impartial bar of the dread Sovereign of the universe; whose
piercing eye now searches the human heart, and tries the reins of the children
of men. Yes, my friends, we must shortly, very shortly, all appear before our
Judge; where our late relation to each other will be brought into view. Where I
must give an account of the errors of my life, and for every neglect of my duty
as a minister of the gospel of the grace of God; and where you, my friends,
must likewise give an account of the temper and disposition with which you have
attended on my ministry, and the manner in which you have profited under it;
and where you must account not only for your conduct toward me as a christian
brother and a christian minister; but likewise for the motives which actuated
you thereto. With pleasing hope and grateful expectation, I look forward to the
events of that all-important period; and may God of his infinite compassion and
grace dispose and enable each of us so to rectify whatever has been amiss,
either in our temper or conduct, as that the approaching day of final
retribution may be as happy as it must be solemn to us all.

But though this life is not the time to revenge injuries, but to forgive, and
if possible, to forget them; yet surely it is a fit season for the grateful
acknowledgement of benefits and kindnesses. And therefore, it is with pleasure,
that I take this opportunity publicly to acknowledge the many and repeated
expressions of friendship and esteem which I have received from many of the
people of this parish, from my first coming among them to the present day. Be
assured, my friends, not the smallest token of your kindness has been passed
unnoticed. I have a lively remembrance of all your favors, it will accompany me
wherever I go, and through whatever scenes I may be called to pass. Although I
may be lost to you, yet your friendship is not lost upon me, it has made such a
deep impression upon my heart, as can never be crased, until it is asleep in
the cold and silent grave. Accept my sincere thanks and most devour good
wishes; they are the only returns that are now in my power to make to all your
benevolence: but they are a grateful offering, which a generous mind will not
despise.

It now remains, that I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which
is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which
are sanctified.

You have now a dangerous path to tread, without any spiritual guide to go
before you in the exercises of public devotion. The Apostle, in our context,
was extremely anxious for the peace and security of his beloved stock at
Ephesus, when he could no longer be with them. For I know this, said he, that
after my departing, shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the
flock. Also of yourselves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw
away disciples after them. And, have I no longer any interest in you, my
friends? God is my witness, who daily hears my prayers for his blessings on
you, that I have. Ye are now my brethren, who so lately were the people of my
charge. And as we are now about to take our leave of each other, to pursue (as
I humbly hope) our journey to our heavenly Father's house; I will offer you the
parting caution which Joseph gave to his brethren, when they left him, to go up
from Egypt, to their father in Canaan.

And he said upto them, see that ye fall not out by the way. Let me entreat you
to forget all former prejudices, and endeavor to be reconciled to one other.
Seek a speedy resettlement of the gospel among you, with sincere desires to
profit profit by the dispensation of its doctrines and its precepts. If you can
be united, you may yet be a happy and a respectable society. But if malice and
ill will, if prejudice, hatred and revenge, and every unfriendly and
destructive passion are not speedily suppressed, your ruin is unavoidable.
Studiously avoid therefore, all movements toward confusion and disorder. Study
the things that make for peace, and things wherewith one may edify another.
Seek to have the word of God dispensed to you in its purity, and cherish the
faith that was once delivered to the saints. You have more pressing motives to
peace and union among yourselves, and more important considerations to prevent
your falling out with each other, on your journey through the wilderness of
this life, than the brethren of Joseph had, while they journeyed toward their
native land.

You are all the offspring of God; the parent of the universe is the former of
your bodies, and the father of your spirits; he regards you as his children; he
knows your infirmities, and is graciously attentive to your wants: Your
existence originated in his love, and you are all equally dependent on his
bounty. He views no individual with a partial fondness, further than
amiableness of temper, and propriety of conduct, may justly merit the
distinction; but as a kind and indulgent parent, he delights in the peace and
happiness of all his children. The relation, therefore, in which you all stand
to God should remind you of the relation you bear to each other, and should
teach you to cherish that fraternal affection, which should be mutually
exercised among brethren. And you are expressly exhorted to the cultivation of
brotherly love by the great Redeemer of the world; who, that he might reconcile
the children of men to one another, and so prepare them for a reconciliation
with offended Heaven, became an instructor and an example in this important
duty; and has left it as the indisputable evidence by which we are to prove
that we are his disciples. -- "For as I have loved you," said Christ, "so ought
ye also to love one another." And by this shall all men know that ye are my
disciples, if ye have love one to another. What a powerful motive should this
be with you, to suppress every unchristian and unfriendly thought, and on every
occasion to manifest mutual love, kindness and compassion.

In innumerable instances we have all transgressed against the righteous laws
of God; and the need we all stand in of his forgiveness should teach us the
reasonableness and necessity of our being willing to forgive those who may have
offended us. And in our addresses at the throne of grace, we are expressly
taught by our blessed Lord, to pray for the forgivenes of our own sins, on
condition of our being freely disposed to forgive those who sin against us; and
are assured, that if we forgive not men their trespasses, neither will our
heavenly father forgive us our trespasses.

While on earth, you are all, my friends, in a state of pilgrimage; professedly
journeying to the same eternal home; and whatever different subordinate views
you may each of you have here, yet your principal and ultimate view is the
same. The heavenly Jerusalem is the place at which you all hope to arrive. And
Heaven, let it be remembered, admits none of those jarring discords, seuds and
confusions which disturb the peace and happiness of the present state; that is
the blessed abode of peace, of joy, and everlasting love. No rankled temper, no
ruffled passions, no disconsonant or unfriendly thought, shall ever be found
among the saints in light: But felicity and truth, amity and love, complacency
and peace, delight and concord, will be the invariable temper of all the sons
of glory. And if the temper or conduct of any of your fellow travelers
occasion you any present vexation or concern, let this thought afford you
comfort and relief, that if ever you meet them in heaven, you will find them so
entirely reformed as that you shall cheerfully embrace them for your most
cordial friends.

There are two things which have a direct and a most unhappy tendency to foment
an unfriendly spirit, and prompt men to a violation of the great laws of
christian charity, viz. Unruly passions and unreasonable prejudices. When these
are indulged so far as to break through the restraints of conscience and of
honor, it is no wonder if we see persons under the government of them
frequently finding fault with the best men, and the best things. From hence
arose that implacable hatred which the Jews showed to our Savior's person, and
the violent opposition they made to his dootrines, and which the bigoted and
profane part of mankind have in some degree shown to his true cause and
faithful servants ever since And even good men, so far as they are under the
unhappy influence of them, always discover either a very unlovely temper, or
very erroneous principles. First then, if you would preserve and cultivate a
spirit of unanimity and peace, you must guard against intemperate passions, and
especially against those, which are most apt to predominate. Passion is always
a blind and a furious guide; and if it is not sanctified by grace, or subdued
by reason, proves exceedingly detrimental to a man's peace and interest. It was
designed to be the servant of reason, and to follow after it; but if instead of
being obedient to it, it once gains the ascendency over it, it hurries a man
into the wildest extremes, and renders him either a very contemptible or a very
dangerous enemy; and like an unbridled, headstrong horse, overleaps all the
bounds of religion, reason, humanity, common sense, or common decency, that
stands in the way of its mad career.

And unreasonable prejudice is equally detrimental to the interests of peace
and brotherly love. Prejudice is a precipitant determination of the mind for,
or against any particular object, previous to a proper enquiry into its nature;
or, as the word itself imports, to judge before we examine; that is to judge by
the passions rather than the understanding. Hence we see that persons of the
warmest passions are frequently the most subjects to this foible. And opinions
thus rashly taken up, without evidence, are called prejudices. And they are
most frequently the effect of ignorance and vanity united; and most incident to
persons of quick and confident spirits, who have not patience to examine the
premises, before they draw the conclusion. And then, through a weak mistaken
notion, that it is dishonorable to be convinced of an error, resolve for the
credit of their understanding, as they suppose (but really at the expense of
it) to retain and defend their error against all evidence of sense, fact and
reason. But this not only exposes a man's understanding, but renders him a very
unsociable creature; an uncharitable christian, if a christian; or an obstinate
infidel if not. And where passion and prejudice both unite their influence,
they make a man unsufferably arrogant and assuming. If therefore you would
cultivate peace and love, you must guard equally against unruly passions and
unreasonable prejudices; and the more carefully, because they are both apt to
steal into the mind unobserved. Resolve freely and heartily to examine, before
you judge of any thing that is proposed to your faith; and let reason and the
sacred scriptures furnish the rules by which you make up your judgment. But
always remember to maintain the truth in love, because the wrath of man works
not the righteousness of God.

And may God Almighty, my friends, take you under his holy protection, and may
his good (...)pirit lead you into all necessary truth.

It would greatly rejoice my heart, could I see (...)u happily united, in the
enjoyment of all the (...)ssings of the gospel of the grace of God. And
(...)nestly pray, that it may please the great Head (...) the Church soon to
send you a pastor after his (...)n heart; who shall lead you into the green
(...)tures of his word, and beside the still waters (...)f his grace.

As for me, I cast myself, and those for whom (...)od and nature command me to
be provident, (...)pon the infinite compassion of that kind and in(...)ulgent
parent, who hears the young ravens when (...)hey cry, and without whose notice
even a spar(...)ow falls not to the ground.

Finally, my brethren, farewell. Be perfect, (...)e of good comfort, be of one
mind, live in (...)eace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you and
bless you.

AMEN.

