MR. HOTCHKISS's THANKSGIVING DISCOURSE.

On National Greatness. A THANKSGIVING SERMON, DELIVERED TO THE FIRST SOCIETY
IN SAY-BROOK, NOVEMBER 29th, 1792.

FREDERICK W. HOTCHKISS, A. M. PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH IN SAY-BROOK.

NEW HAVEN, PRINTED BY THOMAS AND SAMUEL GREEN. M,DCC,XCIII.

TO those Gentlemen, by whose request the following publication appears from
the press, this discourse is dedicated by its author.

He relies on the exercise of their candor toward errors, which may have
escaped the notice of one, whose intentions are the promotion of piety and
religious improvement among the affectionate, united and beloved people of his
care and charge. He begs their acceptance of the following performance, with a
favor equal to the affection with which it was delivered; and that they would
afford it that patronage which is his high ambiton to deserve.

On National Greatness.
DEUTERONOMY, IV. 7, 8, 9. For what nation is there so great, who has GOD so
nigh unto them, as the LORD cur GOD is in all things that we call upon him for?
And what nation is there so great, that has statutes and judgments so
righteous, as all this law which I set before you this day? Only take heed to
thyself, and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things which thine
eyes have seen, and lest they depart from thy heart all the days of thy life;
but teach them thy sons, and thy sons' sons.
MY Christian Brethren, we are now assembled into the Divine Presence, on one
of those anniversary days, in which every grateful heart must feel highly
interested, and in which every soul is most devoutly called to express a sense
of his dependence on Divine Providence, and thankful acknowledgments to the
FATHER of the universe. The duty which we are now solemnising, is most highly
becoming a Christian people, and is of that kind which constitutes the
sublimest part of worship, which intelligences can render to their CREATOR. In
our usual addresses of the throne of grace we are looking for benefits; and the
end of petition centres on self. In adoration, which is the most disinterested
as well as most delightful of human duties, the mind is drawn forth from
itself, by the view of Supreme Excellence; and the DEITY alone absorbs every
attention.

Had man never sinned, there had been no bleeding victim, nor need of an
Intercessor. And in the future state, when perfect holiness shall be restored,
prayer shall cease, faith and hope will cease; but adoration, praise, charity
and love shall exist forever.

When the duty of praising GOD is rightly performed, there ever accompanies it
a lively dispesition of mind. The heart is soothed and elevated, a divine
pleasure expands the soul, and, being irradiated by the splendour of the Supreme
Good, is absorbed in GOD, and raised above all worldly cares, allurements and
amusements, to a peace and joy which the world cannot give or take away.

The human mind, its principles, habits, modes of thinking and conduct will
ever be greatly affected by the objects of its most frequent contemplation.
This originates the different manners of the prince and the peasant But where
is an object so calculated to enlarge and aggrandize the soul, and all its
powers, and to lift it above all low and sordid motives, as the Divine Being
when adored by us, in that amiable view in which the whole biblical volume
presents HIM. But while the mind is elevated with joy raised by the act of
praise above worldly concerns, and greatly enlarged by contemplating upon a
Being so filled with perfection, it is also humbled as to the dust by the
unavoidable view of its own insignificance. The heavens are not clean in his
sight, and the angels He charge with folly; what then is man!

Such being the advantages of that religious service, which we are this day to
offer to the Great Benefactor of the world, let us enter upon it with all those
devout and enlarged principles, which the high objects of gratitude now demand.

To inspire us with these elevated sentiments, few portions of the sacred
scriptures are better adapted than the text which I have read to you. In this
you see the holy prophet, in whom the legislator and the father of his people
are most admirably united, and beautifully illustrated, leading the chosen
tribes to realize, that the favor of GOD and the smiles of heaven, are not only
the greatest blessings, but the highest aggrandisement of any nation. At the
close of a life filled with the most unremitting labors, disinterested
exertions, and unceasing vigilance and prayer for their prosperity, he had now
been recounting the instances of Divine goodness, which they had experienced,
that by impressing their minds with the beneficence of GOD, he might persuade
them to feel the greatness of their obligations, and " not suffer them to
depart from their hearts all the days of their lives, but to teach them to
their sons, and their sons' sons."

" For what nation is there so great, who has GOD so nigh unto them, as the
LORD our GOD is, in all things that we call upon him for!" -- We are peculiarly
happy in having an inspired prophet to assure us, in the name of GOD, of what
the history of ages and the experience of the world have united to convince us,
that no people is so truly great, as that which has the LORD their GOD nigh
unto them. In this respect the nation of Israel appeared highly illustrious.
Their GOD, in whom they trusted, going before them in a pillar of cloud by day
and of sire by night, and being a very present help in time of trouble. To all
their greatness were they raised by the hand of GOD. Divine Sovereignty, whose
power is ever connected with benevelence, beheld a people whom HE loved,
clanking the chains of slavery under Egypt's lords; HE beheld the oppressor and
the oppressed; HE saw the tears of the oppressed, and there was none to comfort
them; and on the side of the oppressor there was power, but they had no
comforter: HE saw this, with that frown of indignation which commands empires
to their original nothingness, and raised the Son of Amram to emancipate Israel
from slavery, and to lead them to a land of liberty, to the confusion of their
enemies, and the destruction of their tyrants. The father of that people was
chosen by Heaven, on account of his faith and piety, to be one, in whom not
only his children, but all the families of the earth should be blessed: blessed
with a Prince to arise and sway the scepter of righteousness, and to erect, on
the ruins of all unjust dominions, a kingdom of the most perfect government, of
the wisest laws, and filled with the most virtuous and happy subjects, enjoying
peace, liberty and bliss. To what high prosperity was that nation afterward
raised, entirely by the sovereign favor of HEAVEN! In an age of great darkness.
when the governments of the world were systems of oppression, and their
subjects educated to believe that they were born to be slaves to the will of
tyrants, this people were illuminated in the knowledge of the principles of the
noblest truths; truths to which the superior improvements of modern times bear
the most honorable testimony, and acknowledge that they are incapable of
greater perfection, and that truly there was the finger of GOD. While other
nations were ruled by oppressors, neither fearing GOD nor regarding man, they
were blessed with one, whose ruling principle was the most disinterested love
to his people, as was most amply evinced in that most benevolent prayer of his,
that they might be saved, to which he added, " if not, blot me, I pray Thee,
out of the book which THOU have written." In him we behold a prophet, a
legislator, and the father of his people, united to which we might add one who
could say. "I fear my GOD and HIM alone." By him designated and raised up for
that people, they were blessed with such a system of religious and civil
polity, blended with each other -- a system so calculated to answer many grand
and noble designs in Divine providence; a system so calculated to produce
patriotism, mutual love and the closest political union, as witness their laws
for triennial assemblies, those for the prevention of perpetual slavery, those
for the relief of every species of distress, that, to this day, Moses is
venerable as a legislator; but in former days, their laws, their government,
and their enlightened policy were the admiration and envy of the world.

Thus were they aggrandised by the goodness of the Divine Sovereign. By this
alone; for in the history of six thousand years, not a single instance,
deserving a parrallel, is to be found, in which a nation has arisen from
obscurity, slavery, wretchedness, or the ignorance attending despotick
governments, to be blessed with a system of religious and civil polity,
inducing liberty and happiness, unless favored by a Divine revelation, or the
immediate hand of HEAVEN. As Israel rose to liberty and glory by the sovereign
goodness of GOD, as their safety and prosperity depended entirely on having the
LORD their GOD near unto them in all that they called upon HIM for, how soon
did they sink into infamy and contempt, when, because of their high and long
repeated ingratitude, they were rejected of their Divine Protector.

To apply these remarks to our own nation -- To what glory have we risen by the
smiles of HEAVEN? To what else can we impute that luster, independence and
glory, which have rendered us the admiration of astonished Europe? Many have
been the times, in which we have been reduced to say, We can only stand still
and see the salvation of our GOD.

Few of us but may recollect those seasons of national distress, in which our
tribes mournfully repaired to the house of the LORD, feelingly impressed with
the belief, that if we were ever saved, it must be by the ROCK that is higher
than man. Then we fully believed the infinitely interesting truths, which we
are now contemplating: then we needed no prophet to inculcate them, as the
immediate message of GOD. We were ready to receive them. And when the GREAT
SOVEREIGN, who disposes of empires according to His will, looked down from the
throne of his Glory on our distress, we gladly reassumed "the harp that had
been hanging on the willows," and unitedly acknowledged, Had not the LORD been
on our side, when our enemies rose up against us, the waters had overwhelmed
us, the stream had gone over our souls. How important is it that these
sentiments be indelibly impressed upon our minds, and that we acknowledge, with
an eastern prince, "Thou Most High, rulest in the armies of heaven, and among
the inhabitants of the earth." Never was there a people more truly originated
and protected by Divine Providence than this; and never was the hand of GOD
more evidently and signally lifted up on behalf of any people, in a season of
the most trying emergency, than we ourselves have seen. How signal the blessing
of a temporal savior, designated by Divine Providence, in the day of our
distress, most inimitably qualified with abilities and patriotism for the
arduous work of giving empire to the nation; a character so renowned among the
nations for great and different talents, so happily blended and concentrating
in the same mind, that the sons of Israel had not more real cause to believe
that their deliverer, from the house of bondage, was sent to them by the 'I
AM,' who appeared on the mount, than we have, to be assured that ours was
purposely raised by HEAVEN, for the day when his country called for his
important services. If we consider that system of government under which we
live, and that happiness which it has diffused through all ranks; if we recollect
that this land is become known through the world, a land of liberty, political,
civil and religious, where all those vain distinctions, on which numbers have
thought themselves entitled to almost every homage, and secured from the just
consequences of their crimes and guilt, are here not to be found; a land where
obscurity of birth or fortune does not prevent the honors due to real merit; a
land where the Jew and the Greek have equal reception, and where liberal
sentiments, on the rights of human nature, have so far prevailed, that there
have been the most noble exertions, that the prophecy of Noah, concerning a
very unhappy branch of his family, which for ages has been most astonishingly
verified, might come to a conclusion, and hereafter the desendants of Shem and
Ham and Japhet might stand on a level, and acknowledge each other as brethren.
What nation is there so great, who has GOD so nigh unto them, as the LORD our
GOD is, in all things that we call upon Him for? and what nation is there so
great, that has statutes and judgments so righteous as has been given to this
favored land? But upon a day like this, it becomes us more particularly to
enumerate the instances of that real greatness, to which this nation has been
raised by the smiles of HEAVEN. If any degree of it consists in the too
customary, but now exploded, method of measuring the greatness of a kingdom by
the extent of territory, we might boast of greater glory than some of the most
famous and potent nations, which have figured in the page of history. But
Judea, Greece and other states have become renowned, not by extensive
territory, but by their noble and liberal policy, their wise laws, their
general liberty, their high patriotism, and the great encouragement to every
thing which might conduce to heighten, aggrandize and bless the subjects of
government. Let us then endeavor to find that real greatness to which we have
been raised, in those circumstances in which we have justly become the
admiration of the world. And here we might observe, that it is a nation in
which, from the earliest settlement of it, there have existed the most noble
and valuable institutions, sacred and civil, which have been transmitted from
the fathers to the children, and have been preserved hitherto to descend to
rising generations. However true it may be, that the first inhabitants of this
country, may have imbibed and possessed many prejudices peculiar to those days,
and to which scarce any people have been known to rise wholly superior, still
we must venerate them for their pious regard to posterity, and for their noble
institutions, sacred and civil, the benefit of which we now enjoy, and by which
we have arisen to a most eminent distinction, and enviable glory to the
surrounding world.

We may next observe, that it is a nation in which the government is truly
representative. This can be said of no one so truly, as of that in which we
live. In the system of the Jewish legislator, the high civil and sacred
offices, though for Divine reasons, were limited to a tribe or a family. There is
an European nation, to which we were once most nearly allied, that boasts of a
representative government, but where the first legislative offices are
completely hereditary, and in the others but a very inconsiderable proportion
of the people are represented. If we survey the European states, called
republican, they are far from being strictly representative. Privileged orders
are found in every civilized country of Europe, possessing powers incompatible
with a just representation. This favored people only, to whom the LORD our GOD
has been nigh in all that they have called upon Him for, has been chosen by
HEAVEN, to realize the fullness of a blessing resulting from this circumstance
of civil government. Here any one possessed of property sufficient to make him
feel himself interested in the prosperity of the nation, and small indeed is
the exception, has a voice in the election to the first offices of state. This
is a circumstance that constitutes no little part of that (...) greatness to
which we have been raised.

We may next observe, that this people have had the singular felicity of living
under a government, in which there has been a very high enjoyment of all the
rights of nature. Nature gives no one a right to oppress his fellow creatures,
nor to hold in servitude his body or mind, his faith or actions. Accordingly no
one is here permitted to assume arbitrary distinctions, and unjust superiority;
none possesses civil or religious powers, but what are voluntarily conferred;
and the Savior's command, to call no man Rabbi or Father, seems to have been
received, and in a great measure accomplished. Those high founding titles, many
of which should be appropriate to JEHOVAH alone, under which villainy was
sheltered from justice, made sacred and venerated by deluded ignorance, and by
which, for too many ages, the greatest scourges of the human race have, in the
name of GOD, carried on the most ambitious and tyrannick designs, both in
political and religious matters, and by which they have made nations, kept by
their policy in the most consummate ignorance, tamely to submit to the most
cruel impositions, sanctified by the name of a BEING whom they justly adored,
are in this nation not to be found. This people by means of the valuable
institutions transmitted to us from the rathers, for promoting useful
knowledge, have become too enlightened for the impositions of any, who should
come to us like the prophet of Mecca, with the sword in one hand and the Koran
in his other. The rights of nature have at length found an assylum in this
favored land. Here we make the laws by which we choose to be bound, and profess
and peaceably practice that mode of religion, by which we are inclined to
worship the GOD of our fathers.

We may next observe, that we live under a government, in which every kind of
useful industry is most liberally encouraged. Separate from the incitement
arising from several legislative acts, there have numerous societies originated
from the patriotism and public spirit of influential persons, which have
excited general emulation for excellence and perfection, in the various arts of
useful industry. Industry has ever been found successful in raising states and
empires, even of the most unpromising beginning, to ranks of the first
eminence. An industrious people will ever be a flourishing and happy people.
Under despotick governments there is but little encouragement for the useful
arts; in republics they have ever found the highest patrouage, and the greatest
perfection. In a nation as this, where industry finds the most flattering
wishes of individuals emulous of improvement so fully gratified; where our
labors are not only rewarded by the honors of the great, but where they are
secured in the profits arising from them, without the danger of their being
subjected to the never ceasing demands of tyranny, what a prospect of rising
greatness presents itself to every view. Whoever labors in this country enjoys
the good of his labor; and is secured in his possessions, while his children
arise and are benefited by the industry of a parent. And this, you will easily
perceive is a much greater blessing, than if it were possible that every want
of the individual were supplied by the public. Necessity brings action, and
action is the life and beauty of the world. If the Almighty were to supply us
with the gratification of every desire without our labor and exertion, what
would the world be, but a scene of idleness and in inactivity. More than half
the beauty of creation would be lost. It is an happy law of nature therefore,
that blessings are offered to our acquisition, not to our inert reception. And
the necessity of this labor originates all those arts and improvements, which
adorn society, and call forth that beautiful variety of talents, which would
otherwise lie concealed from human views. It is kind in Providence, that we
should be obliged to labor, and it is the happy privilege of this nation, that
industry receives every encouragement. It is a greater act of charity in the
public, both to the morals and enjoyment of individuals, to enable them to
acquire possessions, than if it gave to their inactive wishes. And the same
observation may apply to acts of private charity; for an individual to enable
another to acquire wealth for himself, rather than to give without inciting him
to personal activity, is more favorable for his morals and felicity. In
addition to those wise laws, and statutary institutions for promoting industry
in general, we may consider the provisions that are made, and the funds that
exist, for the general diffusion of science. These originated, in several of
the states, with the fathers of this country, to whose provident wisdom for the
welfare of their descendants we are indeed greatly indebted. Their literary
institutions we have preserved; the happy effect of them has been, a great
degree of intelligence through all ranks, most highly favorable to the
existence of that liberty which is found in republics. While our higher seats
of literature prepare the rising generation for the more important departments
of community, the subordinate schools of learning diffuse such a portion of
knowledge, as serves the purpose of enabling the people to study, and value
their privileges; and both united form one of the greatest bulwarks of
rational, civil, political, social and religious liberty. And we ought not to
be unmindful, that these institutions for the general diffusion of knowledge
among the lower ranks of the people, is a very singular blessing, in which we
are privileged above all the nations of the world. While these continue to
exist, despotism and tyranny can never find support. These therefore,
constitute no little part of that greatness, to which we have been raised by
the smiles of HEAVEN.

We may next observe, that we live in a nation, in which we are taught to seek
for our highest glory in the prosperity of all nations. The period has at
length arrived, in which superior improvements in all liberal science has
verified what has been formerly taught only in the Christian religion, that the
truest happiness of the individual, or of the part, lies in the prosperity of
the whole. Enlightened policy and true Christianity concentrate in the same
object, and inculcate the desired felicity of the world: Perhaps, for this
enlightened policy, we are originally indebted to christianity, though
infidelity and deism are not wiling to acknowledge it. But that the fact
exists, witness the disinterested exertions for general liberty, and societies
that are formed to patronise the abolition of general slavery. How different
this from the spirit and disposition of former ages and nations? Patriotism
indeed has been anciently carried to a surprising height: but how illiberal the
principle! A kind of love, which justified the most envenomed hatred to foreign
nations, a love as far removed from the enlarged principles of true
benevolence, as the affection of selfishness toward those who are its friends,
from the philanthropy of a christian, who loves his enemies, and prays for them
that curse him. How great were the prejudices of the Jew and the Greek? and
among Christian nations, how common to find one people seeking for national
aggrandisement, on the reproach or ruin of another? The christian system has
taught its disciples to view the world as a large brotherhood, and to exercise
a benevolence as extensive as the creation of GOD. Late improvements in
knowledge, whether acquired by study, experience, or commerce, have in a great
measure removed those prejudices, which formerly existed: and have taught us
that christian benevolence and enlightened policy are closely united.

We may next observe, that we live under a government in which there is
existing a great degree of equality among the people. In despotick governments
this would be very unfavorable to their existence. Laws are therefore made,
which will ever produce great inequalities among the people, in all nations
which are not republican. By reason of these inequalities, it is very evident,
that the enormous powers of a part of the community over the other, who are in
many instances the most meritorious, have been so long supported. In
governments where these inequalities are maintained by law, it is not uncommon
to find in the same family, one a nobleman, and another but a few degrees above
beggary; and all this for no other reason, but that the former happened to be
the eldest son, and consequently the heir of all the family honor, and wealth,
and titles, and dignities. This law for the maintenance of inequalities, so
necessary in monarchial governments, is a remnant of the ancient fendal system,
but most unjust, and highly disgraceful to an enlightened age. A law somewhat
similar existed in this state, which admitted the eldest male to an equality
with any two of his brethren, and that frequently to the manifest injury of the
family. But we are happy to find that law exists no more. Inequalities, and
extreme ignorance in the lower ranks, constitute no little part of the policy
of all despotick governments, in which they originated, and which they only are
interested to support, as the grand secret of monarchial existence. In
republics, different principles are necessary, and all that equality that
nature has made, except what may arise by superior industry, or the spontaneous
bestowments of a grateful people may render a propriety to exist, ought to be
supported.

We may next observe, that we live in a land where the people are contented and
happy. This is evident in the general emulation to excel in all those useful
arts by which their country may be benefitted, in their peaceable and quiet
attention to their own and family interests, by their veneration of the laws of
the land, the few complaints of oppression and the scarcity of any event that
has the appearance of insurrection. In the class of the unhappy, we find but
few, except those reduced to misery and wretchedness, by utter privation of all
sober principles, and a course of licentious conduct. And no form of government
can bless unprincipled minds. As to the sober and worthy part of community,
they eat the bread of industry, they labor, enjoy the benefit of their labor,
and are happy. Few are there who know the wants of extreme poverty; few so
straitened in their circumstances, but can allow themselves the proper seasons
of rejoicing with their friends, and cultivating the social virtues; few but
can obey the calls of humanity, and contribute for the relief of the
distressed. The poor of our land, and such the Savior says ye shall always have
with you, will unite with us to venerate those laws, by which provision is made
to prevent their extreme sufferings, and the class of those who are in needy
circumstances, will love a country, in which private charity is not a stranger,
and in which the poor of our land are fed with bread.

2. The text inculcates a duty in consequence of being thus highly favored by
the smiles of HEAVEN. Take heed to thyself, and keep thy soul diligently, lest
thou forget the things which thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart from
thy heart, all the days of thy life; but teach them thy sons, and thy sons'
sons. Our duty is first, to be sensible that because the LORD our GOD has been
nigh unto us, we have been raised to all that greatness, which our eyes have
seen; and we are gratefully to remember from whom we have received all our
privileges and blessings. What the same prophet spoke to Israel, may be applied
to us, Not because ye are more righteous than any other people, but because the
LORD had a delight in your fathers, that this land has been given unto you, and
that ye have had the LORD your GOD so nigh unto you, in all that ye have called
upon HIM for. Whence is it, that we have derived all this greatness, that we
enjoy the greatest liberty, and live under the most righteous government, that
we have the best laws in the world, and are free from every species of
oppression? Is it because we have more wisdom and power, and our princes, men
who sear GOD, been more highly illuminated, and possessed of greater
benevolence to the public? The enquiry still meets us, whence is all this?
Surely "because the LORD our GOD has been nigh unto us in all that we have
called upon him for." What ingratitude, if our minds are not deeply impressed
with a realizing sense of the greatness of our obligations? But, my christian
auditors, there is one debt that we owe to GOD, compared to which all others
are greatly lessened. This is the debt of gratitude for the gift of His SON, to
bless the world with the light of the gospel, by which we have received the
most pure and sublime religion, and which, by giving more enlightened
sentiments of GOD, of human nature, and of the most interesting truths, has
not only elevated the hopes of individuals, but has greatly meliorated the
governments of the christian nations, diffused a grater mildness and lenity in
the complexion of the laws, the administration of justice, and the manners of
the people at large. The refinements of ancient Greece and Rome, though the
boast of the enemies of our religion, were barbarism compared to the
civilization to which some christian nations have attained. Witness the public
feasts in honor of the gods in the former, and the unrobed combats and cruel
sports of the gladiators, putting each other to death merely for the
entertainment of the people called refined, in the latter. When we recollect
the great amelioration existing in nations favored with the light of the
gospel, and the just ideas it has given of GOD and man, of the world, its
origin, design and end, of the fall and recovery of the human race, of the
great designs of love reserved for the virtuous, of a future kingdom to be
realized in this world, before the consummation of all things, in which there
is to be exhibited a perfect government, the most righteous and benevolent
laws, and a numerous people all happy in their obedience, we must acknowledge
this a blessing that might with propriety draw from us the language of an
apostle, who was enraptured with its greatness, "The length and breadth, and
depth and height, and to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge!"
Here is love indeed. "Oh the depth both of the wisdom and knowledge of GOD!"

But while we gratefully acknowledge our obligations to the LORD our GOD, for
that greatness to which we have been raised, it is our duty to transmit these
sentiments of gratitude and sense of obligation to posterity. Teach them to thy
sons and thy sons' sons. While the untutored savage "under the shade of his
plantain" teaches his children, who are hanging upon his lips for instruction,
the wondrous deeds of the fathers, surely christians ought with more propriety,
to impress upon the minds of their descendants, those more interesting truths
which they have received, and the astonishing events which have taken place in
former days, because the LORD our GOD was nigh unto the fathers in all that
they called upon him for. Thus spoke the prophet of GOD to Israel. "And these
words which I command thee this day, shall be in thy heart. And thou shall
teach them diligently to thy children, and shall talk of them when thou sit
in thy house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and
when thou rifest up. Thus would the rising generation value the privileges
which we shall have transmitted them, and realizing the greatness of their
obligations, will unite piety with their virtue and industry, in rearing to
perfection the great temple of liberty, which was founded in the days of their
fathers.

We may next observe, that it is our duty to exert ourselves for the
continuance of those blessings which we have received. The time has been, when
we thought the work finished, and our happiness as a nation perfected. We were
careless, we were luxurious and idle. We were in debt to our friends, who had
assisted us in the day of trouble and the hour of blood, with their treasures;
and to our brethren who had fought for us, who had bled, and many of whom had
died, in their country's cause; we were at that time without any energetick
system of national government, and the political affairs of this country had a
very dark aspect indeed: Yet for a time, the people were utterly regardless of
the consequences of their inactivity; industry had greatly failed, vice and
indolence made rapid incursions, and we were inattentive to the first and
necessary step for remedying greater evils, than we had ever before
experienced. Necessity and want at last reduced us to attention, and the
provident wisdom of the sober and prudent part of the nation animated the
people to industry, led them to see the necessity of greater energy in the seat
of government, and we became united in establishing such a system, which
promises the continuance of those high privileges, which we now possess. Still
much is depending on our continued exertions. Look for a moment among nations,
societies and individuals, and we find this invariable truth, that none
flourish without diligence; that blessings acquired are not continued without
industry, and that they, whose circumstances require unremitting exertion, are
the happiest people. It is not only true that diligence is necessary for the
continuance of our privileges, but it is a happy circumstance, that thus it
should be, for active enjoyments are the only real ones. Whatever blessings are
the fruit of constant industry, are the truest riches. None are permitted to
sit down idly at the feast of life, and long be happy

We may in many respects be said to contribute, according to our abilities, for
the security of the blessings we enjoy, and no one is to be excused from
casting in his mite, to the great treasury of the national welfare.

Every honest and industrious man, who faithfully employs the talents committed
to him by the Great Master of the world, and attends to that calling in life
which is assigned him by Divine Providence, contributes a valuable portion to
the public good, serves his GOD and his country, and will at last receive the
reward of a faithful servant. All are not formed to act in the higher
departments of life, neither could all be useful there. Infinitely various are
the demands of the public good, and the great variety of stations and
employments in a civilized community are happily adapted to call forth that
amazing variety of talents, which GOD has, in such wisdom, distributed to his
rational creatures, for all that beautiful subordination, which constitutes no
little part of the glory of this and the upper worlds. Here is then a large
field, in which not only multitudes, but every talent is called forth for
action. While the Great LORD and Master is walking forth, and beholding the
inactive, his language is, " Why stand ye here idle all the day." The
industrious man, while pursuing that employment to which he has been called, is
not only benefiting himself and his family, but society and the public: but
the idle or inactive, while injuring himself, his morals and his family, is
robbing society of its just demands. He is placed as a man among men, endued
with abilities to do good to his fellow creatures, and society justly requires
him to be active and useful. What account can such render to their GOD or
country? What self condemnation, in that awful crisis of human existence, when
called by that VOICE, which none can refuse to hear, and summoned to render an
account for the improvement of that reason, and those talents, with which they
were invested, in the day that they were sent forth into society, with this
command to be active and useful? To benefit the Almighty we cannot; for if thou
art righteous, what do thou give him? But we may do good, and merit from our
fellow creatures; and the Savior has informed us, that in the great day of
retribution, he will accept our sincere and well meant services to others, as
if to Him. Inasmuch as ye have done it to one of the least of these my
brethren, ye have done it unto me.

We may again observe, that all wise institutions for the improvement of the
human mind, for the education of the rising youth, for the encouragement of the
various arts, and the incitement of industry in general, are contributions to
the public good.

Every parent and head of a family may render important services to his
country. In an ancient country, such were taught to consider their children as
rather belonging to their country, than to themselves. In families it is that
those pious maxims, virtuous principles, and useful precepts are taught and
inculcated, by which the rising youth may fill their future stations in life
with dignity and every propriety. Here by the fostering care of a parent they
are trained up for those employments, by which they may serve their country,
and preserve and extend those privileges, which have been transmitted to them
by their ancestors, as the most valuable of earthly legacies. How important
then is the charge committed to every head of a family? How vast is the benefit
which such may render their country, by forming their young and tender minds to
usefulness and virtue, and hereby rendering them blessings to the world? But
farther, here it is, that those religious principles are lastingly impressed,
by which infidelity and vice may receive an early check, and the rising youth
may learn by the examples of their fathers whom they venerate, to revere the
gospel of the Savior, and by which they may finally take an active part with
their ancestors in the sublime and beatific employments and entertainments of
the world of glory. Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is
old, he will not depart from it. And never was there a pious and virtuous maxim
more invariably accomplished and realized.

We may farther observe, that all endeavors to promote the prosperity of
others is a contribution to the public good. If one member be honored, the
whole rejoice with it. It ought to be in society as in a family or a friendly
circle, in which the whole body feel the prosperity of the individual as their
own. And it is as really a fact, that every happiness of an individual is, in
its measure, the felicity of the whole, as in the natural body that the whole
sympathize with the member. The virtuous man considers himself as a part of the
community, and when he beholds the prosperity of others, or of his country, he
lifts his eye to heaven, and thanks his GOD. The Divine Being has so connected
us with each other, that none can live or act without interesting community.
The sin of the first parent has transmitted misery through ages, and that not
by the positive will of GOD only, but by the same law of connection, which we
now see existing between the head of a family or community and its members. On
the contrary the virtue and usefulness of individuals will be diffused through
the whole, and be transmitted to rising generations.

We may next observe, that the support of religion is a contribution to the
public good. By religion we do not intend to include any particular mode or
form; for as the Savior said, The time comes, yea is already come, that
neither in this mountain, nor yet in Jerusalem, shall men worship the Father:
GOD is a spirit; and they that worship him, must worship in spirit and truth.
Different modes will ever be most edifying to men of different prejudices and
educations. It seems as if the Savior had designedly omitted any particular
directions in this respect. Great were the prejudices he had to encounter in
his disciples. But instead of using force, he once observed, Many things have I
to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. But as to religion itself, the
wisdom and experience of ages have sufficiently proved its near connection with
the civil good. The ruler who fears GOD, must have the confidence of his
subjects; and the same religion, which teaches the subjects to revere their
Creator, commands them to be good subjects of civil government, and to look
upon the powers that be, to be ordained of GOD; to be good members of society,
good neighbors, friends, parents, sons, masters, servants, and that every man,
wherein he is called, should therein abide with GOD. Religion alone, by giving
solemnity to an oath, is the very bond of civil society. What would a society
be, in which the members had no fear of GOD before their eyes? How would the
culprit laugh at the executioner, and all the solemn pomp and instruments of
death, were it not for that fear of an unknown futurity, a Divine Legislator
and Judge, which has not only more influence upon the human mind, than is
frequently supposed, but is of more weight, in deterring from the greatest of
human crimes, than all the solemn sanctions that were ever affixed to the laws
of man. Hence the most celebrated legislators have found it necessary to
establish systems of religion. But if those religions, though filled with
error, were necessary for the stability of empire, how much more the religion
which came down from GOD, which exhibits the noblest virtues, all exemplified
by its Divine Author, and in which we are called to practice whatsoever things
are true, and honest, and just, and lovely, and commendable, and ever to study
those things that make for peace and love. How important is religion then, and
that it be countenanced by all ranks, while the fathers set the example, by
leading their children to the temple of JEHOVAH, to be early taught to adore
the Great Benefactor of the world? The religion of the gospel formerly gave us
this land; the same religion still preserves it for their children; and our
elders and princes are still venerable for their piety, while on the weekly
solemnities they are leading forward the tribes of Israel to the mount of
worship, the solemn assemblies, the temple of GOD. May this spirit be cherished
by the rising age. and may the temple and the priest, the altar and the victim,
which have existed for ages among unenlightened nations, never reproach a
people, who may justly glory in superior light and growing advantages. Let us
never forget the religion of our fathers, the religion of Jesus, the bread of
life, and the waters of life.

The whole plan of duty, and of our national prosperity, greatness and
happiness in connection with it, are given us by JEHOVAN himself, and
addressed, by his prophet, to a rising, flourishing commonwealth, like ours, in
the same book from whence I have chosen my text; and they are summed up in
piety and obedience, in religion and virtue. The superstructure of national
happiness and glory is sure to rise upon such a foundation, and no other
foundation can be laid, on which it can arise and find a permanent stability.
To support it in the way of impiety, unrighteousness, profligacy, political
arts, cunning and wickedness, is absurd and self-subversive. It is an
inconsistency in nature, repugnant to the wise, holy, great and good plan of
providence, and therefore the Almighty will frown with indignation upon it. In
this divine plan, the duties of piety are of the highest order, and take place
of all others. The LORD alone must be exalted by us, as the object of our
supreme worship, and of our best affections. We must cultivate the love and
fear of the LORD our GOD, who has been nigh unto our fathers, and unto us their
children, with the highest veneration of his being and perfections,
providence, word and works. The atheist is unfit for human society, and to be
a member of civil community; for he disbelieves the being, omniscience and
power of GOD, to whom the appeal is made as THE WITNESS OF TRUTH, AND THE
AVENGER OF PERJURY. Neither is the deist greatly superior, who denies a
revelation attested by miracles, which none can disprove, and one of which
extorted from the lips of a centurion, presiding at the execution of Jesus,
this confession -- "Surely this was a righteous man." -- MIRACLES ALONE PROVE A
REVELATION.

We may farther observe, that another important duty which we owe to GOD, our
country and ourselves, is fervent prayer for the peace and prosperity of our
Jerusalem. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love thee.
Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces. For my brethren
and companions sake, I will now say, peace be within thee. By this we show a
realizing sense of our obligations and dependence on that GOD from whom we have
received our blessings; and in this way we may hope to secure the great love
which HE has exhibited to a highly favored land.

My christian brethren, let a view of the divine goodness excite us to rejoice
in existence; but particularly that we had our existence in a land of light and
liberty, political and religious. Existence itself is a blessing; but how much
greater, to be assured that there is a divine government, and that goodness and
benevolence preside over the universe? If this be so great a blessing, how much
greater to be yourselves a part of that highly favored people, who have had
the LORD their GOD near unto them in all that they call upon HIM for? But if
this be a blessing that adds to the happiness of our existence, how much more
is it heightened by the consideration, that our existence will never cease, and
that the wise and virtuous, who improve their privileges, their reason talents,
and opportunities for doing good to their fellow creatures, and their country,
shall not only forever live, but be forever advancing in beatific knowledge and
happiness, in the contemplation of divine objects, and a vast and infinite plan
of the most pleasing and astonishing wisdom and benevolence, till the whole
soul be wrapped up in GOD; and the radiant glory of the SUPREME GOOD shall so
entirely absorb the universe of virtuous semis, that there will be but one
great object, one will, (...) desire, and one end of every mind through the
(...) With this view what a blessing indeed is our existence!

Let this view of the Divine Goodness lead us to imitate what we so much love
and admire in GOD. His omnipotence, his universal presence, and those great and
astonishing events which have surprised the world, and been acknowledged the
effect of Power Divine, can only be admired and praised; but we may be Godlike
in goodness; and this is that attribute in GOD, which, among all his
perfections, crowns the whole with superior glory. If we are capable, this is a
sufficient indication that thus GOD wills.

Let a view of the Divine Goodness to ourselves, and our country, lead us to
adore and praise the LORD our GOD, who has been so nigh to us in all that we
have called upon Him for. There is scarce any power or faculty in human nature,
but what may find a resemblance, though in a lower degree, in the animal world.
But do we differ from them only in degree? No, there is one faculty in which we
differ in kind, and are essentially superior. This is our capability of knowing
and resembling the Creator, and adoring his benevolence. This is the superior
glory of man. At the close of the fifth day's work of creation, GOD beheld his
works, and pronounced them good; but lo! there was none found capable of
knowing and adoring their Creator. Then JEHOVAH spoke, LET US make man. -- Man
alone he beheld among all his works capable of knowing his goodness, and on
behalf of all creation, animate and inanimate, as their common priest, capable
of rendering thanksgiving and praise; and He said, Let them have dominion.

But while the Divine Goodness to our favored land leads us to adore Him as on
this day, let it also serve to show us the nature of national vice and
disobedience to that GOD who has been so nigh unto us. What are our sins, but a
violation of those laws, by which alone as a people, or as individuals, we can
arise to real greatness? The law is good as well as holy. Never did an
individual, much less a people, attain to true and permanent prosperity by vice
and want of allegiance to the government of the Supreme Legislator. Thus a
prophet, in the name of GOD, addressed a once chosen people; Oh! that thou
had hearkened to my commandments; then had thy peace been like a river, and
thy (...) as the waves of the sea.

My brethren, We are this day called to rejoice in the Divine goodness: to
rejoice in the (...) of HEAVEN on our country, on the labors of our hands, and
for the numerous comforts of family, of social and private life. As a testimony
of our rejoicing, we are (...) day bringing our (...) and (...) before the
(...), for a grate^^^ acknowledgment of His bountiful (...) Let the (...) of
this day be a rational, manly, grateful and religious joy -- a joy that
elevates and improves the mind, while it gladdens the heart.

What a suitable season is this to make the hearts of our fellow creatures
around us, particularly of the industrious and virtuous poor, to rejoice with
us, and that as far as lies in our power, there be no sorrowing foul; but that
sighing and tears he wiped away, by our exercise of that christian charity and
benevolence, which our holy religion requires. Thus your prayers and your alms,
your thanksgiving and your good works, your joy and your labors of love would
ascend up for a memorial before GOD. This would be the rejoicing of
benevolence, a Godlike affection! a joy that would make us better, as it makes
us happier. Thus would our light break forth as the morning, our righteousness
go before us, and the glory of the LORD would he our reward.

But in the midst of our rejoicing this day, as is natural to every grateful
mind, remember our brethren or friends who as a nation or society may be filled
with fore distress, are contending for the privileges we enjoy, or are exposed
in property, liberty and life to the most imminent dangers. Such is the
situation of an allied European people, who, in the days of our distress,
generously assisted us, and openly befriended the cause of this country against
our enemies. They are now emerging from darkness far greater than ours, to
behold the light of general liberty. The true religion, accompanied with the
knowledge of it, which has for ages been concealed from the commonality, and
which, when known, has ever been found favorable to universal liberty, is now
beginning to break forth, its principles to he diffused, particularly those
which respect the rights of human nature, and bids fair to emblazon speedily
the whole European nations. But they are only arising as yet. Great and
distressing will probably be their conflict with the wrath of united tyrants,
who look forward with terror and dismay to the approaching fall of despotism,
before those liberties and privileges that we enjoy will be established in that
nation. Through what seas of blood have they been already obliged to wade in
pursuit of this high object! but the price is not esteemed too great for a
blessing dearer than life. While we sympathize with them in their distress, we
ought particularly to lament, that it should be, or be thought, necessary to
exile or sacrifice any, who were once highly valued by them, at the shrine of
liberty; any who have been holden in the highest estimation in this country,
and whose names are yet dear to almost every American. This however ought not
to prevent our benevolent wishes for the prosperity of that cause, which, as it
is the cause of human nature, a cause which the more it is investigated by
every nation, the more it must be befriended; a cause which as it involves in
its consequences the liberty and happiness, not of a nation, or an age, but of
ages and nations to come, we have every reason to believe that GOD will espouse
it as His cause and crown it with success. The sun of liberty arose in the
west, and its light is rapidly diffusing to the east; and says the holy
prophet, "wrapped into future times," They shall fear the name of the LORD from
the west, and his glory shall extend to the rising of the sun.

But there are brethren and friends still nearer to us; allied not by treaty,
but by nature; bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh, whom we should
remember this day, in the midst of grateful rejoicing under the smiles of
HEAVEN. They lived with us, but they have gone from us, to take their future
residence in the distant parts of this land, where they are now exposed to the
depredations of a merciless enemy. While we are rejoicing, they are perhaps
this moment trembling under momentary uncertainty and perpetual danger. How
insecure their lives and property! how often are their houses wrapped in
flames, their wives and children taken by brutal violence, without regard or
pity to age or sex, and led to long captivity, or put to a cruel death? The
father leaves his family in the morning in peace, goes forth to his labors in
the field, returns in the evening to gladden a dependent family; but alas, the
sad reverse of fortune! Let imagination paint the scene which has been often
realized.

That grateful joy in the bounties which we receive, and which we are this day
enjoying, in the pleasant society of our families and friends, without any
enemy to molest or make us afraid, should remind us of our brethren who once
sat with us. This is but natural to a grateful and a generous heart. Thus,
while we are sitting around the table, and partaking of the gifts of
Providence, how common is it, to remember some absent friend or relation, who
filled a now vacant seat on the former anniversary day? With the same propriety
we ought this day to remember our brethren in distress, and to raise a
sympathizing heart and eye to the throne of grace, that the Father of love
would protect them, and soon enable them to sit under the peaceful vine.

Finally, let us this day remember our fellow creatures here and elsewhere, who
may be in affliction. Let our hearts be filled with benevolence equal to our
joy. Let (...) break every yoke asunder, and do our endeavors for the peace,
liberty and happiness of all our fellow creatures. Then while the ALMIGHTY
looks down with a frown on the remaining iniquity of an highly favored land,
HE may turn an eye to our deeds of charity and benevolence, with a countenance
beaming with designs of infinite love.


