AN ORATION, IN COMMEMORATION OF The INDEPENDENCE of the UNITED STATES of
America. DELIVERED In the Baptist Meeting House in PROVIDENCE, July 4th, 1793.

By ENOS HITCHCOCK, D. D.

Printed by J. CARTER.

ON the Fourth of July inst. being the anniversary of the declaration of the
Independence of the United States, the following ORATION was delivered, in
commemoration of that event, and is now published at the request of the
inhabitants of this town.

Providence, July 8, 1793.
An ORATION.
THE return of this Anniversary has reminded us, my respected Fellow-Citizens,
of an event full of wonders, and pregnant with consequences important, not to
this country only, but to mankind. Called again to felicitate you on this
memorable day, I feel myself secure in your candor to those sentimental
effusions which the occasion may suggest. There is a pleasure in the idea of
addressing a free and an enlightened people, on the blessings they enjoy, and
on the happiness of their condition. Americans! this day recognizes your
emancipation. It is your jubilee. It is the birthday of your independence, of
your national existence! Let it never be forgotten, that, on the fourth day of
July, one thousand seven hundred and seventy-six, forth issued from the
illustrious and patriotic Congress the following magnanimous declaration:

'WE, therefore, the Representatives of the United States of America, in
Congress assembled, appealing to the Supreme Judge of the World for the
rectitude of our intentions, do, in the name and by authority of the good
people of these Colonies, solemnly publish and declare, that these United
Colonies are, and of right ought to be, free and independent States.'

THIS declaration was accompanied with the reasons which compelled them to make
it, and which were deemed sufficient to justify the measure in the view of the
world. It was nobly made at the most eventful period of the war, when your
country was bleeding at every pore, without a friend among the nations of the
earth. God alone was her friend! The justice of her cause was registered in the
high chancery of heaven. The stars fought in their courses for her; and the
event justified a step which had so astonished the world.

To retrace the steps which led to the accomplishment of the revolution, and
the causes which prepared the way for it, would be to enter into a field of
discussion too large for the present occasion. It would be to repeat what has
already been done in a thousand forms. Historians have collected and arranged
the great mass of materials. Orators have marked, in polished periods, the
great outlines of the revolution. Poets have sung its praises, and, stretching
forward on the prophetic wing, the vocal muse has assigned to it every good of
which so great an event can be productive. The subject, however, is not
exhausted. Sentimental gleanings still remain to be gathered through the
extending field, by those whom you shall annually appoint to celebrate 'this
memorable event.' At a Town-Meeting of the Freemen of the town of Providence,
held on the seventh day of April, A. D. 1793.
RESOLVED, That his Excellency the Governor, Messrs. Joseph Nightingale,
Ephraim Bowen, jun. Jeremiah Olney, and Welcome Arnold, be a committee to make
choice of a person to deliver a suitable Oration on the fourth day of July
next, to commence at twelve o'clock at noon, in commemoration of the
independence of the United States: That said committee provide a place for the
delivery of such Oration; and that an Oration on said memorable event be
continued annually.

A true Copy: Witness, DANIEL COOK, Town Clerk.


New subjects will be continually arising out of the improving condition of our
own country, the progress of society, government and manners, in the world,
which will result from the revolution, and from the establishment of our
independence.

OUR Oration now turns to view the advantages of the natural situation, and
political freedom, which we, as a people, enjoy.

THESE are suggested to us by a recognition of the independency of the American
Republic. To what purpose could be the possession of the former, without the
enjoyment of the latter? In both respects, our lines have fallen in pleasant
places; and we have a goodly heritage. What nation on earth can boast of such a
territory, in extent and fertility of soil, situation and variety of climate?
The situation and extensive territory of the United States are favorable for a
great variety of productions, and convenient for commerce. Extending from the
thirty-first to the forty-sixth degree of north latitude, and averaging at more
than one thousand miles in breadth, they comprehend such a variety of soil and
climate, as to be capable of almost every kind of production, either necessary
or convenient to man. The prolific soil will reward the cultivator's labor,
and furnish an ample supply for its increasing inhabitants. It is not usual for
any of the casualties, whereby the fruits of the earth are at any time cut off,
to pervade so extensive a space at the same time. While one part is pinched
with drought, or devoured by insects, others have a superabundance to supply
their demands. Bounded on the Atlantic ocean by a vast extent of coast, they
enjoy every advantage of foreign and domestic commerce. Intersected by many
rivers, at distances favorable for internal navigation, or to supply
artificial canals, the inhabitants enjoy an easy transportation for the
exuberant growth of their fertile banks.

THIS soil is distributed in such portions amongst the inhabitants, and holden
by such a tenure, as afford the greatest security to the continuation of a free
government. 'Most free states have studied to find out means of preventing too
great an inequality in the distribution of landed property. What tumults were
occasioned at Rome, in its best times, by attempts to carry into execution the
Agrarian law? Among the people of Israel, by direction of heaven, all estates
which had been alienated during the course of fifty years, returned to the
original owners at the end of that term.' It is beyond a doubt, that the fee
simple of the soil generally resting in the cultivators of it, and that general
mediocrity of condition which follows from it, are circumstances most
favorable to a republican form of government. Virtue and industry, talents and
knowledge, will form the principal distinctions; and the motives to these will
be increased, while the opportunities for vice are rendered fewer.

IN such a state, the hereditary demagogue, and the cringing sycophant, are
alike unknown. Protected by laws of their own framing, the people cannot be
oppressed. Enjoying an equal government, which has no lucrative sinecures to
bestow, there will be no great scope for ambitious intrigue. -- Such generally
is the state of this country, whose inhabitants consist principally of
independent and hardy yeomanry, mostly trained to the use of arms, instructed
in their rights -- reaping and enjoying the fruits of their own industry. --
Happy the people that are in such a state! all the blessings of secular and
political enjoyment lie within their reach, unendangered from the rapacious
hand of neighboring powers, jealous of their growth, envious at their
prosperity, and avaricious of their spoils. It is among the principal
advantages of our situation, that we are not surrounded by such petulant and
encroaching neighbors. Of the evil of such a situation, we may form some idea
from what we suffer by the vicinity of the savage tribes.

FROM the natural situation of this country, and the peculiar circumstances of
its inhabitants, arise many political advantages; for the enjoyment of which we
are indebted to the revolution. The features of our policy have a strong
resemblance to the magnificent and well-proportioned features of our country.
No longer do we subscribe to the absurd doctrine of the divine right of kings,
no longer bow our necks to the galling yoke of foreign legislation. Independent
of these servilities, we enjoy the divine right of governing ourselves. In the
exercise of this right, we have seen a complete political revolution, unawed by
surrounding enemies, and uninfluenced by their intrigues. We have seen a
constitution of civil government formed under the influence of reason and
philanthropy, which meets the approving voice of the ablest politicians. Much
has been said of its excellence by the greatest civilians. It is granted on all
hands, that the safety of the nation is the object of all government; and that
the will of the people is the supreme law in all republican governments. But
the arbitrary power of the many will produce anarchy, as that of an individual
does despotism. It is necessary, therefore, that the social will be collected,
and concentrated in one form or constitution of government; no state having yet
appeared, where the people at once govern themselves without representation.
This constitution, like the combination of organs that form the constitution of
the human body, must contain within itself sufficient force and energy to carry
on the necessary functions.' 'The head dictates the laws, and the other members
execute. It is essential that the head, which represents the legislative and
judicial powers, should be calm and deliberate in its decrees; and that the
arm, representing the executive, should have promptitude and force.'

EVERY good government must exist somewhere between absolute despotism, and
absolute democracy. In either of these extremes, neither liberty nor safety can
be enjoyed. It will follow, that a constitution wherein the three powers,
legislative, executive and judicial, are most perfectly combined for the
prosperity of the people, is the best. Indeed, the great Montesquieu has made
it appear, that these three powers exist, in some degree, in every form of
government, even the most absolute. As these powers display their cooperative
influence, in a greater or less degree, in the governmental machine, they have
received their name or style. The name of aristocracy is given to the
government of those states, where a permanent senate governs all, without ever
consulting the people. 'Such is Venice, which is also called a republic; it is
a pure aristocracy in this sense, that the three powers are in the hands of the
nobles. That state, in which the will of an individual is most frequently a
law, and decides on the life or death of the subject, is called a despotic
state. Such is the Turkish empire. But it is not true, that the Sultan is
absolute master; his power finds limits at every step he advances, and he is
obliged to respect them. This empire, then, is between aristocracy and
despotism; but inclines toward the latter. The state in which the will of an
individual is sometimes absolute, but where co-legislative bodies always join
in the exercise of power, is called a monarchy. This species of government is
between despotism and aristocracy, but inclines toward the latter. The state
where the people choose their magistrates for a fixed period, and often
assemble to exercise the sovereignty, is a democracy, and is called a republic*
such were Athens and Rome, and such are the United States of America.'

AMIDST the various shades between the primitive colors in which different
governments have been cast, these United States have wisely cast their's in
that mild form which is most congenial to the rights of man, and the enjoyment
of equal liberty -- that liberty, which to independence unites security --
which to the most ample elective powers, unites strength and energy in
government. -- You will permit me here to felicitate you on the re-election of
two of the first political characters in the world, to the two first offices in
the American Republic; and on the honor your electors have done themselves by
their unanimity in the election.

THE present flourishing condition of these States, affords the best comment on
the excellence of our constitution. All useful theories are practicable. The
most perfect model of government that imagination can form will be useless, if
the state of mankind renders it impracticable. Already has experience taught
us, that our government is fraught with many blessings. The same internal
causes that led to independence, and national existence, have guided the people
of these States to a wise and deliberate choice of persons, to whom the powers
of government might safely be entrusted. To the wisdom of their elections, and
to the judicious appointment of officers to the several departments of state,
are they to ascribe their present flourishing condition. Under the happy
influence of their wisdom, fidelity and industry, we see our credit restored
abroad, and established at home -- our deranged finances reduced to system, and
made productive beyond the calculations of the most sanguine. Although the
revenue laws may, in some respects, operate unequally at present, yet the
object of the government being the distribution of equal justice, such
alterations and reforms will doubtless take place, as to produce all that
equality which the nature of the case will admit. Who does not see reason to
rejoice in the provision making for the current of justice to run pure through
the Union, -- who but the dishonest and fraudulent debtor, or the criminal
offender? The dignity, candor and impartiality, displayed ^^^m the judicial
bench, augur well to the rights of individuals, and to the peace of society.

HERE property is rendered secure, by the equality of law to all; and every
man, being master of the fruits of his own labor, enjoys the right of property
-- no arbitrary imposition of taxes or of tithes, no lordly exactions of rents,
chill the heart of industry, nor repress the cultivator's exertions -- no
mercantile corporations, with exclusive rights, damp the ardent spirit of
enterprise. Hence we see a trackless wilderness, in the short space of one
hundred and seventy years, converted into a fruitful field; and, in the space
of ten years, we see trade and commerce, no longer limited by parliamentary
restrictions, nor distressed by war, extending to all parts of the globe, from
the straits of Magellan to the inhospitable regions of Kamskatka. Hence also we
see the American genius springing forward in useful arts, projecting great and
astonishing enterprises, tearing down mountains and filling up valleys, Mr.
JOHN BROWN, Merchant, of this town, has already gone far, since March last,
toward removing a hill of about 400 feet in length, 180 in breadth, and 60 in
height -- amounting to 150,000 tons of earth; which, when completed, will raise
useless flats into 6 acres of useful building-ground, which will be connected
with the Massachusetts by an elegant bridge, now building by the same gentleman.

The Author hopes Mr. BROWN will pardon this liberty, as reference was
evidently had to it.


and making efforts unknown in those countries where despotism renders every
thing precarious, and where a tyrant reaps what slaves have sown.

A POLITE and ingenious European traveller, (Dr. Moore) tells us, 'The chilling
effects of despotic oppression, or the benign influence of freedom and
commerce, strike the eye of the most careless traveller.' And, speaking of the
disorders incident to free governments, says, 'The temporary and partial
disorders which are the consequence of public freedom, have been greatly
exaggerated by some people, and represented as more than an equivalent to all
the advantages resulting from a free government. But if such persons had
opportunities of observing the nature of those evils which soring up in
absolute governments, they would soon be convinced of their error. The greatest
evil that can arise from the licentiousness which accompanies civil liberty,
is, that people may rashly take a dislike to Liberty herself, from the teasing
impertinence and absurdity of some of her real or affected well-wishers; as a
man might become less fond of his best friend* if he found him always attended
by a snappish cur, which without provocation was always growling and barking.

'WHAT are the disorders of a free government, compared to the gloomy
regularity produced by despotism? in which men are obliged to the most painful
circumspection in all their actions; are afraid to speak their sentiments on
the most common occurrences; suspicious of cherishing government spies in their
household servants, distrustful of their own relations and most intimate
companions; and at all times exposed to the oppression of men in power, and to
the insolence of their favorites. No confusion, in my mind, can be more
terrible than the stern disciplined regularity and vaunted police of arbitrary
governments, where every heart is depressed by fear, where mankind dare not
assume their natural character, where the free spirit must crouch to the slave
in office, where genius must repress her effusions, or, like the Egytian
worshippers, offer them in sacrifice to the calves of power; and where the
human mind, always in shackles, shrinks from every generous effort.'

THERE is a point of depression, as well as exaltation, from which human
affairs naturally return in a contrary direction, and beyond which they seldom
pass, either in their decline or advancement. The present is a crisis, in human
affairs, that teems with great and interesting events. Long, long has the old
world been sunk in ignorance, superstition and bondage. But the period of her
emancipation appears to be rapidly approaching. What a mighty combination of
events is now conspiring to the general spread of knowledge and freedom!
Judging from what we have seen and experienced, we may conclude that the
measures now taken to crush the rights of mankind, and to overturn the altar of
freedom, will be productive of the contrary effect. Indeed a dark cloud at
present vails the fair countenance of liberty in France. Inexperienced in the
science of a free government, and unprepared for the enjoyment of it by a
previous course of education, of intellectual improvement, and moral
discipline, they have tarnished their glory by excesses* and, in the paroxysms
of their zeal, have carried excess to outrage.

IT is the misfortune of men struggling for liberty, that they are apt to be
carried too far, as we have been taught by experience. The more the human mind
have been depressed, the greater will be its extravagancies, when it bursts
forth from the shackles of tyranny into the full light of freedom. Like the
vibrating pendulum, it flies from one extreme to another; and, like that, must
have time to regulate itself. Shall we reject the cause of human liberty,
because anarchy attends the first efforts of a people to gain it, or because
ferocity marks some of their steps toward it? Or shall our confidence in its
progress be overthrown, because threatened by hostile confederacies? As
Americans, we must either renounce that which is our boast and glory, or warmly
wish success to the great principles of the French revolution -- principles
founded on the equal liberty of all men, and the empire of the laws. As
rational beings, and as Christians, we should recollect, that from partial
evil, it is the glory of the Supreme Ruler to bring forth general good; and
that, as inspiration expresses it, 'He makes the wrath of man to praise him;
but the remainder of wrath will he restrain.'

THE present war in Europe has a further object than the subjugation of France.
It is a war of kings and despots, against the dearest rights and the most
invaluable privileges of mankind. Should the combined powers succeed against
France, and the re-establishment of monarchy there exist among possible events,
what security have we, that the same attempt will not be made to restore
monarchy in this country? Has not United America led the way? And may she not
boast, with an honest pride, of the influence of her example in exciting the
attention of many nations to their natural and civil rights? With what freedom
of thought -- with what enlightened and ardent philanthropy, has she inspired
many of the nations of Europe! What would be her condition, if subjugated by
the confederates against freedom, we may learn from the state of Poland, lately
made free by a voluntary compact with its King; but now subdued by the
ferocious power of the north, divided among her jealous neighbors, and the
people sold with the soil, like the animals that graze upon it. -- Let the
generous feelings of human nature rise indignant at the abhorrent idea of part
of itself being thus degraded. Whatever may be the fate of France in the
present contest, the great principles of the revolution will eventually find
advocates in every part of the world, even among those who are now most
inveterate against the conduct of the French. The doctrines of hereditary
powers -- of the divine right of kings -- of their inviolability, and
incapacity to do wrong, are fast declining, and will soon be exploded. They are
solecisms of the same nature with their divine right to do wrong; and will, in
future, more enlightened and liberal days, be read of with astonishment.

How often does a hand unobserved shift the scene of the world! The calmest and
stillest hour precedes the whirlwind; and it has thundered in the serenest
sky. The monarch has drawn the chariot of state, in which he had been wont to
ride in triumph; or been dragged to a scaffold, by the misguided zeal of his
late admirers; and the greatest who ever awed the world, have moralized at the
turn of the wheel. Such, O Louis, has been thy untimely fate! At thy urn, let
pitying nature drop a sympathetic tear! Cease, thou sanguinary demon, any
longer to support thy bloody standard! May the milder genius of true liberty,
and more enlightened policy, speedily pervade the councils, and bless the
people of France!

OUR attention now returns with delight to contemplate that portion of
religious and scientific freedom which our country enjoys. To the early care of
our ancestors to establish literary, and encourage religious institutions, are
we much indebted for the accomplishment of the late revolution, which shows us
the vast importance of paying great attention to the rising sons and daughters
of America, by giving them an enlightened and a virtuous education. Here the
human mind, free as the air, may exert all its powers toward the various
objects laid before it, and expand its faculties to an extent hitherto unknown.
It has been the policy of all monarchical governments, and of some religious
institutions, to keep the people in ignorance, the more easily to dazzle them
into obedience by external marks of greatness, and of native superiority.
Knowledge and true religion go hand in hand, When the former is obscured, the
latter is mutilated, and enveloped in the shades of superstition and bigotry.
And whenever the civil power has undertaken to judge and decide concerning
truth and error, to oppose the one, while it protected the other, it has
invariably supported bigotry, superstition and nonsense.

'ANAXAOORAS was tried and condemned in Greece, for teaching that the sun and
stars were not deities, but masses of corruptible matter. Accusations of a like
nature contributed to the death of Socrates. The threats of bigotry, and the
fear of persecution, prevented Copernicus from publishing, during his life
time, his discovery of the true system of the world. Galileo was obliged to
renounce the doctrine of the motion of the earth, and suffered a year's
imprisonment for having asserted it.' Many other instances of a similar nature,
and much later date, might be mentioned; the tendency of which has been to
cramp the human powers, to destroy in some measure the end of education, by
directing the current of thought into a narrow channel. Hence the doctrine of
the revolution of the earth round the sun, would have been as great 'a
stumbling block to the prejudiced Jews, and as apparent foolishness to the
learned Greeks, as that of a crucified Jesus to be the Savior of the world.'

By the constitution of the UNITED STATES, no man is abridged of the liberty of
enquiry -- no religious test is required -- no bait is thrown out by government
to encourage hypocrisy, or exclude the honest and deserving. In this respect it
possesses a liberality unknown to any people before. It must give pleasure to
every generous mind, to hear 'the children of the stock of Abraham' thus
addressing our beloved President: 'Deprived as we have heretofore been of the
invaluable rights of citizens, we now (with a deep sense of gratitude to the
Almighty Disposer of all events) behold a government erected on the majesty of
the people -- a government which to bigotry gives no sanction, to persecution
no assistance, but generously affording to all liberty of conscience, and
immunities of citizenship -- deeming every one, of whatever nation, tongue or
language, equal parts of the governmental machine. This so ample and extensive
federal union, whose basis is philanthropy, mutual confidence, and public
virtue, we cannot but acknowledge to be the work of the great God, who rules
in the armies of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth.'

Extract from an address presented President WASHINGTON by the Jews at Newport,
when on his tour through the eastern States, August 1790.
IN this view of the subject, may we not consider these as the dawn of brighter
days, of a brighter sun than ever blessed the world before; as a commencement
of the golden age, that introduces a better system of religion than most of
those which have been hitherto professed in the world; a religion that enforces
moral obligations, not a religion that relaxes and evades them; a religion of
peace and charity, not of strife and party rage? The importance of religion to
the peace and order of society, is unspeakably great. Every thing is replaced
and established by religion. It surrounds the whole system of morality,
resembling that universal force of physical nature, which retains the planets
in their order, and subjects them to a regular revolution. But as to all decent
modes and outward expressions of it, the rights of conscience remain untouched.
Here all religious opinions are equally harmless, and render men who hold
different opinions equally good subjects, because there are no laws to oppose
them, no force to compel them. The use of arms, and the military art, of which
we have this day so agreeable and elegant a specimen, are directed to a very
different object, the defense of freedom, and as a bulwark of the State.

MAY we ever show ourselves worthy of the blessings we enjoy, and never tarnish
the bright luster of this day, by any unbecoming excesses. -- Americans! think
of the many privileges which distinguish your condition. Be grateful for your
lot; and let your virtue secure what your valor, under God, has obtained; and
transmit to latest posterity the glorious inheritance. May the political
edifice erected on the theater of this new world, afford a practical lesson of
liberty to mankind, and become in an eminent degree the model of that glorious
temple of universal liberty which is about to be established over the civilized
world.


