A DISCOURSE UPON THE SLAVE TRADE, AND THE SLAVERY OF THE AFRICANS.

DELIVERED In the Baptist Meeting House at Providence, before the Providence
Society for abolishing the Slave Trade, etc.

At their Annual Meeting, on May 17, 1793.

By SAMUEL HOPKINS, D. D.

Pastor of the First Congregational Church in NEWPORT, and Member of said
Society.

Printed at Providence, by J. CARTER.

M,DCC,XCIII

TO THE PROVIDENCE SOCIETY FOR ABOLISHING THE SLAVE TRADE, etc. THE FOLLOWING
DISCOURSE IS RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED, BY THE AUTHOR.

A DISCOURSE upon the Slave Trade, etc.
THE members of this respectable Society, by whom I have been invited to
deliver a discourse before them, at this their annual meeting, on the
Slave Trade, and the consequent slavery of the Africans -- and all those who
are present on this occasion, will not expect that any thing new will be said,
on a subject which has been so much canvassed of late, and on which so many
have written, and so fully exposed the unparalleled unrighteousness, inhumanity
and cruelty, and the odious and horrible attendants of it; by which great light
has been thrown upon it, and the attention of millions turned to it; and they
have been led to execrate it, as a most shocking, outrageous violation of all
the rights of man. -- And there are none, or very few, now, except those whose
minds are blinded, and their hearts hardened, by custom and their supposed
interest, who do not condemn it, as contrary to the true and best interest of
society; and therefore think all lawful endeavors ought to be exerted to
suppress and abolish it forever.

BUT as it is not easy fully to explore this business, and comprehend it in all
its length and breadth, and realize all the evils included in it, it is highly
proper and important often to renew our meditations upon it, and to take those
methods which are suited to impress our minds, and the minds of others, more
and more with the iniquity of this practice, viewed in every different light,
and in all the evil consequences of it.

IN this view, and to promote such a design, the attention, patience and
candor of this respectable audience are asked to the following observations*
which shall be introduced by some of the last words of the benevolent REDEEMER
OF MAN, who came not to destroy men's lives, but to save -- which he spoke to
his disciples, when he was about to leave the world, and ascend to heaven,
recorded by the Evangelist Mark, 16th chapter, and 15th verse, of his gospel:

GO YE INTO ALL THE WORLD, AND PREACH THE GOSPEL TO EVERY CREATURE.

THIS direction and command is an expression of the greatest benevolence to
man. When the Son of God had become incarnate, and taken upon him the form of a
servant, and was obedient unto death, even the death of the cross, in order to
make atonement for the sins of men, and bring in everlasting righteousness,
that God might be just, and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus, and
had risen from the dead, he ordered that this good news should be published
through the whole world, and the offer of this salvation be made to all
mankind, of whatever nation or complexion, whether Jews or Gentiles; the more
civilized or barbarians, rich or poor, white or black: this being the only
remedy for lost man, suited to recover him from that state of darkness, sin and
misery, in which the world of mankind lay, and must perish forever, were it not
for this salvation. -- "Neither is there salvation in any other; for there is
none other name under heaven given among men, whereby they can be saved."

AND as this is an infinitely kind and benevolent injunction, it points out and
commands a duty, an employment, which must be most agreeable and pleasing to
every benevolent mind, whatever labor and expense it may require. And they may
reasonably think themselves highly favored and honored, to whom ability and
opportunity are given to preach the gospel, the unsearchable riches of Christ,
to any of their fellow-men; or who are under advantage to promote this design,
by any exertion in their power.

As the gospel affords the only relief for fallen man, so it is a sufficient
and complete one, where the spirit of it is cordially imbibed, and it is
properly improved for the purposes which it is suited to promote. It raises
sinners from the greatest moral depravity, guilt and misery, to a state of
light, pardon and peace, and brings them finally to the enjoyment of complete
and endless felicity.

THIS institution of heaven, when properly attended to, understood, and
cordially embraced, turns men from darkness to mavelous light. If it finds
them in a state of savage ignorance and barbarity, it civilizes them, and forms
them to be intelligent and good members of society. It subdues the selfishness,
pride and worldly-mindedness of men, and all their inordinate lusts; and
"teaches them to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts* and to live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present world." It raises the mind to the sight
and contemplation of the most sublime, important and entertaining objects, and
manifests those truths, and gives that light, which are received with pleasing
love and admiration; which make men truly wise, and animate them to the
practice of every personal* social and religious duty. It forms men to
uprightness, and the practice of righteousness; to universal benevolence and
goodness, teaching them to love their neighbor as themselves, and to do to
other men as they would that others should do unto them. So far as it spreads,
and has influence on the hearts and lives of men, it banishes the manifold
evils under which mankind have groaned in all ages, and introduces peace, love
and harmony, among men, and unites them together into a happy society, in which
every one puts on bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness and
long-suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving each other in love: each
one studying and exerting himself to do good to all men, according to his
ability and opportunity. At the same time, it forms men to the most sincere
uniform and rational piety, in the exercise of love to God and the Redeemer,
and to all his friends and servants; and they have joy and peace in believing,
and serving Jesus Christ; and their hope of eternal life in the kingdom of
Christ is built and flourishes on the best and most sure foundation.

THIS command of Christ, to preach the gospel to all the nations in the world,
respects not only the Apostles and disciples who then heard him speak, and the
ministers of the gospel in general, who have since been, or are now, or shall
be appointed to that work; but is extended to all Christians in every age of
the church, requiring them in all proper ways, according to their ability,
stations and opportunities, to promote this benevolent design, and exert
themselves for the furtherance of the gospel; that, if possible, all may hear,
and share in the happy effects of it. They ^ho are not called to be preachers
of the gospel, may in many ways assist those who are sent forth to this work,
and do much to forward the propagation and spreading of Christianity; not only
helping by their prayers, but by liberal contributions of their substance, and
by many other labors and exertions. Every true disciple of Christ, who
understands the gospel, and prizes it above silver and gold, and whose heart is
expanded with love to Christ, and benevolence to his fellow-men, must not only
wish and pray that all nations may enjoy the blessings of it, and come to the
knowledge of this saving truth; but considers it as an unspeakable privilege to
be in any way, and in the least degree, an instrument of promoting this design,
whatever labor and expense it may require. And it is owing to the great and
inexcusable wickedness of men, that the gospel did not soon spread all over the
world, after the resurrection and ascension of Christ, and was not embraced by
all men from that day down to this time; which would have prevented the many
and dreadful evils which have reigned in the world in all this period, and
introduced a glorious scene, and series of happy events, which exceed our
present conception. Therefore it can be attributed to nothing but the depravity
of mankind, that the command of the Savior has not been obeyed, and all men
have not been made to share in the saving blessings of the gospel; but that it
has been, and still is, so unsuccessful in the world.

WOULD we know the nature and excellence of Christianity, and the happy
tendency of it to promote the good of mankind, both temporal and eternal, we
must not expect to learn it from the general appearance of it in what is called
the Christian part of the world, and the effect it now has on the greatest part
of those who enjoy the light of it. But we must look into our Bibles, where it
is properly and to the best advantage described, and all the doctrines and
precepts which it contains are plainly written by the pen of inspiration. And
there we are taught the effect it had on those who cordially embraced the
gospel in the days of the Apostles, and to what an excellent character it
formed those who became true Christians. And we are informed by credible
historians what a happy effect it had in the world, where it spread and was
embraced for the first two or three centuries after the ascension of Christ,
until the administration of it was perverted by wicked men, who, with all their
worldliness and pride, crept into the church, and perverted Christianity in its
very nature and design, both in doctrine and practice, to accommodate it to
their selfishness and pride, and so as to answer their own worldly ends. And
there have been numbers, who in all ages since, in the midst of the general
apostasy and corruption, have held fast the form of found doctrine contained in
divine revelation; and in their life and practice have been the humble,
harmless followers of Christ, in the midst of a crooked and perverse
generation, among whom they have shone as lights in the world, exhibiting an
amiable example of faith, patience, righteousness and benevolence, of which
excellent character, we trust, there is a number now in the Christian world,
and among us.

AMONG many other evil things which have prevailed in this apostate world, are
tyranny and slavery, introduced and practiced by the lusts, the selfishness,
pride and avarice of men; which have been the source of unspeakable unhappiness
and misery. The gospel is suited to root these evils out of the world, and
wholly abolish slavery; and will have this effect where it is fully and
faithfully preached, and cordially received and obeyed. For where this takes
place, no one will forfeit his liberty, and therefore must have a right to it;
and no man will make a slave of another, were it in his power, who has not
forfeited his liberty by the sentence of proper judges; for in so doing he
would act contrary to the precepts of Christianity.

THE following precept of our Lord and Savior, "All things whatsoever ye would
that men should do unto you, do ye even so to them," which is included in
loving our neighbor as ourselves, will set at liberty every slave who has not
forfeited his freedom, or to whom slavery can be considered as undesirable, and
a calamity, whenever it is properly regarded, and reduced to practice.

CHRISTIANITY being, in the nature and tendency of it, and the particular
precepts which it contains, thus opposed to slavery, did gradually, even in its
most corrupt state, root it out among the nations in the Christian world, so
that it was almost if not wholly abolished for some centuries, until it took
place again, in a manner and degree which was never known before among any
nation or people, since the world began, in the abominable Slave Trade with the
Africans, and their consequent slavery. That this business, which is such a
gross and open violation not only of the genius and precepts of Christianity,
but of the rights and feelings of humanity, should be undertaken and carried on
by nations who call themselves Christians, and by individuals who bear that
name, is truly astonishing! It is impossible fully to describe, or to have an
adequate conception of the crimes which have been committed in this business,
or the evils which have attended it. If a man of observation, discernment and
humanity, had attended this trade many years, and spent the residue of his life
in the West Indies, under the best advantage to see the inhumanity and cruelty,
and the various crimes which take place in the treatment of the haves, and the
innumerable miseries which they suffer, he would after all have but a very
partial idea and conception of the whole; and know but little, compared with
all of this kind which takes place. How low and saint, then, are our
conceptions of this enormous evil! The Great Omnipotent alone, who will bring
every work of man into judgment, with every secret thing, has a full, clear and
perfect knowledge of the whole of this great evil.

SUFFICE it now, in a few words, to say, that by this trade in the bodies and
souls of men, millions have been violently torn from their native country, and
from every thing dear to them; in the accomplishing of which, fire and sword,
war and desolation, and slaughter of numbers exceeding ou^ reckoning, have
taken place through a vast extent of country; and multitudes have been induced
to betray, steal and sell their countrymen and neighbors. Many thousands of
these, thus taken from their country, and all the enjoyments of life and
liberty, and all their dearest connexions, have died on board the ships, in
their passage to the West Indies, or to other countries; and the rest have been
sold like brute beasts into perpetual slavery, with their posterity after them;
where the most of them are treated in a manner beyond description inhuman and
cruel, by owners, masters and overseers, many, if not the most of whom, are
hardened against all the settings of humanity toward their slaves, and are
themselves a nuisance and burden to the earth, so that the West India islands
in general are become the greatest resemblance of the infernal regions that can
be found in this world.

IN this general, but very superficial and scanty view of the Slave Trade, and
the slavery connected with it, who can forbear pronouncing, that they who have
encouraged, prosecuted or supported this traffic in their fellow-men, though
some of them may have done it in ignorance and unbelief, have really been the
emissaries of satan, and agents for him who delights in the wickedness and
misery of mankind? And though they live in Christian lands, and call themselves
Christians, and whatever plausible pretenses they may make, they have all been
really acting most contrary to the nature and precepts of Christianity, and
doing the works of the devil: and nothing can be more dishonorable to the
gospel, and the author of it, than to attempt to reconcile this practice with
Christianity.

THIS indeed has been attempted by some; and, among other things, it has been
pretended, that this treatment of the Africans was right and commendable, as it
was the way to christianize them, by bringing them from a heathen to a
Christian land. But is this obedience to the command of the Savior, "Go into
all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature?" Is it not directly
contrary to this command? Does this direct men to go into heathen lands, and
take men by force from their own country, and destroy a great part of them, and
reduce the rest to the most abject slavery, in order to make Christians of
them? Does it not rather command us to carry the gospel to them; and to take
all proper pains, in the most friendly manner, to instruct and persuade them to
embrace it, without any force or compulsion, that they may be happy in their
own ^and while they live, and be saved from sin and misery forever? Do the
dealers in slaves make any attempts to carry the gospel to Africa, and
propagate it there? Do they say a word to their slaves about the gospel, or do
any thing that tends to lead them to embrace it? Has not their whole conduct,
in their treatment of the Africans, a direct and strong tendency to the
contrary? The Slave Trade, in the manner in which it has been carried on, tends
to beget the strongest prejudices against Christianity in the inhabitants of
the ^ast continent of Africa, and actually has done it in many nations; and
nothing could have been done by those who bear the name of Christians more
effectually to prevent the introduction of the gospel into that part of the
world, and more directly to counteract the command of Christ to preach the
gospel to them. And how do those who are brought from that country, and put
into a state of slavery, and treated as the slaves generally are in the
West Indies, naturally and unavoidably look upon these dealers in slaves, who
are called Christians? Is i^ possible they should look upon them in a better
light than we do the savages, not to say the inhabitants of the infernal
regions? What then must they think of Christianity? Is this the way to persuade
them to be Christians? What could be done more to prevent it? Many millions of
these poor creatures have doubtless lived and died with the greatest aversion
from Christianity, and even the name of a Christian, from the treatment they
have received from those who have called themselves Christians. And if any have
embraced the gospel, and become real Christians, in circumstances tending so
strongly to prejudice against* it, this must be ascribed to the extraordinary,
wonderful, and no less than miraculous interposition of divine pow^^ and grace;
and no thanks are due to the (...) in slaves, whose whole conduct has been
counteracted in these instances. And can it be believed, that these dealers in
slaves have carried on this unchristian, inhuman and cruel business, with a
view to christianize those whom they thus injure and oppress, or from any
motives of benevolence or humanity? This seems impossible. But if this were
possible, the treatment of these slaves demonstrates that no such motives
exist, while no proper methods are taken to instruct them in Christianity; and
in most instances there has been not only no care taken to instruct them, but
constant care and exertions to prevent it, added to the prejudices against
Christianity which have been mentioned. And there is no reason to consider
those many millions of slaves, who have been made so by this trade, as under
any better advantages for instruction, or to become Christians, than if they
had lived and died in their own country, a few instances only excepted. No!
this business has been begun, and carried on, from that sordid selfishness and
avarice, which fortify men's hearts against the truths and precepts of the
gospel, and will lead them to do the work of the evil one, in order to get
money, and promote what they consider to be their worldly interest.

HAD all those who have had a hand in this antichristian business, by which so
many millions of our fellow-men have been murdered, or treated as brutes, or
both, been disposed to take as much pains, and be at as great cost, to send the
gospel to Africa, and instruct and christianize the many nations in that part
of the world, as they have taken, and expended, to enslave and destroy them,
and thus prejudice them against Christianity, they would probably have been the
means of spreading the gospel over that vast continent, of civilizing those
barbarous nations and of the salvation of millions; and would have prevented
the destruction and misery of which they have been the occasion and
instruments; and would have had the reward of such a benevolent work, and
escaped the guilt which now lies upon them, and the awful consequence!

THIS observation opens a scene to our view, which is enough to overwhelm the
attentive, pious mind, and must therefore be now only mentioned. A future
judgment, an eternity to come, will unfold the whole, of which we can now have
but a transient glimpse.

THIS enormous iniquity, and wide-spreading evil, the Slave Trade, with its
consequences, which has been carried on and advanced to such a degree for more
than a century, by kings and their people in the Christian world, is an
evidence, among many others, and serves to confirm the opinion, that the sixth
vial, mentioned in the sixteenth chapter of the Revelation, has been running
during this time. It is there predicted, that under this vial three unclean
spirits, the spirits of devils, working miracles, or wonderful things, should
go forth to the whole world, to gather them together to the battle of that
great day of God Almighty.

THE work of these spirits is to excite men, especially in the Christian world,
to extraordinary and wonderful degrees of wickedness, by which they unite in
arming themselves against heaven, and are prepared for the judgments which will
follow. Who can attend to the Slave Trade, in the manner in which it has been
prosecuted, with the extent and consequences of it, and not be convinced that
the hand and power of satan has been (...) extraordinary degree exerted and
manifested in it, stirring men up to a kind and degree of wickedness and
mischief, which was not known before?

AND shall this shameful practice, this evil, which has got such deep root, and
is spread so far and wide, never have an end? Can (...) be put to those wicked
men, who are devouring their fellow-men, who are more righteous than they? Must
this gross and open violation of the rights of man, of the laws of God, and the
benevolent religion of the Savior, continue forever? Shall the horrid scene of
unrighteousness, violence, cruelty and misery, which has so long taken place in
the West Indies and Africa, never be abolished?

THANKS be to God! He has assured us, that all these works of the devil shall
be destroyed; and that the time is hastening on, when all the people shall be
righteous and benevolent, and there shall be none to destroy or hurt in all the
earth. And what has taken place of late, gives reason of hope and confidence
that this sore evil will soon be made to cease. The attention of thousands and
millions has been awakened, and turned to this subject; much has been written
upon it, and light and conviction have had a rapid and extensive circulation.
Numerous societies have been voluntarily formed, wholly to abolish this evil;
and there is reason to conclude, that this light and conviction, and these
exertions, will continue and increase, till the Slave-Traders shall be utterly
destroyed.

BUT why is this work still opposed or neglected by any? Why are not the cries
of the millions of Africans in bondage heard by all? Why do they make no more
impression on the public mind, and rouse all to feel for the wretchedness of so
great a part of their fellow-men, and to exertions for their relief? Why is the
British Parliament so slow to abolish the Slave Trade, and no more influenced
by the evidence laid before them of the cruelties and murders which attend this
traffic, and of the moral and political evils produced by it; and by the
repeated, earnest and powerful applications made to them?

AND as to some of us Americans, what shall we say? We have reason to reflect
with painful shame upon the hand we have had in this iniquity; by which so many
thousands of our fellow-men, as good by nature as we are, have been destroyed,
or put into a state of the most abject slavery, in the West Indies, or brought
to this continent, and sold like cattle, and in most instances treated as if
they were not men!

IN the year 1774, when Britain appeared to threaten a war with us, and
disposed to deny to us some part of the liberty which we claimed, and we had a
prospect of entering into a bloody contest in defense of our own rights, the
Slave Trade, which had been practiced by us, appeared so inconsistent with our
contending for our own liberty, that a Congress, which then represented these
now United States, made a solemn resolution, in the name of all the people whom
they represented, in the following words: "We will neither import nor purchase
any slaves imported, after the first day of December next, after which time we
will wholly discontinue the Slave Trade* and will neither be concerned in it
ourselves, nor will we hire our vessels, or sell our commodities or
manufactures to those who are concerned in it." And all the people appeared to
acquiesce in this resolution, as reasonable, important and necessary, in order
to act a consistent part, while contending for their own liberties, and to have
any ground of hope in the protection and smiles of a righteous God, and success
in the struggle into which we were e^^ering. With this resolution we entered
the combat; and God appeared to be on our side, and wrought wonders in our
favor* disappointed those who rose up against us, and established us a free
and independent nation.

AFTER all this, could it have been expected, would it have been believed, if
predicted, that such a resolution, so reasonable and important, on which the
hope of success was in a great measure grounded, and which was doubtless one
mean of it, should be so far forgotten and counteracted, that a Convention, met
to form a constitution, could not agree upon one, unless it did secure the
continuance of the importation of slaves, for a number of years at least? That
the Congress of the United States should so long neglect to suppress this
trade, so far as it is acknowledged they have authority to do it, through the
opposition made to such a measure by a small minority? That notwithstanding
laws have been made, by a number of these States, prohibiting this trade in
human flesh, it is yet carried on openly (horresco referens) especially in this
State, and yet the law be eluded, and cannot be executed? That there are
hundreds of thousands of slaves in these States, and no effectual measures are
taken, where the most of them are, to give them a proper education, and
emancipate them, as soon as it may be done consistent with their best good, and
that of the publi^?

WHEN all this is taken into view by the truly pious, who fear God, and believe
his word, is it to be wondered at, that their flesh trembles for fear of the
righteous judgments of God? Are they to be condemned as superstitious
enthusiasts? Have we not all reason to fear that the vengeance of heaven will
fall upon us, as a people, in ways perhaps which are not now thought of, unless
we repent and reform?

BUT may we not hope for better things? That this evil practice will be better
investigated, and soon utterly suppressed? That benevolence and compassion
toward the miserable Africans will be so sensibly, and with such strength,
exercised toward them, by the people in general, that all proper measures will
be taken to make them a free and happy people? And if it be necessary, in order
to this, that they should return to Africa, the continent which seems to be
best suited to their constitution, may we not wish and hope that such a desire
to compensate them, as far as we may, for the injuries we have done them, and
such a spirit of benevolence will be excited, that we shall with cheerfulness
contribute every thing necessary to answer this end?

WE may hope, that all this dark and dreadful scene will not only have an end,
but is designed by the Most High to be the mean of introducing the gospel among
the nations in Africa: that those who have embraced the gospel, while among us,
with all who have been or may be in some good measure civilized and instructed,
will, by our assistance, return to Africa, and spread the light of the gospel
in that now dark part of the world; and propagate those arts, and that science,
which shall recover them from that ignorance and barbarity which now prevail,
to be a civilized, Christian and happy people, making as great improvement in
all useful knowledge, and in the practice of righteousness, benevolence and
piety, as has yet been done by any people on earth, and much greater. Thus all
this past and present evil which the Africans have suffered by the Slave Trade,
and the slavery to which so many of them have been reduced, may be the occasion
of an overbalancing good: and it may hereafter appear, as it has in the case of
Joseph being sold a slave into Egypt, and the oppression and slavery of the
Israelites by the Egyptians, that though the Slave-Traders have really meant
and done that which is evil, yet God has designed it all for good, the good of
which all this evil shall be the occasion.

OUGHT not this prospect to animate us earnestly to pray for such an happy
event, and to exert ourselves to the utmost to promote it? Can we be
indifferent and negligent in this matter, without slighting and disobeying the
command of Christ, to go into all the world, and preach the gospel to every
creature? And will not such an attempt to send the gospel to Africa, being
willing to spare no expense or labor thus to spread the knowledge of the
Savior among the nations there, be a proper expression of our love and regard
to this benevolent, important injunction?

To this end, let us be firm, wise and active, in pursuing every proper measure
to abolish the Slave Trade, and put an end to the slavery of the Africans,
which is so contrary to the gospel, and has opposed and is now a hindrance to
the propagation of it in Africa, and is so injurious to the spiritual and
temporal interest of all who have any connection with it.

MAY none of this respectable Society, from selfish and sinister views, or from
fear of man, or partial favor and affection to any, or from indolence and
neglect, act a part inconsistent with the benevolent design of it, or unworthy
of a member of it: but may every one, with the utmost care, circumspection,
fidelity and fortitude, act a consistent part, and persevere in constant
endeavors to promote the important end of this institution, whatever may be
the opposition from ignorant, interested men; knowing that he is engaged in the
cause of God and human nature.

LET us consult and determine what we may do in favor of the blacks among us,
especially those who are free; in protecting them from oppression and injuries;
by encouraging and assisting them to industry, and a prudent management of
their worldly affairs; attempting to reform the vicious, to instruct the
ignorant, and promote morality, virtue and religion, among them; and providing
for the education of their children in useful learning, that they may be raised
to an acknowledged equality with the white people; and some of them, of the
most promising abilities and piety, be fitted to preach the gospel to their
brethren in Africa; and that numbers may be the better prepared to move to that
region, and settle there, and set an example of industry and wisdom in
cultivating the land of that fertile country; and of the practice of
Christianity; which will have the best tendency to civilize those now barbarous
nations, to spread the light of the gospel among them, and persuade them to be
Christians.

Is there not good reason to believe, that if this nation, the inhabitants in
the United States of America, both high and low, rulers and ruled, had a proper
view and sense of the unrighteousness of the Slave Trade, and the slavery of
the Africans, and of the sore calamity and misery of millions of our fellow-men
in Africa, the West Indies, and (...) this continent, as the effect of this
iniqui^^ (...) a stop would be p^^ to this trade, and all the (...) among us be
se^ free as fast as possible, (...) such strong compassion would be excited
toward these injured, miserable men, and desire and zeal to make all possible
compensation to them, and render them happy, that no exertions or expense would
be thought too much, which would be required to transport those to Africa who
should be disposed to go and settle there; and to furnish them with every thing
necessary and convenient for their being settled there, in the best
circumstances suited to promote their temporal and eternal happiness, and of
the nations on that vast continent? How happy, if we, as a people and nation,
should cheerfully unite in this, from motives of justice and benevolence, and a
desire that the gospel may be preached to every creature! How unhappy, if we
should be forced to part with the slaves in these States, and send them away,
from the motives of fear and distress, which induced the Egyptians to part with
their dearest treasures, in order to thrust out and send the Israelites from
them, whom they had injured and abused! It is very possible that one of these
may take place.

IF the former, and we should cheerfully agree to do this injured people all
the justice, and show them all the kindness in our power, we should not only
take the most probable method to avert the divine judgments, and obtain the
smiles of heaven, and take, perhaps, the best method in our reach to promote
the propagation of the gospel; but we, especially some of the southern States
in the Union, would be delivered from the sin and calamity of the slavery which
now takes place, which is a great moral and political evil, however insensible
they may now be of it. And such a settlement in Africa, properly conducted and
supported, might be greatly beneficial to the commercial interest both of this
nation and of those in Africa; and in the end produce a temporal good and
prosperity, which might, as far as is now practicable, atone for the evils of
the Slave Trade and slavery.

BUT, be this as it may, we may be assured that we are engaged in a cause which
will finally prosper. The Slave Trade, and all slavery, shall be totally
abolished, and the gospel shall be preached to all nations; good shall be
brought out of all the evil which takes place, and all men shall be united into
one family and kingdom under Christ the Savior, and the meek shall inherit the
earth, and delight themselves in the abundance of peace. In the prospect of
this, we may rejoice in the midst of the darkness and evils which now surround
us; and think ourselves happy, if we may be, in any way, the active instruments
of hastening on this desirable predicted event. AMEN.

APPENDIX.
THE proposal of assisting the blacks among us to go and make a settlement in
Africa, which has been mentioned in the preceding discourse, I have thought to
be of such importance, as to require a more particular explanation to be laid
before the public, with the reasons for it, for their consideration* hoping
that, if it be generally approved, it will excite those united generous
exertions which are necessary, in order to effect it.

THERE are a considerable number of free blacks in New England, and in other
parts of the United States, some of whom are industrious, and of a good moral
character; and some of them appear to be truly pious, who are desirous to
remove to Africa, and settle there. They who are religious, would be glad to
unite as Christian brethren, and move to Africa, having one instructor, or
more, and cultivate the land which they may obtain there, and maintain the
practice of Christianity in the sight of their now heathen brethren; and
endeavor to instruct and civilize them, and spread the knowledge of the gospel
among them.

IN order to effect this in the best manner, a vessel must be procured, and
proper sailors provided, to go to Africa, with a number of persons, both white
and black, perhaps, who shall be thought equal to the business, to search that
country, and find a place where a settlement may be made with the consent of
the inhabitants there; the land being given by them, or purchased of them, and
so as best to answer the ends proposed. If such a place can be found, as no
doubt it may, they must return, and the blacks must be collected who are
willing to go and settle there, and form themselves into a civil society, by
agreeing in a constitution, and a code of laws, by which they will be regulated.

AND they must be furnished with every thing necessary and proper to transport
and settle them there, in a safe and comfortable manner; with shipping and
provisions, till they can procure them in Africa, by their own labor; and with
instruments and utensils necessary to cultivate the land, build houses, etc.
and have all the protection and assistance they will need, while settling, and
when settled there. And, if necessary, a number of white people must go with
them; one or more to superintend their affairs, and others to survey and lay
out their lands -- build mills and houses, etc. But these must not think of
settling there for life; and the blacks are to be left to themselves, when they
shall be able to conduct their own affairs, and need no farther assistance; and
be left a free, independent people.

THIS appears to be the best and only plan to put the blacks among us in the
most agreeable situation for themselves, and to render them most useful to
their brethren in Africa, by civilizing them, and teaching them how to
cultivate their lands, and spreading the knowledge of the Christian religion
among them. The whites are so habituated, by education and custom, to look upon
and treat the blacks as an inferior class of beings, and they are sunk so low
by their situation, and the treatment they receive from us, that they never can
be raised to an equality with the whites, and enjoy all the liberty and rights
to which they have a just claim; or have all the encouragements and motives to
make improvements of every kind, which are desirable. But if they were removed
to Africa, this evil would cease, and they would enjoy all desirable equality
and liberty, and live in a climate which is peculiarly suited to their
constitution. And they would be under advantages to set an example of industry,
and the best manner of cultivating the land, of civil life, of morality and
religion, which would tend to gain the attention of the inhabitants of that
country, and persuade them to receive instruction, and embrace the gospel.

THESE United States are able to be at the expense of prosecuting such a plan,
of which these hints are some of the outlines. And is not this the best way
that can be taken to compensate the blacks, both in America and Africa, for the
injuries they have received by the Slave Trade and slavery, and that which
righteousness and benevolence must dictate? And even selfishness will be
pleased with such a plan as this, and excite to exertions to carry it into
effect, when the advantages of it to the public and to individuals are well
considered and realized. This will gradually draw off all the blacks in
New England, and even in the middle and southern States, as fast as they can be
set free, by which this nation will be delivered from that which, in the view
of every discerning man, is a great calamity, and inconsistent with the good of
society; and is now really a great injury to most of the white inhabitants,
especially in the southern States.

AND by the increase and flourishing of such a plantation of free people in
Africa, where all the tropical fruits and productions, and the articles which
we fetch from the West Indies, may be raised in great abundance, by proper
cultivation, and many other useful things procured, a commerce may take place,
and be maintained, between those settlements and the United States of America,
which will be of very great and increasing advantage to both.

AND this will have the greatest tendency wholly to abolish the abominable
trade in human flesh, and will certainly effect it, if all other attempts prove
unsuccessful.

THAT such a plan is practicable, is evident from the experiment which has
lately been made in forming a settlement of blacks at Sierra-Leona. Above a
thousand blacks were transported from Nova Scotia to that place last year* who,
by the assistance of a small number of whites, and supplies from England, have
formed a town and plantation, which by the latest accounts is now in a
flourishing condition, the inhabitants living in peace and amity with the
neighboring nations, and with a promising prospect of being a great advantage
to them, by teaching them to cultivate their lands, and civilizing them, and
showing them the advantages of peace and of industry, and trade in the
productions of their country, and spreading the knowledge of Christianity among
them. This will gradually put an end to the Slave Trade and to slavery in that
part of the continent. And from this settlement there is a rational prospect of
a commerce, in the productions of that climate, with Britain, which will be so
profitable as more than to compensate the latter for all the expense of forming
and carrying it on, and will be greatly advantageous to both nations.

THERE is reason to believe that a settlement may be made by the blacks now in
the United States in some part of Africa, either on the river Sierra-Leona, or
in some other place, which will be as advantageous to those who shall settle
there, and to the adjacent nations, as this which has been mentioned, and with
much less expense; and which will be a greater benefit to this nation, than
that may be to Britain.

ARE there not, then, motives sufficient to induce the Legislature of this
nation to enter upon and prosecute this design, to form a plan, and execute it,
as wisdom shall direct? And is there not reason to think that it would meet
with general approbation? But if this cannot be, may not this be effected by
the societies in these States, who are formed with a design to promote the best
good of the Africans? Would not this be answering the end of their institution,
in the best way that can be devised, and in imitation of that which has been
formed in Great Britain, for the same purpose?

IS there not reason to believe, that, if such a plan was well digested, and
properly laid before the public, and urged, with the reasons which offer, and a
company or committee formed to conduct the affair, there might be a sum
collected sufficient to carry it into effect?

THE General Court in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts did some time ago make
a resolve to the following purpose, that when a place can be found in Africa
where the blacks in that State may settle to their advantage, they would
furnish them with shipping and provisions sufficient to transport them there,
and with arms sufficient to defend them, and farming utensils sufficient to
cultivate their lands. If all the States in the Union, or most of them, would
take the same measure, such a design might be soon and easily carried into
execution. Nothing appears to be wanting but a proper, most reasonable zeal, in
so good a cause.


