THE TRIAL OF JEREMIAH HILL, FOR HERESY, BEFORE THE CHURCH OF CHRIST IN
BIDDEFORD. MAY 2, 1793.

"Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God among you." Peter. "They received
the Word with all readiness of mind, and searched the scriptures daily, whether
these things were so." Paul. KIND READER,
BEFORE I proceed, it will be necessary to give you the clue which led to this
business.

Simon Wingate one of the deacons of the Church in Biddeford, a rigid
Trinitarian, and a man of a violent temper, had for many years been endeavoring
to for up a church quarrel with Mr. Hill, on account of his catholic ideas,
which he in conversation held up to view, when religion was the topic,
influenced the Rev. Mr. Webster pastor of said church, to invite him and Mr.
Hill to meet at his house, and at the same time to invite a number of the
church to be present. (Mr. Hill had, for a number of years, carefully avoided
any conversation with Deacon Wingate respecting religion, on account of his
rigid principles, and violent temper.)

Accordingly they met at the Pastor's on Friday, the 14th. day of September,
1792, and four other members of said Church. After a little conversation,
Deacon Wingate proposed to Mr. Hill the following Question: --

"Of whom was Jesus Christ the Son?"

To which Mr. Hill answered, "I am not fully satisfied in my own mind." --
"Whom do you think he was the son of?" Answer: "I am inclined to think that he
was the son of Joseph." After a considerable conversation respecting various
texts of Scripture which speak of Jesus Christ, Deacon Wingate finding those
present wished to drop the matter expressed himself after this manner, "If you
are all satisfied, I shall endeavor to make myself contented" -- and each one
returned to his respective home. The next sabbath, Deacon Wingate did not
attend meeting, and it was currently reported that he exclaimed bitterly
against the Pastor and Church, calling them as much heretics as Mr. Hill, and
that he was conscience-smitten, and could not, or would not worship with them,
etc.

Mr. Hill, understanding that James Emery, another Deacon of said Church, was a
good deal affected with the clamor Deacon Wingate had made respecting this
conference, his tenets, etc. wrote Deacon Emery a letter on the subject,
expressing his concern for the difficulties and animosities that agitated the
Church; that as rational creatures we ought to reason on religious subjects, as
we did on other matters; that reason was a distinguishing talent which God had
given men above the brutes, and adduced a number of texts of Scripture to show
the propriety of such an investigation of religious subjects; that the Apostles
always exercised this noble talent in introducing the Gospel into the world;
that we ought to use candor toward one another who made different
constructions of the same text or that the Protestants doctrine of
transubstantiation because it was unreasonable, notwithstanding the Scriptures
plainly said "this is my body -- this is my blood"; that it was as unreasonable
to believe that three were but one, and that one was three, as to believe that
bread was flesh, or that wine was blood; that one great object of Christ's
mission into the world was to enforce the doctrine of the resurrection to an
immortal life, and to give an example as a full proof of the doctrine; that it
Jesus Christ was in the order of beings superior to man, his resurrection would
not prove man's resurrection any more than man's resurrection would prove the
resurrection of a brute; and that concerning the divine conception (so called)
he argued that Mary was espoused, that is, married to Joseph; that Joseph
wascalled her husband, and Mary wascalled by the angel his wife; that if the
had not been his wife; he could not possibly have meditated the putting her
away; that being conceived by the Holy Ghost, signified that the child which
she had conceived, would be highly favored of God, would have much of the
Divine influence, would be the Messiah, the same which the prophets had
foretold was to come, would save the people from their sins, would bring life
and immortality to light; that Joseph, in order to prove the event of his
wonderful dream, declined to have any conversation with her as his wife from
the time of the dream, till she was delivered: that Luke and other disciples
and Apostles supposed him to be the son of Joseph as well as the scribes and
pharisees, who were the teachers of the people in that day, and doubtless were
men of information; that he did not see why we in this day might not suppose so
too; that his being called the Son of God did not prove any trinity, any more
than Adam's being called the son of God; -- for all good men were called the
sons of God; that if we quit reason and common sense, we, by enthusiasm,
bigotry and superstition, might make nothing mean any, thing.

Deacon Emery received this letter kindly; saw Mr. Hill a few days after, and
with more than common cordiality took him by the hand, thanked him for the
letter he had sent him, saying it had given him a good deal of satisfaction;
that his creed was not so bad as he had heard, etc. Deacon Wingate borrowed
this letter and showed it to the Rev. Mr. Lancaster, of Scarborough, who,
filled with enthusiastic zeal, passed his solemn sentence of condemnation upon
it, calling it heresy, blasphemy, damnable doctrine, etc. This awful sentence
being communicated by Deacon Wingate to Deacon Emery; he was much agitated, and
by deacon Wingate's influence, was induced with one other member of said
church, to apply to the Pastor, requesting a church meeting, which was
appointed to be held at the pastor's, January 17, 1793 -- At which meeting
Deacon Wingate appeared, and entered his complaint against Mr. Hill, charging
him with giving it as his opinion, that Jesus Christ the Messiah was not
begotten by the miraculous power of the Holy Ghost, and that he was the real
son of Joseph and Mary. Mr. Hill then desired the meeting might be adjourned,
that he might have time to prepare himself for his defense, and that the
meeting at the adjournment might be held at the meeting house, and public
notice given. Accordingly the meeting was adjourned to the first Thursday in
May, then next following, to meet at the meeting house at 2 o'clock in the
afternoon.

On the first Wednesday in May the Association met at Mr. Webster's parish, and
after lecture, the Church stopped, and agreed to ask counsel in this matter, of
the Association. Accordingly the Church were all invited to meet the
Association that afternoon at Mr. Webster's, which they did, and after a good
deal of conversation, in which Mr. Hill freely and fully gave his opinion
respecting the subject matter of dispute, and his reasons for forming such an
opinion, fixing the whole on his Bible. The Church retired for some time, that
the Association might consult among themselves. After some time the Church were
again invited in, and the Association delivered the result of their
consultation, declaring that the tenet Mr. Hill embraced, was in their judgment
erroneous, and that it ought to be testified and guarded against. The Church as
well as Mr. Hill, were not satisfied with this result, because they had left
the matter as loose as they found it, and the Church as much in the dark as
ever. It must be remembered, that during all this time, Deacon Wingate withdrew
himself from the social worship and communion of the Church; that Mr. Hill had
had two conferences with him before several witnesses, and expostulated with
him on the unreasonableness of his conduct; that observing different creeds
could not hurt their respective believers; that we are in a land of light and
knowledge; that actions spoke louder than words; that Jesus Christ and his
Apostles condemned mal conduct only; and that what we call creeds were not
introduced into the Church till a long time after the Christian Era.

After Mr. Hill found that expostulations had no effect, he exhibited to the
Pastor a complaint against Deacon Wingate, charging him with absenting himself
from the social worship and communion of the Church for six months then last
past; for his unchristian conduct toward those who did not construe the sacred
Scriptures agreeable to his notion. -- For being a railer, a tatler, and a
busybody in other men's matters, contrary to the precepts and examples of Jesus
Christ; for combining with others to defraud one David Hutchins in the sale of
some ironore mines; for unchristian conduct toward him in calling him to a
conference before witnesses, insisting on his answering some questions
concerning Jesus Christ the Messiah, and then making his answers the foundation
of an accusation before the Church; and for persecuting him for a private pique
under the cloak of religion. Mr. Hill always supposed that Deacon Wingate
carried on this matter out of revenge, because he enlisted his apprentice
during the late war, contrary to his will, though his personnal interest did
not suffer by it, for the apprentice gave him one hundred dollars of his
bounty. -- On this account the Deacon often quarreled with Mr. Hill, and
finding he could not get any advantage by quarreling in that way, he commenced
the combat bernard under the cloak of religion. Besides, Deacon Wingate was
jealous that Mr. Hill assisted Mr. Hutchins in his lawsuit against him
concerning the ironore mines; for Mr. Hill, as a Justice of the Peace, took a
number of depositions to be used in that action on both sides, and when Deacon
Wingate came to him for his advice, respecting the matter, he heartily gave him
his opinion, and the reasons why he formed such an opinion, which offended the
Deacon, though the judgment of the court of reference proved to be the same.
But to return,

The Church being met at the meeting house according to adjournment, and the
Rev. Doctor Hemmenway being present, the Church requested him to assist in the
business before them as a conciliator. The Doctor read a paper, which he said
was agreeable to the minds of the Association, giving it as their opinion, that
Mr. Hill's tenet was false, unsound, etc. and that the Church ought to bear
their testimony against it; that they ought to deal tenderly with a brother who
was in an error not voluntarily; that they ought to advise him to study the
Scriptures more carefully, and to be careful in not advancing such doctrines,
they being against the common tenets of the Churches in general, and this
Church in particular.

Mr. Hill then desired liberty to answer for himself, and give the reasons
publicly, why he formed such an opinion, a considerable number of persons being
collected to hear the debates, etc. Mr. Hill then rose and delivered the
following Address:

Friends, Brethren and Fellow-Citizens,

I think myself happy that I am permitted this day to answer for myself before
this assembly, touching the things whereof I am accused, because I know that
this is an age of free inquiry; and I desire to thank my God, that by the
constitution of this Commonwealth, "No subject shall be hurt, molested, or
restrained, in his person, liberty, or estate, for wershipping God in the
manner and season most agreeable to the dictates of his own conscience; or for
his religious profession or sentiments; provided he does not disturb the public
peace, or obstruct others in their religious worship": therefore I beseech you
to hear me patiently.

I shall not pretend to deny the accusation, which is, 'for giving it as my
opinion, that Jesus Christ the Messiah was not begotten by the miraculous power
of the Holy Ghost; and that he was the real son of Joseph and Mary:" but shall
endeavor to give you the reasons why I have formed such an opinion. In doing
this I shall quote no authors but the holy men of God, who wrote as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost; neither shall I give their writings any private
interpretation, but shall construe every text rationally, according to the gift
of God that is in me. But before I proceed, I shall offer for your candid
consideration three propositions, in which think you will agree with me.

1. That the Scriptures are true.

2d., That Scripture is the best interpreter of Scripture.

3d. That God has made us rational creatures and thereby distinguished us from
the brutal creation; therefore he requires us to act and think of him, his
ways, his word, and his works, according to those rational powers and
faculties,-which if we neglect, we, like the slothful servant must be said to
have hid this distinguished talent in the earth, and emphatically to call God
Almighty a hard master. Were either of you to endeavor to persuade a Mehometan
to embrace the Christian religion, would you not bid him use reason? and argue
the reasonableness of the system as a proof of its validity? "Come now, let us
reason together, faith the Lord, though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be
white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool." Isai.
i. 18. -- Which is as if he had said, though your sins be ever so (...), though
they be of the deepest dye, yet if you will but reason with me on my ways, my
word and my works, you will soon be convinced that I am your Almighty father,
who gives you every good and perfect gift, and then you will be ashamed of your
base conduct and ingratitude toward me, and return and repent of all your
transgressions, and put away the evil of your doings from before my face, and
I-do-then assure you that I will pardon all your iniquities; and your sins
shall be remembered no more. Seeing God thus condescends to reason with us,
surely then it is our indispensable duty to reason with one another. The same
prophet says, xlili-28. "Put me in remembrance, let us plead together": also
the prophet Micah says, vi. 23. "Hear ye, O mountains, the Lord's controversy,
and ye strong foundations of the earth, for the Lord has a controversy, with
his people, he will plead with Israel."* "O my people, what have I done unto
thee, and wherein have I wearied thee? testify against me:" Jesus Christ
himself says, John v. 39. "Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have
eternal life, and they are they which testify of me." What can possibly be
meant by searching, if we are not to use our rational powers and faculties in
judging or forming an opinion upon what we find? And how can we judge, or form
an opinion but by exercising those powers and faculties which God has given us
to distinguish us from the brutes? All the parables which are so plentifully
and beautifully interspersed in the four Evangelists, have a tendency to show
the reasonableness of the Gospel. The apostle Paul in all his epistles
exercised these powers and faculties; and the Bereans are said Acts xvii. II.
"to be more noble than those of Thessalonica, in that they received the word
with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily whether these
things were so": and in his defense before Felix, Acts x. iv. 25. he reasoned
so strongly of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come, as to make
Felix tremble. So also on a like occasion, when he was permitted to answer for
himself before king Agrippa, Acts xxvi I. his arguments were so forcible that
Agrippa publicly Confessed that he was almost persuaded to be a Christian. The
whole system of the Christian religion was introduced into the world by the
reasonableness of its precepts, and by that gained ascendency over all other
religions. If then we are to exercise our reason on subjects of this nature, a
subject of the greatest importance to every one both here and hereafter, I
claim your attention and candor to the reasons which I shall now offer in
justification of the opinion whereof I am now accused.

In the first place I shall endeavor to show, upon the principles before
established, that Jesus Christ the Messiah is not, nor can be the eternal
Father of all things, who is Omniscient and omnipresent, God over all blessed
forever. And for the support of which I shall appeal to the "law and the
testimony: for if any man speak not according to this word, it is because there
is no light in him." The Scriptures teach us that there is but one God, who is
himself the maker and governor of all things; that this one God is the sole
object of worship; and that he sent Jesus Christ into the world to instruct
mankind, empowered him to work miracles, raised him from the dead, and gave him
all the power that he everwas or is now possessed of. The Scriptures contain
the most clear and express declarations to this purpose. "Thou shall have no
other God before me." Again, "hear O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord."
Again, "to us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we
in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him."
Again, one Lord, one faith, one baptism, ONE GOD and Father of all, who is
above all, and through all, and in you all. For there is one God and one
Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus." It is no where in
Scripture said that there are three persons in this one God, nor is the
doctrine of a Trinity expressly laid down in any other direct proposition
whatever. Christ himself indeed says "I and my father are one;" but he
sufficiently explains himself by praying that his disciples might be one with
him in the same sense in which he was one with the Father, John xvii. 21, 22.
"that they all may be one, as thou Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they
also may be one in us; and the glory which thou gave me, I have given them,
that they all may be one, even as we are one." The apostle John, 1st. Epist. v.
7. says, that "there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one." By the Father I understand
the creator of all things; by the Word, the power by which he spoke; and by the
Holy Ghost the divine influence which manifests the being of a God, and his
providence to mankind; and are no more three distinct persons than the spirit,
water and blood, which constitute every human being, make each man three men.

This one God is said to have created all things, "In the beginning God created
the heavens and the earth. God said let there be light, and there was light. By
the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the hosts of them by the
breath of his mouth. He spoke, and it was done, he commanded and it stood fast.
Thus faith the Lord thy-Redeemer, and he that formed thee from the womb, I am
the Lord that makes all things, that stretches out the heavens alone, that
spreads abroad the earth by myself" This fame one God is called the Father,
that is; the author of all things, as well with respect to Jesus Christ, as all
other brings. "That they may know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ,
whom thou haft sent. Go to my brethren (says Christ) and say unto them, I
ascend unto my father and to your father, to my God and to your God." He also
expressly says that he is inferior to his Father, and that all his power was
given him by the Father, and that he could do nothing without the Father, John
xiv. 28, "My Father is greater than I. The son can do nothing of himself. The
words that I speak unto you, I speak not of myself, but the Father that
dwells in me, be does the works, He received from God the Father honor and
glory." Again, "the revelation of Jesus Christ which God gave unto him."

"It is said by some that Christ did not mean that he was inferior to the
Father with respect to his divine nature, but only with respect to his human
nature: but if such liberties be taken in explaining a person's meaning,
language has no use whatever. Upon the same principle, it might be said that he
never died, or that he never rose from the dead, secretly meaning his divine
nature only, 2nd there is no kind of imposition but what might be authorized by
such an abuse of language as this."

Some things are said to be with held from him: "Of that day and that hour
knows no man, no not the angles; neither the son, but the Father. To sit on
my right hand and on my left is cot mine to give." So his dominion is said to
be derived from the Father, and is subordinate to that of the Father; "and when
all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the son also himself be
subject unto him who put all things under him, that God may be all in all.

Seeing then Jesus Christ is not the eternal Father, who is he? To the law and
to the testimony. In the infancy of days, God told the serpent, that the seed
of the woman should bruise his head; is it then possible that the seed of the
woman cad be older than the woman herself; and also coequal and co eternal
with God the creator of the woman? Also God told Abraham, that in his seed all
nations of the earth should be blessed; and this seed (faith the apostle) is
Christ. Hear also what Moses said to his people, Deuteronomy. xviii. 15. "the Lord thy
God will raise up unto thee a prophet from the midst of thee of thy brethren,
like unto me, unto him ye shall hearken." The apostle Peter, Acts iii. 20. etc.
speaks of Jesus Christ as being this same person who Moses foretold was to
come, and says, that all the prophets, as many as have spoken have likewise
foretold of these days. Luke in his genealogy has these words, iii. 23. "and
Jesus himself began to be about thirty years of age, being (as was supposed)
the son of Joseph." The words as was supposed are in a parenthesis, which may
be left out in readings, and the phrase would then stand thus "being the son of
Joseph." This agrees with Mat. xv. 55. "Is not this the carpenter's son? is not
his mother called Mary, and his brethren James and Joses, and Simon and Judas:
and his sisters, are they not all with us? whence then has this man all these
things? and they were offended in him. But Jesus said unto them, a prophet is
not without honor, save in his own country and in his own house." The Jews
always conceived that the Messiah, would come from some distinguished family,
with great pomp, and it gave them great offense to see so many of the people
running after this carpenters's son, and calling him the promised Messiah,
which led him to observe as he did, intimating that those whom they called low
people, might have as great abilities, and be as highly favored of God, as
those of more elevated stations, and seemed in an oblique manner to request
their attention to Samuel, who sprang from no distinguished line according to
their own genealogy, and to David, who was a man after God's own heart,
notwithstanding his father's being a husbandman, and he brought up tending
sheep. Also this agrees with what Philip said to Nathaniel, John i. 45. "We
have found him of whom Moses in the law and the prophets did write, Jesus of
Nazareth the son of Joseph." He often called himself the son of man; so the
woman of Samaria faith, "come see a man which told me all things that ever I
did; is not this the Christ?" Jesus Christ also faith to the same woman, "ye
worship ye know not what, we know what we worship: for salvation is of the
Jews." With this agrees the apostles, Acts ii. 22. 'Jesus of Nazareth, a man
approved of by God, by miracles, and wonders, and signs, which God did by him
in the midst of you." Heb. ii. 17. "Wherefore it behoved him in all things to
be made like unto his brethren.' Heb. ii. 10 became him for whom are all things
and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the
captain of their salvation perfect through suffering." 1. Cor. xv. 21. "for
since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead; for as
in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." So the apostle
says, speaking of David, "that God had sworn to him, that of the fruit of his
loins according to the flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit on his throne."
Paul speaks to the same purpose, Romans i. 3. "concerning his son, Jesus Christ
our Lord, which was made of the seed of David, according to the flesh, and
declared to be the son of God with power, according to the spirit of holiness,
by the resurrection from the dead." Hence I think it appears pretty clear that
the disciples and apostles did not conceive of him in any other sense than as a
man divinely favored of God.

I ask your attention once more. It appears that the third day after he was
crucified, two of his disciples went to Emmaus, and as they were talking and
reasoning about what had happened, Jesus drew near and walked with them, and
asked them what they were talking about: they asked him if he was a stranger in
Jerusalem, and did not know the things that had happened? and as they did not
know him, they went on to tell him "concerning Jesus of Nazareth, who was a
prophet, mighty in deed and word before God and all the people"; Luke xxiv. 19.
and how he had been condemned and crucified, and that that it was then three
days since this had happened, and that they had trusted that this Jesus would
have redeemed Israel. Besides, they had heard strange stories about his being
risen again. He then asked them if Christ ought not to have suffered, "and
beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he expounded unto them in all the
Scriptures, the things concerning himself." Now if this doctrine of his being
more than a man had been true, or of so much importance as some would have it,
why did he not teach it plainly to his disciples and apostles? but instead of
this he told them that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in
his name, among all nations: therefore let God be true and every man a liar;
that is, every man who contradicts him. But there are some texts said to be
mysterious, and seemingly to contradict what has been before said: on these I
shall now observe in their order.

John i. 1. etc. "In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and
the word was God, the same was in the beginning with God, all things were made
by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made." The evangelist
appears to me to be here recapitulating the great work of creation, and the
word manifests the power and energy by which he commanded all things into
being: thus, "God said let there be light, and there was light. By the word of
the Lord were the heavens made, and all the hosts of them by the breath of his
mouth. He spoke and it was done, he commanded and it stood fast." Ephesians. iii. 9.
"And to make all men see what is the fellowship of the mystery which from the
beginning of the world has been bid in God, who created all things by Jesus
Christ." Col. i. 1. "For by him were all things created that are in heaven, and
that are in the earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or
dominions, or principalities, or powers; all things were created by him and for
him. Here it may be observed, that heaven and earth were not created by Jesus
Christ, but all things in heaven and in the earth; that is, all things
respecting the new world, or the Gospel kingdom. Heb. i. 1, 2. "God, who at
sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke in time past unto the fathers by the
prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his son, whom he has
appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds." Here the
apostle uses the plural number, worlds: this intimates that these all things
respecting the Gospel, of which he was appointed heir, would spread far and
wide into various regions and countries. These are the only texts, which seem
to favor the notion of Jesus Christ's being the creator of the world, and these
I think, will bear a different interpretation, so as not to clash with other
plain positive texts, which speak of God as the author of all things. It
appears to me that the apostles are here speaking of the excellency of the
Gospel dispensation, and of Jesus Christ as the creator, author, promulgator
and finisher of this dispensation. Hence he is called the head of the body, the
church, "who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead, that in all things
(respecting the church) he might have the pre-eminence; for it pleased the
Father, that in him, should all fullness dwell." Also he is said to be made so
much better than the angels, as he has by inheritance obtained a more
excellent name than they. John viii. 58. Jesus Christ says, "before Abraham
was, I am." This text appears to me to be fully explained by St. Jhon, i. 30.
"this is he of whom I said, after me comes a man who is prefered before me;
for he was before me." To prefer, signifies to regard, esteem or value more
than another, to exalt or raise to dignity. Thus Jesus Christ was preferred
before Abraham, or any of his progenitors, for he was exalted or raised by God
far above any of Adam's race, and in this sense was before them. Phil. ii. 6.
Who being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God."
Which I construe thus, that being a pattern of piety, and doing such things as
none but God could do, does not rob God of any of his attributes. I Tim. iii.
16. "for without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness, God manifest
in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of angels, preached unto the
Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory." That is, as if he
had said, there is no dispute but that the Gospel now delivered was in ancient
days a mystery, which is now made known by this Jesus, a fleshly being, which
was vindicated by the spirit of every man, who duly considered its beneficent
effects upon the world of mankind, as it tended to promote good will and
brotherly love among men, which the angels saw would tend to the glory of God;
and this Gospel was promulgated among the Gentiles, believed on in the world,
and finally this same fleshly being was received up into glory. But he is said
to be "the alpha and omega, the beginning and the ending, the first and the
last." Very true, alpha is the first letter in the Greek alphabet, omega is the
last; the gospel was promulgated to mankind in the Greek language, hence be is
called the first and the last, beginning and the ending of the Gospel
dispensation. But my brethren, saying and doing are very different things; to
say well is good, but to do well is better. A certain man had two sons, one of
their names was Jew, the other's name was Gentile: At harvest time the old
gentleman called on his sons to assist him in his husbandry and to work in his
vineyard. Jew told him plainly he would not, but after reflecting a little on
the matter, he went. Gentile, like a good boy, said I will go sir, but he went
not. Which of the two think ye, did the will of his father? Methinks I hear
some of you whisper, he that went. It is idle for any man to make a profession
of the Christian religion and not to live agreeable to the precepts thereof.
How diametrically opposite is it to the precepts and examples of Jesus Christ,
the great author of the Gospel dispensation, to make it a business to go about
from house to house tattling, making himself busy with every man's matters,
railing at, slandering and persecuting his neighbor, reviling and backbiting
those against whom he happens to have a distaste, and anathematizing those who
do not form an opinion in religious matters agreeable to his notion: this is
diametrically opposite to the precepts of that Gospel which he professes, which
says, Mat. vii I. "judge not that ye be not judged, for with what judgment ye
judge, ye shall be judged, and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured
to you again," and insists on taking a mote out of his brother's eye, without
ever considering that there is a beam in his own, or taking the least thought
of looking after it when he is told of it; or that he has no right to judge
"another man's servant" but emphatically says, "come not near me for I am
holier than thou"; "these (says the prophet Isaiah) lxv 5. are a smoke in my
nose, a fire that burns all the day." A good tree, my brethren, cannot bring
forth corrupt fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit, but
every tree is known by its fruit; do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of
thistles? These are the very characters whom Jesus Christ represents as
shutting up heaven against men; they will not go in themselves, and those who
would go in they hinder; who devour window's houses and for a presence make
long prayers; who compass sea and land to make one proselyte, and when he is
made, make him twofold more the child of hell than he was before. How opposite
is this to the character of a Christian, who always endeavors to deal justly,
to love mercy, and to walk humbly with his God; who performs all the
commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless: full of pity and compassion
to all men, and loves the brethren that all men may know that he is Christ's
disciple indeed and in truth, fulfilling the very last point; "son (as the
apostle James says, ii.10.) whosoever shall keep the whole law and yet offend
in one point, is guilty of all." To keep the whole law, that is, the code of
moral laws, and yet break one of those laws, is a contradiction in terms: for
if the whole were kept, no one could be broken.

A young man came to Jesus Christ in his day, and asked him what he should do
to inherit eternal life: he answered keep the commandments, and told him which
they were, that is, thou shaft do no murder, nor commit adultery, nor steal,
nor bear false witness, but honor thy father and mother, and love thy neighbor
as thyself. All these (says the young man) I have kept from my youth up, what
lack I yet? If thou will be perfect, go and sell all that thou have, and give
to the poor: that is, as if he had said, thou have abundance of this world's
goods, therefore thou ought to be more charitable to the poor and
distressed, this is one thing needful. And the apostle says, "though I speak
with the tongues of men, or of angels, and have not charity, I am become as
sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal: and though I have the gift of prophecy,
and understand all mysteries and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so
that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing. And though I
bestow all goods to the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have
not charity, it profits me nothing. Charity suffers long and is kind,
charity envieth not, charity vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, does not
behave itself unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily PROVOKED, thinks
no evil, rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth, bears all
things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all things. Charity
never fails; but whether there be prophecies, they shall fail; whether there
be tongues, they shall cease; whether there be knowledge, it shall vanish away.
When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a
child; but when I became a man, I put away childish things. And now abides
faith, hope, charity, these three; but the greatest of these is charity." This
is the one point, which if any man neglect to keep, he is verily guilty of
offending against the most important command contained in the Gospel of Jesus
Christ.

I shall now give you by way of conclusion a short schedule of the introduction
of creeds into the Christian church; for in the days of Jesus Christ and his
apostles, there was no creed required of Christians except "believe in God,
believe also in me," that is, Jesus Christ, "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ
and thou shall be saved;" but they were cautioned not to believe every spirit,
but to try the spirits, whether they were of God; because many false prophets
had gone out into the world; and they were told how they should know the true
spirit from the false ones; that is, "every spirit that confesses that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh, is of God." Constantine, Emperor of Rome, about
three hundred years after Christ, having some remorse of conscience for some
enormities he had committed, applied to the priests of the church of Ceres
(then a heathen Church) for a pardon: They knowing his crimes, refused to grant
his request. He took umbrage at their refusal, and immediately applied to the
Christian Bishops, who embraced the favorable opportunity, and told him, they
would grant his request -- provided he would confess his faults, and take the
Christian religion under his protection. He accepted their proposition, made a
confession, received his pardon, and then issued a decree in favor of the
Christian religion, declaring it to be the religion of his empire. Soon after,
in order to establish a uniformity in religious matters, he called a council of
the clergy to assemble at Nice, in which he attended himself, and after long
altercations they brought forth what is now called the Athanasian creed; though a
number of the clergy then dissented, and some others who complied, and
subscribed the creed for the sake of conformity, went home, explained away the
rigor of it, and taught their people a very different doctrine. -- This
incorporation of the civil and ecclesiastical authorities has been the cause of
oceans of blood being spilt in the Christian world, and chiefly to revenge
private piques, and party quarrels, each party being always dubbed by the other
with the title of Heretic. For near ten centuries after this incorporation, to
keep the people in ignorance, this Bible was printed in a language unknown to
the common people, as it is this day in Roman catholic countries, so that the
people were under the necessity of taking their creed from the literati. About
four hundred and forty years ago, it was (...) in England in the vulgar tongue,
but still under the superintendency of these literati, and the least deviaation
from their construction was deemed heretical and dangerous to the lives and
properties of those who dared to think for themselves: witness, John Rogers and
thousands of others. But thanks be to God who has given us, the Inhabitants of
these United States, the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ; and my earnest
prayer is, that his word may have free course, run and be glorified.

To sum up the whole matter, must we not all judge of every thing, according to
such powers and faculties as God has given us? Can there be two Supremes? Can
any being derived be underived? Can any being begotten be unbegotten? Can any
being proceeding from the first cause, be the first cause? Was there any
equivocation or exception in Peter's address, when he said, Acts x. 34. "of a
truth I perceive, that God is no respector of persons, but in every nation, he
that fears God and works righteousness, shall be accepted with him?" Is it
not necessary for every Christian to endeavor to conduct himself agreeable to
the precepts and examples of Jesus Christ, the great author of the Gospel
dispensation? Does any man who (knowingly and wilfully) lives in open violation
of any known command of Jesus Christ, deserve the name of a Christian? Do not
all Christians aim at the fame thing, Happiness? Did not the apostles always
endeavor to keep a good understanding between the Jewish and Gentile
Christians? Is it not the duty of every man to read his Bible? Has not every
man a right to think upon what he reads? Have I not as good a right to think on
what I read and tell my thoughts as any other man? Can any of you, my brethren,
put yourself in my situation (willing, nay desirous, to keep fellowship and
communion with those of a different persuasion in some points, which are
universally acknowledged to be mysterious,) lay your hand on your heart and
condemn yourself? "Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do
unto you, do ye even so unto them; this is the law and the prophets."

Upon which Dr. Hemmenway, at the request of Deacon Wingate, made some cursory
observations; and then the Church passed the following votes:

1st. "That it appears to the Church that brother Hill has professed and
declared his opinion concerning the person of our blessed Savior in the manner
charged in the complaint."

2d. "That the tenet abovementioned is in their judgment false and unsound,
repugnant to doctrine taught in the sacred Scriptures, subversive of the
Christian religion, as taught, professed, and believed in the protestant
reformed Churches, and in this Church in particular; that it is derogatory to
the dignity and honor which is to be ascribed to our divine Redeemer; and that
for any one to hold forth and propagate such sentiments is matter of just
offense to the Church, tending to disturb and destroy the comfort, peace and
edification of the Church, and corrupt the doctrine of faith which is the Bond
of Christian communion, and the church think it their duty to give their
testimony against it: but as brother Hill professes his serious and hearty
belief of the Christian religion as contained in the sacred Scriptures, and his
readiness to receive any farther light which may be offered to him from the
word of God, charity disposes to hope and presume that he is not confirmed and
obstinate in his mistakes, but that upon better consideration he will see
reason to purge out that unsavory leaven, which gives offense to so many
serious Christians: and it is our desire, in conformity to the Rules of the
Gospel, to restore an offending brother in the spirit of meekness, and heal his
wound with a tender hand: we do now earnestly exhort him humbly and prayerfully
to search the Scriptures, to search his own heart, and keep his mind open to
conviction, to guard against prejudices, and not think it any dishonor to give
up any mistakes which he may have unwarily entertained, and it is our hearty
desire and prayer that he and we may be guided and kept in the way of truth,
and that our contending for the faith delivered to the Saints may be conducted
with charity and patience; that we may beware of the devices of Satan and study
the things which make peace and whereby one may edify another."

Then Mr. Hill, at the request of a number of his friends, and not being
anxious to prosecute matters of this kind, withdrew his complaint against
Deacon Wingate.

The Church meeting was then dissolved.


