THE HAPLESS ORPHAN; OR, INNOCENT VICTIM OF REVENGE. A NOVEL, FOUNDED ON
INCIDENTS IN REAL LIFE. In a series of LETTERS from CAROLINE FRANCIS to MARIA B
--.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. I.

BY AN AMERICAN LADY.

"Fragrant is the recollection of friends. The most delightful flowers shall be
scattered upon their valuable remains; and when we recall the sacred spot to
mind, the congenial tear shall sparkle in the eye of sympathy, and their
virtues shall be embalmed in the warm bosom of affection."

PRINTED AT THE Apollo Press, IN BOSTON, BY BELKNAP AND HALL: SOLD AT THEIR
OFFICE, STATE STREET, AND AT THE BOOKSTORES IN BOSTON.

MDCCXCIII.

INTRODUCTORY LETTER. From MARIA B -- of Long Island, the particular friend of
the unfortunate CAROLINE FRANCIS, who is the subject of these Memoirs, to her
sister HARRIOT at New-port.
DEAR SISTER,
IN your last letter you express a strong inclination to become acquainted with
the history of my unfortunate friend Caroline. I am happy it is in my power to
comply with your request; to gratify my Harriot ever affords me peculiar
pleasure: I therefore forward you her letters to me. They contain the most
interesting events of her life, until the period she became missing. To these I
have added the circumstances of her being forced from my brother, with the
melancholy account of her death, as I received them from him. The relation will
excite many painful sensations in your sympathetic bosom, for Caroline was
indeed a child of affliction, and the unfortunate ever claim a large share in
your affections. Remember me to my uncle and aunt, and believe that the warmest
expressions of friendship will not do justice to the feelings of your

MARIA B --.

LETTER I. CAROLINE FRANCIS to MARIA B --.
Philadelphia.
I CAN no longer withstand the importunity of my Maria, but will hasten to
improve every opportunity in gratifying your repeated solicitations.

You urge me, my dear, to return to the earliest period of my life, and to draw
the picture from my first recollection of events. The juvenile parts of life,
Maria, are seldom marked with any great variety, although your Caroline's has
been uncommonly interspersed with gloomy scenes.

Being left in infancy, an orphan, I was committed to the care of an aunt, for
whom, when reason began to dawn upon my mind, I felt no great attachment. My
uncle, who was a sea Captain, was seldom at home; I had therefore but little
opportunity to experience his affections. My aunt, however, treated me with
more attention, previous to her having a child, than afterward. I now began to
make some observations respecting her behavior to me; but being naturally
reserved, kept them to myself. I was sometimes indulged in visiting an uncle
and aunt, who, being without children, were desirous I should reside with them;
but the aunt with whom I was, would never consent.

From the birth of my cousin, I found her severity greatly increased toward
me. My feelings were sensibly injured by her treatment, but I knew of no
redress, and dreaded her resentment. I was therefore the more assiduous in my
endeavors to please, but to no effect. Upon a cursory acquaintance, she was
esteemed as sensible and well bred; this was a thin veil, which a more intimate
knowledge of her easily drew aside. Shall I define her sense, Maria? It did not
consist in a pure and elevated understanding, which leads to solid arguments
and reasonable conclusions: No, my dear; she cheerfully relinquished the dull
road of syllogistic disputation, to the peevish scholar and sour recluse,
conceiving the study of the abstruse sciences, as she styled logical reasoning,
qualifications requisite only for the collegian and divine. With these ideas,
her conversation was ever a scene of illiberal contradictions.

It is common, however, for weak minds to have an exalted opinion of their own
abilities; thus it was with my aunt; and to the most consummate ignorance was
added an overbearing disposition. Young as I was, my feelings were sensibly
injured by her conduct to my uncle, for whom she ever experienced a violent
pang of love or hatred; at times hanging around his neck and pouring forth a
profusion of fond expressions, then relapsing into abuse and ill treatment;
extremely irritable and uncertain in her feelings and disposition. My situation
was peculiarly difficult, and the example set before me prejudicial to my
happiness; but in this state I remained until I was ten years old, when we
received the melancholy news of my uncle's being drowned at sea. This painful
intelligence affected my aunt, as trouble invariably will persons of her
ungovernable disposition, and she was thrown into a momentary state of
distraction. But the idea of being left sole executrix to a handsome fortune,
soon mitigated her distress and absorbed the pearly tear from the cheek of
external woe. Money, Maria, possesses a balmy power; it can even heal the
wounds of the heart. My uncle and aunt Franklin thinking this a good
opportunity to gain the consent of my aunt Noble, solicited the indulgence of
having me with them; but my services were too necessary for her to comply with
their request. Shortly after my uncle Noble's death, his brother lost his wife.

Colonel Noble was a very different man from his brother: Ambitious beyond what
his situation in life could possibly lead him to expect; vain of his imagined
personal beauty, and extremely ignorant. My aunt, as soon as decency would
permit, began to display her charms, and made every advance which art could
suggest to gain his attention. Her conduct exposed her to the ridicule of her
acquaintance; for the first advances to come from our sex is, you know, my
dear, derogatory to the delicacy of the female mind. Suffice it to say, by an
unwearied assiduity and great generosity to him and his family (for Colonel
Noble's circumstances were at this period embarrassed) she succeeded in her
favorite wish of becoming his wife; or, as she in her refined sensibility
termed it, "renewed her first marriage." As all the baleful qualities of
ignorance were assimilated in this connection, the honey moon was short. The
Colonel, by his first wife, had three children, who soon became the cause of
contention. My aunt, by her entire ignorance of mankind, and a want of one of
the principal cardinal virtues, prudence, foolishly threw the fortune of her
child, for whom she was guardian, into the hands of her new husband, whose
embarrassed circumstances induced him to apply the property to family use; nor
would his haughty disposition permit him to render any account of the moneys
received. This created daily disputes. A prudent woman would have guarded
against those difficulties by appointing a new guardian, previous to her second
marriage. His conduct enraged my aunt, and her severity to his children
increased. Their contentions rendered me very unhappy, and finally threw me
into a languid state. While thus indisposed, I repeatedly solicited to see my
uncle F. who was a physician. He was at length sent for; when he came, he was
surprised at finding me so unwell, and observing my health required very great
attention, insisted upon my being removed to his house, that he might have me
under his immediate care. Thus was I relieved from that scene of wretchedness
in which the family of my aunt was continually involved. The family in which I
was now placed were happy in themselves, and assiduous to communicate happiness
to your Caroline. An easy mind, united with their inexpressible kindness, soon
restored me to health. Hitherto my education had been cruelly neglected; this
led them to pay a particular attention to my improvement, and they shortly
implanted in my breast a desire of knowledge. Masters were liberally provided,
and I was instructed in all the branches of polite education. Respect to my
aunt Noble required I should sometimes visit her unhappy family; but as these
visits were only to comply with a necessary attention, I went but seldom. My
desire of improvement daily increased; and my close attention to the different
branches of my education, gained the affection of my uncle and aunt Franklin,
who were equally solicitous to evince their attachment to their little orphan.
But, Maria, death, envious of my felicity, in an unexpected moment, deprived me
of my beloved aunt. This circumstance so distressed my uncle that he neglected
his business; nor could my closest attention restore him to his former
tranquillity. I had the misfortune to see him languish two years, when he fell
a sacrifice to that sincere affection, which had ever designated him an
indulgent husband.

Thus was a connection, fraught with felicity to themselves and friends, cut
off in the zenith of domestic enjoyment: Nor could the eligible situation, in
which this distressing event placed me, sooth my affliction; it preyed upon my
mind and injured my health. Being left joint heir with my cousin, then
stationed at Fort Pit, I felt the necessity of giving him the painful
information of his uncle's death, and taking some steps for my future situation
in life. The property left me was in the funds; the interest of which, while I
remained single, was for my support; but upon my being married, both principal
and interest were to be at my, disposal. The furniture was to be sold at
auction. This made it necessary I should resolve on some place where to remove.
Thus, my dear, have I run through the juvenile parts of my life, which you will
see have not been free from real sorrow to your friend,

CAROLINE FRANCIS.

LETTER II.
Philadelphia.
BY the death of my uncle and aunt, I was left, my dear Maria, at an age the
most necessary to be protected, exposed to the attack of every seducer. This
reflection the more readily induced me to return to the house of Colonel Noble,
thinking that as I now had it in my power to pay for my board, I should be less
subject to their disputes. I accordingly told my aunt, that as I wished not to
be interrupted by her family, if she would accommodate me with a chamber to
myself, I would board with her for a few months. To this she cheerfully agreed;
and I, from present necessity, returned to the place I most detested in my
heart.

My uncle Franklin, at his death, had left me the liberty of selecting from a
valuable collection of books, those which suited my taste; from the perusal of
these I anticipated superior gratification. In this I was disappointed. My
aunt, possessed of a communicative and repining disposition, continually
intruded upon my retired moments, embittering them with a constant repetition
of her wretchedness; and I soon repented of my folly in returning to her house.

Their quarrels ran high, and several days would frequently elapse without
their speaking to each other: Nor did she ever attempt to sooth the passions of
the Colonel; but irritated him in the most abusive and imprudent manner. Thus
those breaches, which might have been healed by a soft and condescending
disposition, were increased until they became incurable wounds.

Her resentment was not confined to the Colonel, but extended its severity to
his children. For her own child, all the feelings of a parental bosom vegetated
in luxuriance: If in the least indisposed, every luxury which the city afforded
was provided for her. Happy had it been, were she disposed to treat his former
children with an equal degree of tenderness; she might then have derived
greater pleasure from her connection.

In my absence she had made an addition to her family. The woman, Maria, who
cannot resolve fully to do the duty of a parent, certainly should not undertake
the charge of children, who must necessarily look to her for instruction and
advice. It is requisite that she conceals even the shadow of a preference; for
a partiality, once discovered, lessens the confidence and affection of her
husband, renders her disrespected by the children, and depreciates her in the
eyes of her domestics.

Another source of contention was her extreme attachment to cards; she however
persisted in the indulgence of this propensity. In playing for amusement only,
there can be no real injury; but when the happiness of our lives is suspended
upon it, what inference can be drawn from our conduct which is not derogatory
to the understanding of rational beings? This excessive fondness for play, was
very disagreeable to the Colonel. A prudent woman would cheerfully have
relinquished so trifling a gratification for the security of her domestic
happiness, but his inclination she seldom consulted: And so infatuated was this
unhappy woman, that notwithstanding his aversion, she early instructed her
children in the various games; and the youngest, before six years old, was a
considerable proficient at cards. As soon as the tea things were removed, loo,
her favorite game, was introduced.

"From the inhuman treatment of her husband, her health (she said) was greatly
injured; amusement was necessary for her." This mode of passing time was
however totally repugnant to my wishes, yet I must acquiesce, or be thought to
derogate from that politeness and attention, necessary to be observed to an
aunt.

Unfortunate at play, the company were frequently thrown into confusion by her
resentment; for she seldom arose from the table without considerable loss. This
was an aggravation to my uncle, who, having no lucrative employment, made it
necessary he should curtail his expenses; though an ill-judged ambition and
pride, the natural growth of ignorance, led him to support an external
appearance, at the expense of many necessaries, for which his family suffered.

My aunt had a small income of sixty pounds per annum, settled upon her by a
relation, to continue during her life, and then to devolve to her first child.
This but partially supplied her with pocket-money, for being what the world
styles generous; but what your Caroline denominates prodigal; it was
insufficient to support her in those extravagances to which she had been, for a
long time, habituated; and not feeling a disposition to confine herself within
the limits of her income, while she had the property of her deceased husband in
possession, she had mostly exhausted it. The whole of the dissipated property
was charged to the extravagance of the Colonel: This excited frequent disputes,
and at length induced her to pursue measures which produced serious
consequences.

Going privately to the judge, she represented her situation, gave up her
guardianship, urging the necessity of a new guardian, being appointed, who
should do immediate justice to her child. Agreeably to her wishes, the Colonel
was summoned to appear, and obliged to render a statement of the accounts,
which proved him to be considerably deficient. But, as it was ever supposed, my
aunt had squandered a very great part.

The reduced situation of my uncle, put it out of his power to refund what had
unavoidably been applied to family use; and, disgusted with the conduct of his
wife, their house became a continued scene of jarrings, reflections, and
disputes. It was certainly proper that the child's property should be secured
even at the hazard of a separation from her husband; but these difficulties she
ought to have foreseen.

The Colonel being deprived of the property of his ward, his next resource, for
the support of his family, was from time to time, to dispose of some valuable
piece of furniture. This added to my aunt's uneasiness -- her complaints were
incessant. She considered the whole city as her friends, and without reserve
proclaimed abroad her domestic troubles. The most entire stranger, as well as
the particular friend, were alike entrusted with her family circumstances. Her
husband she represented as a villain and a cheat; and by this unpardonable
conduct, so injured his character with his fellow citizens, as to occasion a
total loss of credit.

Thus unhappily was I situated for several months, when I resolved to quit the
city, and seek, in the bosom of a more retired life, that peace of which I was
now deprived.

I had written to my cousin at Fort Pit, and so far adjusted my own affairs,
as to be able to dispose of myself in the method most agreeable to my wishes. I
therefore took an early opportunity to acquaint my aunt with my intention,
urging it as necessary to my health, that I should pass the approaching season
in the country. In a few weeks, an eligible situation offering, I quitted, with
avidity, this dwelling of murmur and complaint, replete with the most sanguine
ideas of future happiness.

Scarce had I sipped from this scene of promised pleasure, one pleasing
draught, before I was interrupted with her peace-destroying letters, filled
with her determination of leaving her barbarous husband; and, expressive of her
inclination, to be accommodated with her niece. These letters, Maria, I never
noticed, and in a few weeks became so inured to her complaints, that I began to
feel less affected by them.

The human mind, my dear, in length of time, can become habituated to any scene
with which it is surrounded. Thus the most humane disposition, by being
conversant with sufferings which at first made nature recoil, often delights in
those very things that, but a short time before, were so distressing to it.
This observation demonstrates the necessity of keeping the young mind remote
from every species of cruelty.

Perplexed, as I had been, with the imprudencies of my aunt, I reasoned with
myself upon the impropriety of admitting her complaints to destroy my promised
happiness. Because she was calculated to be wretched, why should it cloud the
dawn of my pleasure? I sincerely regretted her situation; but resolved that a
mind which reveled in affliction, should not render me unjust to myself. It is
difficult, Maria, to conquer our feelings; but by the aid of reason and
philosophy, we may learn to suppress an undue anxiety.

Viewing the unhappy situation of my aunt through its just medium, I shortly
began to consider her sufferings as brought upon herself, by most imprudent
conduct, and therefore resolved to check my feelings. Believing, that although
the Deity has implanted the delicate sensations of sympathy deeply within our
breasts, it is by no means his intention we should become miserable, when it is
not in our power to remove the sufferings of the wretched object. No, my dear,
it is wisely ordered, as all human beings have their own misfortunes to
support, they shall not be capable of retaining the same acute sensations for
the distressed, as they experienced at first sight, and previous to their
having offered such relief as their abilities would admit.

The pleasing thought of having rendered a temporary suspension of misery to a
fellow mortal, is fragrant to the tender mind: Having done this, we return to
our own particular concerns. Disappointment and misfortunes await us in the
journey of life. No situation, however elevated, can secure us from anxiety and
pain. Says Doctor Young --

"The gay, rich, great, triumphant, and august,
What are they? The most happy (strange to say!)
Convince me most of human misery."
These reflections it was my study to strengthen: The indulgence rendered me
tranquil.

The village to which I had retired was upon the road to New York; in it were
several genteel families, so that I was at no loss for society, when disposed
to amuse myself abroad. In the friendly circle, Maria, where conversation is
enlightened by the observations of our superiors in wisdom and experience,
much instruction may be derived: It unbends the mind, gives it a new relish for
retirement, softens the manners and harmonizes the thoughts.

The young ladies who belong to Princeton, a great part of their time, resided
in Philadelphia or New York, for the benefit of their education, which deprived
me of the opportunity of cultivating a friendship with those of my own age.
This circumstance at first was an alloy to my satisfaction; for we naturally
seek our associates from among those of our particular standing in life. Here
we expect to find correspondent inclinations, and from an agreement in
dispositions, a friendship is gradually cemented, which strengthens with
advancing years; and, in the decline of life, is frequently productive of much
real enjoyment.

Attached, however, to retirement, and never at a loss for amusement when I
could obtain an entertaining book, I banished this dispapointment.

The college being near, introduced many young gentlemen to my acquaintance. I
was seldom without a gallant, and had not been long in Princeton before I
enlisted several of the students to the standard of love; or, perhaps, to speak
with more propriety, they were charmed with my fortune, which was now greatly
increased by the unfortunate circumstance of my cousin's supposed death; my
uncle in this case having left me sole heir.

The painful intelligence of Major Willy's defeat, while it threw a general
gloom upon the citizens at large, doubly affected the promised happiness of
your Caroline, as it deprived me of the protection and advice of a much
esteemed friend. My cousin being left in a situation similar to Major Willys,
it was doubtful whether he was really dead, or had fallen into the hands of the
Savages. Until some information could be obtained, we believed he had fallen a
sacrifice. No reflections, my dear Maria, could mitigate this severe
affliction. The idea that he might possibly be a prisoner with the Indians,
disturbed my pleasures, and cruelly tortured my every enjoyment.

Followed with the closest attention from the students, many suspicions were
excited in my breast, that my fortune was the magnet which so powerfully
attracted their notice.

The influence of riches is great. Young and old pay adoration at the shrine of
wealth, but your Caroline has had sufficient warning to guard her heart. --
Matrimony, Maria, is a serious engagement.

Adieu, CAROLINE FRANCIS.

LETTER III.
Princeton.
TEASED, perplexed, solicited by a group of fortune hunters, I can have no
moments my own. Poor Caroline, how does your money involve you in new
difficulties! but I am fixed: To matrimony I will not be confined. A husband,
what a name! is not my aunt a lesson? I will leave the dull road of married
life to fools. Thus thought your friend; but, Maria, thoughts change.

Walking was a recreation in which I usually indulged twice a day when the
weather would permit. I had for some time accustomed myself to stroll into a
delightful spot, to which accident at first led me. Here I was entertained by
the little songsters who charmed me with their melody, and shed a superior
pleasure upon my soul. This I believed calculated for the habitation of some
sylvan deity. In it I generally passed several hours before breakfast, perusing
some favorite author. While I remained in this retirement, I forgot the
disappointments which had veiled my imagined felicity; I became lost in
inexpressible happiness. The boughs of the friendly trees by nature formed a
shade around me; these were decorated with a variety of spontaneous vines,
which entwined themselves in various directions, and while they delighted the
eye, wasted fragrance to the smell. Upon the stumps of a couple of decayed
trees I had placed a board which served me as a seat; every thing around
encouraged contemplation.

One morning as I entered the bowry, I was greatly surprised to see a miniature
picture lying upon the bench; for I had flattered myself this delightful place
was free from intruders. The picture I seized with eagerness, viewed it and was
enraptured: Oh! exclaimed I, is this the portrait of a human being? Sincerely
do I wish his heart! -- Fear now disturbed my reflections. I was uneasy least I
should meet the owner in this place of solitude, and arose to retire, but
casting my eyes around, observing the same peace and serenity yet reigned in
every shrub, I ventured to delay my return, and sitting down upon the bench
wrote with my pencil the following: " The picture left in this place is in safe
and friendly hands." A few days after I found a billet under a stone upon the
bench, addressed to Caroline, of which the enclosed is a copy.

Miss,
The picture you found, belongs to one too much attached to the original to
suffer any other to possess the copy, you will therefore, without delay, place
it where you found it, and thus oblige

ELIZA.


Thunderstruck at the demand, I sat hesitating what to do, when I suddenly
heard a rustling among the bushes, and looking toward the noise, discovered a
young gentleman coming up to me. I was much alarmed. He observed my
astonishment, and stepping gracefully to me, seized my hand: "My charming
girl," said he, "your fears are groundless, give me leave to seat you. The
incident that has caused me to obtrude upon your retirement, which I have long
observed pleasing to you, when you thought yourself secluded from all
observation, has been unfortunate to me: Yes, Caroline, I am neither ignorant
of your name, character or situation. The lines you wrote upon this bench were
read by a young lady to whom I have long been engaged; for the loss of the
picture she is indeed inconsolable; I must therefore request you will restore
it to me." I paused. "You flatter me," said he, "by the reluctance with which
you relinquish it." It was, indeed, Maria, a request hard to reconcile with the
feelings of my heart. The charming youth continued, "with rapture would I
improve the present opportunity, to offer a heart devoted to you alone; but
friends and parental wishes have long since deprived me of the choice:" Then
falling on his knees, he drew out of his pocket a locket elegantly set in gold.
It represented in hair-work, Hope, leaning upon her usual emblem, the anchor,
and pointing with her other hand to a fountain, out of which two doves were
drinking; on the back of it was inscribed " To friendship." "This is my own
performance," said he, "will you honor me by your acceptance of it?" It was
insufficient to purchase the picture then in possession; but how could I refuse
his request. I made no reply: He was still kneeling, urging my acceptance.
While in this attitude, who should appear, through a distant row of trees, but
the enviable, the happy Eliza! I was too well informed of her disposition, not
to tremble at her approach.

Upon my first arrival at Princeton, I had been particularly cautioned not to
form any connection with this young lady, being the only child of parents who
had ruined her in her education; and possessing a naturally revengeful and
jealous disposition, she had made herself disagreeable to all her acquaintance.
Clarimont was surprised; he arose in much confusion, and walking toward her,
seized her hand, saying, "I was pleading for the return of the picture upon
which you are pleased to set so high a value." Until this moment I was ignorant
whose property I had in possession, and dreading her revengeful temper,
hastened to her, presenting the picture, I wish not to detain this, said I, but
am happy in restoring the valuable treasure. Her countenance was suffused with
resentment: she appeared to dispute the sincerity of my expressions. I
immediately retired, resolving never to revisit a place which had been once so
pleasing to me, least it should appear with a design to meet Clarimont, and
become fatal to either of us by the dreaded disposition of Eliza. Having no
wish to interrupt the romantic lovers, I resolved to seek some new spot which
should, if possible, compensate the loss of that to which I had been so partial.

Rising very early one morning I crossed some adjacent fields, and passing
toward a wood which promised to supply my wishes, scarce had I entered among
the trees, when I was alarmed by a voice which appeared to be in very great
distress. I stopped -- nor can language express my astonishment. Remote from
every object, my only resource was to return to the road. With trembling steps
I gained a secret path; but had not proceeded far, before the report of of a
pistol gave fresh agitation to my disturbed mind. Almost distracted with
fright, I had scarce strength to gain the road, when I seated myself, to
recover, if possible, my astonished senses. I had been here but a few minutes,
before an amazing dust arose in columns at a little distance. This was
occasioned by a detachment of new levies marching to the Western Country. As
they approached, every fearful idea of a female mind rushing into view, your
Caroline fainted. When I came to myself, I found I was in the arms of an
officer, who by every tender and polite attention, endeavored to calm my mind.
He urged to know what had thus affected me. I was unable to reply, and could
express no more than the pistol -- the woods -- pointing in consternation to
the spot. A party was instantly detached to search for the cause of my
distress, who soon, returned with the account of having found a young man
weltering in his blood, lifeless upon the ground. By this time I had so far
recovered as to be able to walk; and supporting myself upon the arm of the
officer, soon reached my lodgings.

This event caused a general alarm throughout the village, and in a few hours the
painful intelligence reached me, that Clarimont, the lover of Eliza, had fallen
by his own hands. The agitation of my mind prevented that attention to my
benefactor which his politeness merited. I did not permit him to leave me
without a promise of calling upon me, should an opportunity present.

At this period, little did I expect, this incident would destroy my future
happiness. Providence has wisely concealed those events which are destined to
overtake us in the walks of life* I had not been in company with the
unfortunate youth, since the morning we met in the arbor, having been
particularly cautious not to fall in his way. To what induced him to take this
step I was a stranger.

A jury was summoned, who having sat upon the body, brought in their verdict
insane. The connexions of Eliza now took charge of the corpse. They prepared to
perform the last office to the deceased; as Clarimont belonged to Virginia, and
had been sent to this village for his education. A few days after his
interment, I received the following billet from Eliza: Most detested of your
sex,
How have you involved me in wretchedness by encouraging the private addresses
of a man long engaged to another. Pretend not to vindicate yourself. I have
been a witness of your treachery. Remember your confusion when we unexpectedly
met in the arbor. I then discovered the sentiments of your heart.

Blinded by attachment for Clarimont, I would not suffer an idea of his
duplicity to impress my mind until the night previous to the suicide, when I
accidentally discovered your hated picture hanging around his neck. This
memento of his baseness I tore from him: It is now in my possession, where it
shall for ever remain an indubitable evidence of your treachery and deceit; and
you may be assured the vengeance of Eliza shall ever follow Caroline.

My picture! Maria -- heaven only knows how Clarimont obtained it. He was
indeed attached to his pencil, and possibly might have taken my likeness, as I
had been sitting in the arbor. I was, however, innocent, and addressed the
following reply: Eliza,
I am unhappy that suspicion should be excited in your breast prejudicial to my
character. Suspect me not of a conduct I never pursued. Be assured of my
innocence, and while the rectitude of my actions diffuses serenity to my mind I
am not without the most sympathetic sensations for that affliction which now
surrounds you.

CAROLINE FRANCIS.







This affair having put a period to my enjoyments in this place, I was urged by
my friends to absent myself for some time from the immediate eye of Eliza, who
had become strongly prejudiced against me, and frequently expressed her
implacable resentment.

Uneasy at continuing in the neighborhood of Eliza, while she remained thus
bitter against me, and having been repeatedly solicited to visit New York, I
took a seat in the stage to that city. Upon my arrival I was received with
every mark of friendship by Lucretia Barton, a young lady for whom I had early
imbibed a particular esteem. She was the only child of Mr. Thomas Barton, a
respectable merchant in New York; and having been deprived of her mother in
infancy, had passed much of her time at a boarding school in Philadelphia,
where our friendship commenced. By the sprightly society of this dear girl, the
gloom which involved my mind, gradually dissipated.

From the observations I had made respecting the unhappy conduct of my aunt, I
had long established it a maxim of prudence, and a dictate of reason, to make
as easy as possible the various incidents which occur in the journey of life.
To Clarimont, I confess, I was partial: In his happiness was my heart
interested; but the suspicions which were excited in the breast of Eliza were
as opposed to my innocence as they were destructive of my peace.

The parties in which I was frequently engaged tended to erase from
recollection the dull scenes of Princeton. A succession of pleasureable events
often absorbs the mind, and we forget, when surrounded with dissipation and
amusement, the painful circumstances which had previously invaded our
happiness: Thus is human existence rendered more tolerable.

During my visit in this city I received several letters from my repining aunt:
These afforded Lucretia and myself much amusement. They informed me she had
left her inhuman husband, and taken a small house at Trenton, where she
anticipated the pleasure of seeing me and my friend. Lucretia, pleased with the
invitation, consented to accompany me. We accordingly engaged a seat in the
stage, and were safely landed at the door of my aunt Noble, who, ever attached
to company, gave us a warm reception. Civility and custom obliged us to enquire
after her health. One enquiry, Maria, was a sufficient opening for the relation
of all her mental and bodily sufferings. She seized the hand of Lucretia and
began the uninteresting recital. When she came to the description of her
disorders, it was indeed difficult to refrain from smiling. "A numbness of the
brain, an extreme pressure upon the eyes, and a constant irritation of the
nervous system, I apprehend insanity must finally ensue." Conversing upon this
subject brought on all her spasms, contractions, etc. The doctor was called; he
entered the room: his saddle bags containing his specific medicine, variously
modified, hung upon his arm. This valuable composition, Maria, in the opinion
of this son of Esculapius, was a summum bonum; it possessed all the virtues of
the materia medica. Said Lucretia, aside, will it cure a weak head? We handed
him a chair; he seated himself by my aunt, and with great tenderness, solicited
her to be composed. "I am afraid of convulsions, doctor." "Don't be alarmed,
madam," he replied; "it is the extreme tension upon some of the fine vessels
which produces this distressing taughtness; you want some invigorating
application; nothing is a greater stimulus than camphire; a few drops of this
valuable drug, will shortly relieve you; the virtues of this incomparable gum,
madam, are unknown to the city doctors. It may be used to inexpressible
advantage in every disorder, to which we are incident. In fevers its efficacy
cannot be denied by its peculiar diaphoretic quality; it rapidly throws off
obstructions; it surprisingly heals the inflammation of the bowels and stomach
in consumptive habits, and brings on the necessary expectoration for the relief
of the lungs; it forcibly expels all internal impediments, acting upon the
nerves as opium upon the senses; lulls their agitation, and renders the patient
tranquil and composed. Nor is it less beneficial in all external applications;
even mortifications may be stopped by its peculiar power." During his
animadversions upon the efficacy of camphire, he several times repeated the
dose, which was administered in a cordial. My aunt began to be in better
spirits. The doctor, after having often reminded us of the ignorance of the
city physicians, withdrew.

This was a diverting scene. I fear, Maria, as you are unacquainted with this
aunt of mine, you will begin to think me destitute of those tender sensations
which beautify humanity. If these are your ideas you derogate from your friend,
whose soul is alive to sympathy, and in whose eye frequently sparkles the
congenial tear. My aunt is not without my pity; but the troubles she
experiences are brought upon her by a weak mind, which she never has taken
pains to correct, and an entire ignorance of human nature. These sources alone
would be sufficient to involve her in continual difficulties, had not an
ungovernable temper sealed her misery. Philosophers say, all the virtues are in
conjunction; is this the case, my aunt Noble is strikingly deficient; since
prudence, which is first upon the list, never had the most remote connection
with any part of her conduct. The moral virtues only execute what prudence
prescribes.

Had she taken the steps previous to her late marriage which she has since been
compelled to adopt, those great causes of her unhappiness had been impeded. Nor
could this precaution in any degree evince a want of confidence in Mr. Noble;
she would then have experienced a satisfaction in her own reflections which
would have rendered her inexpressibly happy.

Nothing is more luxuriant to a thinking mind than self approbation: It is a
sun which dispels the clouds of solicitude and anxiety. Homer tells us of an
herb which the ancients called Nepenthe; that being made an ingredient in their
feasts, banished sorrow from their minds. I wish we could obtain this valuable
plant for my aunt: It would be a pleasing substitute for cards; for, as usual,
the tea tray is no sooner removed, than the apparatus for play is introduced.

We had been here but a few days, when Lucretia began to complain that nervous
company disagreed with her taste. Few hours could be agreeable under my aunt's
roof. She ever corroded the pleasures of the table with a recital of her ill
treatment and indisposition: Her uncommon difficulties were the theme of
conversation; her family troubles the topic at all times and places. If checked
for indulging a gloomy disposition, she declared her distress involuntary and
unavoidable. Every pleasing idea forsook her. Her hours were devoted to tears,
and the most bitter invectives against her cruel husband.

I believe you regret that my aunt is thus connected in the story of your
unfortunate friend,

CAROLINE.

LETTER IV.
Trenton.
IN addition to the failings I have already described, my aunt Noble possessed
the painful faculty of anticipating distressing events; so that we were not
only entertaintained with her personal difficulties, but amused with some
dreadful misfortune which was continually about to befall her darling children.
The gloomy premonitions of her mind deprived us of all enjoyment. We certainly
have no occasion to seek the evils of life, they will ever obtrude themselves
upon us. To add to her affliction, she was continually tormented with dreams
which foreboded some sad event, yet she never acknowledged to have slept. Why
madam, said I, will you not wait until the trouble comes, it is surely
sufficient to feel it when it has overtaken you; by indulging this disposition,
you suffer in imagination what may never become real, and thus accumulate
distress. It is the duty of rational beings to exert the powers of the mind,
and to render themselves as comfortable and happy as the mutability of human
life will admit. But my aunt was as great a stranger to ethics as to the
cardinal virtues. Tired with a continued repetition of grievances and
complaints, I dreaded her company. These, however, would have affected me but
little, had she not intruded upon me, when I retired to my chamber, and thus
disturbed my moments of reflection.

Mr. Addison justly observes, "That we should not trouble our friends with
relations which must oblige them to real or feigned affliction. Cares,
distresses, diseases, uneasinesses, and dislikes of our own, are by no means to
be obtruded upon them. We should not bring them little sorrows, which do not
belong to them. Fortune gives us disappointments sufficient; nature is attended
with infirmities enough, without our adding to the unhappy side of our account
by spleen or ill humor."

The physician of my aunt was invariably called, three or four times a week, to
renew his prescriptions of camphire, which he administered in various ways;
sometimes in powder to "brace the debility of her delicate frame;" at others in
drops, "to diffuse itself into the little vessels and cause a proper animation
of the parts. The head, madam, abounds with an infinite number of fine vessels,
some of which are too crowded with blood, while others are flabby and want to
be wound up: Taking plentifully of these, and keeping yourself composed, will
soon relieve you. Camphire is excessively diffusive, invigorating and pungent."

There were no circumstances which occurred while we were at this village, more
replete with diversion to Lucretia and myself than the doctor's visits. In the
city they are short; but a country physician brings in his saddle-bags, takes
off his great-coat and hat, and is seated for an hour or two: It is a fortunate
circumstance their demands are not in proportion to the length of their visits.
I do not pretend to say all my aunt's disorders were imaginary, but am
confident an attention to exercise and diet, would make her life much more
comfortable. I can scarcely believe the complaints of those, who pay no
attention to the regulation of their lives; but at the expense of health, that
greatest blessing mortals can enjoy, gratify their most vitiated appetites; it
is unreasonable to expect that a delicate and infirm habit should not severely
suffer from such indulgences; these imprudences must render futile the
attentions of the physician, and defeat the applications of the most learned
practitioner.

Lucretia wishes to visit Philadelphia: She is uneasy lest she should become
contaminated, and frequently observes, there is no advantage to be derived from
passing our time with those gloomy minds which revel in affliction, and whose
most luxurious repast appears to be the bitter of life.

Did not the circle of our own acquaintance present to knowledge similar
characters with that of my aunt Noble, it would be difficult to realize their
existence. That beings endowed with the powers of rational reflection, who are
at liberty to dwell upon any subject, should select from that variety which
might employ their thoughts, distressing premonitions, and indulge the
anticipation of troubles which may never exist, evinces an unpardonable vacancy
of mind which must stigmatize their folly, and render them contemptible and
little in the opinion of those who are so unfortunate as to have any
intercourse with them. It cannot therefore surprise you that Lucretia is
desirous to leave this place. For my own part, I am sick of hearing a worn out
story related to every new face which appears. Disgusted with her company, I
confine myself to my chamber; even here, as before observed, I am interrupted:
It is impossible to indulge my own ideas. She is displeased that I thus seclude
myself. "It is evident I slight her society." She complains much to Lucretia.
"Her niece, she believes, will turn her brain with reading. For her part she
cannot imagine what business women have with books, unless it is now and then
an entertaining novel. She never knew one who after all her study ever became a
Lock or a Newton. There are certain domestic employments for females beyond
which they have no right to deviate. Science belongs not to them: Let them
study to grace a table, become conversant in domestic concerns, and their minds
are sufficiently improved. But Caroline, to be sure, must be turning over the
leaves of some old history. How she can amuse herself with such dry narrations
I cannot tell."

That such remarks should fall from a woman, who has no idea of the real
enjoyment which is derived from so rational an indulgence, is by no means
surprising. Could she relish this mode of passing her leisure moments, the
vacuum she now experiences, would vanish; a country life would then be more
consonant with her feelings.

If, with the "mind's eye," she had a taste to travel through distant kingdoms
and take a retrospective view of past events, she might nourish that fondness
for variety, so predominant with human nature, and in the indulgence of this
disposition be happy. Sincerely do I wish her singular in these degrading
sentiments; then should we shine more conspicuous.

The divine Creator has made no difference between the souls of the sexes, but
given to each, similar powers of improvement. Education alone constitutes the
superiority. It has hitherto been our misfortune to be greatly neglected,
while schools and colleges have been instituted, and every possible method
adopted to direct the expanding minds of the other sex. Early are they
instructed in such studies as will be most beneficial to them; and from infancy
habituated to arrange their ideas, their whole time is devoted to reflection.
Can it be wondered that they who have made it the business of their lives, to
become masters of reasoning, should excel us who have been deprived of those
advantages. All the education thought necessary for our sex until within a few
years, has been simple reading and writing. Thus neglected we must possess
astonishing geniuses to rise superior to the impediments with which we have
been surrounded; yet we sometimes meet with those who have strength to soar
above these difficulties and reflect a luster upon female abilities.

In the present system of education, there appears to be a very great error.
Introducing young ladies upon the stage to speak in public, tends to give them
a confidence which does not belong to a female; and so far from encouraging
those feelings nature has implanted, lulls them into a dangerous apathy, and by
repetition, destroys that easy, natural delicacy which should ever adorn their
characters.

A certain degree of assurance is necessary for the gentlemen; but a lady is
most pleasingly designated by a modest reserve. It is the most attractive charm
she can possess. True modesty avoids the eye of public admiration. Nature has
connected in our composition such a keenness of sensibility, that we are pained
when exposed to public observation.

A young lady, early accustomed to genteel company, will ever acquire
sufficient confidence for private life. It is necessary to instruct those only
who are designed for the theater, to speak before crowded audiences.

Your friendship is grateful to Caroline, whose heart ever beats responsive to
the warm expression of her Maria.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER V.
Trenton.
ATTACHED to riding on horseback, Lucretia and myself make frequent excursions.
In one of these rambles, in which by necessity we were unattended, for a
country life seldom affords gallants, an incident took place which determined
us in future to be more cautious. Yet such is the construction of the human
mind, that fear must be strongly impressed not to wear off by time. Instead of
riding in the morning as had been our usual practice, we concluded to go in the
afternoon, wishing to take a road, which in the morning, was rendered
disagreeable by giving us the sun in our faces. The day was inviting, we were
pleased with the prospect around, and unmindful of our distance from home.
Engaged in conversation, the sun had set before we had any idea of its
retiring. An improving companion is an instructing thief, which insensibly
steals away the hours. It was, however, prudent for us to hasten into the main
road, where we naturally supposed ourselves more secure. Just as we had entered
the post road, we were familiarly addressed by a person on horseback, who
appeared disposed to accompany us. He begged to know how far we were going. We
assured him we were but a short distance from home and under no apprehensions.
Notwithstanding this, he insisted upon accompanying us. We had gone but a
little way before we made an addition to our party. A person who appeared well
acquainted with our gallant rode up, and addressed him in a style which alarmed
us. Being upon the great road we flattered ourselves we should soon meet with
some traveller who would relieve us. Lucretia and myself rode as near as
possible to each other. Our bosoms beat with anxiety. Our gallants soon
separated, and rode one upon each side of us. Thus confined between them, judge
of our feelings. Just as we came to a retired path they proposed our turning
into it; and finding we would not consent, they seized, at the same instant,
the bridles of both our horses, and with an oath declared we should do as they
said. I shudder when I recollect the providential means of our escape. At this
moment, encouraged by the sound of horses' feet we screamed for help. The
villains were alarmed, and letting go their hold, rode off with precipitation.
We were immediately overtaken by a gentleman on his journey to New York. He
inquired the cause of our fears; very politely attended us to the door of my
aunt, and would now have taken leave, but we urged him to alight; and
understanding he intended putting up at the next inn, insisted on his taking a
bed, which he accepted. Before he left us he impressed the necessity of our being
attended by some gentleman in our future excursions, and promised to call upon
us on his return from New York, if we had left Trenton, to gratify us with a
visit in Philadelphia. This incident fresh in our minds made us cautious of
venturing abroad; it was several weeks before we dared to lose sight of the
house.

The obligation we were under to Mr. Wilkins, the gentleman who fortunately
relieved us from our apparent danger, excites a lively gratitude in the bosom
of your friend,

CAROLINE.

LETTER VI.
Philadelphia.
A FEW days after I wrote you last, as Lucretia and myself were strolling upon
the banks of a little stream, which meandered at the foot of a hill but a short
distance from the house of my aunt, we were alarmed by voices which appeared to
be distant; the water only conveying the sound. This, it is probable, would not
have produced any uneasy sensations in our minds, but for the incident before
related. The danger we had lately escaped rushed full upon us; and without
delay we turned toward the path, resolved to reach the road as quick as
possible. This we scarce had time to effect, when looking behind, we observed a
person in the habit of a woman gaining fast upon us. The oddity of her dress
and the peculiarity of her appearance instantly made us suspect it to be a man.
Suspicion gave wings to our feet and we soon fell in with some honest farmers,
under whose escort we once more safely entered our own doors. It was now judged
prudent we should immediately leave Trenton, as several circumstances
corroborated to convince us a plan was forming against me by Eliza. We
accordingly took seats in the stage for Philadelphia.

It was with pleasure we quitted Trenton, not because the charms of a rural
life had lost their relish: No, Maria; secluded from the busy scenes of the
metropolis, we are free from many cares which extend a feverish anxiety, while
surrounded with dissipation, which too often destroys reflection and embitters
life. But it is painful to be confined to one distressing theme. Human life is
sufficiently crowded with personal troubles: To support them with fortitude,
should be the endeavor of every rational mind.

Encompassed by innumerable cares and anxieties, it was never intended we
should take any further share in the troubles of those around, than was
sufficient, if in our power to relieve their distress. It certainly would be a
great addition to the miseries of life, should we suffer ourselves to be made
wretched by every desponding gloomy disposition, our pity is indeed excited, we
lament their weakness, and urge the necessity of fortitude. Such is the natural
imbecility of the human mind, it confines us to the immediate scenes in which
we are engaged; and as new objects present, the past is in a degree erased from
recollection. This indeed is wisely ordered.

In this city we have taken lodgings at a widow Leason's. She is polite and
agreeable; but as no one is without their particular characteristic, we cannot
expect our landlady to be an exception. Mrs. Leason has one child, blessed with
good natural abilities, and educated by a less indulgent parent, she might have
shone in a domestic character; but when the idea is instilled in the youthful
mind, that it is to be indulged in all its wishes, let the disposition be ever
so pleasing, the soil is contaminated, and instead of producing a grateful
vegetation, is overrun with a spontaneous exuberance of pride, which choaks
every fragrant sprout.

Laura by this too indulgent mother, is even prevented from taking the
necessary exercise which the constitution requires. It would be natural to
suppose, from the line of life which Providence has allotted Mrs. Leason, she
would have habituated her daughter to early attentions in the family. Nothing
can better qualify a young lady, who expects one day to become the mistress of
a family, than a proper respect to the economy and regulations in domestic
concerns. I believe it to be a duty parents owe their children, early to
instruct them in such scenes as will be necessary to future happiness; and let
my fortune be ever so independent, I am resolved, should I ever commence the
mother, early to accustom my daughters daily to devote a few hours to domestic
matters; this will never render them less respected abroad.

Do not mistake me. I have no wish to confine female education to domestic
duties. No, Maria; the greatest source of our happiness is an enlightened mind.
It is a cause of regret that more attention is not paid to our education. If
the mind is a barren waste, of what avail are the beauties of the most lovely
face, the elegance of the most enchanting shape, the grace of the most
accomplished person; the imperceptible hand of time will deprive them of every
external charm, and eclipse the luster of the most penetrating eye. But the
mind, that immortal part, can never fade. If properly cultivated, it will
unfold new beauties, and by a continual progress in virtue and happiness, be
finally prepared for superior enjoyments above; while a trifling dissipated
disposition can never be attuned to those delightful employments which engage
so many departed saints in heaven.

Laura is fond of reading, and by having free access to the city library, is in
a situation to indulge so laudable an attachment; but like too many of her sex,
she neglects those writings which would be beneficial and instructive, and with
avidity seizes every romantic volume; thus her taste becomes poisoned. I wish
not too severely to condemn this kind of writing, but only to impress the idea
that the choice should be directed by judgment. "The style in which they are
frequently dressed captivates the mind, and conveys poison to the youthful
fancy; although their influence is imperceptible, it is not the less sure. The
passions too often become inflamed, and by a repetition of love adventures, the
pure ideas become injured, and we feel a secret wish to imitate scenes with
which we are thus delighted. They have ruined the minds of many, by instilling
into them principlies of duplicity and intrigue, and thus prepared them for
similar violations of morality and virtue."

I have repeatedly expressed my surprise at Laura's taste. She in return is as
much astonished that any can be pleased with the dry, insipid page of history.
Are you fond of love adventures, I replied, you will often meet with them in
history. An illicit love occasioned the destruction of the finest city in Asia.
It caused Anthony to forsake Octavia, and revel in the arms of the celebrated
Cleopatra.

By this delightful study you will be taught the fatal effects of jealousy and
ambition. At one period you will see the world involved in the greatest
ignorance and barbarism; at another, rising by civilization and refinement,
decorated in all the charms of politeness and learning: But it is impossible to
gain her attention.

Mrs. Leason's error, in her daughter's education, is greatly to be lamented.
Habits contracted in early life are often unalterable: Great care is therefore
requisite that none should be formed but such as will establish virtuous and
solid satisfaction: Then would our days dawn amidst the smiles of an approving
conscience, and close with superlative pleasure.

A striking trait in the character of our landlady is a sympathy of soul: She
is ever ready to mitigate the sufferings of the distressed; and the congenial
tear, which is infinitely more valuable than the diadem of Caesar, often
trembles in her eye and discovers the gentleness of her heart: This casts a
veil over many of her failings, while others are too unpardonable to be
overlooked*

Her strong propensity to discover the secrets of those families in which she
visits, certainly evinces a little mind: To this is added a great fondness for
match-making. Several matches formed by her have proved unhappy: This is not
surprising. Connexions, which result from motives of convenience or interest,
either terminate in wretchedness, or are embittered with many real evils.

Marriages, formed upon the idea of protection or fortune, although the
corruption of the present age may style them marriages of reason, in my view,
are but legal prostitutions: Nor can any happiness be expected but from
equality of years, similarity of taste and mutual esteem; these indeed promise
a lasting satisfaction. Lucretia and myself have had several husbands proposed
for us, but we are resolved to choose for ourselves.

Laura is so disobliging to the gentlemen who board with her mamma, that she
has gained their general disesteem. She has established it as a maxim, if she
obliges them by doing any little thing, they will learn to expect it. Upon this
principle she is determined not to indulge them; and flinging back her head
with an air, says, "It is not her place, and to be sure she shall not do it." A
poor conduct for a child to adopt, whose mother is dependant.

Mrs. Leason has been a long while endeavoring to unite Laura and one of her
boarders, but is not likely to succeed. Sincerely do I wish the necessity of
economy in domestic concerns may yet be impressed upon the mind of Laura. Few
American fortunes can support a woman who is above the calls of her family.
Servants, however faithful, seldom consider the interests of their employers
with that attention they would their own; but if unobserved, often bring
affluence to poverty. The care of the mistress is therefore necessary to
prevent prodigality and ruin.

Writing to Maria is so great a luxury, I am ever unwilling to say,

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER VII.
Philadelphia.
AT those moments, my dear Maria, when the recollection of past events would
destroy present pleasures, I have recourse to the consolatory language of your
friendly letters. These are replete with a balm which ever sooths the severity
of my sufferings; nor is there a more pleasing reflection arising in the bosom
of Caroline, than that Maria is her friend. Let me solicit the continuance of
your alleviating letters.

By a few lines, just received from my aunt, I am informed of an attempt of
some persons to enter her house. Fortunately she was at this period afflicted
with some of her nervous complaints, which deprived her of sleep, and hearing
them as they came into the yard, she called the servants, by which circumstance
they were alarmed and made off. The next morning she received the following
billet.

"Madam,

"There is a plan against your niece, which, if she continues in Trenton,
without doubt will be put in execution. I am not at liberty to make myself
known, but solicit the young lady to be upon her guard."

This information will prevent the gratification of many innocent amusements
even in this city; for if Eliza is yet determined to follow me with her
resentment, she can certainly find those in this metropolis calculated for the
execution of her plans.

The gentleman to whom we were indebted for our safety at Trenton, has called
upon us, and if I am not deceived, he discovers a partiality for Lucretia. Mrs.
Leason is acquainted with him, and has given us his character, embellishing it
with many a fanciful relation. His attention appears pleasing to my friend.
Miss Leason's behavior has occasioned her mamma the loss of some of her best
boarders. Upon our good landlady's account, I sincerely regret it; though she
alone is to blame for not instilling into the mind of her daughter, early
principles of propriety. The first ideas impressed upon the youthful fancy, lay
the foundation for their future reputation in life: It is therefore necessary
the gentle hand of instruction should assist the expanding judgment. Laura is
not without her good qualities; but these are discolored by the medium through
which they pass. From the cradle, habituated to indulgence, she cannot support
the most trivial disappointment. This disposition is of itself sufficient to
render her wretched; for disappointments will intrude upon us, notwithstanding
our whole attention is engaged to repel them; and no sooner do we appear on the
theater of life, than we are involved in anxieties.

My aunt, I am told, is endeavoring to obtain the influence of her friends, to
prepare the way for her return to a husband, whom she has publicly declared she
despised. Well acquainted with her capricious temper, I am not surprised at the
inconsistency of her conduct. Such a disposition is the prolific parent of
misery, in private and social life. The schemes, which, but a few weeks since,
she pursued with the greatest avidity, are now the cause of her regret, as they
tend to lessen her own importance.

By her rigorous measures, my uncle has been obliged to quit the elegant
mansion in which he had long resided, and to occupy one in every respect
inferior. Notwithstanding his reduced circumstances, his haughty spirit will
not suffer him to return to a trade in which he had been educated, and from
which a very reputable living might be derived. He prefers passing upon the
world as a gentleman with a thousand wants and an empty pocket, rather than
resume the character of a mechanic, which, he fears would exclude him (...) the
society of those great men into which he has lately been introduced. How false
this ambition. In nothing do we sooner discover our ignorance and folly, than
in the want of a disposition (...) conform to our allotments in life. A
laudable ambition is necessary to carry us with reputation through this world;
but it is highly requisite to draw a line, and to discard that which results
from a vain mind.

Such a connection as my aunt's, makes me tremble at the distant idea of a
change in my situation. Real happy marriages are rare, when money and beauty
are the governing motives, but I am resolved not to purchase a husband with
gold. No, I will believe with suspicion, and arm my heart with such jealous
guards, that Cupid's shafts shall not enter far enough to wound

CAROLINE.

LETTER VIII.
Philadelphia.
IT is our intention shortly to leave this city. From every circumstance I
expect a union will soon take place between Lucretia and Mr. Wilkins; Mr.
Barton having given him permission to attend us to New York. This gentleman is
not a native of Philadelphia, but for several years past has transacted
business here in the negotiating line; and having been successful in
speculation, he has lately connected himself with a gentleman in Virginia. His
character is, I believe, unexceptionable. Lucretia has frequently conversed
with me upon the subject. She acknowledges her prepossession; but is resolved,
in a matter of such importance, to govern herself by the advice of her father
who can only be solicitous for her happiness.

There are few females, Maria, who in the different spheres in which they move,
more conspicuously irradiate and adorn their characters than this dear girl.
She was deprived of her mother at an age when she most needed her affectionate
instructions, to suppress the spontaneous foibles of youth. Her father,
absorbed in the happiness of an only child, exerted himself to impress her mind
with sentiments which should make her happy; and after she had completed her
school education, made her the companion of his leisure hours. Passionately
attached to her mother, he relished no amusements in which Lucretia did not
partake; but while he determined to render her the accomplished companion, he
was also convinced, that it was a necessary part of female education to be
conversant in domestic concerns; he therefore urged her attention to the
family, in which she cheerfully engaged. If she shone in the circles of refined
sentiment, and was acquainted with the etiquette of the gay world, she also
practiced, in the bosom of domestic duties, virtues which endeared her to every
part of the family.

Through every action of her life is diffused the sunshine of tranquillity, but
the partial pen of Caroline can never add a plume to the character of Lucretia.
Possessed of a disposition and qualifications to render a deserving man happy,
I sincerely wish that she may never form a connection which shall mar the
enjoyment of her succeeding days.

There are many families in this place to whom I am attached. It is difficult,
however, to form a real friendship. A true friend is an acquisition seldom to
be obtained. Few are to be found calculated for the offices of friendly and
social intercourse. When I reflect on my unprotected situation, I am not
without my gloomy moments; but Lucretia exerts herself to dispel them. Mrs.
Leason frequently diverts us with her matches; she claims the honor of having
formed the intended connection of our friends. Our landlady is by no means
deficient in understanding, although a want of prudence runs parallel in her
conduct. Connexions, big with importance to our future happiness, should ever
be the result of unbiassed prepossession. For my own part I will never become a
prostituted votary at Hymen's shrine; love alone shall cement the gentle
bandage.

From whom do you think I have just had the honor of a visit? The very Captain
who so fortunately came to my assistance at Princeton, after the death of
Clarimont. He arrived in this city yesterday, from Fort-Pitt, having rode
express from the western army. I am much pleased with him; he is graceful and
polite: His visit was short; but if I am not mistaken, he is sentimental and
accomplished. His countenance is expressive; his eyes beam with understanding
and glisten with sensibility. I have tried to check my prepossessions, calling
upon the guards of my (...) heart, to be cautious and not to admit an
undeserving guest. Yet my breast palpitates at his approach. I am pleased with
his company, and regret his absence. He reminds me of Clarimont. As he is
express from General St. Clair, his stay here will be short; so that should
Caroline be a little entangled in the silken snare of love, absence is said to
be a sovereign remedy. I am not convinced, however; but in this instance it may
prove as injurious as the camphire preparations so indiscriminately used by my
aunt's doctor at Trenton. My penetrating landlady has already discovered my
disease, and assures me of success, if I will submit to her directions. She is
extremely kind, my dear; but I prefer to act for myself. Let your friendship
^ver await

CAROLINE.

LETTER IX.
Philadelphia.
IN my last letter I forgot to mention the name of my charming Captain. Excuse
this neglect, and give me leave to introduce Capt. Evremont, to your particular
friendship. I am convinced Maria will give him a corner of her heart, from the
attachment she has long possessed for her Caroline. I should be doubly happy
personally to present him to my friend, that from an acquaintance with him she
might set a just value upon his accomplishments and virtues; but can only
anticipate this event at a future period. His business with the Secretary at
War has detained him in this city much longer than he expected; and I have the
pleasure to assure my dear Maria, that his breast beats congenial to the
fondest wishes of Caroline's heart. Yes, my friend, we have resolved one day to
form a near and pleasing connection. Flattering as my present prepossessions
are, they have opened upon me new anxieties and cares. It is truly unfortunate
he should, at this crisis, be obliged to accept a commission, for I understand
necessity, rather than an attachment to the mode of life, has urged him to the
step. This gentleman is a native of Boston, and was early placed by his parents
with a respectable merchant in that place. Soon after the difficulties between
Great Britain and America commenced, that capital became a British garrison.
Trade was necessarily laid aside. Thus at an important period was be deprived
of his prospects of business in future life. Here he suffered in the general
calamity, and with a number of his fellow citizens was under the necessity of
entering the army, where he continued until the close of the war. Upon the war
breaking out with the Indians, he again accepted a commission merely for a
support. Being however engaged, it will not do for him to retreat, until the
present campaign is decided. The honor of a soldier, you know, is held dearer
than his life. May the American army be the peculiar care of Providence, and
the goddess of health diffuse her smiles upon them. May fame resound the trump
which shall echo their immortal deeds, and their names be engraven on the
hearts of the virtuous and brave.

Mr. Evremont's tarrying has prevented our going on to New York. Mr. Wilkins
will accompany us to that city, from whence you may shortly expect to hear from
your

CAROLINE.

LETTER X.
New York.
YOU complain of my silence; and add, three posts have arrived without a line
from your friend. The omission is by no means consonant with the dictates of my
heart. Such indeed has been my incumbered situation, that it has been out of my
power to gratify my most favorite inclination. But you have no right to doubt
my friendship. No; that heaven-born spark has long been kindling in my breast
its extatic blaze. I thank you for the pleasing retrospect of our infant
friendship. Those days, indeed, were inexpressibly happy which were illumed
with your society. The tender bud expanded under your invigorating influence,
and received a solid basis for its eternal existence. Yes, my dear, it is not a
meteor dancing in the juvenile fancy, but a creative sun, which animates every
dormant virtue, and beautifies every unfolding plant. Every moment since my
arrival in New York, has been devoted to Lucretia; and we are still busy in
preparing for the intended union. Mr. Barton, previous to our arrival, had
written to his correspondent in Philadelphia, and obtained satisfactory
information respecting Mr. Wilkins, and has been pleased to give his
approbation to an early day for the celebration of the nuptials. Mr. Wilkins's
business calling him to Virginia, where he proposes to settle at a place called
Havre-de-Grace, I have promised to accompany them. Having no particular
attachment to Philadelphia, I think it probable I shall tarry with them a
considerable time. This, I flatter myself will not always be the case; I begin
to think it best to have some one to provide for and protect me. Old age will
come, and the epithet of old maid is, you know, a stigma, the appellation of
which I will, if possible, avoid.

I received a letter from Capt. Evremont, dated Fort-Pitt. He regrets his
present engagements with the army, but flatters himself the troops raising by
Congress, will in one campaign, put a period to the war. Sincerely do I wish
this may not prove an illusive hope; but I fear they will be deceived. We have
long habituated ourselves to consider the Indians as an insignificant enemy,
who are to be silenced by toys; it is now, however, policy to view them as a
formidable body. Mr. Evremont adds, "it is generally believed the depredations
which the frontiers have experienced for years past, have been instigated by
the garrison at Detroit:" If so, it is highly probable they will afford them
every necessary supply. Fortunately my reflections are taken off from these
painful ideas, by my present avocations. I have received a letter from my aunt
Noble, complaining of our taking the rout to New York, through Burlington,
Bordentown, and Amboy, and insisting on our making her house, in our way back
to Philadelphia. The reasons for pursuing this road were not to avoid a
repetition of her grievances, but that we might have an opportunity of seeing
this part of the country; having gratified our curiosity, we intend to indulge
her with a flying visit. She mentions some new circumstances relative to Eliza,
and solicits me to be upon my guard. I flatter myself my journey to
Havre-de-Grace will prove my security. At that distance, I shall consider
myself free from her persecutions. I am called down stairs, and must, for the
present, lay aside my pen --

When I entered the parlour I saw a genteel young man sitting with Lucretia,
who bowing her head as I crossed to a chair, said, "This, Sir, is the lady for
whom you were inquiring." He arose, and addressing me, observed, his brother,
Capt. Evremont, when in Philadelphia a few weeks since, by letter, had
requested him, as he passed through New York, on his way to the Westward, to
call upon his intended sister: I therefore, Miss, agreeably to his wishes,
introduce myself to you. I assured him of the satisfaction his visit afforded,
and made every inquiry after his connexions, which politeness dictated. His
visit was short. Lucretia invited him to dine the next day; but pleading a
previous engagement, we were deprived of his company. He begged I would
heighten his reception at Fort-Pitt, by honoring him with the charge of a
letter, saying he should call upon me the next evening for my commands, as he
expected to leave the city immediately. Capt. Evremont had mentioned his
brother's being soon expected with recruits, and obtained my promise of writing
by him. Pleased with so favorable an opportunity, I entrusted him with a
lengthy letter, replete with encomiums upon my intended brother. I sincerely
regretted his short stay in New York, as it deprived me of the happiness of
being fully acquainted with his merits. But a soldier, my dear, is not the
master of his time; nor can he impede the flying moments. I directed him to
Mrs. Leason's, as a good boarding house, while he tarried in Philadelphia.

How does the heaving sigh swell my agitated bosom, at the anticipation of the
dangers which await my friends: Yet, amidst my distressing thoughts, a beam of
hope darts its animating rays, and gives me infinite support.

I have written you a lengthy letter; accept it as a token of my friendship;
and may virtue, that fair daughter of heaven, descend and illume our path
through the wilderness of life, and sweetening the reflections of expiring
moments, accompany us to the bright region of uninterrupted bliss.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER XI.
New York.
LUCRETIA, the amiable, the charming Lucretia, has now entered the list of
matrons. The indissoluble knot is tied. The wedding was private; but we have
yet to receive the congratulations of a numerous acquaintance.

Our levee is crowded, and I am obliged to obtrude upon those hours, usually
devoted to Morpheus, or deprive myself of the gratification of writing to my
dear Maria, whose happiness is ever interwoven with Caroline's. This said
matrimony is a serious thing; it makes me thoughtful. But I fancy I am more
disposed to be serious, from the unhappy connection of my aunt. It may, however,
teach me an important lesson; a lesson, upon which the happiness of my future
life depends, never to connect myself with a man, whose ignorance disqualifies
him for an agreeable companion. The most ignorant are, in general, the most
tenacious; and possess such high ideas of their imaginary excellencies, that
they cannot allow any merit to their friends. A handsome, face, an engaging
person, will be additionally pleasing to my taste; but I flatter myself, they
will never fascinate my judgment; nor the more captivating allurements of
riches, infatuate my mind.

Virtues, emitted in the calm walks of social life, render pleasant the hours
of retirement, and are alone calculated to insure domestic happiness. Wisdom is
the luminary of the mind; and, by her enlivening powers, dissipates those
painful sensations, which are spontaneous, in the bosom of ignorance. Ignorance
is the fruitful parent of every ungenerous principle.

To be connected with a man of inferior understanding to my own, would excite
reflections which would imbitter life. Yet how many of those matches do we
daily see. Strange that we should be thus deceived. It is said the little
urchin is blind, and this is all the apology that can be made for us. We
frequently, however, purchase our sight by a fatal sacrifice. Pray heaven, it
may never be the lot of Caroline, or her friend, to be thus wretchedly united.

Mr. Wilkins is sensible, genteel, and accomplished. I am not skilled in
phisiognomy, but fear he is avaricious and impetuous. If so, it must cast a
sable cloud over their domestic pleasures; for the disposition of Lucretia, is
nobly generous. Educated in the sunshine of fortune, she has been enabled to
indulge the emanations of a heart, replete with humanity. She has ever sought
objects of distress, and alleviated such as were suffering with cheerless
poverty. This disposition is so seldom implanted in the bosom of affluence,
that its suppression would give me pain. The prudence of Lucretia, will ever
dictate an acquiescence with the will of her husband, and she will readily
relinquish many little decorations, which might be added to her own person,
privately to gratify her god-like propensity. I will not anticipate, what may
never take place: This will be monopolizing a double portion of trouble. Away
with this bane to happiness. Let us take the incidents as they arise* and, by
confining our ideas within the dictates of reason, we shall at least ensure
present peace.

Unfortunately, I was for some time educated by a person, whose peculiar
pleasure it was to color, with the most gloomy shades, every expected event.
This occasioned an early aversion in my mind to anticipation.

Many useful lessons are to be learnt from observation, and great is the danger
of contracting bad habits. Had not my judgment been directed by my deceased
uncle and aunt, there is no doubt but I should have imbibed that disposition,
so injurious to the enjoyment of life. At the early period in which I was
placed under the protection of my aunt Noble, my reason was not sufficiently
expanded, to decide for myself. Those youth, who are within the limits of
enlightened instruction, receive inexpressible advantages. Thus the friendly
hints of my uncle and aunt Franklin, led me to reflect upon many foibles, and
armed me against the rock, upon which my aunt Noble's domestic happiness split.
I have long since been convinced of the folly of considering the world at large
as our friends; to suppose all who hear our troubles, must consequently become
sharers in them, strongly evinces a vacant mind. Relating domestic difficulties
abroad, is inconsistent with the rules of social happiness, and repugnant to
every principle of politeness. Should I ever become a parent, be assured, it
shall be my early endeavor, to check in the youthful mind, every propensity to
a communicative unguarded disposition; and above all, I will impress the
necessity of keeping all family matters sacred.

I have not dwelt thus upon the subject, because I think you need the lesson;
but as the observations naturally occurred, I felt no wish to restrain them.

I shall not write you again, until I arrive at Philadelphia, from whence we
shall go by land to Virginia. Keep your heart for some deserving youth, whose
united virtues, shall insure your happiness.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER XII.
Philadelphia.
HAVING passed through the usual ceremonies of receiving the congratulatory
visits of our acquaintances, we hastened to this city, where we must again
submit to that ridiculous parade, custom has established upon these occasions.
In my view, nothing is so foolish as the sitting ourselves up for a show, and
becoming an object of animadversion. It is a ceremony I am resolved to dispense
with, however opposed to the ideas of the world; for I can never consent to a
form so contrary to my feelings, so derogatory to my judgment. To comply with
it, requires more fortitude and patience than has fallen to my share. Our task,
however, will not be so severe as at New York. Morning visits will be short,
and we have no time to devote to afternoon company. This circumstance will also
relieve Mr. Wilkins.

Mrs. Leason received us with great politeness. I have made inquiries of her,
respecting my intended brother, as I recommended him to her house for lodgings,
but can obtain no information of him. It is probable he fell in with company
upon the road, who introduced him elsewhere.

Several weeks have elapsed, since I heard from Capt. Evremont. His silence is
uncommon; and gives me great anxiety; nor can those amusements to which I have
long been partial, or the joyful event of Lucretia's union, obliterate my
fears. I am much indisposed. There is an inexpressible sympathy between the
mind and body; they are mutually affected. Hope is the anodyne of life, a balm
to the afflicted, and an animating meteor, which dissipates the dew of
disappointment; but fear, by depressing the spirits, brings on disease, which
often terminates life. I love to get by myself. Reflection is pleasing. To drop
a tear upon the recollection of my friends, is a luxury to my soul. Friendship,
true friendship, is a child of heaven.

Agreeably to promise, we made Trenton in our way to this city, and found my
aunt, as usual, complaining. Our visit was short; Lucretia politely gave her an
invitation to visit her at Havre-de-Grace. An invitation I doubt not but she
will accept; some premonition will tell her the journey will be of service, and
point out a thousand chimerical advantages. Civility is frequently a tyrant,
which compels us to do many things contrary to our wishes. You must excuse the
shortness of this letter. My indisposition prevents me from adding more, than
the assurances of my friendship.

CAROLINE.

LETTER XIII.
Philadelphia.
THE gloom which pervaded my mind when I last addressed you, has subsided. I
have been gratified with a letter from Capt. Evremont. It had laid in the war
office more than a week. He does not mention his brother. I suspect there is
some deception in this affair.

My aunt has repeatedly assured me, no measures were unpursued by Eliza to
obtain my letters, and that through this channel, she becomes acquainted with
my private intentions.

I am gaining strength, and hope, I shall soon be able to attend Lucretia home:
She has been particularly attentive to me in my indisposition. By her
persuasions I consented to call in a physician, who has had the impudence to
style my disorder nervous. A pretty custom of the faculty, to class those
complaints, which they have not sufficient abilities to remove, under this
denomination! By placing the disease upon those delicate organs, they conclude,
should their applications be unsuccessful, their patients cannot censure their
judgment, and they will thereby elude reflection.

There is not, in creation, an epithet more wounding to my feelings. To be
nervous, is generally to be a fool; a plague to ourselves and a torment to our
friends. Could I possibly think myself so devoid of stability, so destitute of
philosophy, so depraved in my mind, I would instantly seek some unfrequented
recess, where mortal eye should never reach me.

The sagacious doctor had no sooner determined my disease, than my resentment
was excited. I immediately discarded his prescriptions, and refused his farther
attendance. If that is the case, said I, away with physicians; medicines are
debilitating, resolution shall be my cure; I will never be cheated of the
pleasures of life, by nervous disorders. Since this determination, my amendment
has been rapid. Profit by the lesson, Maria, and be assured, resolution is the
strongest antidote that can possibly be administered, in nervous attacks.

By encouraging the mind in rational pursuits, it soon becomes strengthened; a
succession of entertaining, improving studies, will ward off dejection.

Mr. Wilkins has written to his partner at Havre-de-Grace to secure lodgings
until his furniture shall arrive from New York; which was to have been shipped
soon after we left that city.

My indisposition prevents me from sharing in the congratulations of our
friends; upon Lucretia's account I regret it. The warm wish of my heart is, for
her uninterrupted happiness. May their joys be mutual, and prosperity ever
illume their journey of life.

Unfortunately for Mrs. Leason, Laura is absent from home, consequently a
double attention devolves upon her. Could you see this tasty widow, whose gray
hairs, denote her advanced years, decorated in all the gaiety of youth, I am
sure your sentiments would accord with mine. Nothing expresses a want of
judgment, more, than not complying with a dress suited to declining life. The
gaieties of youth, should certainly be laid aside, as that period retires, and
the sober habiliments of advanced age assumed.

Good sense will ever discover itself throughout our conduct, but in nothing
more conspicuously than this. I have frequently seen the picture of a very aged
lady, seated at her toilet, who by the assistance of her dressing maid (from
whose countenance a striking lesson might be deduced) is decorating herself in
all the finery of a young lady, just entering upon the theater of life. In my
view, this representation, is as severe a sarcasm upon the sex, as can possibly
be portrayed. I wish to purchase it for Mrs. Leason, and am resolved, if I can
ever obtain it, to present it to her. Such characters discover minds as
unimproved as the deserts of Lybia. Old age is indeed a desolating period, if
the illuminating beams of wisdom have not dawned upon the mind; but if she
irradiates the understanding, we can view the close of life with resignation.
And having passed the errors of youth, we may, through the eye of reason,
anticipate increasing infirmities, and approaching death, with peculiar
serenity.

I must plead my former excuse of indisposition; although my letters are short,
the heart of Caroline is not the less attached to Maria B --.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER XIV.
Havre-de-Grace.
WE arrived here the 20th instant. The journey has been of infinite service to
my health. I am extremely pleased with this town. It is situated upon a most
delightful river, and appears designed, by Nature, for trade.

Mr. Wilkins's house is peculiarly pleasant, as it commands an extensive
prospect. The furniture has not arrived. We are at present in the family of
Mrs. Gardner; I will introduce them to my Maria. This lady has been some years
a widow, left with three daughters and two sons; the two eldest girls are the
epitome of their mother. It may be expected, that children, educated by the
same parent, should imbibe similar sentiments and habits.

But this family demonstrates, that nature, unassisted by art, frequently
implants principles in the youthful breast, far superior to the most refined
study.

Mrs. G. is a woman of great ambition, with a high opinion of her own
abilities, she prides herself upon the supposed respectability of her
character, boasts much of her domestic economy, assumes a large share of merit
from the richness of her clothing, exerts herself to be thought a learned
woman, and aims to monopolize respect from the idea of keeping the best company
in the place.

These are the just traits in the character of my landlady and her eldest
daughters.

Educated in such sentiments, it is not surprising, that dressing and visiting,
are the favorite employments of the young ladies, who are particularly
remarked for being in the streets. Fond of being seen, they inquire from shop
to shop, for articles they have no intention to purchase. But shopping is a
charming amusement; it gives them an opportunity to show themselves abroad.
They despise every thing "wulgar," and their friends are the "most affablest,"
and the "most agreeablest" in the world.

Mrs. Gardner and her daughter's loquacity might be overlooked, if every
expression was not tortured by an ignorance of their own language.

Had you been at table a few days since, you would have been diverted; it was
difficult to refrain from laughing. Having dined, Mrs. Gardner filled her
glass, and passing the wine, requested the company to drink "a good husband to
orphan widows." I hesitated; for had my life depended, I could not imagine what
sentiment she meant to convey. I however repeated the toast. Anxious to avoid
laughing, and in haste to dispense with the wine, I choked myself, and was
obliged to leave the room; glad indeed of an opportunity to retire. Lucretia
improved the moment, and followed me up chamber, where we had high diversion.

Fanny, the youngest daughter, is a very different character. Delicate in her
behavior, enlightened in her understanding, she speaks with propriety,
determines with judgment, and possesses a peculiar softness of disposition,
which, like the gentle luster of the evening star, beams in her expressive eye.
These secure her the partiality of the boarders; and her attention to their
little wants, enhances her in their esteem. Her mind indeed, is an assemblage
of virtues. I am not fond of adopting new friends, but there is in this dear
girl, something so engaging, so congenial with my feelings, that I am resolved
to endear myself to her, and, if possible, to become necessary to her
happiness. She appears to possess a natural vivacity, which is at present
clouded, by some unhappy event. If this is the case, time, and assiduity, shall
discover it.

Mrs. Gardner's eldest son is a man of fortune; it is, therefore, unnecessary
to add a man of friends. Although encircled by the fascinating smiles of this
pleasing deity, he claims no pretensions to happiness. Possessing an anxious,
parsimonious disposition, he is deprived of those tranquil sensations which
produce gratitude. Never having sipped of disappointment's bitter cup, his
heart is callous to the tears of sorrow. Absorbed in the pursuit of wealth,
many social virtues lie dormant. Perplexed, least his plans in business should
prove unsuccessful, he cannot relish present blessings, and from an unhappy
temper continually suffers imaginary difficulties. Riches rather augment than
lessen his anxiety. He is a stranger to that real enjoyment, which those
experience, whose bosoms are meliorated by humanity, and irradiated with
benevolence. Contentment, that maid of heavenly origin, absconds his mental
region, and takes her residence in the more serene heart. When we see those who
have been nursed in the indulgent lap of fortune, deprived of tempers to enjoy
her gifts, constantly agitated and distressed, we certainly cannot envy their
possessions. It will enforce the observation that money alone is insufficient
to secure peace.

Mr. Gardner is unmarried, and free from every encumbrance; he wants only a
mind to enjoy the abundance which Providence has poured upon him.

His brother is married, and has a large family dependant on him. There is a
depression in his countenance which excites the tenderest feelings of my heart.
He is, I believe, a child of sorrow. Having indulged myself in repeated
conversations with him, I am deceived if he does not possess a good
understanding, a sincere soul, and a feeling mind. Every new interview
increases my partiality; but these are my own observations: For nothing is more
difficult than ascertaining from the world the true character of an unfortunate
man. Adversity is a cloud which too effectually conceals many real virtues.

I am called off by Lucretia -- can only add,

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER XV.
Havre-de-Grace.
SINCE I last addressed my dear Maria, I have had an opportunity of becoming
more acquainted with the unfortunate Mr. Gardner. Fanny entered my chamber this
morning, and requested me to favor her with some entertaining books. There was
a number upon my table: I desired her to select such as would be pleasing to
her. Engaged in reading, she had reached the door; when looking up and seeing
but a small pamphlet in her hand, I asked her, if there were none consonant
with her taste? Her heart was full; the pearly tear glistened in her eyes: She
could not articulate. Fanny, continued I, what distresses you? Believe me your
friend; unbosom your affliction. She inclined to retire. I arose, took her
hand, and led her to a chair; she laid the book upon the table; I glanced my
eyes upon it, and found it a play, entitled, "The Brothers." Curiosity was
excited; my attachment for her increased; I experienced all that inexpressible
sympathy, which is united with those sweet sensations of a feeling mind, and
was silent for some minutes, that she might give vent to the effusions of her
grief. Tears having afforded a momentary relief, I resumed my solicitations,
assuring her of my preposessions; observing, I had noticed an anxiety upon her
countenance, the cause of which, if possible, it was my wish to remove. She
replied, "I thank you for your friendship; nor can I refuse your request. The
title of that book, forced upon me many disagreeable ideas, by reminding me of
the situation of my brothers; the youngest of whom has experienced a succession
of misfortunes. Long initiated in the school of severe disappointment, with the
most economical attention, and closest industry, he finds it difficult to
support his family; yet his destitute circumstances make no impression upon the
heart of Charles, who, by great success, has accumulated immense property.
Intoxicated by the inebriating bowl of prosperity, he lives only for himself.

"Those innate principles of benevolence, generally ingrafted in the human
heart, which induce it to assist the distressed, appear totally eradicated from
his breast; and he is governed by a penurious disposition, which renders him
callous to the wants of his nearest friends. He views, with an adamantine
indifference, the sufferings of a deserving family, without a single effort to
relieve them. The unpardonable insensibility he uniformly discovers to the
embarrassments of a brother, adds a barb to the dart of misfortune. The pain
which results from the inattention of our connexions, is too severe for a
susceptible mind. To meet indifference, where we expected assistance, destroys
the fond hope nature excites.

"Shall a love of money absorb the natural affections, steel the feelings, and
imperve every virtue of the heart? No, my dear. If we are actuated by
gratitude, our minds will be dilated by the bounty with which we are blessed. We
shall endeavor to communicate happiness to the distressed, and in search of
objects, duty and inclination will first direct to those with whom heaven has
immediately connected us. But sympathy never filled the eye of my brother with
a generous tear; nor has humanity meliorated the insensibility of his heart."
Here she paused. I urged her to suppress feelings so destructive to her health.
Let us anticipate your brother's better fortune. Hope is the cordial of life.
Encourage the friendly delusion: It will assist you in conquering those
reflections so prejudicial to you. She was now called.

The great contrast in this family frequently engaged my reflection. It is
indeed happy for society that characters, similar to Mr. Gardner's, are not
more frequent. How much more amiable the man, who studies to communicate
happiness, whose breast beats with humanity, and who listens to the voice of
sorrow, with a disposition to mitigate human misery. The remembrance of such is
truly grateful to the children of affliction.

Every feeling of my heart is excited for Frederick. I pity and esteem him, and
the amiable Fanny. Pity and esteem! what cold expressions! I will ever evince
my warmest friendship for them. No new attachment shall, however, deprive Maria
of the real friendship of

CAROLINE.

LETTER XVI.
Havre-de-Grace.
I HAVE at length the satisfaction of addressing Maria, from the house of
Lucretia. It gives me infinite pleasure to see her engaged in the regulations
of her family. Her disposition is well calculated to enjoy life. If she shone
as a daughter, and a mistress while with her father, as a wife, she is worthy
the closest imitation. Adorned with sweetness, crowned with virtues, and
dignified with sentiment, from the bosom of domestic life, she shines with an
attractive radiance. It is her study to accommodate herself to the disposition
of Mr. Wilkins, and her constant endeavor to render him happy. If she has not
found in him all she fondly imagined, she prudently conceals it. Solomon,
celebrated for his wisdom, declares, that "Among a thousand women, he had not
found one deserving the name of wife." Mr. Wilkins then, is peculiarly blessed. I
fear he is insensible to the value of the prize. His happiness appears detached
from domestic pleasures. We have but little of his company; his fondness for
variety, renders home distasteful to him. The assiduity and attention of the
lover, is superseded by unpardonable neglect. The woman who a short time since
engrossed every pleasureable idea, he now views without emotion; and, I
sometimes think, returns to, with regret. Business engages his daily attention,
and the tavern his leisure hours; but Mr. Wilkins is not an unfashionable
husband. In this era of politeness, to see a man attached to his wife, denotes
a weakness, which renders him an object of contempt. Love at present is a
passion but little understood. The gentlemen absorbed in some striking
attachment, generally believe themselves caught in the alluring snare, and
resolve to obtain the object of their supposed affection. Their favorite wish
accomplished, they frequently discover their mistake, too late to retrieve the
error, and thus become wretched for life. Happy marriages would be more
frequent, were the first impulse to arise, from the perception of certain
innate virtues; these would expand the tender passion.

Love is the offspring of a vigorous fancy: It is born of youth, and if nursed
with care, will, in the calm sunshine of declining life, meliorate into the
sublimest friendship. Having been matured by reciprocal confidence and mutual
esteem, it softens the winter of old age. The pleasing emanations, which result
from so refined a source, are unknown to those, whose minds have been enervated
by dissipation, and poisoned by vice. He only, whose happiness is centered in a
deserving family, can realize the bliss.

I have received several letters from Capt. Evremont, dated Fort Pit. The last
mentions the arrival of his brother, but does not acknowledge the receipt of
the letter I wrote by him. I am flattered with the prospect of seeing him, as
he expects to visit Philadelphia, with dispatches to the War Office.
Exceedingly I regret his engagements in the military line, and sincerely wish
he could retire from the scene of war, with honor; but this is impossible. My
heart is his faithful attendant. By the papers, we find troops continually upon
their march to that quarter: I dread the event.

A letter from my aunt is just handed me. She complains of her situation,
declares it impracticable to support herself, upon the small stipend she
annually receives, and resolves to attempt a reconciliation with her husband.
The rapid increase of her indisposition makes her anxious to be with those
"whose duty it is to provide, and attend upon her. But some obstacles are
previously to be removed. The children must be banished from home; she did not
marry them and is determined never to live with them. It is the duty of a man,
to make every sacrifice to the happiness of his wife." This novel method of
reasoning, she has adopted, is mortifying to my feelings. I cannot believe a
man must discard all affection for his children, to gratify an unreasonable
woman. Should she obtain her wishes, and be received upon the terms proposed,
with a disposition naturally irascible, a reconciliation will but little affect
her happiness. She urges me to address my uncle upon the subject of her return;
but I am decidedly resolved to have no hand in the affair.

Her annual income is amply competent to a genteel support, would she exercise
economy, and learn the distinction between a prodigal, and a liberal mind; but
possessing an extravagant inclination, she is led into a thousand unnecessary
expenses.

I find some of Clarimont's relations are in this place. They are people in
genteel life: I wish exceedingly to be acquainted with them, that I may remove
from their minds, prejudices imbibed against me.

The unfortunate situation of Mrs. Gardner's youngest son, excites in my
breast, many painful emotions. The advantages of a large fortune, are
inconsiderable, exclusive of the power it gives, of imparting happiness to the
distressed. A mind rightly affected by the bounty of heaven, will never feel
happier, than when engaged in lessening the wants of deserving poverty.

I am grateful to Providence, that I have it in my power, to afford some small
relief, to the family of Mr. Gardner. From repeated conversations with Fanny, I
find his mind delicate and susceptible. To confer favors upon such, is painful
as well as pleasing. A trifle given by the truly humane and benevolent, will
afford infinitely more satisfaction to the feeling mind, than a thousand times
its value, presented by the hand of indelicacy, or the air of reluctance. Such
favors I have often seen, and my heart has bled, for the unhappy dependant. I
am sorry to observe, few know how to confer obligations. The children of
adversity surely have sufficient to bear, without the addition of unfeeling
favors. I was some time at a loss how to present the trifle I intended to
bestow; but finally adopted the idea of addressing a letter to him, with a bank
bill enclosed, which I sent to the post office: This, I flatter myself, will
relieve him from his present difficulties. Through Fanny, I shall be acquainted
with his necessities; and when I hear from my agent in Philadelphia, it will be
in my power further to assist him.

There is a report circulating in this place, that my cousin, who was left heir
with me, to my uncle's estate, is a prisoner with the Indians; and not killed
as was supposed, at the defeat of Major Willis. The story is yet uncertain;
such is the cruelty of the savages to their prisoners, I have hesitated,
whether to wish it true or false. I have written to Capt. Evremont upon the
subject; soliciting him, if possible, to obtain a knowledge of the affair, and
if true, to offer any ransom they will accept for him. Perhaps, by employing
the friendly Indians, information may be received. The idea of his sufferings,
if still among them, frequently invades my heart, and shades my momentary
pleasures. The additional society of my dear Maria, would greatly contribute to
my happiness; but be assurred, neither absence, nor length of time, shall ever
lessen the affection of

CAROLINE.

LETTER XVII.
Havre-de-Grace.
IT is impossible, Maria, to acquaint ourselves with either the foibles or
virtues of mankind, unless we follow them to private life. In public, deception
enrobes their actions. A wish to secure the good opinion of the world, induces
them to conceal their imperfections, and they often establish a false
reputation. But when retired from the eye of censure and criticism, caution
lies dormant, and the actions are shaded by natural vices, or illumed with
enviable virtues.

I am hourly convinced of the justness of these observations, notwithstanding
the exertions of Lucretia, to conceal the fretful, penurious disposition of Mr.
Wilkins. His circumstances cannot occasion him to be parsimonious, or
ill-natured; for his fortune is easy, and his prospects flattering. Yet in his
family he is contracted: He lives without company; not from a wish to be alone.
The social principles are strongly interwoven in his heart, and he has it amply
in his power, to gratify a disposition so congenial to human nature. But he
seeks pleasures abroad. Domestic life, to him is divested of charms; yet
Lucretia is uniformly the same engaging woman; and with a voice, softened by
sincere affection, she ever meets him with a sweetness peculiar to herself.

I yesterday went unexpectedly into her chamber, and found her in tears.
Alarmed at a circumstance so uncommon, my curiosity was excited. Shall there,
said I, be any incident in the life of Lucretia, with which she will not
acquaint Caroline? The crystal drop trembled in her eye; she was silent. Going
to her, I seized her hand, and putting it to my lips, the pearly tear bedewed
the sweet impression; "until you evince your confidence I must be wretched;
wherein have I forfeited your friendship?" Her eyes were fixed upon me; and
beaming with an additional expression, she replied, "Your friendly endeavors
to extenuate my sufferings, add a sweet ingredient to this momentary
indulgence. But there are, my dear, many occurrences which take place,
interesting only to ourselves. It would, therefore, be cruel to impart them to
friends, only to allay their pleasures. Upon this principle, you will excuse my
silence."

There can be no circumstance, I observed, in the life of Lucretia, which does
not deeply interest my heart. Your silence is too distressing. "I have no
cause," she continued, "to distrust a confidence, long deservedly placed in the
bosom of Caroline; but you must pardon my refusing to render you unhappy.
Remember I am now a wife. The little secrets once entrusted to you, as they
concerned no one but myself, I was at liberty to divulge; but it is now my duty
to be silent: Nor are you unacquainted with my sentiments. And as I cannot
deviate from principles so well established, you will require no further
apology for my refusal."

Convinced her happiness was interrupted by the behavior of Mr. Wilkins, I
could no longer urge her to a conduct we had so often reprobated in my aunt
Noble; and commending her resolution, left the chamber.

It is seldom, persons of similar inclinations become united. Should it be the
will of the Deity to connect me with a man possessing sentiments essentially
opposed to mine, may I copy from Lucretia. In early life I have been turned
aside from the flowery path of gaiety and indulgence, by the invidious temper
of Eliza; but I will not take the painful retrospect. Imagination is the
mistress of happiness. I will flatter myself, succeeding days will smile upon
me, and by encouraging the fond idea, enjoy my present blessings: Among these,
I class Maria's friendship; this ever affords me inexpressible pleasure.

CAROLINE.

LETTER XVIII.
Havre-de-Grace.
MANY phantoms of happiness, have danced upon my imagination, which have
vanished before enjoyed; and although I exert myself, to extenuate the evils of
life, I find it impossible to secure my pleasures. Some new incident overtakes
me, which blasts my ideal security, and involves me in unforeseen difficulties.

A few evenings since, hurt by some reflections Mr. Wilkins cast upon Lucretia,
I retired to my chamber. The weather was extremely warm, my window open, and
the curtain down. Inclined to indulge the sensations I then experienced, I left
the room without a light, and had set some minutes regretting his unhappy
irritability, when my attention was called to the sound of my name in the
street; and cautiously removing the curtain, I saw two persons, at a little
distance from the gate, engaged in conversation; but notwithstanding my closest
attention, I heard only interrupted sentences. "By your assistance, the plan
cannot fail of success," was sufficient to excite my fears, and hurrying down
stairs, I intended to send the girl to discover who they were, but not finding
her, the thought immediately occurred, that she was engaging against me. I
hastened into the parlour, and observing Lucretia had been in tears, made no
mention of the affair, until the next day, when I communicated it to her and
Mr. Wilkins: They strongly impressed caution upon me. This circumstance at
present is enrobed in mystery.

I am unwilling to believe Eliza still intends to pursue me. Her disposition
will deprive me of the little happiness allotted to human life. I regret that
one of our sex should possess sentiments so opposite to that delicacy, softness
and humanity, which are their most pleasing characteristics. But shades are
necessary to give beauty to a picture; and the disgusting features of this
unhappy woman, will tend to brighten surrounding characters. May we endeavor
to remove every shade from our actions. May wisdom diffuse her aromatic sweets
upon us; and virtue, that heavenly visitant, perfume our path of life, until we
have accomplished the duties allotted to us: Then shall we bid adieu to time,
leaving our memories untinged with vice.

CAROLINE.

LETTER XIX.
Havre-de-Grace.
IN my last, I mentioned my overhearing part of a conversation, as I supposed,
between the maid and a stranger at the gate, which excited painful suspicions
in my mind; these were not without foundation.

Mr. Wilkins being obliged to go to Baltimore upon business, Mrs. Wilkins and
myself, in his absence, made a visit to a Mrs. Drayton, who lives some distance
from us, where we passed the evening. In returning home, we were under the
necessity of crossing a lonesome place, called Long-Acre. There being only one
gentleman with us; many disagreeable ideas loitered upon my mind, from the
recollection of there having been several robberies lately committed upon this
spot. The evening was clear and serene. The pensive moon had early retired from
the spangled hemisphere, and was journeying in some other clime. The way
through this place was so narrow, it was impossible we could walk together.
Politeness dictating I should resign our gallant to Lucretia, I cautiously went
a little before. Soon observing two persons coming toward me, I walked slowly,
for Mrs. Wilkins and Mr. Lee to overtake me, fancying myself secure with them
immediately behind.

A gentleman now came up, and calling me by name, begged I would accept his
arm. I thanked him, and declined; assuring him, he had the advantage of me. He
replied, "I have frequently had the honor of being in your company at Mrs.
Gardner's, and am sorry you have so soon forgot a fellow boarder." I begged his
pardon, urging the evening as an apology for my inattention, and accepted his
offer. Nor was I a little gratified in having additional company. We soon
reached the corner of a street, which he recommended me to take, as being much
nearer to Mrs. Wilkins's. Infatuation had lulled my apprehensions. I complied
with his request. Nor did my fears return, until I had passed a considerable
way in this road: It then occurred to me I was deceived. I was now in a remote,
unfrequented spot, having passed no house since we turned the corner. I at this
moment recollected that the person, who was with my deceiver, parted from him,
just before he came up with me, and I already believed myself in the power of a
woman, whose resentment I dreaded, yet dared not discover my fears. Every step
I went forward, I believed hastened my misfortune; but I could not return.

Having recourse to deception, I purposely turned my ancle, pretending the
severity of pain prevented my walking, and setting down by the side of a fence,
unbuckled my shoe, and feigned great distress. In this situation I remained
near half an hour, when the distant sound of a carriage, encouraged the hope of
relief. On coming opposite to me, it stopped, and my gallant was called by a
whistle. The certainty of my fate, occasioned an agitation which almost
deprived me of senses. I screamed as they raised me up to hurry me into the
coach. At this instant Mr. Lee arrived to my deliverance. The villains
precipitately retreated. I called for Lucretia. Convey me to my friend, said I.
Mr. Lee endeavored to compose me, assuring me I was safe; and that Mrs.
Wilkins, upon missing me, had stopped at the house of a doctor May, where she
remained waiting for me. My impatience to meet her, hurried me beyond my
strength, and when I reached the doctor's, I was for a considerable time
senseless, one fainting fit rapidly succeeding another. The applications of my
friends finally composed my spirits, and recovering, I found Lucretia sitting
at my side, supporting my head upon her shoulder. "I have been an equal sharer
with you, my dear," said she, "What have I not anticipated! Language is
inadequate to the feelings of my heart; but Caroline is again restored."

The doctor and Mr. Lee, paid us every possible attention. They urged us to
tarry till morning; but we insisting upon going home, they procured a carriage
and accompanied us. When we reached the door of Mrs. Wilkins, the clock struck
one; the girl who came to the door appeared alarmed. Distressed with our
adventure, and alive to apprehensions, we could not support the idea of being
left without a protector; and having no man in the house, solicited Mr. Lee to
take a bed. The doctor took his leave, promising to call upon us the next day.
This incident deprived us of sleep. My heart was filled with gratitude, for my
repeated escapes; and the tear of sensibility, which moistened the cheek of
Lucretia, gave me new proof of her friendship.

In the morning, agreeably to promise, Doctor May called upon us. You can
better judge, than I express, my astonishment, when upon his entering the room,
I discovered the countenance of a man, whose character has been the most
abandoned. I recoiled at the remembrance of his vices. These were strongly
impressed upon my mind, from his having been too successful in the ruin of a
particular friend in Philadelphia. To elude the resentment of her friends he
absconded; and changing his name, putting on a wig, and wearing a large patch
over one eve, practiced physic, as I afterward found, in this place. But at
this moment it was necessary to command my feelings. His visit was painful; I
resolved, however, not hastily to expose his character; but to inform myself if
he was respected at Havre-de-Grace, hoping he had become a good member of
society. Upon questioning Fanny, I found he was yet thought a very great
libertine, and shunned by the virtuous of the fair sex. I now believed it my
duty to caution Mrs. Wilkins, and urged her giving orders to the servant,
should he call again, to tell him we were out.

The story now circulated abroad; and our friends, advised to advertising a
reward for the discovery of the villains; but expecting Mr. Wilkins in a few
days, we concluded to wait his return, and govern ourselves by his advice. I
cannot recall my preservation to mind, without bedewing the altar of gratitude
with tears; and my heart continually expands in ejaculations to heaven. May the
watchful eye of Providence, still preserve me, and render futile the plans of
the enraged Eliza.

Your unalterable friend, CAROLINE.

LETTER XX.
Havre-de-Grace.
MY situation is truly distressing. A favorite child of wretchedness, with the
additional affliction of having involved my dear, my loved Lucretia. How shall
I support the painful idea, or be sufficiently composed to recite the unhappy
story. The balm prepared by the lenient hand of friendship, is inadequate to
the design; and even virtue's angel form, cannot shield me from poignant
sufferings. To be the cause of rendering Lucretia unhappy, is a reflection I
cannot sustain. The return of Mr. Wilkins, which in anticipation afforded
superior pleasure, like all the enjoyments of human life was soon allayed. A
momentary gratification was succeeded by a distress, which enfeebles
description. The satisfaction which beamed from our countenances upon his first
arrival, was soon dispelled by pensive care, and destroyed by gloomy anxiety.
His inquiries after our health in his absence, naturally led us to relate the
incident, which had interrupted our pleasures. No sooner was he acquainted with
the circumstances, than an alarming change of countenance clouded his brow. The
smile of tranquillity retired; an unusual austerity governed every feature of
his face. Whence this transition proceeded, I was at a loss to determine.
Thinking him fatigued, and perhaps unsuccessful in business, I retired early to
bed, hoping in the morning to find him in better spirits. The next day the same
unpleasant look, increased my apprehensions. At breakfast, he was silent. I
observed Lucretia frequently cast her eyes upon him, which instantly glistened
with tears. My heart caught the contagion; but knowing his unpleasant temper, I
concluded some trivial circumstance had soured his mind, and having made it a
rule not to notice his resentments, I asked no questions. As soon as breakfast
was over he took his hat and walked out. Mrs. Wilkins appearing uncommonly
depressed, I requested she would relieve my mind by evolving the cause of her
anxiety. At this request she burst into a flood of tears, which for some
minutes prevented a reply. At length having overcome, in a degree, the pang of
unutterable wretchedness, by an exertion, she replied, "Jealousy, that bane to
domestic pleasure, has taken post at every avenue of Mr. Wilkins's heart. Our
innocent but unfortunate visit to Mrs. Drayton, has cast a veil over present
enjoyments, and unless soon removed, may terminate in most destructive
consequences. I have used every argument in my power, to calm his mind; but
these are devoid of efficacy, while the eye of reason is blinded by passion.
The relation you gave him of your escape, he says, is a corroborating proof of
guilt. To be indebted to such characters as Doctor May, and Mr. Lee, is at once
to be criminal. Never was confidence in a wife so betrayed; never a woman so
deceitful. To be at the house of so dissolute a character, and gallanted by
such debauched rakes, and from a feigned fear, detaining one to pass the night,
evinces a guilt which can never be pardoned. The story respecting Caroline is
premeditated; he will not be deceived. Little did he think, the letter he
received at Baltimore had such good foundation." The letter! I exclaimed. I
regret that your pleasures should be interrupted by any plans against me. Had I
known this circumstance, previous to Mr. Wilkins's going out, he should not
have left us, until, if possible, I had removed from his mind, ideas so
destructive to your peace; be assured I shall exert myself to sooth his present
suspicions.

With the most solicitous impatience, we waited his return to dinner. An hour
after his usual time had elapsed, we sent to the store. Mr. Wilkins was not to
be found. The day was tedious; Lucretia and myself were pensile, between hope
and fear. We doubted not, however, that evening would restore him to our
wishes. In this we were alike deceived. Distant from friends in whose advice we
could confide, we knew not what steps to adopt. I could not prevail upon Mrs.
Wilkins to go to bed. A contrariety of sensations employed our minds; and a
train of subsequent misfortunes, presented to view. Every approaching step
flattered a momentary hope. Those alone who are acquainted with similar
sorrows, could in any degree realize our distress. In this truly wretched
situation, we passed several days.

Lucretia, though possessing a singular benevolence and sweetness of mind, was
little short of distracted. We could get no information of Mr. Wilkins. A week
having elapsed in fruitless inquiries, I advised her to address her papa,
acquainting him with the unhappy event; but her agitation was too great; she
could not compose herself, and requested I would undertake the painful task. I
accordingly forwarded him a circumstantial account. Never did I so essentially
experience the want of your presence, as at this moment. The thick clouds of
adversity suspend every ray of pleasure, but that which results from an
approving conscience, and the alleviating society of Fanny.

It would be impossible to support myself, deprived of Maria, under my present
afflictions, if I was not blessed with this dear girl. Dejection is strongly
depictured upon the countenance of Lucretia, and her mind is wandering; grief
preys upon her.

Strange, that a sudden suspicion should carry Mr. Wilkins to such lengths in
resentment. Called to support this unhappy woman, with a heart replete with
distress, I am inadequate to my duty.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER XXI.
Havre-de-Grace.
OH! my friend, (for by that sacred name I will fondly salute Maria,) could I
take you by the hand and lead you to the chamber of Lucretia, the scene would
excite your tenderest pity, and your heart bleed for her distress.

Confined to her bed; her intervals of reason transient; her countenance wild
and ghastly. The sight is too affecting: But such is my friend, and such the
object which calls my whole attention. Fanny has been with me several days, and
promises not to leave me.

I was sitting one evening upon the bedside of Lucretia, wiping the dewy cheek,
and endeavoring to arouse her despondency, when the doctor and his pupil
entered the chamber. He inquired her situation; and, leaving some new
prescriptions, withdrew. As Fanny was in the room, I followed him, wishing to
know his mind with regard to Mrs. Wilkins, being greatly alarmed at his
unexpected visit, as he had been with her in the afternoon. Observing my
anxiety, the good old gentleman at once assured me, "His visit was not from any
apprehensions of immediate danger; for so long as a fever could be retarded,
there was great encouragement:" And taking me by the hand, "It was to you my
visit was intended. An accidental discovery alarms me for your safety. Your
recent adventure has been a general subject of conversation. Since I was with
you, in the course of my visits, entering cautiously the house of a patient,
who lies extremely ill, I overheard the servants intimate, the person Mrs.
Wilkins has in her service, is not of the sex her habit denotes, but a man,
placed in that capacity, the more effectually to complete your ruin; and that
he addressed a letter to Mr. Wilkins, while at Baltimore, giving such accounts,
as, coinciding with your story, excited that jealousy, which occasioned him to
abscond. I therefore propose, that this young gentleman, under the pretense of
Mrs. Wilkins's danger, tarry with you to night, and in the morning that you
remove to some place better calculated for your safety and happiness."

Cast into the utmost astonishment by the unexpected intelligence, the little
fortitude I had flattered myself I possessed, was long incapable of composing
my mind; nor could I articulate my thanks for his friendship. The doctor now
promised to see me early in the morning, and to afford me every possible
assistance; and requesting Mr. Gilet not to leave the house until he came, took
his leave. How indefatigable is Eliza in resentment; and by what unexpected
events, does the Deity disclose the combinations of the wicked.

Fanny, uneasy at my unusual absence from Lucretia, came softly down stairs and
entered the parlour unperceived by me, as I sat leaning my arm upon the table,
holding my handkerchief at my eyes; she came toward me, and grasping my hand,
with the warmest expression of solicitude, "Caroline," said she, "let me share
in your affliction; impart your distress; acquaint me what new circumstance
allays your happiness." I could not speak. Mr. Gilet stepping to the door,
pushed it too, and returning to her, said, "A suspicion occasions the present
thoughtfulness of your friend." "It must," replied she, "be a well grounded
suspicion, thus to overcome her fortitude." He then related the circumstance.

Duty to the distracted Lucretia, called for my resolution, and I studied to
conquer the exquisite sensations of my breast; but my reflections were doubly
painful, from the insupportable idea of being the innocent cause of her
sufferings. Fanny prevailed upon me to dissipate my tears; and resuming as
composed a countenance, as I possibly could, I returned to Lucretia. The
anodyne she had taken having produced a sleep, she did not notice our entering
the chamber. The night was tedious. The hours seemed uncommonly retarded; I was
impatient for the return of day; sleep was a stranger, and my heart familiar
with sorrow. Early in the morning, the doctor was with us, and advised my
sending for the partner of Mr. Wilkins; resigning to his care, the keys, etc.
and going himself to Mrs. Gardiner's, engaged a room for Lucretia. He then sent
his carriage to convey us to our old lodgings. We at first found it difficult
to prevail upon her to get up and be dressed; but fortunately in her greatest
paroxisms of dejection, I had not lost my influence; and she finally submitted
to my persuasions. Having got her in the coach, melancholy so veiled her ideas,
that she appeared entirely inattentive; and when we reached Mrs. Gardner's, she
suffered us to take her out of the carriage and carry her up stairs, without
any opposition; and from this distressing state of depression and
insensibility, no exertions can renovate this unhappy woman. When I take the
retrospect, how severe my reflections! The thought that Lucretia, the innocent,
the amiable Lucretia, should by me be thus involved in distress, strikes
daggers to my heart. The idea is fraught with extreme wretchedness. Let the
cordial of your friendship, be poured into the wounded bosom of

CAROLINE.

LETTER XXII.
Havre-de-Grace.
IN this my distressed situation, how do I wish your much loved society, to
beguile my grief. Fanny, possessed of feelings which render her valuable to the
children of misfortune, is unwearied in her endeavors to alleviate my misery.
The soft voice of her friendship, excites many grateful reflections, in the
woe-fraught mind of real sorrow: She unites with me her attention in restoring
tranquillity to the distracted breast of my dear Lucretia.

My so suddenly quitting the house of Mr. Wilkins, prevented the execution of
any plans, which the malice of our enemies had suggested against us. Worlds
would not have prevailed upon me, to have remained there, after the information
I had received. To think we were calling upon a man! and a man by interest an
enemy to my peace, I recoil at the idea.

Since we have been at Mrs. Gardner's, Lucretia has, at intervals, been a
little more composed. She once asked me, why I removed her from her own house?
I replied, to cheer her spirits. "You are kind, Caroline," said she, "but that
is impossible; my situation is worse than death. To suffer innocently is indeed
hard." This is the most connected conversation I have had with her, since the
week after the unhappy event took place.

By the next post, I expect to hear from New York. In this period of my
affliction, fail not to pray for the support of your friend. The source of my
sufferings is uncommon; and new plans of destruction yet await me. To suffer
thus in a state of seeming banishment, racks my health, and shatters my
resolution. But the tears I shed are not barbed with guilt. This consolation
enables me to attend my distressed friend. When I consider how much our
characters, and happiness, is in the power of those around us, I shudder at
every step I take. Our sex, are indeed peculiarly exposed to the ill-natured
remarks of a censorious world. Possessing, in general, great vivacity, we are
led into many little errors, which although they cannot be called errors of the
heart, too frequently shade our virtues; nor will the plea of youth, be
sufficient to ward off the stigma of imprudence. When I consider our critical
situation, and the many delicate points upon which our reputation is
established, I tremble for the honor of my sex.

My mind has been filled with conjectures, respecting the deception imposed
upon us, by the servant Mrs. Wilkins had hired. Is this by the artifice of
Eliza? How much should I dread her resentment! I am indeed alive to fear. Can
there, Maria, be a female, so devoid of every requisite, to render her
attractive? I hesitate, to believe there is such a character! Yet what
disagreeable truths, does our increasing knowledge of human nature unfold upon
us. It is too frequently the case, that characters, to a cursory observer,
endowed with all the virtues requisite for social happiness, upon an intimate
or close examination, lose those striking traits, and assume a contrary
appearance, from the varied situations in which they are placed. How opposite
is the rash, imprudent conduct of Mr. Wilkins, to that calm reflection, that
seeming fortitude and prudence, which at my first acquaintance with him, I
believed marked his character. These were only the shadow of those virtues, the
real possession of which constitutes the happiness of man. Had Mr. Wilkins
nursed these virtues, they would not have abandoned his breast, at the first
throb of jealousy, nor have suffered the baleful breath of slander to force him
from a deserving wife, before he had determined upon a just cause of
impeachment. Jealousy is a characteristic of ignorance. When it becomes an
inhabitant of the heart, it turns out reason, affection is banished, and every
tender sensation lies dormant. Yes my dear, even love, that sun of the domestic
soul, is clouded with the black shades of suspicion. If possible, I must erase,
the killing recollection of Lucretia's sufferings. Thanks be to heaven, she is
at this moment a little composed. I will endeavor to amuse her.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER XXIII.
Havre-de-Grace.
WHEN I finished my last, I flattered myself Lucretia was better. But this, my
dear, was a false hope. On my endeavoring to divert her, I found her more
confused than I had imagined. Her replies to my questions greatly unconnected;
her eyes uncommonly wild, and her countenance suffused with a crimson color. I
immediately sent for the doctor, who assured me a fever had set in. Blisters
were applied to her neck and arms, and every possible (...) shown her by this
good, this (...). I have made every exertion to obtain information of Mr.
Wilkins; but to no purpose. Greatly am I alarmed for my friend. -- (...) cause
of her sufferings! -- (...) destroys my resolution. -- It is impossible I
should ever make compensation, for the misery I have occasioned.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER XXIV.
Havre-de-Grace.
THE incidents through which I have passed, would melt an heart of adamant to
pity. Mr. Barton arrived the day before yesterday; but has been too absorbed in
grief, to adopt any measures for the discovery of Mr. Wilkins. I have been
unable to prevail upon him to leave the chamber of Lucretia for a single moment.

Mr. Barton has sent for the partner of Mr. Wilkins. I flatter myself some
information will be obtained from this interview. Could I have a short
conversation with Mr. Wilkins, I am certain, he would be convinced of
Lucretia's innocence. This effected, a thousand daggers, which rankle in my
breast, would be removed. Forget not to petition for your friend.

Adieu, CAROLINE.
P. S. As my letter is not sealed, I will add, Mr. Watson has called upon Mr.
Barton, He acknowledges he is acquainted with Mr. Wilkins's residence; but in
honor cannot divulge it. I believe him to be warmly interested in our
distress. He assures Mr. Barton, his influence shall be exerted in behalf of
Mrs. Wilkins. He advises her father immediately to write him, and offers to
dispatch the letter by a special messenger. But my Lucretia's griefs, I fear,
are beyond a cure; and the arrows of her misfortune rebound with redoubled
force upon the breast of Caroline. Once more, Adieu.



LETTER XXV.
Havre-de-Grace.
RELIGION and philosophy afford me your united aid; strengthen and sustain me
in this complicated affliction. Lucretia's fever is violent. Let one gleam of
hope dart upon my mind, and, if possible, remove my present excruciating
distress, or I shall be incapable of attending this unhappy woman. Hitherto
every bud of hope has been destroyed, ere the fragrant foliage opened its
aromatic charms; and my fondest expectations have been blasted. But infinite
wisdom directs all events. Fanny, the charming Fanny, with what tender sympathy
she affords me her assistance. With what impatience and anxiety does she watch
the bed of Lucretia.

Mr. Barton is now writing to Mr. Wilkins; he is, however, too distressed to do
justice to this tale of woe.

I can spare only a few minutes at a time from this dear woman. Excuse the
confusion of my letter, and let my afflictions apologize for my errors.

CAROLINE.
P. S. Since I wrote the above, Mr. Barton sent for me into his chamber, and
handing me the letter he had written to Mr. Wilkins, requested I would read it.
The enclosed is a copy.

Sir,
My present distress renders me inadequate to the task of writing. -- I am
distracted by my fears. A woman, whose innocence and virtue are as unfullied as
descending snow, has been rendered miserable by an ill grounded suspicion. By
your rash, unjustifiable conduct, an only, a beloved child, is now tortured
upon the bed of sickness, and her life will be sacrificed to your inhumanity.

The man who could thus rashly relinquish domestic happiness, and leave an
amiable wife, to encounter the unfeeling reflections of a censorious world, can
never have a just idea of those feelings, which exist in the bosom of an
anxious parent; a parent who is all solicitous and trembling for the event. To
repeat her sufferings, would make no impression upon a heart destitute of
sympathy and affection, I have, therefore, but little prospect of exciting your
attention. Yet, if one spark of tenderness lurks within your breast, and you
have a wish to view the victim of your cruelty, not one moment must be delayed.
Let me entreat you to hasten to the melancholy chamber, to the suffering angel,
that the last sigh of her departed soul may make some impression upon you.

Neglect not this last request, as you regard the blessing of an injured wife,
whose departed spirit will shortly call upon an injured parent to vindicate her
wrongs; and although your conduct cannot be justified, dare at least to defend
yourself to the distracted

THOMAS BARTON.
P. S. The enclosed will be forwarded by Mr. Watson, who has witnessed the
situation of your wife.






LETTER XXVI.
Havre-de-Grace
LUCRETIA, my loved Lucretia, is now no more: But an inconsolable parent calls
my whole attention. For seven nights I never left her chamber. Fanny, myself,
and the nurse, alternately watched at her bedside, and the greatest part of
this time, Mr. Barton could not be persuaded to retire.

Mrs. Wilkins, never once discovered the least recollection of either of us,
since the day previous to her father's arrival, until a few minutes before her
dissolution. This was an additional affliction. Frequently would Mr. Barton
seize her hand, and pressing it to his lips, exclaim, "Give me but one sweet
word of consolation -- how bitter my cup of affliction!"

A few hours after the letter Mr. Barton had wrote Mr. Wilkins, was sent on, by
express, I found a great alteration had taken place in Lucretia.

It being near the usual time her physician attended her, I waited with the
utmost impatience, nor dared to communicate my fears to her father.

The doctor soon entered the chamber -- I watched his looks, I dreaded the
decision. But the anxiety of a sincere attachment, easily leads us from one
extreme to another, and I flattered myself, from an expression he dropped, I had
anticipated the worst. This feeble dawn of hope, was only the pleasing
offspring of the moment, which was soon destroyed, and gave birth to feelings
inexpressibly distressing. Approaching the bed I had just left, to make room
for the doctor, I begged him by no means to deceive me, in regard to the
situation of my friend. "Every prospect," said he, "of recovery is lost, and
death, that friend to human wretchedness, will soon seal her misery." At this
moment, Mr. Barton entered the chamber, having been in an adjoining room, to
obtain, if possible, a little sleep; these distressing words vibrated upon his
ears, as he opened the door; he flew to the bed, and seizing the cold hand of
the expiring Lucretia, declared, "By all the agonies which now torture my
lovely daughter, by the poignant sufferings of a parent's breast, I swear,
never to suppress my resentment, until this arm shall sacrifice the villain who
has thus undone me." Then hesitating, he turned to the doctor, "Why," said he,
"am I deprived of every hope?" The mournful voice of an afflicted father, at
this instant raised the languid eye of his lovely daughter; and giving him an
expressive look, "My sufferings," said she, "are nearly closed. Caroline, I
entreat you, attest my innocence. My father too! are you a witness of the
scene? My loved, my much loved parent, believe your daughter what she ever was;
believe her innocent. I have only one wish ungratified." "What is that, my
darling child?" said Mr. Barton, "I am all impatience; pray tell your anxious
parent?" "To make Mr. Wilkins sensible of the purity of my mind, of the
rectitude of my actions, to seal his reconciliation, with the warm kiss of
forgiveness, and quit the world resigned." She was now exhausted. Her father
pressed her hand to his lips -- at the instant she expired; lisping in broken
accents, "Oh my father, your blessing, I know, attends me. Let your parental
regards, protect Caroline."

At this gloomy crisis, every turbulent emotion of despair, distracted Mr.
Barton's mind. "Inhuman Wilkins," said he, "revenge shall be mine. With what
pangs have you imbittered my life!" At times he stood motionless, with eyes
rivetted upon the breathless body. The doctor endeavored to prevail upon him,
to withdraw. "And will you," said he, "tear me from all I hold dear? She is my
child, my only child; you shall not take me from her."

Mr. Barton remained in the chamber near three hours. Finding him unwilling to
leave it, I attempted to retire. "And will you quit a distressed parent?" said
he, "Remember you are my adopted daughter. Lucretia bade me love you."
Earnestly as I wished to withdraw, and much as I needed the consoling language
of friendship to assuage my sufferings, my duty compelled me to afford every
attention, to the inconsolable Mr. Barton. But all I urged, yielded him no
relief.

To be conversant with such affliction is too much for my susceptibility, even
if I had no share in the calamity. The connection I have in it, adds to my
wretchedness. But while destined to sorrow, may lenient resignation with the
luster of a noonday sun, dawn upon my mind her peaceful radiance, and dissipate
repining thoughts.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER XXVII.
Havre-de-Grace.
SUCH an ebon shade obscures my happiness, and so great is the vacuum in my
heart, that I am at a loss how to address my dear Maria. To part with our
friends, how severe the task! Language how feeble, when used to express acute
sensations! But you need not the repetition of my exigencies to attune your
breast to pity. The dew of friendship frequently moistens your cheek, on the
recollection of my sufferings* I thank you for this pleasing characteristic of
humanity; let it not insensibly deprive you of your pleasures.

It is impossible to calm Mr. Barton. Bereft of Lucretia -- deprived of his
all, he refuses to be comforted. Having never experienced the meliorating
influence of that religion, which exhilarates the christian, and enables him to
sustain afflictions; he is without that comfort, which can only be derived from
its blessed truths.

Mr. Wilkins's arrival, I anticipate with the most lively distress. The style
in which Mr. Barton addressed him, was not consonant to my feelings. Human
nature is more frequently brought to a sense of its errors, by the mild voice
of persuasion, than the harsh language of resentment. I fear Mr. Barton will
never be sufficiently composed, to treat him with propriety. I cannot prevail
upon him to eat, or sleep. His constant cry is, "Bring me that monster Wilkins;
that scandal to humanity." I dread each distant step, least it should prove the
messenger of his arrival. Twice, since yesterday, he has locked himself in the
chamber of Lucretia; and for more than an hour refused me admittance. My whole
attention is confined to him.

The brow of your friend, long contracted with sorrow, is now marked with
inexpressible dejection. Since I wrote you yesterday, such additional
distresses have enveloped me, as even the warm imagination of Maria, cannot
paint.

For the first time since Lucretia's death, I had prevailed upon Mr. Barton, to
throw himself upon the bed, in hopes a little sleep would better enable him to
pay the last respects to the memory of his unfortunate daughter, who was in the
afternoon to be entombed. A melancholy stillness, encouraged my gloemy
reflections. I was feeding upon the remembrance of Lucretia's sufferings, when
a sudden noise aroused me from my reverie. My foreboding heart, instantly
suggested the fatal truth. So great was my agitation, it deprived me of my
strength. I had not power to rise from my seat. In a few minutes, I heard the
voice of Mr. Wilkins upon the stairs. "Insupportable is my situation!" said he,
"Arrived too late? Lucretia gone!" At the sound of this much loved name, Mr.
Barton started from the bed, and flying to the door, uttered, as he went out,
"Vengeance shall be mine!" I fainted. When I came to myself, I was on the bed;
Fanny was bathing my temples; Mrs. Gardner and the girls were in the room; I
inquired for Mr. Barton; they replied, he was in the next chamber; I requested,
he might be called; they evaded a compliance. Suspicious of new difficulties, I
arose, and going toward the door, was prevented, by Fanny, from opening it.
"Stop, my dear," said she, "Mr. Barton will be with you in a few minutes." I
will not be detained, said I, and pressing by her, hurried down stairs; and
entering the parlour, found Mr. Barton reclining in an arm chair. He took no
notice of me. Going up to him, and seizing his hand, I entreat you, said I, to
let me know the worst. Where is Mr. Wilkins? This name aroused him. "The
villain, the monster," replied he, "who, in a fit of jealousy, murdered my only
child, is now, I hope, no more. Think not an injured parent could forgive his
cruelty. When I heard his voice, I seized the pistol, previously loaded and
concealed in my bosom; and as he was entering the chamber, which contains the
sacred remains of my departed angel, I shot him through the head; and locking
the door, ordered the hated object from my sight" The tears of affliction, now
mingled with those of fear, rolling plentifully from my eyes, deprived me of
expression. Mrs. Gardner coming into the room, I left her with Mr. Barton; and
going unexpectedly to Fanny, found her absorbed in trouble. My dear, said I,
Mr. Barton tells me he has shot Mr. Wilkins through the head. Is he really
dead? "No," replied she, "the ball having entered his right shoulder is thought
to have taken a very dangerous direction; but he yet lives." Is he sensible?
said I. I will hasten to him; let a servant be dispatched to know. Scarce had I
done speaking, before Mrs. Gardner called us. We hastened to her. Mr. Barton
was in a fit. With great difficulty they got him up stairs. The doctor was sent
for. The fits rapidly increased and I was prevented from attending the funeral
of Lucretia. Judge my feelings, when the solemn knell vibrated upon my ears,
which hurried from my view, forever, the sincere friend of my youth, at the
moment her affectionate father was groaning with severe pain. Anxious to
convince Mr. Wilkins of the innocence of his wife, I was impatient to be with
him, that I might improve the first interval of his reason; but duty detained
me with Mr. Barton. I am deprived of every pleasing prospect. She, who once
enlivened the days of childhood, who grew up the participator of my joys and
sorrows, has fled; and by the most painful recollections, I am reminded she
once lived. How fragile the objects upon which we do^^. But I will embalm her
memory in the bosom of friendship. And when time imperceptibly shall have
soothed my sorrows, I shall experience a luxury in the retrospect of her
virtues, which will be more aromatic to my taste, than all the spicery of an
Egyptian soil.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER XXVIII.
Havre-de-Grace.
Mr. Barton's fits have subsided -- they have left him extremely weak -- he
says but little -- when he speaks, it is of Lucretia. I sent this morning to
inquire after Mr. Wilkins -- the servant brought word, he was senseless.
Jealousy, thou bane to human happiness, thou destroyer of all my pleasures! How
have thou subverted every fancied gratification! Had it not been for this fatal
passion, Eliza would not have pursued me with her resentment, nor Lucretia and
Mr. Wilkins been thus wretched.

Fanny tells me it is generally believed, the servant Mrs. Wilkins had in her
house, was a man who had formerly lived with Eliza's parents; I suspect the
letter Mr. Wilkins received at Baltimore, was from him. That it was a man we
had engaged in our service, several circumstances tend to prove; but none more,
than his immediate flight. Many stories circulating in this place detrimental
to our characters, upon being traced, we find originated with him; yet, false
as they are, it will be difficult to remove prejudices. There are some ideas,
which, if once entertained of a character, are ever after believed. This
observation is too generally true, as it regards female reputation. A striking
trait of human depravity! But a chain of unfortunate events has hastened our
ruin. Our visit to Mrs. Drayton has been attended with extreme distress.
Repeating the unfortunate story to Mr. Wilkins, from its being connected with
those loose characters to whom we were indebted, gave us an appearance of
guilt. Let us deduce a moral from the misfortune, and from hence learn, not
rashly to condemn; for although appearances may bespeak guilt, full confidence
is not always to be placed upon them. Appearances can seldom be the standard of
determining the truth, while deception conceals the motives from which we act.
I am called to Mr. Barton.

I am unfit to write, yet fly to my pen, for a mitigation to my harrassed mind.

Mr. Barton has been questioning me respecting the funeral of Lucretia -- he
forbids Mr. Wilkins should be laid at her side; I dare not tell him he yet
lives. The depression of this unhappy man increases. "I shall soon be with my
dear Lucretia," said he, "her lovely image clings to my soul -- I fancy her in
some bright star, decorating the expanse of heaven." -- I long to remove from
this place, to quit objects, which continually remind me of my loss -- not
because I do not wish to nourish every recollection of her virtues. To regard
these, shall be one of the most pleasing employments of my life, but the
immediate circumstances of her sufferings, I wish to erase from memory. The
warm participations you express for me, produce the most grateful sensations in
the tortured bosom of

CAROLINE.

LETTER XXIX.
Havre-de-Grace.
NOTWITHSTANDING my wish to submit to the dispensations of Providence, with
such rapidity do unfortunate circumstances crowd* upon me, that I am frequently
ready to relinquish every cherished idea of resignation. Affliction has a
penetrating power, it searches the inmost recesses of the heart, and every
revolving day ushers upon me new distress.

This morning I was suddenly awakened by the nurse at my bedside. For heaven's
sake, said I, what now awaits me -- is Mr. Barton worse? "Mr. Barton, Madam,"
replied she, "is dead." Shocked at this sudden information, I sprang out of
bed, and slipping on my clothes, ran into his chamber; the nurse followed. "I
went to him," said she, "to inquire if he wished for any thing to take; he
appearing to be asleep, and easier than I had before observed him, I put my
ear, near his mouth, and after listening some minutes, could not perceive that
he drew his breath; alarmed at this, I laid my hand upon his forehead, which
instantly convinced me he was dead." Pray nurse, said I, call Mrs. Gardner; and
flinging myself into a chair, received a momentary relief from a friendly flood
of tears. The family were soon with me. Unmindful of my situation, I still sat
weeping, even after all the boarders had assembled in the room. In the moments
of keen affliction, etiquette and propriety are frequently forgot. Mrs. Gardner
and the girls were also surprised, they were as inattentive as myself; in
short, the most painful confusion prevailed, when two young gentlemen, who had,
I believe, just entered the chamber, came to me, and entreated me to retire;
remaining with the object, they said, would only irritate my feelings, and
assuring me they would pay every possible attention to my friend, directed the
nurse to assist me in returning to my chamber, and by a hint to the other
gentleman, got them down stairs, that I might have an opportunity to pass. When
I entered my room, I threw myself upon the bed, and gave fresh vent to my
tears. In a few minutes Fanny came into my chamber, with a bowl of tea, which
she urged me to drink.

Capt. Clark and Capt. Green, she said, had sent for the doctor, and begged I
would command their services. After complying with her request, she assisted me
in dressing. The doctor now arrived, and I found, by Mrs. Gardner, had
pronounced Mr. Barton's death occasioned by poison. Upon examining the body, it
was extremely swelled; and their moving it, soon made him an object unfit for
sight. The doctor thinking he might burst in a few hours, advised to his being
immediately put into the coffin.

At this dreadful crisis, my reason seemed dormant. I was incapable of doing my
duty; and had it not been for those young gentlemen to whom I am peculiarly
indebted, though entirely unknown, I should have been ignorant of every step
necessary for me to pursue upon the occasion, and still more deeply involved
Mr. Barton's character in disgrace, by adding suicide to murder. It had been
given out by the family, that Mr. Barton had made his escape immediately upon
firing at Mr. Wilkins; and this report concealed him from the hands of justice.
The circumstances of his death, it was likewise necessary to secret. His
having been dangerously ill, favored the idea of a natural dissolution. After
they had removed him into his coffin, a bottle of arsenic was found under his
pillow, which confirmed the suspicion. Fanny, like a guardian angel, never
leaves me. Capt. Clark, she says, ordered every thing belonging to Mr. Barton,
to be locked up, and has taken care of the keys, until I shall be able to
attend to them. He begs me to consider him as a brother, and assures me his
heart is alive to my distress. How does the Deity raise up new friends, when he
deprives us of the support of those with which we had been favored!

Capt. Clark, although a stranger to me, evinces so much sincerity, that I can
do no less than accept his friendly offers. Perhaps you may think me ignorant
of the deception of the human heart; but I have suffered too severely, not to
have learnt a lesson from such repeated afflictions. I shall relinquish the
direction of every thing to him. The family have been very attentive to me;
Fanny I shall ever love. They unite in urging me to join them below. I am
sensible indulgence of grief destroys the health; but have been so confined to
a sick chamber since I have been here, that I am a stranger to all the
boarders; I cannot, however, refuse, without giving them offense.

Mr. Wilkins has lain several days, in such a situation; every hour has been
expected would be his last. Could one interval of reason be allowed him,
eagerly would I hasten to his gloomy chamber, and acquaint him with the last
fond expression of my dear Lucretia. This would ease the pang of dissolving
nature. My narration is so painful, I am at times disposed to cease the recital.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER XXX.
Havre-de-Grace.
THE distance which separates me from Maria, and my connexions, has been an
additional affliction to me. Yet this misfortune has been greatly alleviated by
the lenient balm of Fanny's friendship, and the brotherly attention and
tenderness of Capt. Clark, who has taken every painful task from my hands. My
heart is fraught with gratitude to heaven for such peculiar blessings. Mr.
Barton was privately buried by the side of his daughter, the evening succeeding
his death.

What an affecting story, is that of Caroline! and how much is a jealous temper
to be avoided! Had Mr. Wilkins conducted with prudence, we might still have
been happy. But one rash step has succeeded another, until it has ended in a
murder and suicide. These events, however, although beyond our investigation,
could not have taken place, without divine permission.

From Mr. Wilkins's continuing for several days beyond the expectations of his
physicians, I cannot but flatter myself he may yet recover. Nothing should have
prevented my attendance upon him, since Mr. Barton's death, but my own ill
health. The bloom which once decorated my cheek has fled, and the eye of your
friend, remarkable for vivacity, now bespeaks her grief. How vain and illusory
are our gratifications in life. Mr. Wilkins has not been blessed with one
interval of reason, since the unhappy event; and as I can render him no
essential service, Capt. Clark impresses it upon me as a duty, to keep from a
scene which would give such an additional poignancy to my sufferings. May Maria
ever be protected from such complicated distresses, as involve

CAROLINE.

LETTER XXXI.
Havre-de-Grace.
LAST night, the unhappy Wilkins expired! Hastened into eternity without a
thought suitable for the solemn event! How unprepared must he be, to meet that
Judge, at whose tribunal he now appears! I have urged Capt. Clark to attend me
to the breathless body, that I may take my last, my final leave of the
unfortunate scene. He pleads the impropriety, and will not consent to accompany
me. Can it be more distressing, than the colorings of my imagination? If it
is, I am confident I could not stand it.

Mr. Wilkins having no connexions in this place to delay the funeral, being
originally from North Carolina, was interred the day after his death. I suspect
this was by desire of Capt. Clark, in hopes of alleviating my distress.

This morning, opening my bureau, I saw a letter I had received, when Mr.
Barton lay dead, and knowing the hand writing to be my aunt Noble's, had put it
in this place, till more disposed to peruse it. Upon breaking the seal, I was
agreeably surprised to find enclosed, a letter from Capt. Evremont. He desires
to be remembered to all my friends. This surely includes my affectionate Maria.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER XXXII.
Havre-de-Grace.
SO long have I been accustomed to hope and fear, it is difficult to divest
myself of anxiety and care. I still feel, as if some object demanded my
particular attention. I walk to the chamber of Lucretia, and enter the door,
before I recollect she is gone, beyond the reach of my friendship. Disposed to
indulge my melancholy sensations, I retire to my own apartment; but the
assiduity of Fa^^^ ever prevents me from gratifying a disposition so injurious
to my health. She, in a language dictated by an exalted friendship, prevails
upon me to join the family below, who unitedly exert themselves to dispel my
gloom. Those two gentlemen I have previously mentioned, appear desirous to
amuse me: They are, I find, officers in the second United States regiment, and
profess a strong friendship for each other. Capt. Clark requests me to view his
friend, "As my friend and brother. He has, Madam," continued he, "tasted of the
cup of misfortune; but his mind is superior to every dishonorable idea, and
you will ever find him ready to advise and protect your character and happiness.

This naturally led me to make some inquiries respecting him. "I am gratified,"
said, Captain Clark, "at your inclination, to become acquainted with his
history. His parents reside at Halifax, and are people of interest and
character. At the commencement of the contest, between Great Britain and
America, a spirit of liberty thrilled in his breast: He viewed the measures
pursued against the Colonies, as tending to deprive them of their privileges;
and relinquishing every fond attachment, quitted his native country, that he
might raise his warlike arm, in defense of injured freedom; and taking passage
for Nantucket, from thence he proceeded, by land, to the army, then stationed
near Boston. His story gained him the confidence of the general officers, and
he shortly received a commission in the army, where he served to universal
satisfaction, till the close of the war. By his conduct, he gained the
approbation of his superior officers, and the uniform character of a brave man.
His absenting himself from the government under which he lived, and accepting a
commission from the Americans, enraged his connexions, and they totally
discarded him. Thrown out of all employment, and deprived of every expectation
from his friends, he was left, at the close of the war, with many of his
brother officers, destinate of a support; and has necessarily experienced great
difficulties. The sacrifices he made in behalf of these States at first
procured him a commission; and his invariable bravery and coolness, now call
him from private life, again to encounter the dangers of the field; and we are
mutually engaged in enlisting troops for the Westward."

This little history excited my particular attention. I began to be interested
in his future fortune; for I freely acknowledge I was not so much pleased with
his person or address, as I was with Captain Clark. Certain prepossessions ever
attend a first interview, and we frequently suffer ourselves to be prejudiced
only from appearance. Such determinations are, however, inconsistent with our
better judgment. Many virtues lie concealed from cursory observation, which, on
intimacy, pleasingly expand to view. Besides, there are a thousand little
incidents which tend to bias the mind, and the female is soon partial to the
attention of a pleasing character.

I shall remain in this place but a week or two longer. On my return to
Philadelphia, I flatter myself to hear more frequently from Maria.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER XXXIII.
Havre-de-Grace.
"A FRIEND," says Seneca, "may be taken away, but not the sweets of their
friendship. As there is a sharpness in some fruits, and a bitterness in some
wines which please; so there is a mixture in the remembrance of friends, where
the loss of their company, is sweetened by the contemplation of their virtues."
How pleasingly will this apply to Lucretia. The friendly hand of time,
meliorates our afflictions; it teaches us to view the painful separation of our
friends, as the consummation of their happiness. Through this medium, we become
reconciled; and while we mourn the loss we have sustained, we rejoice, that the
object of our affection is beyond the reach of anxiety and care. Their little
foibles are obliterated from memory, or if we recall them to mind, sensible that
human nature cannot attain perfection, we draw over them the veil of candor,
and dwell only upon their virtues.

Scarce one night do I retire to rest, but my dreaming fancy presents my loved
Lucretia. Frequently am I engaged with her in those amusements which once
delighted her. In these pleasing deliriums, I forget she is an inhabitant of
heaven, and converse with her as a mortal being. Nor does any circumstance tend
more to demonstrate the immortality of the mind, than the excursions it
frequently makes, while the body, to which it is annexed, lies in a state of
insensibility. If we have a just estimation of the amazing powers with which
the Deity has endowed the mind, we shall be lost in admiration, and with Doctor
Young, exclaim --

"Know thou the importance of a soul immortal?
Behold this midnight glory, worlds on worlds!
Amazing pomp! Redouble this amaze!
Then weigh the whole -- one soul outweighs them all,
And calls the astonishing magnificence
Of unintelligent creation, poor."
Gracious Deity, impress this pleasing thought; and may it operate to virtuous
pursuits. Abdiel has been permitted to pluck from the garden of life, an
inviting flower, which had not long expanded its beauties. May this teach us
the uncertainty of present blessings, and prepare us to attend his summons;
then shall we join Lucretia in bliss.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER XXXIV.
Havre-de-Grace.
A FEW days since, I gave you a little history of my friend, Captain Green, and
I make no doubt, but the heart of Maria, which is uniformly interested for the
sons of affliction, experienced a pang, similar with my own.

If I was pleased with the attention of Captain Clark, at the moment of
introduction, I am now doubly attached to him. With the most brotherly
affection, he anticipates my wishes, and aims to ward off every painful
circumstance; he has devoted himself to my service, and discharged all the
bills occasioned by Mr. Barton's and Lucretia's sickness. He proposes Captain
Green shall take the charge of the few men, they have enlisted here, that he
may accompany me in the stage to Philadelphia.

Looking over the pocket book of Mr. Barton, I saw a letter directed to me,
which, upon opening, I found contained a will, by the date discovered to have
been written the day after Lucretia's death; in which, after bequeathing me a
thousand pounds, he divides the residue of his estate between his only sister,
a widow in the State of New York, and her children; leaving the clothes he had
with him, his watch, etc. etc. at my disposal. "In my pocket book," adds the
will, "are bank bills to the amount of five hundred dollars, which will be more
than sufficient to defray the expenses attendant upon Lucretia's, and my
misfortunes; and whatever remains, I request Mrs. Gardner to accept."

He has appointed two particular friends in New York, his executors. I gave the
will into the hands of Captain Clark; who, after having it proved and
registered here, enclosed and forwarded it, by the post, to New York. The trunk
contained only a few clothes; but being a very suitable one for traveling, I
wished to present it to the Captain; yet hesitated at the propriety of the
action; but observing he appeared much pleased with it, I handed him the key,
begging he would oblige me, by calling that, and the contents, his own. He
received this token of my friendship, with a grace peculiar to himself. There
is an ease in the most trivial actions of his life, which discovers his
education. But even the society of Captain Clark and his friend, with the
addition of my dear Fanny, cannot erase from my mind those hours which are
passed. No, Maria; retrospection carries me back to those happy days, when I
sipped pleasure from the conversation of Lucretia. May heaven bless you.

CAROLINE.

LETTER XXXV.
Havre-de-Grace.
FOR several days, having observed a great depression upon the countenance of
Fanny, I resolved, the first favorable moment, to acquaint myself with the
cause. Yesterday morning missing her from breakfast, I inquired of her mamma
the reason: She informed me, her health had been very indifferent for some
time; and that last night she had experienced an ill turn. As soon as I had
breakfasted, I left the table, and going softly up stairs, cautiously opened
the chamber door, and found her awake. Having made a few inquiries, I told her
my apprehensions, and begged to know if any new circumstance had taken place to
interrupt her happiness. If there has, said I, you must not keep me ignorant.
"How benetrating is the eve of Caroline," replied she, "that I cannot conceal
the secret sentiments of my heart. It is the necessities of Frederick, which
render me thus wretched. Deprived of a handsome property by the casualties of
trade, he finds it impossible to support a helpless family, without becoming
more deeply involved in difficulties.

"A few weeks since, he received from an unknown hand, a sum sufficient to have
discharged his little debts. This unfortunately was handed him when Charles was
present. Frederick had long owed him a small debt, and his inflexible
parsimony, would not suffer him to see a brother thus providentially relieved.
He insisted that he should pay him a great part of what he had received, or he
would immediately attach his furniture for the debt, and Frederick was obliged
to submit.

Humanity, that emblem of an exalted mind, how foreign from a heart
characterized by the most sordid avarice! His stoical indifference to a
suffering brother, debilitates my health; my pleasures sicken, and my eyes are
filled with the briny dew of sorrow."

Fanny, said I, humanity, sympathy and benevolence, are darling virtues seldom
found in the bosom of prosperity. If we abound in riches, we are placed above
an experimental knowledge of those necessities which are inseparable to a state
of poverty, and too often become inattentive observers of human misery. Riches
have a contaminating influence; they frequently petrify the finest feelings of
the heart. It is not, my dear, in your power to change the disposition of
Charles, nor must you suffer it to make you wretched. It is sometimes our duty
to conquer our most exquisite feelings. Obtain from your brother the sum
necessary for present relief, and if within my abilities, it will contribute to
my happiness, to lessen his affliction. Saying this, I left the chamber. How
unequal are the distributions of Providence! Some abound, while others want the
daily supports of life. Give, most merciful Father, to the fortunate, feeling
hearts, and may they aim to lessen human sufferings.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER XXXVI.
Havre-de-Grace.
WHEN I gave you a little history of Captain Green, I was totally unacquainted
with that of Captain Clark, but have since found, from his friend, he is a
native of Boston, where his connexions now reside; from what I can learn, I
believe him to be a deserving, experienced officer. The life of a soldier, his
necessities have compelled him to adopt. I am ever cautious in my expressions
respecting new friends, but the general behavior of this gentleman, evinces a
superiority of mind, which cannot fail to please. Be not jealous, that my
affections are diminished for Captain Evremont, when I declare I am pleased
with the attentions of Captain Clark, and the friendship he expresses for me. I
acknowledge to feel for him, a sisterly affection. He is well acquainted with
my engagements, and speaks of Captain Evremont in exalted terms. He served in
the same regiment with him, the last war, and says, "He ever found him, a good
soldier, and a valuable friend." A valuable friend! How much is implied, in
this short, but comprehensive sentence! It vibrates pleasingly upon my heart.
It re-echoes harmony to my soul.

Mrs. Gardner has consented that Fanny shall accompany me to Philadelphia. I
cannot think of parting with her; and her ill health favors my request.

For several days past, I have been finessed into a temporary happiness, by the
assiduity of my friends. I feel my obligations for this momentary forgetfulness
of trouble. Their seasonably engaging my mind in conversation, was better
calculated to relieve my distress, than any diversion I could have pursued. It
is an indulgence in which I delight. It does not confine us to any particular
theme; hence it can never cloy. By affording that variety consonant to the
human mind, it long retains its powers of amusement.

I much suspect the poetic description of the golden age -- for such is human
nature, that a repetition of the same objects, palls the mind, and renders them
insipid. We are continually impatient for some new event, and looking to a
future period for gratification. Thus Caroline anticipates the pleasing moment,
when the society of Maria, shall consummate one of her fondest wishes.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER XXXVII.
Havre-de-Grace.
WHEN I last addressed you, I flattered myself my next letter would be dated
from Philadelphia, as Captain Green had consented to take the charge of Captain
Clark's men. But I am yet detained in this city by an unfortunate accident, in
which my friend, the Captain, is particularly concerned.

A few days after his arrival at Havre-de-Grace, as he was standing at the door
of the coffee-house, a Mr. Peter's went up to him, and said, "Was my brother,
who served upon Rhode Island, arrested for cowardice in that expedition?"
Captain Clark, with an air of indifference, replied, "Just as you say, Sir."

Nothing farther passed between them, until the night previous to our intended
departure for Philadelphia; when Mrs. Gardner, alarmed by a knocking at the
street door, jumped out of bed, and pushing up the window, requested to know
who was there. A person now inquired for Captain Clark, adding, "He must see
him immediately. She observed, "The Captain intended setting off very early in
the morning for Philadelphia, and she could not think of calling him at so late
an hour -- pray Sir, please to leave your name, I will not omit to tell him you
called." "Madam," said he, "be so obliging as to step to his door, and tell him
Captain Peter's is in waiting and must see him, as an event of the utmost
importance has taken place at the coffee-house, and his advice is wanted, to
settle an unhappy affair." Mrs. Gardner appearing to hesitate, he continued, "
I give you my honor, Madam, that no injury is intended him." Finding she could
not put him off, she delivered the message to Captain Clark, who, ever ready to
assist all who were involved in difficulty, arose, and putting on his clothes,
hurried down stairs, and opening the street door, found Captain Peter's and his
brother, who apologized for calling him out of bed, by observing, that a number
of gentlemen, engaged in a dispute at the coffee-house, had agreed to leave it
with him to settle. And taking him under each arm, they walked on, till they
reached the spot, intended for their pusilanimous plan, when Captain Peter's
thus addressed him: "Did you, Sir, assert that I was arrested upon Rhode Island
for cowardice?" "No," he replied, "I did not." "It is a lie, Sir," said Captain
Peter's, and instantly gave him a severe stroke with his cane, which brought him
to the ground; when, like cowards, they both beat him until he was senseless,
and then left him. In this situation, he remained all night. In the morning he
was taken up, and carried into a house in the neighborhood. A physician was
called, who fortunately was the one that attended Mr. Barton; and having washed
and dressed the wounds, recollected the countenance of my friend. He
accordingly dispatched a person to Mrs. Gardner to acquaint her with the
accident. As soon as she received this information, she came into my chamber,
to inform me of the cause of our delay, and added, "There was nothing to fear
from the wounds, no bones being broken." Distressed by this circumstance, I
hastened down stairs, and dispatched a servant to the doctor, requesting to see
him. He soon came, and begged me to entertain no fears in behalf of my friend,
assuring me he was greatly recovered since the dressing of his wounds, and he
flattered himself would, in a few days, be able to pursue his journey. An
unavoidable engagement obliges me at present, to subscribe,

CAROLINE.

LETTER XXXVIII.
Havre-de-Grace.
ALTHOUGH we had absolutely engaged seats in the stage, and Captain Green had
taken leave of us the day before, it was impossible for us to commence our
journey. This disappointment was trifling, compared with the anxiety I
experienced for my friend.

About noon, Captain Clark stopped at the door in a carriage. I ran to meet
him. Upon observing me, he assumed an air of gaiety, which, it was easy to
perceive, was foreign from his heart. "I regret," said he, "you are deprived
the satisfaction of joining your friends, as early as you wished, but I flatter
myself it will delay you only a few days." I strove to suppress my tears; yet,
notwithstanding every exertion to check my feelings, my tell-tale eyes
glistened with the tears of pity. "Gratified as I am, said he, "with the
interest you take in the abuse I have experienced, let me entreat you not to
add to my present feelings -- do not distress me with your tenderness." Hard
was the struggle to conceal the sensations of my heart; but, resolving to cast
the mantle of friendship over my painful emotions, I feigned a serenity I did
not enjoy. He then gave the story as I have related it to you.

For Captain Peter's to pledge his honor that no injury was intended, and then
to prostitute this sacred pledge, was an unpardonable, ignominious deception,
far beneath the dignity of a brave and noble mind. To give his sacred honor,
and to abuse that trust this confidence inspires. To attack an unarmed man,
and, with the assistance of his brother, thus to beat him, leaving him to
suffer in the street the whole night, are blots in their characters, which will
excite universal contempt. I am apprehensive of the issue.

Captain Clark's disposition will not suffer him to submit to treatment thus
incompatible with his honor. But these men are not entitled to what the world
calls " honorable resentment." I therefore flatter myself there will be no
duel in the affair. This idea alone affords consolation to the afflicted bosom
of

CAROLINE.

LETTER XXXIX.
Havre-de-Grace.
CAPTAIN Clark is yet confined to the house. I exert myself to amuse him; but
this is difficult. The gentlemen are early familiarized to business and
amusement, which call their attention abroad; short confinements are, to them,
almost insupportable; and a little sickness, with all their bravery and
courage, frequently renders them peevish and impatient; while our sex, inured
to scenes more tranquil and retired, are less liable to repine at indisposition.

Notwithstanding the severe blows my friend has received, his eyes are not
deprived of their usual luster. These yet speak, in the most expressive manner,
the manly and noble sentiments of his soul. I wish not to present him to you,
as a regular beauty, or an elegant form. These, I am convinced, will never
operate upon your mind; but I will introduce you to a man, whose person and
conduct, has long designated the soldier; whose bosom glows with generosity,
sensibility, ambition, courage, and honor. In his heart are united sentiments
and feelings which dignify the human mind; qualifications, which will recommend
him to Maria.

For several days I was greatly distressed, least a duel should terminate the
unhappy affair; but yesterday it was settled through the interposition of
friends.

The doctor having given it as his opinion, that Captain Clark may safely
proceed to Philadelphia, I know of no circumstance which can prevent our
journey. I am truly impatient to quit a place, where I have experienced so much
real sorrow. My life has been immersed in afflictions; but I will endeavor to
banish every corroding idea. Vain cares, and anticipated sorrows, shall never
prevent the enjoyment of virtuous reflections. Pleasure and pain are blended in
the events of life; and by the alternate operations of hope and fear, we are
prevented from sinking into apathy and inattention; these, by exciting contrary
emotions, keep the mind alive, and contribute to the happiness of human
existence.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER XL.
Havre-de-Grace.
WE should have left this the last stage, had not Fanny's anxiety for her
unfortunate brother yet detained us.

Agreeably to my promise, the day previous to our intended departure, I
presented her the sum she had assured me was sufficient for his present relief.
This she went in the evening to give him, when she found the family in the
greatest distress. His creditors impatient for the discharge of their debts,
had that day made several attachments; and as Fanny opened the door to enter
the house, an officer availed himself of the opportunity to execute another
writ: This execution deprived them of every necessary article. Fanny
immediately dispatched a message to her brother, in hopes, by bringing him to
witness his distresses, he might be induced to assist him; but when he came, he
absolutely refused the most trivial relief. She now took Mrs. Gardner aside,
and presented the bills received from me. Thus being enabled to satisfy present
calls, he saved his little remaining furniture, deprived of which, his family
could not have continued together. Fanny, overcome by this circumstance,
requested I would relinquish the idea of her accompanying me. To this I could
not consent.

Captain Clark has interested himself in behalf of this child of adversity;
and, in the most pathetic language, endeavored to excite feelings in the
breast of Charles; but without effect. What a heart must he possess, thus to
suffer a deserving brother, deprived of health and property, to want even the
necessaries of life! Unpardonable man! The Deity may not always smile upon your
prosperity. Intoxicated with your present success, you think yourself far
beyond the reach of fortune's frown; but remember, you may sink from the
pinicle of affluence, from the most elevated summit of wealth, to the dreary
vale of misfortune. And although you are basking in the indulgence of all your
wishes, the scene may suddenly change, and poverty, with its concomitant
miseries, await you; you may yet drink in full draughts, the gall of
disappointment, and largely share in similar misfortunes with your afflicted
brother.

Mr. Gardner determines, if he can make sufficient interest, to obtain a
commission in the army; and to relinquish all idea of remaining with his family.

This resolution he reluctantly pursues. His attachment to a family, unable to
provide for itself, renders it painful. Captain Clark has promised him his
influence; and as Mr. Gardner held a commission in the late army, flatters
himself he shall succeed. Whatever the reflections of his brother may be, with
respect to his unfeeling conduct, the time, I doubt not, will arrive, when he
will retire to the family of his own thoughts, replete with the most poignant
sensations, for having added to the complicated distress of a deserving brother.

May the journey of our lives, my dear Maria, be rendered pleasant by the
sunshine of prosperity; and while we drink from the full bowl of fortune, may
we be protected from the usual infatuation of her bewitching smiles.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER XLI.
Philadelphia.
WE have at length arrived in this city. Mrs. Leason received us with painful,
as well as pleasurable sensations. She had previously been acquainted with my
affecting story; and, possessed of a sympathetic heart, shared in my affliction.

Sympathy, my dear, is a pleasing sentiment, implanted in the human breast,
which induces us, if we cannot mitigate, to become momentarily interested in
the misfortunes of our friends.

Laura welcomed us with a degree of politeness, which, had it been unconnected
with a haughty air, would have been acceptable. When I was last in
Philadelphia, she was absent from home. Her countenance is pleasing, but the
airs she assumes, are incompatible to her situation in life. Strongly attached
to pleasure and amusement, rational indulgences cloy her taste. Dissipation is
dangerous: It vitiates the mind, and attaches it to a round of amusements.

The troops in this city have received orders to march in a few days. The
spirits of my friend appear depressed. He flatters himself that the formidable
appearance of the army will deter the Indians. Many things concur to excite
disagreeable ideas in my mind. It is my sincere prayer, that the all-wise
Director of the universe, may take them into his peculiar charge.

Since my arrival, I have received a letter from Captain Evremont. He complains
much of a silence, I am sure, I have not observed; my letters must certainly be
impeded. There is no gratification we experience in the absence of our friends,
superior to the pleasure of receiving their letters. It is a delightful
substitute for the loss of their society. Captain Evremont writes me, he is
stationed at an advanced post, a mile distant from Fort-Pitt. He expresses
great impatience for the arrival of the troops* but writes, with the most
sanguine enthusiasm of success.

Captain Clark has, I find, many friends in this city, who are partial to his
merits. This is pleasing to me. To have our choice in any point, approved by
men of sense, is ever a flattering circumstance, and obliterates from a female
mind, every ray of uneasiness, lest her too tender susceptibility, had
pourtrayed excellencies, which existed no where, but in her partial
imagination. Some of your relations are pleased to patronize him: They have
united their influence with his, in behalf of Mr. Gardner, and have a prospect
of success. I regret the sad alternative, which obliges him to quit his family
for a life so averse to his wishes, and which some small assistance from his
brother might prevent. Surely the Deity has traced the outlines of our duty
upon our hearts, which a certain inexpressible consciousness points out to us;
yet we frequently stifle feelings so honourary to our natures. Being in haste,
can only add the assurances of my friendship.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER XLII.
Philadelphia.
MRS. Leason tells me, she has received a letter from my aunt Noble, requesting
to be accommodated at her house a few weeks, as she wishes to make a visit to
Philadelphia: She at first hesitated a reply; but finding me silent, and that
her stay would be short, she has consented. Thus I am still to be troubled with
the repetition of a story, long since hateful. I can bear it with tolerable
fortitude in a letter; but to be taken by the hand, and compelled to hear a
distasteful tale, deprives me of all my philosophy. I am half a mind to fly to
the arms of my friend, in whose society I am confident I should receive new
gratifications, and whose friendship would give me a hearty welcome.

Fanny is much pleased with this city. It is said to be one of the most
beautiful America can boast; but perhaps you may think I carry my ideas of
variety rather too far, when I say, there is a little too much sameness for my
taste. I acknowledge it is uncommon for one, who styles herself a citizen, to
be impartial; for the place of our birth, generally claims our warmest
attachment.

We made a party, a few days since, to the Falls of Schuylkill, to give Fanny
an opportunity of seeing some of the delightful seats. I sincerely hope, the
journey, and attention to her health, will be of service to her. I am impatient
to introduce this dear girl to Maria: She is indeed one of those rare plants,
seldom to be found in the wilderness of life. There is an innocent expression
in her countenance, which cannot, like the fading flower of beauty, be divested
of its charms.

Captain Clark will soon leave us. How many incidents occur to destroy our
happiness! The sweet sensibility which gives us the true relish of our joys,
frequently increases our weight of suffering. The gratification we derive from
the society of congenial minds, occasions the most severe regret, when deprived
of their valuable intercourse. It is so seldom we find those, who are
susceptible of real friendship, who are incapable of deception, and who
unitedly possess the qualifications requisite for a friend, that such a prize
cannot be sufficiently estimated. I know it is the common idea of the world,
that "Friendship with women is sister to love." But while I would pay a due
respect to their general principles and observations, I must take the liberty
to deviate from them, when their sentiments are incompatible with my own
experience. I already discover your conclusion, and that you are classing
Caroline as a Platonic disciple: It will not, however, denote her character;
although I cannot imagine, as much as the world laugh at this philosopher's
ideas of love and friendship, why we may not esteem an enlightened mind,
without feeling for the person, that degree of affection which denates a
peculiar, undescribable attachment. It is indeed seldom the case, that real
mental abilities are the foundation of a first prepossession; external beauty,
an accomplished behavior, or the more captivating charms of fortune, are too
often the illusive meteors which enchant the eye and constrain the heart. Think
not I intend a general reflection, when I add, the art of speaking trifles
agreeably, too often proves a destructive poison, which terminates the
happiness of female life. Daily observation demonstrates the truth. Nor is an
agreeable address more likely to deceive our sex, than those who claim the
boasted superiority of prudence, penetration and wisdom. We frequently see the
merchant deceived by his ill placed confidence, and his family involved in
complicated wretchedness. As I have written a long letter, I now feel disposed
to conclude, -- I hear Captain Clark's step below. Don't be jealous, my dear;
my time is equally divided between you; and Maria may rest assured of a liberal
portion.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER XLIII.
Philadelphia.
I FEEL disposed to be dull. My friend marched yesterday for the Westward. My
aunt came to town a week before he left us. She has adopted a new plan, by
which she means to accomplish a reconcilement with her husband. Confining
herself to her chamber, she gives out she is extremely ill, and is continually
endeavoring to prepare our minds for her approaching death. It is, she says,
impossible for her to continue long among us; nor can she be easy to quit the
world without being previously reconciled to her husband. To die among
strangers, to be buried from a strange house, are ideas she cannot support.
Repeatedly have I been summoned to her bedside to take her last adieu, and as
often commissioned to tell my uncle his unpardonable conduct had given a cruel
stab to her peace, drove her from home, and brought upon her complicated
misery, which had hastened her end. She frequently solicits me to write to him,
and request of him one interview with his dying wife. Upon my refusal, she has
sent for her favorite, from his family, through whom, it is probable, she will
accomplish her purpose. She is continually giving some new alarm, which keeps
the house in constant agitation. If she is not successful I am resolved to quit
my lodgings.

Previous to Captain Clark's leaving this city, he informed me, the brother of
my dear Fanny, had obtained a Captain's commission in the same regiment with
him; and that the Secretary at War, in the letter in which he enclosed his
commission, directs him to be in Philadelphia by the tenth of the month.

I have received a billet from a gentleman, with whom I am entirely
unacquainted, informing me, Eliza has been in Virginia several months, and
intends passing the winter in this place; this is friendly, but painful
information. Every circumstance concurs, to confirm my belief, that it is
through her I have been made thus wretched. Strange, that prejudices so ill
grounded, should never be effaced from her mind. But all events are under the
direction of an overruling Providence. May Maria never experience such
vicissitudes, as have attended

CAROLINE.

LETTER XLIV.
Philadelphia.
MY aunt's pretended indisposition has increased. Of stricture, tension,
febrile heat; an universal affection of the nervous system, an inexpressible
irritation, and expected fits, I am continually hearing. With propriety she
claims the denomination of the most miserable being upon earth. "Born," she
says, "under some malicious star, evil is her destiny." But if she wishes to
impose upon Mrs. Leason and the family, she must send to Trenton for her
sympathetic doctor; the city physicians are not to be deceived. By her frequent
importunities, we yesterday sent for a doctor; I was sitting by her when he
entered the chamber. He felt her pulse, examined her tongue, inquired her
complaints, and rising from his seat, stamped upon the floor, saying, "All you
want, is to get back to your husband." And hastening out of the room, "Begged
she would give him no further trouble." Most sincerely do I wish her with him
-- and I am convinced she will never rest until this is accomplished.

I have received letters from Captain Evremont, which mention the arrival of
several companies; this renders his duty less severe. I expect daily to hear
from my friends, as Captain Clark has promised to write, upon his arrival at
Fort-Pitt.

At present I am separated from almost all my friends. I have no protector near
me. Zeno, the father of the stoics, styled that hour the happiest of his life,
which deprived him of his whole estate. "This event," he says, "drove him into
the haven of philosophy." May the loss of my friends, drive me to reflection;
and that the painful vicissitudes of my life, may be the means of directing me
to that divine religion, which can alone, render a future existence pleasing,
is the fervent wish of

CAROLINE.

LETTER XLV.
Philadelphia.
MY uncle has, at length, been prevailed upon to visit his distressed wife, who
was confined to her bed. She has effected her purpose. It was agreed she should
return the next day to his house. She accordingly dispatched invitations to her
acquaintance, requesting their company the next afternoon, "To witness the
renewal of her marriage." An elegant supper was proposed, which was to have
been at her expense, had not the advice of her particular friends prevented it.
The morning of this happy day, my aunt arose from her bed, which she had not
left for several days, and with every pleasure which anticipation gives, waited
the coming moment. The company assembled, and after tea, a coach was called to
convey her home. I feel assured of your congratulations, on being thus
relieved; yet I fancy you are a little surprised at its taking place so soon;
but an artful, determined mind can often get through apparent impossibilities.
It would be fortunate for my aunt, was she resolved to be happy; but I believe
if she has any reflections, they are replete with discontent and wretchedness.
She may perhaps experience a temporary gratification, but this will be short;
new contentions will arise; and tempers, naturally ungovernable, cannot easily
be restrained at so advanced a period of life. Had she ever considered present
actions, as though they had past, she would never have exposed to the world, a
thousand little incidents in her family, which a prudent woman, would blush to
have had known.

In the most happy connexions -- in the best regulated families, many things
take place, which should be cautiously concealed from the eye of the world; and
the woman who would expose the faults of her own family, must possess a
disposition which should be severely reprobated.

Leaving a husband, is a serious undertaking, and should never be done without
the most urgent necessity and cool reflection. It is a step which injures the
characters of both, and is attended with continual mortifications. But if they
are compelled to it, they should, I think, abide by the unhappy alternative. I
believe I may venture to assert, that, in few instances, has a separation ever
removed the cause of uneasiness, but rather increased the wretchedness, and
rendered the parties disrespected by the world.

Captain Gardner and Mr. Lee arrived last night. They put up at Mrs. Leason's.
I am extremely sorry for this last addition to our family. I had not seen him
since the death of my dear Lucretia. His presence renews my grief. If he
tarries any time in Philadelphia, after Captain Gardner has left us, I shall
propose an excursion to Bristol; it is a village to which I am partial; and, I
hope, a change of objects will be a relief to Fanny. Her spirits, at present,
are greatly depressed.

I see, by the papers, your cousin has accepted a commission. I flatter myself
he will not fail to call upon me, as he passes through Philadelphia. Your
attachment to him, will make you more sensible of the feelings of

CAROLINE.

LETTER XLVI.
Philadelphia.
I AM seriously concerned for my friends at the Westward. Parties are daily
leaving this city, to join the troops already there. A winter's campaign is
alarming. For Fanny's sake, I shall be glad when her brother has left us. The
poor girl, is scarce able to support the thought of his leaving her. She
possesses a disposition too tender for her own happiness; and, I verily
believe, it occasions all her ill health.

Laura's haughty behavior, in several late instances, has determined me to
pass a few weeks in the country. Having been from infancy, taught to value
herself upon a pretty face and a genteel person, she thinks herself entitled to
(unmerited) respect from all the boarders; and behaves as if external beauty
was an ample compensation for the want of internal merit. She considers a
condescending disposition as only necessary to those who are destitute of the
attractive charms of a handsome face, and believes the study of the
belles-lettres, only calculated for such as have no pretensions to beauty. She
cannot realize, that an accomplished mind will render happiness durable, when
the bloom of youth shall fade, and the transitory flower shall have wasted its
sweets. Nor does she cultivate ideas which will render pleasant the last stage
of existence. That stage, when the debilitated mind will look back to its
trifling gratifications, with the most severe regret; when the want of better
reflections, will obtrude the idea of her past life, upon her imbittered
thoughts. But Fanny is a pleasing contrast. She has caught from the refulgent
beams of wisdom, rays, which will adorn her character, and will render her, at
every period of life, an entertaining, agreeable companion. Her heart expands
for the unfortunate. "For each one's woes, she has a tear."

I am interrupted; but believe me, my dear, the friendship of Maria, possesses
a peculiar power of dispelling the gloomy cares of

CAROLINE.

LETTER XLVII.
Philadelphia.
YOUR cousin has arrived -- he is so altered by an uniform, I did not know him;
but when he handed me a letter, which he said was from Maria, I recognized his
countenance, and introduced him to Mrs. Leason, Laura and Fanny; to the last,
as my particular friend. I viewed him, my dear, with all those pleasing ideas,
which result from the consideration he is your cousin. -- I am sorry you think
me too severe upon my own sex. You are deceived in your conclusions. The
observations I made, as you advance in life, you will find to be just. I meant
not to deviate from the strictest principles of philanthropy or good humor;
and the traits I have drawn, are perfectly consonant to many characters. If
Maria is at present more happy in her companions and friends, I heartily
rejoice; but give me leave to remind you, that a knowledge of human nature, can
only be learnt by experience; and that insincerity and deception too often
characterize mankind.

I yesterday received an invitation to pass the afternoon and evening with my
aunt Noble. Fanny was too depressed with the prospect of parting with her
brother to give us her company. The natural vivacity of her disposition,
withers at the recollection of his misfortunes. The idea of his sufferings,
sharpens the arrows of her affliction.

I went early to Colonel Noble's, that I might have an opportunity to converse
a little with my aunt. Upon entering the doors, several new pieces of
furniture, caught my attention. My aunt is not without her ambition, any more
than the Colonel. I found her alone; congratulated her upon her return, and
hoped she enjoyed all that happiness she had imagined. "While my property
lasts," said she, "it may do, but the little I have, will never provide for a
family. At present, there is not an article brought into the house, but at my
expense." We were now interrupted by company; for she had given large
invitations to her acquaintance for the celebration of this pleasing event. Tea
and cards preceded an elegant supper, prepared by this foolish woman, whose
circumstances rather call for the strictest economy, than allow of the smallest
profusion. For my own part, I know no minor, who stands more in need of a
guardian, than my aunt Noble. A prodigal disposition, is far from evincing a
liberal mind; in any situation of life, it is to be avoided. The indulgence of
it hurries us into a thousand evtravagancies, which will finally be destructive
to our happiness. Her disposition, united with the Colonel's, whose predominant
passions are show and parade, would soon exhaust an extensive fortune. My uncle
is not, however, singular in his false ideas of greatness. There are many who
will not deny themselves the superfluities of life, although the butcher and
tradesman, are continually dunning at the door.

I left my aunt's, disgusted at her imprudent conduct, and much displeased at
that violent fondness they express for each other. It is unnatural to believe
such cruel stabs, and recent wounds, have not cankered the mind. But if they
possess such heaven-born tempers as totally to forget the past, we should
suppose, prudence would dictate to them to conceal the violence of their
affections. To see a couple continually fondling and kissing in company, is
disgusting, and causes in my breast suspicions of their conjugal felicity; not
that I would discourage that pleasing, affectionate attention, which
distinguishes the happy pair.

Mr. Lee yet continues in Philadelphia. Being with him, excites contending
passions. While the sprouts of gratitude shoot forth with luxuriance, memory
awakens the painful remembrance of Lucretia's sufferings. Mrs. Leason tells me,
he has been some years married to a young lady in Bristol, whom he now disowns
as his wife. I shall endeavor to inform myself of this circumstance, when I
visit that place. I am impatient to enjoy a short time the pleasures of
solitude. My attachment to a country life, has been uniformly the same; but I
will not indulge too many pleasurable anticipations, lest my fond hopes should
be destroyed in the first moment of enjoyment.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER XLVIII.
Philadelphia.
CAPTAIN Gardner with his party left this city yesterday. Your cousin expects
to stay with us but a few days. He has introduced a particular friend of his to
our acquaintance -- a General Hill. This gentleman is, I find, married. I pity
his good lady. The army will do better for single, than married men. Was I a
wife, I should never consent to my husband's commencing soldier.

I am not a little jealous Capt. Belmour has an attachment for Fanny. Mrs.
Leason has proposed several matches for this dear girl. One young gentleman she
represents as deeply in love with her; and yesterday seriously asked me if I
thought she could not be prevailed upon to receive his addresses? Not by my
intercession, replied I, and hastily left the room. This good lady grows more
attached to dress. Her hair is craped and curled in the highest taste. Could I
procure a London doll, marked with the wrinkles of old age, I would dress it by
my landlady, as a pattern to your mamma. This attachment to dress, frequently
places her in a ridiculous light. It injures the reputation of the sex, by
enforcing the idea of our vanity, and establishing the illnatured observations
of the world, depreciates us with men of sense.

I am deceived, if Laura does not envy Fanny the attentions of Mr. Belmour.
Your cousin is indeed, handsome; but a uniform, my dear, is a great addition.
It is truly an attractive magnet with the female eye.

Fanny has received a letter from her mamma, which mentions, that a number of
Captain Gardner's friends, had opened a subscription, for the relief of her
sister, who they wished to place in some little business, which should enable
her to provide for herself and children. This, was presented to Mr. Charles
Gardner, who refused being concerned in so laudable an undertaking. How
contracted the dispositions of mankind! The avaricious miser, lives but for
himself, pursuing his plans with eagerness -- with the most frigid
indifference, he passes objects of distress -- estranged to the pleasures of
benevolence, which aims to blunt the edge of adversity, he refuses every
relief. He knows not the luxury which results from having lessened human
wretchedness. Philanthropy and benevolence are not the characteristics of his
heart. But sympathetic minds, enjoy pleasures with which these sordid beings
are unacquainted. They pass through life with the sweet reflection, of having
relieved the distressed; and at the close of existence, derive a source of
satisfaction from the grateful recollection. I am flattered with the idea of
your passing the approaching winter in this city; and am sorry you postpone
coming so long. Urge your mamma to set an earlier day. You have no friends who
will give you a more hearty welcome, than

CAROLINE.

LETTER XLIX.
Philadelphia.
I HAVE just received a letter from Captain Evremont, which communicates the
pleasing information of the safe arrival of my friends at Fort-Pitt. Captain
Clark adds a postscript, and says, With Mr. Evremont's permission, he shall do
himself the honor to write to me in a few days.

I regret that the youth, most distinguished among us, should be called from
the pleasures of domestic life, and sent into an uncultivated country, against
an enemy upon whom we can place no dependence; whose treaties are easily laid
aside; who, from their uncivilized situation, are ignorant of the enjoyments of
society; and who never are at a loss, in the remotest forest, for the
necessaries upon which they exist; whose barbarity to their prisoners must
increase the fears of the soldiers' friends, and render it even doubly painful
to themselves to encounter. An enemy, whom, from their method of battle, it is
almost impossible to subdue.

Your cousin, and his friend, will leave us tomorrow; they desire to be
remembered to you. Mr. Belmour adds, "When you meet your Caroline in
Philadelphia, Fanny must be particularly introduced to you."

Excuse my adding more, as I must improve the remaining hours in writing to
Captain Evremont.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER L.
Bristol.
BELIEVING it would be an amusement to Fanny, and an advantage to her health, I
resolved to pass a few weeks in this village; and leaving the city the same day
with your cousin, soon reached our present abode.

From the back windows of the house at which we are, we may view, over the
adjacent fields, the river Delaware, extending several miles. The silver
surface of this limpid element, exhibits a charming appearance. A little to the
left, is an enchanting grove of weeping willows, whose romantic shade invites
to tread the pleasurable path of retirement, so favorable to reflection. Here
the mind may expand uninterrupted, and enjoy, unenvied, every rational idea;
and while we discover nature in her genuine simplicity totally divested of the
decorations of art, we cannot but admire the works of that Being who has thus
variegated the prospects of the earth for the enjoyment of man. I regret that
the season is so far advanced; not because the changing of the leaves, gives me
any painful emotions -- this rather produces a pleasing thoughtfulness; but as
the spring and summer are better calculated for Fanny's recovery.

Since I have been in this place, I have commenced an acquaintance with a Mrs.
Little. A short history of whom, I flatter myself will be acceptable to Maria.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

END OF VOLUME FIRST.
THE HAPLESS ORPHAN; OR, INNOCENT VICTIM OF REVENGE. A NOVEL, FOUNDED ON
INCIDENTS IN REAL LIFE. In a series of LETTERS from CAROLINE FRANCIS to MARIA B
--.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. II.

BY AN AMERICAN LADY.

"Fragrant is the recollection of friends. The most delightful flowers shall be
scattered upon their valuable remains; and when we recall the sacred spot to
mind, the congenial tear shall sparkle in the eye of sympathy, and their
virtues shall be embalmed in the warm bosom of affection."

PRINTED AT THE Apollo Press, IN BOSTON, BY BELKNAP AND HALL: SOLD AT THEIR
OFFICE, STATE STREET, AND AT THE BOOKSTORES IN BOSTON.

MDCCXCIII.

LETTER LI.
Bristol.
AGREEABLY to the promise in my last, I have forwarded the history of Mrs.
Little. It shall be clothed in her own expressions -- receive it as I had it
from her.

"An unfortunate connection, has destroyed my fond ideas of happiness. At the
age of seventeen, I was, after a courtship of two years, united with a Mr.
Little, then twenty-two. He was a foreigner, who had resided some years among
us. My parents and friends unanimously approved the match, and my juvenile
fancy planned many happy scenes.

"Being an only daughter, my wishes were ever superseded by the attentions of
my doting parents, and I flattered myself long to enjoy the present current of
unallayed felicity. But the morning which rises with the clearest hemisphere,
is often obscured by a stormy sky. An unexpected circumstance soon presented,
which obliged Mr. Little to cross the seas. The voyage was short. I had no idea
of a separation, for more than a few months. With impatience I waited the
period of his expected arrival -- I chid the dilatory hours -- Time appeared to
pause -- I enjoyed no pleasures -- I shared in no amusements; the anticipation
of his return, engrossed my whole attention. At length, the vessel in which he
sailed, arrive. My brother hastened to meet him. In imagination, I was raised
to the summit of happiness. I believed uninterrupted pleasures, would crown
succeeding days. But the chilling frost of disappointment, blasted my visionary
joys. Mr. Little was left behind. Not a single line did I receive from him, nor
could any information be obtained of him; he having left the island from which
the vessel came. Notwithstanding this, little did my unsuspecting heart,
forebode his villainous intentions. Educated in retired life, I was
unacquainted with the deceptions of the beau monde. Never having been
accustomed to disappointments, it was at first a lesson difficult to learn.

"In this situation, I passed four years; when my father received a letter from
a friend in South Carolina, acquainting him, Mr. Little lived in Charleston,
with a woman to whom, it was reported, he was married. The contents of this
letter, I obstinately refused to credit. For more than two years, I resolved
not to listen to the calumniating breath of the world; when the arrival of a
particular friend from Carolina, opened my deluded eyes. Fortunately I
possessed great resolution. Yet, having to combat with a warm attachment, and
all the pains of neglected affection, I was attacked with a distressing
illness, which confined me some months to my chamber. During this time, I had
many intervals of hope that Mr. Little might yet return, repenting his past
conduct; till at length; having hackneyed every plea, which affection, duty,
and benevolence could suggest, I determined to reason myself into a
disposition, to relinquish him forever. This was a trying undertaking; but his
conduct rendered it necessary. I now requested his name might never again, be
mentioned to me, that, if possible, I might obliterate him from remembrance.
Blessed with indulgent parents, who have studied to make me happy, I have been
enabled to abide by my resolution; or probably, before this, I should have
ended my days.

"Accustomed to a country life, I have devoted much time to reading: This
attachment is strengthened by affliction. Thus have I given you a detail of my
unhappy situation. That I have given up every idea, of a man who had thus
transferred his affections; who had forfeited the grateful title of my
protector and friend, who had proved himself my seducer; my greatest enemy,
will not, I feel assured, prejudice your mind against me. For, believe me, my
heart shed its dearest drops; and had not fortitude shielded me with the helmet
of perseverance, I should have relapsed into former unbelief, But by her
influence, and the consideration of having done my duty, I rise superior to my
fate. I make no animadversions upon the conduct of Mr. Little, not doubting,
although I have suffered thus severely, you are more acquainted with the
villainy of the world than myself."

What a history is the above. It veils my pleasurable ideas: It unfolds to view
a conduct, which, for the honor of human nature, I could wish, concealed. But
how frequently do our sex become wretched, by the deep laid plans of wicked
minds! When such instances shade the characters of youth, they must tend to
destroy our confidence in a sex designed, by heaven, for our protection. And
while they awaken our suspicions, should impress us with a caution, necessary
to guard our reputation and honor, from the concealed plans of the base
libertine, who delights in the most villainous seductions, and who frequently
selects the most virtuous of our sex for destruction. Disguising his sentiments
by virtuous intentions, he secures the affections of the object he aims to
ruin; and having blasted the unsullied flower, leaves it to wither and decay.
Mrs. Little now receives the addresses of a gentleman high in office; and it is
expected, will be shortly married. Warm are my wishes for her future happiness.
May the intended connection, compensate for those painful days she has past, and
the hitherto dreary path of her married life, be contrasted by future domestic
endearments.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER LII.
Bristol.
BEING upon a visit, a few days since, to Mrs. Little, I took the opportunity
of making some inquiries concerning Mr. Lee; observing, various reports were
circulating in Philadelphia. Upon my asking if he really had a wife in that
place, she begged leave to introduce me to her aunt Watts, who could gratify my
curiosity respecting her cousin. Having no idea I was among the friends of this
unfortunate woman; I felt distressed, lest I had, unintentionally, injured
their feelings; and made many apologies for my unguarded conduct. I had
awakened the remembrance of many painful circumstances; and a silence of some
minutes followed my imprudence. The thrilling tear, having relieved the
acuteness of first emotions, Mrs. Watts requested to know "If I had any
acquaintance with Mr. Lee?" I told her I had boarded, some time, in the house
with him. "You shall then," said she, "be informed, the true circumstances of
my dear Harriot's seduction.

"My niece was left in infancy, an orphan. In humanity to her tender years, I
took her under my protection. It was not in my power to educate her in gay
life, but I neglected not to instill virtuous principles upon her mind; and she
received the common instructions of a country school. The estate of her father
being rendered insolvent, she depended entirely upon her character for a
settlement in life. Her constitution was slender, and inadequate to the common
offices of a country living. Attached to her needle, she soon imbibed a turn
for millinery, and engrossed the work of this place. Her figure was naturally
genteel. Her taste fanciful, and her features, though not perfectly regular,
expressive and soft.

"At the age of sixteen, she had the misfortune to attract the notice of Mr.
Lee, who frequented this road, in his excursions to Bordentown. He became
acquainted with her, and we believed his intentions honorable. Unfortunately
for the dear girl, she now lost her uncle. Soon after this, Mr. Lee proposed
marriage, and with my consent, a day was fixed for the wedding.

"A few days after the last publication had taken place, he urged her to
accompany him to Philadelphia. As I wished her to purchase a few articles for
herself, I joined in his request, little thinking I was acceding to her ruin.
He had not rode far, when he proposed they should be married before they
returned from Philadelphia. Harriot, knowing of no obstacles, agreed to the
wishes of Mr. Lee; and, in the evening, the ceremony was, as she believed,
performed. Upon their return, he introduced her to me as his wife; nor did I
once suspect the fraud.

"Mr. Lee's business calling him to Philadelphia, and Harriot's health
rendering it necessary she should reside in the country, she never left me; and
from this time, for three years, he uniformly visited her several times a week.
But he now began to neglect her, and abroad denied the marriage; and to avoid
our inquiries, finally left Philadelphia for Maryland. I frequently addressed
him by letter, but received no reply. At length I wrote to a friend in
Philadelphia for the character of Mr. Lee, who, affected with my story, made me
a visit, and revealed his villainous deceptions; assuring me, that the ceremony
was performed by an abandoned rake, dressed for that purpose: That the house to
which he carried Harriot, was kept by a woman of ill fame; and that the
company, to which she was introduced, were the most profligate of her sex.

"Knowing the tenderness of her disposition, I thought it best to draw her off
from him by degrees, and took every opportunity to insinuate, that she would
never see him again; but she could not be persuaded to entertain ideas
incompatible with his hon^^^

"Two years after this, as she was sitting at her window, she saw him pass in
the stage -- upon which she fainted. Upon her recovery she observed that she
must now relinquish every idea she had entertained of Mr. Lee's affection.
"Life is a burden," said she, "misery is my doom." I sent for a lawyer in the
neighborhood, requesting him to visit Mr. Lee at the tavern, and threaten him
with a prosecution; but he laughed at his baseness, saying, we were fools to
think he ever meant to be confined to one -- "I will rove at large; they may do
as they please." A depression ensued, which brought on a rapid consumption, and
she is now sinking under complicated diseases.

"Thus has Mr. Lee loaded her with infamy and distress. But a period of remorse
must come, when with sorrow, and, I hope, a sincere repentance, he will regret
his deviation from virtue." At this instant she was called to her niece.

The cruel conduct of Mr. Lee, made a deep impression upon my mind. How does
deceiving man triumph over female innocence; crop the sweet flower of virtue,
and boast his insidious plans! Beauty, simplicity and virtue, too often, fall a
prey to a dissembled passion.

May my fair country women, never repose in the shades of security, while
environed with the errors, the follies, and the dangers of youth; but remember,
one devious step can never be retrieved; and assiduously shun the society of
those, who study to corrupt the female mind. Invariably consider the siren
tongue of flattery, as a foe which awaits your destruction.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER LIII.
Bristol.
YESTERDAY a billet was handed me from Mrs. Watts, requesting to see me. I
hastened to comply with the invitation. When I reached the house, I sent my
name to her. She hurried down stairs, apologized for the liberty she had taken,
and observing it was the wish of her niece to see an acquaintance of Mr. Lee's,
and viewing it as one of her last requests, she chose to gratify her. I assured
her it would be pleasing to me to afford any satisfaction to her or Harriot.
"The unfortunate girl," said she, "can remain but a few hours -- every symptom
of dissolving nature fast approaches; but I will go and acquaint her, you are
below."

In a few minutes she returned, and I followed her to the distressing chamber.
Upon her opening the door, every object filled me with horror. The shutters
were closed. At the sight of the emaciated, heart-broken afflicted girl,
bolstered up in her bed, my resolution left me, and I was seized with a
faintness. I had recourse to my smelling bottle; and seating myself at her
side, she appeared to be dozing. "Harriot," said her aunt, "this is Miss
Francis, whom you wished to see." Looking at me with an eye, which was sunk
deep in its socket, and extending her hand with a feeble voice she could just
articulate, "The goodness of your heart will excuse my inclination. I wished to
see you, that you might acquaint Mr. Lee with what I shall entrust to you; that
you, who was a stranger to me in former life, should witness my dying words;
and that in these all-important moments, I declare him to be my husband. Tell
him from me, the time will come, when that silent monitor, conscience, will be
true to its trust. The intoxications of debauchery and pleasure, however they
may enchant in the moments of enjoyment, will then be deprived of their charms;
and though the grave will have buried my sufferings, he will consider himself
as the disturber of my peace, the destroyer of my health, and the shortner of
my days; but not the corrupter of my heart. Though I have been rendered
wretched by his villainy, my innocence is unsullied." Distressed for breath,
she was some time unable to proceed. When a little recovered, she continued,
"Painful recollections do not imbitter the close of my days; and well would it
be for my seducer, if his retrospections were alike pleasing; but happiness is
too strongly cemented with virtue to be his companion. Witness to the world, I
die a sacrifice to the villainy of an unprincipled man. Exert yourself to save,
from similar wretchedness, any who shall be so unfortunate as to attract his
notice."

Her disorder would not suffer her to say more. I sat some time by her side; it
growing late, I was induced to retire; and promising to see her in the morning,
I took my leave of the affecting scene. Early the next day, Mrs. Little sent to
acquaint me that Harriot had winged her way to the realms of eternal bliss.

So many painful circumstances have engaged my attention, since my arrival in
this village, that my preconceived pleasures have fled. Possessed of a warm
imagination and easy circumstances, my fancy frequently depictures
gratifications I can never enjoy. Harriot has entrusted me with a painful
commission. A commission I shall not be able, personally, to execute.

Fanny has been attacked with a spitting of blood -- I must, therefore, hasten
to the city for advice. Let us beware, my dear Maria, of the deceptions of a
sex, whose study is, too often, to ensnare the innocent and virtuous; and
constantly invoke the protection of that guardian power, who alone can shield
us from every danger.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER LIVE.
Philadelphia.
I HAVE again returned to the noisy city. Fanny is much better. Her physician
advised to opening a vein. This has been twice repeated within a few days.

Mr. Lee has left this place. I have caused the death of the unfortunate
Harriot, to be published in the Philadelphia papers; and her charge to me, as
given to a particular friend. This, I have no doubt will reach him. May it have
a happy effect.

Mrs. Leason and Laura, have urged Fanny and myself to accompany them to the
theater. I cannot consent that Fanny, while in such ill health, should go into
a crowd, or be exposed to the night air; and I acknowledge an inclination, on
my part, is wanting. I am too much interested in the situation of my absent
friends to receive entertainment. Yet I cannot avoid a compliance.

The stage in this city, is said to be under good regulations. A well regulated
theater, might become a source of great improvement; but it has hitherto, been
impossible to restrict it. Obscene expressions, and double entendres will creep
in, and they frequently receive an eclat, even in polite assemblies.

This letter will be handed you by Major Holmes, who is now waiting for it;
which obliges me to bid you

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER LV.
Philadelphia.
I ALMOST regret the day which gave me birth; as I seem destined to make
wretched every family in which I reside.

Since my last, by Major Holmes, a circumstance truly distressing has taken
place. In that, I acquainted you of my promise to attend Mrs. Leason and Laura
to the theater. Judge, Maria, my feelings, when I found myself in the adjoining
box to Eliza. By her expressive countenance, I was convinced she noticed me;
and from what I had experienced, doubted not her imagination was engaged,
inventing new schemes against me. Upon each wrist, I perceived a bracelet; and
by a light which was near her, discovered that one was the picture of the
unfortunate Clarimont; the other, a representation of that rural retreat which
proved the introduction to all my misfortunes. Philoclea was the tragedy
performed this evening. It was a play to which I was partial; but having
severely experienced the vindictive disposition of this unhappy woman, I could
not divest myself of many fears, which forced themselves upon me, and obscured
the whole entertainment. The letter, which I informed you I had received from a
person unknown, should have prevented my imprudence in thus venturing into a
crowd. I wished to tell Mrs. Leason my discovery, but was too closely watched
by Eliza. When the play was over, I begged Laura not to be in haste. Mr. Heart,
the gentleman who had escorted us thither, waited upon Mrs. Leason and myself
to the carriage, and a gentleman who sat in the same box with us, requested the
honor of attending Laura; who, fond of attention, and unsuspicious of any
plans against me, accepted his offer: The crowd soon separated us. We waited at
the door a considerable time for her, until her mamma, thinking she had taken
another carriage, desired our driver to hasten home; but different ideas rushed
upon my mind; ideas I dared not avow. When we reached the house, Laura had not
arrived. Mrs. Leason going up stairs to undress, I took the opportunity to tell
Mr. Heart my fears; who instantly walked out in search of her. Fanny, previous
to our return, had retired to bed. When Mrs. Leason came down, finding her
daughter yet absent, she began to be alarmed. The other boarders soon came in;
Mrs. Leason acquainting them with the circumstance, they immediately agreed to
take different routs, and enjoin it upon the city watch to patrol the streets,
and stop all persons passing through the night. I was now left to afford all
the consolation, and to encourage all the hopes an imagination inexpressibly
agitated could suggest. A degree of delirium seized her unhappy mother. The
sluices of maternal grief were opened, and sorrow, like a pestilential
exhalation, corrupted every pleasure. In this distress we counted the silent
hours of night, and when the day beamed its rays upon us, the gentlemen
returned, but unsuccessful. At this period, every prospect of Laura's recovery
was obscured.

It was now necessary to communicate the painful information to Fanny. This, if
possible, I would have avoided; for misfortunes are doubly barbed, when
directed at the bosom of sensibility and sympathy; and these were among the
darling virtues which shone conspicuous in the bosom of my friend.

This dear girl, discovering the situation of my mind, commanded her own
sensations. Her disposition is indeed uncommonly serene. The mild virtues of
philosophy are implanted in her breast.

The gentlemen having refreshed themselves, renewed their search. Mrs. Leason's
mind, like barren winter, presented naught but dreary prospects. Were I to
attempt a description of my sufferings, through th^^ day, it would fall
infinitely short of the ^^ality.

In the evening it was agreed, by a number of Laura's friends, to form several
parties, and watch certain suspicious houses, without the limits of the city,
concluding it probable she might have been carried to one of these for the
present. They accordingly, at an early hour, took their appointed posts.

Mrs. Leason had refused every nourishment, and was now so exhausted, that we
no sooner recovered her from one fainting-fit, than she relapsed into another.
Clothed in the sable livery of affliction, neither Fanny nor myself could
afford her consolation. Between the hours of eleven and twelve a carriage
stopped at the door. I flew to the head of the stairs to inform myself if any
intelligence was obtained of Laura, when I heard Mr. Heart desire the servant to
tell Mrs. Leason, Miss Laura would soon be at home. Eager to give the pleasing
news, I was returning to the chamber, but a sudden fainting-fit deprived me of
my senses, and I fell upon the floor. Fanny, alarmed at the noise, ran into the
entry to discover the cause, and calling some assistance, had me conveyed into
the parlour. When I recovered, I observed Laura in a chair near me. The
friends, who had shared with us in the sorrows of the day, were engaged in
comforting her and restoring me; while Fanny, having returned to Mrs. Leason,
was assuring her of her daughter's safety.

As I have written you a long letter, I will leave you in idea to participate
in that joyful scene we have now witnessed.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER LVI.
Philadelphia.
THE meeting between Laura and her mamma, was a real picture of affection and
gratitude. It was an inexpressibly pleasing event, in which words were useless.
In this instance the silent, but comprehensive language of the eye, the
endearing demonstrations of reciprocal joy, evinced in their conduct, declared
their real feelings, better than the most studied expressions. I was impatient
to become acquainted with her story; but the confusion of the family prevented
my wishes until the next day, when Mr. Heart gave me the circumstances of her
recovery as follows: "Being concealed within view of the house, to which we
imagined she might have been carried, we remained without any discovery until
after ten, when a carriage stopped at the door. We now walked up to it; and
just as they had forced Laura out of the door of the house, a pistol I had in
my hand, accidentally went off, at which the horses took fright; and those who
had hold of her, instantly fled; while myself and party, ran to her assistance.
It was for some time, impossible to convince her that she was under the
protection of her friends; nor has she given us any account of her being
carried away." Thus far gratified, I was obliged to wait, until Laura was
sufficiently composed to acquaint us with the manner of her being carried off.
When she assured her mamma, she was hurried through the crowd, and handed into
a carriage, by a gentleman who sat in the box with us, who accompanied her to
the place from which she was rescued by Mr. Heart. Here she was confined to a
chamber, and attended by a woman, from whom she learnt, that she was to be
removed further into the country the next night; and must take her final leave
of Philadelphia. She repeatedly asked, why she was thus torn from all her
friends? but could obtain no answer. In the evening she was told a coach was
come to take her from this place, and she was immediately hurried down stairs
to the door from whence, as above related, she was rescued by Mr. Heart.

This affair has given a fresh stab to my enjoyments. It deprive me of the
satisfaction I flattered myself to have received from the society of my
friends. I feel a lassitude I cannot describe. The anxiety of Mrs. Leason and
Laura has produced fevers, which at present run high. It will require some time
for them to recover their health. I am destined to the severest trials --
continually involving my friends in affliction. The idea saps every promised
pleasure; and I find their anticipation a chimera. May your friendship animate
my heart -- be to Caroline a Mentor, who, recalling her wandering thoughts,
shall remind her, that although philosophy directs us to fortitude, religion is
the only support in the storms of life.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER LVII.
Philadelphia.
MRS. Leason and Laura are better.

This recent affair, has determined me never again to venture in public. I am
at times disposed to retire to some unfrequented spot, and by assuming a
different habit and name, endeavor to live undisturbed in obscurity. Fanny is
urgent for me to take the advice of my friends, with respect to securing Eliza.
But I have no proof against her, unless the letter to me, after Clarimont's
death, will be accepted as such. I intend, however, to write to Captain
Evremont for his advice. My present situation is critical. I have no friends in
Philadelphia, whose duty it is to protect me; and fear is viewed as the child
of guilt. But why should all my happiness be sacrificed to the jealous
disposition of a disappointed woman, who is certainly the source of my
misfortunes?

A letter is this moment handed me from Captain Evremont. It contains the
certain accounts of my cousin's having fallen a victim to savage ferocity,
instead of his being killed at the defeat of Major Willys. This intelligence he
has received several ways. Yattacheu, a friendly Indian, who has been several
days at Fort-Pitt, has given the most direct information, of his being burnt by
slow fires, near the Miami villages. This story is corroborated by a prisoner
lately returned to camp, who was taken in the same defeat; but fortunately
obtained his ransom, through the interposition of a gentleman trading among
them, who formerly lived in the same town with him.

What hope do I encourage, which is not destroyed by the breath of
disappointment? Every object recals the tortured body to my view; my heart is
warped with the most tenebrous ideas, and misfortune awaits me upon every side.
Our friends strongly attach us to life. To part with them is painful -- but to
part with them, by the aggravated tortures of savage invention, is an
insupportable reflection. May I not, in this case, say, "Memory thou sting!"
Providence has prepared a double portion of affliction for your friend.
Frequently does the big drop, burst from my eye. But I will watch every
murmuring thought.

By the same conveyance is handed me a letter from Captain Clark; a copy of
which I shall enclose to you; not because it contains any particular
information, but the style in which it is dictated, I am sensible, will be
grateful to my friend. Ye guardian powers, who protect the thread of human
life, extend your watchful care, to the bosom of that wilderness, which
contains Columbia's favorite sons; let not the nervy arms successful in
securing the liberties of this Western World, be subdued by savage power;
screen them from every danger, and safely return them to more tranquil honors.

Adieu, CAROLINE.
Copy of Captain CLARK's Letter.
Fort-Pitt.
AGREEABLY to the promises of friendship, and the wishes of my own heart, I
improve the present opportunity to inquire after my friends.

The deranged state of the army since my arrival at Fort-Pitt, has alone
prevented me from commencing a correspondence so flattering to my vanity; and
by which I shall receive the communications of a sensibility, tempered by
judgment, matured by observation, and heightened by the endearing information
of the welfare of many friends, I esteem in Philadelphia. Captain Evremont had
almost discouraged me from writing, by reading me a paragraph in one of your
letters, wherein you express a great degree of diffidence in regard to
addressing me, and beg him to intercede for you.

I have frequently been favored with the perusal of detached parts of your
letters to him, and think my friend Caroline must be unpardonably diffident of
her own abilities, or suppose me most consummately vain of mine; to express a
wish, that I should overlook faults, if any exist, beyond my comprehension; and
which I am not sufficiently acquainted with language to criticize.

You justly observe, in your last letter to the Captain, "That many a man who
wears the uniform and cockade, cannot reconcile the idea of parting with his
friends, and commencing citizen of the world." I confess there are situations
in life, more grateful to my feelings, and in which I could be happier. I am,
however, blessed with a disposition for a military life, which will ever lead my
inclination to a parallel with my duty. Your remarks also, respecting the
uniform and cockade, are unhappily too true. The female mind delighted by
appearances, too often betrays the heart into error, misery and ruin. "
Encircled as we are with friends, whose ideas and wishes are correspondent with
our own, you fancy no circumstance can allay our happiness. "In their society,"
you add, " no plebeian principles intrude; but every lord may exercise his full
authority, and receive his wonted submission. A fine school for despotism!"
Your ideas are erroneous. For myself, I am indeed sensibly impressed with the
very honorable station in which I am placed, I feel like a soldier, but I feel
like his friend. " Despotism" will never be a boding feature in my character,
although there are " Plebeians" whose principles are not consonant to mine, and
whose ideas are too contemptible for my approbation.

Several Indians have been admitted to private conference with the General, and
the superior officers to a knowledge of their business to which my rank does
not entitle me.

It is thought by the army that we shall leave this place as soon as the
expected troops arrive. Tell Fanny her brother came into camp yesterday, in
good health, and desires to be remembered to you both.

That my friends should be thus particular in the assurances of their esteem,
flatters me much: They may be assured, that my heart most sensibly accords with
my wishes for their happiness. Tender them, in return, my warmest
acknowledgments.

Your friends here, join with me, in the fullest assurances of friendship to
you and Fanny; and you may believe I shall ever feel myself honored in your
correspondence, and that my wishes for your happiness, are sincere.

HENRY CLARK.




LETTER LVIII.
Philadelphia.
MANY things concur to render me unhappy. The exposed situation of my friends
at the Westward -- Being myself without a protector, Fanny's ill health, and
the melancholy certainty of my cousin's tortures, are alone ample causes of
anxiety and pain. Our happiness through life, Maria, is unavoidably connected
with that of our friends. Captain Clark's letter, expresses such unmerited
encomiums, that I have regretted sending it to you. But you must remember, my
dear, it is a tenet of the gentlemen, that they cannot render themselves
agreeable to our sex, unless they sacrifice their sincerity at the shrine of
flattery. This is indeed the lesson they have received, from that celebrated
courtier, Lord Chesterfield, according to whose ideas, no " Compliment is too
gross for the female ear." Although his lordship, in this observation, confined
the gratefulness of flattery to the " Female ear," he was himself convinced, it
was a language pleasing to human nature, and strictly observed it, upon all
occasions. It would, however, be a pleasing idea, if this sentiment was not, in
connection with others, ruinous to the morals of society. When I read his
letters, I regret, a book so fatal to the happiness of the community, so
replete with poison to the youthful mind, should ever have been published. In
youth the imagination is warm, the passions strong, and without incitement,
they are prone to err. Lord Chesterfield's accomplishments, if a character
practiced in deception, and educated in intrigue, can be styled accomplished,
could never be substituted for those virtues, in which he was most strikingly
deficient. His instructing his son in the arts of seduction and adultery, is an
error which can never be approved, by the most licentious and depraved.

It being the immediate province of our sex, to implant the first lessons of
instruction in the infant mind, let us studiously endeavor to impress the
opening judgment with a just detestation of such sentiments as will subvert the
principles of morality; for sentiments early impressed, will sink deep into the
heart, and greatly regulate future conduct; and even in the moments of a
dangerous deviation, prove a faithful Monitor. By our bright example, may the
rising generation be led to imitate virtues, which shall adorn the name of
Americans.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER LIX.
Philadelphia.
CAPTAIN Clark's letter discovers a depression which gives me pain; but he is
not the only friend compelled to pursue a mode of life, derogatory to his
wishes. The unfortunate Mr. Gardner, has also been obliged to relinquish the
society of a beloved wife; to tear himself from the engaging prattle of his
infant children; to quit a home, which might have been rendered peaceful and
happy, had the breast of his brother, been filled with that sympathy, which is
an ornament to humanity. But there are mysteries in Providence, which human
wisdom cannot reveal; and we frequently see one brother loaded with a
redundance of fortune's gifts, devoid of a soul to relieve another, equally
deserving, who experiences the most distressing wants.

The miser, what a sordid worm! Full of anxiety, he pursues his speculations;
he eats the bread of carefulness; he smothers every spark of benevolence; his
character is shaded by inhumanity; and his name becomes odious, even to his
friends.

I have received a morning's visit from my aunt Noble. She had been shopping,
and has purchased a variety of finery. While she has a copper left, it will be
impossible for her to restrain her prodigal disposition. I inquired if my uncle
was likely to get business? She replied, there was no prospect of it at
present, and that she soon expected to want the necessaries of life. Strange
woman* thought I, that with such ideas can be thus indiscreet. She acquainted
me with a secret, which she determines to keep inviolate; but I will pledge my
word, if she should, it will be the first that ever she kept in her life. Nay,
could I trace her to the houses she has visited this morning, I dare assert, I
should find it already communicated to every family.

"The Colonel and she, have not spoke to each other for several days." Old
quarrels are renewed. Solomon's words are established. "A continual dropping in
a rainy day, and a contentious woman are alike."

This great secret was told before Mrs. Leason, Laura and Fanny. Her visit was
short, consequently the more agreeable to her niece. She had to call at several
places; and if by accident she should fall into company with entire strangers
to her, or her situation, I would forfeit half I possess in the world, if she
did not acquaint them with all her grievances.

I find my aunt's tears of irritability are yet at command. The weakness of her
conduct has created her many enemies: She has made herself the derision of the
city. Many who wish her well, in justice to themselves, are obliged to withdraw
from her society: For however mankind are disposed to befriend the unfortunate,
they are soon wearied with a recital of complaints; and the less we proclaim
our cares and troubles abroad, the more we shall be respected. It is necessary,
as much as possible, to banish them from our own minds. The journey of life is
short -- and it is folly to mar present enjoyment, by a rehearsal of evils, or
to pursue objects as necessary to our happiness, which lie far beyond our
reach; and which, if we have the good fortune to attain, still leave us far
distant from felicity. Duty directs us to enjoy the present moment, and not to
hanker after a something unpossessed.

"Not happiness itself makes good her name,
Our very wishes, give us not our wish:
How distant often the thing we dote on most,
From that for which we dote, felicity."
It is frequently the case, that the very periods, which we were so impatient
should arrive, reach us without the power to satisfy, or we soon become
satiated with possession. Unfortunately our greatest enjoyments proceed from
the expectation of a future good, we wish to obtain a something beyond our
reach, and Hope, that friendly companion of human life, animates us in the
pursuit. Thus immersed in expectation, we hurry through the events of life,
till old age overtakes us, and we fall a victim to its attendant diseases.

Let us learn to be virtuous and wise -- true happiness will certainly ensue. I
am, my dear, your affectionate friend

CAROLINE.

LETTER LX.
Philadelphia.
I HAVE the pleasure to congratulate my dear Maria, upon the arrival of her
brother, from the West Indies. Most feelingly do I wish to add, the
re-establishment of his health; but although he enjoys a greater share, than
when he left Philadelphia, he is yet an invalid. Mrs. Leason and Laura are so
far recovered as to be below. Fanny is at present better; but I fear the
disorder will finally settle upon her -- such repeated attacks must essentially
weaken her constitution.

I last week, made one of a large party to your aunt. She is indeed, an
amiable, sensible, and accomplished woman. Having ever been accustomed to the
style in which she now lives, she is free from those supercilious airs, which
many of our present gentry assume. In her family is the strictest regularity.
Liberality is here seen without profusion -- Grandeur without ostentation.

Mr. P. is a man, possessed of talents, which would reflect superior honor
upon him, if he would consent to fill the vacancy in government, to which he
has been appointed; but having declined the repeated wishes of his country, it
is his determination to close his days in private life. He is indeed justly
esteemed for the solidity of his understanding, his unblemished integrity, and
the virtues of his heart.

Here I was introduced to a Mrs. Williams, a lady, with whose character I have
long been acquainted, and I have no doubt but public fame has also given it to
Maria; but least you should in this respect be singularly ignorant, I will
acquaint you. She is originally from New England; and possesses a striking
levity of disposition, which, with an excessive vanity, leads her to a conduct
that renders her disrespected. For several years past, she has been conversant
with the etiquette of the polite world, and lives in a style, few Americans
will attempt to imitate. Her whole study is, to surpass the gay circle in
which, like the gaudy butterfly, she flutters, to display her variegated
colors, and peculiar richness of apparel.

In the course of conversation she observed, "It gave her great pleasure to
anticipate the time, when a proper distinction would be paid to the characters
of the rich and elevated; for the present equality was horribly mortifying. It
is now impossible to obtain any article of dress which is not immediately
copied by the vulgar. A few weeks since I ordered my milliner to make a hat in
the newest and most elegant taste. Agreeably to my directions it was superbly
decorated, and I thought the price it cost would prevent imitation; but the
second time I wore it. I was mortified to find Mrs. B. with one exactly
resembling it; and going home, I committed my own to the flames."

This noble lady is united with a man, who, by the most fortuitous events, has
gained an elevated office, and the momentary breath of popularity. But although
she at present basks in the indulgence of her consummate arrogance; yet high as
her husband has been raised to honor, and bountifully as his country has
provided for him, the provision will fall infinitely short of the calls of a
woman who has no bounds to her extravagance.

From the observations I made upon her conduct, during the afternoon and
evening, I am convinced, this motto may be affixed to her arms, " a short life
and a merry one." She has forgot the times that are past, when the occupation
of her husband placed her in a sphere of life, far different from that in which
she now moves; she is also unmindful, that, by the voice of the people, he came
into political existence; and that the same voice can deprive him of his
honors, and return him to that mass of " Vulgar Citizens" from which he
sprang. Her conduct is censured, even by her friends; but fancying herself
beyond the reach of envy, she " Bids defiance to the low aspersions of plebeian
calumny," and pursues her favorite pleasures. Mr. Williams, bewildered with
her ideas of greatness, which she lineally inherits, appears equally
intoxicated.

In this uncertain tide of her prosperity, it would surely be friendly, to
remind her she may fall, and again commence the wife of a plebeian. But I
believe she considers reflection, as too laborious an employment for a
fashionable mind. Convinced that you will excuse my deviating from my own
story, I shall ever feel at liberty to communicate such as occur to me; and
while they tend to unfold the vanity of the human heart, I flatter myself they
will not be unacceptable to Maria.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER LXI.
Philadelphia.
A FEW days since, Fanny received a letter from her sister Gardner, acquainting
her with the late severity of her brother: Who no sooner saw this distressed
woman, placed by her friends in a situation, which they flattered themselves,
would enable her to supply the calls of an infant family, than he made a
pressing demand, for what his brother owed him, and has finally obliged her to
give him her obligation, to pay him weekly, a certain proportion, until both
principal and interest shall be discharged. And having lately come into
possession of the house she now occupies, he has greatly added to her rent, and
requires indubitable bondsmen for her punctual payment of it. La Bruyer's
observation, when speaking of characters similar to Mr. Gardner, is certainly
verified. "They are neither," says he, "fit for friends, citizens, nor
christians. If you admit them any merit, it is because they have money."

The unfeeling mind, is unacquainted with those sublime emotions, which dignify
the benevolent heart. Your brother, whose breast yields to every tender call of
humanity, was present when Fanny opened the letter. He watched her countenance,
discovered her uneasiness, and urged to be acquainted with the cause. In vain
did she attempt to conceal her sorrow; his curiosity was not to be evaded; and
submitting to his entreaties, she gave me the letter, and left the room. I
handed it to him. No sooner was he acquainted with the contents, than he
addressed a letter to Mrs. Gardner, in which he enclosed the mortgage of a
house in Havre-de-Grace, begging her acceptance of it; with permission to draw
upon him, for the sum necessary to discharge Mr. Gardner's debt. An act of
generosity this, which doubly endears him to my heart. Blessed with a fortune
which enables him to indulge his philanthropic wishes, he is indefatigable in
pursuit of distressed objects. And considering himself responsible to the
Deity, for the property he has bestowed upon him, he believes it his duty to
lessen the wants of the afflicted. I am convinced it is a grateful reflection
to your mind, that those virtues, for which your deceased father was so justly
revered, are transmitted to his only son; and that in the brother, the parent
yet lives.

Left early in life an heir to such immense property, great was the danger
which encompassed him; but blessed with a religious education, he was armed
against the incitements of the world; and viewing virtue as the only road to
happiness, he disregarded the vanities of life. Free from the ostentation of
youth, he holds external pomp as useless; making it his endeavor to alleviate
human sorrow; his health will not permit his personal attention to business,
but the mercantile connection he formed immediately after his father's death,
renders his attendance unnecessary. His liberality to the University at
Rhode Island, of which he is a member, united with his many public and private
acts of charity, render him conspicuously beloved. Uniform in his disposition
to do good, he visits the humble dwelling of poverty, and privately affords his
assistance; while numbers are relieved by his benificence, who know not, from
whence the bounty flows.

How different is the disposition of Mr. Belmour, from the general
characteristic of the world, who are seldom affected with a distant view of
misfortunes. Did the sons of prosperity, imbibe sentiments similar to him, how
much would misfortunes be alleviated. We should not then see a Gardner,
depriving the widow, and the orphan, of their little property, to defray a
paltry rent, which their narrow circumstances, disabled them from paying. We
should not then find one brother, callous to the wants of another, destitute
and dependant, but universal benevolence and love would govern the actions of
man. Pardon my repeating to you, deeds which will immortalize the name of your
brother. And believe that the language of adulation, is foreign from the heart
of

CAROLINE.

LETTER LXII.
Philadelphia.
BY a letter received by the post this evening, from Capt. Evremont, I find, he
had drawn twenty days provision, and was to leave Pittsburg, for
Fort-Washington the fifth of September. This fort is three hundred miles from
the place where my letter was dated. What an extent of country already
separates us! and what innumerable difficulties must the army encounter, before
they return to the wishes of their friends! Convinced that you will indulge me
in my moralizing reflections, I shall not apologize for those sentiments which
may flow from my pen, for I cannot avoid being thoughtful upon the present
occasion. That human life is of a cobweb texture is an idea which should be
impressed upon our minds. This would tend to secure us through the storms in
which we ride. Those who have never trod the thorny path of sorrow, would
perhaps be disgusted with the sermonizing Caroline; but, Maria, although a
favorite of fortune, has severely felt the lash of affliction by the repeated
death of friends, I am therefore assured of your warmest participation, while
agitated with my present painful feelings. In youth we too often look with
impatient expectation, to those enjoyments which we fondly imagine will be
connected with mat^^^r age -- painting in idea, unnumbered gratifications, and
promising ourselves a succession of pleasures. Few of us but find it a rugged
path; or if we glide through life in the possession of all we had vainly
pictured, old age will insensibly steal upon us, and the infirmities of weary
nature, proclaim our approaching end; and although we may have been loaded with
the most flattering honors, the wrinkled messenger of death, whose arrow is
not blunted by the numbers it has slain, will finally terminate the period of
existence. Where are those that once crowded the busy streets, grasping after
riches, popularity and fame? Are they not enshrined in the silent tomb, and
become objects unfit for sight? This will also be the case with us, in a few
revolving years: Nay, perhaps we have already taken the final leave of friends
dear unto us. What are the objects which engage our daily attention but
shadows, that make a momentary impression, and leave, upon recollection, an
imperfect remembrance -- passing from us with such velocity as mutually to
efface each other!

Let us not then suffer ourselves to become infatuated with the foibles and
vanities of the world, which too often enslave us by their opinions, and
frequently make us the objects of their derision; but while the votaries of
vacant gratifications summon their idle amusements to assist the flight of
time, may we pass those moments of relaxation, which nature demands, in such
pursuits as will tend to strengthen, rather than weaken the mind.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER LXIII.
Philadelphia.
FANNY lately received a letter from her mamma, by a Mr. Gibbins, whom she
wished Mrs. Leason to accommodate with lodgings; but the house was then so full
of boarders, it was not in her power to entertain him. This gentleman is nearly
sixty years old, and a widower with a large fortune; he has, however, been our
constant visitor; and I sincerely believe our landlady flattered herself she
had made a conquest; for the whole artillery of her charms have been arranged
upon the occasion. The barber has been employed to new model her head, and has
supplied her with a false dress, which partially conceals the emblem of her
age. But a few evenings since, he made a declaration, by which she discovered
it was his intention to persuade some pretty girl to make him happy: This has
induced her to relinquish her first intention, and to adopt every stratagem,
that Laura may become the happy being.

Mr. Gibbins may have been handsome twenty or thirty years back, though at
present no vestige of beauty remains; and he is one of the most illiterate
beings I ever heard attempt to speak. But why do I mention these. Ignorance and
age are not to be considered, when contrasted with a fortune and carriage. This
gentleman differs, in many respects, from his sex: For a lady to have rude
health is so vulgar he cannot abide it. "There is a certain something to be
expressed to a sick wife which suits the softness of his disposition; it gives
an affectionate husband an opportunity to show his regards." A very pretty
affection truly, that cannot be evinced, unless the beloved object is
languishing in a consumption, or tortured with pain!

Mrs. Leason readily falls in with all his ideas. Her daughter is quite an
invalid. She proposes, her making a visit to Potsgrove: The ride would be of
service to her health. This is artfully done before Mr. Gibbins. He begs not to
be deprived of Miss Laura's company. Mrs. Leason is now highly gratified. She
then makes an objection to her going with any of the young boarders; and she
cannot possibly accompany her. Mr. Gibbins requests the honor to attend her,
and assures her mamma, his chariot and himself are equally at Miss Laura's
command. I suspect this will end in a connection; but I am not, I assure you,
envious of Laura's prospects.

Fanny, your brother and myself, frequently pass an hour with your aunt P. I
never quit her company without regret. More real pleasure results from her
conversation, than from all the circles of the city. I am delighted with her
family government. Heaven has blessed her with a number of children, who, from
the cradle, are taught to obey. Indeed every part of her house appears to be
directed by a mechanical hand, which moves the whole system in perfect unison.
Mr. P. has added to his family several little orphans, who being left destitute
of property or friends, induced this benevolent man to take them into his
house, these receive the same education with his own children. He derives an
inexpressible pleasure from the indulgence of his beneficent mind. While the
selfish heart, wastes its days, without ever wiping the tear of affliction from
the furrowed cheek of poverty, few partake of the philanthropy of a P. or a
Belmour. Was the world more generally governed by their principles, we should
experience a happiness unknown to the present age. We should not then find one
brother compelled to go into distant, and hazardous countries, where he must
experience innumerable hardships, while another continued at home, counting his
property, and oppressing the distressed.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER LXIV.
Philadelphia.
MY aunt was with me a few days since. " A new blow," she says, " is struck at
her domestic peace." My uncle has been reflecting upon her for some of her late
imprudencies, and she, as usual, I suppose, returned a double share of
invective. She resolves not to continue with him; but is undetermined what
steps to pursue.

The connection between Mr. Gibbins and Laura goes on rapidly. I have taken the
liberty to make some observations to Mrs. Leason, respecting the age of her
daughter's gallant. With these she was much offended, and replied, "It was
better to be an old man's darling, than a young man's slave. It is not
probable" she says, "that Mr. Gibbins will live a great while, and then what a
fortune Laura will have! All the young gentlemen in the city, will be after the
rich widow." Since I find how it is, I shall be cautious that I do not again
injure the feelings of my landlady.

In this instance, I am sure, money must make good great deficiencies. But Mrs.
Leason and Laura are not singular in their ideas. Strange infatuation! that for
the prospect of wealth, they give up every pleasing expectation of connubial
happiness. What can a young lady flatter herself, who, in the bloom of youth,
is connected with a man in the last stage of life, that is either satiated with
the follies and amusements through which he has passed, or who is unable, by
the decrepitude of age, to enjoy the gay scenes in which the heart of his wife
constantly partakes. A uniformity of taste, is an essential requisite to
domestic happiness; and this can never be found in so striking a contrast of
years. Would Laura and her mamma, anticipate what must take place a short
period hence, when the concomitant diseases of advanced life, shall reduce her
intended husband to a second childhood, they must, I think, be convinced that
the most unbounded fortune, would be inadequate to the sacrifices she will make.

Fanny and your brother desire to be remembered to you. May Minerva ever be the
guide of Maria.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER LXV.
Philadelphia.
MRS. Leason is truly an artful woman. Her finesse alone will obtain a husband
for Laura. The old gentleman pays her the closest attention. She begs that I
will not say any thing to discourage her daughter. I am perfectly sick of his
company; although, when he is present, I cannot help smiling. The horses and
servants are already changed; they had neither sorcibility nor faculty
sufficient for her taste.

The pleasure which the anticipation of this connection affords Mrs. Leason,
cannot be expressed. She has long been endeavoring to make a match between her
daughter and a certain young gentleman in this city, who has been some time her
gallant; but notwithstanding every opportunity she had given him to encourage
an infant partiality, which she flattered herself was kindling in his breast;
he has never made any declaration of his passion.

Upon the arrival of Mr. Gibbins, Mr. Hill was slighted, as he does not make so
great a show. His virtues and good qualities are obscured; real accomplishments
are neglected, for imaginary ones. For my own part I have endeavored to
discover one pleasing trait in the character of Laura's lover, but have not
succeeded. He may be styled one of those beings, which the world denominates
harmless and inoffensive; terms, which in my view, designate the most
contemptible character. It is at once to say they are unfit for enterprise, and
destroys every idea annexed to the requisite qualifications of either the
active citizen, the soldier, or the real friend. I regret your mamma's
indisposition, and sincerely wish a restoration to her former health. Make my
bests respects acceptable to her.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER LXVI.
Philadelphia.
WHEN will my fondest wishes be gratified? The period I fear is remote. Yet my
heart continually aspires after the society of my friends. By this time they
are in the center of a desert, on all sides liable to be attacked by the beast
of prey, hourly exposed to the more voracious inhabitants, and continually in
danger of that inexpressible cruelty, which marks the savage tribes. To
enjoyment I am a stranger; but it is unfriendly to increase the anxiety of
Maria. The same Providence which protects us, in the retired, and less exposed
walks of life, can also screen them in the field of battle. Into the hands of
an unerring power we must commit them, and may he who sways the scepter of
universal nature be their constant protector.

A strange affair has taken place in this city. You remember the story of
Henrietta Careless, who was suddenly missing, and was long since, supposed to
be dead. Her friends last week received a letter from her, which gives the
following account.

"Having for some time, encouraged an attachment to a certain French gentleman,
who had resided several years in Philadelphia, she resolved to follow him to
his native country; and understanding that a French family, who sailed soon
after him, wished a person to attend them upon their passage, and take the care
of their children; having suitably clothed herself for the purpose, she made
application to them, and engaged in their service.

"Soon after their arrival in France, Monsieur De Lot made a visit to the
family in which she was, to congratulate them upon their return. Having been
intimate with this gentleman in America, she feared he might recall her
countenance; but being engaged in accomplishing a piece of needle work for the
lady with whom she lived, she endeavored to command her feelings; and learning
by their conversation, that he accustomed himself to walk some time after
dinner, in the celebrated gardens of Mr. M. an American gentleman, she resolved
the next day to decorate herself in a particular dress, which had been much
admired by him, while in Philadelphia, and to walk in the gardens, about the
time she expected he would appear there. She had not been long amusing herself
in this delightful spot, before she saw him enter, and soon found she had
caught his attention.

"Having followed her some way, he hastened his step; and overtaking her,
expressed great joy from the unexpected meeting, welcomed her to Paris, and
begged to know what had brought her from home? She replied, the circumstances
of her voyage were singular, and at present could not be divulged. "You will,
however," said he, "permit me to visit you, and attend you in public!" She
assured him it was not in her power, at present, to gratify a wish, in which
her heart so largely shared. "You must indulge me," said he, "in visiting you."
She assured him, that could not yet be granted. "Your story must indeed be
singular," said he, "which induces you thus to seclude yourself from the
society of one, who has long felt his heart glow, with a partiality he cannot
conquer. Nothing, my adored Henrietta," continued he, "but an engagement I had,
previous to my visiting America, bound myself by every tie of honor, to
fulfill, would have torn me from you. Consider me as your protector. Since my
return, I feel myself less obliged to pursue an object, whose conduct in my
absence, has rendered her disgustful to me. The three years I passed in
America, have changed my opinion with respect to the education of my own
country women. I have entirely lost my attachment to that volatile conduct,
which in my view borders upon a criminal levity; and I am resolved to obtain an
American wife. This declaration determined her to keep inviolate her story; and
as she could not see him, while she remained in her present capacity at Madam
-- 's, she begged he would excuse her being seen by him for a few days; and
insisted that he should not attend her from the place where they then were. She
did not, however, leave him, without a promise of meeting him in the same
garden in a few days. Being repeatedly seen together, various conjectures were
excited; and in a short time it was known, that the American girl who lived
with Madam --, was the person who met Monsieur De Lot. The lady with whom she
lived, unfortunately was connected in the family with which this gentleman had
long expected a union; she therefore thought it best to quit her house, and
retire to private, but reputable lodgings, where she frequently received the
visits of her lover. Thus they passed several months; when the day was fixed
for the wedding, and the next week, she was to have been introduced to his
connexions; but having taken his leave of Henrietta one night, later than
usual, she never saw nor heard of him more. Notwithstanding the indefatigable
exertions of his friends to recover him, and having passed a year in fruitless
inquiries, she finally resolved to retire to a monastery, where she has taken
the veil, and determines to end her days in a voluntary exile, as busy life is
without enchantments to her. Her brother is preparing to sail in the packet for
France; if possible, to prevail upon her to return to the embraces of her
impatient parents. Your former intimacy with Henrietta, and the conversation it
has afforded in Philadelphia, will be an ample apology for my relating it to
you. May Caroline largely share in the affections of Maria.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER LXVII.
Philadelphia.
A LARGE packet has been handed me from the Westward. It contained letters from
my friends Evremont and Clark. That you may have some idea of their situation,
I shall enclose Captain Clark's letter for your perusal. Since the receipt of
these, I am doubly distressed; and the present appearance of nature, is
perfectly consonant to the gloomy feelings of my heart. The waste and
desolation now before me increases my sable thoughts. Winter is spreading round
us her serious attire; but although personally secured against the howl of the
tempest, and the gripe of the frost, I cannot be insensible to the sufferings
of my distant friends. Nor do I ever approach the table, abounding with a
luxurious supply, or seat myself by the cheerful fire, without reiterating my
wishes, that I could impart them to those I so much esteem. The season, Maria,
which once, with all its bleakness and severity, I most admired, from the more
extensive social indulgences we were then enabled to enjoy, is now without its
charms. The part I take in the wants my friends must unavoidably experience,
renders me an unsocial companion. Indulge me with your frequent letters. Write
me every little incident which occurs to you, and believe me immutably your
sincere friend,

CAROLINE.
Copy of a letter from Captain CLARK.
A LETTER, which I have this day received from my friend Caroline, affords me
most sensible pleasure. It calls my imagination to the peaceful scenes of
domestic life. My fancy presents my friends in various points of view* and
leads my mind to the variegated pursuits in which they are engaged: That they
may ever be promotive of their best interest and happiness, is the warmest wish
of my heart. As my present situation may prevent my writing more than a few
lines at a time, my letter may bear more the appearance of a journal than an
epistle. I shall, however, avail myself of every opportunity, to give you some
account of our situation.

I left Pittsburg on Monday, September the fifth, in company with three other
boats commanded by Captain Evremont, Captain Gardner, and Lieutenant G. Nothing
material occurred on our passage to Muskingum, except my discovering, by an
excellent glass I had in the boat, men on shore, about two miles ahead, filing
off through the bushes, as I supposed, to attack us. We prepared to receive
them, and kept our lads at their arms, until we arrived at Muskingum, which was
the seventh of September. We paid the compliment of the drum, and received a
salute from the block-house here. At this place I met many of my old
acquaintance, who were happy to see me. I was delighted with the situation of
Marietta, but think the " Campus Martius," derives its principal excellency
from its strength against an Indian, rather than a military enemy. We took our
leave of this in a few hours, accompanied by a number of gentlemen who were
bound to Belle Pre, and who were so polite as to attend us twenty-five miles
beyond that place. I think they paid dear for their gratification, as they had
to row back against a current, which now runs about four and a half knots an
hour.

When we came opposite the French settlement of Galliopolis, I was so sick,
that I was obliged to send a letter ashore to Captain G. to apologize for my
not visiting him with my brother officers. The ninth, a large bear swam across
the river. One of my men jumped into a canoe, but bruin reached the shore
before him, and made off. This was the first large species of game I have seen,
during my march to Pittsburg, or sail thus far down the river, except one fawn.
The tenth, landed at the famous settlement of Limestone. To say I was
disappointed, would give but a small idea of the place, or my feelings. It is
true, the land about it is luxuriantly fertile, and the town is happily
situated; but the houses, for so old a settlement, are contemptibly mean and
badly built. Most of the people are poor and lazy, and the streets abominably
filthy and dirty; owing to their hogsties being contiguous to them; and from
laziness, or some reason incomprehensible to me, their suffering the filth and
excrements to run into the streets. Limestone is sixty miles from Fort-Washton.

The next place we landed at, was a settlement called Little Miami. It is
indeed a beautiful situation, and the people appear contented and industrious.
Having reached Fort-Washington, waited upon General St. Clair. The twelfth,
dined with General Harmer; were ordered to hold ourselves in readiness to march
at the shortest notice. Thursday, September the fifteenth, ordered to march for
headquarters, which is twenty-four miles from Fort-Washington. Forded two deep
creeks during the march; halted at Mill-Creek, ten miles from Fort-Washington;
the road so very muddy our baggage could not keep up with us; of consequence we
were obliged to lay in the woods on a wet piece of ground, without a blanket or
great coat, with only thin nankeen overalls, and a linen jacket. I confess I
was most uncomfortably cold, although I lay with my feet to a good fire. The
fog was so thick as to wet my clothes through. About twelve at night, a large
tree, fell upon two of the soldiers, one of whom died in a short time; the
other was badly wounded. The sixteenth, we were impeded in our march, by reason
of the surveyors not having blazed Blaze is a term signifying a white spot made
in the trees, by a hatchet, cutting off the exterior bark. In New England it is
called spotting the trees, and it is designed as a direction to the traveller.
the trees, or opened the road, further than ten miles; they had left us to
find our way out of the woods as well as we could. The riflemen were now sent
to reconnoitre, and make a new road into the old one, which was discovered
three miles from where we were. Our baggage now came up, and we got something
to eat and drink; it being the first time since the day before. "It is tight
times with us, I assure you."

The seventeenth reached the great Miami. The eighteenth, General St. Clair
arrived from Fort-Washington. The nineteenth, several large rattle-snakes were
killed by our men in camp.

I cannot account for the mode in which duty is generally done in this camp;
for I conceive it absolutely unmilitary: But as older officers than myself have
done the same tournament in the game, I acquiesce, though I think it a
ridiculous mode; but hope the style will be altered, when we move toward the
enemy, who, we are informed, are fifteen hundred strong, and are determined to
give us battle. So be it: Although I am sorry our force is not so respectable
in point of strength as numbers. This day, immediately upon coming off my duty,
I was ordered to make out a muster-roll, and an inspection-return, against
tomorrow!

Consideration is one of the first properties in my estimation of a good
General; but to put an officer upon duty, and, as soon as he comes off, to
expect three days business, with close application* to be performed in one, is
a refinement beyond my comprehension! However, what can be, shall be done.

Major H. returned yesterday from Fort-Washington, but with small
encouragement, as to our baggage being forwarded. This is against me, as all my
stores were left there, and the difficulty of having them sent to me, naturally
increases with my distance from them; however, it is nothing uncommon to
soldiers, and I must and will be contented. This afternoon my boy returned to
me from the hospital at Fort-Washington. Poor boy! the scenes are so novel,
and, as he conceives, hard, that it affects his spirits, and makes him unhappy.
He little thinks what fatigues and dangers are yet to come! Indeed, my friend,
I anticipate a winter's campaign, in a country inhabited only by wild beasts,
or the still more ferocious bipeds of the forest, without baggage, and I very
much fear, in a manner without provisions; as it is clear to my understanding,
that the frost will destroy the herbage of the country, which is the sole
dependence, at present, of our bat-horses and cattle! This anticipation, with
the reflection of having no other coverings in our best situation, but our
tents, in the middle of winter; and that when on picquet, we shall be allowed
no fire, however stormy or cold it may be, I confess affords me but little
satisfaction in the contemplation.

The continual rains in this country must render it very unhealthy. We have but
few dry nights. My tent, bed and clothes are always wet. Frequently do we
bestow a benediction upon the contractors, for the thinness of our tents; the
backs and doors of which are made of the coarsest oznabrigs, through which it
rains as through a sieve; thus is the country cheated, and the soldier imposed
upon.

"I dined this day upon bear, venison, and wild turkey. The enemy is ever on
the watch, and stands ready to take off the foretop of all who come within
their reach. I shall forward this to Fort-Washington by Captain Green, who is
ordered with fifty men to that place, in order to escort baggage to camp; from
thence, I have no doubt it will be forwarded with the first dispatches to
Philadelphia. Captain Evremont is also writing. I shall, if my life is spared,
continue to give you such information as I believe will be acceptable to you.
Remember me to all my friends, and be assured distance will never lessen my
friendship for you.

HENRY CLARK.




LETTER LXVIII.
Philadelphia.
THE tribute of my dear Maria, and her god-mother's benevolence, are duly
received. Accept my thanks in behalf of Mrs. Gardner. I shall, by an early
opportunity, transmit this token of your sympathy to her; and feel assured, it
will be received with a grateful heart. By letters lately from her, we learn,
that by the severity of Mr. Gardner, several respectable planters in the
neighborhood of Havre-de-Grace, have been reduced to very great distress. The
situation of one of these unfortunate persons, is indeed afflicting.

Mr. Gardner had long expressed a particular friendship for a Mr. Henshaw; he
availed himself of those professions, and hired of him a sum of money, for
which he gave a mortgage of his plantation as a security. This property, united
with the stock he previously owned, enabled him to commence a large speculator;
but finally proving unfortunate, and being followed with repeated bad
contracts, he found himself thousands worse than nothing. Mr. Gardner had
loaned him the money upon an extravagant interest, but had given him his honor
that he would never distress either him or his family for it; nor never suffer
them to be turned off from their estate. But these promises were made to a man
in affluence, and were never meant to be extended beyond the period of
prosperity. Notwithstanding Mr. Henshaw had received but one half the value of
his place, which has since been apprised by indifferent people; the other half
was shortly swallowed up by the usurious interest which Mr. Gardner demanded;
and this unfortunate man, who has an aged father and mother, besides an
extensive family dependant upon him, is thrown upon the bounty of his
neighbors for a present subsistence. This, my dear Maria, is one among the
unnumbered instances of his barbarity. An amiable, a happy family are at this
moment experiencing his inexorable cruelty; his surprising parsimony and usury;
and while they view him as the great cause of their distress, are loading him
with their severest reproaches. But though the heart of a Gardner is hardened,
and his ears deaf to their distress, yet he who reigns above, and views with a
just abhorrence, his inhuman conduct, will finally shower down his vengeance
upon the perpetrator of so cruel a deed. Then will he, who now thrives by
oppression, and who views the distress of a brother and a friend, with a heart
hardened by a love of wealth, experience that severe remorse of conscience,
which he has kindled by a rapacious mind. Then will the anger of an offended
Deity roll upon him, and in his moments of anguish he will regret the
calamities he has brought upon others. It is the voice of heaven which
denounces woe unto them who heap up wealth in abundance, grinding the face of
the poor, considering not the sweat of their brow; but who are rejoicing alone
in their possessions.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER LXIX.
Philadelphia.
A FEW evenings since, the servant acquainted me that a person at the door
wished to speak with me. I arose from my chair, and was passing into the entry,
when Mrs. Leason bid the boy desire them to walk into the parlour and deliver
their message; but not having any idea of danger, I endeavored to pass her;
when she caught my hand, and led me back into the room. The boy soon returned
with a card, which gave me an invitation to pass the next evening with your
aunt P. Without hesitation I returned my compliments, and assurances of
attending her. When your brother came home, I told him my engagement, and
claimed the honor of his company. The next day proved stormy; but not
inclining to be deprived of society to which I am strongly attached, your
brother procured a carriage and attended me to his aunt's. From the particular
invitation I had received, I expected to find a select party assembled; but
upon my entering the room, discovered we were unexpected, though welcome
visitors. This induced me to apologize for being out so disagreeable an
evening; and I assured her, my partiality to her company, as well as real
politeness, which obliged me to fulfill particular engagements, had alone
induced my present visit. "It is truly," replied she, "an agreeable
disappointment, for I anticipated passing this evening alone, as Mr. P. left
the city yesterday, and will not return this week; I shall therefore claim you
as my companion until he arrives. I now began to suspect the card a deception;
and taking out my pocketbook, handed it to her, requesting to know if that was
her invitation. She assured me it was not. This confirmed my imagination, and
has again filled me with fears. Watched by so inflexible an enemy as Eliza, my
conduct, must indeed be guarded; so great is her art, I cannot develope her in
a single instance; although it is evident, she leaves no stratagem unessayed to
complete my destruction. Those reflections, however, which result from a
recognition of my conduct, greatly contribute to my happiness. To these I
retire with a satisfaction, of which I can never be deprived by the severest
persecution; they will contribute to my support. An invariable attachment to
virtue, and a strict adherence to duty, will, notwithstanding the misfortunes
we meet, facilitate the journey of life. Self-approbation, greatly contributes
to our enjoyment; nor can we be deprived of a tranquil and happy mind, while we
reverence the dictates of conscience. Do as thou would be done unto, is a
precept which should early be impressed upon the heart; and they, whose actions
coincide with this copy will ensure a permanent reward. While I continued at
Mrs. P's. a billet was handed me from my aunt Noble, which was written, as she
expresses, from her bed of sickness and distress. This begged my immediate
attendance upon her: But being convinced it was nothing more than a return of
her old disorder, I felt no inclination to hurry myself; and accordingly
deferred my visit until the afternoon; when going to the house, I found her
below, and at her favorite amusement, cards. This was, however, a matter of no
surprise to me, for I had frequently known her while at Trenton, to keep her
bed, send for her minister and doctor, and in less than an hour after they had
left her, come down stairs, apparently in her usual health, and devote the
whole day to the card-table. She pleads in excuse for this indulgence, her
indisposition and difficulties; and to smooth the brow of a gloomy imagination,
plunges deep into error; nor does she ever enjoy herself but in ceasing to be
reasonable; for such those surely are, who can never be happy but when thus
employed. The Deity has, undoubtedly* designed us mutually to contribute to the
happiness of each other; and the love of society is strongly imprinted upon our
hearts. It is a tie, which properly enjoyed, leads to the most refined
pleasures. By this social intercourse, our ideas become enlarged, the torch of
knowledge is lighted, and we derive a gratification, superior to every idle
amusement. But that mind must indeed be peculiarly vacant, which can never be
at ease, unless engaged in scenes of dissipation; we require some moments for
reflection which we cannot enjoy in a round of company.

-- There is a time
For those whom wisdom, and whom nature charm,
To steal themselves from the degenerate crowd,
And soar above the little scene of things:
To tread low-thought vice beneath their feet,
And sooth their throbbing passions into peace.
Thomson's Seasons. May it be our study to conquer the whims of the heart,
before habit rivets them upon us. Let us aim to live agreeably to the dictates
of reason; for a dereliction from this will render us truly miserable, while an
attention to her uniform voice, will fix us firm as Atlas amidst the storms of
life.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER LXX.
Philadelphia.
THE anxiety I experience for my friends, prevents me from partaking in that
current of happiness, which is now overflowing the ambitious imagination of
Mrs. Leason and Laura, from the anticipated connection with Mr. Gibbins. Yet
notwithstanding my painful sensations, I am obliged to decorate my expressions
in the livery of gaiety, to dissemble my feelings however difficult the
undertaking. Deception in this respect, is a double duty which I owe to the
friendship and health of Fanny; but it is impossible always to conceal my
feelings, and she frequently discovers the uneasiness of my heart. Her
solicitous friendship, adds a jewel to her virtues, and reflects redoubled
luster upon her actions. I keep, as far as possible, every painful event from
her knowledge, and the frequent letters she receives from her lover and
brother, are also written in a style of gaiety. There being an established
post, from this place to Pittsburg, we often have an opportunity of hearing
from our friends, though several weeks have elapsed since we received any
information. This causes the most distressing ideas to haunt my imagination.
Forgive me, Maria, if I indulge a gloomy propensity. Inclinations which we
rather encourage than repress, are quick in their growth.

This city is full of mirth and dissipation, yet I cannot become interested in
the pleasures which encircle me. Fatal premonitions deprive me of even the
comforts of hope; but I will not trouble you with the gloom of my heart.

Your brother has been making provision for the two eldest sons of Mr. Henshaw,
and has written to this unfortunate man, acquainting him with his intentions. I
cannot express my regards for a man whose benevolence is thus unbounded. The
remembrance of his name, will be ever fragrant to

CAROLINE.

LETTER LXXI.
Philadelphia.
THIS letter accompanies one I yesterday received from Captain Clark, which by
your particular desire I have enclosed to you. As you expect to be in
Philadelphia within a few weeks, I send the original, knowing upon your arrival
I shall receive it from you. This will more fully convince you of the situation
of our friends, than any animadversions I could make upon it. Indeed I am not
at present disposed to correspond; no, not even with Maria!

Adieu,
Captain CLARK to CAROLINE FRANCIS.
October 4 th.
YOUR last letter, while it evinces your friendship, I confess gives me pain,
by the discovery of your anxiety. You must not suffer the situation of a
soldier to impede your happiness. Captain Green, upon his return from
Fort-Washington, told me he had given our letters to a dispatch which left that
sort for Pittsburg; from thence they will be immediately forwarded to
Philadelphia, by my friend Mr. T. I wish this letter could picture to you a
more agreeable prospect than my last; but my anticipation in that, respecting
the pea vine, our principal dependence for the support of our horses, etc. and
all the herbage of the country, except long sour grass, and decayed leaves, is
now cut off: The horses are enfeebled and die daily; we had only a few bags of
flour on hand for the support of the whole army, until the arrival of the
brigade of sixty horses, with which Captain S. came; and they only brought
three days provision. On the road they met a brigade of horses, which left us
three days ago; but the badness of the road rendered still worse by the heavy
rains, had worn the horses down, and discouraged the pack-horse masters, who,
Captain S. informs, swear they will not return!

Our situation in a few days will be critically distressing, if Mr. D's agents
have no other dependence for the transportation of provision to us than the
present set of horses belonging to the army. Heaven knows the poor creatures
cannot bear but little, if any burden; and a few days or weeks, will finish the
campaign with most of them.

The Indians have taken fifty-six horses from Ludlow-Station, the night before
last. This place is between Fort-Washington and our camp. It seems to be their
adopted policy to capture our horses; and is, beyond a doubt, the most
effectual mode of preventing the expedition against the Miami towns, as our
army cannot move without horses to transport their necessary provisions and
stores. The pack-horse masters of our own camp, on counting their horses, miss
one hundred, which are also supposed to be taken by the Indians.


October 22 d.
SINCE I wrote the above, we have marched, cutting the road as we went, some
days more, others less, undergoing cold, fatigue, and hunger; for our ratios
are now reduced, until a further supply shall arrive. This has occasioned sixty
of the Kentucky militia to leave us, and the remainder swear they will not
stay, unless they are allowed their usual provisions. I shall be obliged to
leave all my baggage, except what I can carry in my knapsack, at this garrison,
as we are not to have bat-horses, and I am informed we are to advance twenty
miles further and build another fort. So be it: But it is hard to have our
necessaries scattered throughout such a wilderness as this!

We are ordered to hold ourselves in readiness to march at the shortest notice;
I expect this will be tomorrow. I have at present a most violent cold in my
head and limbs; however, flatter myself, that tomorrow I shall feel more equal
to my duty. I am indeed at present, the only Captain in our regiment, who is
well enough to do any duty. My indisposition obliges me to shorten my letter.
Caroline, you know my heart, and I doubt not will communicate my sincere
wishes, for the happiness of my friends in Philadelphia.

With respect and friendship, I am yours, etc. HENRY CLARK.




LETTER LXXII.
Philadelphia.
MY last letter from the Westward, if possible, has added to my depression.
Calypso, you know, was inconsolable for the loss of Ulysses, and all the
beauties around her only heightened her distress. Thus it is with Caroline.
Fanny, although possessing a greater command of her feelings than myself,
suffers inexpressibly by her fears. I have at present, little relish for
society; but my wish to amuse my drooping friend, forces me from home.

A few days since, we fell in company with several of those very polite young
gentlemen, who rather than give others the trouble to talk, engross the
conversation themselves. I dare say you frequently meet with those coxcombs,
whom nature has rendered vain, by bestowing upon them a likely face.
Intoxicated by their personal charms, they view, with contempt, the sentimental
and improved companion. These simple pretty fellows, are, in their own
opinions, accomplished characters. Having acquired a few compliments, and
plundered the dictionary for the most labored expressions, they arrange them
into unintelligible sentences, to which they affix a few oaths, as an
additional eloquence to their discourse, imagining themselves equal to the most
celebrated philosophers; they soar into the ethereal space for their
expressions, and leave a common understanding, at a loss for their ideas.

I soon took my leave of this company. The cheerful fire side of Mrs. Leason,
is far preferable to the conversation of such triflers. Visiting is designed as
a relaxation to the mind; and we seek entertainment abroad, that we may indulge
those social feelings, inherent in our nature. Agreeable society mutually
improves the understanding; but the vague prattle of the coxcomb, can never
enlarge the ideas. Vanity is said to be peculiar to our sex. Is not this a
sentiment born of prejudice, and nursed by a partial imagination? Vanity is
invariably the companion of an empty mind; and an intercourse with the world
certainly exhibits as many vacant heads in one sex as in the other; nor is
beauty less destructive to the understanding of the gentlemen, than of the
ladies.

I am sincerely yours, CAROLINE.

LETTER LXXIII.
Philadelphia.
WILL you believe me, Maria, the bearer of your last letter, Mr. Trevers,
pretends to a violent passion for your friend. Let not this information impress
you with an idea of my being vain. I am sensible we often mistake attention for
love; but if the most languishing expression of the eye, the most passionate
language of the tongue, and the most assiduous conduct, denote affection, the
youth feels the pang. It seems, Maria, you have been saying many civil things
of your friend, and he acknowledges he meets me preattached. Why did you not
also tell him of my engagements? but even this, I apprehend, would not have
discouraged him; for I find he is so much in love with himself, that he will
not easily be brought to believe, any can be indifferent to his charms.

As you ask my opinion of him, I will heartily acknowledge, that to me, he
appears to be one of those empty-headed youths, who are destitute of intellects
sufficient to entertain you for a single hour. Notwithstanding he has knocked
his head against the walls of a college, and taken the tour of the States, he
has not acquired sufficient understanding to render himself agreeable; nor
would all his property, for he tells me he is "Heir to a great estate,"
compensate for the vacuum in his brain. In company he has a trick of playing,
incessantly, with the chain of his watch; to render more obvious, I conclude,
many expensive trinkets annexed to it.

I asked him, a few days since, if he was fond of reading, and offered to lend
him some entertaining authors, in hopes of losing a few of his morning visits;
but in his great gallantry, he replied, at the same moment squeezing my hand
with the most imaginable fondness, that "My company was vastly to be prefered
to so insipid an employment;" and that four years hard study at college, had
sickened him of books. What a gallant youth have you introduced to me! He has
had an entertainment since he has been in this city, and I am told, set the
tables himself; and that he is really accomplished in this business. Such an
husband might be very useful upon these occasions: But the man to whom I give
my hand, Maria, must have an understanding, infinitely superior to what I can
pretend. A mind fettered with ignorance is unfit for social happiness, and
shall never command the heart of

CAROLINE.

LETTER LXXIV.
Philadelphia.
AN accident, yesterday, brought me into the company of Eliza. I had engaged to
accompany a little party to a tea-house, seven miles from town. When we
alighted we were told the house was crowded; but that a party who had dined
there, were preparing to return; and that this room should be reserved for us,
if we would for the present step into a small one adjoining it. This room was a
passage to that in which the company was. We had not been long seated, before
several gentlemen and ladies passed through it, who being acquainted with our
party, insisted we should join them. To this they cheerfully agreed. Our
addition to their society giving them new spirits, they proposed to pass the
evening and have a dance. I had been with this company but a short time, before
Eliza, with two other ladies, entered the room. I resolved, however, not to
render the evening painful to my friends; but, as they had made the excursion
for pleasure, to suppress feelings which involuntarily occur, when I consider
her as the cause of my wretchedness.

In the party in which I was, I felt secure from her malice, whatever the
dictates of her heart might suggest. Music was accordingly procured, and your
friend, Mr. Trevers, solicited me to engage myself as his partner for the
evening; but having uniformly discouraged his attachment to me, I refused to
comply with his request, by pleading a previous engagement. Unfortunately he
obtained Eliza for his partner, and was placed the next couple to me. This gave
him frequent opportunities of discovering his gallantry, which induced him to
say many soft things to your friend. These I would fain have considered as
unmeaning sentences often repeated to us without design to make impression upon
the mind; but so much did I engage his attention, that he was deficient in his
politeness to Eliza, and frequently repeated to her the passion he experienced
for me.

Mr. Helen, the gentleman with whom I had the happiness to dance, was in his
person elegant, in his manners accomplished, while virtue appeared to elevate
his mind and invigorate his imagination; and the evening passed in the
indulgence of that innocent gaiety which delineates the features of youth. I
could not, however, feel that tranquillity I should have experienced had Eliza
been absent. Fanny's health did not permit her attending us: Her indisposition
deprives her of many gratifications; but she shines in the hours of sickness,
and has a disposition sweetly submissive to the will of heaven. When Hygeia
shall forsake my cheek, and the pallid messenger of incurable disease denounce
the irrevocable decree, may I feel that resignation which is so striking in my
friend.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER LXXV.
Philadelphia.
IT is in vain. I find I cannot get rid of my lovesick Damon; he is the most
persevering lad I ever knew. I imagine he flatters himself, that if he could
obtain my hand, my heart would soon follow; but love must be free. The
affections cannot be forced. Perhaps he is indifferent to the acquisition of
the heart, and is only solicitous for the person of your friend. I believe he
thinks, that the service of plate, which he has taken peculiar care to acquaint
me he has making in this city, and for which he even wishes my taste, with the
elegant house his father is now building, together with a superb carriage which
is is nearly completed, will finally tempt your friend. But I am resolved not
to sacrifice my happiness to pride. All these things have their influence, I
shall have no objection to shining in an elevated situation with the man I
love, nor of experiencing a few wants with him who shares my sincere
affections. Are these sentiments worthy of Caroline?

Mr. Helen has politely called upon me. He increases upon an acquaintance. I
dare not say half I really think, of this charming young man. He insensibly
engages the heart. Be under no apprehensions respecting Captain Evremont: My
affections are not diminished for him.

This letter will be handed you by your brother, who can give you every
information of*

CAROLINE.

LETTER LXXVI.
Philadelphia.
I AM flattered, Maria, with the friendship of Mr. Helen. His understanding I
esteem, and his sentiments reflect an honor upon his education. Time glides
imperceptibly in his society. I am improved by his visits. Attached to the
company of the ladies, he frequently passes an hour with us. He is indeed a
contrast to Mr. Trevers. In the one, we discover the ignorant, but haughty
youth; proud of his wealth, despising the opinion of the world, laughing at
every moral sentiment, addressing you in a language replete with indelicacy,
entertaining you with his intrigues, his riches, and himself. His conversation
is indeed a repetition of egotism, painful to a delicate ear, and disgusting to
a virtuous mind. The other, exhibits a manliness of sentiment, and a purity of
judgment, which secures the approbation of the sensible and refined: He boasts
not of his possessions or merits, but unfolds a heart adorned with virtue, and
purified with knowledge. Having associated with the amiable of our sex, he is
our advocate and friend. That he may obtain a companion for life, whose virtues
shall immutably secure his happiness, is the wish of

CAROLINE.

LETTER LXXVII.
Philadelphia.
IN the bosom of friendship I seek that consolation the world cannot bestow.
How full the measure of my wretchedness! -- Read the following: --

From this moment I relinquish the flattering idea of a connection, which, in
imagination, has produced such scenes of future happiness. Your duplicity
evinces you unworthy my affection; and although it is hard to divest myself of
feelings I have long encouraged, I am resolved to take the final leave of an
object unworthy of my heart. In this determination, I feel the struggle of a
sincere affection. I reluctantly pursue a conduct, which nothing but the
indubitable proof of your deceit, could induce me to adopt. My very particular
friend, Mr. L. who was lately upon a party with you, and witnessed your
behavior, and the attention you then received from your rival lovers, has
given me the information. Had it not come from him, I should have suspected the
truth; I should not have believed you capable of trifling with a man, who has
thus uniformly demonstrated his attachment. I will not, however, look back to
fancied felicity, to encounter my present feelings; it is necessary to suppress
every recollection of the past. You have long since been convinced, that it was
not a mere sentiment of tenderness which actuated my bosom, but an affection
refined and elevated by that show of virtue which I flattered myself you really
possessed; and which my partiality prevented me from discovering was, the vague
drapery of an unworthy mind. From this moment I will endeavor to banish from
my heart, forever, the loved image of Caroline. (...) will take a final adieu
of an object which I falsely, hoped to call my own* I will forget those sweet
ideas unmingled with a vicious passion, and if possible, rise superior to my
present depression; yet I cannot close my letter, without repeating my wishes
for your happiness, and cautioning you against deception. The character of a
coquet is truly despicable. Trifle not with the feelings of your present
lovers, but early decide your choice. Treat them with candor, and believe a
generous mind will be more strongly attached by an open behavior. Once more, a
long, a final adieu.

WILLIAM EVREMONT.


In the above letter, I trace the malicious disposition of Eliza. Free from the
unjust aspersions cast upon my conduct, conscience does not impeach my
behavior. Had Captain Evremont been present, I am certain he would have
approved my actions. I require some friend to advise with, in my present
situation! A brother to interfere in my behalf! To whom shall I apply? It is
necessary to make some inquiry of Mr. L. that I may know if he will acknowledge
such a letter! I cannot myself appear in the affair! Mr. Helen is my friend,
but not my lover! He is generous! He is sincere! Will it be proper to interest
him in my cause? Consult your mamma; she will consider me as her daughter, and
advise me as such. Let me receive your immediate reply. I cannot relinquish my
partiality, nor suffer my conduct to be reproached. This is an important moment
to your unhappy friend,

CAROLNE.

LETTER LXXVIII.
Philadelphia.
I THANK you for your attention to my last, and shall, in every instance,
follow the advice of your mamma. I have made Mr. Helen my confident. He is the
only person in this city, who knows the situation of Caroline. I plead to Fanny
and Mrs. Leason, for the depression of my spirits, an indisposition of body.

Mr. L. is unfortunately from home, but is expected in town tomorrow. Every
delay adds to my wretchedness. The sincerity with which Mr. Helen engages in my
behalf, renders his friendship an acquisition. I am convinced of your interest
in my afflictions, and that your friendship would induce you to lessen my
sufferings; but, Maria, I am peculiarly wretched.

Adieu, CAROLNE.

LETTER LXXIX.
Philadelphia.
MR. Helen has called upon Mr. L. He disavows any knowledge of this affair, and
has written to Captain Evremont upon the subject, by the post. This will surely
convince him of the deception.

To his letter I have added an account of the party in which I met Eliza,
reminding him of all her plans against me; and I flatter myself to erase
prejudices excited by her malignant spirit. How have my days been shaded! Even
those moments allotted to amusements are tinged with sorrow. The being,
possessed of a mind restless for revenge, fabricating mischief, and aiming to
blast the little buds of pleasure, which now and then present themselves in the
desert of life, is alike an object of our pity and our fear.

I am impatient for these letters to reach Captain Evremont. May no
circumstance impede their way. While I suffer in his opinion, my mind is far
from ease, my heart a stranger to joy.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER LXXX.
Philadelphia.
WHEN I peruse the lines dictated by the friendly hand of my loved Maria, my
imagination presents her, possessed of health, possessed of happiness; for
which I cast my eyes to heaven, with a heart warm with gratitude, and in the
most fervent ejaculations, thank the beneficent Dispenser of every blessing,
and solicit their continuance. That mind alone, which is warmed with the
delightful sensations which friendship inspires, can realize the bliss I feel.
Were it not for these frequent tokens of your affection, I should sink beneath
the weight of my afflictions. I flatter myself soon to hear from Captain
Evremont. I almost wish the hours rolled more rapidly. The wheels of time never
appeared half so dilatory; and with my poetic friend I am disposed to exclaim,

"Whirl fast around, ye radiant globes of light,
Roll on ye hours, add rapture to your flight
Till he returns, then stop the wheels of time,
In one fair morn, eternal and sublime."
Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER LXXXI.
Philadelphia.
IN answer to the flattering sentiments with which your last is introduced, I
can only observe, that your partiality and politeness are equally apparent. The
many encomiums you are pleased to bestow upon me, have no claim upon my vanity;
a consciousness that they are not merited, but originate from the friendship
you have so long evinced for me, will ever operate as a repellent against the
baleful influence of a vain imagination.

You complain of the shortness of my letters. I have been, and continue to be,
too anxious to correspond.

Fanny has received a letter from your cousin; he is appointed Brigade-Major to
General Hill. I sincerely rejoice with her in the pleasure she experiences upon
this occasion. Nothing can surpass the emotions of a feeling mind, when it
bursts the seal of a friendly epistle. They are indeed joyful messengers, which
mitigate the painful separation of kindred souls. It is the anticipation of a
letter from Captain Evremont, which enlivens my dreary prospects. I feast upon
this solacing reflection; it animates my torpid mind. The attentions of Mr.
Helen, would, if possible, make me forget my wretchedness; but the wound of my
heart, Maria, cannot early be healed.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER LXXXII.
Philadelphia.
EMERGED, my dear Maria, from the first impressions of my distracted mind, I
fly to my pen. The melancholy accounts from the western army have involved me
in unutterable distress. While nourishing the pleasurable anticipation of a
reconciliation with Captain Evremont, I was unmindful of the dangers to which
he was exposed, and totally unprepared for the distressing event. The object
upon which I fondly placed my expectation of future happiness, to whom I looked
for protection and advice, is far removed from me. Insupportable idea! He has
left the world alienated from Caroline. I cannot lisp, but in the most feeble
accents, the bitterness I feel. Can my exhausted nature sustain so severe a
stroke! My eyes are dim with sorrow; a universal langour is diffused throughout
my frame. The tear which often relieves the troubled mind, is congealed; the
pearly drop is petrified. I am inadequate to the offices of friendship. Gladly
would I pour the balm of consolation into the tortured mind of Fanny, but I am
incapable of every soothing attention; and if I attempt to evince my sympathy,
my expressions faulter -- every face is marked with the signature of sorrow.

My friends, Captain Gardner, Clark and Green are also among the slain. Yes,
Maria, they fell equally distinguished by their bravery and honor, and
universally regretted for their united virtues. But I will, for the present,
leave the melancholy subject.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER LXXXIII.
Philadelphia.
MY distress must apologize for the neglect, in my last, in not participating
with you in behalf of your cousin, whose name, I am told, is upon the list of
the wounded. My hand trembles while I write -- my mind shudders when I recall
the distressing scene -- every pleasing expectation is inactive -- my situation
is, beyond idea, wretched -- all hope is fled. Had I been deprived of Captain
Evremont, previous to the late fatal conduct of Eliza, I should have had a
consolation to which I am now a stranger. To suffer in the estimation of those
we love is distracting to our reflections, and increases the wounds of the
heart. Your cousin is, I find, left to regret the loss of his particular
friend, General Hill. This defeat alike involves the affectionate parent -- the
wise beloved, and the amiable sister in the most complicated distress. The
throb of anguish, now tears the parental breast -- many of whom are mourning
for an only child. The most torturing ideas will corrode the happiness of
disconsolate widows; while sisters and friends, justly partial to the merits of
the deceased, will mingle the tears of affection and sorrow. The delicate
situation of Fanny's health, if possible, adds to my distress upon this
melancholy occasion.

Those who discover the violence of their grief by strong expressions, or great
agitation, sooner recover from affliction, than those whose silent sufferings
prey upon their spirits, destroy their health, and frequently render them
victims to their misfortunes. This I fear will be the case with my dear Fanny.

The bullets which know no distinction, in this defeat, have destroyed the
flower of the army. I am anxious to be acquainted with the true situation of
our surviving friends, and often spare a sigh for the loss of my country.

While adversity pursues your Caroline, may it sublimate her virtue, and raise
her far above the uncertain fruition of earthly pleasures.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER LXXXIV.
Philadelphia.
I HAVE received a letter of condolence from your cousin. It is tender and
sympathetic. He observes, there are no reflections to imbitter the recollection
of Captain Evremont, as he died like a soldier, and was, he flatters himself,
instantly translated to the realms of bliss. It affords peculiar satisfaction,
that he was not left upon the field of battle to encounter the last pangs of
dissolution, with the additional sufferings of savage torture, but that he
received a sudden translation from earth to heaven. These reflections prevent
many distressing ideas, which would result from an apprehension of his having
been left without a friend, exposed to insult, cruelty and distress. Yet my
bosom labors with its weight of sorrow.

His letter expresses a very sensible regret for the loss of Mr. Gardner, and
his highly esteemed friend, General Hill.

May this unfortunate day, stand unparalleled upon the historic page.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER LXXXV.
Philadelphia.
CONVINCED that Maria will be a participant with me, and that the plaintive
voice of unfeigned sorrow, will deeply interest your heart, I have frequent
recourse to my pen. It is a luxury thus to unbosom my affliction.

What adverse storms await me! What unnumbered accidents mar our felicity!
Those sweet moments which blessed me with the society of my friend and lover, are
gone forever; they cannot be recalled: But although the vital spark has ceased
to animate his decaying body, and his limbs are now stiffened by the hand of
death, I look, with pleasing expectation, to that period, when our kindred
souls shall meet in the region of uninterrupted felicity, to renew our
friendship, and never part. Oh, balmy hope! what a sweet ingredient art thou in
the cup of life! Your cousin's letter to Fanny mentions, that Captain Green,
having discovered the most undaunted bravery, received a wound in his hip,
which rendered him unable to stand; and as no attention was paid to the wounded
veterans, he was left, when the army retreated, with many unfortunate deserving
men, sitting upon the way-side, encouraging them in their retreat.

My friend, Captain Clark, notwithstanding he had been engaged through the
whole battle, in the early part of which he received a wound in his ancle, was
shamefully left to cover the retreat of the flying army. Having tied his
handkerchief over the wound, he returned five miles from the spot upon which
the engagement commenced, when, grown faint with loss of blood, he begged his
men to hasten on without him, and as he must die, insisted they should not
expose their lives upon his account; but at this instant a horse was obtained,
and as his friend was assisting him to mount it, a ball, commissioned by
heaven, ended the life of a real soldier. No weeping connexions attend the
body, to pay the last sad offices of humanity. No tolling bell announced the
melancholy event; but, with many brave men, he lies exposed to the insult of
every barbarian. Scarcely can I support the coloring with which my imagination
paints the sufferings of my friends. The frequent letters of Maria will be
necessary to strengthen the gloomy mind of

CAROLINE.

LETTER LXXXVI.
Philadelphia.
RECEIVE, my dear Maria, my sincere and grateful acknowledgments, for that warm
participation, you so feelingly express, in your last letter, for myself and
Fanny. The present painful event, has indeed involved us in real afflictions.

Though the loss of friends is ever painful to the feeling and sympathetic,
there are circumstances which mitigate these unavoidable afflictions, and
certainly it is no inconsiderable one, to be allowed, by heaven, to contribute,
though but in the smallest degree, to the comfort of their departing moments,
to receive their last injunctions, and to pay the respect due to their memory.
But these pleasing, painful gratifications are denied upon the present
affecting occasion, and the bodies thus dear to the recollection of congenial
friends, are not only fallen a sacrifice in a distant country, but have become
the plunder of the savage tribes, from whom we cannot expect less than
barbarity and abuse. Could I select the melancholy remains of those departed
heroes, and deposit them in one friendly vault, then would I indulge the luxury
which would result from moistening the sacred sod, and guarding it against the
rude feet of disrespectful intruders. But, alas! every friendly office is
denied; and were it not for the fragrant reflection, which alone perfumes the
gloomy mind, that the soul, that superior and immortal part, is fled, far
beyond the former confines of its solitary prison, and is beyond the reach of
mortal resentment, we should be encircled with an impenetrable night, and
pierced with such additional arrows, as would convey incurable poisons,
contaminate every enjoyment, and canker every social pleasure. But this idea,
illumes the mental hemisphere; it lessens the affliction.

There is, indeed, an additional satisfaction, that although by a lively fancy
we can picture their distress, yet the truth, if corresponding with those
piercing images of our afflicted mind, is, with us, a matter of uncertainty;
and the real sufferings which they have undergone, are concealed from our view.

Most sensibly do I feel the present stroke. Yes, Maria, it will not look to
you, who have so often heard my sentiments of my friends while living, as
affliction decorated in the language of unmeaning flattery, but as the genuine
sprouts of a real regard, which have grown spontaneous in the warm bosom of
friendship.

Since the first moment of my acquaintance with Captain Evremont, I have
acknowledged myself his friend. My partiality may possibly magnify his merits;
but I am confident I give him no more than his due, when I say, few possessed
minds better formed, or sentiments more strictly consonant with integrity,
bravery, and honor. In private life, he was particularly distinguished, by
those virtues which form the basis of a real friend; and as his ideas were
delicate and refined, I was ever happy to receive his approbation of my
sentiments, valuing it as the evidence of their worth. As a soldier, I can add
no encomiums: Public fame echoes from every quarter his praise; and the
monuments, upon which will be enrolled the names of many brave and valiant,
will evince to future ages, the obligations of their country, and the general
regret, which the unhappy event produced.

Fanny's indisposition has increased, since the unfortunate accounts of the
western army: May heaven give her strength to sustain the present affliction;
for without the interposition of an overruling Providence, many surviving
friends must sink beneath this distressing event.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER LXXXVII.
Philadelphia.
WHEN encircled with pleasures, and in the pursuit of happiness, we forget that
the arrows of affliction may pierce our hearts, and suddenly destroy the
enthusiastic structures which are too often reared in a juvenile fancy; but
should the distant prospect deceive us, and our ascent to the flowery temple of
that sickle deity, fortune, prove difficult, and disappointments in rapid
succession obtrude upon us, our most favorite amusements become insipid, we
lose our taste for the society of our gay associates. Yes, Maria, in the sable
hour of affliction, religion is alone able to support us; and although we may
have slighted her serious admonitions, while captivated with success and
dissipation, we now solicit her meliorating influence.

Fanny's anxiety for a destitute sister, and the helpless offspring of a
bereaved brother, deeply affects her sympathetic breast -- she is urgent to
return to Havre-de-Grace, that she may personally exert herself to support them
under so severe a trial. I have solicited her to continue a few weeks longer in
Philadelphia; and upon the promise of accompanying her home, obtained her
consent.

I flatter myself your cousin will soon be with us: His long absence renders
her impatient to see him. What distressing scenes has he endured since he last
bid adieu to my friend! Within a few weeks, how many of our gay companions have
been snatched from all their fancied honors, and their immortal souls wafted
to another world! How many, thoughtless of the sad event, now sleep in
eternity, instead of gathering the laurels of fame, and retiring to the
plaudits of their friends and citizens! What a large portion have made the
unalterable exchange! To what cause shall we attribute this unexpected defeat?
May he who has hitherto directed our battles appear for us, and, if our cause
is just, grant his future aid and presence.

Adieu, CAROLINE

LETTER LXXXVIII.
Philadelphia.
NEXT Tuesday is appointed for the celebration of Laura's nuptials. My mind is
too much pervaded with disquietude, to share with Mrs. Leason and her daughter,
upon this pleasing event. Not only the loss of my friends has cast a veil over
my enjoyments, but the situation of Fanny's health, gives an additional
dejection to my spirits -- my heart, indeed, is insensible to the pleasing
vibrations of mirth. Attuned to sorrow, it cannot feel the joy of the family:
But I am not unmindful of the blessings I yet experience. No, my dear,
ingratitude shall not intrude upon me, for if it is the blackest crime, which
can discolor human actions, its malignity must be infinitely augmented, when
indulged against heaven* What are the riches, the honors, the amusements, and
the pleasures of life, if we are deprived of feelings to enjoy them! If we
ourselves, are experiencing indisposition, or if those who are endeared to us
by the most affectionate ties, linger with pain, and are daily consuming with
irremediable disease!

My whole attention is devoted to my declining friend. I have the misfortune to
see her continually drooping, with a disorder which has hitherto baffled the
skill of our physicians. The sensations which inhabit my bosom upon this
occasion are past description.

A late military commander, has arrived in this city. No sumptuous cavalcade
escorted him hither; no applause and glory echoed forth his bravery; no
honourary torch is lighted to denote his praise, nor is he received with
acclamations of joy. The friends of those unfortunate men who were wounded in
the first of the battle, and left to cover the retreat of the army, will long
retain a lively recollection of the error: Nor will the most plentiful draughts
of Lethe, obliterate the deed. Many reflections have been cast upon certain
characters among us, by whose immediate influence, it is thought the present
war has been thus rashly pursued. These reflections may finally terminate in
the entire loss of their now declining popularity.

I need not tell you how much I love you, nor how ardently I desire to welcome
you to Philadelphia.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER LXXXIX.
Philadelphia.
EVERY thing is preparing for the marriage of Laura. They are to leave this
city for Carolina, a few days after the ceremony is performed. Mrs. Leason has
agreed to resign her house, here, and pass the next summer with her daughter.
They are indeed quite elated with their present prospects. I sincerely wish
they may not be disappointed; but Mr. Gibbins is an entire stranger in this
city, nor have they informed themselves of his real situation or character. In
an action which involves the happiness of future life, too much caution cannot
be observed. Dazzling appearances should not bewilder the reason; for although
we may be seated upon the silken sopha, or roll in the gilded carriage,
happiness may be a stranger to the mind. Cheerfulness is often expressed in the
features, while anxiety corrodes the heart. But the conduct of our landlady and
her daughter, speaks a language contrary to experience. It expressly declares
they have nothing to fear from a connection with a man of money. It will enable
Laura to indulge her fanciful disposition, to ornament her person, and consult
her looking-glass; to command a carriage, and to be gratified by an external
parade. These are the summit of her wishes. She certainly will not care how
little she is troubled with the insipid society of a husband; this indeed would
be ridiculous. These, Maria, may be the fashionable arguments of the polite
world, and such is the force of fashion, that we are frequently obliged to
submit to its powerful voice; for unless we are subservient to the mode of the
times, we must prepare for the derision of our well bred companions. Thank
heaven, however, I am not yet contaminated: My feelings have hitherto been my
guide, and by their decision, I hope to have sufficient virtue, to direct my
future conduct. I shall then never marry merely for a support, but feel myself
peculiarly happy, when business and inclination shall bless me with the society
of my husband. Old fashioned as these ideas may be, they are not less the
sentiments of

CAROLINE.

LETTER XC.
Philadelphia.
LAURA's nuptials were celebrated at Christ's Church on Tuesday morning; since
which, the house has been filled with company, in joy of the event. Fanny and
myself were voluntarily secluded from both. Hearts depressed with affliction,
cannot relish the flush of festivity. The feelings, attendant upon virtuous
sadness, elevate the mind, far above that unmeaning gaiety, in which the world
is too often involved.

They will leave us next week. My best wishes attend them. It is true, I have
not passed the walk of life so far as Mrs. Leason, but from infancy, having
been exposed to misfortune, observation has necessarily been enforced upon me,
I have seen the most promising connexions disappointed, and dread the event of
those matches which have money alone for the foundation of domestic felicity.

I am rendered extremely uneasy, by the situation of Fanny. She rides every day
when the weather will permit; but the season is unfavourable to her. Never did
her eyes emit a more delightful effulgence, than at this moment. Her
countenance is suffused with the most expressive grief; her whole soul rises
into view, and the natural softness of her features is increased. Yet with
submission she sustains affliction. Unite with me your petitions for her
recovery.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER XCI.
Philadelphia.
FEW, my dear Maria, have been called, so early in life, to experience such
severe misfortunes as your Caroline. Deprived of my parents, before I was
capable of knowing my loss; left a destitute orphan dependent upon the
benevolence of a few connexions; in early life, habituated to severity, and
greatly neglected in my education, until I happily fell into the hands of my
uncle Franklin, of whom Providence shortly saw sit to deprive me, though not to
reduce me to former dependence, and to add to the catalogue of my sufferings,
Eliza has been permitted to persecute and cruelly to injure me. Her
persecutions have involved my particular friends in insupportable distress, and
finally deprived me of my much loved Lucretia, whose death consigned to the
silent tomb, a father and a husband.

These reflections alternately force themselves upon my mind; and as our
happiness in life, depends upon that of our friends, my pleasures have ever
been impeded. The social, benevolent, and sympathetic, partake in the sorrows
of each other. Sympathy and benevolence are among the pleasing signatures of
the human heart; and he who is divested of them, must indeed, be a Misanthrope.
Agreeable connexions, greatly contribute to our enjoyment of life. Many are the
tears I have shed, at the idea of being without a relation capable of directing
my youthful steps. But heaven has hitherto supported me. May I yet be enabled
to encounter the difficulties which await me. I remain immutably the sincere
friend of Maria.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER XCII.
Philadelphia.
THE unfeeling conduct of Mr. Gardner, to his deceased unfortunate brother, is
so strongly impressed upon the amiable Fanny, that she cannot suppress the
silent tear. It insensibly steals down her languid cheek, and I fear she will
fall a victim to that exquisite sensibility she so largely possesses, and sink
with the weight of her affliction to the grave. Repose has fled her couch: Her
pillow is wet with the dew of sorrow, and exhausted nature finds no relief from
momentary slumbers. I frequently remind her, that although the present
dispensations of Providence are enrolled in darkness, we must not murmur; that
afflictions are to prepare us for superior happiness in a better state of
existence; and that they are necessary to disengage us from a world, to which
we should probably be too much attached. "Far from my heart, Caroline," says
she, "is every repining thought; but the commands of the Deity to those in
affluence, force upon my afflicted mind. Are we not expressly forbidden not to
harden our hearts, or shut our hands against our brothers, but to open wide
unto them, and to lend them sufficient for their need, in that which they want,
lest they cry unto the Lord, and it be a sin against us? This is a duty
strongly impressed. We are told we shall surely give unto them; and that our
hearts shall not be grieved, when we give unto them. The reward is affixed to
the fulfillment of the duty, and for this the Lord thy God shall bless thee in
all thy works, and in all that thou put thine hand unto.

"This sacred volume enforces it upon us to remember them that suffer in
adversity, as being ourselves also in the body. But how widely has my brother
deviated from the commands of heaven, which forbids us to be covetous. Man's
life consists not in the abundance of things which he possesses. The miser
says to himself, I will pull down my barns and build greater; there will I
bestow all my goods. I will say to my soul, thou have much goods laid up for
many years; take thine ease, eat, drink and be merry. But God, displeased at
the breach of confidence placed in him, speak with a voice from heaven, thou
fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee; then whose shall those
things be, which thou have provided? My affliction, Caroline, arises from many
causes, nor do I wish to be deprived of feelings I have long nourished. I
regret that a tender concern for objects of distress has never softened the
breast of my brother; for upon the benevolent and virtuous tempers of the
heart, does our happiness in life greatly depend: To be devoid of feelings, is
to be reduced to a state of barbarism."

The force of these observations cannot be denied. Were mankind actuated by a
similar disposition with Mr. Gardner, how would society become involved in acts
of inhumanity. On the contrary, if the savages of our country were civilized
and refined, we should not experience the present scenes of cruel desolation.
Let us, therefore, anticipate the pleasing period, when knowledge shall be
diffused throughout the uncultivated forest, and the inestimable charms of
social life shall actuate the breast of its inhabitants, and cement them by
mutual acts of friendly intercourse.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER XCIII.
Philadelphia.
LAURA left this city some days since. The confusion in which the family have
been involved, by the wedding, preparations, etc. has kept me three weeks a
prisoner to my room. I am become quite an invalid.

Mr. Helen's attention attaches me to him. He insists I shall have the advice
of a physician. But medicine will not heal a bleeding heart. Time only can
restore tranquillity. While in the present abyss of affliction, I am not to be
amused by delusive images of future happiness. I am absorbed in the
contemplation of my loss -- a loss aggravated by the unhappy circumstances
which preceded it. Yet I will not seclude myself from the pleasures of society
and friendship. Here ardent, and susceptible hearts, derive a satisfaction
which cannot be defined. In the presence of our friends, the tumultuous
passions subside; the care-worn mind is lulled by the sweetening intercourse.
It enjoys a momentary repose; and while it is amused with the adventures of
youth, it is taught experience by the lessons of age. In the friendly circle,
the attention is diverted from those turbulent scenes of folly, which too often
engage the mind; and a placid tranquillity favorable to the gentle virtues,
secure our most refined enjoyments. It is not our duty to indulge a desponding
temper. Submission should ever mark the christian character. Yet it is hard to
relinquish the objects upon which we had placed our prospects of future
happiness. The unfortunate Mrs. Gardner, has been deprived of her reason, from
the first moment the fatal information of her husbands death reached her; and
her friends fear the delirium rather increases than subsides. This must be an
additional affliction to her unhappy family.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER XCIV.
Philadelphia.
MR. Helen has been absent a week; and I will acknowledge to Maria, that I feel
the loss of his society. Habituated to his condoling language, I am even
sensible of impatient moments. That sincerity he evinces for me, that
benevolent, friendly, and affectionate attention he has observed to my
happiness, insensibly attaches me to him. I am charmed with his unaffected
manners. Alive to the gentle emotions, the tender sentiments of humanity, his
mind aspires with every laudable principle, and his soul is exalted by a
superior worth. How does my friendship, for him, soften my sensibility! It is
this which actuates my mind. Without the pleasures, which are derived from
friendship, existence would be dull and irksome. We should be devoid of those
exquisite enjoyments we now experience; we should feel a vacuum not to be
supplied. But this gives energy to life.

Your friend, Mr. Trevers, continues to visit me. I sincerely wish his mind
more enlightened, his manners more pleasing. He intends soon to leave us; and
has urged me to accompany him to Long Island. Earnestly as I desire to see
Maria, my heart cannot assent to a separation from Fanny, while she is thus
indisposed.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER XCV.
Philadelphia.
YOUR cousin came upon us by surprise, although we had expected him several
days. I wrote him a few lines last week and mentioned the situation of Fanny,
requesting him, upon his arrival here, to acquaint me with it, previous to his
calling at Mrs. Leason's, that I might prepare my friend for an interview,
which I apprehended would sensibly affect her; but this letter did not reach
camp before he had left it, and unfortunately he met Fanny in the entry as she
was passing to the carriage, which was in waiting at the door. I shall not
pretend to describe their sensations. There are certain scenes, which must be
felt to be realized; among these is the pleasure of embracing the object of our
fondest wishes, after a painful separation, and those only who experience a
pure affection, who exist but in the felicity of each other, can realize the
rapturous moment. True love is not an illusion of the mind; it is a passion
which, by brightening the prospect of human life, increases the happiness of
its votaries. The bosom of my friend was agitated with joy and sorrow. The
return of her lover from a dangerous excursion, recalled the loss of an
affectionate brother, and their meeting was silently expressive of a sincere
affection. Mr. Belmour had entertained no idea of the ill state of Fanny's
health; and the langour, which indisposition had spread over her countenance,
impressed him with a thoughtfulness which he could not banish. Hard did he
struggle to conceal the rising tear. Those who could have been indifferent to
so affecting a meeting, must be without claim to tenderness. I regret that your
health obliges you to defer your visit, having long embosomed the darling
expectation of seeing you in Philadelphia. I know not how to relinquish the
fond idea; be strictly attentive to yourself, and, as soon as you are able,
hasten to

CAROLINE.

LETTER XCVI.
Philadelphia.
YOU think the heart of Caroline in danger; and that, under the idea of
friendship, she is encouraging affection. I doubted not a pang of jealousy
would seize you, when you read my late acknowledgment. "It may," you say,
"possibly be, that I may find a lover, where I expected only a friend." However
lively this anticipation, I cannot consent to deprive myself of an agreeable
companion, nor have I the vanity to believe that Mr. Helen has the most distant
idea of a connection with me. His attentions arise from that amiable goodness of
soul, which uniformly adorns his actions. Considering me as an unprotected
woman, he kindly steps forward, as a brother, to advise me; but be assured, it
is only friendship which actuates him. That he is my friend, I have every
reason to believe; I am flattered with his partiality; I am grateful for it; I
thank you, however, for your caution, and will endeavor to keep a watchful eye
upon my heart. I am also aware of the sentiments of the world, who immediately
style attention, courtship; nor am I ignorant with what avidity, fancied
connexions are circulated abroad. You say, "From the character I have given you
of Mr. Helen, you acknowledge there is little danger that he will exercise any
advantage from the discovery of my partiality; although it is possible he means
to gain my affection, previous to a declaration of his attachment." Be assured,
Maria, I shall never discover the sentiments of my heart, in a way which shall
lincense him to assume upon it; nor do I think him capable of pursuing a
conduct so replete with vanity, so degrading to the honor of my sex. No, my
dear, upon the discovery of danger, I will imprison my affections, and reserve
the power of refusing him, who would thus render me contemptible to myself.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER XCVII.
Philadelphia.
"Night, sable goddess! from her ebon throne,
In rayless majesty, now stretches forth
Her leaden scepter over a slumbering world.
Silence how dead, and darkness how profound!
Nor eye, nor listening ear, an object finds:
Creation sleeps" --
THIS solemn pause of busy life, I improve to address my friend, who,
doubtless, before this, is locked in the arms of sleep. May your slumbers be
undisturbed. May angels protect your pillow, while Caroline enjoys, in idea,
your security and happiness. The universal stillness which at this moment
prevails, gives an additional pensiveness to my feelings. Secluded from the
noise and bustle, the cares and dissipation of the day, I can, without
interruption, enjoy my contemplation. In this my retirement, I can lisp my
gratitude to that ineffable being, by whose immediate eye I am preserved from
every danger; and while I implore his paternal care, I am not unmindful of my
friends.

Fanny is now sleeping by me. I flatter myself she rests more serenely than she
has for some time past. Her cough is obstinate; nor are her other symptoms less
alarming. You, my dear, who have been called to attend the dying pillow of
tender friends, can feel for my sufferings. When I consider the critical
situation of Fanny, who, I fear, will soon be taken from me, I can scarcely
support the reflection. To see those who are in the bloom of youth, snatched
from the enjoyments of life, and consigned, by the cruel spoiler, to the
untimely grave, is peculiarly affecting; yet these instances frequently occur,
and we daily see the ravages which relentless death makes among us -- "Breaking
the thread of an elegant affection," and disuniting the nearest friends; but I
pray heaven long to avert the blow, and yet to spare the friend and the
companion of my heart: If, however, it is otherwise decreed, may I be enabled
to say, thy will be done. The gravity of this epistle, though it would discord
with a vague, and a fashionable mind, I am convinced will beat in unison to
that of my friend, with whom retirement and reflection has a captivating power.

My affection to your cousin, is enhanced by his attention to my declining
friend. He has brought with him the pocketbook, journal, and sword of the late
Captain Gardner; these he has delivered to my care. I shall forward them by the
first private conveyance, to his amiable widow.

The watchman now proclaims the midnight hour, and nature, which is easily
exhausted, begins to want repose; I will, therefore, wish you a good night, and
indulge her just demands. But while my senses are confined in sleep, may my
dreaming fancy be similar to Maria's.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER XCVIII.
Philadelphia.
THE unjust aspersions which have been cast upon the character of General Hill,
have greatly added to the affliction of your cousin. It is, however, his
resolution at the risk of his commission to vindicate the reputation of that
brave deserving officer. Since his arrival, he has addressed a letter to the
unfortunate widow, in which he offers to produce indisputable evidence, to
prove the conduct of her deceased husband uncensurable. His conduct must be
replete with the most grateful sensations to an afflicted widow, sufficiently
involved in distress by the loss of an affectionate husband, without the
additional tortures of unmerited reflections. May heaven grant him success in
the undertaking. The consequences may be anticipated. It is surely a very bold
step, for so young an officer to dispute the official accounts of his General;
but should he be arrested, and, which is too often the case, finally made a
sacrifice to men in power, as he is not dependent upon his commission for his
existence, I feel assured, that spirit of independence, which now marks the
investigation, will be his support.

The late defeat of the western army, bears a striking analogy to that at
Ticonderoga, in 1777; nor was the rapid flight of the army at that place, less
destructive, nor the fate of General Hill dissimilar to that of the brave
Colonel F. who was left, alike unsupported, while his commander fled six miles
from the scene of action! But history is the accuser, and distant generations
will be the judges, at whose tribunal the actions of public characters will
receive their decisive sentence. A single error in the life of a great man, has
frequently destroyed the monument of his fame. A uniform attention to justice,
is the only foundation that can render him secure. Happy they who pass through
life, enjoying the blessings of society, without being exposed to the dangerous
eminence of popularity. Few are capable of sustaining an elevated situation,
with approbation. Such is human nature, that, if suddenly raised to honor, it
is prone to assume, unmindful of the capricious disposition of fortune, who
takes delight in persecuting her greatest favorites; they fancy themselves far
removed from the reach of envy, and look down upon their fellow citizens with
disdain and contempt. May we not thus address these characters? "Measure your
shadows, and you will find no addition to them" by your present honors.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER XCIX.
Philadelphia.
MR. Helen's visits are so constant, and his attentions so particular, I am at
times induced to believe our friendship will terminate agreeably to the
prediction of Maria; but great as my present partialities are, I should be
disgusted with an immediate declaration of his attachment. Some time must yet
elapse, before I can consider even Mr. Helen as my lover. Former prepossessions
are not so soon to be effaced. I feel the loss I have sustained, with too much
poignancy; nor can I suddenly relinquish the fond remembrance of Captain
Evremont. "Friendship," you say, "is a tempting theme, and gratitude a powerful
advocate with a susceptible mind. A frequent intercourse with a man whose
sentiments and taste are pleasing, may finally ensnare the heart of Caroline,
before she suspects the danger."

Your observations are just, and I assure you of my obligations for your
watchful care. Continue to guard my conduct, and to warn me of my danger.
Shaded as my days have been with persecution, I have never been left without a
friend, who has aimed to beguile the vicissitudes of my life. May those
sweeteners of human existence ever be continued to me, and in the list of
friends, may Maria Belmour conspicuously appear.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER C.
Philadelphia.
SINCE the death of Captain Evremont, my company, I suspect, has been too grave
for Mr. Trevers; his visits have been less frequent, and much shorter than
before. I do not, however, repine at the loss.

Should he remain much longer in Philadelphia, I shall become acquainted with
all your gallants; he has already introduced several of his friends to me. At
every interview, I am entertained with his history. He gives me, unasked, the
account of the company in which he has been, the superb tables at which he has
dined, the names of all who were present, the compliments and attention, which
were particularly paid to him. This conversation, though truly uninteresting,
politeness compels me to hear.

What think you of a young husband for the gay Mrs. Leason? A gentleman who
arrived some weeks since from England, and boards with us, really pays her
great attention. At present, I will not call him her lover. He might have been
an acquisition for Laura, but I cannot think him calculated for the mother.
Cupid, thou mischievous little urchin, how artfully, how imperceptibly do
thou take possession of the heart, frequently rendering reason subservient to
thy cause!

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER CI.
Philadelphia.
BY the public papers, I doubt not, you are acquainted with the situation of
your cousin, who has been several weeks under an arrest. The evidences he has
produced against certain characters, have occasioned his being ordered, by the
Secretary at War, nine hundred miles from home, for a trial!

Is not this a violation of the rights of freemen? A glaring usurpation of
power? Can the country, which so lately contended against illegal authority,
passively submit to such an absolute trait of despotism? Is not the precedent
alarming? and unless timely suppressed, may it not terminate in the destruction
of liberty? Those whose actions will not bear the scrutinizing eye of justice,
are suffered to retire from their official departments, while the reputation of
a brave, an amiable officer, is sacrificed to misrepresentations, founded upon
private pique, or secret resentment.

How cruel are the aspersions, cast upon the conduct of General Hill! They
extend their inhumanity to a deserving family, who, while they suffer the loss
of a protector, have also to struggle with the addition of unmerited reproach
-- the just objects of our misfortunes are protected by the wings of greatness.

When the historian, who shall transmit to future ages, the melancholy event,
and pen the disgraceful tale, what apology shall he make, for a conduct so
reprehensible? If to the relation he should add the evidences of a Dark and a
Gaither, will not the name of Belmour, be rendered conspicuous, who, regardless
of the vindictive arm of power, that could crush his military glory, dared thus
to justify the character of his deceased friend?

His trial may be ordered in the wilderness, far distant from his friends; his
future rise in the army may be suppressed; but not even the voice of greatness,
can destroy his honor, bribe his determinations, or silence his pen. With my
best respects to your mamma, I am your sincere

CAROLINE.

LETTER CII.
Philadelphia.
MRS. Leason is in great affliction. She has received a letter from Laura,
acquainting her with the failure of Mr. Gibbins, and the total loss of his
property. Being deeply concerned in speculation, he is deprived of his fortune
by the failure of several brokers in Charleston, with whom he had entered into
large contracts; and in his absence his whole property has been attached by his
creditors, and he, with his family, obliged to take private lodgings.

This unexpected event, has thrown the old gentleman into a dangerous state of
ill health. His physicians give but little hopes of his recovery. I am
sincerely affected at this information. How suddenly are the prospects of Laura
changed! From the fancied scenes of indulgence, from the gay circles in which
she expected to flutter, to poverty, retirement and pain: Yet these are
contrasts which human life daily presents.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER CIII.
Philadelphia.
YOUR friend, Mr. Trevers, will take his leave of Philadelphia tomorrow. He
has figured much among the ladies in this city, and will be missed as a
gallant. Observe his manners -- tell me if he is improved. His father, he
informs me, wishes him to adopt some profession; and as he has had a liberal
education, proposes he shall study the law; but study he cannot abide; he is
indeed too indolent to pay attention to any thing but the ladies; and they
truly inspire him. If he is calculated for a polite circle, it is where the
conversation seldom exceeds the raging fashion, and trivial inquiries supply
the place of better observations. I doubt if he would make a graceful orator.
Methinks I see him at the bar. Half a dozen hems succeed every expression. His
words are destroyed by the peculiar delicacy with which they are uttered, while
his hands, unformed for grace, now fix his cravat; now pull down his waistcoat.

He is impatient to become a married man. Much shall I pity the lady with whom
he is connected. If she possesses sentiments similar to my own, she must indeed
be wretched. He will truly be a fashionable husband. Ardent as his first
attachments may be, he cannot long relinquish his favorite pleasures; and
unless she is a fashionable wife, her happiness will be sacrificed to his
darling amusements. But such there are, who are most gratified, when separated
from each other. A lady, educated in a vortex of amusement, has little idea of
any happiness, but that which results from a round of dissipation. Her mind is
employed in new plans of decorating her person; and when connected with a man
of correspondent taste, they form a fashionable pair. In a short time they are
disgusted with the society of each other. They pursue separate gratifications;
seldom passing an hour at home together; and if they chance to meet in company,
are civil to each other: But this, she does not regret.

Such a woman is best calculated for your friend, Mr. Trevers; but happier
they, who pass through life, enjoying the superior blessings of a sincere
attachment. May this happiness be the lot of Maria and

CAROLINE.

LETTER CIV.
Philadelphia.
MRS. Leason has really consented to give her hand to Mr. King, the gentleman I
mentioned to you in a former letter. The day is even fixed for the wedding; as
he is soon to return to England, and cannot think of leaving his Dulcinea,
until he has secured her as his own. Mr. King has the appearance of a
gentleman; his person is pleasing, and his manners graceful; but he is
infinitely too young for my landlady; I am indeed astonished at them both.

Mr. Helen has finally disclosed his sentiments to me, and proposes a
connection. I believe the young man caught the flame, from the constant love
scenes he has lately witnessed. I suppose you think you already know my mind,
and the answer which I gave him; but believe me, Maria, the sentinels of my
heart were not asleep. No, my dear, they were too frequently aroused by my
severe injunctions, not to adhere to their duty. They have been faithful to
their trust, and I have not yet given him a decisive answer. He will this
evening call upon me. How does my heart palpitate at his anticipated visit! I
am communicating my secrets because I am assured you will feel for

CAROLINE.

LETTER CV.
Philadelphia.
MATTERS are all adjusted, Mr. Helen must be considered my lover. What says
Maria to this? Is the memory of Captain Evremont already sunk in oblivion? Can
Caroline, who boasts such delicacy of sentiment, already forget her deceased
friend? No, my dear, a review of his virtues renders his recollection pleasing;
my bosom is their sacred repository; this thrills with the most pensive
satisfaction; and the recollection of his partiality for me, although cruelly
interrupted in the last moments of his existence. As a memento of my uniform
attachment, I will cause a monument to be raised, on the base of which shall be
represented, upon one side, an urn, which shall be supposed to contain the
ashes of my friend; over which two Cupids shall hold a cypress wreath;
immediately under the urn, shall be displayed the fatal trophies of war; while
the figure of a female, shall be seated under the friendly shade of a weeping
willow, in a melancholy attitude, pointing to a number of angels that will be
seen above. The urn shall be inscribed to friendship, bravery and virtue. Upon
the opposite side of the base, an urn, guarded by the goddess of Friendship,
shall represent the sacred remains of my dear Lucretia; while a figure, whose
countenance, replete with every malignant passion, and whose eyes shall emit an
insatiate revenge, shall hold in her hand, a dart, which she is aiming at the
bosom of a female who stands weeping over the remains of her friend. At one end
shall be engraven, in capitals, Suppress every emotion of revenge. On the
other, To the memory of Thomas Barton and Henry Williams. This voluntary
oblation will I pay to the manes of those I so tenderly loved; and this shall
stand the evidence of my attachment, when I shall mingle with my kindred dust.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER CVI.
Philadelphia.
MR. Helen will leave me, in a day or two, for Virginia; he expects to be
absent several weeks. Fanny is very solicitous to accompany him: But although
she is surprisingly better, she is totally unfit to undertake so long a journey
at such an uncertain season of the year. This idea, with the impossibility of
her affording a delirious sister the smallest consolation, tends to reconcile
her to continuing longer in Philadelphia; although she is anxious to wipe the
tear from the cheek of weeping innocence.

How is our happiness continually receiving fresh alloys from the afflictions
which await our friends. Dependent as we are, upon a variety of accidental
causes, we are continually exposed to disappointment, anxiety and pain; and the
higher we estimate the society of our connexions, the more are we exposed to
real sorrow. The uncertainty of our present blessings, and the pleasing
reflection, that we are in the hands of him who cannot err, will tend to
reconcile us to the events of life. Let us improve the fleeting moments. May we
endeavor to secure an internal satisfaction: This will sustain us through the
loss of property, the deprivation of friends, or the lingering hand of sickness.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER CVII.
Philadelphia.
SINCE I last addressed my friend, a strange incident has taken place. I have
already acquainted you that Mr. King being soon to sail for England, had
hurried the proposed connection. The evening had arrived, the company assembled,
the minister every instant expected, when a loud knocking at the door, was
supposed to announce his arrival; but this proved a letter to Mr. King; and the
bearer requested to see him in private. Soon after, Mrs. Leason was called out
of the room. Here unfolded a scene, to which all description is inadequate; and
of such a nature, that it could not be communicated to the disappointed
company. A messenger was, however, instantly dispatched, to acquaint the
clergyman that the wedding was deferred; and the company were told, by a
particular friend, that for certain reasons, which could not then be divulged,
the wedding was postponed. Various conjectures arose, in the breasts of all who
were present, but none could solve the real cause. For several days, I was
myself a stranger to the true circumstances, until, by repeated importunities,
I prevailed upon Mrs. Leason to entrust me with the secret, when she gave into
my hand the following letter:

London.
MR. James King, the young gentleman I take the liberty to introduce to you, is
the natural son of our mutual friend the late Captain John Leason, who, for
many years, sailed from Philadelphia in the London trade. His father upon his
arrival here, soon after his birth, appropriated the interest of a certain sum
for his support and education, and appointed me the guardian of this youth.
Pleased with his natural abilities and manly sentiments, I have paid particular
attention to my trust; and as he inclined to the mercantile business, I took
him into my counting house, and since he has been of age, into partnership with
me. He has been taught to consider himself an orphan, and has ever been called
King; but knowing your attachment to his deceased father, I thought fit to
communicate a secret to you, which I never before disclosed to any person. He
is on a visit to Philadelphia, and, if he finds it agreeable, intends to
establish a house in that city; but his stay will be short, as matters of
consequence render it indispensibly necessary that he should be in London in
June. If he can possibly find leisure to visit you, I have enjoined it upon
him, and any attention shown to him will be gratefully acknowledged by your
friend and humble servant, etc.


This letter, it appears, upon his arrival, he forwarded to Connecticut, and
upon the receipt of it, the gentleman to whom it was written, sent a pressing
invitation for Mr. King to pay him a visit; to this polite and friendly
request, he returned for answer, that a multiplicity of business, and the
pleasing connection which he was about to form with a widow Leason, together
with his being obliged to return immediately to England, put it out of his
power. Upon the receipt of this, his friend was alarmed, and immediately wrote
by express, to prevent the marriage; in which letter he enclosed the above. The
timely moment of their arrival was, indeed, a happy circumstance.

Mrs. Leason is much affected at the event. The attachment she felt for Mr.
King when she considered him as her husband, must be very different from that
filial affection she must now experience. Mr. King was born two years before
the marriage of Mrs. Leason. This, with the affection which she retains for her
deceased husband, strongly attaches her to his son. However the above story may
resemble fiction or romance, be assured it has made too deep an impression upon
my heart, easily to be effaced.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER CVIII.
Philadelphia.
FANNY and myself, coming from church on Sunday last, were addressed by a young
gentleman to whom I was a stranger; but in such a familiar way, that I was soon
convinced he was an old acquaintance of here is. He gallanted us home. When we
reached Mrs. Leason's, with an air of indifference, she passed upon him the
compliment of walking in. This invitation he readily accepted. She now
introduced him to Mrs. Leason and myself. I found, by her unusual reserve, that
he was not agreeable to my friend. From his conversation I discovered he had
been absent three years; and had but just returned to America. In the evening,
Mrs. Leason wishing me to visit a particular friend, proposed my going with
her. To this I agreed, and we left them, promising to return in a short time.
But the hours, in agreeable company, pass with great rapidity; and we had
lengthened our visit far beyond our intention, before we were aware of the time
we had been from home. Yet upon our return we found Mr. Ashely with Fanny.
Immediately upon my entering the room, I discovered his agitation. I had a
strong propensity to be acquainted with the history of this young gentleman,
and as soon as he withdrew, applied to my friend for the circumstances of their
first acquaintance.

"Mr. Ashely," said she, "belongs to Maryland; but was educated with an uncle
in Havre-de-Grace, and has, for many years, foolishly encouraged a partiality
for me. This I have invariably assured him I cannot return. His friends,
alarmed by the consequences of my obstinate refusal, have repeatedly interested
themselves in his behalf. My own connexions were for some time desirous that I
should encourage his attentions; but my heart has uniformly disavowed every
favorable sentiment for him; and I have constantly declared it impossible ever
to be his; yet he has persisted to encourage his unhappy attachment -- I have
been wretched by his persecutions. At length his friends, convinced I could not
be brought to consider him as a lover, ceased their importunity, and advised
him to avoid my company. I also assured him, unless he could resolve never to
mention a subject so painful to me, it was my determination to seclude myself
from his society, and never to see him more; but if he would visit the family
as a transient acquaintance, he might rely upon my treating him with every
civility; and that on this footing alone, he must in future expect to meet me.
After this he became negligent of his business, which increased the uneasiness
of his friends: They urged him to take a voyage to India; and his uncle made
him such proposals as induced him to accede to their wishes. From this voyage
he has just returned, and accidentally has discovered my being in this city; he
has already renewed the declaration of his passion; I must therefore deny
myself to him; and if unfortunately I should fall into his company, I must
entreat you never to leave me alone with him."

It is unhappy for Mr. Ashely that he cannot give up a woman who entertains not
a partial sentiment for him. I regret that he has discovered her being in
Philadelphia, and shall exert myself to prevent every interview between them.
Such a troublesome swain as this young man, I sincerely hope will never fall to
the lot of Maria or

CAROLINE.

LETTER CIX.
Philadelphia.
IT appears to be the determination of Mr. Ashely, at all events to obtain the
hand of Fanny. He has been several times with me, soliciting my influence with
her; and assures me his whole happiness depends upon it. This accomplished, he
thinks nothing could impede the pleasures of future life. I have endeavored to
impress upon him the necessity of his relinquishing the idea, as she is
absolutely engaged to another; and that this alone, would be a bar to every
prospect of a union with him. "Absolutely engaged to another," said he, "where
is the enviable man?" I replied, gone to visit his friends. "If this is to
prevent my further application, know, Madam, that I shall not so easily
relinquish the object of my warmest affection. Life, without Fanny, is
insupportable. Werter could not exist when Charlotte was beyond his reach. I
will have one more interview with her -- beg her to grant this last request,"
Fanny, said I, has been many months deprived of health; I wish rather to
relieve her mind from every uneasy thought, than add to her anxiety by an
application which must be painful to her. Nothing favorable can result from
the interview.

He walked the room in great agitation; and presently seating himself at the
table, wrote a few lines which he desired me to give her. Unwilling he should
think that I influenced her, I rung the bell for the servant, and sent her up
stairs with the billet. To this she returned for answer, that he was well
acquainted with the sentiments from which she had never deviated, and must be
excused complying with his request.

He now came toward the fire, and taking from his pocket the Sorrows of
Werter, he turned to a page where this sophistical reasoner, fallaciously
argues in favor of suicide; and reading it exclaimed, "My sentiments, oh
Werter! are strictly consonant with thine. Life without the object of my
wishes, would be a void." You cannot, said I, justify a conduct so
reprehensible as Werter's. A conduct, which uniformly demonstrated a weak, and
wicked mind. Consider that Charlotte was a wife; consequently he could have no
expectation of honorably obtaining the object of his wishes. Was it not his
duty to crush every idea of a criminal attachment? Instead of which, he glories
in the wicked indulgence of an impious passion, and ever stands ready to commit
the most atrocious deeds. He imposes no restraint upon his inclination, but
deducing his arguments from the most absurd causes, he endeavors to justify a
conduct fatally erroneous. Trace his extravagant behavior, and it will
evidently appear, that caprice, pride, and passion, are the principles which
govern his actions. By no means, Mr. Ashely, said I, encourage the ideas of
that writer. It is exposing yourself to the immediate precipice of destruction.
"Make him," said he, "what you please; sophistical, fallacious, vile; upon his
arguments I am willing to depend for my future happiness." When he had said
this, he was greatly agitated, and left the room. Believe me, at this moment
every sentiment of my heart beat for the unhappy situation of the deceived
youth.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER CX.
Philadelphia.
MR. Ashely yesterday addressed a few lines to Fanny, again soliciting a short
interview with her in private. If she will grant this request, he declares he
will forever cease to distress her with his importunities. She showed me the
letter, and wished me to direct her conduct; observing, that "The meeting could
be only a painful repetition of her former assurances. He can have nothing new
to communicate to me," said she, "I regret his unhappy partiality. It is a
painful reflection, that I am, though involuntarily, the source of his misery.
But by granting his request, is it not probable I shall strengthen his
attachment? I will, however, leave the decision to my friend."

Having considered the circumstances, and consulted with Mrs. Leason, we
agreed, that nothing pleasing could result from another meeting, and joined
with Fanny in the impropriety of granting it; she therefore wrote the following
reply.

Sir,
I can by no means consent to gratify your request. You can have nothing to
communicate to me, which can justify a private interview. The subject upon
which we have frequently conversed, is to me painful; let me entreat you never,
again, to mention it. My present engagements, united, with my unalterable
determination, induce me to entreat you will avoid my society. Absence, reason,
and perseverance, will in the end, produce indifference. Pursue this conduct,
and you will finally conquer your unhappy attachment. And that the best of
heaven's blessings may be yours, is the sincere wish of

FANNY GARDNER.


This letter she sent in the morning. In the afternoon, as Fanny and myself
were sitting in the parlour, with Mrs. Leason and a young lady from Lancaster,
who boards in the family, Mr. Ashely was introduced into the room by the
servant: He had a smile upon his countenance, yet appeared discomposed; an eye
of surprise was alternately cast at each other; our astonishment must have been
visible to him. Possessed of great assurance, he placed himself next to Fanny,
and soon took an opportunity of expressing his doubts of a future existence;
observing, that mind must be pusillanimous indeed, that could consent to drag
out a wretched life, when one instant would put a period to misery. "A period
to misery," said Fanny, "you may indeed terminate the life of the body, but the
soul, Mr. Ashely, is immortal, and must suffer an eternity of bliss or woe. We
are here upon trial; a certain time is allotted us; the number of our days is
unknown; and at the tribunal of our Maker, we shall be accountable for our
actions on earth. There the decisive sentence will be passed upon us -- a
sentence, from which there is no appeal. We have within, an unerring monitor,
which dictates our duty. Its dictates we cannot mistake. Its injunctions are
not to be violated with impunity, any more than the laws of society are to be
broken without punishment. Can he whose conduct is marked with sacrilege, who
rushes into eternity with a heart opposed to the sacred character of an
offended Deity, seriously expect the forgiveness of an angry God? Or must he
not tremble to meet the supreme Judge of all, who will banish him from his
presence, and consign him to everlasting misery!" "A future existence," replied
Mr. Ashely, "is uncertain; and if true, I have no idea of a never-ending
punishment. It is inconsistent with the benevolence of the Deity; nor would a
life passed in the most atrocious crimes, on a retrospect, add one thorn to my
expiring moments."

With such sentiments, it is not surprising that he should advocate the right
of taking away his own life, whenever it becomes irksome to him. How
destructive such principles to human happiness! How derogatory to reason,
philosophy and religion! I tremble for the event. Fanny is undoubtedly right,
in refusing a man she cannot love. A young lady is not to be answerable for the
conduct of a rash, unprincipled youth; nor is she obliged to sacrifice the
happiness of her life, lest her lover should blow out his brains, or swallow a
dose of poison. For the present,

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER CXI.
Philadelphia.
MR. King has sailed for London, but intends to return in the fall.

Mrs. Leason has received a late letter from Laura, which mentions, that Mr.
Gibbins has entirely lost the use of his limbs. She wishes much to return to
this city; but there is, at present, no prospect of it. Mr. Helen and your
cousin being absent, we are quite without gallants.

Maryann Gay, the young lady who boards at Mrs. Leason's, tells me she was well
acquainted with you, while you were in Philadelphia, and desires me to assure
my friend, she still retains a friendship for her; she is a lively, agreeable
girl, and though by no means a regular beauty, has a captivating expression in
her countenance.

Fanny has had a relapse, and is at present extremely ill. This return of her
disorder, I attribute to the anxiety of her mind. She cannot but feel alarmed
at the sentiments of Mr. Ashely. He is our daily visitor; but as Fanny has not
been below since the afternoon I mentioned to you, nothing further has passed
between them. I am convinced she cannot reflect upon herself for any part of
her conduct; but her ill health, renders it indispensably necessary, every
anxious thought* if possible, should be suppressed. The watchful eye of
friendship, shall be exerted to render her happy.

It is some time since I had a letter from you; I am uneasy lest your disorder
has returned. If unable to write yourself, request your mamma to honor me with
one line, that I may know how you are. I can never be free from inquietude,
while ignorant of the health of Maria.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER CXII.
Philadelphia.
YOUR brother-in-law, Mr. Herv^y, upon his arrival in this city, waited upon me
with your letters. I am happy you are so far recovered, and flatter myself you
will soon be able to meet me here. Believe me, until the arrival of your
letters, I was totally unacquainted with the connection likely to take place
between Maryann and Mr. Hervey. Had I realized she was to be the sister of
Maria, I should have been assiduous in cultivating a friendship with her;
though her numerous engagements, since she has been in this city, and the
indisposition of Fanny, would in a measure have retarded it. From this moment,
however, I shall improve every opportunity to make her my friend.

I am distressed with the continual applications of the unhappy Mr. Ashely, to
intercede with Fanny, for but five minutes private conversation with her. When
he has been gratified in this point, he promises to quit her for ever. I have
been finally obliged to assure him of my influence if he will wait a few days,
until she recovers. He embraces every opportunity to read me some paragraph of
his favorite author, which he always carries about him. How are the literary
talents of this writer prostituted, in the encouragement of the most atrocious
crimes! Must not the just indignation of every virtuous mind fall upon him? In
this heart of man, vice shoots spontaneous; we need not hale poisonous
sentiments, to encourage its rapid growth. The soil is luxuriant; to suppress
and prune the rising sprouts, has required the utmost vigilance of the moralist
in every age and country.

Neither sublimity of composition, an energetic and affecting style, nor the
false appearance of argument, can ever compensate for the injury that vague
minds receive, from the perusal of those publications, where suicide is
represented as heroism; nor can the writer of the Sorrows of Werter, ever make
atonement for the injury he has done to society.

Mr. Ashely is greatly to be pitied. Having connected all his ideas of
happiness with the darling hope of obtaining fanny, he disregards every other
consideration. Thus foolishly are we, through life, fixing upon certain
objects, from which we fancy we shall derive our future pleasures; and making
our happiness entirely dependent upon them, we expose ourselves to unnumbered
calamities, unmindful that a single moment could destroy our prospects, and
whirl us to the abyss of sorrow. My heart glows with friendship, and my
benediction ^^aits Maria.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER CXIII.
Philadelphia.
I FEEL uncommonly dull. Our parlour, not long since the region of love, where
I fancied Cupids in every corner, is now deserted by all but Mr. Ashely; and he
avails himself of every opportunity to urge the fulfillment of my promise. This
morning, while we were at breakfast, he entered the room; an uncommon agitation
was visible in his countenance. After a little apology for his intrusion, he
walked about for a considerable time without speaking; at length coming to me,
he inquired after Fanny, and wished to know if she was well enough to be seen.
She has had a tolerable night, said I, but I have not yet mentioned your wishes
to her. Turning from me with disgust, he went to the table, and taking out of
his pocket, pen, ink and paper, wrote the following:

To FANN GARDNER, the lovliest of her sex.
Most adored of women,
In vain have been all my efforts to forget your charms. An absence of three
years has only increased my affection. I am convinced I can never live without
you; yet I cannot consent to die, until I once more see you. One private
interview is my last request; pity my distracted situation, and grant my only
hope."


This he gave to the maid, ordering her to carry it to Fanny; who returned with
a verbal message, that she would give an answer at four in the afternoon. He
instantly left the house without speaking to Maryann or myself. I immediately
hastened up stairs to my friend. She showed me the billet; but being at a loss
how to advise her, I made no reply. Never did I experience more painful
sensations, than at this moment. The mind of Fanny can never be changed; but
Mr. Ashely is so strenuous for an interview, I do not know how she will refuse
to see him. That heaven may direct her, is the wish of

CAROLINE.

LETTER CXIV.
Philadelphia.
GRACIOUS Deity! What a scene will this letter unfold to Maria! Be prepared for
the dreadful recital of my uncommon misfortunes. Yet how shall I disclose to
you that calamity in which I am involved! The relation of the sorrowful tale
cannot, however, be dispensed with. The awful hand of death has arrested from
me my Fanny -- my companion, my friend. A dreadful tragedy has been acted since
I wrote you last. Mr. Ashely -- detested name -- himself the murderer of the
object he adored! Excuse me, I am lost in grief, horror and amazement. I must
wait a composed moment -- at present I cannot write.

I will endeavor to explain the history of my woe. I will not thus give way to
suggestions of despair. At the fatal hour, Mr. Ashely returned to know the
determination of Fanny. I was sitting in the chamber with my friend, when the
girl came to acquaint her that he was below. She requested that he might be
asked up stairs into the drawing room; where, in expectation of company, a fire
had been kindled, and went herself immediately into it. I had a book in my
hand, and in vain endeavored to read; being seized with a universal horror. In
a few minutes the report of a pistol, like a severe shock of electricity,
deprived me of my strength; the firing was instantly repeated; Mrs. Leason and
the family were alarmed; and running up stairs, opened the door of the drawing
room, when a spectacle presented, which reality only can give a just idea of.
For some time, every exertion I made to rise was in vain. The general, the
piercing scream, which immediately succeeded the opening of the drawing room
door, convinced me Mr. Ashely had committed the act of suicide; but I had no
idea, that he had also taken away the life of my friend. I still sat waiting in
expectation that Mrs. Leason would come into my chamber; until the trembling
which at first seized me had a little subsided. At length I arose, and going
toward the chamber door, opened it; when I had a full view of Fanny. She was
leaning back in an arm chair; the blood profusely poured from her wound;
nothing can ever efface the impressions the horrid sight has made upon my mind.
Mr. Ashely had fallen upon the floor by her side, and was also covered with the
crimson fluid. My power of action was lost; my ideas suspended. Mrs. Leason
came to me; she led me to a chair; the neighbors were already alarmed; the
house was crowded.

The bleeding, mangled shade of the amiable Fanny, is continually before my
eyes. Our house is one constant scene of horror. Oh, Maria! how does frail
humanity need consolation, when beset with affliction! The anguish of my soul
is inexpressibly severe.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER CXV.
Philadelphia.
SEVERAL days have passed since the distressing event. I have repeatedly
endeavored to write, but my senses are stupefied with grief, and with the
opium, which I have been obliged to take in large quantities, to obtain a
little repose. I will now attempt to continue the narrative of the dreadful
scene. A jury being summoned, it appeared, upon examining the papers of Mr.
Ashely, particularly the following letter, that he was determined, since Fanny
refused to give him her hand, she should never become the wife of another.

3 o'clock, P.M. Dear Jack,
IN a little more than one hour from this, the fate of your friend will be
irrevocably decided.

You need not be told the source of my misfortunes. You already know, that I to
easily yielded to the sweet impressions of love. The passion, which I have so
often avowed for Fanny Gardner, has uniformly been fervent and sincere; and
notwithstanding the attention of my friends, and their exertions to expel the
fatal prepossession, I cannot conquer my affection, nor ever support the
thought of seeing her in the possession of another. The idea is distracting. I
am therefore resolved -- my determination is immutable. The pistols are loaded.
At four I expect to see her alone -- if she declares her sentiments the same as
before, I will have the sweet satisfaction of knowing, that she finishes life
with me: And if there is a future existence, I will cast myself upon the mercy
of a benevolent and forgiving God. The Sorrows of Werter is now open upon my
table: It animates my heart; it cheers my soul; it will sustain me through the
scene which I am about to act.

Remember me to yo^^ sister; tell her not to impute my conduct to distraction.
I am at this moment a calm, a rational being, resolved to live and die with my
adored Fanny. Though I cannot take you by the hand to bid you a last adieu, I
sincerely wish you every happiness.

Yours, etc.


Deluded youth! "cast himself upon the mercy of a benevolent and forgiving
God." Could he, in the cool moments of reflection, if such he ever had, suppose
that he, who with one hand destroys the life of his friend, and with the other
sends himself into eternity, shall ever receive that welcome sentence, "come ye
blessed," etc. What would be the situation of society, if crimes were
unpunished? If the murderer was secured from justice? Does not the penalty of
the laws deter from vice? Can we suppose that the Deity, who has denounced a
woe unto those who obey not his commands, will neglect to inflict the
threatened punishment? Were those his sentiments, they are fraught with error,
they are ruinous to society, and destructive to the youthful mind. Mr. Ashely
is, before this, convinced of his mistake; and could he revisit his gay
companions, he would warn them of their impending danger.

The letter, a copy of which I have enclosed to you, was a sufficient evidence
against Mr. Ashely; nor did the jury hesitate in their verdict. The next day
the law was to have been executed upon his body, but his friends privately
buried him the same evening; and Fanny was, a few days since, followed to the
silent, to the dreary mansion of the grave! While we shed over the tomb the
unavailing tear, let us stifle every rising murmur.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER CXVI.
Philadelphia.
ALAS, Maria, my countenance is pale and languid -- my heart vapid and dull. No
more shall I enjoy the pleasure of seeing her I so tenderly loved; no more
shall I press to my bosom, my distracted bosom, my companion, my friend. But
the hand of friendship shall wipe from the eye of Caroline, the rising tear;
and by the solacing attention of Maria, my soul shall yet emerge from its
present dejection.

Mrs. Leason and Maryann, kindly enforce principles of resignation. Conscious
that the moment will arrive, when anxiety shall for ever cease, when I shall be
reunited to those friends, who are now beyond my reach, I feel in a degree
composed.

I recall to mind the countenance of Fanny. In it there was a sublime harmony;
her eyes were admirably expressive of the softer passions; a natural grace, was
united with a friendly behavior; she was actuated by the most benevolent
sentiments, and studied, as far as in her power, to lessen the miseries of
human life. Possessed of great mental beauties, she was a pleasing companion, a
real friend. Though long deprived of health, she was snatched from life, in a
manner the most unexpected, and in the morning of youth. On the remembrance of
her virtues, will often flow the solitary tear.

Your brother has written to Mrs. Gardner, giving her an account of the
distressing event, and has also addressed your cousin upon the subject. As
emulation is favorable to virtue, Caroline will study to emulate the virtues
of her deceased friends.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER CXVII.
Philadelphia.
IN the delightful field of friendship, my heart has realized superior
gratifications; and though my present depression veils the pleasing retrospect,
it shall not destroy the buds which are expanding in the bosom of Caroline. I
will anticipate that meeting with my friend, to which your last letter is the
happy prelude. I will welcome you to this city, with an unfeigned pleasure. In
the society of each other we will take a review of the virtues of Fanny and
Lucretia -- they shall frequently be the pleasing theme of our conversation.

I am infinitely obliged to Maryann, for her polite attentions to me; your
brother also, has a large share of my gratitude, for the interest he takes in
my unhappy situation. Mr. Helen, in all his letters to me, has been particular
in his inquiries after Maria; and uniformly concludes with his compliments to
my friend. The uncommon affliction in which I have been involved, must
apologize for my not presenting them to you. This moment I am called to attend
my aunt Noble, who is said to be extremely ill.

Adieu, CAROLINE.

LETTER CXVIII.
Philadelphia.
IN my last, I acquainted you that I was requested to hasten to my aunt Noble.
When I entered the chamber, I found the family in tears. I approached the bed.
She was insensible, and expired in a few minutes. Upon inquiry, I was told that
she had been several days confined up stairs; but that the family had not
entertained an idea of her danger, until the night previous to their sending
for me.

Death, Maria, is a serious event. If we have no real attachment for the object
he selects, we cannot divest ourselves of feeling. How many of my friends have
been taken from me! May it remind me that I am also mortal; and enable me to
fulfill the duties of life, so as to render my memory grateful to my surviving
friends. When the virtues of the deceased live in the mind, they afford a sweet
consolation -- a consolation which cannot be derived from those
accomplishments, that too frequently decorate a newspaper character, but
existed not in reality. When the important moment shall arrive which shall
separate my immortal mind from its feeble mansion, may the pen of the
panegyrist be silent. Convinced that I have no virtues which claim an eulogium,
I wish not my tombstone to express what I never merited: But if those to whom I
have been long attached, and who, by the endearments of mutual friendship are
partial to me, wish to mark the spot which contains the remains of a friend,
let this inscription denote the grave: "The body here entombed, once possessed
a mind warmed with humanity, animated with friendship, and glowing with a
religious hope."

Since I wrote the above, I have received a letter from Mr. Helen. He expects
to reach this city tomorrow night; and proposes that Fanny and myself shall
meet him a few miles out of town. He had not, I find, received the letter I
wrote him since the death of that dear girl. I shall comply with his request,
provided your brother and Maryann will accompany me; and should Maria join our
little party, agreeable to her intention of reaching Philadelphia this week, it
will heighten the pleasure of

CAROLINE.

LETTER CXIX. MARIA B -- to HARRIOT B --.
Philadelphia.
IT is a week, my dear Harriot, since I arrived in this city, and every moment
has passed in the most distressing anxiety. Agreeably to the promise I had made
Caroline, of paying her a visit, I directed the driver of the stage to stop at
Mrs. Leason's; but having received, at New York, a letter from her the
preceding evening, I was prepared to find her from home. Here I waited, with
the utmost impatience, the return of my friend. I repeatedly mentioned to Mrs.
Leason, the satisfaction which I flattered myself would result from my visit to
Philadelphia. In the course of the evening I experienced many painful
sensations at their long stay; these increased with the advancing hours; yet I
endeavored to sooth my apprehensions, by forming some unavoidable delay. Mrs.
Leason discovering my anxiety, used every argument to quiet my fears, and
kindly endeavored to conceal her own uneasiness; but convinced that Caroline's
impatience to meet me, exclusive of every other consideration, would have
hastened her early return, had not some unhappy circumstance impeded her
wishes, it was impossible for her to dispel my anxiety: I therefore retired to
my chamber, with feelings contrasted to those I had annexed with my arrival in
this place. Here I continued till past eleven, when a carriage stopped at the
door. I instantly hurried down stairs -- The voice of my brother was grateful
to my ears. I ran to meet him, inquiring for Caroline. He took me by the hand,
and led me into the parlour -- Where is my friend? said I. He evaded a reply. I
cast my eyes upon Maryann -- distress was visible in her countenance. I
observed her turn aside, as if to conceal her tears. Mrs. Leason begged to know
what had detained Mr. Helen and Caroline -- I seconded her solicitation. "An
accident has prevented them from accompanying us," replied my brother; and
passing into the kitchen, Mrs. Leason followed. I became more alarmed, and went
immediately after them. He was sitting by the table, and Mrs. Leason was
untying a handkerchief, which was bound round his head, that she might dress
his wound. I now discovered blood upon his face. Mr. Hervey, said I, it is
impossible for the reality to be worse than my fears; keep me not thus in
suspense, let me know what has befallen Caroline and yourself. "Be not
distressed," said he, and drawing a chair near him, he requested me to sit
down. He now informed me, that in consequence of the letter which she had
received from Mr. Helen, Maryann and himself had agreed to accompany her a few
miles out of town, in expectation of meeting him; and stopping at a public
house, they called for tea; concluding, by the time it was ready, Mr. Helen
would be with them; but, having waited until dark, he proposed their returning
to town. Caroline became very unhappy; she took her letter from her pocket, and
repeatedly read it over; she scrutinized the hand writing -- compared it with
others she had received from Mr. Helen, and believed it to be his; nor would
she consent to leave the inn, until nine o'clock. At this late hour they sat
off for home; but had not proceeded far upon the road, before they were
attacked by two men; one of whom, seizing the bridle of the horses, fired at
the driver, shot him in the side, and obliged him to come from his seat; the
other went up to the side of the carriage upon which my brother was, and
presenting a pistol at him, assured him not a moment was to be delayed; that
their design was not against his life, but he must immediately relinquish the
lady who was with him. Caroline was sitting opposite to him, and seeing his
danger, gave the arm of the villain a sudden push, upon which the pistol
instantly went off, and slightly wounded my brother in the head. Maryann had
fainted at the first of the attack, and had fallen upon the floor of the coach,
where she remained during the whole scene. The villain who had wounded the
driver, led the horses to a tree, where he made them fast, and joined his
accomplice. My brother was without any kind of weapon. In vain were his wishes
to protect my friend -- she was torn from him. His attention was now called to
Maryann, whom he raised up, and acquainted her with what had passed. After
this, he made a search for the driver, whom he found too much weakened, with
the bleeding of his wound, to resume his seat; they therefore took him into the
carriage, and Mr. Hervey drove home himself.

Since this unhappy event, every possible step has been pursued to discover the
wretched Caroline -- but exertion has hitherto been ineffectual. It is
generally believed that the resentful mind of Eliza, has planned this unheard
of revenge; although it has been given out for several weeks, that she has
sailed for Europe.

I shall not fail to transmit you every circumstance which takes place,
respecting the discovery of Caroline; and flatter myself her situation cannot
long be concealed.

Your distressed sister, MARIA B --.

LETTER CXX. MARIA B -- to HARRIOT B --.
Philadelphia.
IT it several weeks since you received my last. Nothing has yet occurred
respecting the discovery of Caroline. Mr. Helen's friends, yesterday received a
letter from a physician who resides at a village a few miles from this city,
informing them that he lies dangerously ill; and requesting them, without
delay, to hasten to him. They set off this morning -- my brother accompanied
them. I am very solicitous for his return.

Several letters directed to Caroline, which have reached Philadelphia since
the misfortune that has befallen her, we have been induced to open. They were
from Mr. Helen; and mention, that unexpected business having called him to
Georgia, he should not be able to return at the time he expected. From these
letters it does not appear he had made any previous proposal of Caroline's
meeting him on his way home.

The dreadful uncertainty of Caroline's situation, produces the most gloomy
presages in my mind. Suspense is often more poignant than reality.

Adieu, MARIA B --.

LETTER CXXI. MARIA B -- to HARRIOT B --.
Philadelphia.
THE task how painful! I have to communicate to you, my dear Harriot, the
dreadful, distressing certainty of my Caroline's fate! All hopes of recovering
my friend, are now destroyed -- my consolation fled -- what keen sensations
accompany the distracting thought! Every exertion I make to suppress my grief,
swells my bosom with insupportable anguish. But I will exert myself to relate
the circumstances as I received them from Mr. Hervey, who left Mr. Helen last
evening.

It appears, that being detained upon the road, he put up at a public house in
the village, where he yet remains; and being intimate with a couple of young
gentlemen who are studying with the physician in that town, he called upon
them, and was introduced into their room. He had not long been with them,
before he understood they were that evening to dissect the body of a young lady
who had died with an uncommon disorder, and they were anxious to discover the
source of her complaints; but her friends having refused their opening her,
they had privately taken her up, and gave him an invitation to stay with them
during the operation. This he accepted. The subject was soon brought out of the
closet, and the sheet in which it was concealed untied. Mr. Helen, upon seeing
the face, discovered the countenance of Caroline. A^ an event so totally
unexpected, the seat of reason instantly became vacant; his eyes flashed with
the distraction of his mind; he flew to the body, raised it from the floor,
pressed it to his bosom, and exhibited the most frantic agonies of despair --
continually repeating the name of Caroline. His friends were finally obliged to
force him from it, and confine him, lest in his violent fit of distraction, he
should commit some outrage. Having made him secure, they returned to the
subject, and soon discovered, that the body, in their possession, was not the
one they wished to obtain. They had marked the grave, and were certain they had
taken it from the spot where their patient had been buried; yet the conduct of
Mr. Helen appeared very mysterious. Acquainted with his engagements to
Caroline, and recollecting her being forced from the carriage, with the
discovery of their mistake, they suspected the cause of Mr. Helen's affliction;
and in this they were confirmed, by his constant repetition of Caroline's name.
A violent fever soon seized him, and an express was, the next morning,
dispatched for his friends, who have no expectation of his recovery.

Upon opening the grave the next day, the coffin from which my dear Caroline
had been taken, was found; and upon removing this, the one that contained the
subject, these young gentlemen were in pursuit of, was discovered. It is
believed the body of my friend was intentionally concealed here, to prevent any
suspicions, that might arise upon the appearance of a new grave, which could
not be accounted for. No marks of violence were found upon her body, and it is
thought that she fell a sacrifice to her distress, and died with a broken
heart. Although we cannot trace the immediate authors of her death, we do not
hesitate on whom to fix as the source of this calamity. The invariable
persecutions which this unhappy girl has experienced from Eliza, will license
every conjecture. Her unrestrained jealousy, has been productive of the most
complicated distress, to an innocent, amiable woman. Her artful and revengeful
mind, has been continually creating some malignant design against her, in which
she has finally been too successful.

How dangerous such a disposition! -- how prejudicial to the pleasures of
social life! My present feelings are associated with the sweet remembrance of
Caroline's virtues. To do justice to these I am inadequate; but I will
endeavor to copy from her pleasing example, that my memory may be alike
grateful to my friends.

That her unfortunate story may enforce a striking lesson, and early teach us
to suppress every unhappy passion, is the wish of your affectionate sister,

MARIA B --.

THE END.
ERRATA to Vol. I. -- Page 37, line third from bottom, insert a semicolon after
denied, and dele it in line second, after quality. P. 38, first line, insert a
semicolon after stomach, and line second dele and. P. 68, second line from
bottom, read "love alone shall cement the gentle bondage." P. 202, line fifth
from bottom, read denotes.

Vol. II. -- Page 33, last line, read diffident (in a few copies.) (...), line
thirteen from top, read, my rank does not entitle me to a knowledge of their
business. P. 86, line seventh from bottom, read, and taking it out of my, etc.
P. 162, last line, read, familiar with Maria. P. 171, line ten from top, insert
and, after protector.

District of Massachusetts, to wit:
L.S.
BE it remembered, that on the twenty-second day of March, in the seventeenth
year of the Independence of the United States of America, BELKNAP and HALL, of
the said District, have deposited in this office the title of a book, the right
whereof they claim as Proprietors, in the words following, to wit, "THE HAPLESS
ORPHAN; or Innocent Victim of Revenge. A novel, founded on incidents in real
life. In a series of Letters from Caroline Francis to Maria B --. In two
volumes. By an American Lady." In conformity to the Act of the Congress of the
United States, entitled, "An Act for the encouragement of learning, by
securing the Copies of Maps, Charts and Books to the Authors and Proprietors of
such copies, during the times therein mentioned."

N. GOODALE, Clerk of the District of Massachusetts.
A true copy of record,

Attest, N. GOODALE.




