A SERMON, CONTAINING A BRIEF ILLUSTRATION AND DEFENSE OF THE DOCTRINES
COMMONLY CALLED CALVINISTIC.

Preached before the Charleston Association of Baptist Churches.

By HENRY HOLCOMBE, V.D.M. Pastor of the Baptist Church at Enshaw.

I have not shunned to declare unto all the counsel of God.

ACTS 20 and 27. CHARLESTON: Printed by MARKLAND and M'IVER, No. 47, BAY.
MDCCXCIII.

TO THE CHARLESTON ASSOCIATION.
Reverend and Beloved Brethren,
THE following sermon, the substance of which I had the honor of delivering
before you, as I now have of publishing it at your request, is, with great
deference and affection, submitted to your candid perusal, and under your
patronage, to that of the impartial public, by your, and their, servant in the
Lord,

THE AUTHOR.
August 30th, 1793.
Who has believed our report?

Isaiah 63 and 1.
THIS is a part of a remarkably full and clear prophecy of the Messiah. The
sacred historians scarcely write on his incarnation, life, sufferings and
death, with greater perspicuity and precision, than the evangelic prophet.
These beautifully plaintive words are quoted by the evangelist John, and the
apostle Paul, who inform us they were originally addressed to God, and had
immediate reference to Christ's rejection by the Jewish nation. By this report,
or doctrine, as the marginal reading is, taken in a large sense, may be
designed the inspired writings in general, or the whole subject of the gospel
ministry; but in the strict acceptance, it relates immediately to the scheme
of salvation by Jesus Christ, and calls our particular attention to his
incarnation, sufferings and death. The truth and excellency of natural
religion, have rarely been called in question, but who has believed the report
in contemplation? This some reject, and others still less ingenuous, wrest to
their own destruction. The preaching of the cross, or the sublime, yet
unpopular doctrine of the bible, is to them that perish, foolishness; but to us
who are saved, it is, instrumentally, the power of God. Our text implies, that
God has some faithful ministers among men, who call on his name, and are
concerned for his glory, to whom he has committed a report, or system of
doctrines, sufficiently authenticated, which they plainly, fully, and
consistently declare; and which those to whom it is addressed are bound to
believe, according to the nature and degree of evidence produced; but that,
from some cause, they are lamentably incredulous. These propositions compose a
foundation, on which might be shown the characteristics of gospel ministers,
the contents of their report, the evidence of its authenticity, the motives
inducing a declaration of the whole divine counsel, the nature, kind, degrees,
grounds, use, objects of, and obligations to faith; together with the causes
and consequences of unbelief: But your time on the present interesting occasion
will not admit, and my feeble talents are very unequal for the consideration of
these important things at large. I shall only attempt, as the Lord may assist,

First, A brief recital and illustration of the leading doctrines of our faith,
reported in the gospel.

Secondly, To show of whom, and the grounds on which, faith is required in our
gospel report, considered as it respects the whole of divine revelation. And

Lastly, I shall endeavor to answer a few of the most plausible and popular
objections against this scheme.

First, I am to attempt a brief recital and illustration of the leading
doctrines of our faith as reported in the gospel. The very foundation of
revealed religion, which stands with distinguished glory and luster, is the
sacred and mysterious doctrine of the blessed Trinity. This,

First, demands our most serious and devout attention. That there is a God, is
as evident as that there is an universe. Deity is inscribed in glaring and
indelible characters on every object. And that there is, and can be but one
God, is also evinced by reason. But for the knowledge of three distinct persons
in the indivisible God Head, we are wholly indebted to revelation. This is
confessedly a great mystery. But how can it be otherwise, as it respects the
mode of the incomprehensible Jehovah's existence? With submission, I conceive
all endeavors to elucidate it (to say the least) are unnecessary. One justly
observes, "That reason never shows itself more reasonable, than when it ceases
to reason about things above reason." This peculiarly abstruse point, upon
God's authority, demands our unreserved faith, with the most profound adoration
and awe. It was stated and maintained with an energy and evidence divinely
glorious at Christ's baptism, and is forcibly inculcated every time that sacred
ordinance is administered. Simon Magus held, that the Father, Son, and Spirit,
are only characters of one person considered in different points of view, or
according to his different manner of operation. But the admission of this idea
would render all the scriptures that relate to the important subject,
unintelligible and absurd. The Three that bare record in Heaven, and whom we
worship as the one eternal God, are persons, to whom all the attributes of
Deity are indiscriminately applicable. This glorious peculiarity of revealed
religion, is denied, opposed and rediculed by Arians, Socinians, and Deists, of
every description. It Is what these rationalists, as they are fond to be called,
with all their erudition and sagacity cannot apprehend, and their preposterous
conclusion is, therefore it is false and absurd. But these black epithets, upon
the same principle, may be bestowed upon many of the most stubborn facts. When
our learned opponents explain the union betwixt their own bodies and minds, and
show how any being can exist without a cause, or be the cause of its own
existence, we shall pay an implicit deference to their other logical decisions.
But at present, we deem it highly rational to believe the account God has
plainly given of himself, however incomprehensible by us. His knowledge, also,
is too wonderful for us; yet we must believe and confess,

Secondly, That his understanding is infinite. The sublime doctrine of divine
foreknowledge, is no inconsiderable part of our invaluable report. The ancient
veterans of Jesus Christ, in the cause of God and truth, used it with happy and
never-failing success, in overthrowing all systems that taught, or implied
contingencies, as applied to God. Their most acute and powerful adversaries
could neither evade nor withstand the force of arguments properly drawn from
this source: And all advocates for the invincible system of eternal truth, may
ever avail themselves of this resistless and divine weapon. Some have the
daring effrontery to deny God's fore knowledge of the free volitions of moral
agents, which, in my judgment (one attribute of Deity being as perfect as
another) is the same in effect, as to deny his being infinitely just. But from
the highest authority, we know that his wisdom is illimitted. "He looks to the
ends of the earth, and sees under the whole Heaven." And the same infinite
discernment that penetrates the most secret recesses of immensity now,
intimately pervades all the dark intricacies of futurity. "His eyes are in
every place, beholding the evil and the good;" and both good and evil, as they
originate in, and proceed from the heart. "He fills Heaven and earth, and knows
the thoughts of the mind afar off." Not only the present but the most remote
thought. "Hell and destruction are," and were from eternity, "naked before him:
How much more the hearts," and all the free volitions, "of the children of
men?" There can be nothing concealed in the most distant and darkest gloom,
from the only wise God, with whom the light dwells. These, and many other
similar assertions, with which the scriptures abound, have all been
demonstrated by his foretelling, particularly, at the distance of ages, a
multitude of deep and intricate events, depending for their existence, on the
free volitions of moral agents. And if God's knowledge of that which to us is
future, is perfect; and who can say it is not, all the objects of it, or events
foreseen, must be from some cause absolutely necessary. That which to us is
past, and cannot be otherwise, can be no more certain as it respects God, than
all that is yet to come. With him, the future is as the present and the past.
Well might an adoring apostle exclaim, O the depth of the riches of the
knowledge of God! It is true, foreknowledge has no influence on its subjects;
yet all must grant, that their existence, by some means, is made as certain and
inevitable, as the knowledge that comprehends them, is clear and infallible. No
mathematical axiom can be more self-evident, than that certain foreknowledge
has an indissoluble connection with that which is certainly fore-known. He who
will not allow this, can deny, that "Things equal to one and the same thing,
are equal to one another." With the same variety and strength of evidence, the
divine oracles declare,

Thirdly, The existence of an eternal, determinate and untrustrable counsel,
the evolution of which will not be effected by less than the consummation of
all things; nor prior to that period. God's sovereign and eternal will, being
infinitely free to form his wonderful plan of operations, by effecting and
permitting, as seemed good in his own sight; this is properly and emphatically
called, "THE COUNSEL OF HIS OWN WILL." "A decree is declared: The decree of the
Most High, which shall not pass."

And what can be more rationally supposed, than that God would not begin to act
without proposing a determinate and important end? And to devise and secure all
the means leading to, and inseparably connected with its accomplishment, was
equally eligible and necessary. God's ultimate end in all his works, of nature,
providence and grace, was neither the happiness nor misery of any, or all his
creatures, but his own declarative glory. "He made all things for himself." And
this important truth extending its influence to all parts of the divine system
with which it is connected, merits the strictest attention; many scriptures and
dispensations being inexplicable without the reflection of its rays. Though
there is no distinction betwixt the prescience and counsel of God, as immanent
acts of the divine mind, in order of time, both being eternal, yet this was
prior to that in order of nature. God did not foresee the events of time, and
their final issue, falling out fortuitously as some: or by an undesigning
fatality, as others suppose, and decree accordingly; but with sovereign freedom
and infinite skill, he drew his inimitable plan; and as the effect of his
righteous and immutable decrees, foresaw its happy and exact execution. The
admirable chain of providence respecting man, has been let down for enough to
discover a design, too grand and consistent to be dependent on the giddy and
clashing volitions of short-sighted mortals. Had they been all left to their
sinful propensities, exposed to the violence of their own base and turbulent
passions; without restraint, or quickening and directing influence from on
high, the inevitable result must have been, their universal destruction.

Blind chance is as incompetent to the government of the moral, as it would
have been to the formation of the natural world. God's providence is universal
and particular. To answer his wise and holy purposes, he effects the good which
exists, permits the evil, and restrains the rest. And as the most minute
incident may have an astonishing influence on a long series of interesting
dispensations, all things were made the subject of divine determination. There
is an indissoluble concatination betwixt things more distant and
disproportioned, than the extremes of time; or the fall of a sparrow and the
revolution of a kingdom. "The very hairs of our heads are numbered." Those who
grant this, are prepared,

Fourthly, To contemplate, with awful and delightful reverence, the stupendous
displays of God's sovereign, electing and eternal love. This incomprehensible
love, is the most interesting animating, and delightful theme, that ever
exercised a created mind. Love is an essential attribute of the divine nature.
"God is love." His love, like himself, is without beginning or end. He has
loved all the objects of his present favor, with an everlasting love. He is
good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his works. But his love to his
redeemed is special, without the least imaginable injury to the rest of his
creatures. It is with respect to this special love, that those who are not the
objects of it, are represented in holy writ, as comparatively hated, without
the consideration of their having done either good or evil.

But even these have great reason to be thankful; and are highly culpable in
having an evil eye, a murmuring heart, or a caviling tongue, because their
bountiful benefactor is transcendantly good to others. Let the creature who has
not received as much as it deserves, demand a recompense of God. But if he is
indebted to none, let him without censure, do what he will with his own. When
he was pleased to set up Christ in the office of mediator, as head of all
principalities and powers, who had a right to be dissatisfied at being left to
occupy an inferior sphere? God's setting up his only begotten son from
everlasting, could do no shadow of injury to any, while it was infinitely
advantageous to innumerable millions. For he was chosen as a head, and with
reference to a body, which was accordingly chosen in him, irrespective of works
of righteousness, from eternity. And who among the non elect, God having dealt
bountifully with them, could say that they were wronged in not being made to
share the still richer communications of his exuberant goodness, and the
manifestations of his special love. Were complaints, on the score of an unequal
distribution of the divine bounty just, there would be matter of universal
murmuring. Every species of inferior creatures might repine, because they are
not a superior link in the chain of being, from the meanest animalcule, to the
flaming seraph; who, likewise, dissatisfied with finite powers, might aspire at
deity.

But the ingratitude, pride, and rebellious ambition, that prompt to such
daring impiety, and a conduct so dreadfully perilous, must ever furnish sad
monuments of signal vengeance. The order of the visible and necessary
subordination which exists among the creatures, shall never be violated. God's
choosing a certain and definite number from among men in, and giving them as a
portion, and charge to Christ, as their glorious head and representative,
rendered the condition of others, by no means worse than the law of their
creation had made it. God was under no obligation to elect any man, or election
was of debt contrary to scripture; and consequently he had an indisputable
right to pass over whom he pleased. The fulfilling of no future conditions by
the creatures, induced God's choice; nor were characters, but persons, the
objects of it. Men are not elected because converted; but converted because
elected. Faith and obedience are not causes, or conditions, but fruits and
evidences of election. The elect being loved with an everlasting love, they are
drawn with loving kindness. They were chosen to holiness, as well as, and in
order to happiness. They were chosen to salvation through sanctification of the
spirit, and belief of the truth. "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ," says the seraphic Paul, "who has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings in heavenly places in Christ, according as he has chosen us in him,
before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame
before him in love. He has saved us and called us with an holy calling, not
according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was
given us in Christ Jesus, before the world began." And whom he thus fore-knew,
we are to observe,

Fifthly, "He also did predestinate to the adoption of sons. The elect are
"Predestined to the adoption of children by Jesus Christ, in whom they have
obtained an inheritance, being predestined according to the purpose of him
who works all things according to the counsel of his own will." Men are not
ordained to eternal life because they believe; but as many as are ordained, or
predestined to eternal life, believe. Predestination, taken in its largest
sense, has all creatures and events for its objects in a certain sense; but
that branch of it which respects the elect, is well defined by the 39th article
of the English national church, in the following words: "Predestination to life
is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby, before the foundations of the world
were laid, he has constantly decreed, by his counsel, secret to us, to deliver
from curse and damnation, those whom he has chosen in Christ out of mankind,
and to bring them by Christ to everlasting salvation, as vessels made to
honor." After these authorities, it would be superfluous to add any thing more
on this head. As election supposes refusing, or passing by some; so
predestination to life, as some are finally lost, leads us

Sixthly, To consider the particular decree that respects them. "If our gospel
be hid," says St Paul, it is hid to them that are lost." And we learn by St.
Peter, that there are some, "Who stumble at the word, being disobedient,
whereunto also they were appointed." These are they "Whose names were not
within the book of life from the foundation of the world." The decree which
justly appointed them to wrath is called reprobation. We read of some styled
reprobate silver, and of others, who concerning good works were reprobate. The
word in both these places signifies adulterated, or counterfeit. In this sense,
God never reprobated any man. Men have reprobated and ruined themselves. Though
eternal life is God's gift, through Jesus Christ, without respect to any merit
in the heirs of it; eternal death is the just wages of sin. God never punishes
any man unless he deserves it; and then only in exact proportion to his
demerit. Man has no one to blame for his reprobation and destruction, but
himself. Reprobation, as it is God's act, does indeed signify, abandoning to
eternal misery; but it is for infinite and voluntary offenses against his royal
law and authority. All men act with the natural liberty of the will, and are
worthy of praise and blame, gracious reward, and righteous punishment according
to their works. "Whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap." Some divide
reprobation into preterition and predamnation. Preterition found and left the
non-elect like the rest of the human race, doing them neither good nor harm;
and predamnation was their righteous appointment unto wrath, for their foreseen
wickedness. A creature is never sent to hell, the bedlam of the universe, as a
creature, or while it is fit for any other place. Damnation is of the sinner.
All the damned are vessels of wrath, fitted by their God provoking sins, for
destruction. These are the ungodly men, who, as such, were before of old,
ordained to this condemnation. And it was undeniably as just, upon perfect
foresight of their sins, to predetermine, as it is actually to inflict their
damnation. "I cannot think," says that eminently great and good man, president
Davies, "that the events of time, or the judicial process of the last day, will
furnish God with any new intelligence to enable him to determine the final
states of men more justly than he could from eternity." The non elect were left
to enjoy common gifts, blessings and privileges, in a providential way; but
eventually to perish in and for their sins. From this awful truth, permit me to
call your attention,

Seventhly, To the covenant of redemption. The blessings of the elect were
secured by covenant. God made a covenant with his chosen, ordered in all things
and sure. It was between the eternal Three, in behalf of the elect: Provision
was made in this eternal contract to effect their recovery from the dire
effects of the fall, in a way that would manifest, magnify, and do infinite
honor to every divine perfection. The righteous law of God was viewed as
shamefully violated, and divine justice, as thereby infinitely injured. Men
were viewed as depraved, guilty, helpless and condemned creatures, without the
least inclination or ability to satisfy for their offenses or to return to God.
Now God could not deny himself. He would by no means, as lawgiver and judge,
acquit the guilty. He would not agree for grace to reign but through
righteousness; or to justify the ungodly, unless he could do it justly; justice
being essential to the divine character.

And though he might have exacted satisfaction of the (...) bankrupts
themselves, he not only admitted, but exercised his wisdom goodness and mercy
in providing a surety in the person of his own Son. The Father was to prepare
him a true body and a rational soul, through the agency of the Holy Spirit, of
the nature of man the transgressor, which in the fullness of time, he was to
take into an inseparable union with the divine nature, as it existed in his
person, that he might be a suitable mediator between God and man. In this
capacity he stipulated to magnify and make honorable the law, by a personal
obedience adequate to all its extensive requisitions; and to satisfy the utmost
demands of justice, by the sacrifice of his soul and body in the room and stead
of his people, whose transgressions were all accordingly imputed to, or laid
upon him. He then, as their covenant-head, received in their behalf, all the
great and precious promises which enrich and adorn the inspired volume;
together with all gifts, graces and heavenly blessings that were to be
conferred upon, and applied to the whole church, by the divine spirit. And the
sacred compact was ratified by oaths, promises and blood. By this eternal
contract the travel of Christ's soul was secured: Hence, "He shall see his
seed, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand." Of the
accomplishment of this, there can be no reasonable doubt, when it is considered.

Lastly, That redemption by Christ, as it respects the satisfaction of justice,
is finished and complete. All who were chosen in, and given to him, he
covenanted in behalf of, and obeyed, suffered and died for, to put an end to
their transgressions, and bring in for them an everlasting righteousness. For
these many, for this all, he gave his life a ransom. This is the church he
purchased with his blood. And for these, distinguished from the world, he
intercedes. These are the ransomed of the Lord, who shall return to Zion with
songs and everlasting joy. These are redeemed from among men, out of every
tongue and kindred and people; and, as a consequence, washed in the blood of
the Lamb. Christ will accomplish his whole undertaking. It never shall be truly
said of him, "He began to build, but was not able to finish." If he undertook,
absolutely, to save the whole human race, there is nothing but change of mind,
or want of power, neither of which can be ascribed to him, that can hinder an
universal salvation; which does not, however, appear to be the doctrine
contained in the oracles of God. If he satisfied unconditionally for all the
sins of all men, not a soul in justice can be damned. But if he only satisfied
for part of the sins of all men, however considerable a part that might be,
they will have to answer for the other part, and there being an infinite evil
in the least sin, not a soul can be saved. If Christ did not satisfy for
unbelief, as well as other sins, all unbelievers must necessarily be lost,
nothing having the efficacy to cleanse from sin, but his invaluable blood.

From which it evidently appears, that either Christ did not satisfy for their
sins who are finally lost, or that men may perish everlastingly for the very
transgressions to which he put an end by the vicarious sacrifice of himself.
And if this is a possible case, I beg leave to ask, what besides the death of
Christ, is sufficient to keep a soul from condemnation. If the merits of Christ
alone are not sufficient to rest upon for salvation, what in addition to them
is, should doubtless be precisely ascertained. It is said, that he undertook to
save men conditionally; but if he only undertook to save those who are finally
lost upon conditions which he knew would eventually never be fulfilled, he in
fact never designed their salvation at all and consequently did not die, nor
intercede for them. His life was infinitely too dear to lay down at
uncertainties; much less for the salvation of those whom he knew would be
finally lost; and least of all for those who were lost already when he died. It
appears that he obeyed, suffered and died for the elect only, who are called
accordingly, by invincible grace, out of darkness into light, justified by his
righteousness imputed to them, sanctified by his grace implanted in them, and
kept by divine power, through faith unto salvation. Admonished by my assigned
limits, I proceed,

Secondly. To show of whom, and the grounds on which faith is required in our
report, considered as it respects the whole of divine revelation.

First, I am to show of whom this faith is required. It will doubtless be
attended with little difficulty to prove, if a negative may be admitted, that
faith is never required without information and testimony. All agree that a
revelation is not made to many who are lost; and yet some say that no man is
condemned but for unbelief. But how can it be supposed, that a person who never
heard, or obtained knowledge of our report, by any means, can be concerned with
it as an object of faith? That faith through the powerful influence of the Holy
Spirit may virtually, or essentially exist, without the use of external means,
and so produce the salvation of the subjects of it, is readily allowed; but
that even this is required without being produced, much less the exercise of
it, must be denied. A man can be under no obligation to believe, without a
revelation: An angel in Heaven is incapable of this. For faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God, in the manner effects are produced by
their cause. Objects may exist without any connection with, or relation to
faith; but faith cannot exist without reference to an object, real or
understood, and an object revealed. Facts must really or possibly exist, to
become objects of faith; then they must be revealed, and the revelation
requires, and can only produce a faith according to its own nature. Faith never
puts its object into existence, as some have absurdly represented, and facts
are true whether they are believed or not. Some confess, that an historical
faith without information, or a saving faith, with a merely external
revelation, is more than man can produce; but they argue that his ability in
his present state, is not the standard of his duty, and that God justly
requires that of him now, which, through his own voluntarly contracted
depravity, he cannot perform.

But though, in a qualified sense, we grant this, it will not follow, that God
will require any thing inequitable or unreasonable of his creatures, as that
unquestionably would be, for which he never gave them a capacity. And it is
evident, that man in his primoeval state, had no power to believe without a
revelation. And how can it be supposed, I speak with reverence, according to
our ideas of justice, that that can be justly required of man, to which his
nature and powers in their highest perfection were inadequate? What God calls
us to perform, is but our reasonable service. And yet it must be owned, that
duties are required of us, for which we have not, at present, a moral ability.
It would be impious in the highest degree, for us to deny that it is our
indispensable duty, to love the Lord our God, with all our hearts, minds and
strength, and our neighbors as ourselves; and it would be equally false and
absurd to say, that we have a moral power to discharge this important
obligation in our depraved state. But as we were originally sufficient for
these things, and have no one to blame but ourselves, that we did not continue
so, we are without excuse in not living in the constant habit and exercise of
them. We must own, that all the duties required of our common parents, when
recent from their Maker's hands, by the moral law, may be demanded, with equal
justice, of their posterity; but they are under no further obligations until
they have a revelation from heaven. The obedience which our parents owed the
moral law prior to the fall, was without controversy, due then from their
posterity, who seminally and representatively existed in them; and the law
being as unalterable as the divine perfections of which it is a transcript, the
very same obedience must be as justly due sinc the fall. The guilty loss of our
moral power to obey, by no means slackened our obligations to obedience. The
divine law, founded in eternal equity, and the various relations sustained by
all intelligent creatures to God and each other, form the universal, perpetual,
and unalterable criterion of vice and virtue. "By the law is the knowledge of
sin." If the law might have been satisfied with the best obedience of which
fallen men are capable, Christ need not have come to magnify and make it
honorable. For it is evident that in the righteousness which has the
approbation of the law, a man may be justified before God. The scriptures and
facts too, declare our guilt of the first man's offense. And the loss of our
original righteousness abstractedly considered, being our common sin, or sin of
our nature, cannot be admitted as an excuse, but is rather an aggravation of
our want of conformity unto, and transgression of the divine law. A man's
voluntary intoxication, especially when he is apprized and warned of its
effects, furnishes him with no admissible apology for any consequential
misdemeanor. But as it did not become the duty of Adam to believe in the
Messiah, until he was revealed unto him, and then only according to the manner
in which he was revealed, so his sons can be under no obligation to believe
either in the written, or essential word, without a revalation.

But those who are favored with a revelation, are bound to a correspondent
faith. These are the persons of whom faith in our report are required; and upon
what grounds, comes next under our consideration. In attending to this matter,
it will be necessary to make an enquiry with respect to the necessity of a
revelation. It is said by the deists, that a revelation is unnecessary; reason,
as possessed by man in his present state, being adequate to all his exigencies:
And could this assertion be proved, all would be constrained to allow that
supernatural assistance would be superfluous, and that therefore it would not
be afforded. But what our natural light is competent to, let the state of the
present Heathen nations, and the public and well-known practices of the past,
at the most enlightened periods, declare. It is notorious that there are
nations of men, whose collected wisdom and ingenuity are insufficient, as an
elegant writer observes, to form a nail or a hatchet. Their worship is worse
than brutal; they are in every respect hateful, hating, and (literally) biting,
devouring and massacreing one another. And whether the unassisted reason of
such wretched savages, ever so strictly followed, may be depended upon as a
sure guide to virtue and happiness; and what they might do toward forming a
system of laws and ethics, tending to promote and secure their present and
future felicity, I leave my judicious hearers to determine. The deplorable
condition of these profoundly ignorant and most unhappy beings, who are
partakers of all our merely natural advantages, and the fragments of revelation
found among the more improved heathen nations, tend to prove that even all the
improvements in science, arts and civilization among the latter, are greatly
owing to supernatural revelation. And it may be rationally presumed, that if it
were not for the very advantages derived from the scriptures, those who are now
laurelled as men of wit and politeness, merely because they can dexterously
ridicule every thing that is sacred, might have been like the Hottentots,
adorned with the entrails of wild beasts tied to their hair, as ensigns of
their superior worth and accomplishments. But without some knowledge of the
bible, by tradition or otherwise, it has been found by long observation, that
no nation or community could ever arrive at any tolerable degree of moral or
religious refinement. The public practices of the learned and renowned heathens
of antiquity, which were highly esteemed and celebrated by their famous poets
and orators, were grossly idolatrous, and most detestably obscene, lewd and
cruel. No abstract reasonings can affect the validity of these stubborn and
melancholy facts, or hinder them from showing, to all who will calmly consider,
the necessity of a revelation from heaven. And none can deny that the thing, in
itself, is possible. God is undeniably able to communicate divine intelligence
to his rational creatures, which his goodness induces a hope for: And who, in
our happy land of light, is not convinced that this is done? The glorious
effects of supernatural rays, every where evince their divine origin. True
light in the moral world, now shines. And all must be constrained to own, that
the bible, from its pureness and excellency, has, indisputably, the fairest
pretensions to this exalted character: In this respect it has no competitor.
The once famous lying oracles among the pagans, have been long since dumb. And
no man of candor and information, will put the Alcoran in competition with the
writings which we call inspired. For though it is highly venerated by the
Mahometans, as brought chapter by chapter to their founder, by the angel
Gabriel; it is an evident medley of paganism, Judaism and christianity, without
a single internal mark of originality; much less of inspiration. In a time of
gross darkness, it was palmed upon its deluded votaries, in order to unite them
together in bloody wars with their neighbors. And the hellish project
succeeded. The execrable end was answered to the gratification of the pride,
ambition and sensuality of its author. But Mahomet himself, never denied the
divine authority of the bible. His pretense was, to revive the primitive way of
worship and purity practiced by the ancient patriarchs: The Jews readily
acknowledge the authenticity of the old testament, which every unprejudiced and
discerning person must see stands or falls with the new. And these excellent
writings, not only shine with unrivaled splendour, when compared with others,
but appear to still higher advantage, both as to evidence and worth, upon an
absolute investigation. Both their matter and manner bespeak their author. They
contain every thing that could be required or expected from a divine
revelation, and nothing more. They are neither deficient nor redundant.
"Indeed," says the great Mr. Lock, "the perfection, the fullness, the
comprehension of the holy scriptures, is truly astonishing." Nor is it matter
of wonder, that men of such penetration and profound erudition, as Seldom,
Milton, Boil, Lock, Sir Isaac Newton, Addison and Lyttleton, ranked among
their warmest admirers. They are adapted to every state and capacity; and with
a commanding authority, and transforming efficacy on the heart, inculcate every
thing perfective of mankind, both in time and eternity. They possess the
beauties and excellency of historical, poetical, epistolary, theological and
moral composition, in their highest perfection. The simplicity, solemnity,
conciseness, sublimity and majesty of their style, excite the admiration of all
who have critical knowledge, or a taste for fine writings; to which may be
added, the aptness and elegance of their similies, parables, metaphors
allegories, and other elucidating, engaging and striking figures of speech,
which are equalled by nothing but the excellency of their doctrines, the purity
of their morals, and the importance of the facts they relate or unfold. And
this invaluable assemblage of sacred truths, is pervaded by the sweetest
harmony, and the strictest consistence. This internal evidence of its divine
original is found, upon strict examination, to be irresistibly strong; but it
authenticity is also clearly attested, by a cloud of unexceptionable witnesses
from without. We find the blessed bible in the highest estimation with all good
men, in every age, among whom are many not only of the finest parts and
greatest discernment, but such who display its efficacy by a virtuous and
exemplary conduct; a number of whom have, at various periods, but particularly
in the early days of christianity, seated the truth of their testimony with
their blood. And it is no where treated with contempt but by wicked men whose
dislike arises from the reproof it gives their vices which is a most convincing
evidence of its intrinsic excellency. The enemies of the christian religion
among Jews and gentiles, demonstrate its genuineness, and are every day
fulfilling the predictions of its adorable author. And notwithstanding the
opposition it meets with from the lusts and passions of men, by a special
providence it is permanently established in various populous countries and
great nations, and extorts external deference from many who secretly repine at
its prosperity; the clouds of ignorance, error and superstition fly before, and
the works of darkness languish under its effulgent beams. Its friends and
advocates are continually strengthening and multiplying, and its infatuated
enemies falling before its gentle, though irresistible influence.

If we look back to the primitive state of christianity, we find it surrounded
by numerous learned politic and powerful persecutors among Jews and Gentiles,
yet gloriously triumphing over all opposition. It made its way without the
least external force, with such amazing rapidity through the kingdoms of the
world, that this single circumstance is enough to convince any reasonable man,
it was assisted by divine power. "Turtullian tells the Roman governors, that
their corporations, councils, armies, tribes, companies, the palace, senate and
courts of judicature, were filled with christians. And Arnobious asserts, that
men of the finest parts and learning, orators, grammarians, rhetoricians,
lawyers, physicians, philosophers, despising the sentiments they had been once
fond of, took up their rest in the christian religlon." Neither secret fraud,
nor open violence, could retard its progress. As to the miracles ascribed by
the scriptures to Christ and his apostles, their most avowed enemies
acknowledged them, though they absurdly and blasphemously ascribed them to
magic. Than these, nothing at the same distance of time, can be better
attested, And none can deny, that the writers of the scriptures appear to have
been good men. Their whole lives and their deaths demonstrated the purity of
their intentions. And as they lived in different nations, and in distant ages,
it is impossible there could have been any combination among them to deceive.
Besides, good men would scorn to deceive, or attempt affixing the seal of
heaven to their own performances. From the manner in which they received their
various intelligence, it is impossible they could have been deceived
themselves. And it is certain, from the implacable enmity that wicked men have
ever manifested against the scriptures, that persons of their spirit and
character never wrote them. Upon these considerations, together with the
acknowledged accomplishment of many of their important predictions, we fairly
conclude that their author is God. If with this authority and evidence, to
mention no more, the scriptures are not believed, by those to whom they are
sent, the infidels, virtually, in the judgment of an apostle, give God the lie,
and may therefore justly expect, except they repent, the forest condemnation.
Yet this sin is as common, as aggravated; though it is impossible for a history
to be better attested than that of the bible; or more calculated to promote the
happiness of mankind, even in this life. Collectively considered, believers are
exceedingly numerous, but they are comparatively few. In this point of view, we
may exclaim "Who has believed our report?" But dismissing the explication,

I shall lastly endeavor to answer a few of the most plausible and popular
objections against what has been delivered. I have shown that there are three
that bear record in heaven, and that these three are one; that God's
understanding is infinite; that he works all things according to the counsel of
his own will; that there is an election of grace to eternal glory; that the
elect are predestined to the adoption of children by Jesus Christ; that
others, for their foreseen sins, are righteously appointed unto wrath; that all
gifts and graces bestowed upon the church from age to age, under every
dispensation, Christ stipulated for in the covenant of redemption; that he
obeyed, suffered and died for the elect only, to whom accordingly the special
benefits of his death are peculiar; that those only who hear are bound to
believe; that a revelation never requires a faith different from its own
nature; that supernatural light is necessary, might be expected, and evidently
is communicated; that the bible contains it; and, upon the internal and
external evidence in its favor, is to be received as the record of a divine
revelation. And against a system of doctrines so consistent with itself, and
all the known attributes of God; so corroborated by all the dispensations of
providence; so much for the interests, happiness and security of all good men;
and so much for the encouragement of all who sincerely desire to be saved from
sin and misery, one would think there could be few serious objections. And we
are fully persuaded there are none so weighty but may be removed. What has been
advanced is indeed mysteriously awful and stupendous, infinitely transcending
all the powers of human reason. And if it was otherwise, as it professes to be
a revelation of the counsels of eternal wisdom, the origin, revolutions and
final states of the rational world, it would be less credible. These are the
deep things of God which the spirit reveals, and which angels desire to look
into. Had we an exact account of the material system of the universe, in its
nature, connection and dependencies, perhaps we should not be less astonished.
Yet the mysterious nature of some divine truths, is considered, by a certain
class of men, as a very capital objection against them. They think it
unreasonable to believe without comprehending a proposition. I allude to those
incredulous gentlemen (and such as partake measurably of their spirit) who can
only believe that the harmonious and astonishingly grand system, of which the
terraqueous globe is a small part, is the illustrious offspring of the great
goddess CHANCE; to whom they ascribe their own fearful and wonderful formation,
together with the preservation and government of all worlds. And this is no
greater an exertion of the credulous faculty, than to believe that a commodious
and superb edifice, displaying all the symmetry, proportion and elegance of
architecture, may be an accidental coalition of heterogeneous materials. Every
article in their creed is as evident, as that a most curious and useful watch,
may be the result of a fortuitous collection of splendid particles, independent
of ingenuity or design: Or, that a voluminous and accurate history, containing
an authentic narrative of the events of an age, and embellished with all the
elegancies of diction, may be the production of types and points, formed, and
thrown together by accident. But we are told, that our scheme is not only too
mysterious for admission, but makes God the author of sin. This we deny. Though
we cannot to account for its origin, believe with the Manichoeans, that there
are two almighty conflicting principles, who reign independent of each other,
one of whom is the author of evil; yet we acknowledge it is dreadfully certain,
sin has entered into our system and reigned unto death; but its origin, among
the secret things which belong to God, is in many respects, environed with
impenetrable darkness. From his purity and holiness we know that he can tempt
no man to, nor have the least fellowship with sin, much less be the author of
it; but as he is the Almighty, and does whatsoever his soul pleases, it is
equally certain that it cannot exist contrary to his permissive will. It is
evident that God could have prevented its existence, and we are sure his
goodness and benevolence would have disposed him to it, would it have
ultimately answered the most valuable and important purpose. He had, no doubt,
infinitely weighty reasons, to us unknown, for forming as he did all his
permissive and effective decrees, which he fulfils in a wise, holy, just, and
powerful manner; without offering the least degree of violence to the will of a
creature. He has permitted poisons to enter into the natural as well as the
moral world, and has created their antidotes; and in so doing, was not less
holy than wonderful in counsel; and is as pure as excellent in operation. Here
the grey-headed objection, "why does he yet find fault; for who has resisted
his will?" is sure to be revived; but our apostle has answered it. Wicked men
and devils must know, that their voluntary wickedness shall be righteously
punished, though God overrules it, contrary to their design and intention, for
his own glory. The wrath of man shall praise him, and the remainder he will
restrain. The wicked are without excuse, though with satanical effrontery they
(...) against God. Another objection against our repose is, that it charges God
with being a respecter of persons. But let it be considered, that a sovereign
judge (...) the capacity of a benefactor, may give to one man* without being
under the least obligation to bestow as much upon every one in the same
condition; though in the execution of his office, he must pronounce sentence
upon every offender, in exact proportion to his guilt. To depart from the line
of justice in the last instance, will subject him to a charge of partiality; to
which he is never liable, in doing what he will with his own. And who can
presume to deny the judge of all the earth the same privilege. In dispensing of
his benefits, he may and does open wide his munificent hands, and give
liberally to some, while he withholds from others; which applies to the common
bounties of providence, as well as to the special blessings of grace. But as a
lawgiver and judge, "God will render to every man according to his deeds: To
them, who by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for glory, and honor, and
immortality; eternal life: But unto them that are contentious, and do not obey
the truth, but obey unrighteousness; indignation and wrath, tribulation and
anguish, upon every soul of man that does evil, of the Jew first, and also of
the Gentile. For there is no respect of persons with God." When he gives, it is
not from a partiality to the objects of his bounty; but from motives of
sovereign goodness within himself. He has as much respect for a Gentile, as for
a Jew; for the poor, as for the rich; for the bond, as for the free; for the
illiterate, as for the learned. Our doctrines only contend, with the
scriptures, for his doing what he will with his own. It is also said, that the
doctrine of particular election, represents God as unrighteous and cruel, in
passing by a number of fallen men, without giving them a chance for salvation.
Please to observe, that those who deny an election of persons to glory, are
constrained directly or indirectly to argue, that God was bound by his
perfections, to put the whole lost race of men into a salvable state; for were
they to acknowledge, that he might have justly left all men to perish, as
trangressors of his holy law, it would undeniably follow, that he might, as he
certainly did, leave some men to perish. But if God was bound to make salvation
possible for all men, provision for their recovery was no act of mercy, but the
discharge of an indispensible obligation. If God could not justly have left
sinners to perish in, and for their sins, he was bound in, and by justice to
provide for their salvation. But does this accord with the scriptures? Do they
say that in laying the foundation of our hope, God did by us what justice
required; or that he had unmerited mercy upon us? If making salvation possible
was required by justice, all that we have to praise God for, on this head, is
for not acting contrary, at least, to one of his attributes; which was
impossible. But this, with a witness, makes provision for salvation of debt,
instead of grace. Again, the advocates for this scheme, which makes salvation
possible to all men, grant, it does not make it absolutely sure to any man. Now
if this scheme is true, it was not impossible but Christ might have died in
vain; but for him to die in vain, according to the counsel of God, is an event
unworthy of an all-wise, immutable and almighty being; therefore this
celebrated scheme, so congruous to the ideas of natural men, must be false. I
speak to those who acknowledge the divinity of Christ, and unto wise men, judge
ye what I say. Besides, does this plan exclude boasting, even before God? Was a
man to be glorified upon it, might he not rise with propriety before the
eternal throne, and addressing himself to the happy intelligences, say, "I
confess I fell in Adam, but God being bound to put me into a salvable state, I
was capacitated, in common with my species, to save myself; and, fulfilling the
conditions of my salvation, by a steady perseverance, without the least special
assistance, I happily arrived at glory. And those indolent and perverse
wretches, who are suffering the vengeance of eternal fire, had in every
respect, an equal chance with me for a blissful immortality. It was not the
impartial Jehovah who made me to differ; by diligence and perseverance I am
what I am!" These, and many other similar absurdities, we must admit, or else
acknowledge with St. Paul, that God might have mercy on whom he would, without
the shadow of cruelty or injustice. Some who hold that Christ died
intentionally for the elect only, think our system deficient, because it does
not allow that he died sufficiently for all mankind. But, with all deference, I
beg leave to say, that this appears, at least to me, to be a groundless
distinction. It is certain Christ's merits were sufficient, had they been
designed for such an end, to have satisfied for as many sinful worlds, upon the
supposition of their existence and fall, as there are individuals belonging to
the human race. But the object cannot be inferred from the sufficiency of
Christ's death. He will save no more, and he will certainly save no less, than
those for whom, by divine appointment, he died, and for whom he accordingly
intercedes. All men receive innumerable common gifts and blessings, for the
elect's sake, in consequence of Christ's mediatorial interposition; but as he
never intended to save those whom he knew would be eventually lost, it appears
inconsistent with the divine wisdom and economy, to make provision in his
redemption for them. Christ is the common and providential savior of all men;
but he is the special savior only of those whom he purchased; and to whom he
accordingly gives evangelical faith and eternal life. Some think a great
difficulty arises here from the obligations all men are under to believe in
Christ. But let them distinguish between believing in Christ as the Messiah,
with an historic or rational faith which is required, and may be produced by
the written word; and believing in him spiritually, as having died for our
sins, which faith is of divine operation, and the difficulty vanishes. Their
not believing in Christ as the Messiah, was the unbelief for which the Jews
were blamed, and for which their punishment will be more intolerable in the day
of judgment than that of Sodom and Gomorrah, who added not the contempt of the
gospel, to the violation of the law. A man will not be blamed, much less damned
in the great day, because he did not believe that Christ died for his sins. No
consistent Calvinist will grant that any man will be damned, for whose sins of
every kind, Christ died; and I suppose there is no one that can think a man may
be damned for not believing what is not true. But one of these propositions is
true, or no sinner will be damned for not believing that Christ died for him.

The Jews, with all other men, were in a condemned state when Christ came; and
they hated and rejected that glorious light, because their deeds were
previously evil. They were told that they were in a state of condemnation, as
the sinful offspring of Adam, as was evident from their not having faith, the
only instrument and evidence of personal justification. Some, from supposing
the scriptures to be full of offers of salvation to all men, infer an universal
redemption. And without supposing, either that God is insincere and
disingenuous in his offers, or that Christ purchased salvation for many in
vain, they must hold, to be consistent with an universal salvation too. But it
should be carefully observed, that eternal life is not the offer, but the gift
of God. And all invitations to a participation of special benefits are
addressed to the characters to whom the promises belong. If Christ, as man, had
no right to bestow a place in his kingdom on a petitioner, but according to his
Father's appointment, much less have his ministers a right to offer salvation
to those for whom the Father never may have designed it. There is a division of
the word to be made, and the different characters are to have their different
portions. Christ crucified, or the gospel, which knows nothing of offers, terms
or penalties, but is a declaration of life and salvation through Christ, for
condemned, ruined, helpless sinners, is to be preached to every intelligent
attending creature. And all that find, and feel themselves condemned, ruined
and helpless, are to be encouraged to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ; for
such he came to seek and to save. He was anointed to preach good tidings to the
meek, and came to bind up the broken hearted; and, not to offer, but to
proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that
are bound; to comfort all that mourn. The simple, the scorners and sinners of
every description, are to be exhorted to attend to the reproofs of wisdom, and
use all the public and private means of grace; and repentance is to be
preached, and enforced as the duty of all men; for had not a savior been
provided for any man, repentance would have been the duty of all sinners; but
these are not to be invited to partake of the food and privileges of children.
IF children, then heirs. It is said that sinners must have Christ, or life
through him offered to them, to leave them without excuse, which involves the
absurdity of God's being bound to provide and offer a savior to fallen men, to
leave them inexcuseable; as if the law did not stop every man's mouth, and
prove the whole world guilty before God. But Christ came not to condemn the
world. It is not Christ, but Moses that accuses men to the Father. It is not
the gospel that condemns and leaves men without excuse, but the law. Some, who
would be thought great friends to holiness, are apprehensive we neglect the
interest of morality, and open a door for licentiousness, by not making works
the condition of salvation; but we most freely leave the world to determine
what doctrines have been most owned through all ages, in destroying the works
of darkness, and producing the fruits of holiness. If we consider the dead in
sin, in no capacity to work for life; we believe those who are the workmanship
of God, created anew in Christ Jesus, will work from life. And natural men, who
discern not the things of the spirit, but deem them foolishness, have many
other motives which are more powerful with them, to discharge the external
duties of which they are capable, than the promise of eternal life would be. As
to the frivolous, vulgar objections against the doctrines of grace, from their
being ignorantly supposed to render the use of means, holiness, and a judgment
to come, unnecessary, because these things cannot change the mind of God, or
give him information, they are too palpably contemptible to be regarded. As the
light of truth and philosophy prevail, our glorious system will shine and
triumph with peculiar luster and energy. The more it is studied and
investigated, the more perspicuously its excellencies appear. It exalts every
attribute of deity, shows the necessary dependence of all things on the first
cause, gives weight, efficacy and permanency to all the divine promises,
threatenings, and prophecies, leaves sinners without excuse, excludes boasting
from saints, and lays a firm foundation for the full assurance of faith, for
the most lively hope, humble resignation, perfect patience, manly fortitude,
and exalted piety. Heathens could exclaim against vice, as the odious bane of
personal and social felicity, with as much pertinence and zeal, as our merely
moral preachers, and show with equal elegance, the nature, beauty, fitness and
utility of moral duties: But evangelical preachers not only set morality in a
more engaging light, but direct to strength and righteousness* discover a
rational method of acceptance for our persons and performances with an offended
God; and engage us in the highest improvement of our nature* and the most
vigorous exertion of all our powers, for the interests of mankind, and the
glory of God, by the most animating and powerful motives drawn from the grand
peculiarities of the gospel. Moral, merely moral lights may shine, but
evangelical, both shine and warm.

(...) in the candor of this venerable audience, I shall (...) leave the issue
of my mite to the determination of heaven, without further trespassing on your
patience, by apologizing for the consumption of a much larger proportion of
time than fell to my years and abilities. The Lord, the Holy Spirit, give each
divine truth delivered, its due weight and importance on every mind, influence
those immediately concerned for Zion's prosperity, in all their consultations
and determinations, direct your hearts into the love of God the Father, and
into the patient waiting for Christ our Redeemer. Amen.

THE END.
ERRATA.
In the title page for. "I have not shunned to declare unto all," etc. read, I
have not shunned to declare unto YOU all, etc.

Fourth page, 7th line, for "recitaal," read recital.


