A SERMON, PREACHED IN NEW YORK, JULY 4th, 1793. BEING THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE
INDEPENDENCE OF AMERICA: AT THE REQUEST OF THE TAMMANY SOCIETY, OR COLUMBIAN
ORDER.

BY SAMUEL MILLER, A. M. ONE OF THE MINISTERS OF THE UNITED PRESBYTERIAN
CHURCHES, IN THE CITY OF NEW YORK.

NEW-YORK-PRINTED BY THOMAS GREENLEAF.

In Society, July 4, 1793.
RESOLVED, That the Thanks of this Society be returned to the Rev. Mr. SAMUEL
MILLER, for his elegant and patriotic Discourse, delivered by him, before the
Society, this Day.

ORDERED, That Brothers Rodgers, Mitchell, and Ker, be a Committee to wait on
Mr. MILLER, for this Purpose, and to request a Copy for the Press.

A true Copy from the Minutes, BENJAMIN STRONG, Secretary.

TO THE TAMMANY SOCIETY, OR COLUMBIAN ORDER -- WHOSE PRINCIPLES OF ASSOCIATION
MERIT THE HIGHEST APPLAUSE -- AND WHOSE PATRIOTIC EXERTIONS DEMAND THE WARMEST
GRATITUDE OF EVERY AMERICAN --

THIS SERMON, Delivered and published at their Request, Is respectfully
dedicated, By their Fellow-Citizen,THE AUTHOR.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following Discourse is published, almost verbatim, as it was delivered,
excepting the addition of the Notes. It was composed on very short Notice --
amidst many pressing Avocations -- and, consequently, in great Haste. These
Circumstances, together with the want of Abilities and Experience in the
Author, must apologize for its indigested and defective Appearance.

CHRISTIANITY THE GRAND SOURCE, AND THE SUREST BASIS, OF POLITICAL LIBERTY: A
SERMON.
II. CORINTHIANS, iii. 17. -- AND WHERE THE SPIRIT OF THE LORD IS, THERE IS
LIBERTY.
IN contemplating national advantages, and national happiness, numerous are the
objects which present themselves to a wise and reflecting patriot. While he
remembers the past, with thankfulness and triumph; and while he looks forward,
with glowing anticipation, to future glories, he will by no means forget to
enquire into the secret springs, which had an active influence in the former,
and which, there is reason to believe, will be equally connected with the
latter.

THESE ideas naturally arise, in the mind of every American citizen, especially
on this Anniversary of our country's natal hour. While we review, with
gratitude and exultation, the various steps which have paved the way for our
political advancement, we are obviously led to search for the happy principles,
which laid at the foundation of these -- And while we suffer fancy to draw
aside, for a moment, the veil which covers futurity, and to disclose its bright
scenes, we cannot overlook the same objects, on the extension and farther
influence of which, we are to build our hopes.

WE have convened, indeed, principally to celebrate the completion of another
year of freedom to our western world. We are to keep this day as a memorial of
the time which gave rise to the precious privileges we enjoy, as a sovereign
and independent people. It may, therefore, be imagined, that our only proper
employment, on the present occasion, is, to take a retrospect of the
interesting scenes, which that glorious era presented to the mind, and to
recount the noble achievements, which, under the direction of infinite wisdom,
laid the foundation of our prosperity and happiness. But why should our chief
attention be directed toward these objects? They are objects, indeed, upon
which to gaze, delights and elevates the patriotic mind. They are objects,
which, to lose sight of, is to forfeit the character of a faithful citizen.
But, at the same time, they are objects too familiar to all present to need the
formality of repetition. I address many of those who were near witnesses of
these stupendous transactions; and not a few who were agents in the important
work. Whose hearts burn within them, at the recollection of events, which the
world beheld with amazement: and who view with transport, the political
greatness which these events were the means of ushering in, and establishing in
our country.

IN an audience of this description, then, where is the necessity of my
trespassing on your patience, by a bare recital of what is so well known, and
so feelingly remembered? Where is the need of my attempting, with minute care,
to call up to your view, the patriotic and wise management of our counsels, in
those trying times -- the fortitude and enthusiastic ardor of our heroes -- the
splendour of our conquests -- or the dignity and glory to which we are exalted
by the supreme Arbiter of nations? Rather let us turn our attention to the
grand Source, from which we are to expect the long continuance, and the happy
increase of these invaluable gifts of heaven.

AND to this choice of a subject I am also led by the recollection, that the
respectable SOCIETY to which this discourse is, in a particular manner,
addressed, hold up, as the great object of their attention, every thing that
may tend to promote the progress of civil liberty, and to transmit it, pure and
undefiled, to the latest posterity. They profess to stand as guardians over
those inestimable rights and privileges, which have been so dearly purchased,
and, in general, to seek, in every form, the advantage of their country. To an
association established upon such laudable principles, nothing that is included
in these great outlines of their system, can be considered either as foreign to
their plan, or beneath their attention. Nothing can be considered entirely
inapplicable to their designs, in celebrating this auspicious day, that is, in
any degree, connected with the promotion of public dignity and happiness.

IT is under this impression, my fellow citizens, that I propose, on the
present occasion, to offer you a few general remarks on the important influence
of the Christian religion in promoting political freedom. And, as the
foundation of these remarks, I have chosen the words which have just been read
in your hearing.

I am well aware, that these words, taken in their proper sense, have a
principal reference to liberty of a different kind from that to which I would
accommodate and apply them. They refer to that glorious deliverance from the
power, and the ignoble chains of sin and satan, which is effected by the Spirit
of the Lord, in every soul, in which his special and saving influences are
found. They point out, also, that release from the bondage of the legal
administration, which the gospel affords to all who receive it in sincerity and
truth. -- But, as I am persuaded the proposition contained in our text is
equally true, whether we understand it as speaking of spiritual or political
liberty, we may safely apply it to the latter, without incurring the charge of
unnatural perversion.

THE sentiment, then, which I shall deduce from the text, and to illustrate and
urge which, shall be the principal object of the present discourse, is, That
the general prevalence of real Christianity, in any government, has a direct
and immediate tendency to promote, and to confirm therein, political liberty.

THIS important truth may be established, both by attending to the nature of
this religion, in an abstract view; and by adverting to fact, and the
experimental testimony with which we are furnished by history.

THAT the corrupt passions and the vices of men, have, in all ages of the
world, been the grand source and support of tyranny, and of every species of
political and domestic oppression, is a truth too well known, and too generally
admitted, to require formal proof, on the present occasion. A moment's
reflection on the nature of tyranny, and of those dispositions in the
constituent members of society, which lead to its origin and advancement, is
sufficient to convince every unprejudiced mind, that human depravity is the
life and the foul of slavery. What was it that first raised this monster from
the infernal regions, and gave him a dwelling among men, but ignorance, on the
one hand, and on the other, ambition and pride? These his complotters and
associates, proceeding in a state of indissoluble connection, have always held
up his deformed head, and wielded his iron rod. Together they have invariably
come into being -- together they have lived and flourished -- and into one
common grave have they sunk at last.

THE truth is, that political liberty does not rest, solely, on the form of
government, under which a nation may happen to live. It does not consist,
altogether, in the arrangement or in the balance of power; nor even in the
rights and privileges which the constitution offers to every citizen. These
indeed, must be acknowledged to have a considerable effect in its promotion or
decline. But we shall find, on a close inspection, that something else is of
equal, if not of greater importance. Cases may easily be conceived, where,
without a single material or glaring deficiency in any of these, true and
desirable liberty may be almost unknown: and, on the other hand, where, under
the most wretched organization of government, the substance of freedom may
exist and flourish. Human laws are too imperfect, in themselves, to secure
completely this inestimable blessing. It must have its seat in the hearts and
dispositions of those individuals which compose the body politic; and it is
with the hearts and dispositions of men that Christianity is conversant. When,
therefore, that perfect law of liberty, which this holy religion includes,
prevails and governs in the minds of all, their freedom rests upon a basis more
solid and immovable, than human wisdom can devise. -- For the obvious tendency
of this divine system, in all its parts, is, in the language of its great
Author, to bring deliverance to the captives, and the opening of the prison to
them that are bound; to undo thenheavy burdens; to let the oppressed go free;
and to break every yoke. But to be more particular --

THE prevalence of real Christianity, tends to promote the principles and the
love of political freedom, by the doctrines which it teaches, concerning the
human character, and the unalienable rights of mankind; and by the virtues
which it inculcates, and leads its votaries to practice. -- Let us take a hasty
view of each of these --

CAN oppression and slavery prevail among any people who properly understand,
and are suitably impressed with, those great Gospel truths, that all men are,
by nature, equal -- children of the same common Father -- dependent upon the
same mighty power, and candidates for the same glorious immortality? Must not
despotism hide his head in those regions, where the relations of man to man are
distinctly realized -- where citizens, of every rank, are considered as a band
of brethren, and where the haughty pretensions of family and blood, are viewed
in all their native absurdity, and in those odious colors in which this
sublime system represents them? In short, must not every sentiment, favorable
to slavery, be forever banished from a nation, in which, by means of the benign
light of the glorious Sun of righteousness, all the human race are viewed as
subject to the same great laws, and amenable to the same awful tribunal, in the
end.

CHRISTIANITY, on the one hand, teaches those, who are raised to places of
authority, that they are not intrinsically greater than those whom they govern;
and that all the rational and justifiable power with which they are invested,
flows from the people, and is dependent on their sovereign pleasure. -- There
is a love of dominion natural to every human creature; and in those who are
destitute of religion, this temper is apt to reign uncontrouled. Hence
experience has always testified, that rulers, left to themselves, are prone to
imagine, that they are a superior order of beings, to obey whom, the ignoble
multitude was made, and that their aggrandizement is the principal design of
the social compact. But the religion of the Gospel, rightly understood, and
cordially embraced, utterly disclaims such unworthy sentiments, and banishes
them with abhorrence from the mind. It contemplates the happiness of the
community, as the primary object of all political associations -- And it
teaches those, who are placed at the helm of government, to remember, that they
are called to preside over equals and friends, whose best interest, and not the
demands of selfishness, is to be the object of their first and highest care.

ON the other hand, Christianity, wherever it exerts its native influence,
leads every citizen to reverence himself -- to cherish a free and manly spirit
-- to think with boldness and energy -- to form his principles upon fair
enquiry, and to resign neither his conscience nor his person to the capricious
will of men. It teaches, and it creates in the mind, a noble contempt for that
abject submission to the encroachments of despotism, to which the ignorant and
the unprincipled readily yield. It forbids us to call, or to acknowledge, any
one master upon earth, knowing that we have a Master in Heaven, to whom both
rulers, and those whom they govern, are equally accountable. In a word,
Christianity, by illuminating the minds of men, leads them to consider
themselves, as they really are, all coordinate terrestrial princes, stripped,
indeed, of the empty pageantry and title, but retaining the substance of
dignity and power. Under the influence of this illumination, how natural to
disdain the shackles of oppression -- to take the alarm at every attempt to
trample on their just rights; and to pull down, with indignation, from the seat
of authority, every bold invader!

BUT again -- The prevalence of Christianity promotes the principles and the
love of political freedom, not only by the knowledge which it affords of the
human character, and of the unalienable rights of mankind, but also by the
duties which it inculcates, and leads its votaries to discharge.

THE fruits of the spirit are, justice, love, gentleness, meekness, and
temperance: Or, in other words, these are among the distinguished graces and
duties, which the Christian system not only commands us constantly to regard,
but which it creates in the mind, and which are found to prevail, in a greater
or smaller degree, in all who sincerely adopt it. Now these are unquestionably
the grand supports of pure and undefiled Liberty -- They stand equally opposed
to the chains of tyranny, and to the licentiousness of anarchy.

IT is a truth denied by few, at the present day, that political and domestic
slavery are inconsistent with justice, and that these must necessarily wage
eternal war -- So that, wherever the latter exists in perfection, the former
must fly before her, or fall prostrate at her feet. What, then, would be the
happy consequence, if that golden rule of our holy religion, which enjoins,
that we should do unto all men whatever we would wish that they should do unto
us, were universally received and adopted? We should hear no more of rulers
plundering their fellow citizens of a single right; nor of the people refusing
that obedience to equitable laws, which the public good requires. We should see
no oppressor claiming from his equals, a subjection which they did not owe; nor
should we see the latter lifting up their lawless hands, to resent the
reasonable requisitions of an authority constituted by themselves. In short,
were this principle universally to predominate, we should see nothing, on the
one side, but demands founded on a sincere regard to the general interest; and,
on the other, that ready compliance, which promotes the peace and happiness of
society.

NO less extensively beneficial in its effects on civil liberty, is that pure
and refined benevolence, which the Christian system inculcates, and establishes
in the minds of those who are under its government. Though the constitution of
a country be ever so defective; yet if every rank of citizens be under the
habitual influence of that universal charity and good will, which is one of the
distinguished glories of our holy religion, there will freedom substantially
flourish. To suppose that oppression, with the numerous hell-born woes, which
follow in his train, can be cherished in regions, where the mild Spirit of
benevolence and love reigns, is to suppose that the most discordant principles
are capable of uniting; that demons of darkness, and angels of light can dwell
together in harmony. -- Impossible! Wherever that heavenly temper is sound,
which, like the Deity himself, delights in showering down blessings, both on
enemies and friends; there will the unalienable rights of men be acknowledged,
and every infringement of them will be viewed with abhorrence. Here it will,
perhaps, be objected, that however just these remarks may appear in theory, yet
their force is not a little weakened, by adverting to the numerous persecutions
and wars, to which Christianity has given rise. -- But let it be remembered,
that Christianity has been more frequently the more pretext, than the true
motive, of those multiplied acts of cruelty and intolerance, which fully the
pages of history. Generally have the offspring of ambition, revenge, or some
equally corrupt principle, been attributed to religion, and supposed to have
nothing else for their origin. But admitting for a moment, that Christianity
has in reality, been the cause of much mischief of this kind; yet it was
Christianity shamefully misunderstood, and impiously perverted. It was not the
pure and benevolent system of the Gospel, but blind zeal and mad fanaticism.


NOR let us omit to take notice of the peculiar temperance and moderation,
which the Gospel systemenjoins. These are of no less importance, with respect
to their influence on political happiness, in general, and especially as they
affect the interest of civil liberty. It is an observation as old as the fact
upon which it is founded, that nothing more certainly tends, to subvert the
principles of freedom, and abate a laudable enthusiasm for republican equality,
than a departure from that simplicity of manners, and that prevailing
moderation, which our religion inculcates and promotes. Ever since the
establishment of civil society, the words of the Roman Poet, when speaking of
his own country, have been applicable to most great empires -- -- Saevior armis
Luxuria incubuit, victumque ulcisitur orbem.
JUV.

BUT for this evil, there is no preventive that promises so much success, no
cure so effectual, as that which is here presented. Christianity, more powerful
than human strength, and more efficacious than human law, regulates the
passions, and roots out the corruptions of men. It not only tames the savage
breast, and gives a deadly blow to barbarity of manners; but also tends to
quench every extravagant thirst for power; to beat down every high thought,
that exalts itself against the general good; and to render men contented with
those rights which the God of nature gave them. While these dispositions
prevail, slavery must stand at an awful distance, bound in chains, and --
Liberty, fair daughter of the skies! Walk in majestic splendour over the land,
Breathing her joys around --

HAVING thus contemplated, in an abstract view, the native tendency of the
Christian religion, to promote civil liberty; let us now take our stand with
History, that mistress of wisdom, and friend of virtue, who from her exalted
station, causes human events to pass in review, before her impartial tribunal.

WHEN we compare those nations, in which Christianity was unknown, with those
which have been happily favored with the light of spiritual day, we find ample
reason to justify the remarks which have been made. It may be asserted, with
few exceptions, that there never was a regularly organized government, since
the foundation of the world, where the true religion was not received, in which
political slavery did not hold a gloomy reign. To relate the enormities of
despotism, and the consequent degradation and wretchedness to which human
nature has been reduced, in many parts of the globe, would be equally shocking
and incredible to an American car. How must the lives and fortunes of men have
been trampled upon, among the Mexicans, when, at the dedication of their great
temple, we are told they had 60 or 70,000 human sacrifices; and that the usual
amount of them, annually, was about 20,000! See Clavigero's History of Mexico.
vol. I. page 281.
-- It has been generally found, indeed, that in proportion as the faint
glimmerings of the light of nature, with which Pagan nations were favored,
gathered strength, and grew in brightness, in the same proportion has something
like social freedom been promoted and extended. But these glimmerings have
still proved inadequate to the desirable purpose, of imparting to their liberty
a consistent and permanent character. The republics of Greece and Rome must be
acknowledged, in some degree, exceptions to this general remark. But even among
them, numerous were the instances in which the aspect of their political afairs
bare testimony to their sad want of Christian knowledge.
As examples of this truth, you will readily recur to the African and Asiatic
kingdoms, not excepting some in other quarters of the globe.

ON the other hand, it may be observed, with equal confidence, and with fewer
exceptions, that there never was a government, in which the knowledge of pure
and undefiled Christianity prevailed, in which, at the same time, despotism
held his throne without control. "Christianity, says Baron Montesquieu, has
prevented despotism from being established in Ethiopia, notwithstanding the
heat of the climate, the largeness of the empire, and its situation in the
midst of African despotic states."
It is true indeed, that in the Christian world, during those centuries wherein
gross superstition reigned, and the truth was buried in darkness, slavery
reared his head, and scattered his poison among men. It is true, that then, the
cloud of oppression sat thick and deep over the nations, and the world was
threatened with a relapse into ancient barbarity. But when, at the auspicious
era of the reformation, the great source of day rose again upon the benighted
world; when the true knowledge of the Lord revived, the truth speedily made men
free. When, in this splendid and glorious light, they began to see what they
were, and what they ought to be; they delayed not to cast off their chains, and
to assert their rights, with dignity and independence. This is the light, which
ever since those days, has been gradually undermining the throne of tyranry in
Europe. One of the bitterest enemies of Christianity, Mr. Hume, observes, that
"the precious sparks of liberty were kindled and preserved by the Puritans in
England; and that, to this sect, whose principles appear so frivolous, and
whose habits so ridiculous, the English owe the whole freedom of their
constitution." The unfounded and malicious reflection which this passage
contains, deserves no comment. The concession is worthy of notice, as it is the
concession of an adversary.

It may also be mentioned, in this place, that out of the 17 provinces of the
Low Countries, which groaned under the tyranny of Philip II. only the 7, now
called the United Provinces, which admitted and established the principles of
the reformation, succeeded in their attempts to throw off the Spanish yoke. The
rest, indeed, made a faint effort to gain their liberty, but failed* and are
not, to this day, a free people. A remarkable testimony, that Christianity can
only be expected to exert her native influence, and produce the happiest
effects, when she appears in her beautiful simplicity, stripped of that gaudy
and deforming attire, with which corrupt and ambitious men have ever been
disposed to clothe her.


This is the light, which, gathering strength and refinement, by its passage
over the mighty deep, has kindled a flame in this western world, which, we
trust, will continue to blaze, with increasing brightness, while the Sun and
Moon shall endure.

NOR is it political slavery alone, that yields to the mild and benign Spirit
of Christianity. Experience has shown, that domestic slavery also flies before
her, unable to stand the test of her pure and holy tribunal. After the
introduction of this religion into the Roman empire, every law that was made,
relating to slaves, was in their favor, abating the rigors of servitude, until,
at last, all the subjects of the empire were reckoned equally free. When Pope
Gregory the great, who flourished toward the end of the 6 th century, gave
liberty to some of his slaves, he offered this reason for it -- "Cum Redemptor
noster, totius Conditor naturoe, ad hoc propitiatus, humanam carnem volueret
assumere, ut divinitatis suoe gratia, dirempto (quo tenebamur captivi) vinculo,
pristinoe nos restitueret libertati: satubriter agitur, si homines, quos ab
initio liberos natura protulit, et jus gentium jugo substituit servitutis, in
ed, qud nati fuerant, manumittenti^ beneficio, libertali reddantur." Gregor:
Magn: ap. Potgiess: lib. iv. c. I. fect. 3. What a triumph is here exhibited,
of Christian principles, over the sordid dictates of pride and selfishness!
Would to God we could more frequently hear this language, and see corresponding
practice, in Christians of the present day!


HUMANITY, indeed, is still left to deplore the continuance of domestic
slavery, in countries blessed with Christian knowledge, and political freedom.
The American patriot must heave an involuntary sigh, at the recollection, that,
even in these happy and singularly favored republics, this offspring of
infernal malice, and parent of human debasement, is yet suffered to reside.
Alas, that we should so soon forget the principles, upon which our wonderful
revolution was founded! But, to the glory of our holy religion, and to the
honor of many benevolent minds, this monster has received a fatal blow, and
will soon, we hope, fall expiring to the ground. Already does he tremble, as if
his destruction were at hand. -- With pleasure do we behold many evident
presages of the approaching period, when Christianity shall extend her scepter
of benevolence and love over every part of this growing empire -- when
oppression shall not only be softened of his rigours; but shall take his flight
forever from our land.

THAT happier times, and a more extensive prevalence of liberty, are not far
distant, there are numerous reasons to believe. -- If so signal and glorious
has been the influence of Christianity, in promoting political and domestic
freedom, notwithstanding her restrained and narrow operation among men, what
may we not expect, when her dominion shall become universal? If such have been
her trophies, amidst so much opposition, and the continual struggles of
contrary principles, what may we not indulge the hope of seeing, when her
empire shall be coextensive with terrestrial inhabitants -- when the knowledge
of the Lord shall cover the earth, as the waters cover the depths of the sea?

THEN, may we not conclude, that universal harmony and love, and as the
necessary consequence of these, universal liberty, shall prevail? Then, may we
not confidently hope, that oppression shall be as much abhorred, and as much
unknown, as freedom is, at present, in many parts of the globe? That the name
of man, of whatever nation, or kindred, or people, or tongue, shall then be the
signal of brotherly affection: -- When the whole human race, uniting as a band
of brethren, shall know no other wishes, than to promote their common
happiness, and to glorify their common God: -- When there shall be nothing to
hurt nor destroy in all the holy mountain of God -- when the desert shall
rejoice, and blossom as the rose; and when the kingdoms of this world, shall
become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ?

IMAGINE not, my fellow citizens, that these are the flights of a vain and
disordered fancy. The sacred volume teaches us to comfort one another with
these words, and to triumph in the glorious prospect. The Author of truth
himself, bids us look forward, with joy and gladness, to --

"The blessed Immanuel's gentle reign;" -- when, from the rising of the Sun, to
the going down thereof, his name shall have free course and be glorified.

To the introduction of these happy days, it seems as if the present time
afforded many hopeful preludes. Can we turn our eyes to the European states and
kingdoms -- can we behold their convulsive struggles, without considering them
as all tending to hasten this heavenly era? Especially, can we view the
interesting situation of our AFFECTIONATE ALLIES, without indulging the
delightful hope, that the sparks, which are there seen rising toward heaven,
though in tumultuous confusion, shall soon be the means of kindling a general
flame, which shall illuminate the darkest and remotest corners of the earth,
and pour upon them the effulgence of tenfold glory?

THE splendour of their prospects is, indeed, not altogether unclouded. But, we
trust, that every difficulty and disorder will speedily vanish, and give place
to harmony, and efficient government. We trust, that He who rides in the
whirlwind, and directs the storm, will wield their fierce democracy with his
mighty arm -- hush the rude noise of war in their borders -- breathe propitious
upon their counsels -- and, in the end, crown their exertions with abundant
success. --

THE glorious structure, which this once oppressed people are employed in
erecting, has been assailed by numerous malignant foes. Black, and awfully
threatening clouds have hung over it -- the rains have descended -- the floods
have poured forth -- the winds have blown -- they have all beat violently upon
it; but, as if founded upon a rock, it has yet stood. And we hope it will
stand. We hope that, bidding calm defiance to the fury of every tempest, it
will continue to rise with increasing greatness, until time shall be no more.
Cease, then! ye shortsighted sons of ambition, who would oppose this important
work; ye who delight in oppression, and who feed on the miseries and debasement
of men; cease to imagine, that by your feeble arm, you shall be able to
withstand the Mighty One of Israel! -- Remember, that if this cause be of the
Lord, you cannot overcome it; and if, happily, you be found fighting against God,
your labors, like those of the unhappy sufferer of old, will but revert upon
your own heads.

Let the haughty kings of the earth, then, set themselves, and the rulers take
counsel together, against the Lord, and against the work of his hands; -- He
that sits in the heavens will laugh -- the Lord will have them in derision.
If this wonderful Revolution be, as we trust, a great link in the chain, that
is drawing on the reign of universal harmony and peace; if it be occasioned by
christian principles, and be designed to pave the way for their complete
establishment, however it may appear to be sullied by irreligion and vice, The
Author is well aware, that, in offering his sentiments, thus freely, on the
French Revolution, he stands upon controverted ground. It would, therefore, ill
become his inexperience, and more particularly his profession, to enter into
the details, or the warmth of this argument. He cannot help thinking, however,
that the great pillars of this Revolution rest upon those natural rights of
men, which are assumed by the best writers on government; and upon those
fundamental principles of religion which the Author of our natures has revealed.

It is objected to this revolution, that it has been stained by violence and
inhumanity of the most attrocious and unnecessary kind. Wherever a life has
been wantonly destroyed, or other severities unnecessarily inflicted, no one
should withhold his censure. But shall we make no distinction between the
crimes of an enraged multitude, and the decisions of constituted authorities?
or, between the precipitancy of a popular assembly, at the crisis of a
struggle, and the deliberations of settled government? When a nation, so long
distressed, lifts her avenging arm and breaks her chains on the heads of her
oppressors; when a people make a violent effort, to overturn the mountains of
despotism under which they are buried, can we expect perfect wisdom, prudence,
and moderation to guide all their exertions? While man remains such a creature
as he is, this would be a miracle indeed!

But it will be further asked -- Why, since the great object of this discourse
is to establish a natural connection between christianity and political
liberty; why, in France, amidst the prevalence of the latter, does the former
appear to be so little respected and acknowledged, especially among the
principal friends and promoters of the revolution? Why do we not see a
remarkable attention to real religion, amidst so many exertions to secure the
rights of men? The answer is, that Christianity, considered as a system of
principles, in theory, may produce extensive effects, where its special and
saving influence is extremely small. Nay, every attentive observer of human
affairs, has doubtless discovered a secret but important operation of these
principles, on minds actually despising and rejecting them. The one half of
that light, in which infidels boast, as the splendid result of reason alone,
is, in fact, the light of revelation; and while they contemn its grand Source,
they adopt and use it, in all their religious creeds, and in many of their
daily actions. A small extension of this thought, will, perhaps, when applied
to the French nation, and to all similar cases, go far toward solving the
difficulty in question -- That people may be acting in the light of christian
principles, though they know it not, neither regard them. A deliverance from
the darkness of superstition, may have led them, at once, to cast off the
chains of tyranny, and to renounce even the just restraints of real
Christianity.

But, after all; is there not reason to hope, that many of the accounts which
have been circulated in America, respecting the disorder, vice, and contempt of
all sacred things, prevalent in France, are totally groundless? Is it not
possible, that there is much more regularity, decorum, and real religion, in
that struggling Republic, than her neighboring enemies, so fond of
misrepresentation and calumny, are willing to allow? That many shameful
instances of exaggeration have been detected is well known.


it is the cause of God, and will at last prevail.

HAVING thus commented, in a general manner, on some of the leading objects,
which presented themselves from the passage of scripture which was chosen, the
first emotions which naturally arise, both from the preceding remarks, and this
interesting occasion, are those of gratitude and of praise. Here, happily, our
thankfulness as patriots, and our thankfulness as christians, perfectly
coincide, and are inseparably connected together.

LET us unite, then, in offering our grateful acknowledgments, to the Sovereign
Dispenser of all blessings, that, while many nations are covered with the
mantle of darkness and superstition; and in consequence of this, are groaning
under the yoke of servitude; the Sun of righteousness has risen upon us, with
healing in his wings; and has taught us, in a political view, to know, and to
maintain our proper character. Let us bless his holy name, that, under the
influence of this light, we have been led to assert the dignity of human nature
-- to throw off the chains of oppression -- to think and act for ourselves, and
to acknowledge no other king than the King of the universe. Let us bless his
name, that, under the guidance of the same light, we have been led to frame a
constitution, which recognizes the natural and unalienable rights of men; which
renounces all limits to human liberty, but those which necessity and wisdom
prescribe; and whose great object is, the general good. O give thanks unto the
Lord! for he is good; for his mercy endures forever. Let the redeemed of the
Lord say so, whom he has redeemed from the oppressor, and delivered from all
their destructions. O that men would praise the Lord, for his goodness, and for
his wonderful works to the children of men!

AGAIN; if it be a solemn truth, that the prevalence of Christianity, has a
natural and immediate tendency to promote political freedom, then, those are
the truest and the wisest patriots, who study to increase its influence in
society. Hence it becomes every American citizen to consider this as the great
palladium of our liberty, demanding our first and highest care.

THE Lord has done great things for us, whereof we are glad. The lines are
fallen unto us in pleasant places, yea, we have a goodly heritage. We possess
an extensive, noble country. Fertility and beauty vie with each other, in favor
of our ease, accommodation, and delight. Every avenue to national importance,
and the felicity of individuals, is opened wide. Let it, then, in addition to
all these advantages, and to complete its glory, let it be Immanuel's land.
This will refine, and inconceivably appreciate your freedom. This will render
you at once the pattern, and the wonder of the world.

To each of you, then, my fellow citizens, on this Anniversary of our
Independence, be the solemn address made! Do you wish to stand fast in that
liberty, wherewith the Governor of the universe has made you free? Do you
desire the increasing prosperity of your country? Do you wish to see the law
respected -- good order preserved, and universal peace to prevail? Are you
convinced, that purity of morals is necessary for these important purposes? Do
you believe, that the Christian religion is the firmest basis of morality? Fix
its credit, then, by adopting it yourselves, and spread its glory by the luster
of your example! And while you tell to your children, and to your children's
children, the wonderful works of the Lord, and the great deliverance which he
has wrought out for us, teach them to remember the Author of these blessings,
and they will know how to estimate their value. Teach them to acknowledge the
God of heaven as their King, and they will despise submission to earthly
despots. Teach them to be Christians, and they will ever be free!

AND O, THOU EXALTED SOURCE OF LIBERTY! not only grant and secure to us
POLITICAL FREEDOM; but may we all, by the effectual working of thy Mighty
Power, and through the mediation of Christ Jesus, be brought into the GLORIOUS
LIBERTY OF THE SONS OF GOD; that when this world, and all that is therein,
shall be burnt up, we may become citizens of a better country, that is an
heavenly.

AMEN! JULY 4, 1793.

