A SERIOUS EXPOSTULATION WITH THE MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF
THE UNITED STATES.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and sold by DANIEL LAWRENCE, No. 33. North
Fourth-street, near Race. M. DCC.XCIII.

A SERIOUS EXPOSTULATION, etc.
IN the American Daily Advertiser, and other public papers, are inserted
Debates of the House of Representatives of the United States, on the 28th of
November last, some speeches or animadversions of two or three of the southern
delegates, on the presentation of what is there styled "a paper purporting to
be a memorial respecting the abolition of slavery, which in the opinion of the
said delegates, and diverse others, was declared to be an application
unconstitutional, and of mischievous consequences, as it would only tend to
render the Negroes unhappy, and excite them to insurrections in those states
where they were most necessary to be retained; and that even the publication of
a fanatical memorial in the newspapers, might have a fatal effect in
disturbing the present excellent harmony of the union; for the people of the
southern states may be led thereby to suppose, that this memorial is before
Congress, and will be discussed during the present session, it is therefore the
more necessary to undeceive them, by publishing the contrary, and by expunging
the entry from the journals."

Having believed it my religious duty to address that memorial to Congress, and
that in so doing, I was really influenced by the Catholic principle of
universal good will to men, and sincerely desirous of promoting that excellent
harmony and union, which is founded on the solid basis of impartial liberty and
common right, I may acknowledge it is far from being a matter of indifference
to me to find, in the above cited publication, so little regard paid to this
great fundamental of the public weal; by men chosen and entrusted to fill a
station so very important, who ought and may be supposed, on a subject of so
interesting and extensive concernment, to speak their real sentiments,
unbiassed by any sinister purpose; I have been therefore led I trust, by the
same disinterested and Christian motive, which induced me to make the
application in question, to enter into a close self-examination and
reconsideration of the tenor of my said memorial, left through an unguarded
warmth of zeal, I might have given occasion to those not well-affected to that
divine precept and perfect rule of universal equity, enjoined by the highest
authority, whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so unto
them Matt. vii.31.
-- to stamp the righteous and liberal aim and design of my memorial, with the
opprobrious stigma of fanaticism; and as far as I have been capable of an
impartial scrutiny, I do not find any thing therein contained more justly
meriting so invidious a censure, than what may be found in diverse publicacions
of Congress on the same subject; some of which I have thought proper to select
and bring into view, beginning with the following remarkable language of the
association entered into the 20th of October, 1774.

"And therefore we do for ourselves and the inhabitants of the several colonies
whom we represent, firmly agree and associate under the sacred tics of virtue,
honor, and love of our country, as follows:

2d Article. "We will neither import nor purchase any slaves imported after the
first day of December next, after which time we will wholly discontinue the
Slave Trade, and will neither be concerned in it ourselves, nor will we hire
our vessels, nor fell our commodities or manufactures to those who are
concerned in it Did not Virginia and Maryland consider this to be perpetual, by
their Assemblies passing laws accordingly?
.

8th Article. "And will discountenance and discourage every species of
extravagance and dissipation, especially all horse racing, and all kinds of
gaming, cock-fighting, exhibitions of shows, plays, and other expensive
diversions and entertainments."

To the Inhabitants of the Colonies.

"In every case of opposition by a people to their rulers, or of one state to
another, duty to Almighty God, the Creator of all, requires, that a true and
impartial judgment be formed of the measures leading to such opposition; and of
the causes by which it has been provoked, or can in any degree be justified,
that neither affection on the one hand, nor resentment on the other, being
permitted to give a wrong bias to reason, it may be enabled to take a
dispassionate view of all circumstances, and to settle the public conduct on
the solid foundations of wisdom and justice. From counsels thus tempered arise
the purest hopes of the divine favor, the firmest encouragement to the parties
engaged, and the strongest recommendations of their cause to the rest of
mankind, etc."

Address to the Inhabitants of Canada, May 29, 1775.

"When hardy attempts are made to deprive men of rights bestowed by the
Almighty, when avenues are cut through the most solemn compacts for the
admission of despotism."

Declaration July 6, 1775, of the causes and necessity of taking up arms.

"If it were possible for men who exercise their reason to believe, that the
Divine Author of our existence intended a part of the human race to hold an
absolute property in, and unbounded power over others, marked out by infinite
goodness and wisdom as the objects of a legal domination, never rightfully
resistable, however severe and oppressive the inhabitants of these colonies
might at least require from the Parliament of Great Britain, some evidence that
this dreadful authority over them has been granted to that body So may the
Africans say
.

"But a reverence for our great Creator, principles of humanity and the
dictates of common sense must convince all those who reflect upon the subject,
that government was instituted to promote the welfare of mankind, and ought to
be administered for the attainment of that end. The Legislature of Great
Britain however stimulated by an inordinate passion for power, etc."

2d. Address to the People of England, July 8, 1775.

"Britains can never become the instruments of oppression 'till they lose the
spirit of freedom."

Address to Ireland, July 28, 1775.

"Compelled to behold thousands of our countrymen imprisioned, and men, women,
and children involved in promiscuous and unremitted misery, when we find all
faith at an end, and sacred treaties turned into tricks of state; when we
perceive our friends and kinsmen massacreed, our habitations plundered, our
houses in flames."

And in the Declaration of Independence is inserted respecting the King as
follows:

"He has plundered our seas, ravaged our coasts, burnt our towns, and destroyed
the lives of our people. He is at this time transporting large armies of
foreign mercenaries to complete the works of death, desolation and tyranny,
already begun with circumstances of cruelty and perfidy searcely paralleled in
the most barbarous ages, and totally unworthy of the head of a civilized
nation. He has excited domestic insurrections amongst us."

And here I think it may be proper to mention, that under permission of Divine
Providence, the measure which both Britains and Americans had long dealt to the
natives of Africa, they were in like manner suffered reciprocally to mete out
to each other, by burning towns, etc. captivating their inhabitants, stowing
them into gaols and prison ships, to linger under agonizing pains unto cruel
death; at this stage of affairs Congress resolve at different times on public
fasting and prayers, wherein they acknowledge the superintendence of an all
wise Providence, and the obligations our nation was under to reform from its
sins and implore his merciful interposition, to remove those calamities from
the land, and avert those desolating judgments with which we were threatened.
See Journal June 12, 1775, and March 16, 1776.

In a pamphlet, entitled, "Observations on the American Revolution," published
by order of Congress in 1779, the following sentiments are declared to the
world, viz.

The great principle (of government) is and ever will remain in force, that men
are by nature free: as accountable to him that made them, they must be so; and
so long as we have any idea of Divine Justice, we must associate that of human
freedom. Whether men can part with their liberty, is among the questions which
have exercised the ablest writers; but it is concluded on all hands, that the
right to be free can never be alienated -- still less is it practicable for one
generation to mortgage the privileges of another."

After the laborious productions of the wisdom of this country, manifested to
the world by the declarations and addresses from which the foregoing are
extracted, with others of a similar nature, demonstrating the natural rights of
men in so clear a manner, the following appears to have been adopted as the
then faith of the nation, in the declaration of independence the 4th of July
1776, viz. "We hold these truths to be self evident, that all men are created
equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights;
that amongst these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness."

At the time of entering into the solemn league and covenant (20th October
1774) to vindicate the rights of man, and promote national righteousness, had
any one declared as their opinion that it was of mischievous consequence,
tending to render unhappy the helpless victims of despotic tyranny, and excite
to insurrection, or attempted to enforce as a political creed, so detestable a
position, as that a happy national harmony and union depended on securing to
one class of men, the power and privilege of enslaving and exercising an
imperious lordship over another part of God's rational creation, such person,
though he might not have been stigmatized as a fanatic -- would doubtless have
been in danger of being proscribed as an enemy to his country, and a traitor to
the common cause of equal liberty: now feeling such a weight on my spirit, I am
thereby impelled, by a sense of duty to the Sovereign of the Universe, and the
dictates of humanity, to open my mouth for the dumb, in the cause of such as
are appointed to destruction; and if this is fanaticism, enthusiasm, etc. may
the Almighty grant a double portion to what I ever experienced, if it be his
holy will! I cannot use the carnal sword in my country's defense, I believe
that weapon for a Christian to be unlawful, yet I trust I shall with the
weapons that are to me lawful in the cause of my country, manifest as much
firmness and stability, though it be but in the exercise of one talent, as
those who think themselves justified in the use of other and greater talents:
and therefore, as I do indeed feel alarmed, when I consider that the solemn
professions so lately made in time of extremity and danger, and held up as the
national faith, should so soon on this important occasion seem to be regarded
as mere tricks of state, what can be thought will be the issue? may it not be
considered like trifling with omnipotence?

I crave your patience, my fellow citizens -- I am interested in the welfare of
this country; but I cannot have any conception that this nation will long fare
well, when after such declamations against Britain on account of the despotic
measures pursued by her administration, the spirit of tyranny and oppression is
suffered so readily to prevail in the councils of American rulers, to a degree
in no instance exceeded by Britain; on which head I venture to appeal to the
witness for God in your own breasts, which will undoubtedly show the national
iniquity is the same, whether it proceed from Acts of Convention, or receive
its strength from the countenance of Congress.

Had Congress done as much toward removing this national guilt, as by the
tenor of their own vote they have power to do, there is no doubt with me, but
that it would at least have given a very powerful check, if not a total stop to
the odious traffic, notwithstanding the plea of restriction in the constitution
of the general government: but whether you will hear or forbear, I think it my
duty to tell you plainly, that I believe the blood of the slain, and the
oppression exercised in Africa, promoted by Americans, and in this country
also, will stick to the skirts of every individual of your body, who exercise
the powers of Legislation, and do not exert their talents to clear themselves
of this abomination, when they shall be arraigned before the tremendous bar of
the judgment seat of him who will not fail to do right, in rendering unto every
man his due; even him who early declared, "at the hand of every man's brother
will I require the life of man;" before whom the natural black skin of the body
will never occasion such degradation. I desire to approach you with proper and
due respect, in the temper of a Christian, and the firmness of a veteran
American Freeman, to plead the cause of injured innocence, and open my mouth
for my oppressed brethren, who cannot open theirs for themselves. I ask no
pecuniary advantage for myself, neither post nor pension. I feel the sweets of
American Liberty -- I trust I am sensible of, and thankful for the favor; and
am not easy to partake of mine so partially, and see, hear and know of my
brethren and fellow mortals being so arbitrarily and cruelly deprived of
theirs, and not enter my protest. I desire to have this favor and blessing
continued to myself and posterity, and cannot but view the tenure, both to
myself and countrymen, as very precarious, while a plea is founded on the
general constitution, in bar of the rights of man; and the equal distribution
of justice being confirmed, that the views of a righteous government would be,
to promote the welfare of mankind universally, as well those of other nations,
as the subjects or citizens of its own; and therefore, that it is obligatory on
the United States, to prevent the citizens thereof injuring the inhabitants of
Africa, as those of one state the citizens of another: and I doubt not in the
least, if Africa was in a situation to send fleets and armies here to
retaliate, but Congress would soon devise ways, without violating the
Constitution, to prevent our citizens from aggravating them. The almost daily
accounts I have of the inhumanity perpetrated in these states on this race of
men, distresses me night and day, and brings the subject of the Slave Trade
with more pressure on my spirit; and I believe I feel a measure of the same
obligation that the Prophet did when he was ordered to cry aloud, spare not,
list up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their transgressions, and
the house of Jacob their sins. And here I think I can show, that our nation are
revolting from the law of God, the law of reason and humanity, and the just
principles of government; and with rapid strides establishing tyranny and
oppression; to prove which, I need do no more than oppose the present conduct
of the nation, to that part of it which I have now brought to your view, from
the former journals of Congress, and then mention the sanction the African
Slave Trade at this time has from the general government; in proof of which I
may refer to the condition on which Congress accepted the cession of the
Western Territory of North Carolina, viz. That no regulation made or to be made
shall tend to emancipate slaves.

I am concerned that the leaders of the people may not cause them to err, or
strengthen them in error; the plea now is by state Legislators, as well as
other classes of citizens, and even those abandoned dealers in the persons of
men, that Congress authorizes the traffic as I myself now believe you virtually
do.

If your disapprobation of this trade as a body was publicly known to be
sincere, I believe it would have a good effect; and if you are so it is my
judgment the people has a right to know and expect it from you. I am persuaded,
nine tenths of the citizens of the United States reprobate the African Trade,
and consider every slave imported an injury to the public; and that they repose
confidence in your wisdom as guardians of the nation, to prevent its injury;
and that herein you betray the trust reposed in you, which is indeed a great
and weighty trust, even to do that which of right ought to be done by the
nation; therefore it requires on this very important subject your deep and
serious consideration, what you can do so as to obtain the favor of Divine
Providence to this land, which I do indeed believe will be marked with
something very different, if such an inhuman traffic is continued.

Humane petitions have been presented, to excite in Congress benevolent
feelings for the sufferings of our fellow citizens under cruel bondage to Turks
and Algerines, and that the national power and influence might be exerted for
their relief; with this virtuous application I unite, but lament that any of my
countrymen, who are distinguished as men eminently qualified for public
station, should be so enslaved by illiberal prejudice, as to treat with
contempt a like solicitude for another class of men still more grievously
oppressed.

I prosess freely, and am willing my profession was known over the world, that
I feel the calls of humanity as strong toward an African in America, as to an
American in Algiers, both being my brethren; especially as I am informed the
Algerine treats his slave with more humanity; and I believe the sin of
oppression on the part of the American, is greatest in the sight of the father
of the family of mankind.

I hope some will excuse my inserting, in this apologetic expostulation, a few
texts of scripture as they revive -- I trust there are some of our rulers yet
believe in the authenticity of the holy scriptures; what revives now, is the
declaration of our Lord, Matt. 25 chap. and 41 verse. Then shall he say also to
them on the left hand, depart from me ye cursed, etc. They also shall answer
him, saying -- When saw we thee an hungered, or athirst, or a stranger, or
naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee? His answer then
you may read, Inasmuch as you, did it not to the least of these, ye did it not
to me.

That I may not be thought to trespass on your patience on this momentous
subject, after repeating my special request, that you would without delay exert
your power and influence to frustrate the avaricious purpose of those
mercenaries, who are perhaps now on their voyage from Liverpool to Africa, to
bring to some of the Southern states cargoes of innocent human beings into
cruel, unconditional bondage; the grounds I have for this apprehension, are I
believe not unknown to some among you. I will draw toward a conclusion, with a
quotation from the address of Congress to the Assembly of Jamaica, dated 26th
of July 1775.

"We receive uncommon pleasure from observing the principles of our righteous
opposition distinguished by your approbation: we feel the warmest gratitude for
your pathetic mediation in our behalf with the crown -- but are you to blame?
mournful experience tells us, that petitions are often rejected, while the
sentiments and conduct of the petitioners entitle what they offer to a happier
fate."

That wisdom from above may be mercifully vouchsafed to direct the councils of
America, that this extensive and rising republic may be exalted by
righteousness, and not overturned by pride, oppression, and forgetfulness of
the rightful Ruler and Dread of Nations, is the prayer of an enthusiast in a
pure and uncorrupted sense, and who am both yours individually, and my
country's real friend,

WARNER MIFFLIN.
Kent County, state of Delaware, 21st of the 1st Month, 1793.
FINIS.
THE MEMORIAL Alluded to in the FOREGOING PAMPHLET, WITH THE INTRODUCTION
THERETO;

Taken from the PROVIDENCE GAZETTE of DECEMBER 22, 1792.

"To the Editor of the Providence Gazette.
OBSERVING in the Journals of Congress, given us in the last Gazette, mention
is made of the reading and returning a Memorial subscribed by Warner Mifflin:
As the design of publishing those Journals is, I presume, to give their
constituents the means of forming an opinion of the doings of their
representatives, I therefore request the enclosed copy of said Memorial may
have a place in the next Gazette, as without it, no safe opinion can be formed
upon that article in the Journals. The Memorialist has been well known to many,
in almost every state in the union, to be a man of good sense and solid
discernment, of a plentiful estate and unfullied character, a citizen of one of
the southern states, and a firm friend to the universal liberty of mankind,
both in principle and practice. Whether the sentiments in that Memorial could
consistently warrant the epithet fanatical, from any one Member of Congress,
who professes to believe in the moral government of the world by a Supreme
Being, the reader will judge.

A Friend to Truth and Justice."

THE MEMORIAL OF WARNER MIFFLIN To the PRESIDENT, SENATE and HOUSE of
REPRESENTATIVES of the UNITED STATES.
He that rules over Men must be just, ruling in the fear of God. 2d Samuel,
xxiii. 3.
HAVING for a long time felt my mind impressed with a religious engagement on
your account, and a belief, that if measures are not taken to redress the
wrongs, and alleviate the sufferings and oppressions of the African race in
these states, the Almighty will manifest his displeasure in a more conspicuous
manner than has yet appeared; the consideration whereof excites me, in his
fear, earnestly to solicit, and solemnly to warn you, to exert your power and
influence, that right and justice may be done in this important case.

I have also been affected with the following declaration of the Prophet, Ezekiel.
iii. 20. When a righteous man does turn from his righteousness, and commit
iniquity, and I lay a stumbling block before him, he shall die; because thou
have not given him warning, he shall die in his sin, and his righteousness
which he has done shall not he remembered, but his blood will I require at
thine hand.

21. Nevertheless, if thou warn the righteous man, that the righteous sin not,
and he does not sin, he shall surely live, because he is warned, also thou have
delivered thy soul.

Now I cannot view the declaration made by the first Congress, in substance to
amount to any thing short of a solemn covenant entered into, with the God of
heaven and the whole earth, viz We hold these truths to be self-evident, that
all men are created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain
unalienable rights, among which are life, liberty, etc. and which remains
obligatory on the present Congress so to consider. How then have those rights
become alienated, that Americans should be permitted to continue to ravage the
coast of Africa, thereby promoting murder, pillaging, plundering and burning
its towns, and enslaving its inhabitants? -- And in the United States, while
some of those very men, who perhaps with their own hands subscribed the
aforesaid declaration, remain in the supreme Legislature,' that avaricious men
should be permitted to pass through the country, steal, buy, traffic, barter
and exchange the blacks, as though they were indeed brute beasts, separating
husband from wife, parents from children, even mothers from infant babes, yea,
from all that is dear to men in this world, except life, and indeed that also,
as there are diverse instances of their being murdered; others in iron setters,
huddled into gaol until the number wanted is collected, then stowed into
vessels for transportation to foreign ports, and sold into perpetual slavery,
not permitting a parting leave between the nearest ties of nature --

My soul now revolts at the infernal crime committed against innocent persons,
without provocation. Oh let me now beseech you, not to think it too much
degradation for you to reflect, was this the lot of one of your beloved
delicate wives, your tender babes, or near relatives, how then would you feel!

Do not you with me believe, that there is a God of justice, who will finally
recompense unto all men according to the fruit of their doings; and that he
does at one view, by his all penetrating eye, behold the actions of men over
the face of the globe? if so, how do we think he will look on the rulers of
this land, when he beholds many of them faring sumptuously every day, living in
ease and fullness, and at the very time that they are inventing unto themselves
instruments of music, and spending their precious time in vain theatrical and
Other amusements, remember not the afflictions of their suffering African
brethren, who in this country may be loaded with irons, under all the pangs of
sorrow the human heart can be capable of enduring, for no crime whatever, but
because it pleased God to suffer them to come into the world with a black skin
-- will this not make him your enemy, who is a God that is no respecter of
persons?

I crave your serious attention to this important subject; and that while you
may feel an animated warmth to fill your minds, when engaged respecting the
natives of this land, you suffer a turn of thought respecting the conduct of
Americans in Africa, and in this country also toward Africans, and see if any
savage cruelty of the natives can exceed that of the white people toward the
Africans, considering our superior advantage of civilization, under the light
of the gospel. Let us consider we are informed, that the measure we mete to
others is to be meted to us; and likewise, that we may so conduct, as never to
feel the effects (in the full extent) of the declaration of the Almighty
formerly delivered to a highly favored people, in failure of complying with
their covenants and engagements, viz. Jerome. xxxiv.17. Behold I proclaim a
liberty for you, says the Lord, to the sword, to the famine, and to the
pestilence.

Is there not reason to acknowledge, that we have seen in some measure
fulfilled a part of the first? are there not traces of the second? and do we
not acknowledge, that all three are subservient to Almighty power! and has our
nation fulfilled its covenant? Oh! my countrymen and fellow-citizens, be
serious on this subject, and allow me the liberty of a free expostulation with
you. I feel for the welfare of my country, and my fellow-citizens, every one of
whom I love; and believing myself every way equally interested with the largest
part of your body in the welfare of my country, I hoped you would allow me
freely thus far to relieve my pained heart, who feel so much on account of the
barbarous cruelties exercised on an unoffending people, (which I am persuaded
you generally have not a full conception of) that under an apprehension of duty
I have attempted in this manner to address you; being, with sincere desires for
your welfare,

Your real Friend, WARNER MIFFLIN.
Philadelphia, 23d IIth Month, 1792.
FINIS.

