OBSERVATIONS ON THE CAUSE, NATURE, and TREATMENT OF THE EPIDEMIC DISORDER,
PREVALENT IN PHILADELPHIA.

BY D. NASSY, M. D. Member of the American Philosophical Society, etc.

[Translated from the French.]

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by Parker and Co. for M. Carey, Nov. 26, -- 1793.

NUMBER XLVIII. District of Pennsylvania, to wit, --
(L. S.) BE it remembered, that on the twenty second day of November, in the
eighteenth year of the independence of the united states of America, Matthew
Carey and --, of the said district, have deposited in this office, the title of
a book, the right whereof they claim as proprietors, in the words following, to
wit:

Observations on the cause, nature, and treatment of the epidemic disorder,
prevalent in Philadelphia. By D. Nassy, M. D. Member of the American
Philosophical Society, etc. In conformity to the act of the congress of the
united states, entitled, An act for the encouragement of learning; by securing
the copies of maps, charts, and books, to the authors and proprietors of such
copies, during the times therein mentioned.

SAMUEL CALDWELL, Clerk of the district of Pennsylvania.

THIS work would have appeared six weeks since, if the translator had finished
it at the time promised: however, although it is published at a period when the
disease is extinct, it yet seems to lose nothing of its merit; and we hope it
will be well received by a judicious public. In this expectation, we have
prevailed on the author (who was desirous to withdraw the manuscript) to
consent to the publication.

OBSERVATIONS, etc.
MANY Physicians have published in the newspapers of this country, their
methods of preventing and curing this disease, which may be ranked as one of
the most destructive and fatal; -- but none of them have yet thought of
favoring the public with an accurate account of the nature and particular
symptoms of the fever, that makes such cruel havoc.

Never agreeing among themselves, they have mutually opposed the opinions of
each other, and have often bestowed reciprocal offense. The result of this
difference of ideas, always dangerous for suffering humanity, has been, that
each prescribed according to his own manner, as well for preserving persons
against the contagion, as for treating the disease, by bleeding, drastic
purges, by stimulants, by diluents, by demulcents, by antiseptics, and by
tonics, without pointing out, in the smallest degree, the circumstances or
particular cases, wherein such medicines might be employed or rejected.

The most credulous amongst the people, alarmed by the public papers, and by
the numerous precautions advised to be taken against the pretended pestilence,
began to administer medicines to themselves, and in order to avoid imaginary
evils, produced real ones; some by having recourse to the heating regimen, gave
additional fire to their disease, and thus created their own graves -- others
applied to physicians, who, smitten with fear, thought that they perceived
pestilential appearances in a common disorder, and ordered medicines, which
could only add to the evil. Of consequence, those who did not fall a sacrifice,
recovered with difficulty. Hence the number of the sick and dead have amazingly
increased; and the sentiment of fear operating upon every mind, has made the
greatest part of the inhabitants to leave the city, and forsake in it, without
attendance or assistance, the sick, who were not able to quit it. I could
mention several facts to prove the melancholy situation of the sick, from the
desertion of their friends; but we must forgive those individuals, in favor of
many of the inhabitants of Philadelphia, who have hurried to the assistance of
the poor with an ardor which does honor to humanity.


Would to God, that instead of that fear carried to excess, the citizens of
Philadelphia had imitated the Turks! thus behaving like them toward those,
would not have abandoned their children, nor the children their parents, the
servants their masters, nor friends each other; but every one would have
contributed to comfort and solace one another. The physicians were frequently
compelled, by motives of humanity, to become nurses to the sick, who were
unable of themselves to take the medicines. They have by their flight to the
country fully complied with the Latin Distich, Hoc tria labificam tollunt
adverbia pestem,
Mox, long, tarde, code, recode, rodi.



These remarks may sound harshly, but they are founded upon my own experience
as well as that of several other physicians, who, whilst others were arguing on
the means of preserving the city from the contagion, were courageously treading
in the path of practice, solicitous to fulfill the sacred and religious duties
of their profession.

In order to make up as much as in my power lies, for the void left by those
who have spoken of that disease in the public papers, I shall endeavor to
express my ideas as clearly and precisely as I can.

I may have mistaken the inductions with which the diagnostic signs of the
disease have furnished me. I may also have mistaken the proximate and distant
causes of the present epidemic. But what I am to advance, shall be less sounded
on theory, which often deceives, than on practice, and my clinical
observations. Thus, I will only say what I have seen or believe myself to have
seen, in my patients. I shall neither exaggerate nor disguise any thing. I only
seek for truth, and I write but for the good of humanity, without intending to
give my observations for incontestable decisions. Hippocrates has said of
medicine, Ars longa, occasio celeris, experimentum periculosum, et judicium
difficile. I have, then, no other aim but to stimulate my colleagues, more
learned than me, to enlighten the public. It is our duty likewise to undeceive
the physicians in other parts of this continent, and of Europe, concerning the
specifics recommended in the newspapers of North America, which may be very
fatal to mankind.

All epidemics are more or less contagious. They can be but the effect of a
common and universal cause: the vitiated nature of aliments, or a derangement
of the temperature of the atmosphere, cause them. If the air is not infected,
diseases cannot be epidemic, and this is so, indeed, though it only attacks the
natives. Many circumstances, says Boerhaave, induce us to believe that the
causes of epidemic diseases reside in the air, and depend upon the inexplicable
variety of the exhalations therein contained.


What can be the cause of that corruption of the air? For what reason are the
natives and those inured to the climate of Philadelphia alone infected, with
the prevailing disease, whilst foreigners escape it? they are the first
subjects of our enquiry.

The summer of 1792 was very warm. We were tormented by an amazing number of
flies and other insects, till the middle of November. The following winter was
very moderate as to cold, but subject to surprising variations. By various
meteorological observations, it appears that the thermometer Reaumur's.
ascended and descended from eight to ten degrees in a single day. There was
almost a constant rain, till the end of the Spring, which was very cold, and
very damp. There was no hard frost, and the snow had scarcely fallen, when it
was succeeded by a thaw. According to the observations of Hippocrates, when the
winter has been too mild, or too cold, when the Spring or Summer, and the
following Autumn have been dry, we must fear cruel diseases. The musquitoes
were uncommonly numerous during Autumn: a certain sign, says Dr. Lind, of an
unwholesome atmosphere.
The waters, which, without being frozen, had been stagnant; the quantity of
insects, which winter had killed, the entrails of the fish made use of in the
city, cast by the side of the Delaware, the rotten skins of the dead animals,
and reptiles left near the wharves, or at a short distance from the city, have
all certainly contributed to fill the air with putrid and hurtful miasma. These
added to the quantity of vapors, and of corpuscles of all kinds with which the
atmosphere is always loaded, cannot but rarify or thicken the liquids, affect
the solids, and derange the animal economy, in the most sensible manner. A
stench which proceeded from the lakes about two leagues from Montpellier, says
Mr. Sauvage, in his Nosology, produced pestilential pleurisies in the
neighboring cities.


Besides the burning heat of this Summer, we have had a small share of wind,
rain, or thunder since Spring; and those three agents are necessary to purge
the air from the putrid miasma, and the infectious particles with which it was
impregnated. The exhalations continually produced by the rays of the sun, from
the prodigious number of burying places in Philadelphia, must be subjoined to
the other causes of infection. To these we likewise must add the great
consumption of meat, salt provisions, and green fruits; the strong drink, an
ill fermented beer, and cider made of green fruit; we will perceive, I think,
in this manner of living of the inhabitants of this country, (notwithstanding
the conformity of their constitutions to the atmosphere, of which I shall speak
hereafter) that their stomachs were much more disposed to receive the putrid
miasmas of the air, than the stomachs of those who have observed a good
regimen, and have been regular in their eating, and sober in their drinking.
Let one observe the most part of those who have been attacked by this disease.
He will find that seven-eighths have been strong persons, mechanics who had not
observed any regimen, and children, whom green fruits, and an immense quantity
of water melons, and sweet potatoes, have caused to be attacked by worms, which
killed them, without the most part of the latter being attacked by any
particular fever, either bilious, putrid, or malignant. Besides, we are not
ignorant, that every country has its periodical diseases; that the spring,
equinox, and summer, produce a great deal of disorder in the animal economy,
and that as soon as the air is infected, the character of endemical diseases is
changed, and they become more serious, and mortal. That being once admitted, we
shall proceed, to investigate the nature of the fever, which the air and so
many other causes have produced, and we shall afterward examine which are the
surest means of curing it. I do not flatter myself that I shall analyze these
objects with certainty: physic being a science conjectural, notwithstanding its
own principles, and the mass of knowledge requisite for practicing it. -- I
will then only relate the observations which I have made upon a considerable
number of patients, and the inferences with which they have supplied me.

Fevers, in general, may be ranked in two classes: essential fevers, and
symptomatic fevers. These take their origin from a local vice, or from another
disease caused by some accident, or by some putrid miasma residing in the air;
and whose characters vary infinitely, owing as well to the complexion, to the
solids and liquids, as to the stomach, to the liver, and finally, to the whole
hypogastric region, and abdominals, etc. We shall say nothing of the essential
fevers proceeding from the fault of the blood and humors alone: which appear
to us to have no affinity with the epidemical diseases, since they are the
effects of a complication of causes belonging to the individual.

The reigning fever as far as I have been able to observe it, begins by pains
in the loins, and in the head, at first light, and afterward acute,
accompanied with chills more or less considerable. The face then becomes very
red, as well as the eyes, which are filled with tears. Some are delirious from
the first day of the fever, some only toward the third day, after which they
sink into a state of weakness, or into a profound lethargy, from which they
never recover. The belly, and hypocondres, excepting a few pains, are almost in
their natural state; but the stomach is generally tense or painful. The tongue,
in all cases, from the beginning to the end, is loaded with a whitish crust,
and the edges are of a very high red.

Some have vomitings from the first days, others only toward the third or
fourth day. The matter which they then bring up, is whitish, green or black.
Some vomit pure blood. They have a bloody flux, always preceded by bleeding of
the nose more or less considerable. Some are thirsty, and others, though their
tongue is dry, are not so. The skin is sometimes dry, and shrivelled, and
sometimes much covered with sweat. But I have not perceived on the skin of any
of my patients, any buboes or carbuncles or any other pestilential eruption. I
have observed on three persons only, some few red spots, like the bite of a
fly, on the stomach or breast. Those spots were so inconsiderable, that I doubt
whether I may rank them among the petechiae, or milliary eruptions.
Many are fatigued and low spirited.

Some have kept their spirits, and have exhibited all the good symptoms, during
four days, till the beginning of the fifth, when all is changed, and the
patient is despaired of. The urine, as to quantity, is the same as in a state
of health; as to quality, it is highly colored, with a great deal of a whitish
sediment. But some have, toward the beginning of the seventh day, considerable
evacuations of blood. Amongst my patients, I had but one who had an entire
suppression of urine during five days. Warm baths and flaxseed mucilages were
of great service to him, and he is now recovered.
The pulse, that compass of physicians, is here very equivocal. It never
corresponds with the alarming symptoms which accompany the disease, excepting
the starting of the tendons; and that in a few patients, I have neither found
the pulse intermittent, nor altogether obliterated. -- More or less motion,
strength or weakness was all that I could observe; so that, during the time of
my attendance I regarded, with more attention, the other signs, than the state
of the pulse. In that variety of symptoms, the patients die on the second,
third, fifth, seventh, or ninth day, of the disease; and notwithstanding the
observation of those critical days, several have elapsed without having any
sensible crisis, whereby nature could drive away the disease. They recovered in
proportion as the alarming symptoms ceased, which happens very seldom in acute
diseases. Some women, attacked with that fever during their menses, had them
suddenly suppressed, and children sometimes passed up and down a great quantity
of worms, for the most part very red. In the critical days, the hiccup torments
the patients in a most cruel manner, and then the eyes and skin of some become
yellowish. Several patients who spate or vomited blood, bled at the nose,
evacuated a brown matter, and were tormented with the hiccup, did however
recover, notwithstanding those alarming signs, which together with the other
symptoms, announced the approach of death. But those who vomited a black
matter, who pissed blood, who were heavy and sleepy, who became yellow before
the seventh day, or whose stomach was much swelled, especially those who in the
beginning of the disease, made any use of cathartics, died between the fifth
and eighth day. It is well known that purgatives do not act only upon the
stomach and intestinal canal, but their action is communicated to the liver,
the pancreas, and the spleen.


Those are the observations, I have made on my patients, whose different
situations I have studied with the most steady application.

What is then this fever? Is it the sweating sickness, the putrid bilious
fever, the inflammatory fever, or the disease of Siam, or the malignant fever?
-- I do not know; but I am convinced, that it unites in itself almost every
characteristic sign of these diverse fevers. Besides, it disguises itself,
varies and assumes so many different aspects, according to the complexion and
constitution of the patient, the state of the mass of blood and humors, the
diseases, which he was subject to, when he was attacked with that fever, and
still much more than it is supposed, to the tranquillity and agitation of his
mind, that all judgment, and even inductions, upon its particular character,
are liable to error.

Nevertheless it appears that it is produced by one and the same cause: that it
shows the cause of its own principle, and is only derived from an inflammation,
which the miasmas of the air, combined with the dispositions of the body,
produce an inflammation in the episgrastic region, which affects the liver and
the hypocondria in such a manner, that the blood, the bile, and other humors
acquire more fluidity, owing to the heat increasing the dilatation of the
vessels, causing a dissolution of the blood and of the humors, which are the
principal characters with which the fever in question is accompanied. Pains in
the stomach and reins, the first signs of this disease, are succeeded by the
pathagnomic signs, as well as by vomitings and pissing of blood; and it is
certain, that all which can produce the gastritis, of which the several species
have been described by Sauvage and Hoffman, and especially drastic cathartics,
strong emeticks, and all that increase the fluidity of the humors, such as
mercury, etc. are not only contrary to the treatment of the disease, but may
occasion certain death. And how many since it prevails have been victims of the
violent treatment, and pretended specifics? It is true that Mr. Rosensten, a
celebrated Swedish physician, prescribed calomel with camphor and aloes, as a
preservative against the small pox, a disease well marked. But who is yet
acquainted with the nature of an epidemic, so as to prescribe preservatives in
the beginning of the disease? Besides mercury dissolves the blood, and above
all the other humors. It is then, contrary and dangerous, for all that has a
tendency to dissolution, and consequently in the prevailing disease. Let the
bodies of those who die of that disease be opened, it will be found that the
lower part of the belly, and all the epigrastic are the only ones affected,
while the heart and the brains are in their natural state. Besides, let the
dead bodies of those who used mercury and cathartics, be examined, and it will
appear, whether in these, the evil has not been increased and whether the
gangrenous spots do not visibly discover the violent irritations caused by
those corrosive medicines. The philosophical stone of physic, the universal
panacea, is not yet discovered, and were it amongst possible things, one may
well be allowed to doubt that Heaven had only reserved that discovery to the
physicians of this part of the globe.


The result of all that I have said is that in the cure of this disease, no
regular system can be followed. -- Therefore, I followed none, nor have I
adopted any one medicine in preference to another. My prescriptions were only
regulated by the conjectures which I have drawn from the examination of my
patients, and the informations they could give me concerning their
constitutions, and the state of their health before they were taken ill.

After that, here is a summary of the method I have followed, and still
constantly follow, with such successes, that compared, with the number of
patients, whom I fear to have been the unfortunate victims of the means used in
vain to cure them, confirms me more and more in the resolution I have taken to
follow that practice. I have visited and attended during the course of this
disease, that is to say, since the 28th August to this day, more than 160
patients, of whom 117 were really attacked with the fever, which it would be
difficult to call by a very characteristic name. Of that number I had the
misfortune to lose 19. To eleven of these I was only sent for on the 2d, 4th or
5th day after they were taken ill, after they had been treated by other
physicians, after they had taken violent vomits, cathartics, tincture of bark,
with liq. laud. as they themselves informed me. Every one complained of beating
pains on their stomach already much swelled. -- Eight others who sent for me in
the beginning of this sickness, had on the second or third day of my treatment,
considerable vomitings of a black matter, the jaundice, pissed blood, and died
on the 4th, 5th, 7th or 9th day.

I do not mention other patients whom I have visited and treated during that
time the number of which exceeds fifty. Many had but little remittent, or
colliquative fever. A greater number were affected more in mind than body,
having consulted me, the more I attributed their uneasy situation to the fear
they were seized with, and the more that I assured them they were not sick, the
less they believed me. I was obliged in order to cure them, to make use of an
innocent stratagem, by giving them some agreeable potions concealed under the
disgusting appearance of medicines; and though they were only made with a few
grains of cooling powders of stahl, they operated on them, by the merit of
persuasion, by restoring to them the tranquillity of mind they had lost.




As soon as I was called to visit a patient, and as soon as I perceived the
least sign of inflammation, I, first of all, ordered him to be bled once or
twice, and regulated the quantity of blood to be let, according to his age, and
the strength of his constitution. If it was the first day of the sickness, and
the inflammation was not likely to be of consequence, and if the patient
inclined much to vomiting, I administered to him either a vomit in a large
quantity of water, or some purgative of senna, manna, cream of tartar, and salt
of seignette to cleanse the first passages. If he complained of a head ach,
which did not lessen, or if the inflammation began, I prescribed bleeding after
the purgatives None of my patients were bled more than twice, and they lost but
6 or 8 ounces of blood at a time. My well grounded fear of the dissolution of
the blood, made me to be very cautious about bleeding, which I prescribed but
in case of need, and according to the signs I perceived in my patients. Thus
many recovered without having been bled.
, and during that time until the third day, I only prescribed plentiful and
cooling drinks, and in proportion as the strength failed, or I suspected a
beginning of dissolution in the humors, I did not spare cordials, or the most
softening astringents, mixed with mucilages and antiphlogistics; not
forgetting, when occasion required, antiseptics, for which I used the
alexipharmic essence of stahl, and the camphoric tincture of besoard; I also
prescribed blisters, when I perceived the least sign of sleepiness. I have
never purged any patient, excepting those who took physic on the first day; but
about the sixth day of his illness, or when I perceived, by his urine, that the
coction was made, I never used bark, which I look upon rather as a good
strengthener than as an antiputrid, before the disease is abating. As to
children, all I prescribed for them was bermifuges and glysters made of milk
and honey, and every one evacuated a considerable quantity of reddish worms.

Amongst all the melancholy symptoms of this cruel disease, I found none so
difficult to calm as vomitings, and hiccup. Acids composed of dulcified marine,
and vitriolic salt, had but little success. I succeeded much better, as well
against continual vomitings as against bloody evacuations, with a strong
mucilage made of flax-seed, gum-arabic, honey, and cinnamon water, of which I
directed my patients to take a spoonful every ten minutes.

Topics of emollient herbs boiled in strong wine, vinegar applied warm on the
stomach, the lower part of the belly, and the reins, have also been of great
service with me against the pains of those parts. I used no narcotics. If the
patient, when the disease abated, was tormented with a want of sleep, I only
administered to him almond-juice very thick, mixed with diacodium. In fine, my
whole treatment was at first only established upon the inflammation, which I
always believed to be the origin of that disease, and afterward on the
dissolution of humors which followed; and therefore I made the application
according to circumstances, and the different shapes in which the disease
presented itself, and of the best advices given us by the most eminent authors
who have written on physic.

But is, or is not this disease contagious? A question which I think I am only
able to answer by a distinction, which experience seems to justify. It is
contagious for those, whose organical constitution has great homogenity with
the air of this country. The affinity and relation existing between their
constitution, and the impression of this atmosphere, gives them a nearer
disposition to receive the impressions of the putrid miasmas, with which the
air is impregnated, and which alter and trouble, more, or less that equilibrium
of the solids and liquids, so necessary to maintain good health. The disease is
not contagious for foreigners, whose constitutions have little homogenity with
that dry air. We are convinced of it by the prodigious numbers abounding in
this city, none of whom were attacked with that disease, whilst the most part
of the natives, and those used to the climate, were taken ill with it.

The relations of man with all that surrounds him, and the influence of the air
on the constitutions, cannot be described. We see the effects of them without
often being able to penetrate the causes. We can give but conjectures on that
head; and I only ground this, upon this certain fact, that men accustomed to a
climate, are much more subject to the hurtful variations and influences of its
atmosphere, than those, whose complexion, through a physical propensity, is
still subject to the nature of the climate that they have just quitted. From
thence arise endemic diseases, which do not affect foreigners, and from thence
also the peculiar diseases which attack new-comers, without affecting the
natives, as experience has often showed to us in our colonies.

Such are, in a few words, what I have observed in this disease, and the
methods I have followed to cure it. This is what the little leisure, left me by
my patients, could allow me to commit hastily to writing. The public will not,
certainly, find, in my style, any thing to make amends for the dryness of the
subject I am writing upon. If what I say, has nothing new nor learned, what I
have shown, without order and method, is at least said with candor and
sincerity. My aim is to obtain light, in order the better to serve my patients;
and should this short publication prove agreeable to the public, I will give a
longer dissertation on the actual epidemic. If, after what I have just said,
any physicians, having followed a method different from mine, may have met with
greater success, I beg that they would publish their observations. I assure
them, before hand, of my sincere gratitude, and of the thanks of the public;
non est in medico semper relevetur ut aeger.

Philadelphia, Oct. 10th, 1793. D. NASSY.

POSTCRIPT.
Whilst this paper was in the hands of one of my friends, who had undertaken to
translate it into English, and print it, I had an opportunity of visiting the
new asylum of the unfortunate, at Bush-hill. For this favor, I was indebted to
Mr. Devese, a physician and surgeon from, St. Domingo, who, by a happy choice,
has been entrusted with the care and direction of the hospital at Bush-hill;
and who, to a feeling heart, unites the knowledge requisite for doing honor to
his two professions. At my request, he was kind enough to have opened, in my
presence, the bodies of two patients, who had died of the reigning disease. Of
these two, the one had, before he came to the hospital, made use of the drastic
purges with mercury, and the other had been treated in a more mild manner. The
anatomical inspection of these two bodies, and of several others, made in the
same hospital, has confirmed, in a most incontrovertible manner, the truth of
what I have advanced, in one of my notes (P. 31,) and have plainly proved the
havoc that those violent medicines, when administered in an inflammatory
sickness, have caused in the stomach and intestines, the effects whereof were
perceived upon the bodies of other patients who died of that disorder, although
treated in a different manner. Therefore if the virus of that epidemical
disease, yields, but with difficulty, to the cool antiphlogistic method, much
more will it destroy the patient, in a still shorter time, if, with the
intention of opposing it, we augment its violence by medicines analogous to its
destructive nature.

How much that new hospital has penetrated my heart with gladness! The
situation, the cleanness, the neatness that reign in every room, the contented
and satisfied looks of the patients, who seem to bless their benefactors from
the bottom of their hearts; the vigilance, the activity of the French
under-surgeons, American nurses, and others whom I found there; the obliging
and solacing manner in which they speak to the patients; in a word, every
circumstance has moved my sensibility, in such a way, as to shed tears. Without
prodigality, there is nothing wasted in that hospital. The most valuable
medicines, the most exquisite wines, the nicest and most suitable diet, in
short, every thing is in abundances, and every thing is destined for the relief
of those unhappy and devoted persons, whom the epidemic has struck with (...)
blow.

If the peace and tranquillity, which are enjoyed in this country, enchant the
soul of the meek and peaceful man, the charity of the American people toward
their poor, the eager cares with which some humane and generous persons, have,
in a short time, and at their own expense, fitted up this new asylum for
suffering humanity, the assiduity and zeal of the committee that superintend
it, all this may edify the most virtuous people on earth, and give an example
to the universe how much more, of what adds to the dignity of the species, man,
when in society, can perform, than when alone, than when he has not degraded
his nature by ambition, covetousness, and cold self-love. This picture, so
comforting for humanity, must and ought to spread joy, in a heart of
sensibility, and make one say with transport, Blessed be the name of God!
Notwithstanding the crimes and horrors committed in some parts, virtue and
charity are not yet banished from the whole earth!

FINIS.
* The reader is requested to observe, that the note to page 6 belongs to page
7; and that at the bottom of page 7 to page 6.


