POLITICAL MISCELLANY.

CONTAINING: I. OBSERVATIONS ON OUR POLITICAL AND COMMERCIAL CONNECTIONS WITH
FRANCE. II. EXTRACTS FROM A SPEECH, MADE BY MAXIMILIEN ROBERTSPIERRE, IN THE
NATIONAL CONVENTION, THE 10th OF MAY, 1793, ON THE ABUSES OF ANCIENT
GOVERNMENTS. III. EXTRACTS FROM AN ORATION, DELIVERED BY ELIHU PALMER, THE 4th
OF JULY, 1793. IV. ORATION ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF INDEPENDENCE, BY CITIZEN
BRACKENRIDGE, AUTHOR OF MODERN CHIVALRY.


NEW YORK -- PRINTED BY G. FORMAN, NO. 36, MAIDEN-LANE. -- 1793. --

OBSERVATIONS ON OUR POLITICAL and COMMERCIAL connections with FRANCE.
TO judge on these important subjects, we must consider the peculiar situation
of the United States, as connected with the European powers.

AS a commercial country, it is our interest to form a friendly intercourse
with such nations as are disposed to promote the great objects of trade on the
principles of reciprocity. To effect this purpose, we should examine the
conduct and disposition of the several powers; and when convinced of their
friendship, we ought to grant favors, and confer privileges, with the same
degree of liberality, as they appear inclined to act toward us. It is a good
maxim in politics, to do to others, as they do toward us; and in order to
prevent a continuance of injuries, it is incumbent on us to check them by a
vigorous and timely retaliation. By pursuing a constant course of defensive
operations against such nations as wantonly endeavor to distress our trade, we
shall speedily convince them of our increasing strength, and teach them the
folly of commencing a commercial war with us.

THESE observations being premised, the question is, what nation seems most
disposed to form connections with the United States, founded on the broad basis
of mutual advantages? What European power holds out the most favorable terms,
to promote and enlarge our commerce? Which among them displays a generous
cordiality toward our government and citizens; or by legislative acts, shows a
disposition to harmonize and equalize the trade and intercourse of both
countries? Can Americans be at a loss to announce the nation, thus disposed to
overtures of friendship? Among the combined powers at war against France, can
one among them, with propriety receive the appellation of friends, as to their
proceedings toward us? Which among them has ever come forward with commercial
propositions, worthy our acceptance? Notwithstanding we have rushed
precipitately into the British trade, and inconsiderately lavished among her
merchants and manufacturers, the principle part of every profitable branch of
our commerce, yet we find that this nation, far from returning even decent
attention to the numerous benefits they derive from the connection, treat us
with the most studied insolence, and are ever planning measures to embarrass us
in every port we enter. Since their contest with France, have they not presumed
to prohibit our carrying the produce of America to that country, even as a
neutral nation? Our vessels and property are now become the sport of their
privateers; and the American flag, can scarcely be unfurled on the ocean
without being treated by them with indecency, and exposed to insults.

THE coolness and indifference which many seem disposed to show toward France,
are difficult to account for, as it respects both our political and commercial
interest. As a young nation, is it not of the utmost importance, that we secure
the friendship and confidence of France? That we do not create a jealousy, and
thereby excite her resentment? If she appears disposed to assist us, and wishes
to bestow every commercial benefit upon us, ought we to treat her favors with
coldness, or appear backward in acknowledging her benevolence and partiality?

THERE appears a disposition among some, to prefer a connection with Britain,
rather than with France. It is evident that this is the aim and design of
certain individuals, however they may wish to conceal it. But no man who is a
friend to, or who understands the political and commercial welfare of these
states, can seriously desire it. Should Britain succeed against France, can we
ever expect to reap any advantage from the acquisition? Should they restore the
monarchy, is there any one benefit to accrue to us in consequence of it? Will
the American commerce thrive by the measure, or will there be less impositions
practiced on our trade? Will the British ministry be more cordial to our
welfare? Will the legislature of the nation become more favorable in their
plans; or will their acts be less injurious in their operation? In short, not
one advantage can we propose to ourselves from their success; but on the
contrary, every misfortune would await us. If the British are now so insolent,
amid their present complicated distresses, what may we not expect, should they
effect their nefarious purposes of subjugating France? The idea is too
distressing to anticipate.

BUT let us reverse the scene, and inquire, what may we not expect, should
France succeed? The friendship of this nation has ever been conspicuous. During
our war with Britain, we experienced the salutary effects of her favorable
disposition. Since the peace, her exertions have not ceased to assist our
trade, and cement our alliance. There has ever appeared a noble generosity in
all their proceedings* to encourage the American connection; despising the
paltry resentments that appeared to influence the British nation, they have
treated the Americans with a liberality worthy the character of a magnanimous
people. Since their contest with the European powers, they have come forward
with a philanthropy and independence that must astonish their enemies, and
rivet the affections of their allies. They seem disposed to give the United
States all the advantages of the war; and for that purpose have passed decrees
to grant the most ample encouragement to our commerce in every part of their
dominions. They have placed us on the broadest basis of neutrality, by
admitting the property of all nations to be carried in American bottoms, free
from capture.

THE importance of the French nation, in the scale of Europe, is a weighty
consideration, why we ought to inculcate an harmony with them. Many persons
talk of France, as they would speak of Nootka-Sound, Botany-Bay, or the Miami
Villages; as if it was a country just discovered, and of but little note in the
political calendar. But it rises in weight and dignity when it is considered,
as one of the most powerful, most numerous, and most opulent nations in Europe.
Its power is immense, when we reflect on the magnitude of their present
contest. Is there a nation that could contend for so long a period with the
combined powers of Europe? That could command such resources; maintain such
armies; equip such navies, and defend themselves without the assistance of a
single ally, against the combination of such numerous adversaries? -- When we
consider France thus standing alone, in this arduous and obstinate conflict,
the magnanimity, resolution and formidableness of the nation, stand
unparalleled.

THE strength of the nation is inconceivable, as it respects the number of its
citizens. -- Is it a small matter for America to conciliate the affections of
twenty-six millions of people? -- Shall we by our coldness and lukewarmness,
hazard the advantages to be obtained from a nation so respectable, as to its
population? -- Is it policy in us to forfeit every benefit to be acquired from
an alliance so reputable? Or shall we overlook every flattering consideration
merely to pay our devoirs to the tottering, crumbling nation of Britain? --
When we reflect on the probable advantages that will arise to our commerce, in
consequence of retaining the friendship of France, it must appear the highest
folly not to cement our union. Should we by our pusillanimous conduct excite
their jealousy, or forfeit their confidence they might be led to retaliate with
some pointed resentment on our conduct; and should they pursue a similar system
with Britain, we should be placed in a very distressing situation.

THE resources of the French nation is another matter worthy of observation,
and must impress every person with an exalted idea of its power and riches.
Though they stand alone against the combined armies of Europe, they are enabled
without any foreign loans, to raise funds sufficient for all other purposes. --
Is it possible to conceive of a nation more respectable in this point of view?
-- Notwithstanding their demands are so immediate and enormous, we find they
are all answered with the utmost readiness, and not a murmur is heard, either
in the National Convention, or among the people, of the burden of their taxes.
-- While the other powers are convulsed for want of resources* France abounds
with every pecuniary supply, necessary for the most extensive enterprises. When
we consider the wealth of France, in comparison with their enemies, how vastly
superior do they rise in our estimation?

IN short, they have already bankrupted Europe; and as for England, they have
shaken her to the center, without even firing a gun within her territory,
merely by the echo of their cannon from the shores of Holland.

IT is deragatory to France, to draw any comparison between them and England:
Can the latter display such an army, or equip such a navy, upon any emergency;
more particularly, had they to contend with one quarter of the force combined
against the former? On the contrary, the proposition of a loan, has spread such
an universal insolvensy, throughout the British nation, as to throw a great
part of her merchants and manufacturers within the statute of bankruptcy, and
reduced her minister to the pitiful state of an insignificant pawn-broker.

THESE are the ideas that ought to operate on the minds of Americans, when
reflecting on our connection with France. -- The pusillanimity we so often
observe held up in our papers, may answer the purposes of British sycophants,
and others, whose interest wholly depends on the revenue arising from our
destructive importations from England; but the people of America, who act and
reason on the grand scale of public happiness, cannot but view the friendship
of France, as it concerns both our political and common interest, as an object
of the highest magnitude.

FROM the foregoing observations, it is not meant that we should wantonly
plunge ourselves into a war with the British, or become a party in the present
contest (unless France requests it) but thus much is meant and asserted, that
our National Honor demands of us to support our National Flag; protect the
property of our citizens, and possess the FORTS within our own territory,
which, by treaty we are entitled to -- more especially, when it is considered,
that the " strong arm of the Union," has been exerted to quell a few tribes of
Indians, and more money has been expended in these disgraceful expeditions,
than would build and equip a NAVY sufficient to protect our commerce, and
defend our flag against every indignity.

IT is remarkable, that this ignominious Indian war, has ever been vindicated
in those papers that are now so zealous to injure the cause of France, and
palliate the conduct of Britain. -- Millions of dollars can be expended in
disgraceful contracts, for the purpose of destroying the villages of our
innocent natives; but when the perfidy and insolence of Britain, is brought
into view, then forsooth the poverty of the states is plead, and their strength
is reduced to the forlorn condition of ' twelve revenue cutters.'

TO conclude, the predilection for British politics among many leading
characters; the influence of these sentiments, which is every day prevailing
within particular circles, together with the prospects of numerous fictitious
actions being soon commenced by refugees against every state in the Union, are
circumstances truly alarming, and require a strict watch on the conduct of
Britain and her satellites. -- Provided they can effect their purposes by
personal influence; drain the treasury of every state by constant demands from
TORIES, Who are probably supported in their claims by the British nation, to
create divisions, and to refund what they have already paid to these persons.
hold our Frontiers, and disaffect toward us the only friendly power in
Europe, these, our enemies, anticipate the period when the United States of
America will become SUPPLIANTS to their clemency. May Heaven avert the
catastrophe!

EXTRACTS FROM A SPEECH, MADE BY MAXIMILIEN ROBERTSPIERRE, IN THE NATIONAL
CONVENTION, ON THE TENTH OF MAY, 1793.
MAN is born to enjoy happiness and liberty, yet every where he is miserable
and enslaved. Governments are instituted for the preservation of his rights,
and to perfection his faculties, yet every where governmenrs degrade and
oppress him. The time is come which is to restore him to the state he was
intended for; the progress of information has prepared a great revolution, and
to you it belongs to accelerate it. To fulfill your duty in this respect, you
are to practice exactly the contrary of what has hitherto been done. Hitherto
the art of governing has been the art of despoiling and enslaving the majority,
to the advantage of a few; and legislation the art of reducing those crimes to
a regular system. Kings, aristocrats have played their parts admirably well: to
you it belongs now to do your duty, and to render men happy and free by the
means of wholesome laws.

TO give to government energy sufficient, that citizens may ever respect the
right of their fellow-citizens, and to prevent government from encroaching on
those rights. This is my opinion, the double problem that legislators have to
solve.

THE first appears to me easy; the other one might be tempted to consider as
insolvable, if a cursory view only is taken of present and past events, without
examining their cause. Read history and you will every where see rulers
oppressing citizens; governments swallowing up sovereignty. Tyrents speaking of
sedition, the people complain of tyranny, when the people dare to complain,
which is when excessive oppression restores their energy and independence.
Would heaven, they could always preserve these; but the reign of the people is
of a day; that of tyrants stains the history of ages.

I HAVE heard much said of the anarchy since the revolution of July 14th, 1789,
and especially since that of the 10th of August, 1792. -- But in my opinion it
is not anarchy that is the malady of the political body, but despotism and
aristocracy. I am of opinion, whatever may be said to the contrary, that it is
only from that apocha, which is so much abused, that we have had a beginning of
laws and government, notwithstanding some disturbances, which are nothing more
than convulsions of expiring royalty, and the last struggle of a faithless
government against equality.

POLITICAL evils never are occasioned by the people, but are caused by the
government. -- How could it be otherwise? The people are interested in the
public good; the man in office has a private interest.

IF I choose to stoop to answer absurd prejudices, I would say, that power and
opulence are the parents of vice; that poverty, mediocrity and industry, are
the supporters of virtue; that the weak only ask for the protection of mild
laws; that the passions of the powerful tend to raise them above just laws, or
to produce tyrannical laws.

GOVERNMENT is instituted to cause the general will to be obeyed; but men who
govern, have a will of their own, and every will tends to make itself obeyed.
If they employ to this effect the public force, with which they are armed, the
government becomes a scourge. Agree then, that the first object of every
constitution ought to be to defend public liberty against the encroachments of
the government.

IT is this principal object that legislators have forgotten -- they have all
studied to give governments energy; none of them thought of bringing it back to
its original intention. They have taken infinite precautions against
insurrections of the people; but have at the same time encouraged all in their
power the revolt of their delegates. I have already given the reason of this.
Ambition, violence and perfidy, have legislated for the world. They have even
enslaved human reason, by first debasing it, and have rendered that reason,
thus perverted, the instrument of man's misery.

DESPOTISM produced the corruption of manners; and the corruption of manners
supported despotism. In this state of things, the contest is, who shall sell
his soul to the strongest, to legalize injustice and deify tyranny.

OBSERVE even those among legislators, whom the progress of political
information appears to have impressed with some principles -- observe whether
they have not perverted their talents to elude them, when they clashed with
their personal interest. Observe whether they have done any thing more than
vary the forms of despotism, and determine the nice shades of aristocracy. They
have pompously proclaimed the sovereignty of the people, and have enslaved
them; at the time they acknowledged magistrates as the servants of the people,
they have treated them as their masters and idols. All have agreed in supposing
the people mad and factious, and public functionaries absolutely wise and
virtuous. Without seeking for examples of this among foreign nations, we can
find some very striking in the bosom of our own revolution, and even in the
conduct of the legislators, our predecessors.

SEE with what baseness they burnt the incense of adulation, at the altar of
royalty; with what impudence they preached up confidence in the public
functionaries, whom they knew to be perfidious; with what violence they defamed
the people; with what barbarity they abused them. And yet see on which side the
civic virtues weighed; the generous sacrifices of indigence; the shameful
averice of wealth; recollect the heroic conduct of the private soldiers -- the
base treasons of their officers; the invincible courage; the magnanimous
patience of the people -- the vile egotism; the odious perfidy, of so many of
the public functionaries.

BUT do not let us be surprised at the sight of so much injustice, when we
consider the nation has just emerged from a state of the deepest corruption;
how could a great portion of our representatives be expected to show respect
for humanity; to love equality, and believe in virtue.

UNFORTUNATE that we were! We were attempting to erect a temple to liberty,
with hands yet galled with the chains of despotism. What was our former
education, but a continual lesson of self-love and vanity? What were our
customs, and what we called our laws, but a code of nonsense and baseness, in
which men were classed in a whimsical gradation, and more or less despised,
according to a multiplicity of fantastical distinctions?

TO despise and be despised; to creep to the seat of power; slaves and tyrants
by turns -- one moment kneeling before a master, the next trampling under feet
the people: such was our fate; such was our ambition, of almost all of us;
whether well born, lawyers or financiers; whether counselors, or belonging to
the army. Is it to be wondered at, that so many conceited merchants; so many
vain cits held in sovereign contempt the class of artisans, when they in their
turn were treated in the same manner by the nobility? Oh what a noble pride!
Oh! the wonderful education! And yet it is for this that the happiness of the
world is checked! For this the bosom of our country is torn by traitors! For
this the savage satellites of the despots of Europe have destroyed our crops;
burnt our cities; massacreed our women and children. The blood of 300 thousand
Frenchmen has been shed, and perhaps an equal number are yet to perish; that
the plain farmer should not hold a seat in the senate with the rich dealer in
grain; that the artisan should not have a vote in the assemblies of the people,
as well as the illustrious merchant or the presuming lawyer; and that the poor,
but intelligent and virtuous citizen be not allowed to appear as becomes a man
in the presence of the wealthy and profligate fool.

INFATUATED men, you who cry out for masters, that you may have no equals; do
you believe then that the tyrants will agree to realize the dreams of your
presumptuous vanity and base cupidity? Do you believe that the people, after
having conquered for liberty, and shed their blood in the defense of their
country, when you reposed in the arms of indulgence and luxury, or conspired
against them, will suffer you to enslave them? No -- if you respect neither
humanity, justice nor honor, at least study your interest as far as it respects
your treasures, which have no other enemy than the excess of human misery,
which you so imprudently aggravate. -- But what reasoning can weigh with proud
slaves? The voice of truth thundering in a depraved heart, resembles those
sounds which are heard in funeral vaults without awakening the dead.

YOU then, to whom liberty and your country is dear, undertake alone the task
of saving the public weal, and since the moment when its darkest dangers appear
to call for your whole attention, is when an attempt is made to raise the
edifice of the constitution with improper haste, found it at least upon the
eternal basis of truth. Establish as a first principle, that the people are
good; their delegates corruptible; that it is in the virtue and the sovereignty
of the people that a preservative against the vices and despotism of government
is to be found.

FROM the principle I have endeavored to establish, let us now draw some
consequences useful in practice, which may form a solid basis for a free
constitution.

THE corruption of governments flows from excess of powers, and their
independence of the sovereign: Find a remedy for this twofold abuse.

FIRST lessen the influence of magistrates. -- Hitherto politicians, who have
appeared to make some efforts, less to defend liberty, than modify tyranny,
have only been able to suggest two modes of effecting this -- the balance of
powers, and tribunes for the people.

AS to the balance of powers, we may have been the dupes of that illusion, at a
time when fashion appeared to require of us to give a mark of applause grateful
to our neighbors, at a time when our own degradation left us to admire all
foreign institutions with any thing like a shadow of liberty to recommend them.
But with little reflection, it is easy to perceive, that that balance must be
either a chimera or a scourge; that it supposes the government a total nullity,
did it not necessarily occasion a league between the rival powers against the
people; for it must easily be perceived, that they will rather agree among
themselves, than call in the sovereign to judge in his own cause. Witness
England, where the gold and power of the monarch always inclines the scale on
one side, where the opposition party appears to solicit a reform in the
national representation only to retard it, in concert with the majority, which
they seem combating; a species of government monstrous, where the social
virtues are only to be found in appearance; where the phantom of liberty
excludes the reality; where law sanctifies despotism, and the rights of the
people are the objects of open traffic; where corruption is even disengaged
from the shackles of modesty. And what are to us the contrivances that balance
a tyrannic authority! It is tyranny itself that must be extirpated. It is not
during the differences of their masters only, that the people wish to breath a
few moments; it is in their own strength they should repose for the security of
their rights; for the same reason I am not in favor of tribunes; history has
not taught me to respect them.

I WILL trust so great an interest (that of the people) with no one man -- they
are all weak and corruptible. Protection from tribunes, presupposes the people
slaves. I do not like to see the Romen people retiring to the holy mount, and
thence asking for protectors from a despotic senate or insolent patricians; I
wish them to remain in Rome, and thence to drive all tyrants. I hate as much as
I hate those patricians themselves, and I despise much more, the ambitious
tribunes, those vile proxies for the people, who sell to the wealthy of Rome,
their speeches and their silence, and who only defended their rights now and
then, better to bargain when they come to barter them for gold. There is but
one tribune of the people that I can acknowledge -- the people themselves; it
is to each section of the French Republic, that I wish to confide the power of
tribune; and it will be easy to organize them in such a manner as to free them
from the storms of absolute democracy, and the perfidious calm of
representative despotism. But before we think of placing barriers to protect
civil liberty against the overflowings of the power of magistrates, let us
first define the just limits of that power.

A FIRST rule to attain this end is, to fix short periods from one election to
another, applying this principle in an inverse ratio to the quantum of power
entrusted.

2d. ESTABLISH, that no one shall hold more offices than one at the same time.

3d. THAT the powers be divided. It is better to multiply public officers, than
trust to a few, a formidable power; let legislation and execution be totally
separated.

LET the various departments in the execution be entrusted to different hands,
and to as many hands as the nature of the business will allow.

ONE of the great faults of the present organization is, the too great extent
of each of the ministerial departments, in which are collected various branches
of administration very distinct in their nature.

PUBLIC opinion ought to be the guide of men in public life, and public men
should not attempt to guide or form public opinion.

I SHALL be asked, perhaps, how, with such severe restraints upon public
functionaries, I can secure obedience to the laws and government? I answer,
that thereby I strengthen that security; by those very precautions I give to
the laws and government the influence I take from the vices of men who govern
and make laws.

THE respect which a public functionary inspires, depends much more upon the
respect he shows for the laws, than on the power he usurps -- and the power of
the laws lies much less in the military force ready to enfore them, than on
their agreeing with the principles of justice and the general will. When the
law has for basis the interest of the people, it will have the people for
support, and its energy will rest upon the energy of the whole community, of
which it is the work.

THE general will and public force have the same origin; the public force is to
the political body, what the arm is to the human body, executing what the will
commands, and repelling every thing that menaces the head and heart.

WHEN the public force seconds the general will, the country is free and quiet;
when they differ, the country is either enslaved or its tranquillity disturbed.

THE public force contradicts the general will in two instances; either when
the law is not an expression of the general will, or when the magistrate
employs it to violate the law. Such was the horrid anarchy that tyrants have
ever established, under the name of tranquillity, good order, legislation and
government. All their arts consists in insulating and oppressing each citizen
with the public force; to render them all slaves to their caprice, which they
dignify by the name of law. Legislators enact just laws -- magistrates cause
them to be punctually executed, and you will give to the world a new spectacle,
that of a great people, free and virtuous.

EXTRACT FROM AN ORATION, Delivered at Federal Point, near Philadelphia, on the
FOURTH of JULY, 1793, by ELIHU PALMER, citizen of Pennsylvania; and published
by request of those who heard it.
Friends and Fellow Citizens!
THE age of reason and philosophy has at length arrived, and begins to
illuminate the world! While that veil of darkness, which spread itself over all
nations, was faithfully preserved by the pious alliance of CHURCH and state,
the earth wore a wretched aspect, and humanity wept for the miseries of man.
But when enlightened men began to examine the cause of human wretchedness, and
by their efforts had penetrated the secret corruption of royal courts, the
pillars of despotism were shaken to the foundation. King-craft and
priestcraft, those mighty enemies to reason and liberty, were struck with
death by the genius of 1776. For seventween years they have been decaying under
the influence of a mortal wound, and now in the last stage of their existence,
like a drowning man catching at a straw, one more desperate effort is making to
preserve them from inevitable destruction. But they are summoned with a mighty
voice to the dark abodes of oblivion, "to which I wish them a speedy and
unobstructed passage," never more to raise again to scatter mischief among
deluded nations.

IN this view of the subject, and considering the consequences, it is
impossible not to admire the manly firmness which dictated the declaration of
American Independence. Those bold patriots deserve, and will undoubtedly obtain
the thanks and applause of all posterity. How much is it to be lamented, that
any whose names we see affixed to that great instrument, should at this day
afford good ground of suspicion, that their political principles are directed
to the total destruction of LIBERTY and EQUALITY. But the genious of liberty is
rousing from slumber, and will eventually emancipate the world. Beware, ye
American aristocrats! your principles and efforts are leading you to a
precipice, from which the just resentment and indignation of an injured people
will hurl you into eternal infamy. Civil and religious oppression will not gain
much ground in the American world, though attempts are making to effectuate
both. If the cause of France, which is the great cause of human nature, should
succeed, then farewell kings, aristocrats, and the long catalogue of clerical
impositions -- impositions which have robbed man of his greatest dignity, and
closed every avenue of independent reflection. Indeed, had it not been that the
clergy gained a complete ascendency over the minds of men, the civil
oppressions of the world would long since have tumbled into ruin. But living on
the spoils of the people, it was easy for these impostors to preach up the
beauty and excellency of humiliating poverty, that they themselves might riot
upon the luxuries of the earth. And thus while they degraded the human
character and feasted on the iniquitous profits, they aided the already too
potent arm of the civil tyrant, and prepared every living creature for the
completest slavery.

HOW lamentable is it, that religion, which ought to unite all hearts, should
so often be made use of as a cloak for the commission of the greatest crimes,
and by those very men too, who have so often imposed themselves upon the world
as persons of superior sanctity and virtue. I do not mean to insinuate in this
place that there are not virtuous and upright individuals among this body of
men; but, take them as a body, they have done infinite mischief, and many of
them merit the curses of the present and all future ages. In justice, however,
to the American clergy, it ought to be observed, that in effecting our
revolution, many of them by their precepts and example afforded great service,
and were truly valuable members of the community. I wish it could be said at
this day, that none of them assumed the mysterious carriage and imaginary
dignity of an European bishop. In the state of Connecticut, they are thought
generally to have deviated from the revolutionary principles of 1776. " The
clergy in Connecticut (says Mr. Morse) have hitherto preserved a kind of
aristocratical balance in the very democratical government of the state; which
has happily operated as a check upon the overbearing spirit of republicanism."
[MORSE'S GEOG.]


BUT the enlightened friends of humanity, may congratulate each other upon a
glorious prospect. The empire of reason will soon sweep from off the earth this
bundle of nonsense and oppression, and permanently fix the attention of the
human mind upon a point essential to its dignity and happiness. Already have
the two revolutions of America and France awakened in the intellectual world a
new energy of thought, and turned the pursuit of man upon scientific principle
into the path of liberal discussion. Previous to these great events -- events
unparelleled in the history of ages, every pursuit of man was tinctured with
the despotism of church and state. Scarcely a single art or science could be
independently investigated without fear and trembling; at least it was first to
be enquired how the proof of any proposition would affect the power and
influence of those two holy sisters, who subjugated the earth in perpetual
bondage. The rights, dignities, and essential privileges of the human race,
were buried in the gulf of royal and clerical avarice and deception. But these
days of fanaticism and oppression are vanishing away, and the philosophy of the
human mind is making deep researches, to develope the nature of those
principles, which will afford a permanent hope to the wretched in every part of
the world.

THE cries of millions of innocent sufferers are calling aloud upon reason and
philosophy to come forth to their aid, and lead them with a powerful hand to
the land of light and joy. And it is a matter of unusual consolation, that the
two great events, previously mentioned, have so far contributed to stimulate
reflecting men to investigate the principles of nature, as leads to a hope,
that a lasting source of felicity may be established for the great family of
mankind. Not much longer shall superstitious impostors decimate the fruits of
man's industry: but the principles of government, religion, literature, and
morals, shall receive that candid and impartial discussion, which the nature
and importance of the several subjects require. Already great improvements have
been made, and though many are in dread of innovations, yet I conceive no good
ground of apprehension has been shown on these subjects.

THE philosophy of this age, teaches the most pure and unadulterated morality;
and stripping religion of its mysteries and external trappings, will present it
to the view of the human mind in more beautiful and attractive charms: so that
in every point of view, these great political events will serve to ameliorate
the condition of the human race.

ORATION, BY CITIZEN BRACKENRIDGE, On the Celebration of the Anniversary of
Independence. [Pittsburgh, July 4, 1793.]
THE celebration of the day, introduces the idea of the principle that gave it
birth: Was it the wisdom of the king of Great Britain, who saw the growing
greatness of the province, that they were now of age to act for themselves, and
bade them be independent? No -- The wisdom of the parliament of Great Britain,
that seeing the inconvenience or impossibility of our being represented in the
legislature, and sensible of the unreasonableness of being bound by laws
without being represented, saw the expediency of a separation from them, and
said to us, Be independent and become an allied power? No -- Nothing of all
this. The king and parliament of Great Britain, were of opinion, that without
representation, we were bound by their laws, and though descendants of their
isle, had no right to freedom in a great forest.

WHENCE then our independence? It was the offspring of the understanding and
the virtue of the people of America themselves. The eloquent advised; the brave
fought, and we succeeded. The day on which we assumed our rights, became a
festival; and every future year shall remember it with ardent exertion.

THE celebration of the day, introduces the idea of the effect of it beyond the
sphere of these states. The light kindled here has been reflected to France,
and a new order of things has arisen. Shall we blame the intemperance of the
exertions? Was there ever enthusiasm without intemperance? and was there ever a
great effect without enthusiasm? Thy principles, O! Liberty, are not violent or
cruel: but in the desperation of thy efforts against tyranny, is it not always
possible to keep within the limit of the vengeance, necessary to defense? Do we
accuse the air, or the bastile of the mountain, when the rock is burst, and the
town engulphed? The air of itself is mild, and scarcely wafts a feather from
its place: But restrained and imprisoned, the yielding and placid element
becomes indignant, and tears the globe before it. Do we accuse the hurricane,
when the mariner is tossed with the tempest, and is an incidental sufferer in
the storm? The naturalist does not. He tells you that the equilibrium of the
atmosphere has been disturbed, and if man has suffered more than the demerit of
his transgressions it is in a struggle of nature to restore herself.

IS it the duty of these states to assist France? That we are bound by treaty,
and how far, I will not say; because it is not necessary. We are bound by a
higher principle, if our assistance could avail; the great law of humanity.

WE might, it is true, allege the stipulations of a treaty, and the guarantee
of her possessions to France. But all the world would know, and we ought to
avow it, that it is the cause of republicanism which would induce our efforts.
The tyrant of Great Britain alleged the stipulations of a treaty relative to
the opening of the Schaldt and waiting for no requisition on the part of
Holland to observe the guarentee. But all the world knew, and he might have
avowed it, that it was not the opening of the Scheldt, but the attack upon
monarchy, that prompted his interposition. Shall kings combine, and shall
republics not unite? We have united. The heart of America feels the cause of
France; she takes a part in all her councils; approves her wisdom; blames her
excesses; she is moved, impelled, elevated and depressed; with all the changes
of her good and bad fortune; she feels the same fury in her veins; she is
tossed and shaken with all the variety of hopes and fears, attending her
situation: Why not? Can we be indifferent? Is not our fate interlaced with
hers? For, O France! if thy republic perish, where is the honor due to ours?
From whom respect to our flag upon the seas? Not from France restored to a
monarch, and indignant at these very feelings which are now our glory: Not from
the despots that are against her: These will easily recollect that the cause of
their evils took their rise here.

CAN we assist France by arming in her favor? I will not say that we can. But
could we, and should France say, United States, your neutrality is not
sufficient; we expect the junction of your arms with mine; your heroes on the
soil, and your privateers on the ocean, to distress the foes; who is there
would not say, It shall be so; you shall have them; our citizens shall arm;
they shall attack; our oaks shall descend from the mountains; our vessels be
launched upon the stream, and the voice of our war, however weak, shall be
heard with yours!

IF we our ourselves should judge that our arms could assist France, even
though the generrous republic required it not, yet who would hesitate to
interfere, not only at the risk of property, but life itself? Is it illusion;
or do I hear France say? My daughter America! I know the dutifulness of thy
heart toward me; and that thou art disposed to show it, by taking part in this
war. But I wish thee not to provoke hostilities for my sake. If I perish, I
perish; but let not a mother draw in a hapless child, to suffer with herself:
Is it illusion; or do I hear America reply? I do, and it is in the language of
the Moabitess Ruth, to her mother-in-law, the Jewish Naomi, "Entreat me not to
leave thee, or return from following thee; for whither thou go, I will go;
and where thou lodgest, I will lodge; thy people shall be my people, and thy
God my God; where thou die, I will die, and there will I be buried. God do so
to me, and more also, if aught but death shall part thee and me."

BUT whether we assist or not, thy cause, O! France, will be triumphant. Did
the enthusiasm of a small Roman people, repel their invaders, until Rome became
the protectress of nations? Did the enthusiasm of a few Greeks, repel the
millions of Asia, and afterward overrun her kingdoms? Did the enthusiasm of
the Saracens, in a few years spread to Spain on the one hand, and the Indus on
the other? Did the enthusiasm of a few mad Crusaders, burst upon the Saracen,
and establish the kingdom of Jerusalem in the center of his empire? And shall
the enthusiasm of a brave people, more numerous than the early Roman republic,
the Greeks under Alexander; the Saracens of Arabia, or the Crusaders of Europe,
be subdued by all that are against them? The weight will but condense
resistance, and as the materials of explosion in the ordonance acquire a spring
by confinement, so in proportion to the attack of this people, will their voice
be terrible, their blow irresistible.

FRANCE will be independent also, and celebrate her anniversaries; and in doing
so will recollect that our independence had preceded hers and made the example.
-- The anniversary of the independence of Amarica will be a great epoch of
Liberty throughout the world. Proceed we then to celebrate the day; advance to
the festive board; pour out liberations to sentiments of liberty, and let the
loud mouthed artillery be heard on the hill!

THE END.

