Dr. PARKER's ELECTION SERMON. MAY 29, 1793.

COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS. IN SENATE, May 29, 1793.
ORDERED, That THOMAS DAWES, and BENJAMIN AUSTIN, jun. Esquires, be a Committee
to wait on the Rev. Doctor SAMUEL PARKER, and thank him in the name of the
SENATE, for the SERMON delivered by him this day, before his Honor the
LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR, the Honorable COUNCIL, and the two Branches of the
LEGISLATURE; and to request of him a Copy thereof for the Press.

Attest. SAMUEL COOPER, Clerk.

A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE His Honor the Lieutenant Governor, THE HONORABLE THE
COUNCIL, AND THE HONORABLE THE SENATE, AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, OF THE
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS, MAY 29, 1793; BEING THE DAY OF GENERAL ELECTION.

BY SAMUEL PARKER, D. D. RECTOR OF TRINITY CHURCH, BOSTON.

PRINTED AT BOSTON, BY Thomas Adams, PRINTER TO THE HONORABLE GENERAL COURT*
M,DCC,XCIII.

AN ELECTION SERMON.
PROVERBS xiv.34. RIGHTEOUSNESS EXALTS A NATION: BUT SIN IS A REPROACH TO ANY
PEOPLE.
THE great source of all human knowledge is experience; and that experience
which teaches us practical wisdom, and informs us of the many evils that
constantly wait on life, is acquired chiefly by observation and reflection.
Time, indeed, is continually forcing the instructions of this sage monitor on
our notice, and when "length of days" has not made us sufficiently acquainted
with her, we fly to the aged that we may learn her counsels; or read them with
sufficient certainty, in the misconduct, disappointment, and miseries of others.

THE Historian makes it his peculiar glory, that by faithfully recording the
fates of kingdoms, by delineating the virtues which raised some to
magnificence, and the vices which brought others gradually to destruction, he
anticipates the future by a true representation of the past, and teaches men
wisdom by the example of others. But though, from the short period of human
life, the narrowness of our views, and the necessary calls of duty, we are
obliged to recur to the experience of those who have gone before us, for almost
all our knowledge; yet the few events that happen to ourselves, or that fall
within the circle of our own observation, make a far more lasting impression on
us, and have a much greater influence over the heart.

THE strange vicissitudes of fortune, that happen either to nations or
individuals, we hear with faint emotion, and often regard them only as they
serve to gratify curiosity, and increase our store of knowledge. The
Historian's eloquence, and the Poet's fancy can scarcely raise the tear of
sympathy, while they relate, with all the decoration of language, the miseries
of life; and those sorrows which only the best and softest bosoms feel
occasionally for the calamities of others, are but of short duration. They
vanish quick as the morning dews dissolve before the rising sun, and often, like
them, "leave not a trace behind." But such calamities and disappointments as
befall ourselves, are considered as dear bought experience, and treasured up in
the heart. These are the counselors that will make us wise and good; unless in
despite of reason and of nature, we suffer life to glide away unnoticed,
without improvement in knowledge or in virtue.

SERIOUS reflection on what has passed, with a constant habit of comparing it
to the future, seems, indeed, to be a rule of moral discipline, natural to the
mind of man, and is one of the greatest safeguards of virtue, as well as the
best means of acquiring useful knowledge. The fluctuating state of our minds
makes it necessary to take these retrospective views of life, that we may
increase in prudence, ane establish ourselves in virtue.

UNDER the full persuasion of the efficacy of this principle, as well as the
influence of the Divine Spirit, the Proverbs of Solomon, which have always been
esteemed a most valuable part of the holy Scriptures, were written. He says
himself, that they were the fruits of his most profound meditations, and of his
most excellent wisdom. Because the Preacher was wise, he still taught the
people knowledge; yea he gave good heed, and sought out, and set in order many
Proverbs. Eccles. xii.9.
To give the more weight and dignity to his precepts, he delivers them not as
his own, but as those of Wisdom herself; and in the poetic and dramatic way,
introduces her as a divine person, the favorite offspring and first born of
God, who dwelt with him before the foundations of the earth were laid, before
time and the world was, and who is sent forth from him to guide, and instruct
the children of men.

AMONG these Proverbs or wise sayings, we find many excellent rules for the
conduct of human life, and for leading men to happiness. But perhaps there is
not any thing in the whole book, of greater importance to us, as members of
civil society, than the aphorism contained in our text. Righteousness exalts
a nation, but sin is a reproach to any people.

IT is well known, that the word righteousness is used, in the sacred writings,
with different degrees of latitude. Sometimes, it is applied in a confined
sense, as signifying that uprightness, equity and justice, which we should
maintain in our treatment of our fellow creatures, by rendering to all their
proper dues; and is synonimous with justice. But the word is usually taken in a
more extensive signification, as descriptive of goodness in general. In this
sense the righteous man is one, who acts well in all the relations and
characters in which he is placed; who lives in the practice of piety,
benevolence, self government and universal goodness. In this larger meaning,
the term is most commonly used throughout the Psalms, the Proverbs and the New
Testament. Thus, To him that sows righteousness shall be a sure reward. As
righteousness tends to life, so he that pursues evil, pursues it to his own
death. It is in this extensive sense, that the word is undoubtedly used in our
text. A righteous person is one who maintains an upright, holy and virtuous
part through the whole course and tenor of his life. He is one, who seriously
considers, and steadily discharges the general obligations of piety and
goodness. This, no doubt, will necessarily include in it, his being righteous
in the strict and limited signification of the term. He makes a point of
preserving an exact fidelity and equity in his intercourse with mankind.
According to the best of his abilities he renders to his fellow creatures their
dues, and treats them in a manner agreeable to the various claims, of one kind
and another, which they have upon him. He is true to his engagements, and
faithful to his promises.

BESIDES this, he performs the other offices and duties of the virtuous
character. He is not only honest and equitable, but kind and benevolent. He
endeavors to promote the welfare of those around him, and to behave, in every
respect, as one who is animated with the principles of affection to his
brethren of the human nature. He makes it his labor, his delight, to render
them happy, so far as the capacity of doing it, which Providence has put in
his power, extends.

NOR, while he is just and generous toward men, is he unjust to, or forgetful
of, the ever blessed GOD. He seriously considers his obligations to the
greatest and best of beings, and is solicitous to testify his sense of them, by
all the returns which he is capable of making. Hence he cultivates the deepest
reverence for the sacred name of his Maker, and the warmest sentiments of
devotion toward him. Hence he loves his high Creator and Benefactor, above
every object beside, is truly thankful for the mercies he receives from him,
trusts in his protection and support, submits to his will, and is obedient to
his commands.

EQUALLY intent is the righteous man upon maintaining and cherishing the
personal virtues. He keeps himself in the exercise of self government,
temperance, moderation, meekness, humility and contentment. In short, he
endeavors to be found in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord
blameless, and to preserve all the graces of the spiritual life.

SUCH is the righteousness the wise man speaks of as exhibited in practice; and
a righteous nation consists of a number of individuals whose character and
conduct are such as we have now briefly delineated.

THE sin mentioned in our text, as the reproach of a people, must be considered
as the opposite to this great and good character. When the people composing a
nation show no regard to the eternal rules of equity and justice; when true
religion decays, and they lose their reverence for the Divine Being; when they
despise his institutions, and profane his sabbaths; when they ridicule his
word, and indulge themselves in the breach of his commands; when infidelity and
vice prevail; when impiety and irreligion mark the character of a people --
then iniquity abounds, and they are under the influence of that sin, which is
their greatest reproach.

TAKING then the word righteousness in the sense we have explained it, to
signify religion and virtue in general, our text naturally presents us with a
subject, which, I flatter myself, will not be considered as altogether foreign
from the design of our present assembling, viz. THE HARMONY OF RELIGION AND
CIVIL POLITY; or, that religion and virtue are the surest means of promoting
national happiness and prosperity.

WHEN Solomon asserts that religion or righteousness exalts a nation, we are
not to understand the proposition in so strict and absolute a sense, as that
true religion is so necessary, in all its doctrines, and in all the extent of
its precepts, that there have been no instances of the prosperity of societies,
which have not been wholly regulated by it. Some States, it must be
acknowledged, which have been only partially governed by its maxims, have
enjoyed long and glorious advantages upon the theater of the world; either
because their false religions contained some principles of rectitude, in common
with the true religion; or, because GOD, in order to animate and encourage such
people to the practice of some virtues, necessary to the very being of society,
annexed success to the exercise of them; or, because rectitude was never so
fully established upon earth, as to preclude injustice from enjoying the
advantages of virtue, or virtue from suffering the penalties of vice. However
this may be, we affirm, that the most sure method that a nation can take to
support and exalt itself, is to follow the laws of righteousness, and the
spirit of religion.

NOR is it asserted in our text, that, in every particular case, religion is
more successful in procuring some temporary advantage than the violation of it;
so that to consider society only in this point of light, and to confine it to
this particular case, independently of all other circumstances, religion yields
the honor of temporary prosperity to injustice. Some State crimes may have
been successful, and have been the steps by which certain nations have acquired
worldly glory. And should we acknowledge that virtue has sometimes been an
obstacle to grandeur, still the truth of the proposition in our text stands
unimpeached -- that if we consider a nation in every point of light, and in all
circumstances, it will be found that the more a society practices virtue, the
more prosperity it will enjoy; the more it abandons itself to vice, the more
misery it will sooner or later suffer; so that the very vice which contributed
to its exaltation, will produce its destruction, and the virtue which seemed at
first to abase it, will in the end exalt its glory.

WE observe further here, that by a nation's being exalted, the inspired author
of our text does not intend such an elevation as worldly heroes, or rather
tyrants, aim at. If, by exalting a nation, is understood an elevation extending
itself beyond the limits of rectitude; an elevation not directed by justice and
good faith, consisting in the acquisitions of wanton and arbitrary power,
obliging other nations to submit to a yoke of slavery, and thus becoming an
executioner of divine vengeance on all mankind -- we allow, that in this sense,
exaltation is not an effect of righteousness. But, by exalting a nation, the
wise man intends, whatever promotes the greatest happiness and prosperity of
its citizens; its being governed by wise and wholesome laws, enjoying liberty
and equal government, negociating successful treaties, attacking its enemies
with courage, defending itself with resolution, enjoying every blessing
conducive to the prosperity and happiness of a people; and at the same time
blessed with the favorable notice and regard of the Divine Being. Such an
exaltation is obtained only by righteousness.

IN a word, it is not the lot of humanity, that the prosperity of any nation
should be so perfect, as to exclude all untoward circumstances. The meaning of
our text must be, that the highest glory, and the most perfect happiness, which
can be enjoyed by a nation, in a world, where, after all, there must be a
mixture of adversity with prosperity, are the fruits of righteousness. No
nation was ever yet free from evils and inconveniences of many kinds; and even
the most virtuous societies have been suffered to labor under many straits and
difficulties; and it must be allowed, that this world will always be to public
bodies what it is to individuals, a place of misery and unhappiness; and
therefore we must understand our text as asserting only, that the most solid
happiness, which can be enjoyed here below, has righteousness for its cause. It
is the more necessary to restrain it within these limitations, not only because
they explain the sense of the inspired author, but because they serve to
preclude such objections, to unravel such sophisms, and to solve such
difficulties, as infidels and libertines have urged against its truth.

TO prove, then, that religion and virtue are the surest means of promoting
national happiness and prosperity, let us consider the origin of civil
government, and the motives which induced mankind to unite themselves in
society. By doing this, we shall perceive that righteousness is the only thing
that can render nations happy.

EVERY individual has a great variety of wants, and but few, and those very
limited, faculties to supply them. Every individual of mankind has need of
knowledge to inform him, of laws to direct him, of property to support him, of
food to nourish him, of clothing and covering to defend him against the
inclemencies of the seasons. This catalogue of our various and respective wants
might easily be enlarged. Similar interests form a similar design. Diverse men
unite themselves together, in order that the industry of all may supply the
wants of each. Hence the origin of societies and public bodies of men.

THE Author of our being has also given to man a nature fitted for, and
disposed to, society. It was not good for man at first to be alone; his nature
is social, having various affections, propensities and passions, which respect
society, and cannot be indulged without a social intercourse. The natural
principles of benevolence, compassion, justice, and indeed most of our natural
affections, powerfully incite to, and plainly indicate that man was formed for,
society.

THE social affections of our nature, and the desire of the many conveniences,
not to be obtained or enjoyed, without the concurrence of others, probably
first induced men to associate together. But the depravity of our nature since
the apostasy, and the great prevalency of lusts and corruptions, have obliged
mankind to enter into closer connexions and combinations, for mutual protection
and assistance. Thus civil societies and governments were formed, and in this
way government comes from God, and is his ordinance. The kingdom is the Lord's,
and he is the Governor among the nations. By him kings reign, and princes
decree justice, even all the judges of the earth.

THE end and design of civil society and government, from this view of its
origin, must be to secure the rights and properties of its members, and to
promote their welfare and happiness; or, in the words of inspiration, that men
may live quiet and peaceable lives, in all godliness and honesty.

IT is easy to perceive then, that in order to enjoy the blessings proposed by
this assemblage, some fixed maxims must be laid down, and inviolably obeyed. It
is necessary that all the members of this body should consider themselves as
naturally equal; that by this idea they may be inclined to afford each other
mutual succor. It is requisite that they should be sincere to each other, lest
deceit should serve for a veil to conceal the sinister designs of some from the
eyes of the rest. The rigid rules of equity should be inviolably observed, that
so they may fulfill the contracts, which they bound themselves to perform, when
they were admitted into this society. Esteem and benevolence ought to give life
and action to righteousness. It is of the utmost consequence, that the
happiness of all should be preferred before the interest of an individual; and
that in cases where public and private interests clash, the public good
should always prevail. Every citizen ought to cultivate his own talents, that
he may contribute to the happiness of that society, to which he ought to devote
himself with the utmost sincerity and zeal. These duties are absolutely
necessary for the welfare and prosperity of societies. And what can be more
proper to make us observe these rules than religion, -- than righteousness?
Religion brings us to feel our natural equality; it teaches us that we
originate in the same dust; have the same GOD for our Creator; are all
descended from the same first Parent; all partake of the same miseries, and are
all doomed to the same last end. Religion teaches us sincerity to each other;
that the tongue should be a faithful interpreter of the mind; that we should
speak every man truth with his neighbor; and, that being always in the sight
of the GOD of truth, we should never deviate from the laws of truth. Religion
teaches us that we should be just; that we should render to all their dues;
tribute to whom tribute is due; custom to whom custom; fear to whom fear;
honor to whom honor; that whatsoever we would men should do unto us, we
should do even so unto them. Religion requires us to be animated with charity,
-- to consider each other as creatures of one GOD, subjects of the same
heavenly King, members of one body, and heirs of the same glory. It requires us
to give up our private interest to the public good, not to seek our own, but
every one another's wealth; it even requires us to lay down our lives for the
brethren. Thus if we consider nations in these primitive views, it is
righteousness alone that exalts them.

WERE we to descend from these general principles, and take into view the
particular forms of government, which have been adopted by the various nations
upon earth; or rather, which have grown out of particular occasions and
emergencies; from the fluctuating policy of different ages; from the
contentions, successes, interests and opportunities of different orders and
parties of men among them (for such we shall find was the origin of most of the
particular forms of government in the world,) we shall be convinced that each
nation has been, more or less happy, in its own mode of governing, has more or
less prevented the inconveniences, to which its form of government is subject,
according as it has been more or less attached to religion or righteousness.
The precepts and the maxims of religion, applied to these imperfections, would
effectually restrain all those excesses, and preclude those evils, from which
the most perfect forms of government are not entirely free. But the time will
not permit us to enter into so particular an inquiry, or to multiply quotations
to prove this point.

I PROCEED to observe, secondly, that the doctrine of Providence will furnish
us with another argument, to prove the truth of our text.

THE conduct of Providence, with regard to public bodies is very different
from that, which prevails in the case of individuals. It is a rule in the
divine government, to deal with nations according to their moral character.
Perfect justice is the invariable rule of his dominion over public bodies. In
regard to individuals, Providence is involved in darkness. Many times it seems
to condemn virtue, and crown injustice; to leave innocence to groan in silence,
and to empower guilt to riot, and triumph in public. The wicked rich man fared
sumptuously every day, while Lazarus desired, in vain, to be fed with the
crumbs that fell from his table. St. Paul was executed on a scaffold, while
Nero reigned on Caesar's throne.

BUT Providence is directed in a different method, in regard to public bodies.
Prosperity in them is the effect of righteousness; public happiness is the
reward of public virtue; the wisest nation is usually the most successful, and
virtue walks with glory by her side. The work of righteousness shall be peace,
and the effects of righteousness, quietness and assurance forever. On the other
hand, the judgments of Heaven are commonly showered down upon a wicked people;
he turns a fruitful land into barrenness, for the wickedness of them that
dwell therein.

GOD sometimes, indeed, afflicts the most virtuous nations; but he does so with
the design of purifying them, and of opening new occasions to bestow larger
benefits upon them. He sometimes, indeed, prospers wicked nations; but their
prosperity is an effort of his patience and long suffering; it is to give them
time to prevent their destruction, and by his goodness, to lead them to
repentance. But, as before observed, prosperity usually follows righteousness
in public bodies; public happiness is the reward of public virtue; the
wisest nation is the most successful, and glory is generally connected with
virtue. And this conduct of Providence is grounded on this reason. A day will
come when Lazarus will be indemnified, and the rich man punished; when St. Paul
will be rewarded, and Nero will be confounded. Innocence will be avenged,
justice satisfied, the majesty of the laws repaired, and the rights of GOD
maintained.

BUT such a retribution is impracticable in regard to public bodies. A nation
cannot then be punished as a nation, nor a kingdom as a kingdom. All the
different forms of government will then be abolished. While some of the human
race are put into possession of glory, others will be covered with shame and
confusion of face. It seems then, that Providence owes to its own rectitude,
those times of vengeance, in which it pours all its wrath on wicked nations;
sends them them wars, famines, plagues and other catastrophes, of which history
gives us so many memorable examples. To place hopes altogether on worldly
policy; to pretend to derive advantages from vice, and so to found the
happiness of society, on the ruins of religion and virtue, is little short of
insulting Providence. It is to arouse that power against us, which, sooner or
later, overwhelms and confounds vicious societies.

BUT if the obscurity of the ways of Providence, which usually renders
doubtful, our reasonings upon the divine conduct, weaken this argument, let us
consider the declarations of GOD himself upon this point.

THE whole 28th chapter of Deuteronomy, all the blessings and curses pronounced
there, fully prove our doctrine. Read the tender complaint, which GOD formerly
made concerning the irregularities of his people. O that they were wise, that
they understood this, that they would consider their latter end! How should one
chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight. Agreeably to this, are
the affecting words uttered by the mouth of the Psalmist -- O that my people
had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways. I should soon have
subdued their enemies, and turned mine hand against their adversaries. Their
time should have endured forever. I should have fed them also, with the finest
of the wheat, and with honey out of the rock should I have satisfied them. What
noble promises are made also by the ministry of Isaiah? Thus faith the Lord thy
Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel, I am the Lord thy God which teaches thee to
profit; which leads thee by the way thou should go. O that thou had
hearkened to my commandments! then had thy peace been as a river, and thy
righteousness as the waves of the sea; thy feed also had been as the sand, and
thy name should not have been cut off, nor destroyed before me. Observe also
the terrible threatenings, denounced against backsliding Israel, by the prophet
Jeremiah. Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind could not be
toward this people; cast them out of my sight, and let them go forth. And it
shall come to pass, if they say unto thee, Whither shall we go forth? Then thou
shall tell them; Thus faith the Lord, Such as are for death to death, and such
as are for the sword to the sword, and such as are for the famine to the
famine, and such as are for captivity to captivity. Thou have forsaken me,
faith the Lord, thou art gone backward; therefore will I stretch out my hand
against thee, and destroy thee: I am weary of repenting.

NOT to multiply quotations; we find that through the whole history of the Old
Testament, the interchangeable providence of GOD, toward the Jewish nation,
were always suited to their manners. They were constantly prosperous or
afflicted, according as religion and righteousness flourished, or declined
among them.

NOR was this Providence exercised only toward his own people, but he dealt
thus with other nations, as their history evinces; and thus the truth of our
text is proved by experience. Were we to consult the ancient history of the
Egyptians, the Persians, or the Romans, who surpassed them all, we shall find
they were by turns exalted, as they respected righteousness, or abased, as they
neglected it.

BY what mysterious art did ancient Egypt subsist, with so much glory, during
the period of fifteen or sixteen ages. Diodo^ Si^ulus. H^^odotu^ lib ^
By a benevolence so extensive, that he, who refused to relieve the wretched,
when he had it in his power to assist him, was himself punished with death: by
a justice so impartial, that their kings obliged the judges to take an oath,
that they would administer impartial justice to all, though they, the kings
themselves, should command the contrary: by an aversion to bad princes so
fixed, as to deny them the honors of a funeral: by entertaining such just
ideas of the vanity of life, as to consider their houses as inns, in which they
were to lodge, as it were, only for a night; and their sepulchers as
habitations in which they were to abide for many ages; for which reason, they
united, in their famous pyramids, all the solidity and pomp of architecture: by
a life so laborious, that even their amusements were adapted to strengthen the
body, and improve the mind: by such a remarkable readiness to discharge their
debts, that they had a law, which prohibited the borrowing of money, except on
condition of pledging the body of a parent for payment; a deposit so venerable,
that a man who deferred the redemption of it, was looked upon with horror: in a
word, by a wisdom so profound, that Moses himself is renowned in Scripture for
being learned in it.

THE Persians, also, obtained a distinguished place of honor, in ancient
history, by considering falsehood in the most odious light, as a vice the
meanest and most disgraceful; by a noble generosity, conferring favors on the
nations they had conquered, and leaving them to enjoy all the ensigns of their
former grandeur; by an universal equity, obliging themselves to publish the
virtues of their greatest enemies; by educating their children so wisely, that
they were taught virtue, as other nations were taught letters. The children of
the royal family, and of the nobles, were, at an early period of life, put
under the tuition of four of the wisest and most virtuous statesmen. The first
taught them the worship of the gods; the second trained them up to speak truth,
and practice equity; the third habituated them to subdue voluptousness, and
enjoy real liberty; to be always masters of themselves and of their own
passions; and the fourth inspired them with courage; and by teaching them to
command themselves, taught them how to rule over others.

Montague's Letters.
The Romans founded their system of policy upon that best and wisest principle,
the fear of the gods; a firm belief of a divine superintending Providence, and
a future state of rewards and punishments. Their children were trained up in
this belief from tender infancy, which took root and grew up with them, by the
influence of an excellent education, where they had the benefit of example, as
well as precept. Hence we read of no heathen nation in the world, where, both
the public and private duties of religion, were so strictly adhered to, and so
scrupulously observed, as among the Romans. They imputed their good or bad
success to the observance of these duties, and they received public
prosperity, or public calamities, as blessings conferred, or punishments
inflicted, by their gods. Though the ceremonies of their religion justly appear
to us, instances of the most absurd and most extravagant superstition, yet, as
they were esteemed the most essential acts of religion, by the Romans, they
must consequently carry all the force of a religious principle. Ciero de Harus.
Resp. p. 183.
Cicero, the great Roman orator and philosopher, speaking of his coutrymen,
says, We neither exceeded the Spaniards in number, nor did we excel the Gauls
in strength of body, nor the Carthagenians in craft, nor the Greeks in arts and
sciences: But we have indisputably surpassed all the nations in the universe,
in piety and attachment to religion, and in the only point that can be called
true wisdom, a thorough conviction, that all things here below, are directed
and governed by Divine Providence. To this principle alone, he wisely
attributes the grandeur and good fortune of his country. From this principle
proceeded that respect for, and submission to, their laws; and that temperance,
moderation, and contempt for wealth, which are the best defense against the
encroachments of injustice and oppression. Hence too arose that
inextinguishable love for their country, which, next to the gods, they looked
upon as the chief object of veneration. Cicero de officiis.
This they carried to such an height of enthusiasm, as to make every tie of
social love, natural affection, and self preservation, give way to this duty to
their dearer country. Hence proceeded that obstinate and undaunted courage,
that insuperable contempt of danger, and death itself, in defene of their
country, which complete the idea of the Roman character, as it is drawn by the
historians, in the virtuous ages of the republic. As long as the manners of
the Romans were regulated by this first great principle of religion, they were
free and invincible. But the atheistical doctrine of Epicurus, which insinuated
itself at Rome, under the respectable name of Philosophy, undermined and
destroyed this ruling principle. The luxuries of the East, after the conquest
of Asia, corrupted the manners of the Romans, weakened this principle of
religion, and prepared them for the reception of atheism, which is the never
failing attendant on luxury. And thus, by their rapid and unexampled
degeneracy, was brought on the total subversion of that mighty republic.

WERE we to inquire into the reasons of their decline; were we to compare the
Egyptians under their wise kings, with the Egyptians in a time of anarchy; the
Persians victorious under Cyrus, with the Persians enervated by the luxuries of
Asia; the Romans at liberty under their consuls, with the Romans enslaved by
their emperors, we should find, that the decline of each was owing to sin,
which is a reproach to a people; to the practice of vices, opposite to the
virtues which had caused their elevation; we should be obliged to acknowledge,
that a total disregard to religion and righteousness; luxury, voluptuousness,
disunion, corruption, and boundless ambition, were the odious means or
subverting states, which, in the height of their prosperity, expected to
endure to the end of time.

HAVING thus established the truth contained in our text, let us employ a few
moments in reflecting on what has been said.

IN the first place. What gratitude is due from us to the King of kings, for
affording us better means of knowing the righteousness, that exalts a people,
and more motives to practice it, than all the nations of antiquity. They had
only a superficial, debased, confused knowledge of the virtues, which
constitute substantial grandeur; and as they held errors in religion, they must
necessarily have erred in civil polity. Our heavenly Father, glory be to his
name, has placed at the head of our councils, the most perfect Legislator, that
ever held the reins of government in the world. This Legislator is Jesus
Christ. His kingdom, indeed, is not of this world, but the rules, he has given
us to arrive at his heavenly kingdom, are the most proper to render us happy in
the present state. When he says, Seek ye first the kingdom of GOD, and his
rightousness, and all other things shall be added to you; he gives the command,
and makes the promise, to whole nations, as well as individuals.

WHO ever carried, so far as this divine Legislator, ideas of the virtues we
have mentioned, and by practicing which, nations are exalted? Who ever formed
such just notions of that benevolence, that love of social good, that
magnanimity, that generosity to enemies, that wisdom, justice, and equity, that
frugality, and devotedness to the public good, and all the other virtues,
which render antiquity venerable to us? Who ever gave such wise instructions to
kings, and subjects; to magistrates and people; to citizens and soldiers; to
the world and the church? We are better acquainted with these virtues, than
most of the nations in the world. We are able to carry our glory, far beyond
the nations of antiquity; if not that glory, which glares and dazzles, at least
that which makes tranquil and happy, and procures a felicity far preferable to
all the pageantry of heroism, and worldly splendour.

LET not these things, my friends, be matters of mere speculation to us. Let us
endeavor to reduce them to practice. Never let us suffer our political
principles to clash, with the principles of our religion. Far, far, be from us,
and from our rulers, that deceit and hypocrisy, that falsehood and insincerity,
that dissimulation and craftiness, those abominable maxims, which a depraved
Florentine Machiavel.
recommended to statesmen. Let us obey the precepts of Jesus Christ, and
practice that righteousness which exalts a nation, and by so doing, we shall
draw down blessings on our nation, more pure and perfect than those, we now
enjoy. The blessings we now enjoy, are such as ought, on this auspicious
anniversary, to inspire us with lasting gratitude to the great Arbiter of
nations, -- to him who sets up one, and puts down another.

IT was a favorite method of instruction with the Jewish Legislators and
Prophets, to recur to the history of their nation; to ancient events, and also
to such as took place, in a period coeval with themselves, in order to excite a
correspondent gratitude, and a spirit of religious obedience, in the breasts of
the people. The time will not admit us to adopth the same plan, and enter into
such an extensive discussion: A few, however, of the more general, and more
conspicuous, you will permit me to glance at.

THE first is the blessing of public peace. When we look back on the
difficulties and dangers, in which the United States were involved, in the late
contest with Great Britain; when we reflect on the perils and disasters we
experienced, when surrounded with scenes of horror and devastation -- with the
depredations and shocking ravages of war -- when our liberties, our country,
and even life itself might be said to "hang in doubt," and contrast it with the
present peaceable state of our nation, we must acknowledge the gracious
interference of almighty GOD, in our favor.

WHILE wars, and rumors of wars are now spreading, and prevailing through all
Europe -- while nation is rising against nation, and kingdom against kingdom --
while the old world is generally convulsed, and tottering under those signs and
symptoms, which denote approaching dissolution, -- to us is given, and as yet
continued, the blessing of peace.

How long we shall enjoy this greatest of the divine favors, the commotions,
which have overspread the European nations, have rendered very uncertain. No
one can doubt, that our interest, our safety, and our happiness, as a nation,
forbid us to interfere in their quarrels. Whether the faith of treaties, or
principles of gratitude, for services performed in our distress, call upon us
to hazard our own peace and prosperity, it is neither prudent, nor proper to
discuss, in this place. This is a subject that rests in the Supreme Executive
of the United States; in the wisdom, firmness, and prudence of which, we are
happy that we can place entire confidence.

THE present appears to be as eventful an era, as any the annals of mankind
can furnish. A combination of events seems to be manifestly tending to bring
about some mighty revolution, among the nations of the earth. History has
scarcely ever before furnished us, with an instance of a populous, and powerful
nation, throwing off the yoke of despotism, and acquiring sentiments and
habits, congenial to a great and free republic. We have seen the mists of
ignorance and errors fast rolling away, and the benign beams of liberty,
freedom and science, spreading their luster over the mighty kingdom of France.
The flame caught from America, and the spirit of patriotism illumined that
whole nation. What generous mind did not espouse its cause? What friend to
liberty, and equal rights did not with them success?

BUT alas! the fair countenance of freedom has been overspread with a dark
veil; and the victims, which popular anarchy and ferocity have sacrificed, must
be allowed to have sullied the glories of a revolution, which bid fair to
astonish the world. It is forever to be regretted, that any dark shade of
ferocious revenge should eclipse the glory of establishing liberty, and
freedom, in that nation. But where do the records of history point out a
revolution, unstained by some actions of barbarity? When do the passions of
human nature rise to that pitch, which produces great events, without wandering
into some irregularities? Perhaps, at so great a distance as we are placed, and
with so small means of authentic information, we are not capable of forming a
proper judgment of their conduct, and the reasons of all their actions; but
must patiently wait for the pen of the impartial historian, to enable us to
decide, how far to justify or condemn. Should an apology, for that mental
intoxication that seems to have influenced them, be necessary, or proper to be
here inserted, permit me to give it, in the words of a very sprightly female
writer. Helen Maria Williams.
"Let us remember," says she, that the great cause of liberty remains
uncontaminated, by the assassinations at Lisle. Though fanatical bigots, in the
rage or superstitious cruelty, have dragged their victims to the stake, would
it be rational to extend our abhorrence of such actions to Christianity itself?
-- to that benevolent religion, which inculcates universal charity, love and
good will toward men; and choose the comfortless, the sullen indifference of
atheism? And shall we, because the fanatics of liberty have committed some
detestable crimes, conclude that liberty is an evil, and prefer the gloomy
tranquillity of despotism? If the blessings of freedom have sometimes been
abused, it is because they are not well understood. Those occasional evils,
which have happened in the infant state of liberty, are but the effects of
despotism. Men have been long treated with inhumanity, therefore they are
ferocious. They have often been betrayed, therefore they are suspicious. They
have once been slaves, and therefore they are tyrants. They have been used to a
state of warfare, and are not yet accustomed to universal benevolence. They
have long been ignorant, and have not yet attained sufficient knowledge. They
have been condemned to darkness, and their eyes are dazzled by light. The
French have thrown aside the ritual of despotism, but they have not all had
time to learn the liturgy of that new constitution, which is laid upon the
altar of their country. But the genuine principles of enlightened freedom will
soon be better comprehended, and may perhaps, at no distant period, be adopted
by the nations of Europe. Liberty may bring her sons from afar, and her
daughters from the ends of the earth.

THE oppressions which mankind have suffered in every age, and almost in every
country, will lead them to form more perfect systems of legislation, than if
they had suffered less; and they will only have to regret, that their happiness
has been purchased, by the misery of past ages.

THEN will the reign of humanity, of order, and of peace, begin; the gates of
Janus will be forever closed; liberty will extend her benign influence over the
nations, and ye shall know her by her fruits.

BUT to return to ourselves.

ANOTHER blessing we enjoy, and which calls aloud for our gratitude, is the
excellent constitution of our state government, and that of the federal system,
which gives union, order, and happiness to America.

FEW nations have ever enjoyed the opportunity of taking up government upon its
first principles, and of choosing that form, which is adapted to their
situation, and most productive of their public interests and happiness. The
government of the United States, says a political writer, Paley.
approaches nearest to the social compact, of any that history can furnish.
Upon an impartial examination of our constitution of government, we find it the
best calculated for promoting the happiness, and preserving the lives, liberty,
and property of the citizens, of any yet recorded in history. Liberty is here
placed in the custody of the people. It wisely guards against anarchy, and
confusion on the one hand, and tyranny, and oppression on the other. It is
framed upon an extent, not only of civil, but of religious liberty, unexampled,
perhaps, in any other country. The sacred rights of conscience are so secured,
that no citizen can be hurt, molested, or restrained in his person, liberty or
estate, for worshipping GOD, in the manner and season, most agreeable to the
dictates of his conscience, or for his religious profession or sentiments. How
should this consideration endear it to its citizens, and induce them to
reverence it -- not only calmly to submit to it, but to regard it with a
veneration and affection rising even to enthusiasm, like that, which prevailed
at Sparta, and at Rome.

HAPPY people, whose lot is fallen to them in pleasant places, and who have so
goodly an heritage. Happy people! if we have wisdom and virtue, to improve
aright the advantages we now enjoy. Blessed be GOD, who has visited, and
redeemed his people who has called them to liberty, and granted them the
blessing of peace, and of a free government.

ONE other favor, you will permit me to mention, is our national prosperity.
One blessing generally introduces another, and this is the consequence of
peace, and a free government. Our swords are now turned into ploughshares, and
our spears into pruning hooks. Our ships, instead of carrying the engines of
destruction, are now fraught with the stores of the merchant, and convey to us,
from all quarters of the world, the peculiar treasures of kings, and the
provinces. The riches of the earth, and the abundance of the seas, are
profusely poured into our laps.

BUT are we not, by an abuse of these blessings, in danger of being deprived of
them? If, having eaten and become full; having built goodly houses, and dwelt
therein; and having our silver and our gold, and all that we have, greatly
multiplied and increased; instead of being thankful for these blessings, and
temperate in the use of them, we become presumptuosly lifted up, and forget the
Lord our God; if, while we enjoy the highest degree of political liberty and
prosperity, we are not a virtuous and religious people, shall we not provoke
the Most High to withdraw these favors from us, and to empty us from vessel to
vessel? If, instead of practicing that righteousness, which exalts a nation,
we indulge a spirit of self exaltation; what an army of evils will prevail with
it?

Luxury and excess supersede the enjoyment of the things themselves.
Oftentation, in a great measure, supplants the true delights of society, and an
emulous superiority in pride, and distinction, contributes, materially to the
utter annihilation of simple principles, and almost, cuts asunder the cords of
genuine, sentimental friendship, The fate of nations confirms a very ancient
doctrine of revelation, that whenever pulick prosperity causes a forgetfulness
of GOD, a contempt of religion, and increasing profligacy, in the manners of a
people, that very prosperity shall destroy them.

WITH this declaration, and with the many examples of its truth, recorded in
the page of history, let us exert ourselves to perpetuate the great blessings,
and privileges we enjoy, by a contrary demeanor, and a more Christian
deportment than we have hitherto exercised; for the prolongation of our
national charter is entirely dependent thereon; and the continuance of national
prosperity is solely held, by this conditional tenure, the Lord is with us,
while we are with him; if we seek him, he will be found of us, but if we
forsake him, he will forsake us.

NOR are we in less danger, from the abuse of our civil liberty, than from that
of our prosperity.

CIVIL government is, doubtless, one of the greatest external blessings, of
which we are possessed. It is our protection from fraud and injustice -- from
rapine and violence. It is the security of our lives -- of our property -- of
every thing that is dear to us. The abuse of liberty is the greatest of evils,
and draws after it, a train of the most baneful consequences. When a people
misimprove their privileges, and become disorderly, ungovernable, and factious,
they introduce a state of anarchy, which is worse than absolute despotism.

No one, of the least reflection, can be insensible, what great advantages that
nation enjoys, which is not only in a state of perfect peace with its
neighbors, but possesses uninterrupted quiet tranquillity at home; which is
neither threatened with foreign insult, nor molested by inbred commotions,
generaly, speaking far more dangerous than the former; at least, when they rise
to any considerable height. It has, indeed, been said, that small disturbances
in the state, do the same service that the winds do in the air, by motion to
keep it from stagnation and putrefaction: But when once the winds are raised,
no one can tell when they will be laid, or how strong they will grow; and that
which was wantonly, or from selfish views, raised, to serve a present turn,
may, in time, come to overturn a constitution.

WE are not indeed to suppose, that every small inquietude, every little party
or faction, that happens to take place, will be able to accomplish such
extraordinary, such pernicious events; yet, it will not be disputed, but that
they are liable to produce many fatal, and destructive consequences; which,
though nor always immediately apparent, will yet, in time, become sufficiently
manifest, by a general corruption of manners, and by breaking loose from all
proper restraint.

AN ingenious writer Federalist.
justly observes, "That a dangerous ambition oftener lurks behind the specious
mask of zeal for the rights of the people, than under the forbidden appearance
of enthusiasm, for the firmness, and efficiency of government. History will
teach us, that the former has been found a much more certain road to the
introduction of despotism, than the latter; and that of those men who have
overturned the liberty of republics, the greatest number have begun their
career, by paying an obsequious court to the people, commencing demagogues, and
ending tyrants."

HOW cautious, then, should we be, while we are zealous for liberty, that we do
not despise government, and weaken the springs of it, by running into
licentiousness. A spirit of faction, of murmuring and discontent, may execite
internal discord, which may accomplish that, which external violence was not
able to effect, I mean our independence, liberty, and safety.

WE have no reason to doubt of the virtues, and abilities of those, whom our
own free choice has made the guardians of our rights, both in the federal and
state governments; we are persuaded, that their upright and faithful endeavors
will be exerted to secure, and perpetuate the blessings of peace, and liberty,
and to promote the true interest of this people. While the measures of
rightousness are religiously observed in their administrations, we are sure,
they will be crowned with success. For it is by righteousness, the throne of
government is established, and the nation is exalted.

WE have the happiness of seeing once more, at the head of this Commonwealth, a
Gentleman, His Excellency JOHN HANCOCK, Esquire.
of whose abilities in the arduous and important science of government -- of
whose patriotism and love of liberty -- of whose integrity and upright
intentions we have had long experience. That display of wisdom, fortitude, and
magnanimity, joined with the most unremitting attention, and perseverance,
manifested in the virtuous struggle, to obtain and secure our independence,
must place his Excellency in the rank of those great and worthy patriots, who
have distinguished themselves as the defenders of the rights of mankind: And
the many and eminent services he has rendered to this Commonwealth, over which
he has so often, and so long presided; as well as his many public and private
virtues, add a luster to his character. We sincerely lament, that the discharge
of the duties of his high, and important station, is rendered so difficult and
irksome, by his Excellency's ill state of health, and the many bodily
infirmities with which he has been long afflicted. May the benevolent Parent of
the universe, who is the health of our countenance, and our GOD, remove the
pains and disorders, under which his Excellency labors, restore and confirm
his health, make the remainder of his days happy to himself, and useful to the
Commonwealth, and finally reward all his services with eternal happiness in his
kingdom above.

THE patriotism, firmness, and inflexible attachment to the interest of his
country, manifested by his Honor, the Lieutenant Governor, His Honor SAMUEL
ADAMS, Esquire.
through a long series of years, justly entitle him to the second rank in
government: And the great unanimity, with which his Excellency and Honor have,
so repeatedly, been elected to their respective honorable stations, by the
unbiassed suffrages of their fellow-citizens, is the highest attestation of
their merit. To the gracious protection of almighty GOD we commend them both;
beseeching him to grant them wisdom from above; and grace to improve their
distinguished talents, in promoting the true interest of this Commonwealth, and
the United States.

THE Gentlemen, who compose the two branches of the General Court, have, many
of them, the satisfaction of reflecting, that their former services have proved
acceptable to the multitude of their brethren, by their being re-elected into
the important department of legislation. In filling up the few vacant seats in
the Senate, and in choosing an executive Council, for the ensuing year, which
is the first object of their concern, they will not be influenced by personal
or interested views; but will elect such out of those, who are the subjects of
their choice, as are able men; such as fear GOD; men of truth, hating
covetousness.

IT has indeed been doubted by some, whether this rule should, in all cases, be
strictly adhered to; whether a man who is not of this description, who is not a
man of rigid probity; who does not appear to have the fear of GOD before his
eyes, and to be governed by a sacred regard to his laws, may not still, in a
political capacity, be entitled to great merit, and be a proper person to be
concerned in guiding the helm of state. Long experience in civil affairs, it is
said -- a superior knowledge of the laws -- a facility of speaking and of
dispatching business -- the discovery of arts useful to government, are
qualifications necessary to promote the good of the state, which is the main
end of all government.

PERHAPS we may allow of the exception, provided there is nothing in the
personal character of such, from which the state may apprehend greater danger,
or inconvenience, than it can expect good, from their capacity to serve it.

STILL it holds good, that men of probity, -- of virtue, -- of religion ought,
in all well regulated states, to be the objects of the people's choice, both
from the natural tendency of virtue to promote the happiness of a nation, and
from the influence of a good example; which has, in persons distinguished by
the confidence of their brethren, a sensible and powerful influence, toward
rendering religion and virtue more generally esteemed, and practiced. This
consideration will have the greater weight, if we reflect, that (as we have
shown) most of the flourishing states in the world, have owed their origin and
increase to virtue and righteousness; so, as the manners of the people grew
more dissolute and corrupt, they gradually declined in power, in wealth, in
credit.

IT would be going out of my proper sphere, and perhaps invading the province
of the Chief Magistrate, to enter into a detail of those objects, which claim
the attention of the General Court, in their present or future sessions, in the
course of this year. Their own good sense, their political knowledge, and their
perfect acquaintance with the internal state of the Commonwealth, will point
out, and lead them to adopt such measures, as present exigencies require.

OUR civil fathers, however, will permit me to remind them, that it is
righteousness only which exalts a nation; that it can never be good policy to
transgress the sacred rules of justice and fidelity; and, that the grand secret
of political wisdom is to maintain a steady and untainted integrity. They will,
therefore, for the support of public faith and honor, as well as domestic
tranquillity, pay the strictest attention to commutative justice and equity, by
a faithful observance and fulfillment of all public engagements; remembering
that public contracts are as binding, as private ones can be supposed to be;
and ought to be discharged with the same good faith and punctuality; and that
no nation can make the least pretension to the character of a righteous one,
that does not pay sacred regard to its promises and contracts.

THEY will maintain inviolate, by a strict adherence to its original
principles, our happy constitution of government; and, for the purposes of
national happiness and glory, they will support and strengthen the federal
government of the United States, by every constitutional means in their power;
fully persuaded that the continuance of our national government is essential to
our independence, our safety, our very existence as an empire.

OUR civil rulers, will think themselves obliged, both in their public and
private stations, to propagate a spirit of industry, frugality, and sobriety,
among all ranks of people; to encourage agriculture, commerce and arts; and to
promote the interest of literature and science; from the strongest conviction,
that ignorance and liberty are incompatible; that the former is the parent of
despotism, and the nurse of superstition. In fine, they will do all in their
power, that wisdom and knowledge may be the stability of our times -- that all
vice and impiety be suppressed, and that the people may be allured to the
practice of that righteousness, which exalts a nation. In order to this, they
will show, in their own persons, that they are not ashamed of the gospel of
Christ, by paying all due regard to his sacred institutions, and obedience to
his laws.

SENSIBLE of the difficulties of their task, and of their need of divine aid
and support, we commend them to him, who gives wisdom to the wise, and
understanding to the prudent; beseeching him to direct and prosper all their
consultations, to the advancement of his glory, the good of his church, the
safety, honor and welfare of the people of this Commonwealth, and of United
America.

PERMIT me to conclude, by reminding this whole assembly, that it concerns
every one to live in the practice of religion and virtue; not only as the
public prosperity is deeply concerned in it, but as their own personal
happiness, both here and hereafter, absolutely depends upon it. Godliness is
profitable for all things, having the promise of this life, and of that which
is to come. As therefore we wish the prosperity of our country; as we wish to
enjoy the comforts of the present world; as we are anxious to meet the
approbation of GOD, and to enjoy his favor in heaven; let us become the
sincere disciples of JESUS CHRIST; let us follow peace with all men, and
holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. Let the recollection, that
the eyes of GOD are against those who evil, and of that indignation, which he
will finally pour upon the ungodly, deter us from all iniquity, and lead us to
aspire after thar genuine piety, which will most assuredly, through the
infinite merits and mediation of JESUS CHRIST, introduce us to the future
vision and fruition of GOD, where we shall see him as he is, and know even as
we are known.


