A DISSERTATION ON THE MINERAL WATERS OF SARATOGA; CONTAINING, A TOPOGRAPHICAL
DESCRIPTION OF THE COUNTRY, AND THE SITUATION OF THE SEVERAL. SIRINGS; AN
ANALYSIS OF THE WATERS, AS MADE UPON THE SPOT, TOGETHER WITH REMARKS ON THEIR
USE IN MEDICINE, AND A CONJECTURE RESPECTING THEIR NATURAL MODE OF FORMATION:
ALSO, A METHOD OF MAKING AN ARTIFICIAL MINERAL WATER, RESEMBLING THAT OF
SARATOGA, BOTH IN SENSIBLE QUALITIES AND IN MEDICINAL VIRTUE.

By VALENTINE SEAMAN, M. D. Physician in the City of New York.

"In all ages, good Physicians, desirous of establishing the salutary art, on a
firm foundation, have considered it incumbent on them, to submit to chemical
analysis, such Waters as were famous for the cure of any Disease." BERGMAN.
NEW YORK, PRINTED BY SAMUEL CAMPBELL: No. 37, HANOVER SQUARE. M,DCC,XCIII.

ROBERT R. LIVINGSTON, CHANCELLOR OF THE State of NEW YORK, and PRESIDENT of
the SOCIETY, instituted in the State of NEW YORK, for the promotion of
AGRICULTURE, ARTS and MANUFACTURES,
NOTHING less than a belief of the indulgent disposition so notedly predominant
in great minds, could have prevailed with me to submit the following
dissertation to thy perusal, which I was the more desirous of doing, from the
benevolent manner in which thou have employed thy great talents, in the
promotion of useful knowledge -- pointing thee out as the proper Patron of an
attempt, whose object is the general good, and which, from its being the first
production of the kind, that has yet appeared in the state, if it cannot more
justly claim, at least is in the more need of protection.

WITH a desire that thy labors may continue to merit the thanks of thy
countrymen, and that thou may increase in utility, as thou advancest in
years;

I remain, with due respect, and esteem -- thy friend, VALENTINE SEAMAN.
1st. Mo. 1st, 1793.
INTRODUCTION.
IT is justly expected of every physician, that at least, he will enquire into
the virtues of such substances, as shall offer themselves to his observation,
supposed to possess active medicinal qualities: for "The Lord has created
medicines out of the earth; and he that is wise will not abhor them (...)
xxxviii. 4.
". And as there still remain diseases, which dare raise up their reproachful
heads, in obstinate defiance of our art, it is more especially our duty to
search out weapons for their destruction: for it is not consistent with our
ideas of the goodness of the Deity, to suppose that he would have permitted the
favorites of his creation to be inflicted with diseases, without having formed
remedies for their relief: but for these, as for relief from spiritual evils --
we must seek, and we shall find; and as in the latter case, we are directed to
the almighty "Father of spirits;" so in the former we should apply to the
supplier of all corporeal wants -- our all bountiful mother earth, out of whose
bosom, as above observed, "The Lord has created medicines."

AMERICAN physicians, in particular, from their being situated in a country,
with respect to medical researches, almost unexplored, must consider it doubly
incumbent on them, to attend to its productions; for besides the ipecacuanha,
the nake-root, the jalap, and many other useful remedies; America has also
already furnished a bark, that has removed the fatality of that disease, which
in less than forty years deprived Britain of two of its monarchs The
intermittent fever, which is now considered as an innocent complaint, was
arranged in the class of incurable diseases, till the discovery of the Peruvian
bark: James the 1st, and Oliver Cromwell, both died of this complaint.
: and "Who knows but what at the foot of the Allegany mountain there blooms a
flower, that is an infallible cure for the epilepsy? Perhaps on the
Monongahela, or the Potowmack, there may grow a root, that shall supply, by its
tonic power, the invigorating effects of the savage or military life, in the
cure of consumptions Dr. Rush's concluding lecture.
:" and why may there not spring up a water, in some neglected valley, whose
solvent quality, may melt down the torturing stone, or whose penetrating
influence may root out the scrophula from the system?

WHAT funds of useful knowledge may there still be reserved for the discovery
of Americans: since it was for them to check the fatal career of the cynanche
maligna The late Dr. Ogden, of Jamaica, Long Island, was the person who first
introduced the use of Calomel, in this complaint; before which, its fatality
among children, was unparalleled, by any disease to which they are liable.
, and also to loosen the fixed jaw, and relax the rigid muscles of a tetanus We
are indebted to Dr. Rush, for erasing this from the list of incurable diseases.
? Why may we not hope, that some other of our countrymen, may be fortunate
enough, still farther to diminish the list of those diseases, which yet
continue to elude the power of medicine?

THESE reflections prevailed upon me, notwithstanding a surrounding cloud of
difficulties The most able professions in Europe, say, that The analysis of
mineral waters, is justly considered, one of the most difficult problems in
chemistry.
, to attempt to ascertain the composition of the mineral waters of Saratoga --
whether I have fully succeeded or not, my experiments, (which I have inserted
at full length, for that purpose,) with the skilful chemist will determine; In
the mean time, not doubting but that his knowledge of the intricacy of the
subject will furnish him with a cover for the little inaccuracies he may
detect, particularly when he considers, that in this work, I have acted in the
dangerous and toilsome capacity of a pioneer, I have opened a way to the
analysis of these waters, whereby others may follow on, probably with more
success, at least with less difficulty No one has heretofore attempted to
analyze these waters, all that has been done, was merely skimming their
surface; just an enquiry into the nature of the air discharged from them; see
Dr. Mitchell's experiments, related in the American Museum, Vol. IV. I am the
first who has ventured to search into their real substance, to ascertain the
ingredients of their composition.
.

IT has been my intention to render this treatise as generally useful as
possible; I have, therefore, not only forborne the use of the new and accurate
nomenclature of the French chemists; but have also, in other respects, employed
as familiar terms as the nature of the subject would admit of; and as in
compositions of this kind, beauty of style is less aimed at, than perspicuity
of expression -- I doubt not but that the reader will excuse me, if he finds
some sentences which might have been expressed in more elegant language.

WHETHER water of itself considered, is a simple elementary substance,
according to the opinion of the ancients, or a compound, as asserted by many of
the moderns, though, perhaps, well deserving of attention, is not the business
of this dissertation to determine? Its views being confined, merely to discover
the nature of such mineral substances, as are often dissolved in it, and to
which many waters owe their particular medicinal virtues.

SUCH mineral waters have been noticed as far back as the time of Hyppocrates.
Pliny mentions certain of them, as possessing medicinal properties; but we do
not find any account of a method to detect their composition, till about the
middle of the seventeenth century, when Boil first observed, that the infusion
of vegetable blues, was an accurate test for discovering the presence of
uncombined acids or alkalies, by becoming red with the former, and green with
the latter. He afterward found out many other substances, for the more full
examination of waters.

DURING the time that Boil was employed in these researches, Duclos was busy
in the analysis of the waters of France, and made several improvements, by the
addition of galls, and the tincture of turnsol, to our stock of regents.
Hierne, Vallerius, Boulduc and many other celebrated chemists, continued to
render this branch of science more perfect.

IN the beginning of the present century, Hoffman, followed by Springsfield and
Venel, paid particular attention to what they called the mineral spirit of
waters, and which since, by Dr. Priestly, has been proved to be the aerial or
cretacious acid.

THE mode of analising waters have been continually improving, since the first
experiments of Boil -- till at length the celebrated Bergman has given the
finishing stroke of its present perfection.

IN examining these waters. I have proceeded first by reagents, to ascertain
the different ingredients in their composition: for notwithstanding a late
author (...)
considers these as mere amusing experiments, yet I rather suppose them very
useful means, nor that purpose, particularly when applied in the extensive
manner that I have done; and I fancy every reader will be of my opinion, upon a
candid perusal of this dissertation: I acknowledge we are thereby only enabled
to discover the different ingredients of mineral waters -- but not the
proportion of each. I was, therefore, obliged to apply to distillation, to
obtain the proportion of their aerial, and to evaporation and chrystalization
-- that of their fixed principles.

A DISSERTATION ON THE MINERAL WATERS OF SARATOGA, etc.
A topographical description of the country, and situation of the several
springs.
THESE springs are situated on the westerly side of a valley, which lies about
twelve miles west of the conflux of Fish-Creek, with the North River Which is
about two hundred miles above the city of New York.
, in the country of Saratoga, and state of New York. This valley, at least the
part of it where the springs rise, runs a northerly and southerly course, and
appears to have been formed by a branch of the Kayadoroseres river; which flows
through the middle of it. The high ground that forms the westerly bank of the
valley, and which appears to supply the waters of these springs, which are
situated at its foot, is composed, almost entirely, of calcarious rocks, whose
surface, however, is mostly overspread with a sand and clayey soil, and covered
with tall pines and oaks: there are several deep subterraneous caverns observed
in it, which open but a small distance from where the declivity commences. The
bank on the easterly side appears almost entirely sand, with not the least
vestige of calcarious earth, and is a perfect pine plane.

THE cause of this sudden change of soil, which however, is not peculiar to
this place alone As Hempstead plains on Long Island and its contiguous soil is
a remarkable instance.
, and also of the river's making its way, at this particular juncture -- I
leave to the speculation of the naturalist to determine, a mere knowledge of
their existence and situation being all that is necessary, either as to their
affording us an assistant means for ascertaining the nature of the mineral
waters, in their neighborhood, or as enabling us to account for the presence
of ingredients we may find in them. About four miles west of these springs, I
am informed there is a strong scented sulphurious spring.

THE springs are eight or ten in number, and all are within the space of about
half a mile; the one which has particularly attracted the attention of the
curious, and which is mostly drank by valetudinarians, rises about midway
between the others; it is entirely surrounded by a rock of a conical shape,
which is about five sect high, and whose base is about nine feet in diameter;
it has a circular hole, in its apex, of near ten inches across, which is the
opening of its inner cavity in which the water rises to within about two feet
of its top. This cavity, like the outside of the rock, enlarges, as it
descends. The surface of this rock is of a brownish color, and appears compact
and polished, it has a check in one side of it, which is supposed to descend
internally and form some vent below the surface of the ground, by which the
water makes its way out, as it has not been known to overflow for several years
past. The crack is believed to have been produced by the fall of a tree over
the spring; and the remains of the upper part of one which lies in the marsh
below, and whose body is directly immediately toward it, renders this opinion
very probable, since its size and situation prove that it must have stood on
the opposite side of the rock; indeed I am informed, by a man of that country,
that he very well recollects when the tree stood there, and that then the water
overflowed the rock: another person informed me, that he knew it to overflow in
the time of the late war.

THESE waters naturally deposit a (...) matter where they flow; thereby forming
to themselves, a barrier of defense against the intrusion of heterogeneous
substances: the reason why the rock spring (as the one just described is
called) in particular has surrounded itself by such a regular formed pyramidial
mass -- I take to be owing to its natural situation rendering it more
inaccessible to the animals, that may have resorted here for the waters, (which
they appear to be very fond of, as well as of licking substances about the
springs, on account of their saline impregnation,) whence is has, perhaps,
during the course of ages, been permitted, unmolestedly, to precipitate
particles upon particles of its stony matter, till finally, it has attained its
present appearance, while a spring, a small distance from it, which, (from its
supplying the waters that are continually conveyed from it, by a little wooden
gutter, fixed for that purpose, into the bathing tub; which is situated in a
log enclosure, just below it in the marsh) is called the bathing spring; which,
notwithstanding it has afforded a much greater quantity of this petrefactive
deposition, so as to form an irregular rock, of about twenty one feet in
diameter, around itself, by being more easily come at, has had its tender
layers trodden down continually, as they formed, before they could assume any
regular shape.

THE stony matter of these springs, by calcination, forms quicklime.

A PIECE of it, put into vitriolic acid, caused a great effervescence, and
formed a selenites, or plaster of Paris, and also a small portion of alum,
proved, by the solutions depositing a cloudy sediment, by passing volatile
alkaline gas through it; and also martial vitriol, whence it assumed a
beautiful blue color, by the addition of lime water saturated with Prusian
blue: hence the petrefactions must be composed of an argillo calcarious earth
and iron; to this last is owing the redish color, with which great part of it
is tinged.

HAVING settled these preliminaries; I proceed more particularly to enquire into

THE NATURE OF THE WATERS.
First. Of their physical properties.
I. THESE waters, in general, appear nearly transparent, yet none of them are
perfectly so, excepting that which rises up in a barrel, which the neighbors
have fixed for the purpose of collecting it, and is called the barrel spring;
they are colorless, and emit a great quantity of air by agitation, even by
standing still in an open vessel, it almost immediately forms bubbles around
its inside, which soon rise up and are discharged. The vessel used to dip the
water out of the rock, and also the bathing tub, soon gather an ochery crust
upon their inner surfaces. Wherever these waters stagnate, around the springs,
besides depositing the stony matter before mentioned, they also soon become
covered with a pellicle of a metallic splendor, reflecting variegated colors.

II. THEY diffuse a subtle penetrating odor, which is most particularly
experienced by breathing in the orifice of the rock.

III. WHEN drank, their first impression on the palate, is agreeably acescent,
succeed by a nauseous saline taste; they afterward give up acescent
eructations, like fermented liquors, and which are no ways unpleasant.

IV. THE hydrometer stands at the same height in these, as in snow water.

V. NOTWITHSTANDING the discharge of air from these waters, makes them appear
to be in a continued ebulition, yet they are cold, the temperature, however, is
not the same in all the springs; but seems to diminish in proportion to their
briskness, thus the bathing spring and the barrel, each of which discharges
about twenty gallons in an hour, which is much more than the rest do, lowered
Fatherinheits thermometre from 72, the heat of the atmosphere, to 52, while in
the others it stood at 56 and 58, but in the rock water, which runs very
slowly, it remained at 67.

VI. BY the application of a gentle heat, these waters discharge a great
quantity of air in bubbles; it is upon this property, that their use in raising
bread depends, and for which purpose they are carried away in considerable
quantities, daily, even sometimes to eight or ten miles distance; all that is
necessary being merely to make the dough, with flour and this water alone, and
it is immediately ready to put in the oven.

II. EXPERIMENTS UPON THE AIR.
I. A lighted candle let down in the crater of the rock, was immediately
extinguished, both blaze and wick, before it came within a foot of the surface
of the water: the air obtained by agitating the water of this, as well as of
the other springs, was equally incapable of supporting combustion, as was also
that collected from the bubbles, that were continually discharging from the
different springs.

II. A chicken being immersed in this air, expired in three minutes. A kitten
confined in it for one and a half minutes, appeared very flaccid and almost
dead; yet, on being brought out, into free atmospheric air, its fleeting life
was soon recalled through the medium of violent convulsions; being again put
into the noxious gas, in fourteen minutes it was irrecoverably dead.

III. THE air being made to pass through limewater immediately rendered it
very turbid.

IV. IT rendered a diluted tincture of turnsol of a red tinge, by passing
through it.

FROM the physical qualities mentioned, and from the above experiments, we may
safely conclude, that this air is the true spiritus mineralis of Hoffman, the
carbonic acid gas of the French chemists, the aerial acid of Bergman, the fixed
air of Priestly and Black, the cretacious acid of Fourcroy, and what is
generally known with the miners, by the name of choke damp; it is similar to
the noxious gas, which rises up to the height of several inches, in the famous
grotto del cani in Italy; this cave having received its name from its fatality
to dogs: they, from carrying their heads below the surface of this stratum of
air, being the animals which are generally submitted to experiment, to satisfy
travelers of its deleterious effects. It is this air which is so plentifully
given out, during the spirituous fermentation, and is what gives that briskness
to porter, and other malt liquors. Being united with the vegetable alkali, it
forms our common potash -- hence the reason why our good housewives are
enabled, any time, at half an hour's warning, to furnish us with a well raised
cake, merely by mixing up the flour with a solution of potash and sour milk;
here the acid of the milk, from a greater attraction, joins itself to the
alkali, while the aeriform acid being set at liberty, and assisted by the
expansive power of heat, penetrates and puffs up every particle of the dough.
It is this air also, which constitutes the difference between quicklime and
chalk or limestone, its discharge is the effect of their calcination.

III. THE EFFECTS OF REAGENTS UPON THE WATERS.
I. THE rock water had a little of the tincture of turnsol dropped into it,
which immediately gave it a reddish tinge.

II. The infusion of our common blue larkspur The infusion of blue lark-spur, I
have found to be a most accurate test for discovering the presence of the
smallest quantity, of either uncombined alkalies, or fixed acids.
was not changed by it.

III. IN limewater, it instantly induced a milky turbidness, followed by a
deposition of white powder.

IV. Tincture of galls rendered it purple It has been observed, that
notwithstanding this water mixes with gin, without discoloration; yet it will
not make grog: for immediately upon pouring in the spirits, it becomes
blackish. This, though unaccountable to many, is no more than what every
chemist would expect, when he considers that from the oak casks in which
spirits is kept, it generally becomes a true tincture, of a vegetable
astringent.
.

V. Prusian limewater produced no change in it.

VI. A SOLUTION of pure vegetable alkali, produced a turbidness in it.

VII. IT was also made turbid by aerated vegitable alkali.

VIII. CAUSTIC volatile alkali, forms a cloudiness in it; yielding a white
precipitate.

IX. Vitriolic acid, dropped into the water, caused a great effervescence, and
a little turbidness.

X. AFTER vitriolic acid had been dropped in the water, it then became blue by
Prusian limewater This experiment, which is an original one, shows by what
method we may detect aerated iron, by the Prusian limewater, and tends to
conform the experiment with tinct. of galle.
.

XI. Nitrated silver formed an immediate copious white curdled precipitate;
this, as also the water itself, soon assumed a dirty bluish color.

XII. Nitrated mercury produced a copious yellowish precipitate.

XIII. Acid of sugar, occasions a cloudiness, which soon falls down in a white
precipitate.

XIV. Acetated lead, produced a copious white, but not granutated precipitate.

MOST of these experiments were frequently repeated, and with similar results.

THE waters of the other springs exhibited the same appearances, with the above
reagents, as the rock water, excepting that of the bathing spring and of the
barrel's showing a deeper purple tinge with tincture of galls.

THE water being boiled, discharged a great quantity of air, formed a pellicle
on its surface, and deposited a white powder. It afterward had not that brisk
accidulous taste, as before, but was extremely nauseous; it was not reddened by
tincture of turnsol, nor rendered purple by tincture of galls; with infusion of
lark-spur, it became green: it still precipitated limewater, though not so
plentifully as before, and also effervesced slightly, with vitriolic acid; but
was not made turbid thereby. Acid of sugar did not induce a turbidness, its
appearance was not altered by the caustic vegetable nor volatile alkalies, nor
by the aerated vegetable alkali.

FROM these experiments, I conclude, that these waters contain,

I. An uncombined ACID, whereby they become red by tincture of turnsol, and
that this cannot be a fixed acid, since it does not redden infusion of
lark-spur, and is evaporated by boiling; for afterward the water does not
change tincture of turnsol; therefore it must be the cretacious acid, the same
as has been heretofore proved to be continually discharging from them, in large
quantities: it is from the presence of this, that limewater becomes so very
turbid; for with lime it forms an insoluble compound.

II. IRON. -- Hence it takes a purple tinge, with tincture of galls, and also,
when previously joined with vitriolic acid, becomes blue, with Prusian
limewater, and that the iron is not kept in solution, by the vitriolic acid,
or it would have become blue by this test, before the acid was united with it;
but by the cretacious acid, since after being boiled, this water is no more
discolored, by tincture of galls.

III. A QUANTITY of LIME held in solution by the cretacious acid; for
notwitstanding lime, as above observed, is rendered insoluble by uniting with
the cretacious acid, yet it is otherwise when supersaturated therewith; for
then it is, to the contrary, much more soluble: hence the cause of a
precipitation, by the caustic vegetable, and volatile alkalies. They, from
their affinity to the acid, deprive the lime of its superabundance, and permit
it to fall down in a white powder. The vitriolic acid, on the contrary,
attracts the lime, and forms a gypseous deposition, while the cretacious acid
flies off in a great effervescence. The acid of sugar, also, evinces the
presence of lime, by uniting and forming an insoluble compound with it. These
tests did not exhibit the same appearances with the water, after ebulition:
hence the pellicle and deposition formed, during that process, I take to be
calcarious earth and iron.

IV. A MURIATIC ACID. Hence with nitrated silver it forms a sudden, caseous
precipitate, and also a precipitate with nitrated mercury; this last
precipitate on being sublimed, afforded corrossive sublimate.

V. A NEUTRAL SALT. Since they have been proved by the two last mentioned
experiments, to contain a marine acid, and by some of the previous ones, that
this cannot exist in a separate state; therefore it must be united either with
an earth, or an alkali, and as a cretacious alkali will be shown to be present
in the water, it is evident that it must be joined with the latter; since
alkalies have a greater attraction for acids, than earths have.

VI. A CRETACIOUS ALKALI, whereby, after the water has been boiled, it renders
the infusion of lark-spur green, and effervesces with vitriolic acid; this may
also be the cause why limewater is still precipitated by it. Here the
cretacious acid quits the alkali, to unite with its more attracting lime,
forming therewith, as abovementioned, an insoluble compound. The reason why the
water did not change the infusion of larkspur, before it had been boiled, must
be owing to the alkali's being supersaturated with the cretacious acid, in
which case, as I proved by an experiment made for that purpose, it may exist in
a considerable quantity in a water, without changing vegetable blues.

VII. A SLIGHT impregnation of SULPHUR, thereby darkening the nitrated silver;
this is what might reasonably be expected, as within about four miles there is
a proper strong scented sulphurious spring.

THE last mentioned experiment, on the waters, previous to ebulition, (see p.
20.) proves, by the precipitate's not appearing granulated, that vitriolic acid
does not exist in these waters, either in a simple or combined state.

THE presence of an uncombined alkali, (if we may still be permitted to call
aerated alkali's so) as proved, by the boiled water's rendering infusion of
lark-spur green, clearly proves the nonexistence of any earthy or metallic
salts in this water; since the alkali, from its superior attraction to acids,
must entirely prevent their formation.

FROM the above effects of reagents, it appears, that the waters contain
Cretacious acid, Aerated iron, Lime, supersaturated with cretacious acid, A
muriatic neutral salt, A cretacious alkali,
and a Sulphurious impregnation.

THE proportion of each of the above ingredients, and the nature of the base of
the neutral, and the species of the cretacious alkali, yet remain unknown; I
therefore proceeded, by the more tedious processes of distillation,
evaporation, and chrystalization, to ascertain these points.

IV. DISTILLATION.
FROM the experiments of Bergman, it appears that water is capable of absorbing
about equal its bulk of cretacious acid, at the temperature of 55, and
proportionably less as its temperature is increased. Now, as before observed,
the bubbles of this acid, are continually passing through the waters, under
examination, it is therefore clear that they must be fully saturated with it,
and as their temperature is higher than that at which water will retain its
equal bulk, we are obliged to conclude, that it does not contain quite so much;
but from the following experiment I doubt whether it lacks much of it.

BY the means of a florence flask, with a siphon properly affixed to it and the
application of heat, I collected, from a given quantity of this water, in a
glass vessel that had been previously filled with, and inverted in hot water,
upwards of its bulk of aerial fluid, the greater part of which I take to be the
abovementioned acid; the rest, perhaps, partly atmospheric mephites, and partly
vital air. That the water contains this last, is proved, by its depositing an
ochery substance, after having some green vitriol dissolved in it, in a well
corked viol.

V. EVAPORATION.
AFTER evaporating ten pounds of the water of the rock, in glass vessels, by
the heat of a water bath, I obtained a brownish colored residue, which when
dried, weighed 6 drachms, 2 scruples, 3 grains; this residum was put into four
times its weight of spirits of wine, and after standing a considerable time,
being frequently agitated; was filtered and dried, and was found to have lost
about 17 grs. which proved to be common salt; for by evaporating the spirits, I
obtained it in regular cubic chrystals. This circumstance of spirits of wine
dissolving a portion of marine salt, I take to be owing to its not being so
highly rectified, as it ought to be: for when perfectly pure, it will only take
up salited lime, and salited magnesia, nitrated lime, and nitrated magnesia,
and salited terra ponderosa; but when some what diluted, it will, beside these
salts, also take up others: but, however, as by evaporation I obtained nothing
but cubic chrystals, I now conclude, positively, what in fact was before proved
by reagents, that there are none of the above mentioned earthy salts in these
waters.

I now immersed the residum in 8 oz. of cold distilled water, which, after
remaining several hours, and being frequently agitated, was filtered; the
insoluble residue being dried and weighed, was found to have lost, 3 drachms, 2
grains; this watery solution, by turning the infusion of larkspur green, is
proved to contain an uncombined alkali. Experiments before made, show that
these waters contain the muriatic acid, and as the mutual attraction, between
an acid and an alkali, will not permit them to remain in company with each
other, particularly when surrounded by their conjuctive agent, water: without
uniting, therefore, we must again suppose this acid to be in combination, and
indeed its not rendering the infusion of larkspur red, decidedly forbids any
other conclusion.

THIS solution of a muriatic neutral salt and an alkali, I submitted to the
heat of the sun, whereby, after great part of the water was evaporated, some
cubical chrystals appeared to form upon its surface, but which were soon
disturbed, by irregular saline concretions.

HAVING ascertained the presence of a muriatic neutral salt, and an uncombined
alkali; but not knowing decidedly, either the species of the alkali, or the
base of the neutral salt; I therefore made a saturated solution of this mixed
salt, and added thereto, acid of tartar, and no precipitation taking place, I
concluded that no vegetable alkali can be present, or it would have fallen down
in the form of cremor tartar; therefore, the aerated alkali must be of the
mineral kind, and the base of the neutral, must be the same, which, with its
acid, forms our common sea salt.

To find the proportion of the marine salt and the alkali, I dissolved the
mixed salt in water and added distilled vinegar thereto, until I brought it to
the exact point of saturation: I then saturated an equal quantity of distilled
vinegar, with mineral alkali, for which purpose it required 26 grains, whence
it appears, that ten pounds of this mineral water contains 26 grs. of mineral
alkali, the remainder, 156 grs. must be common salt, which added to the 17 grs.
dissolved in the spirits of wine, makes ten pounds of the water contain 173 grs.

THE remaining 3 drachms, I scruple, 4 grains, I exposed to the sun, for
several weeks, moistening it frequently with rain water; this was done, in
order to rust the iron, so as to make it insoluble in distilled vinegar; in
which this residue was afterward digested and filtered. The filtered liquor
was then evaporated, and what was left, was re-dissolved, in vitriolic acid,
with which it formed a gypsum, but no bitter salt; hence, as there was but
about 12 or 14 grs. remaining on the fillet, it appears that ten pounds of this
water contains 3 drachms, 10 grs. of aerated lime -- but no magnesia.

THE substance remaining on the filter, by being dissolved in vitriolic acid,
afforded 8 and 1-2 grs. of iron, precipitated in form of Prusian blue, by the
Prusian limewater.

IT appears, from a review of these experiments that a quart of this water must
contain, Cretacious acid, about 40 cubic inches, Mineral alkali, 5.2 grs.
Common marine salt, 34.6 AErated lime, 38.0 AErated iron. 1.7.


BARKER's SPRINGS.
THE mineral waters that have been already noticed, are not the only one's in
the county of Saratoga. About three miles below the junction of Fish-Creek with
the North River, and about two miles west of the latter, in a hollow belonging
to, and immediately back of the dwelling house of, William Barker, are several
mineral springs, the waters of which, both by their sensible qualities, and by
the operation of reagents, appear to be very similar to those heretofore
mentioned. They do not, however, deposit the stony matter, as the others do,
nor do they in other respects, appear to be so strongly impregnated with
mineral substances.

THEY are situated in a clayey soil, with no appearance of limestone in their
neighborhood. The land is covered with beach and oak trees.

THE air which bubbles up in these springs, by the experiments formerly
mentioned; appears to be the same cretacious acid as is discharged from the
other springs, it equally extinguishes flame, render lime water turbid, etc.

THE water is also proved to contain the same air in its composition, not only
by the experiments as made at the other springs; but also by its not being able
to support animal life. A fish in two and a half minutes died in it.

IRON appears to exist in these waters, by their becoming tinged, though
slightly with tincture of galls; and it must be aerated; since this property no
longer continues after the water has been boiled.

LIME rendered soluble by a superabundance of cretacious acid; was detected in
these, by the same means as were used with the other waters.

THEY contain aerated ALKALI, therefore after being boiled they still
effervesce with vitriolic acid.

A MURIATIC ACID is proved to exist in them, by the nitrated silver, and
nitrated mercury; and it must be in combination; thereby forming a neutral
salt, whose base, though not fully ascertained, is presumed from its taste, and
the great similarity there is between these and the other waters. to be of the
mineral kind; therefore the neutral I believe to be sea salt.

BESIDES these acescent springs there is also another in the same hollow; about
a stones throw distance from them, which is entirely of a different nature, and
from its smelling like the washings of a gun-barrel, has gained the name of the
gunpowder spring. The water is transparent: its temperature 58; it smells and
tastes like sulphur, or rather liver of sulphur; by boiling it looses both its
disagreeable smell and taste.

THE air discharged from it by boiling, being made to pass through lime water;
produced no turbidness, hence they contain no free aerial acid.

THIS water is not discolored either by tincture of galls or Prussian lime
water.

WITH nitrated mercury it forms a precipitate.

WITH nitrated silver it also forms a precipitate; which as well as the water
directly assumes a dark purpleish brown color: this precipitate is suspected
to arise from a marine acid, and the dark color from hepatic or sulphurious
gas.

Vitriolic acid, produces an effervescence, this must be owing to the presence
of a cretacious alkali, it also rendered lime water turbid; this must be from
the same cause, hence the abovementioned muriatic acid must be in combination,
in form of a neutral salt.

OF THE MEDICAL VIRTUES OF THE WATERS OF SARATOGA.
Notwithstanding these waters, when properly applied may be useful in many
complaints; yet as is generally the case with medicines that get into practice,
and gain a degree of reputation, before their real qualities are known; they
are used too indiscriminately for the cure of almost every disease, even those
of a directly opposite nature, thus we find intermittents, pleurisies,
dropsies, manias, etc. all equally apply here for help, and what is still more
extraordinary, while I was at the springs I saw a person there who had come
upwards of three hundred miles, to drink the waters for the cure of a fistula
lachrymalis.

THESE waters may be taken in very large quantities into the stomach without
producing any uneasiness or weight, excepting sometimes in delicate stomachs,
they cause a sense of coldness and sometimes proves emetic: some persons will
drink several quarts within half an hour, without any inconvenience, in which
case they generally operate two or three times by stool, and very copiously by
urine; they at the same time frequently produce a gentle diaphoresis; they more
particularly act upon these two last excreories, when taken in small doses as
from half a pint to a pint, and repeated four or five times in the course of
the day; in some persons these waters induce a degree of inebriety similar to
wine: they generally increase the appetite.

IT is much to be regretted, that there does not some person properly qualified
reside at these springs; who would keep a register of the complaints of those
who apply there for relief; and the effects of the waters upon them: the want
of this obliges us to establish their virtues, from the known effects of the
ingredients of their composition, which are now ascertained; assisted by the
inaccurate accounts of the neighbors.

FROM the great relief that Benjamin Colburn first received by the use of an
alkaline water, supersaturated with cretacious acid, and which afterward
proved equally serviceable to his fellow sufferers, with stone and gravely
complaints; and also from the experience of DR. FALCONER in confirming the same
See Falconer's appendix to Dobson's commentary on fixed air.
, I have not the least doubt but that these waters may be used with advantage
in these complaints; since they are proved to contain a supersaturated aerated
alkali, and also as they are found to operate very quickly and powerfully on
the urinary passages, indeed the neighbors report of its use in such cases,
confirms this opinion.

THE cretacious acid is proved by the experiments of DR. DOBSON, to be a
powerful stimulant and antisceptic, and in these waters its being conjoined
with a chalybeate; I fully believe according to the accounts of the neighbors,
and persons who had experienced relief from those complaints, that they may be
very serviceable in chronic rheumatisms, dyspepsia, and some other long
standing complaints of debility: and also in old phagedenic ulcers and
scorbutic complaints.

FROM their conjoined effects of purgative antiseptic and tonic qualities; they
appear to be properly formed for the cure of the dysentery: a person at the
springs, was using them for this complaint while I was there, he informed me
that they formerly cured him of it.

Cutanious Eruptions, frequently prove very obstinate diseases; therefore are
found in great plenty at these springs, and I am happy to add, that they have
generally disappeared by the use of the waters: for this purpose they must be
used externally, as well as internally. We need not be surprised that these
waters are so very useful in such complaints, since from their proving gently
diaphoretic, and also by the bathings keeping the skin clean and moist, in
conjunction with the sulphurious impregnation, proved to exist in them; they
appear to be extremely well calculated for that purpose I am told that during
the late war, while the troops lay at Saratoga, many of them were affected with
the itch and were sent off in companies to these springs; by which they were
all cured.
.

I HAVE never heard of the effects of these waters in serophula; (or kings
evil) but as they contain sea salt, and as they appear from increasing the
different excretions to act particularly on the glandular system; and as they
also prove a stimulus and tonic to the system at large. I think them well
deserving a trial in this disease.

THEIR use in bypochondriasis and other nervous affections, which are diseases
generally arising from the indolence and luxury of a city life; and
consequently a considerable distance from the springs, perhaps depend in a
great degree upon the amusing scenes, more simple food and constant exercise,
which are unavoidably connected with a long journey; and if any advantage is
gained in consumptions from their use, I rather suppose it owing to the same
circumstances connected therewith; since fixed air, which seems to be the
predominant agent in the operation of these waters, has, by those who have made
experiments thereon, generally been found prejudicial in these complaints, in
fact the common report is, that these waters are prejudicial in phthisical
complaints.

THESE waters have also been in repute for the cure of Dropsy, and from their
possessing such a conjoined stimulant, and evacuative quality as already
mentioned; it appears very probable that they may promote the absorption of the
fluid in the cavities of the human body; and carry it entirely out of the
system.

THERE are likewise very satisfactory accounts of paralitic affections, having
been cured or at least considerably relieved, by the inward and outward use of
these mineral waters.

IT has likewise been related, upon undoubted testimony, that fevers and agues
or intermittents have frequently been cured by them.

ALL these observations apply particularly to the asidulous springs. The
sulphur water, I imagine may be more usefully applied in cutanious eruptions,
particularly the itch; however I believe no trials have yet been made with it
in any complaint.

A CONJECTURE UPON THE MANNER OF THE NATURAL FORMATION OF THESE WATERS.
THE manner by which these waters become charged with their iron, lime, salt,
and alkali, hardly needs an explanation; as all these substances exist ready
formed in the bowels of the earth; and water after being aerated cannot pass
over them without taking up a part; but the manner in which it gains this
aerial impregnation, as the cretacious acid does not naturally exist in an
uncombined state in the earth; is not so easily accounted for.

THE cretacious acid is extricated from its combinations in the large way, by
three different processes, viz. by fermentation, by the action of a stronger
acid, and by heat; the first method cannot operate in this instance, the second
may have its effects; let us try how far it will explain the subject in
question. Suppose this water first containing a marine acid, should have passed
over a quantity of cretacious alkali; here the acid contained in ten pounds of
it, would unite with 73 grs. of pure alkali, which contained, and accordingly
will discharge 58grs. equal 116 square inches of this acid. Now the water is
supposed to contain at least 200 inches, hence we see that the most favorable
statement of this mode, will not account even for the quantity of air actually
existing as a component part of the water; much less for the great
superabundance which is continually bubbling up through it, and is discharged.
We cannot suppose that the vitriolic acid, might act on calcarious earth, and
discharge this air, whereby the water might become impregnated, before it was
charged with sea salt and alkali; or else we should have detected some glaubers
salt in the waters, as they would at the time that they received their air,
also unavoidably become saturated with gypsum, which when it came in contact
with the alkali would have been decomposed thereby, and form this salt.

WE must therefore conclude, that this air must be produced by subterranean
heat, acting on calcarious earth or limestone; thereby setting it at liberty in
this great profusion; indeed the deep caverns opening on the lime stone bank
beforementioned, gives some plausibility to this opinion, for it clearly
evinces that some considerable operations must be going forward in the earth
below: the only objection that can be raised against this conjecture is, the
coldness of the waters, but this may be obviated by considering, that even if
they do not come any great distance after their aerial impregnation; yet they
may have afterward met with their salts, which as is the case with all
substances going from the solid to the fluid state, will absorb a considerable
quantity of heat, during their dissolution, and thereby produce the coldness in
question: should any suppose that this cause is not adequate to the production
of the coldness of these waters, they are at liberty to consider them as being
aerated at a greater distance from the springs than is suggested; my above
observations however will not permit them to suspect but that the air they
contain must have been evolved from its combination by subterranean fire, the
which is proved, by the heat of the waters of Lebanon, to exist at no great
distance About 5^ miles.
from these springs.

By the waters running over a bed of sulphur, their alkali may form a hepar
with this mineral; the gas discharged from which, may give them their
sulphurious impregnation.

A METHOD OF MAKING AN ARTIFICIAL MINERAL WATER, RESEMBLING IN EVERY RESPECT
THAT OF SARATOGA.
ONE great advantage resulting from the Analysis of mineral waters is, the
being enabled thereby to make artificial waters similar to them, whence all
their virtues may be obtained at pleasure; and at any place, without the
inconvenience or expense of attending at the springs.

THERE are some mineral waters, that from the fixed nature of their
ingredients, may be kept for a considerable time and transported from place to
place without suffering much, if any, alteration in their natures; as for
instance those of Epsom, Richmond, Swansey, and the like; while others as those
of Pyrmont, Seltser, Saratoga, etc, notwithstanding our greatest care, can be
kept but a short time and consequently cannot be conveyed to any great
distance, without loosing in a considerable degree their medicinal qualities;
for besides the cretacious acid which from its volatile nature flies off, the
iron that was kept in solution thereby, is also deposited; hence they must
loose the two most active and essential parts of their composition; therefore
if any one would have these waters at a distance from the springs, it is art
alone that can supply him.

THE manner in which I prepared a water resembling the Saratoga waters, not
being possessed of Nooth's apparatus, was as follows: To a quart of simple
water, I added 38grs. aerated lime or chalk, 34.6 grs. common salt, and 5.2
aerated mineral alkali; being just the proportion that I obtained from a quart
of the mineral water; I also suspended in it some fresh iron filings tied up in
a linen rag, then by means of a bottle with a siphon affixed to it, and which
also had a mouth whereby I could put in my ingredients, I caused the air that
was discharged from chalk by a diluted vitriolic acid, to pass through the
water abovementioned, till it appeared to be fully saturated: to this water was
then added some coarsely powdered sulphur, which after standing awhile was
decanted off.

THIS liquor was now acknowledged by several persons who had drank of the
Saratoga waters perfectly to resemble them in taste.

MOST of the reagents used on the natural waters, were repeated on these and
with like effects; here then is a clear proof of the success of the analysis,
for synthesis or the recomposition of a substance, with similar ingredients to
what were obtained from it, by all chemists is considered the surest evidence
of the truth of an analysis.

NOTWITHSTANDING I have not had an opportunity of trying the effects of this
water in diseases, yet the above circumstances proving it to be composed of the
same ingredients as the natural waters; leaves no doubt, but that it must
possess the same medicinal virtues.

FINIS.

