THE YORKER'S STRATAGEM; OR BANANA'S WEDDING. A FARCE, IN TWO ACTS. AS
PERFORMED AT THE THEATER IN NEW YORK, BY THE Old American Company of Comedians,
WITH UNIVERSAL APPLAUSE.

By J. ROBINSON, Comedian.

NEW YORK: Printed by T. and J. SWORDS, No. 27, William-Street. -- 1792. --

TO THE PUBLIC.
THE Author of the following little Piece is sensible of its numerous defects
-- it was got up in a hurry, and under many disadvantages. The very flattering
marks of approbation, however, with which it was received, together with the
pressing importunities of many friends, have led him to suppose that a
publication of it would not be unpleasing.

To the generous Patrons of the Drama, and to the worthy Sons of Columbia who
feel an interest in the welfare of the American Stage, the YORKER'S STRATAGEM
is most respectfully dedicated: and the Author is not without hopes, that this
feeble attempt, defective as it is, will meet an apology from every generous
heart for its introduction into the world.

J. Robinson.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Banana, Mr. ROBINSON. Fingercash, Mr. HEARD. Ledger, Mr. MARTIN. Captain
Oakum, Mr. ASHTON. Acid, Mr. RYAN. Governor, Mr. HAMMOND. Frenchman, Mr. DUMAS.
Sailors, Soldiers, etc. And Amant, Mr. HARPER. Mrs. Banana, Mrs. HAMILTON. Miss
Bellange, Miss TUKE. Pressa, Mrs. GRAY. Mrs. Fingercash, Mrs. RANKIN. And
Louisa, Mrs. HENRY.
THE YORKER'S STRATAGEM.
ACT I.
-- SCENE I.
A Chamber in a Tavern. Amant and Captain Oakum seated; Amant dressed like a
Yankey clown. Amant. WELL, Captain, here are we arrived in the West Indies, the
climate for life, luxury and fashion; do you not think I have chose a pretty
fancy dress to come ashore in?


Captain. Why truly, Sir, there are two things which appear very odd to me, and
which I own give rise to strange conjectures.


Amant. What are they?


Captain. In the first place, why you should prefer this out-bay, where there
are but a few fishing-huts and two or three stores, to your chance of a market
at the principal town; and secondly, your coming ashore in this disguise has
something tha appearance of a spy.


Amant. Well, my dear fellow, to clear your suspicions I will fully acquaint
you with my design in coming here, and the story that gave rise to it -- It is
almost needless for me to request your secrecy and assistance.


Captain. You may depend on me.


Amant. In our conversations about the fair sex, you have frequently heard me
dwell with rapture on the virtues and beauty of a young lady with whom I got
acquainted when she was at a boarding-school in York.


Captain. I have, Sir, and wished to ask you particularly about her, but was
afraid it might offend.


Amant. Her name is Sophia Bellange, a native of this country; her parents are
lately dead. It Is a letter from her since her arrival here that was the cause
of my closing my affairs at home, and undertaking this journey. She describes
her guardian to be avaricious, and totally destitute of principle, constantly
employed in every warrantable theft that the simplicity or imprudence of his
neighbors will permit him to practice.


Captain. Well, how do you intend to meet him?


Amant. With his own weapons, artifice and chicane. You must introduce me as
supercargo, a true Yankey, sent out by daddy with a cargo of lumber, hogs and
poultry, to make daddy's own son a 'squire. My apparent simplicity will ensure
him a gull, and me an opportunity of seeing my mistress, and contriving some
means to get her and her fortune out of his hands.


Captain. But what part am I to take in this scheme?


Amant. You must say as little as possible, appear almost as ignorant as
myself, and depend on me for instructions as we go on. Suppose we call in the
landlord and make some enquiry about the old gentleman?


Captain. I think it will be necessary. But are you Jonathan here?


Amant. In every place 'till I get into the arms of my mistress. (Mimicks)
House, house, who keeps house here? Will Not that do?


Captain. Oh, very well.


Enter Acid. Acid. Did you please to want any thing?


Amant. Don't you think, Captain, that we two might make out with a little
apple toddy?


Acid. That is, Sir, you want a bowl of punch, and a slice of pineapple in it.


Amant. You be drot, do you think I came all the way from Stony-Town, and not
know that apples don't grow on pine-trees, and that punch aint toddy?


Acid. I beg your pardon, Sir, we have no other apple here except the coushooe.


Amant. Don't tell me about your cow shoe, nor your horse shoe, I Will not put up
with any of your half laughs, I Will be dur if I do, and that is point blank.


Acid. Sir, I would not wish to offend any gentleman.


Amant. Then you do think I am a gentleman?


Acid. I am sure you look very like one.


Amant. Why then, friend, to show you I don't belie my looks I Will be generous,
and treat Nathan hear to a bottle of wine; and do you hear, bring a jug of cool
water -- this country seems hot.


Acid. (Aside.) Hot enough to sweat your plank and salt fish, or I Am mistaken.
Madeira, Sir?


Captain. Yes, to be sure.


Amant. Now, an't you a pretty sort of a landlord and don't know that gentlemen
drink French wine?


Acid. (Aside.) Lord! Lord! what an ass you are.


Exit. Captain. Why, you play Jonathan better than I expected.


Amant. It Is my surest card; ten to one if our landlord is not the first to
make a report to the old gentleman of the simplicity of his guests.


Captain. You have christened me too.


Amant. O yes, remember you are Nathan Goslin, and I am Jonathan Norrard.


Enter Acid, with bottle, glasses, etc. Amant. Ay, now, that is ship-shape, as
our mate says. Come, landlord, will not you take a glass? Come, be bold, I don't
value a glass of wine a corn-cob, not I. Sit down; it is as cheap sitting as
standing.


Acid. Sir, you are very polite.


Amant. Ay, so our neighbors daughters tell me; and now, since I Have crossed
the seas, I intend to be a great man before I go back to daddy. Pray, friend,
do you know one Mr. Fingercash, some place about here?


Acid. Yes, Sir, he is my neighbor.


Amant. They talk in our parts that he buys super-cargoes.


Acid. (Aside.) He Will buy and sell you if you fall into his clutches. Yes, Sir,
he purchases cargoes of all sorts.


Amant. Then I think I can suit him to a notch -- Pray what sort of a man is he
to deal with?


Acid. As to his honesty, I would vouch for it as soon as for my own -- He Is my
particular friend; if you please, Sir, I Will introduce you to him; he is vastly
hospitable to strangers: you have never seen him, I presume?


Amant. No, I should not know the man if I was to meet him in my mush; but I Will
be bound he knows daddy.


Acid. What may his name be, Sir?


Amant. What! do'nt you know he? I did not think there was a dog in the parish
but knew Old-Caleb at the saw-mill.


Acid. If you please to favor me with his surname --


Amant. His brother Epram drives more hogs to the market than any five men in
our county. The old 'squire used to say that Epram Norrard's word was as good
as any man's bond.


Acid. Mr. Norrard, (takes him by the hand) I am very proud, I assure you, to
see you under my roof: how lucky you was in happening to call here: my good
friend, make yourself at home, be perfectly easy about every thing; Mr.
Fingercash and I will take a pleasure in getting your cargo off your hands.


Amant. I have not the least doubt of that. (Aside.) But how the plague did you
make out to know my name? I Will swear you must be a witch.


Acid. My dear Sir, I am not unacquainted with the fame and respectability of
your family. Your own character is now perfectly known to me, and you may rest
satisfied I shall make it my study to profit by so valuable an acquaintance.


Amant. Not so much as you imagine. (Aside) Then you think I may do in this
country?


Acid. Undoubtedly, my dear friend; come along with me, and I Will put you in a
way of doing for yourself in a very little time. Oh you cursed jack-ass!


Exit all. SCENE II.
Mr. Fingercash's house. Mr. and Mrs. Fingercash. Mrs. Fingercash. Well, what is
this business?


Mr. Fingercash. It is simply this; we have both agreed not to give our
daughter a farthing of portion, till our death, and as the young fellows now a
days will not take a girl without a fortune, I think it advisable to strike
with Mrs. Banana's proposal of a match between our daughter and her son: he has
got a fine estate, and however defective he may be with regard to education,
and that bauble sentiment, it will be amply made up for by his cash and
canefields.


Mrs. Fingercash. Well, husband, do as you will. (Aside.) I shall now get rid
of a prying impudent step-daughter.


Enter Servant. Servant. Masa Acid dear want for see you, he hab two Yankey wid
he.


Mr. Fingercash. How do you know they are Yankeys?


Servant. Them tan so, them hab salt fish in one hand, and trokey in todder.


Mr. Fingercash. Something is in the wind; Acid is always on the look-out;
quick in scent, sure of his game. Go, go wise, break the match to your young
pullet, and I Will go and pluck the Yankey geese.


Exit Mrs. Fingercash. Mr. Fingercash. How I do long to prey upon a bacon-fed
Yankey, or porgy-headed Bermudian!


Enter Acid, Amant, and Captain. Mr. Fingercash. Your servant, friend Acid.
Gentlemen, your most obedient.


Acid. This, Sir, is Mr. Norrard, supercargo of the brig arrived this morning.
His father is as respectable --


Amant. Stop, friend, few words are best; but if you go to that, daddy will not
turn his back on any man in our parts, from a cedar shingle to a two-inch
plank, and I can prove it down right point blank upon the nail.


Mr. Fingercash. You have brought some lumber then?


Acid. If you get him to answer that or any other question in a direct manner,
I Will forfeit a dozen of my best claret.


Aside. Amant. Yes, mamy sent a few corn-fed hogs, and sister Tabithy a few
fowls, and such odd notions, to buy silken truck like, to make her a gown like.


Mr. Fingercash. Any good puncheon staves?


Amant. Yes, the 'squire of our town did ship a few casks of choice salt fish,
I Am a sheep's-head if there is better between this and Cape-Cod. Smell that.
(Knocks the fish against his nose.)


Mr. Fingercash. It smells well; but that is a rough manner of producing your
sample.


Amant. I don't make many compliments, not I; the plain thing is the plain
thing, and so sister told Nickadamus, when she broke his face last husking time.


Mr. Fingercash. (Aside to Acid.) He Will do, he will do, he is the thing.
Concerning the boards and staves.


Amant. Considering that the frost did stint the apples, we have got a few
barrels nice cider; it is sweet as lasses, an't it Captain?


Mr. Fingercash. There is to getting a direct answer from that thick skull of
his. (Aside.) Speaking of apples, have you brought any with you? our ladies are
vastly fond of them.


Amant. Yes, I have brought a plaguey sight of gingerbread, hickory nutts, and
such like truck, to treat the lasses.


Mr. Fingercash. Was there ever such a stupid dog! but I Will make his purse
answer me if he will not. (Aside.) Would you be so obliging, Sir, as to favor me
with a sight of your invoice, or to make out a sketch of your cargo?


Amant. Ask Captain, he deals in black and white, and I keep tally.


Captain gives him the invoice, and enter Mrs. Fingercash, Miss Bellange, and
Louisa. Amant. Heavens! the sight of her has so disconcerted me, I shall never
be able to go through with it.


Mr. Fingercash. Where are you going, my dear?


Mrs. Fingercash. To the plantation, my dear, to break that affair to Louisa.


Mr. Fingercash. You must defer it, my dear, to receive those sons of liberty,
from the land of freedom, to which they shall not return till they have tasted
of our hospitality. (Aside.) After I have taxt them first pretty high. Smooth
them up, my dear, they are flats, downright flats.


Mrs. Fingercash. Sons of Columbia, deign to receive the humble welcome of your
lowest slave.


Amant. I don't understand that sort of talk, not I; Columbus might be a very
honest sort of a man, but I would have you to know that I am no bastard of his,
nor any Indian son of a --


Captain. (Clapping his hand on Amant's mouth.) Manners, Jonathan, before the
ladies.


Mr. Fingercash. (Aside.) Wife, you will ruin all with your figurative stuff:
divert him with bargaining for his turkeys, while I draw the Captain aside and
found him.


Fingercash takes the Captain aside. Mrs. Fingercash. My husband informs me you
have got some poultry to dispose of.


Amant. They are all as fat as bacon, I Will be bound for them; feel you the
weight of that (offers to give her the turkey; she drops it; he runs after it,
and then takes some corn out of his pocket and cries) Coobity, coobity,
coobity. Oh Lord, what shall I do? I must never look daddy in the face again,
for loosing sister Tabithy's black hen.


Miss Bellange. Be not afraid, Sir, the Negroes will take care of it.


Enter a servant, whispers Mrs. Fingercash. Mrs. Fingercash. Miss Bellange, you
are acquainted with the gentleman's country, oblige me by entertaining him till
I return. Exit Mrs. Fingercash.


Miss Bellange. Come, Louisa, this man may perhaps give me some information of
my Amant; his simplicity will afford you a laugh at least. Pray, friend, how
does all at home do?


Amant. Ay, now Miss, you speak as if you had been born in a christian country.
Our folks are a sort of so, and a sort of not so; sister Jemima has got the
mumps, and brother Ebby's heels are all over kibes; all well besides.


Mr. Fingercash. (Coming forward with the Captain and Acid.) Captain, your
supercargo seems to do better with the young ladies than with my rib. I can
tell by his eye he is a rogue amongst the girls.


Captain. I Will be bound, he is a great favorite with our lasses.


Amant. Yes, I have bundled with them, sparked in Virginia, and played up old
Harry all about.


Mr. Fingercash. Bravo! bravo! By the Lord he is a lad of spirit; give me your
hand, you dog; who knows but with that plump round face of yours, and that
genteel air and carriage, but you may carry off some of our Creole girls of
fortune? eh, you rogue!


Amant. Who knows but I may? eh, Captain. Pray, Sir, have you got any of them
thingumbobs in your store that please the lasses?


Mr. Fingercash. My dear fellow, you may suit yourself there from a sailor's
jacket to the robe of an emperor; the ladies will recommend to you what is most
fashionable, and the Captain and I, if he pleases, will go and see what is to
be done over a bottle.


Amant. I vow now if that an't right friendly. Go, Captain, and make out bills
of invoices, and I Will trade with the ladies for some of sister's truck.


Exit Captain and Mr. Fingercash. Miss Bellange. Pray, Sir, what part of
America are you from?


Amant. Stony-Town last.


Miss Bellange. Was you ever in York?


Amant. Tarnashon seize the place, I fell downright in love there, and all I
ever got for my pains was that there ring. Shows a ring.


Miss Bellange. Heavens, my Amant! Lend me your hand, Louisa.


Amant. Cursed impatience, I am discovered.


Louisa. Be under no apprehensions, Sir, I am well acquainted with the
attachment subsisting between you and Miss Bellange, and as her friend you have
nothing to fear from me.


Amant. My Sophia, (kneeling and kissing her hand,) how blessed am I to press
this hand unseen by other eyes than those of friendship. Can you forgive, my
love, this premature discovery, that has so ruffled this dear form?


Miss Bellange. And can you, Amant, ask me that question? (Looking tenderly.)


Amant. No, my angel, I read my welcome in those beauteous eyes, true to the
dictates of a heart where love and candor only dwell.


Miss Bellange. Oh, my Amant! what have I not suffered since the sad event that
drew me from you!


Amant. My soul felt all your anguish; by the strong power of sympathetic love
I shared in all your sorrows, and now am come to sooth the sad remembrance, to
be your friend, your father, and your --


Miss Bellange. I know the other title you would claim, but am afraid there is
an insurmountable obstacle in your way to that.


Amant. In surmountable, Madam, did you say?


Miss Bellange. Why do you start? you know my heart is only yours, but fortune
--


Amant. Well, what of fortune?


Miss Bellange. Makes it --


Amant. What?


Miss Bellange. Impossible I can be yours.


Amant. And are my flattering hopes thus blasted? Have I then quit my home in
expectation of exalted bliss, to meet the most aggravating of disappointments?


Miss Bellange. You are in an error -- do not give way to the impetuosity of
your temper.


Amant. Heavens, Madam! is it possible I could with patience meet such an
unexpected reception?


Miss Bellange. Sure you do not doubt my sincerity?


Amant. I never did till you began to speak of obstacles.


Miss Bellange. But do you know what they are?


Amant. You are acquainted with them, and that I suppose is sufficient.


Miss Bellange. Will you but hear me?


Amant. What, to make me more distracted than I am?


Miss Bellange. This, Sir, is a specimen of your temper I never thought of
seeing.


Amant. This is a trial I thought it beyond the power of fortune to put it to.


Louisa. Come, I see there is a misunderstanding between you, and as it is a
relation of mine that is the cause of it, I Will endeavor to clear it up.


Amant. A brother, I presume? Cursed fortune!


Louisa. No, Sir, it is my father, without whose consent she cannot give away
her hand; and her fortune, (which although he says is small) has too many charms
for him to resign in a hurry.


Amant. Ah! my Sophia, and is that the only bar that can impede my happiness?


Miss Bellange. The sole one; and do you not think the want of fortune is a
strong one?


Amant. By heaven if there was any circumstance on earth could make me love you
more, it would be to labor against difficulties to make you happy; but surely
my fortune, and abilities in business, are by no means so despicable as to take
away from my felicity with the woman that could return my love.


Miss Bellange. And where is the woman that would not make a return to such a
generous heart? Take then my hand, and let your counsel guide my will.


Amant. Then I am completely happy; secure in your affections, if I even fail
in procuring the old gentleman's consent I shall possess a treasure which, in
my estimation, is richer than all these Indies can bestow.


Louisa. Come, come, please to lay aside your love and sentiment for a period
that I hope is not far off, and reassume your character of Jonathan, which you
personate so well; a thought has struck me, that with the assistance of a dying
swain (who I will this moment introduce you to) we may all of us be enabled to
set sail for your country, where Virtue gives distinction, Industry wealth; and
where, like Majesty Divine, the hand that can deal thunder to usurping foes,
distributes the blessings of Liberty and Concord to his fellow citizens, by the
justice and wisdom of his laws.


END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
-- SCENE I.
A Chamber in Fingercash's House. Enter Frenchman and Mrs. Fingercash.
Frenchman. MADAME, the arrival of this Yankey doodle, or vat you call him, est
fort apropos, I am transporte aux ceiux, ah comme nous serons heruex how
blistered we shall be.


Mrs. Fingercash. But will you not despise me for taking so imprudent a step?
Consider he is my husband.


Frenchman. C'est vrai par de law of de man, but vat is dat to de law of the
pitit dieu Cupid in de cour of l'amour? we shall be uge, and I sa'l be condamne
to die vid transport on your saft a bosom.


Mrs. Fingercash. Oh, you are a flattering creature.


Frenchman. No, I assures you I love you vid a passion si vive, que je ne puis
pas vivre that I can not live vidout you. Ah comme yous etez joli Venus meme
est moins belle qui vous, vous avaiz tout a fait l'air enjo^e et vos beaux yeux
you pretty little eyes, so very full of vivacite. Vat you call dat in English?


Mrs. Fingercash. Oh you are an enchanting creature.


Frenchman. Ah, Madame, si je puis parle l'Englois comme je parle la Francois
l'ardeur of my language, vould kiss you very soul.


Mrs. Fingercash. What animated notions of the passion of love you Frenchmen
have?


Frenchman. Madame, l'am dune Francois est faite pour l'amour them soul is made
for love, it is dat inspire them vid courage to encounter vos charms, and it is
dear gloire d'etre vancu to fall you captive.


Mrs. Fingercash. Yes, Sir, but after you become our captives you too
frequently break your parole d'honneur, and make yourselves matters of the
power by which we subdue; as per example, you say you are my captive, yet I am
such an unguarded general, that I now give myself up to your direction, to
oppose any peril you dare face.


Frenchman. Ah, quelle joi, I am drunk vid my bonheur, I sall go dans une
instant and purchase the cargaifon of the Yankey doodle, and he will carry us
to de Martinique, where we vel live upon l'amour.


Mrs. Fingercash. And a little money, mon ami, so I Will go and secure the old
gentleman's strong box or coffre sort, as you call it; but above all, remember
to bind the Yankey to secrecy, for fear of a discovery.


Frenchman. No fere, no fere, de Yankey doodle love de l'argent too much for
make de discover, I will give he nof of dat, no fere.


Mrs. Fingercash. Well, well, go and secure him directly.


Frenchman. Je vol, I fly, ma charmant, adeau mon coaeur. (Sings.) Adeau, ma
princessa, il faut partir. (Going, returns.) Ecoute donc no forget de coffre
fort, de stronga box.


[During this last speech they look tenderly at each other, at parting,
dividing the stage.] Enter Banana, Priscilla following him. Priscilla. Good
People all shut all you year, open all you yi, harken to my tory, da hangman
teef.


Banana. Take care muma Priscilla, egad you mout make you fool: suppose you gim
me saucy, I take my tick, I hit you be^m. (Sings.)

As I was a goin a long, Priscilla come for take me,
I take my tick (...) brake he head, and that the way for whack he.
ty,
shaw,
I never no de like man.

Priscilla. You no hab shame, for use somebody, fo look'a my poor peak'ney, he
yi tan like for you, he back tan like for you, you can have de heart, for leave
poor ting so, O, O. (Cries.)


Banana. No vex yera. (Aside.) I no can tan see yi run water so.


Priscilla. Consider he da you pick'ney.


Banana. Da true.


Priscilla. You da he daddy.


Banana. True ra muma.


Priscilla. When you marry de lady, them will bang poor little Quaka.


Banana. No talk so, poor lille soul.


Priscilla. Worka like a horse; hungry da kill he.


Banana. Yam babrakoo.


Priscilla. No fill he belly.


Banana. Poor he one.


Priscilla. Up all night.


Banana. Driver da wrong he.


Priscilla. If he peak obaseer, da bang he. (Both shouting together) O Lord, oh!


Enter Mrs. Banana. Mrs. Banana. What is here fur do? You, Priscilla, you no
hab de impurence of de dibel, to make such a noise in a my house?


Priscilla. I no hab right for come see my husband?


Mrs. Banana. Who da you husband?


Priscilla. Banana da my husband.


Mrs. Banana. Who tell you so?


Priscilla. Da, me tell myself so.


Mrs. Banana. Who, you, you?


Priscilla. Me, me, me, me, Priscilla.


Mrs. Banana. You mullatto Seasar, go tell de obaseer for come turn dis
imperence hussy out of doors.


Priscilla. Lard a mighty in a tap, me poor one in a buckra country; you eber
been hear de like of dat -- me da imperence hussy -- eh -- who da you?


Mrs. Banana. Me da lady.


Priscilla. You da dible, look a like a lady; tigh, dirty no come dab me.


Mrs. Banana. Me hab plantation.


Priscilla. You, ye lookee like a mumu; you mout like a bull-frog.


Mrs. Banana. Me hab nega like a you.


Priscilla. You, lie, you sesy yi, you mumu nose, you daddy mout chew tobacco,
fire gun beem; me no care dat for you.


Snaps her teeth with her fingers. Mrs. Banana. Cato, Quaminu, somebody come
and carry dis year dibel to de justice, for tie up he mout.


Enter Negroes, who take hold of Prissey and carry her off. Banana. Sorry,
sorry for me do.


Mrs. Banana. How sorry for you, you fool?


Banana. No let them bang poor Prissey.


Mrs. Banana. How come so?


Banana. Because, mumma, I lob her too much.


Mrs. Banana. You hab de face for tell me so? you no hab no more amminition in
you than one hog. Lookee dear (shows a letter) da from Mr. Fingercash; call de
obarseer, he will read him for you. Here he de come. (Enter Overseer.) Bery
well, read dat dear for you young massa.


Banana. Yes, da me, me da you massa -- tie man!


Struts about. Overseer reads. MADAM,
I have well weighed your proposals, and have at length determined your son
shall have my daughter. Although she seems extremely averse to the union, time
may reconcile her to the husband. Be that as it will, if you are willing to run
the risque, she shall not dispute my authority. The sooner the ceremony is over
the better, as delays are dangerous with obstinate children -- If you have no
objections, this evening would be most agreeable to your obedient servant,

J. FINGERCASH.



Mrs. Banana. Dear, dear for you! go in your chamber, make yourself mackey
beau, for go marry wid de lady.


Banana Lard, mumma, I no hab de heart.


Mrs. Banana. How come so?


Banana. When de lady put hefyi upon me, I will shame so. --


Mrs. Banana. Keep heart, my shild, neber fear; come let a me see how you will
berave yourself when you come before company.


Banana. I will ax them how ebrey body do.


Mrs. Banana. Tie, you fool like trokey; you must do him so (shows him); how do
you do, ma'm? how do you do, sa'ar? how do young lady do?


Banana. Es, mumma, but what I mus say to de young lady?


Mrs. Banana. You must gib he sweet mout, tell him you love he better dan all
the world.


Banana. Better more dan Prissey?


Mrs. Banana. You no can shut your mout about dat colored dibel. Go put on you
tings, and I will tell you how for make de girl fool as we go on the road.

Exit. Banana, alone. Poor me one, my mumma tink she hab sabby in she head.
Egad, she fool more dan poor me; she want a me for marry de fine lady, to make
my head grow big like a guaba bush. Niber mind, I will marry de fine lady for
please my mumma, and go lib wid Prissey and poor little Quacka for please
myself.

Exit.
Scene changes to Mr. Fingercash 's House. Enter Mr. and Miss Fingercash. Mr.
Fingercash. Well, Miss Pert, what are your reasons why you will not marry this
ignoramus, as you call him, who is as rich as a Jew?


Louisa. My dearest father, can you ask me that question? Does not the
difference of our education plead most powerfully against it, in breaking the
laws of delicacy and society, by joining two persons whose souls are so very
opposite in sentiment?


Mr Fingercash. Hark'ee, Miss, none of your figurative capers with me; I have
sent for Mr. Banana, and you shall marry him this evening, I am resolved upon
it. Going.


Louisa. On my knees I beg you hear me: Can you resolve to give up your child
to a being that the most abandoned of our sex would loath and spurn at? -- The
very thought strikes me with madness.


Mr. Fingercash. By the Lord well acted! a chip of the old block, romance to
the bottom, the mother from top to toe.


Louisa. Oh, Sir, do not force your daughter to sacrifice her duty to her love
--


Mr. Fingercash. Eh, how, what is that! In the name of all that is obstinate,
what does the girl mean?


Louisa. And make her fly for protection from your tyranny into the arms of the
man she adores.


Mr. Fingercash. Bravo! bravo! excellentissimo! ten flights above any thing
your mother ever soared to yet. But who is this mighty champion, this
knight errant, who will stand forth in your defense?


Enter Ledger. Ledger. I am he, Sir.


Mr. Fingercash. What, with a quiver of quills and a shield of parchment? Ha,
ha, ha.


Ledger. No, Sir, with my life and fortune.


Mr. Fingercash. Pounce and ink-powder -- Well said Ledger -- ha, ha, ha.


Ledger. I have a fortune, Sir.


Mr. Fingercash. Yes, if you could but get any one to give you a fair title to
it -- ha, ha, ha.


Ledger. Do you think, Sir, I would tell you a lie?


Mr. Fingercash. One? ay, a thousand to get the handling of my strong box, and
leave to make an entry into the heart of that young lady.


Louisa. That he has already done, and no power on earth shall ever erase it.


Mr. Fingercash. Zounds! was ever man so insulted by a romantic girl and a
beggarly adventurer, whom I took from starving out of a prison, and who now
wants to rob me of my daughter, and I know not what besides? -- Get out of my
house, Sir, and if you ever dare to come within these doors again, I Will have
you committed to prison.


Ledger. Take care, Sir, how you threaten; recollect your villainous practices
have put you in my power, not me in yours.


Mr. Fingercash. Egad, he has me there; I must act with caution in this affair,
and get rid of him as quick as possible. (Aside.) I have it -- Look'ee, Sir, I
have not so bad an opinion of you as to suppose you could be guilty of
ingratitude, and I believe your happiness must be concerned to force you to
betray your benefactor; therefore, if you will promise not to take any
advantage of me for this evening, I may take the affair into consideration,
provided you can bring any proofs of your having even the expectation of a
fortune.


Ledger. I agree to your proposals, and you may rest satisfied I shall take no
step to yours or the young lady's injury.


Mr. Fingercash. Very well, very well, that is a good lad, go to the
counting house and make out the Yankey's account. [ Exit Ledger.] And you,
Miss, go to your mother's room, I Will follow you there. [ Exit Louisa.] So I
have quieted their minds by a vain hope, and as soon as Banana arrives I Will
have her secretly carried off in a carriage to Pierre Jean's, and married; and
as for her gallant, I Will get him off the island cost what it will. -- Oh,
apropos, here comes the very man I wanted. ( Enter Amant and Captain.) Well
friend N^^rard, how goes it?


Amant. Bad enough.


Mr. Fingercash. What Is the matter?


Amant. I am bewitched, I wish I never had left daddy.


Mr. Fingercash. What, has any of the Negroes been practicing their obeo on you?


Amant. No, it is neither obeo nor o, b, e, c, but the tarnish roguish looks of
that satin's imp, Miss Bellmange.


Mr. Fingercash. What has she done to you?


Amant. Done, ecod I cannot tell what she has done to me, she has made me feel
all over.


Mr. Fingercash. Why, you are in love man.


Amant. May be so. Now, can you tell me any cure for that?


Mr. Fingercash. Marriage, to be sure; did I not tell you you would carry off
some of our Creole girls!


Amant. Oh Lord, have I come all the way over seas to fall in love with a
screetch-owl?


Mr. Fingercash. She Is a fine girl, an't she?


Amant. Ay, she may be fine enough for these parts, but she would not suit our
markets; I would give all I am worth in the world, and mammy's hogs in the
bargain, that I had never seen her face, for when I do go home to daddy's,
she will haunt me like a ghost, I shall be so thinking about her.


Mr. Fingercash. Ah, my good friend, if you would but do me a small service, I
would put you in a way of curing your love, and making your fortune.


Amant. I vow now if you an't the best friend I ever had in my born days, I
could find in my heart to fight through thick and thin to serve you.


Mr. Fingercash. Give me your hand, my honest fellow, why, I knew you were the
lad for my purpose the moment I saw you. You know my clerk?


Amant. Yes, what about him?


Mr. Fingercash. He has robbed me.


Amant. I swear and swamp it, who would have thought he was such a devil?


Mr. Fingercash. It Is too true. Now, as the young fellow is of a good family, I
would not wish him to come to public shame; if you will carry him home with
you, you shall have my consent to marry Miss Bellange, and that will be the
making of your fortune.


Amant. Eh, Captain, what shall I do?


Captain. Try your luck man, faint heart never won a fair lady.


Amant. Agreed; but suppose I don't get her consent now, may I try it again
next voyage?


Mr. Fingercash. Yes, yes, you cannot expect it this, for you must off directly;
I will make out your account this instant, and give you the balance in cash, my
boy.


Amant. What, hard cash?


Mr. Fingercash. Hard as iron, my lad. It will be cursed hard if I don't bilk
you out of it though. (Aside.)


Amant. I shall have the young lady when I get her consent, for certain?


Mr. Fingercash. O yes, undoubtedly. If your head don't ache till then, you will
have luck my lad. (Aside.)


Amant. Ecod then I Will do it.


Mr. Fingercash. You must gag him till you get him aboard, for he will be
declaring his innocence, and keep him close under the hatches till you get
clear of the land, he is a bloody minded fellow.


Amant. Don't you put yourself into any consternations about it. I Will turn
kidnapper for once, and sell my soul to the old boy, but I take you both to
witness it is for that snake of temptation called a Woman.


Mr. Fingercash. Yes, yes, I Will give you a certificate, that you are a damned
jack-ass. (Aside.) Gentlemen, I Will go and prepare your cash for you. Exit.


Amant. Well, my friend, what think you now?


Captain. That fortune has smiled auspicious on your schemes, and that you will
be as successful as any hero that every trod the region of romance; and your
meeting with your friend Ledger, who you supposed died in prison, is as
romantic an incident as ever turned up to any Quixote of them all.


Amant. Yes, faith, but the Frenchman's' intrigue crowns all; that secret will
command what terms I please for myself, and Ledger too I hope. He has wrote to
the Governor on the tyranny of the old gentleman's forcing his daughter to a
preposterous match with Banana, so we must wait his arrival before we open our
plot. You have got possession of the strong box, the coffre fort?


Captain. Safe.


Amant. Then allons vive l'amour. Exit.


SCENE II.
Fingercash 's House continued. Mrs. Fingercash and Louisa. Mrs. Fingercash.
Well, child, my heart is softened by your tears and entreaties, and you may
depend on my assistance, if you can devise any scheme to counteract your brute
of a father; and to prevent any suspicion, you must seem to comply with his
wishes.


Enter Mr. Fingercash. Mr. Fingercash. Well, wife, does Miss begin to listen to
reason?


Mrs. Fingercash. Yes, my dear, my elocution has at length subdued her
obstinacy, and she is convinced of her error?


Mr. Fingercash. Then, if that is the case, I freely forgive her, and am proud
to find she is disposed to receive her intended husband with propriety.


Enter Servant. Servant. Misses Banana da come wid he son.


Mr. Fingercash. Show them in.


Enter Mrs. Banana and Son. Mr. Fingercash. We are all happy to see you on
occasion that will put your son in possession of as fine a girl as any in the
country, (aside,) and me of his money.


Mrs. Banana. You savant, Sir, you savant, Ladies, I am as proud as you can be,
an do my son no schola, he hab a heart.


Banana. Big like a pumkin, mumma.


Mrs. Banana. Shut you mout.


Banana. Yes, no bex year.


Mrs. Banana. What make you tan so?


Banana. Tie, mumma, you no see me tan on my foot; how I must tan?


Mrs. Banana. Where all them fine tings I been learn you for say?


Banana. Tie, them gone, them gone out of my head, an no sabby catch 'em.


Mr. Fingercash. Son, Banana, that is to be, your most obedient, you are grown
vastly corpulent since I had last the pleasure of seeing you.


Banana. Yes, a' daddy, me da corporal in de militia, me da go sajant nex a
year.


Mrs. Banana. You fool like a trokey, you no hab no mo gramification in you dan
if you neber been larn you letter. Why you no peak to de lady, man?


Banana. Marra ma'am. (Goes sneekingly up to her, then retires.) Lud, mamma, I
no sabby do um.


Mr. Fingercash. Mrs. Banana, your son is rather modest; he is bashful before
company; suppose we leave the young folks together, I have something to
communicate to you in private?


Mrs. Banana. Wid all my heart, Sir.


Exit Mr. and Mrs. Fingercash, and Mrs. Banana. (As Mrs. Banana is going off,
Banana catches her by the sleeve; she pushes him back.) Banana. No leab a poo
me, shame da kill me, Lard wha me da go do, my yi turn, my heart go tumpity
tump, my knee go bumpity bumity bump.


Louisa. Poor wretch, he seems quite confounded with the inequality of his
situation.


Banana. (Timidly approaching Louisa.) Suppose you no bex, I will tell you one
tory; I lobe a you, I lobe a you, like peppa pot my heart da burn, a burn a
like a fire coal, put you yi sweet upon me, sorry fo' me, sorry fo' me, sorry
fo' me do, or I da go dead like a one pig.


Enter Ledger from a closet, with a pistol. Ledger. Say that again, you
scoundrel, and I Will send this bullet through your head.


Banana. O Lord, Oh! -- (Falls down on his face.)


Ledger. Offer to squall and I Will -- (Points the pistol at him, Banana looking
up with terror.)


Banana. Lod, I dead a ready.


Ledger. You wretch, how could you dare --


Banana. Ax a pardon, good man, da no been me.


Ledger. Who then?


Banana. Da been, da been, da --


Ledger. Speak cut, you rascal.


Banana. Lod, me no sabby peak.


Ledger. What Is the matter?


Banana. Da someting you hab dear look angry so.


(Points to the pistol.) Ledger. What, this?


Banana. Yes, shut up he mout, no let he talk, and I will tell you one tory.


Ledger. (Puts up the pistol.) Now go on.


Banana. My mumma want a fo' ride grande, gallop away prookety, prookety,
prook; me know me da fool, and me want fo' walk tofly, tofly; you sabby, tofly
catch quickly; me mumma want me for marry wid de fine lady, I want fo' go lib
wid my own lobe Prissey.


Ledger. What, you have got a mistress then?


Banana. Yes, an pickney too. You no know little Quacka?


Ledger. And don't you love your Prissey?


Banana. Yes, I lobe he like a hell, and she lobe me like a dibel.


Ledger. Well, if ever you wish to see Prissey's face again, go into that
chamber, put on a suit of clothes you will find there, and don't dare to move or
speak till I bring you out; then you shall be lawfully married to her.


Banana. Bless a you heart, good soul, I will do ebery ting you bid a me.
(Going to the closet returns.) Lod, I want fo' beg you one someting.


Ledger. What Is that?


Banana. Fo'^^ang my mumma, curse he old heart.


Ledger. Remember, don't stir, or I Will -- (Pulls out the pistol.)


Banana. O Lod! O Lod! Exits terrified.


Ledger. Now, my Louisa, every thing goes on to our wish -- give this note to
your maid to give your father; that will prevent his going with you to Pere
Jean's. I Will go mask my face and put on Banana's clothes; the coachman is in my
interest, and is willing to be deceived. Exit Louisa.


Enter Amant. Amant. Well, have you succeeded with Banana?


Ledger. To a miracle; it was the wish of the poor wretch to get an opportunity
of being off. -- The Governor will be here about the hour the priest has made
Louisa mine -- Are your sailors in readiness?


Amant. Yes; but I don't fully understand how you intend to conduct this
business.


Ledger. It Is thus; I overheard a conversation between Louisa and her mother,
who has yielded to her entreaties, and promises her assistance. Louisa's maid,
under pretense of betraying me, will give the old gentleman a note, making an
appointment to meet his daughter at the place and hour the Frenchman has fixed
for eloping with Mrs. Fingercash. Now, you must be ready with your sailors to
carry off the Frenchman, whom Fingercash will suppose to be me, as he is to be
masked, you know.


Amant. Ay, now I understand you.


Mr. Fingercash* (from within.) Louisa, Louisa.


Ledger. Zounds! here is the old fellow; I must to my hiding place. Exit.


Enter Mr. Fingercash. Mr. Fingercash. Have you seen Louisa this way?


Amant. No; I have been looking for her to get her to speak a good word for me
when I am gone.


Mr. Fingercash. I wish you was safe gone, and that villain Ledger along with
you. Would you believe it, not content with robbing me, he keeps lurking about
with an intention to run away with my daughter; her maid has betrayed them, and
gave me this note, appointing a rendezvous. Now, my dear fellow, to prove
yourself worthy of my friendship and Miss Bellange's love, be you and your
sailors ready to go along with me, and we'll there gag him and carry him on
board.


Amant. Oh, never fear me.


Mr. Fingercash. Boy, [enter seavant] tell your mistress to come here -- Are
your hands stout fellows? To Amant.


Amant. They are not over and above stout, but I believe they are fellows.
Looks at his hands.


Mr. Fingercash. Stupid ass! (aside) your men I mean?


Amant. Yes, fine chowder-fed boys.


Enter Mrs. Fingercash. Mrs. Fingercash. What do you want, my dear?


Mr. Fingercash, (going to show the letter.) No, I Will not trust her 'till it is
all over. -- My dear, I have a pressing reason why I should wish this business
of our daughter's was finished, and must request you to go in my place to Pere
Jean's. There is no time to be lost, so you must about it this instant, and
return immediately after the ceremony, for then my fears will have an end. --
Come along with me, honest Jonathan, and I Will settle with you.

Exit Mr. Fingercash and Amant. Mrs. Fingercash, alone. Surely he does not
suspect me -- oh no -- my daughter said she would send him on a wrong scent
till her affair is over, and this is the most charming opportunity for me to
make off with my spark. I Will see if Ledger is ready. Hist, hist. [Goes to the
door, it opens.] Oh, you are ready, I see; my daughter and I will call on you
in an instant. Remember, you must turn me out of the coach as soon as we lose
sight of the house.


Ledger. Is the old gentleman secured?


Mrs. Fingercash. All ready, and now for a trip to the land of love. Exit.


Scene a Jessamine Bower. Enter Frenchman masked. Frenchman. This is the arbor
of jassamine, I will go secure my prize.


[He enters, the door flies back, followed by Fingercash, Amant, and sailors.]
Mr. Fingercash. Seize him! seize him! at him, my boys, at him!


Frenchman. Oh des voleurs! des voleurs! Murder! murder!


Mr. Fingercash. Yes, yes, these are thieves, and you are one of them. You was
punctual to the hour, and you did not find me behind hand.


Frenchman, (the sailors tying him.) Ecoute moi?


Mr. Fingercash. Changing your language will not do; we are prepared for you,
although the lady was'n't.


Frenchman. Je suis ennocent je vous.


Mr. Fingercash. There, did I not tell you he would plead innocent: gag him,
gag him.


(The sailors attempt to gag him.) Frenchman. Waw, waw, waw, waw, de Yankey
doodle. (They endeavor to stop his mouth, he continues the noise.) Waw, waw,
waw.


Mr. Fingercash. He sings Yankey doodle to a new tune, and waw, waw, waw, make
a most excellent chorus.


(The sailors take him on their shoulders.) Sailors. Well, Sir, we are all
ready for sailing.


Mr. Fingercash. Stop, I must give your passenger his clearance. (The old man
flogs him on the back with his cane; the sailors marching round the stage; old
man singing Yankey doodle, waw, waw, Yankey doodle dandy; and at the last blow)
that is the dandy!


[The time he is beating the Frenchman Mrs. Fingercash* enters, and goes off
again unperceived.] Scene changes to a Chamber in Mr. Fingercash's house. Miss
Bellange and Governor seated. Governor. I am very glad, Madam, you have had
recourse to these artifices, for had I been obliged to interpose with my
authority, it might have been attended with disagreeable consequences to this
cruel father.


Miss Bellange. Still, Sir, I must request you to speak in the same absolute
style to Mr. Fingercash you have done to Acid, for he is the most artful of men.


Governor. I conceive your meaning, and will attend to it.


Enter Mr. Fingercash. Mr. Fingercash. Your Excellency's most obedient.


Governor. Soldat. (Enter two soldiers and take hold of Fingercash.)


Mr. Fingercash. Gentlemen, what is the meaning of of all this? (To the
Governor.) I am sorry, Sir, I am not at liberty to give you my best welcome in
this house, as these gentlemen seem to be masters of the ceremony.


Governor. This pleasantry will not soften my resentment; I am come here to see
justice done.


Mr. Fingercash. I am sorry, Sir, the bird is flown, your justice cannot extend
to the stretching Mr. Ledger's neck this time.


Governor. What, Sir, do you take me for a hangman?


Mr. Fingercash. No, Sir, but he is the only offender about my house.


Enter Amant, Mrs. Fingercash, and Mrs. Banana. Amant stares, and bows to the
Governor, then passes over to Fingercash. Amant. Lord, what is the matter
friend? sure you are not going to sing to the tune of Yankey doodle, waw, waw,
etc.


Mr. Fingercash. Peace, man; swear to whatever I say, and you shall have Miss
Bellange, and her fortune into the bargain, whether she will or not.


Amant. You may depend upon me, Sir; I Will stand by you, till you get your
deserts, you scoundrel. (Aside.)


Mr. Fingercash. You have heard, Sir, of the robbery he has committed?


Governor. No, Sir, I have heard of no robbery.


Mr. Fingercash. Sir, he has almost ruined me.


Amant. I Will swear right down point blank he has.


Mr. Fingercash. Besides, he wanted to carry off my daughter, and tried all he
could to get the poor innocent Yankey to join him in the plot.


Amant. Yes, I Will be drot if he did'n't.


Mr. Fingercash. A wicked black plot, Sir, as ever you heard of.


Amant. Yes, a tarnashon black plot the whole of it, and here comes a fellow
with a black patch on his face to prove it.


Enter Ledger, ( disguised as Banana,) and Louisa. They kneel. Ledger. Your
blessing, daddy.


Mr. Fingercash. How, sure this an't Banana?


Ledger. No, Sir, but your own Ledger, neatly bound by father Jean, and
elegantly gilded by this lady's hand.


Amant. A cursed black plot indeed!


Mr. Fingercash. What, are you concerned in it too?


Amant. Me, Sir; if I had any hand in patching that black face, I wish the
devil may take me. Oh Lord, there he is.


Enter Frenchman tar'd and feathered. Frenchman. Revenche, revenche, de Yankey
doodle, et de goudron de feder, de feder and goudron. ( The Frenchman runs
after Amant, who at length hides behind the Governor.)


Amant. Yes, you are very well feathered, and I have made a very good run to
keep clear of old nick. Do Governor, keep him off.


The Frenchman starts and kneels. Frenchman. Mon General.


Amant. Ecod, I never knew the old boy had got a commander before.


Governor. Ah, you are there, Mr. Deserter; vous serrai pendu mon ami.


Soldiers go from Fingercash to the Frenchman. Amant. What, are you going to
sing the second part of Yankey doodle, waw, waw?


Puts his hand to his neck. Mr. Fingercash. I am lost in amazement. Wife, in
the profundity of your wisdom can you find any mode to expound this? What, your
figurative store exhausted!


Ledger. Yes, Sir, it has taken flight, and you may think yourself extremely
happy it has not carried your solid stuff along with it. What say you,
Monsieur? the coffre fort, ha, ha, ha!


Mr. Fingercash. Eh, what is that about the strong box? Exit.


Mrs. Banana. [Kneels.] I ax pardon, my aminition been make me fool, I no been
know myself, no punish me for my prerumption, I punish enough already, I loose
my poor pickney; wha me da go do for my poor pickney, oh?


[Ledger opens the door, Banana runs to his mother, kisses her.] Banana. Here
me mumma.


Mrs. Banana. Lard, my pickney.


Banana. Tie mumma.


Enter Mr. Fingercash. Mr. Fingercash. I am robbed, I am robbed! Governer, I
request justice; order your soldiers to secure every body in the house, that my
money may be restored.


Governor. My intention in coming here was to see justice done every one.


Banana. Lard, mumma, take care, massa Ledger been promise to bang you, he will
pay you well.


Ledger. No, Banana, your goodness --


Banana. Yes, me da good boy.


Ledger. Protects yourself and mother.


Banana. Tank you. (To his mother) Keep heart, old soul.


Governor. Now, gentlemen, Banana's business being over --


Banana. Me da go marry Prissey.


Governor. Peace, Sir.


Banana. I done, massa, no bex year.


Governor. Advance your different claims, and let me know the nature of them.


Amant, ( speaks in his own tone.) I believe, Sir, mine stands first upon the
list. Fingercash starts.


Mr. Fingercash. Hey day! in the name of wonder, who are you, pray?


Amant. My name is Amant, a favored admirer of this lady's, whose fortune I
now demand; my right of claim to it being your and her consent to our union.


Mr. Fingercash. Well, this makes good the old saying, that a true bred Yankey
is a match for the devil: -- But you will find yourself mistaken in her fortune
-- I have large demands against the estate.


Amant. How justly founded my friend Ledger can explain -- You see I Am a match
for you every way -- Remember you said I was the boy for your purpose.


Governor. You find, Sir, from your ungovernable desire of riches, you not only
put people upon their guard against you, but oblige them to descend to the
lowest arts, to defeat you in your villainy. To such a degrading state of
infamy did you lower yourself, that you made even your wife and child abhor you
as a monster that knew no distinction of either appetite or sentiment: that
abhorrence gave rise to inconstancy in the one, and disobedience in the other.
The only atonement you can now make for your past errors, is to return to the
paths of honor and honesty, and by your endeavors to make your family happy,
be reinstated in their loves.


Mr. Fingercash. Your words are backed with truth and sound reason, and I Am
become their convert. I humbly beg pardon for the trouble I have given you: But
if you and this good company will bury in oblivion my past errors, and those of
the YORKER'S STRATAGEM, I shall for the future only exist in meriting your --
no -- ( to the audience) their approbation.


FINIS.

