MEDICAL INQUIRIES AND OBSERVATIONS.

BY BENJAMIN RUSH, M. D. PROFESSOR OF THE INSTITUTES OF MEDICINE, AND OF
CLINICAL PRACTICE IN THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA:

VOLUME II.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY T. DOBSON, AT THE STONE-HOUSE, NO. 41, SOUTH
SECOND-STREET. M,DCC,XCIII.

CONTENTS.
I. AN inquiry into the influence of physical causes upon the moral faculty,
Page. 1 II. An inquiry into the effects of spirituous liquors upon the human
body, and their influence upon the happiness of society, Page. 57 III. An
inquiry into the causes and cure of the pulmonary consumption, Page. 83 IV.
Observations on the symptoms and cure of dropsies, Page. 161 V. An inquiry into
the causes and cure of the internal dropsy of the brain, Page. 199 VI. An
account of the measles, as they appeared in Philadelphia, in the year 1789,
Page. 229 VII. An account of the influenza, as it appeared in Philadelphia, in
the years 1789, 1790, and 1791, Page. 245 VIII. An inquiry into the causes of
the increase of bilious and remitting fevers, in Pennsylvania, Page. 263 IX. An
inquiry into the causes and cure of sore legs, Page. 275 X. An account of the
state of the body and mind in old age, with observations upon its diseases and
their remedies, Page. 293
PREFACE.
THE candid reception of a small volume of Inquiries and Observations,
published in the year 1788, has encouraged me to offer a second to the public,
with the same title. Three of the inquiries were published several years ago;
two The inquiry into the influence of physical causes on the moral faculty, and
the inquiry into the influence of spirituous liquors upon the human body, etc.
of them in pamphlets, and the third The inquiry into the causes of the
increase of bilious and intermitting fevers in Pennsylvania.
in the second volume of the American Philosophical Transactions. They are now
republished, in their present form, at the request of several of my friends,
with the addition, chiefly, of a few notes.

I AM aware of the fate of every attempt to introduce new opinions into
medicine. My apology for this attempt in some of the following essays is, that
I believe the want of success in the treatment of those diseases which are
thought to be incurable, is occasioned, in most cases, by an attachment to such
theories as are imperfect or erroneous. I do not say, by a want of theory
altogether, for it is impossible for a physician to prescribe, without a theory
of some kind. I believe further, after all that has been said against theory,
and in favor of simple observation in medicine, that uniform and complete
success can never be attained, but by combining with observation a perfect
knowledge of all the causes of diseases. Perhaps it would be equally just to
assert, that observation will always be extensive, accurate, and useful, in
proportion as it is directed by principles in medicine.

I HAVE one more excuse to offer for my temerity in proposing the new opinions
which are contained in the following inquiries, and that is, they were not
sought for, but obtruded upon me, and that too in spite of a conviction of the
certain loss of reputation which follows a change of opinion upon any subject;
for I well knew the world was not disposed to admit as a justification of this
change, that it is always the necessary effect of the discovery or adoption of
new truths; and that stability in principles and practice, in an imperfect
science, is, for the most part, the effect of a timid or slothful perseverance
in ignorance or error.

IN departing in some things from the system of Dr. Cullen, in which I was
educated, I do not relinquish the whole of his principles, much less do I
reject indiscriminately the systems of authors, whether ancient or modern, of
less reputation. Truth in medicine, as far as it has been discovered, like
truth in religion, appears to exist in greater or less proportions in different
systems; but the fabric which shall include a knowledge of the causes and cure
of every disease, remains yet to be completed, by an application to its
unfinished parts, of the successive labors of Physicians in generations, or
perhaps ages, yet to come.

HAD I yielded to personal considerations, I should have kept these papers a
few years longer from the public eye, in order that they might have become more
correct from the influence which time alone exerts upon all literary
performances; but I have preferred at every hazard, fending them thus early
into the world, from a desire that my opinions and practice may be corrected,
or supported, by the auxiliary observations and reasonings of my medical
brethren; and that several formidable diseases may thereby be opposed, not by
an individual only, but by the confederated exertions of men of different
talents, and situations, in every part of the republic of medicine.

I HAD another reason for committing these Essays to the press, in their
present immature state, and that was, I have observed freedom in thinking, to
be necessarily connected with freedom in communicating the result of inquiries
after truth. I consider this volume therefore, with all its imperfections, as a
pledge of equal boldness, and I hope, of more success, in all future
investigations.

PHILADELPHIA, 4 th July, 1793.
AN INQUIRY INTO THE INFLUENCE OF PHYSICAL CAUSES UPON THE MORAL FACULTY,
DELIVERED BEFORE THE AMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY, Held in Philadelphia, on
the 27th of February, 1786.
GENTLEMEN,
IT was for the landable purpose of exciting a spirit of emulation and enquiry,
among the members of our body, that the founders of our society, instituted an
annual oration. The task of preparing, and delivering this exercise, has
devolved, once more, upon me. I have submitted to it, not because I thought
myself capable of fulfilling your intentions, but because I wished, by a
testimony of my obedience to your requests, to atone for my long absence from
the temple of science.

THE subject upon which I am to have the honor of addressing you this evening,
is An enquiry into the influence of physical causes upon the moral faculty.

BY the moral faculty I mean a power in the human mind of distinguishing and
choosing good and evil, or in other words, virtue and vice. It is a native
principle, and though it be capable of improvement by experience and
reflection, it is not derived from either of them. -- St. Paul, and Cicero,
give us the most perfect account of it that is to be found in modern or ancient
authors. For when the Gentiles, (says St. Paul) which have not the law, do by
nature the things contained in the law, these, having not the law, are a law
unto themselves; which show the works of the law written in their hearts, their
consciences also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing,
or else excusing another. Rom i. 14.15.


THE words of Cicero are as follow -- Est igitur haec, judices, non scripta,
sed nata lex, quam non didicimus, accepimus, legimus, verum ex natura ipsa
arripuimus, hausimus, expressimus, ad quam non docti, sed facti, non instituti,
sed imbuti sumus. Oration pro Milone.
This faculty is often confounded with science, which is a distinct and
independent power of the mind. This is evident from the passage quoted from the
writings of St. Paul, in which conscience is said to be the witness that
accuses or excuses us, of a breach of the law written in our hearts. The moral
faculty is what the schoolmen call the "regula regulans," -- the conscience is
their "regula regulata." Or, to speak in more modern terms, the moral faculty
performs the office of a lawgiver, while the business of conscience is to
perform the duty of a judge. The moral faculty is to the conscience, what taste
is to the judgment, and sensation to perception. It is quick in its operations,
and like the sensative plant, acts without reflection, while conscience follows
with deliberate steps, and measures all her actions, by the unerring square of
right and wrong. The moral faculty exercises itself upon the actions of others.
It approves even in books, of the virtues of a Trajan, and disapproves of the
vices of a Marius, while conscience confines its operations, only to its own
actions. These two powers of the mind are generally in an exact ratio to each
other, but they sometimes exist in different degrees in the same person. Hence
we often find conscience in its full vigor, with a diminished tone, or total
absence of the moral faculty.

IT has long been a question among metaphysicians, whether the conscience be
seated in the will or in the understanding. The controversy can only be settled
by admitting the will to be the seat of the moral faculty, and the
understanding to be the seat of the conscience. The mysterious nature of the
union of those two moral principles with the will and understanding, is a
subject foreign to the business of the present enquiry. --

AS I consider virtue and vice to consist in action, and not in opinion, and as
this action has its seat in the will, and not in the conscience, I shall
confine my enquiries chiefly to the influence of physical causes upon that
moral power of the mind, which is connected with volition, although many of
these causes act likewise upon the conscience, as I shall show hereafter. --
The state of the moral faculty is visible in actions, which affect the
well-being of society. The state of the conscience is invisible, and therefore
removed beyond our investigation.

THE moral faculty has received different names from different authors. It is
the "moral sense" of Dr. Hutchison -- the "sympathy" of Dr. Adam Smith -- the
"moral instinct" of Rousseau -- and "the light that lights every man that
comes into the world" of St John. I have adopted the term of moral faculty
from Dr. Beattie, because I conceive it conveys with the most perspicuity, the
idea of a power in the mind, of choosing good and evil.

OUR books of medicine contain many records of the effects of physical causes
upon the memory -- the imagination -- and the judgment. In some instances we
behold their operation only on one, -- in others on two, -- and in many cases
upon the whole of these faculties. Their derangement has received different
names, according to the number or nature of the faculties that are affected.
The loss of memory has been called "amnesia" -- false judgment upon one
subject has been called "melancholia" -- false judgment upon all subjects has
been called "mania" -- and a defect of all the three intellectual faculties
that have been mentioned, has received the name of "amentia." Persons who
labor under the derangement, or want of these powers of the mind, are
considered, very properly, as subjects of medicine; and there are many cases
upon record that prove, that their diseases have yielded to the healing art.

IN order to illustrate the effects of physical causes upon the moral faculty,
it will be necessary first to show their effects upon the memory -- the
imagination and the judgment; and at the same time to point out the analogy
between their operation upon the intellectual powers of the mind, and the moral
faculty.

1. DO we observe a connection between the intellectual powers, and the degrees
of consistency and firmness of the brain in infancy and childhood? -- The same
connection has been observed between the strength as well as the progress of
the moral faculty in children.

2. DO we observe a certain size of the brain, and a peculiar cast of features,
such as the prominent eye, and the aquiline nose, to be connected with
extraordinary portions of genius? -- We observe a similar connection between
the figure and temperament of the body, and certain moral faculties. -- Hence,
we often ascribe good temper and benevolence to corpulency, and irascibility to
sanguineous habits. Caesar thought himself safe in the friendship of the
"sleek-headed" Anthony and Dolabella; but was afraid to trust to the
professions of the slender Cassius.

3. DO we observe certain degrees of the inteltectual faculties to be
hereditary in certain families? The same observation has been frequently
extended to moral qualities -- Hence we often find certain virtues and vices as
peculiar to families, through all their degrees of consanguinity, and duration,
as a peculiarity of voice -- complexion -- or shape.

4. DO we observe instances of a total want of memory -- imagination -- and
judgment, either from an original defect in the stamina of the brain, or from
the influence of physical causes? -- The same unnatural defect is sometimes
observed, and probably from the same causes, of a moral faculty. The celebrated
Servin whose character is drawn by the Duke of Sully in his Memoirs, appears to
be an instance of the total absence of the moral faculty, while the chasm,
produced by this defect, seems to have been filled up by a more than common
extension of every other power of his mind. I beg leave to repeat the history
of this prodigy of vice and knowledge. -- Let the reader represent to himself a
man of a genius so lively, and of an understanding so extensive, as rendered
him scarce ignorant of any thing that could be known -- of so vast and ready a
comprehension, that he immediately made himself master of whatever he attempted
-- and of so prodigious a memory, that he never forgot what he once learned. He
possessed all parts of philosophy, and the mathematics, particularly
fortification and drawing. Even in theology he was so well skilled, that he was
an excellent preacher, whenever he had a mind to exert that talent, and an able
disputant, for and against the reformed religion indifferently. He not only
understood Greek -- Hebrew -- and all the languages which we call learned, but
also all the different jargons, or modern dialects. He accented and pronounced
them so naturally, and so perfectly imitated the gestures and manners both of
the several nations of Europe, and the particular provinces of France, that he
might have been taken for a native of all, or any of these countries: and this
quality he applied to counterfeit all sorts of persons, wherein he succeeded
wonderfully. He was moreover the best comedian, and the greatest droll that
perhaps ever appeared. He had a genius for poetry, and had wrote many verses.
He played upon almost all instruments -- was a perfect master of music -- and
sung most agreeably and justly. He likewise could say mass, for he was of a
disposition to do, as well as to know, all things. His body was perfectly well
suited to his mind. He was light, nimble, and dexterous, and fit for all
exercises. He could ride well, and in dancing, wrestling, and leaping, he was
admired. There are not any recreative games that he did not know, and he was
skilled in almost all mechanic arts. -- But now for the reverse of the medal.
Here it appeared, that he was treacherous -- cruel -- cowardly -- deceitful --
a liar -- a cheat -- a drunkard and a glutton -- a sharper in play -- immersed
in every species of vice -- a blasphemer -- an atheist. -- In a word, in him
might be found all the the vices that are contrary to nature -- honor --
religion -- and society, -- the truth of which he himself evinced with his
latest breath; for he died in the flower of his age, in a common brothel,
perfectly corrupted by his debaucheries, and expired with the glass in his
hand, cursing, and denying God Vol. III. p. 216.217.
.

IT was probably a state of the human mind such as have been described, that
our Savior alluded to in the disciple, who was about to betray him, when he
called him "a devil." Perhaps the essence of depravity in infernal spirits,
consists in their being wholly devoid of a moral faculty. In them the will has
probably lost the power of choosing Milton seems to have been of this opinion.
Hence, after ascribing repentance to Satan, he makes him declare, "Farewell
remorse: all good to me is lost,
"Evil, be thou my good." -- -- -- -- --
PARADISE LOST, Book IV
, as well as the capacity of enjoying moral good. It is true, we read of their
trembling in a belief of the existence of a God, and of their anticipating
future punishment by asking, whether they were to be tormented before their
time: But this is the effect of conscience, and hence arises another argument
in favor of this judicial power of the mind, being distinct from the moral
faculty. It would seem as if the Supreme Being had preserved the moral faculty
in man from the ruins of his fall, on purpose to guide him back again to
Paradise, and at the same time had constituted the conscience, both in men and
in fallen spirits, a kind of royalty in his moral empire, on purpose to show
his property in all intelligent creatures, and their original resemblance to
himself. Perhaps the essence of moral depravity in man consists in a total, but
temporary suspension of the power of conscience. Persons in this situation are
emphatically said in the scriptures to be "past feeling" -- and to have their
consciences feared, with a "hot iron" -- they are likewise said to be "twice
dead" -- that is, the same torpor or moral insensibility, has seized both the
moral faculty and the conscience.

5. DO we ever observe instances of the existence of only one of the three
intellectual powers of the mind that have been named, in the absence of the
other two? We observe something of the same kind with respect to the moral
faculty. I once knew a man, who discovered no one mark of reason, who possessed
the moral sense or faculty in so high a degree, that he spent his whole life in
acts of benevolence. He was not only inoffensive, (which is not always the case
with idiots) but he was kind and affectionate to every body. He had no ideas of
time, but what were suggested to him by the returns of the stated periods for
public worship, in which he appeared to take great delight. He spent several
hours of every day in devotion, in which he was so careful to be private, that
he was once found in the most improbable place in the world for that purpose,
viz. in an oven.

6. DO we observe the memory, the imagination and the judgment, to be affected
by diseases, particularly by fevers and madness? Where is the physician, who
has not seen the moral faculty affected from the same causes! How often do we
see the temper wholly changed by a fit of sickness! And now often do we hear
persons of the most delicate virtue, utter speeches in the delirium of a fever,
that are offensive to decency, or good manners! I have heard a well attested
history of a clergyman of the most exemplary moral character, who spent the
last moments of a fever which deprived him both of his reason and his life, in
profane cursing and swearing. I once attended a young woman in a nervous fever,
who discovered after her recovery, a loss of her former habit of veracity. Her
memory (a defect of which, might be suspected of being the cause of this vice)
was in every respect as perfect as it was before the attack of the fever I have
selected this case from many others, which have come under my notice, in which
the moral faculty appeared to be impaired by diseases, particularly by the
typhus of Dr Cullen, and by those species of palsy which affect the brain.
. The instances of immorality in maniacs, who were formerly distinguished for
the opposite character, are so numerous, and well known, that it will not be
necessary to select any cases, to establish the truth of the proposition
contained under this head.

7. DO we observe any of the three intellectual powers that have been named,
enlarged by diseases? Patients in the delirium of a fever, often discover
extraordinary flights of imagination, and madmen often astonish us with their
wonderful acts of memory. The same enlargement, sometimes, appears in the
operations of the moral faculty. I have more than once heard the most sublime
discourses on morality in the cell of an hospital, and who has not seen
instances of patients in acute diseases, discovering degrees of benevolence and
integrity, that were not natural to them in the ordinary course of their lives?
Xenophon makes Cyrus to declare, in his last moments, That the soul of man at
the hour of death appears most divine, and then foresees something of future
events.


8. DO we ever observe a partial insanity, or false perception on one subject,
while the judgment is sound and correct, upon all others? We perceive, in some
instances, a similar defect in the moral faculty. There are persons who are
moral in the highest degree, as to certain duties, who nevertheless live under
the influence of some one vice. I knew an instance of a woman, who was
exemplary in her obedience to every command of the moral law, except one. She
could not refrain from stealing. What made this vice the more remarkable was,
that she was in easy circumstances, and not addicted to extravagance in any
thing. Such was her propensity to this vice, that when she could lay her hands
upon nothing more valuable, she would often, at the table of a friend, fill her
pockets secretly with bread. As a proof that her judgment was not affected by
this defect in her moral faculty, she would both confess and lament her crime,
when detected in it.

9. DO we observe the imagination in many instances to be affected with
apprehensions of dangers that have no existence? In like manner we observe the
moral faculty to discover a sensibility to vice, that is by no means
proportioned to its degrees of depravity. How often do we see persons laboring
under this morbid sensibility of the moral faculty, refuse to give a direct
answer to a plain question, that related perhaps only to the weather, or to the
hour of the day, lest they should wound the peace of their minds by telling a
falsehood!

10. DO dreams affect the memory -- the imagination -- and the judgment? Dreams
are nothing but incoherent ideas, occasioned by partial or imperfect sleep.
There is a variety in the suspension of the powers of the mind in this state of
the system. In some cases the imagination only is deranged in dreams -- in
others the memory is affected -- and in others the judgment. -- But there are
cases, in which the change that is produced in the state of the brain, by means
of sleep, affects the moral faculty likewise; hence we sometimes dream of doing
and saying things when asleep, which we shudder at, as soon as we awake. This
supposed defection from virtue, exists frequently in dreams where the memory
and judgment are scarcely impaired. It cannot therefore be ascribed to the
desertion of those two powers of the mind.

11. DO we read, in the accounts of travelers, of men, who in respect of
intellectual capacity and enjoyments, are but a few degrees above brutes? We
read likewise of a similar degradation of our species, in respect to moral
capacity and feeling. Here it will be necessary to remark, that the low degrees
of moral perception, that have been discovered in certain African and Russian
tribes of men, no more invalidate our proposition of the universal and
essential existence of a moral faculty in the human mind, than the low state of
their intellects prove, that reason is not natural to man. Their perceptions of
good and evil are in an exact proportion to their intellectual powers. But I
will go further, and admit with Mr. Lock Essay concerning the Human
Understanding, Book I. Chap. III.
, that some savage nations are totally devoid of the moral faculty, yet it will
by no means follow, that this was the original constitution of their minds. The
appetite for certain aliments is uniform among all mankind. Where is the nation
and the individual, in their primitive state of health, to whom bread is not
agreeable? But if we should find savages, or individuals, whose stomachs have
been so disordered by intemperance, as to refuse this simple and wholesome
article of diet, shall we assert, that this was the original constitution of
their appetites? -- By no means. As well might we assert, because savages
destroy their beauty by painting and cutting their faces, that the principles
of taste do not exist naturally in the human mind. It is with virtue as with
fire. It exists in the mind, as fire does in certain bodies in a latent or
quiescent state. As collision renders the one sensible, so education renders
the other visible. It would be as absurd to maintain, because olives become
agreeable to many people from habit, that we have no natural appetites for any
other kind of food, as to assert that any part of the human species exist
without a moral principle, because in some of them, it has wanted causes to
excite it into action, or has been perverted by example. There are appetites
that are wholly artificial. There are tastes so entirely vitiated, as to
perceive beauty in deformity. There are torpid and unnatural passions. Why,
under certain unfavourable circumstances, may there not exist also a moral
faculty, in a state of sleep, or subject to mistakes?

THE only apology I shall make, for presuming to differ from that
justly-celebrated oracle, who first unfolded to us a map of the intellectual
world, shall be, that the eagle eye of genius often darts its views beyond the
notice of facts, which are accommodated to the slender organs of perception of
men, who possess no other talent than that of observation.

IT is not surprising, that Mr. Lock has confounded this moral principle with
reason, or that Lord Shaftsbury has confounded it with taste, since all three
of these faculties agree in the objects of their approbation, notwithstanding
they exist in the mind independent of each other. The favorable influence which
the progress of science and taste has had upon the morals, can be ascribed to
nothing else, but to the perfect union that subsists in nature between the
dictates of reason -- of taste -- and of the moral faculty. Why has the spirit
of humanity made such rapid progress for some years past in the courts of
Europe? It is because kings and their ministers have been taught to reason upon
philosophical subjects. -- Why have indecency and profanity been banished from
the stage in London and Paris? It is because immorality is an offense against
the highly cultivated taste of the French and English nations.

It must afford great pleasure to the lovers of virtue, to behold the depth and
extent of this moral principle in the human mind. Happily for the human race,
the intimations of duty and the road to happiness are not left to the slow
operations or doubtful inductions of reason, nor to the precarious decisions of
taste! Hence we often find the moral faculty in a state of vigor, in persons in
whom reason and taste exist in a weak, or in an uncultivated state. It is
worthy of notice likewise, that while second thoughts are best in matters of
judgment, first thoughts are always to be preferred in matters that relate to
morality. Second thoughts, in these cases, are generally parlies between duty
and corrupted inclinations. Hence Rousseau has justly said, that "a well
regulated moral instinct is the surest guide to happiness."

IT must afford equal pleasure to the lovers of virtue to behold, that our
moral conduct and happiness are not committed to the determination of a single
legislative power. -- The conscience, like a wise and faithful legislative
council, performs the office of a check upon the moral faculty, and thus
prevents the fatal consequences of immoral actions.

AN objection, I foresee, will arise to the doctrine of the influence of
physical causes upon the moral faculty, from its being supposed to favor the
opinion of the materiality of the soul. But I do not see that this doctrine
obliges us to decide upon the question of the nature of the soul, any more than
the facts which prove the influence of physical causes upon the memory -- the
imagination -- or the judgment. I shall, however remark upon this subject, that
the writers in favor of the immortality of the soul have done that truth great
injury, by connecting it necessarily with its immateriality. The immortality of
the soul depends upon the will of the Deity, and not upon the supposed
properties of spirit. Matter is in its own nature as immortal as spirit. It is
resolveable by heat and mixture into a variety of forms; but it requires the
same Almighty hand to annihilate it, that it did to create it. I know of no
arguments to prove the immortality of the soul, but such as are derived from
the Christian revelation "Life and immortality are brought to light only
through the gospel." -- 2 Timothy i. 10.
. It would be as reasonable to assert, that the basin of the ocean is immortal,
from the greatness of its capacity to hold water; or that we are to live for
ever in this world, because we are afraid of dying, as to maintain the
immortality of the soul, from the greatness of its capacity for knowledge and
happiness, or from its dread of annihilation.

I remarked in the beginning of this discourse, that persons who were deprived
of the just exercise of memory -- imagination -- or judgment, were proper
subjects of medicine; and that there are many cases upon record which prove,
that the diseases from the derangement of these faculties, have yielded to the
healing art.

IT is perhaps only because the disorders of the moral faculty, have not been
traced to a connection with physical causes, that medical writers have
neglected to give them a place in their systems of nosology, and that so few
attempts have been hitherto made, to lessen or remove them by physical as well
as rational and moral remedies.

I shall not attempt to derive any support to my opinions, from the analogy of
the influence of physical causes upon the temper and conduct of brute animals.
The facts which I shall produce in favor of the action of these causes upon
morals in the human species, will, I hope, render unnecessary the arguments
that might be drawn from that quarter.

I am aware, that in venturing upon this subject, I step upon untrodden ground.
-- -- I feel as Aeneas did, when he was about to enter the gates of Avernus,
but without a Sibyl to instruct me in the mysteries that are before me. I
foresee, that men who have been educated in the mechanical habits of adopting
popular or established opinions, will revolt at the doctrine I am about to
deliver -- while men of sense and genius will hear my propositions with candor,
and if they do not adopt them, will commend that boldness of enquiry, that
prompted me to broach them.

I shall begin with an attempt to supply the defects of nosological writers, by
naming the partial or weakened action of the moral faculty, MICRONOMIA. The
total absence of this faculty, I shall call ANOMIA. By the law, referred to in
these new genera of vesaniae, I mean the law of nature written in the human
heart, and which I formerly quoted from the writings of St. Paul.

IN treating of the effects of physical causes upon the moral faculty, it might
help to extend our ideas upon this subject, to reduce virtues and vices to
certain species, and to point out the effects of particular species of virtue
and vice; but this would lead us into a field too extensive for the limits of
the present enquiry. I shall only hint at a few cases, and have no doubt but
the ingenuity of my auditors will supply my silence, by applying the rest.

IT is immaterial, whether the physical causes that are to be enumerated, act
upon the moral faculty through the medium of the senses -- the passions -- the
memory -- or the imagination. Their influence is equally certain, whether they
act as remote, pre-disposing, or occasional causes.

1. THE effects of CLIMATE upon the moral faculty claim our first attention.
Not only individuals, but nations, derive a considerable part of their moral,
as well as intellectual character, from the different portions they enjoy of
the rays of the sun. Irascibility -- levity -- timidity -- and indolence,
tempered with occasional emotions of benevolence, are the moral qualities of
the inhabitants of warm climates, while selfishness tempered with sincerity and
integrity, form the moral character of the inhabitants of cold countries. --
The state of the weather, and the seasons of the year also, have a visible
effect upon moral sensibility. The month of November, in Great Britain,
rendered gloomy by constant fogs and rains, has been thought to favor the
perpetration of the worst species of murder, while the vernal sun, in middle
latitudes, has been as generally remarked for producing gentleness and
benevolence.

2. THE effects of DIET upon the moral faculty are more certain, though less
attended to, than the effects of climate. "Fullness of bread," we are told, was
one of the predisposing causes of the vices of the cities of the plain. The
fasts so often inculcated among the Jews, were intended to lessen the
incentives to vice; for pride -- cruelty -- and sensuality, are as much the
natural consequences of luxury, as apoplexies and palsies. But the quality as
well as the quantity of aliment, has an influence upon morals; hence we find
the moral diseases that have been mentioned, are most frequently the offspring
of animal food. The prophet Isaiah seems to have been sensible of this, when he
ascribes such salutary effects to a temperate and vegetable diet. "Butter and
honey shall he eat," says he, "that he may know to refuse the evil, and to
choose the good." -- But we have many facts which prove the efficacy of a
vegetable diet upon the passions. Dr. Arbuthnot assures us, that he cured
several patients of irascible tempers, by nothing but a prescription of this
simple and temperate regimen.

3. THE effects of CERTIAN DRINKS upon the moral faculty are not less
observable, than upon the intellectual powers of the mind. Fermented liquors of
a good quality, and taken in a moderate quantity, are favorable to the virtues
of candor, benevolence and generosity; but when they are taken in excess, or
when they are of a bad quality, and drank even in a moderate quantity, they
seldom fail of rousing every latent spark of vice into action. The last of
these facts is so notorious, that when a man is observed to be ill-natured or
quarrelsome in Portugal, after drinking, it is common in that country to say,
that "he has drank bad wine." While occasional fits of intoxication produce ill
temper in many people, habitual drunkenness (which is generally produced by
distilled spirits) never fails to eradicate veracity and integrity from the
human mind. Perhaps this may be the reason why the Spaniards, in ancient times,
never admitted a man's evidence in a court of justice, who had been convicted
of drunkenness. -- Water is the universal sedative of turbulent passions -- it
not only promotes a general equanimity of temper, but it composes anger. I have
heard several well-attested cases, of a draught of cold water having suddenly
composed this violent passion, after the usual remedies of reason had been
applied to no purpose.

4. EXTREME HUNGER produces the most unfriendly effects upon moral sensibility.
It is immaterial, whether it acts by inducing a relaxation of the solids, or an
acrimony of the fluids, or by the combined operation of both those physical
causes. The Indians in this country whet their appetites for that savage
species of war, which is peculiar to them, by the stimulus of hunger; hence, we
are told, they always return meagre and emaciated from their military
excursions. In civilized life we often behold this sensation an overbalance for
the restraints of moral feeling; and perhaps this may be the reason, why
poverty, which is the most frequent parent of hunger, disposes so generally to
theft; for the character of hunger is taken from that vice -- It belongs to it
"to break through stone walls." So much does this sensation predominate over
reason and moral feeling, that Cardinal de Retz suggests to politicians, never
to risk a motion in a popular assembly, however wise or just it may be,
immediately before dinner. -- That temper must be uncommonly guarded, which is
not disturbed by long abstinence from food. One of the worthiest men I ever
knew, who made his breakfast his principal meal, was peevish and disagreeable
to his friends and family, from the time he left his bed, till he sat down to
his morning repast, after which, cheerfulness sparkled in his countenance, and
he became the delight of all around him.

5. I hinted formerly, in proving the analogy between the effects of DISEASES
upon the intellects, and upon the moral faculty, that the latter was frequently
impaired by fevers and madness. I beg leave to add further upon this head, that
not only fevers and madness, but the hysteria and hypochondriasis, as well as
all those states of the body, whether idiopathic or symptomatic, which are
accompanied with preternatural irritability -- sensibility -- torpor -- stupor
-- or mobility of the nervous system, dispose to vice, either of the body or of
the mind. It is in vain to attack these vices with lectures upon morality. They
are only to be cured by medicine, -- particularly by exercise, -- the cold
bath, -- and by a cold or warm atmosphere. The young woman, whose case I
mentioned formerly, that lost her habit of veracity by a nervous fever,
recovered this virtue, as soon as her system recovered its natural tone, from
the cold weather which happily succeeded her fever There is a morbid state of
excitability in the body during the convalescence from fever, which is
intimately connected with an undue propensity to venereal pleasures. I have met
with several instances of it. The marriage of the celebrated Mr. Howard to a
woman who was twice as old as himself, and very sickly, has been ascribed by
his biographer, Dr. Aiken, to gratitude for her great attention to him in a fit
of sickness, I am disposed to ascribe it to a sudden paroxysm of another
passion, which as a religious man, he could not gratify in any other, than in a
lawful way. I have heard of two young clergymen who married the women who had
nursed them in fits of sickness. In both cases there was great inequality in
their years, and condition in life. Their motive was, probably, the same as
that which I have attributed to Mr. Howard. Dr. Patrick Russel takes notice of
an uncommon degree of venereal excitability which followed attacks of the
plague at Messina, in 1743, in all ranks of people. -- Marriages, he says, were
more frequent after it than usual, and virgins were, in some instances
violated, who died of that disorder, by persons who had just recovered from it.
.

6. IDLENESS is the parent of every vice. It is mentioned in the Old Testament
as another of the the predisposing causes of the vices of the cities of the
plain. LABOR of all kinds, favors and facilitates the practice of virtue. The
country life is a happy life; chiefly, because its laborious employments are
favorable to virtue, and unfriendly to vice. It is a common practice, I have
been told, for the planters in the Southern States, to consign a house slave,
who has become vicious from idleness, to the drudgery of the field, in order to
reform him. The Bridewells and workhouses of all civilized countries prove,
that LABOR is not only a very severe, but the most benevolent of all
punishments, in as much as it is one of the most suitable means of reformation.
Mr Howard tells us in his History of Prisons, that in Holland it is a common
saying, "Make men work and you will make them honest." And over the rasp and
spin-house at Groeningen, this sentiment is expressed (he tells us) by a happy
motto: "Vitiorum semina -- otium -- labor exhauriendum." The effects of steady
labor in early life, in creating virtuous habits, is still more remarkable. The
late Anthony Benezet of this city, whose benevolence was the sentinel of the
virtue, as well as of the happiness of his country, made it a constant rule in
binding out poor children, to avoid putting them into wealthy families, but
always preferred masters for them who worked themselves, and who obliged these
children to work in their presence. If the habits of virtue, contracted by
means of this apprenticeship to labor, are purely mechanical, their effects
are, nevertheless, the same upon the happiness of society, as if they flowed
from principle. The mind, moreover, when preserved by these means from weeds,
becomes a more mellow soil afterward, for moral and rational improvement.

7. THE effects of EXCESSIVE SLEEP are intimately connected with the effects of
idleness upon the moral faculty, -- hence we find that moderate, and even
scanty portions of sleep, in every part of the world, have been found to be
friendly, not only to health and long life, but in many instances to morality.
The practice of the Monks, who often sleep upon a floor, and who generally rise
with the sun, for the sake of mortifying their sensual appetites, is certainly
founded in wisdom, and has often produced the most salutary moral effects.

8. THE effects of BODILY PAIN upon the moral, are not less remarkable than
upon the intellectual powers of the mind. The late Dr Gregory, of the
university of Edinburgh, used to tell his pupils, that he always found his
perceptions quicker in a fit of the gout, than at any other time. The pangs
which attend the dissolution of the body, are often accompanied with
conceptions and expressions upon the most ordinary subjects, that discover an
uncommon elevation of the intellectual powers. The effects of bodily pain are
exactly the same in rousing and directing the moral faculty. Bodily pain, we
find, was one of the remedies employed in the Old Testament, for extirpating
vice and promoting virtue: and Mr Howard tells us, that he saw it employed
successfully as a means of reformation, in one of the prisons which he visited.
If pain has a physical tendency to cure vice, I submit it to the consideration
of parents and legislators, whether moderate degrees of corporal punishments,
inflicted for a great length of time, would not be more medicinal in their
effects, than the violent degrees of them, which are of short duration.

9. TOO much cannot be said in favor of CLEANLINESS, as a physical means of
promoting virtue. The writings of Moses have been called by military men, the
best "orderly book" in the world. In every part of them we find cleanliness
inculcated with as much zeal, as if it was part of the moral, instead of the
levitical law. Now, it is well-known, that the principal design of every
precept and rite of the ceremonial parts of the Jewish religion, was to prevent
vice, and to promote virtue. All writers upon the leprosy, take notice of its
connection with a certain vice. To this disease gross animal food, particularly
swine's flesh, and a dirty skin, have been thought to be predisposing causes --
hence the reason, probably, why pork was forbidden, and why ablutions of the
body and limbs were so frequently inculcated by the Jewish law. Sir John
Pringle's remarks, in his Oration upon Captain Cook's Voyage, delivered before
the Royal Society in London, are very pertinent to this part of our subject. --
Cleanliness (says he) is conducive to health, but it is not so obvious, that it
also tends to good order and other virtues. Such (meaning the ship's crew) as
were made more cleanly, became more sober, more orderly, and more attentive to
duty. The benefit to be derived by parents and schoolmasters from attending to
these facts, is too obvious to be mentioned.

10. I hope I shall be excused in placing SOLITUDE among the physical causes
which influence the moral faculty, when I add, that I confine its effects to
persons who are irreclaimable by rational or moral remedies. Mr Howard informs
us, that the chaplain of the prison at Liege in Germany assured him, that the
most refractory and turbulent spirits, became tractable and submissive, by
being closely confined for four or five days. -- In bodies that are predisposed
to vice, the stimulus of cheerful, but much more of profane society and
conversation, upon the animal spirits, becomes an exciting cause, and like the
stroke of the flint upon the steel, renders the sparks of vice both active and
visible. By removing men out of the reach of this exciting cause, they are
often reformed, especially if they are confined long enough to produce a
sufficient chasm in their habits of vice. Where the benefit of reflection, and
instruction from books, can be added to solitude and confinement, their good
effects are still more certain. To this philosophers and poets in every age
have assented, by describing the life of a hermit as a life of passive virtue.

11. CONNECTED with solitude, as a mechanical means of promoting virtue,
SILENCE deserves to be mentioned in this place. The late Dr Fothergill, in his
plan of education for that benevolent institution at Ackworth, which was the
last care of his useful life, says every thing that can be said in favor of
this necessary discipline, in the follow-words. To habituate children from
their early infancy, to silence and attention, is of the greatest advantage to
them, not only as a preparative to their advancement in a religious life, but
as the groundwork of a well cultivated understanding. To have the active minds
of children put under a kind of restraint -- to be accustomed to turn their
attention from external objects, and habituated to a degree of abstracted
quiet, is a matter of great consequence, and lasting benefit to them. Although
it cannot be supposed, that young and active minds are always engaged in
silence as they ought to be, yet to be accustomed thus to quietness, is no
small point gained toward fixing a habit of patience, and recollection, which
seldom forsakes those who have been properly instructed in this entrance of the
school of wisdom, during the residue of their days.

FOR the purpose of acquiring this branch of education, children cannot
associate too early, nor too often with their parents, or with their superiors
in age, rank, and wisdom.

12. THE effects of music upon the moral faculty, have been felt and recorded
in every country. Hence we are able to discover the virtues and vices of
different nations, by their tunes, as certainly as by their laws. The effects
of music, when simply mechanical, upon the passions, are powerful and
extensive. But it remains yet to determine the degrees of moral ecstasy, that
may be produced by an attack upon the ear, the reason, and the moral principle,
at the same time, by the combined powers of music and eloquence.

13. THE eloquence of the pulpit is nearly allied to music in its effects upon
the moral faculty. It is true, there can be no permanent change in the temper,
and moral conduct of a man, that is not derived from the understanding and the
will; but we must remember, that these two powers of the mind are most
assailable, when they are attacked through the avenue of the passions; and
these, we know, when agitated by the powers of eloquence, exert a mechanical
action upon every power of the soul. Hence we find in every age and country,
where christianity has been propagated, the most accomplished orators have
generally been the most successful reformers of mankind. There must be a defect
of eloquence in a preacher, who with the resources for oratory, which are
contained in the Old and New Testaments, does not produce in every man who
hears him, at least a temporary love of virtue. I grant that the eloquence of
the pulpit alone, cannot change men into christians, but it certainly possesses
the power of changing brutes into men. Could the eloquence of the stage be
properly directed, it is impossible to conceive the extent of its mechanical
effects upon morals. The language and imagery of a Shakespeare, upon moral and
religious subjects, poured upon the passions and the senses, in all the beauty
and variety of dramatic representation! Who could resist, or describe their
effects?

14. ODORS of various kinds have been observed to act in the most sensible
manner upon the moral faculty. Brydone tells us, upon the authority of a
celebrated philosopher in Italy, that the peculiar wickedness of the people who
live in the neighborhood of Aetna and Vesuvius, is occasioned chiefly by the
smell of the sulphur and of the hot exhalations which are constantly discharged
from those volcanos. Agreeable odors, seldom fail to inspire serenity, and to
compose the angry spirits -- Hence the pleasure, and one of the advantages of a
flower garden. The smoke of tobacco is likewise of a composing nature, and
tends not only to produce what is called a train in perception, but to hush the
agitated passions into silence and order -- Hence the propriety of connecting
the pipe or segar and the bottle together, in public company.

15. IT will be sufficient only to mention light and darkness, to suggest facts
in favor of the influence of each of them upon moral sensibility. How often do
the peevish complaints of the night in sickness, give way to the composing rays
of the light of the morning? Othello cannot murder Desdemona by candlelight,
and who has not felt the effects of a blazing fire, upon the gentle passions?

16. IT is to be lamented, that no experiments have as yet been made, to
determine the effects of all the different species of Airs, which chemistry has
lately discovered, upon the moral faculty. I have authority, from actual
experiments, only to declare, that Dephlogisticated Air, when taken into the
lungs, produces cheerfulness, gentleness, and serenity of mind.

17. WHAT shall we say of the effects of Medicines upon the moral faculty? That
many substances in the materia medica act upon the intellects, is well known to
physicians. Why should it be thought impossible for medicines, to act in like
manner upon the moral faculty? May not the earth contain in its own bowels, or
upon its surface, antidotes? But I will not blend facts with conjectures.
Clouds and darkness still hang upon this part of my subject.

LET it not be suspected from any thing that I have delivered, that I suppose
the influence of physical causes upon the moral faculty, renders the agency of
divine influence unnecessary to our moral happiness. I only maintain, that the
operations of the divine government are carried on in the moral, as in the
natural world, by the instrumentality of second causes. I have only trodden in
the footsteps of the inspired writers; for most of the physical causes I have
enumerated, are connected with moral precepts, or have been used as the means
of reformation from vice, in the Old and New Testaments. To the cases that have
been mentioned I shall only add, that Nebuchadnezzar was cured of his pride, by
means of solitude and a vegetable diet. -- Saul was cured of his evil spirit,
by means of David's harp, and St. Paul expressly says, I keep my body under,
and bring it into subjection, lest that by any means, when I have preached to
others, I myself should be a castaway. But I will go one step further, and add
in favor of divine influence upon the moral principle, that in those
extraordinary cases, where bad men are suddenly reformed, without the
instrumentality of physical, moral, or rational causes, I believe that the
organization of those parts of the body, which form the link that binds it to
the soul, undergoes a physical change; St. Paul was suddenly transformed from a
persecutor into a man of a gentle and amiable spirit. The manner in which this
change was affected upon his mind, he tells us in the following words --
Neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new
creature. -- From henceforth let no man trouble me; for I bear in my body, the
marks of our Lord Jesus. Galatians, vi. 15.17.
and hence the expression of a "new creature," which is made use of in the
scriptures to denote this change, is proper in a literal, as well as a
figurative sense. It is probably the beginning of that perfect renovation of
the human body, which is predicted by St Paul in the following words -- For our
conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for the Savior, who shall
change our vile bodies, that they may be fashioned according to his own
glorious body. I shall not pause to defend myself against the charge of
enthusiasm in this place; for the age is at length arrived, so devoutly wished
for by Dr. Cheyne, in which men will not be deterred in their researches after
truth, by the terror of odious or unpopular names.

I cannot help remarking under this head, that if the conditions of those parts
of the human body which are connected with the human soul, influence morals,
the same reason may be given for a virtuous education, that has been admitted
for teaching music and the pronunciation of foreign languages, in the early and
yielding state of those organs, which form the voice and speech. Such is the
effect of a moral education, that we often see its fruits in advanced stages of
life, after the religious principles which were connected with it, have been
renounced; just as we perceive the same care in a surgeon in his attendance
upon patients, after the sympathy which first produced this care, has ceased to
operate upon his mind. The boasted morality of the Deists, is I believe, in
most cases, the offspring of habits, produced originally by the principles and
precepts of Christianity. Hence appears the wisdom of Solomon's advice -- Train
up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not, I had
almost said, he cannot "depart from it."

THUS have I enumerated the principal causes, which act mechanically upon
morals. If from the combined action of physical powers that are opposed to each
other, the moral faculty should become stationary, or if the virtue or vice
produced by them, should form a neutral quality, composed of both of them, I
hope it will not call in question the truth of our general propositions. I have
only mentioned the effects of physical causes in a simple state. The doctrine
of the influence of physical causes on morals is happily calculated to beget
charity toward the failings of our fellow creatures. Our duty to practice
this, (it is true) is enforced by motives drawn from sciences, as well as from
the precepts of christianity.


IT might help to enlarge our ideas upon this subject, to take notice of the
influence of the different stages of society, of agriculture and commerce, of
soil and situation, of the different degrees of cultivation of taste, and of
the intellectual powers, of the different forms of government, and lastly, of
the different professions and occupations of mankind, upon the moral faculty;
but as these act indirectly only, and by the intervention of causes that are
unconnected with matter, I conceive they are foreign to the business of the
present enquiry. If they should vary the action of the simple physical causes
in any degree, I hope it will not call in question the truth of our general
propositions, any more than the compound action of physical powers, that are
opposed to each other. There remain only a few more causes which are of a
compound nature, but so nearly related to those, which are purely mechanical,
that I shall beg leave to trespass upon your patience, by giving them a place
in my oration.

THE effects of imitation, habit and association upon morals, would furnish
ample matter for investigation. Considering how much the shape, texture, and
conditions of the human body, influence morals, I submit it to the
consideration of the ingenious, whether in our endeavors to imitate moral
examples, some advantage may not be derived, from our copying the features and
external manners of the originals. What makes the success of this experiment
probable is, that we generally find men, whose faces resemble each other, have
the same manners and dispositions. I infer the possibility of success in an
attempt to imitate originals in a manner that has been mentioned, from the
facility with which domestics acquire a resemblance to their masters and
mistresses, not only in manners, but in countenance, in those cases where they
are tied to them, by respect, and affection. -- Husbands and wives also where
they possess the same species of face, under circumstances of mutual
attachment, often acquire a resemblance to each other.

FROM the general detestation in which hypocrisy is held both by good and bad
men, the mechanical effects of habit upon virtue, have not been sufficiently
explored. There are, I am persuaded, many instances where virtues have been
assumed by accident, or necessity, which have become real from habit, and
afterward derived their nourishment from the heart. Hence the propriety of
Hamlet's advice to his mother --

"Assume a virtue, if you have it not,
"That monster, custom, who all sense does eat,
"Of habits evil, is angel, yet in this,
"That to the use of actions fair and good,
"He likewise gives a frock or livery,
"That aptly is put on -- Refrain tonight,
"And that shall lend a kind of easiness,
"To the next abstinence; the next more easy,
"For use can almost change the stamp of nature,
"And master even the devil, or throw him out,
"With wondrous petency."
THE influence of ASSOCIATION upon morals, opens an ample field for enquiry. It
is from this principle, that we explain the reformation from theft and
drunkenness in servants which we sometimes see produced by a draught of spirits
in which tartar emetic had been secretly dissolved. The recollection of the
pain and sickness excited by the emetic, naturally associates itself with the
spirits, so as to render them both equally the objects of aversion. It is by
calling in this principle only, that we can account for the conduct of Moses,
in grinding the golden calf into a powder, and afterward dissolving it
(probably by means of hepar sulphuris) in water, and compelling the children of
Israel to drink of it, as a punishment for their idolatry. This mixture is
bitter and nauseating in the highest degree. An inclination to idolatry,
therefore, could not be felt without being associated with the remembrance of
this disagreeable mixture, and of course being rejected, with equal abhorrence.
The benefit of corporal punishments, when they are of a short duration, depends
in part up their being connected by time and place, with the crimes for which
they are inflicted. Quick as the thunder follows the lightning, if it were
possible, should punishments follow the crimes, and the advantage of
association would be more certain, if the spot where they were committed, were
made the theater of their expiation. It is from the effects of this
association, probably, that the change of place and company produced by exile
and transportation, has so often reclaimed bad men, after moral -- rational --
and physical means of reformation had been used to no purpose.

AS SENSIBILITY is the avenue to the moral faculty, every thing which tends to
diminish it tends also to injure morals. -- The Romans owed much of their
corruption to the sights of the contests of their gladiators, and of criminals,
with wild beasts. For these reasons, executions should never be public. Indeed,
I believe there are no public punishments of any kind, that do not harden the
hearts of spectators, and thereby lessen the natural horror which all crimes at
first excite in the human mind.

CRUELTY to brute animals is another means of destroying moral sensibility. The
ferocity of savages has been ascribed in part to their peculiar mode of
subsistence. Mr. Hogarth points out in his ingenious prints, the connection
between cruelty to brute animals in youth, and murder in manhood. The Emperor
Domitian prepared his mind by the amusement of killing flies, for all those
bloody crimes which afterward disgraced his reign. I am so perfectly satisfied
of the truth of a a connection between morals, and humanity to brutes, that I
shall find it difficult to restrain my idolatry for that legislature, that
shall first establish a system of laws, to defend them from outrage and
oppression.

IN order to preserve the vigor of the moral faculty, it is of the utmost
consequence to keep young people as ignorant as possible of those crimes, that
are generally thought most disgraceful to human nature. Suicide, I believe, is
often propagated by means of newspapers. For this reason, I should be glad to
see the proceedings of our courts kept from the public eye, when they expose,
or punish monstrous vices.

THE last mechanical method of promoting morality that I shall mention, is to
keep sensibility alive, by a familiarity with scenes or distress from poverty
and disease. Compassion never awakens in the human bosom, without being
accompanied by a train of sister virtues -- hence the wise man justly remarks,
that "By the sadness of the countenance, the heart is made better."

A late French writer in his prediction of events that are to happen in the
year 4000, says That mankind in that era shall be so far improved by religion
and government, that the sick and the dying, shall no longer be thrown together
with the dead, into splendid houses, but shall be relieved and protected in a
connection with their families and society. For the honor of humanity, an
institution A Public Dispensary.
destined for that distant period, has lately been founded in this city, that
shall perpetuate the year 1786 in the history of Pennsylvania. Here the feeling
heart -- the tearful eye -- and the charitable hand, may always be connected
together, and the flame of sympathy, instead of being extinguished in taxes, or
expiring in a solitary blaze by a single contribution, may be kept alive, by
constant exercise. There is a necessary connection between animal sympathy and
good morals. The priest and the levite, in the New Testament, would probably
have relieved the poor man who fell among thieves, had accident brought them
near enough to his wounds. The unfortunate Mrs. Bellamy was rescued from the
dreadful purpose of drowning herself, by nothing but the distress of a child,
rending the air with its cries for bread. It is probably owing in some measure
to the connection between good morals and sympathy that the fair sex in every
age, and country, have been more distinguished for virtue, than men -- for how
seldom do we hear of a woman, devoid of humanity? --

LASTLY, ATTRACTION, COMPOSITION, and DECOMPOSITION, belong to the passions as
well as to matter. Vices of the same species attract each other with the most
force -- hence the bad consequences of crouding young men (whose propensities
are generally the same) under one roof, in our modern plans of education. The
effects of composition and decomposition upon vices, appear in the meanness of
the schoolboy, being often cured by the prodigality of a military life, and by
the precipitation, of avarice, which is often produced by ambition and love. A
citizen of Philadelphia had made many unsuccessful attempts to cure his wise of
drinking ardent spirits. At length, despairing of her reformation, he purchased
a hogshead of rum, and after tapping it, left the key in the door where he had
placed it as if he had forgotten it. His design was to give her an opportunity
of destroying herself, by drinking as much as she pleased. The woman suspected
this to be his design -- and suddenly left off drinking. Anger here became the
antidote of intemperance.


IF physical causes influence morals in the manner we have described, may they
not also influence religious principles and opinions? -- I answer in the
affirmative; and I have authoriry, from the records of physic, as well as from
my own observations, to declare, that religious melancholy and madness, in all
their variety of species, yield with more facility to medicine, than simply to
polemical discourses, or to casuistical advice. -- But this subject is foreign
to the business of the present enquiry.

FROM a review of our subject, we are led to contemplate with admiration, the
curious structure of the human mind. How distinct are the number, and yet how
united! How subordinate and yet how coequal are all its powers! How wonderful
is the action of the soul upon the body! Of the body upon the soul! -- And of
the divine spirit upon both! What a mystery is the mind of man to itself! -- O!
nature! -- Or to speak more properly, -- O! THOU GOD OF NATURE! -- In vain do
we attempt to scan THY immensity, or to comprehend THY various modes of
existence, when a single particle of light issued from THYSELF, and kindled
into intelligence in the bosom of man, thus dazzles and confounds our
understanding! --

THE extent of the moral powers and habits in man is unknown. It is not
improbable, but the human mind contains principles of virtue, which have never
yet been excited into action. We behold with surprise the versatility of the
human body in the exploits of tumblers and rope-dancers. Even the agility of a
wild beast has been demonstrated in a girl in France, and an amphibious nature
has been discovered in the human species, in a young man in Spain. We listen
with astonishment to the accounts of the memoirs of Mithridates, Cyrus, and
Servin. We feel a veneration bordering upon divine homage, in contemplating the
stupendous understandings of Lord Verulam and Sir Isaac Newton; and our eyes
grow dim, in attempting to pursue Shakespeare and Milton in their immeasurable
flights of imagination. And if the history of mankind does not furnish similar
instances of the versatility and perfection of our species in virtue, it is
because the moral faculty has been the subject of less culture and fewer
experiments than the body, and the intellectual powers of the mind. From what
has been said, the reason of this is obvious. Hitherto the cultivation of the
moral faculty has been the business of parents, schoolmasters and divines The
people commonly called Quakers and the Methodists, make use of the greatest
number of physical remedies in their religious and moral discipline, of any
sects of Christians -- and hence we find them every where distinguished for
their good morals. There are several excellent physical institutions in other
churches; and if they do not produce the same moral effects, that we observe
from physical institutions among those two modern sects, it must be ascribed to
their being more neglected by the members of those churches.
. But if the principles, we have laid down, be just, the improvement and
extension of this principle should be equally the business of the legislator --
the natural philosopher -- and the physician; and a physical regimen should as
necessarily accompany a moral precept, as directors with respect to the air --
exercise -- and diet, generally accompany prescriptions for the consumption,
and the gout. To encourage us to undertake experiments for the improvement of
morals, let us recollect the success of philosophy in lessening the number, and
mitigating the violence of incurable diseases. The intermitting fever, which
proved fatal to two of the monarchs of Britain, is now under absolute
subjection to medicine. Continual fevers are much less fatal than formerly. The
smallpox is disarmed of its mortality by inoculation, and even the tetanus and
the cancer have lately received a check in their ravages upon mankind. But
medicine has done more -- It has penetrated the deep and gloomy abyss of death,
and acquired fresh honors in his cold embraces. -- Witness the many hundred
people who have lately been brought back to life, by the successful efforts of
the humane societies, which are now established in many parts of Europe, and in
some parts of America. Should the same industry and ingenuity, which have
produced these triumphs of medicine over diseases and death, be applied to the
moral science, it is highly probable, that most of those baneful vices, which
deform the the human breast, and convulse the nations of the earth, might be
banished from the world. I am not so sanguine as to suppose, that it is
possible for man to acquire so much perfection from science, religion, liberty
and good government, as to cease to be mortal; but I am fully persuaded, that
from the combined action of causes, which operate at once upon the reason, the
moral faculty, the passions, the senses, the brain, the nerves, the blood and
the heart, it is possible to produce such a change in his moral character, as
shall raise him to a resemblance of angels -- nay more, to the likeness of GOD
himself. -- The State of Pennsylvania still deplores the loss of a man, in whom
not only reason and revelation, but many of the physical causes that have been
enumerated, concurred to produce such seize in moral excellency, as have
seldom appeared in a human being. This amiable citizen, considered his fellow
creature, man, as God's extract, from his own works; and whether this image of
himself, was cut out from ebony or copper -- whether he spoke his own, or a
foreign language -- or whether he worshipped his Maker with ceremonies, or
without them, he still considered him as a brother, and equally the object of
his benevolence. Poets and historians, who are to live hereafter, to you I
commit his panegyric; and when you hear of a law for abolishing slavery in each
of the American States, such as was passed in Pennsylvania, in the year 1780 --
when you hear of the kings and queens of Europe, publishing edicts for
abolishing the trade in human souls -- and lastly, when you hear of schools and
churches with all the arts of civilized life, being established among the
nations of Africa, then remember and record, that this revolution in favor of
human happiness, was the effect of the labors -- the publications -- the
private letters -- and the prayers of ANTHONY BUNEZET This worthy man was
descended from an ancient and honorable family that flourished in the court of
Lewis the XIV. With liberal prospects in life, he early devoted himself to
teaching an English school; in which, for industry, capacity and attention to
the morals and principles of the youth committed to his care, he was without an
equal. He published many excellent tracts against the African trade, against
war, and the use of spirituous liquors, and one in favor of civilizing and
christianising the Indians. He wrote to the queen of Great Britain, and the
queen of Portugal, to use their influence in their respective courts to abolish
the African trade. He also wrote an affectionate letter to the king of Prussia,
to disuade him from making war. The history of his life affords a remarkable
instance how much it is possible for an individual to accomplish in the world;
and that the most humble stations do not preclude good men from the most
extensive usefulness. He bequeathed his estate (after the death of his widow)
to the support of a school for the education of negro children, which he had
sounded and taught for several years before he died. He departed this life in
May 1784, in the 71st year of his age, in the meridian of his usefulness,
universally lamented by persons of all ranks and denominations.
. --

I RETURN from this digression, to address myself in a particular manner to
you, VENERABLE SAGES and FELLOW CITIZENS in the REPUBLIC OF LETTERS. -- The
influence of philosophy, we have been told, has already been felt in courts. To
increase, and complete this influence, there is nothing more necessary, than
for the numerous literary societies in Europe and America, to add the SCIENCE
of MORALS to their experiments and enquiries. The godlike scheme of Henry the
IV. of France, and of the illustrious Queen Elizabeth of England, for
establishing a perpetual peace in Europe, may be accomplished without a system
of jurisprudence, by a confederation of learned men, and learned societies. It
is in their power, by multiplying the objects of human reason, to bring the
monarchs and rulers of the world, under their subjection, and thereby to
extirpate war -- slavery -- and capital punishments, from the list of human
evils. Let it not be suspected that I detract by this declaration, from the
honor of the christian religion. It is true -- Christianity was propagated
without the aid of human learning; but this was one of those miracles, which
was necessary to establish it, and which, by repetition, would cease to be a
miracle. They misrepresent the christian religion, who suppose it to be wholly
an internal revelation, and addressed only to the moral powers of the mind. The
truths of Christianity afford the greatest scope for the human understanding,
and they will become intelligible to us, only in proportion as the human genius
is stretched by means of philosophy, to its utmost dimensions. Errors may be
opposed to errors; but truths, upon all subjects, mutually support each other.
And perhaps one reason, why some parts of the Christian revelation are still
involved in obscurity, may be occasioned by our imperfect knowledge of the
phenomenon, and laws of nature. The truths of philosophy and Christianity,
dwell alike in the mind of the Deity, and reason and religion are equally the
offspring of his goodness. They must, therefore, stand and fall together. By
reason, in the present instance, I mean the power of judging of truth, as well
as the power of comprehending it. Happy era! -- When the divine and the
philosopher shall embrace each other, and unite their labors, for the
reformation and happiness of mankind! --

ILLUSTRIOUS COUNCILLORS and SENATORS of Pennsylvania! His excellency the
president, and supreme executive council, and the members of the general
assembly of Pennsylvania, attended the delivery of the oration, in the hall of
the university, by invitation from the philosophical society.
I anticipate your candid reception of this feeble effort to increase the
quantity of virtue in our republic. It is not my business to remind you of the
immense resources for greatness, which nature and Providence have bestowed upon
our state. Every advantage which France has derived from being placed in the
center of Europe, and which Britain has derived from her mixture of nations,
Pennsylvania has opened to her. But my business at present, is to suggest the
means of promoting the happiness, not the greatness the state. For this
purpose, it is absolutely necessary that our government, which unites into one
all the minds of the state, should possess, in an eminent degree, not only the
understanding, the passions, and the will, but above all, the moral faculty,
and the conscience of an individual. -- Nothing can be politically right, that
is morally wrong; and no necessity can ever sanctify a law, that is contrary to
equity. VIRTUE is the soul of a republic. To promote this, laws for the
suppression of vice and immorality will be as ineffectual, as the increase and
enlargement of gaols. There is but one method of preventing crimes, and of
rendering a republican form of government durable, and that is by disseminating
the seeds of virtue and knowledge through every part of the state, by means of
proper modes and places of education, and this can be done effectually only, by
the interference and aid of the legislature. I am so deeply impressed with the
truth of this opinion, that were this evening to be the last of my life, I
would not only say to the asylum of my ancestors, and my beloved native
country, with the patriot of Venice, "Esto perpetua" -- But I would add, as the
last proof of my affection for her, my parting advice to the guardians of her
liberties, "To establish and support PUBLIC SCHOOLS in every part of the state."

AN INQUIRY INTO THE EFFECTS of SPIRITUOUS LIQUORS UPON THE HUMAN BODY, And
their INFLUENCE upon the HAPPINESS OF SOCIETY.

AN INQUIRY, etc.
BY Spirits I mean all those liquors which are obtained by distillation from
fermented juices or substances of any kind. These liquors were formerly used
only in medicine -- They now constitute a principal part of the drinks of many
countries.

SINCE the introduction of spirituous liquors into such general use, physicians
have remarked that a number of new diseases have appeared among us, and have
described many new symptoms as common to old diseases. Spirits in their first
operation are stimulating upon the system. They quicken the circulation of the
blood, and produce some heat in the body. Soon afterward, they become what is
called sedative; that is, they diminish the action of the vital powers, and
thereby produce languor and weakness.

THE effects of spirituous liquors upon the human body, are sometimes slow in
their appearance. A strong constitution, especially if it be assisted with
constant and hard labor, will counteract the destructive effects of spirits
for many years, but in general they produce the following diseases:

1. A sickness at the stomach, and vomiting in the morning. This disorder is
generally accompanied by a want of appetite for breakfast. It is known by
tremors in the hands, insomuch that persons who labor under it, are hardly
able to lift a tea cup to their heads, till they have taken a dose of some
cordial liquor. In this disorder, a peculiar paleness, with small red streaks,
appear in the cheeks. The flesh of the face, at the same time, has a peculiar
fullness and flabbiness, which are very different from sound and health sat.

2. AN universal dropsy. This disorder begins first in the lower limbs, and
gradually extends itself throughout the whole body. I have been told that the
merchants in Charleston, South Carolina, never trust the planters when spirits
have produced the first symptom of this disorder upon them. It is very natural
to suppose that industry and virtue have become extinct in that man, whose legs
and feet are swelled, from the use of spirituous liquors.

3. Obstruction of the liver. This disorder produces other diseases, such as an
inflammation, which sometimes proves suddenly fatal -- the jaundice -- and a
dropsy in the belly.

4. Diabetes.

5. Pains in the limbs, accompanied by a sense of burning in the palms of the
hands and soles of the feet. This disease has sometimes been called the Jamaica
Rheumatism.

6. Hoarseness and cough. These complaints predispose to fatal attacks of
Pneumonia Notha.

7. THE Epilepsy. 8. Madness. 9. Palsy, and, 10. The Apoplexy, complete the
group of diseases produced by spirituous liquors. It has been remarked that
those drunkards in whom a fit of intoxication is terminated by sleep and
stupor, die of palsy, gout, and gravel; while those in whom it terminates by
copious sweats, vomitings or stools, or by a discharge of pale urine, perish by
diabetes and dropsy.


I do not assert that these disorders are never produced by any other causes,
but I maintain that spirituous liquors are the most frequent causes of them,
and that when a predisposition to them is produced by other causes, they are
rendered more certain and more dangerous by the intemperate use of spirits.

I have only named a few of the principal disorders which are produced by
spirituous liquors. It would take up a volume to describe how much other
disorders natural to the human body, are increased and complicated by them.
Every species of inflammatory and putrid fever, is rendered more frequent and
more dangerous by the use of spirituous liquors.

THE danger to life from the diseases which have been mentioned is well known.
I do not think it extravagant therefore to repeat here, what has been often
said, that spirituous liquors destroy more lives than the sword. War has its
intervals of destruction -- but spirits operate at all times and seasons upon
human life. The ravages of war are confined to but one part of the human
species, viz. to men; but spirits act too often upon persons who are exempted
from the dangers of war by age or sex; and lastly, war destroys only those
persons who allow the use of arms to be lawful, whereas spirits insinuate their
fatal effects among people, whose principles are opposed to the effusion of
human blood.

BUT the effects of ardent spirits upon the human body, do not end in the
destruction of life. They derange and even deform a dead body so as to render
it a loathsome addition to the clay which conceals it from human view after
death. This has been frequently demonstrated in the dissection of persons who
have been destroyed by the use of ardent spirits. They harden and contract the
fibers of the stomach and bowels, or induce in them abscesses and gangrene --
they produce schirri in the viscera -- they contract the diameter of the
sanguiferous and bronchial vessels -- they induce o^^fications in the tendons,
arteries, and pleura, and lastly -- they produce a peculiar crispness in the
hair of the head, insomuch that the wig-makers in London give much less for it,
than for the hair of sober people.

IF we advance a step further and examine the effects of spirituous liquors
upon the mind, the prospect will be still more distressing and terrible. Their
first effects here, show themselves in the temper. I have constantly observed
men who are intoxicated in any degree with spirits, to be peevish and
quarrelsome; after a while they lose by degrees the moral sense. They violate
promises and engagements without shame or remorse. From these deficiencies in
veracity and integrity, they pass on to crimes of a more heinous nature. It
would dishonor human nature only to name them.

THE next operation of ardent spirits is upon the understanding. This sublime
power of the mind is first debilitated in hard drinkers. -- They discover a
torpor in every mental exertion, even when they are not under the immediate
influence of spirits. To this debility in the understanding succeed the loss of
memory, and the perversion of all the intellectual powers in melancholy and
madness, and in some cases the total extinction of them in idiotism.

LET us next turn our eyes from the effects of spirits upon the body and mind,
to their effects upon property; and here fresh scenes of misery open to our
view. Among the inhabitants of cities, they produce debts, disgrace, and
bankruptcy. Among farmers, they produce idleness with its usual consequences,
such as houses without windows, barns without roofs, gardens without
enclosures, fields without fences, hogs without yokes, sheep without wool,
meagre cattle, feeble horses, and half clad dirty children, without principles,
morals, or manners. This picture is not exaggerated. I appeal to the
observations of my countrymen, whether such scenes of wretchedness do not
follow the tracks of spirituous liquors, in every part of the United States.

THUS have I in a few words pointed out the effects of spirituous liquors upon
the bodies, minds, and estates of my fellow-citizens. -- Their mischiefs may be
summed up in a few Words. They fill our churchyards with premature graves,
they deface the image of God in the soul, they derange or destroy the
intellectual powers, they fill the sheriff's docket with executions, they crowd
our hospitals with patients, and our jails with criminals, they lead to places
of public ignomy and punishment, and lastly, they people the regions -- but it
belongs to another profession to show their terrible consequences in the future
world.

AFTER this melancholy detail of the pernicious effects of spirituous liquors
upon the body, it may not be improper to enumerate the usual causes which lead
to their intemperate use. They are, 1. Exposure to excessive heat and cold. 2.
Hard labor, disproportioned to the strength of the body. 3. Hunger, more
especially those degrees of it which have been excited by long intervals
between meals. 4. Long speaking, or long sittings in company. 5. Smoking and
chewing tobacco. 6. Taking medicines in ardent spirits. 7. Breeding sickness.
8. Great domestic care. I have of observed this cause to produce it, in several
instances in women. 9. Domestic vexations, more especially conjugal infelicity.
10. The infection of company that is addicted to strong drink. 11. Debt. 12.
The corrodings of a guilty conscience; and, 13. Solitude where the mind does
not possess resources in itself, in books, or religion. It is remarkable that
an intemperate use of ardent spirits is seldom produced by that grief which
follows the death of relations or friends.

IN the use of spirits, there are certain progressive stages which deserve to
be mentioned. Men begin generally by drinking them in a diluted state, at
dinner only. They next drink them in the same state in the afternoon and
evening. In the course of a few years, they call for them in the forenoon, and
soon afterward before breakfast, increasing their strength from time to time
until they finally drink them in a undiluted state during every hour of the
night. I have known several persons who have passed through all the above
stages of intemperance, in whom the pulse of life seemed to be supported for
several months before their death, only by drinking from one to two quarts of
raw spirits every night.

I shall now proceed to combat some prejudices in favor of the use of
sprituous liquors.

THE three occasions in which spirits have been thought most necessary and
useful are the following:

1. IN very cold weather.

2. IN very warm weather. And,

3. IN times of hard labor.

1. THERE cannot be a greater error than to suppose that spirituous liquors
lessen the effects of cold upon the body. On the contrary, I maintain that they
always render the body more liable to be affected and injured by cold. The
temporary warmth they produce, is always succeeded by chilliness. If any thing,
besides warm clothing and exercise, be necessary to warm the body in cold
weather, a plentiful meal of wholesome food is at all times sufficient for that
purpose. This, by stimulating the stomach, invigorates the whole system, and
thus renders it less sensible of the cold.

2. IT is equally absurd to suppose that spirituous liquors lessen the effects
of heat upon the body. So far from it, they rather increase them. They add an
internal heat to the external heat of the sun; they dispose to fevers and
inflammations of the most dangerous kind; they produce preternatural sweats
which weaken, instead of an uniform and gentle perspiration, which exhilarates
the body. Half the diseases which are said to be produced by warm weather, I am
persuaded are produced by the spirits which are swallowed to lessen its effects
upon the system. "I aver from my own knowledge and custom (says Dr. Mosely
Diseases of tropical climates.
) as well as the custom and observations of many other people, that those who
drink nothing but water, or make it their principal drink, are but little
affected by the climate, and can undergo the greatest fatigue without
inconvenience. Those who use water for their common drink will never be subject
to troublesome or dangerous diseases, and the only inconvenience attending
water drinkers is, that their appetite is so keen that they eat more than they
ought."

"Rum (says Dr. Bell Inquiry into the causes which produce, and the means of
preventing diseases among British officers, soldiers, and others in the
West Indies.
) whether used habitually, moderately, or in excessive quantities, in the
West Indies, always diminishes the strength of the body, and therefore renders
the men more susceptible of disease, and unfit for any service in which vigor
or activity are required.'




3. I maintain with equal confidence, that spirituous liquors do not lessen the
effects of hard labor upon the body. Look at the horse, with every muscle of
his body swelled from morning till night in the plough, or the team, does he
make signs for spirits to enable him to cleave the earth, or to climb a hill?
-- No. He requires nothing but cool water and substantial food. There is
neither strength nor nourishment in spirituous liquors. If they produce vigor
in labor, it is of a transient nature, and is always succeeded by a sense of
weakness and fatigue. These facts are founded in observation; for I have
repeatedly seen those men perform the greatest exploits in work both as to
their degrees and duration, who never tasted spirituous liquors.

BUT are there no conditions of the human body in which spirituous liquors are
required? Yes, there are; 1st. In those cases where the body has been exhausted
by any causes, and faintness, or a stoppage in the circulation of the blood has
been produced, the sudden stimulus of spirits may be necessary. In this case we
comply strictly with the advice of Solomon, who confines the use of "strong
drink," only to him "that is ready to perish!" and 2dly. When the body has been
long exposed to wet weather, and more especially if cold be joined with it, a
moderate quantity of spirits is not only proper but highly useful to obviate
debility, and thus to prevent a fever. I take these to be the only two cases
that can occur, in which spirituous liquors are innocent or necessary.

BUT if we reject spirits from being part of our drinks, what liquors shall we
substitute in the room of them? For custom, the experience of all ages and
countries, and even nature herself, all seem to demand drinks more grateful and
more cordial than simple water.

TO this I shall reply, by recommending in the room of spirits, in the first
place,

1. CIDER. This excellent liquor contains a small quantity of spirit, but so
diluted and blunted, by being combined with an acid and a large quantity of
sacharine matter and water, as to be perfectly inoffensive and wholesome. It
disagrees only with persons subject to the rheumatism, but it may be rendered
inoffensive to such people by extinguishing a red hot iron in it, or by
diluting it with water. It is to be lamented that the late frosts in the spring
often deprive us of the fruit which affords this liquor. But the effects of
these frosts have been in some measure obviated, by giving an orchard a
north-west exposure, so as to check too early vegetation, and by kindling two
or three large fires of brush and straw to the windward of the orchard, the
evening before we expect a night of frost. This last expedient, has in many
instances within the compass of my knowledge, preserved the fruit of an
orchard, to the great joy and emolument of the ingenious husbandman.

2. BEER is a wholesome liquor compared with spirits. The grain from which it is
obtained is not liable like the apple, to be affected by frost, and therefore
it can always be procured at a moderate expense. It abounds with nourishment --
hence we find many of the common people in Great Britain, endure hard labor
with no other food than a quart or three pints of this liquor, with a few
pounds of bread a day.

3. WINE is likewise a wholesome liquor, compared with spirits. The low wines
of France, I believe, could be drank at a less expense than spirits, in this
country. The peasants in France, who drink these liquors in large quantities,
are a healthy and sober body of people. Wines of all kinds yield, by chemical
analysis, the same principles as cider, but in different proportions; hence
they are both cordial and nourishing. It has been remarked, that few men ever
become habitual drunkards upon wine. It derives its relish principally from
company, and is seldom, like spirituous liquors, drank in a chimney corner, or
in a closet. The effects of wine upon the temper are likewise in most cases,
directly opposite to those that were mentioned of spirituous liquors. It must
be a bad heart, indeed, that is not rendered more cheerful and more generous,
by a few glasses of wine If two barrels of cider fresh from the press, are
boiled into one, and afterward fermented, and kept for two or three years in a
dry cellar, it affords a liquor which (according to the quality of the apple
from which the cider is made) has the taste of Malaga or Rhenish wine. This
liquor, when mixed with water, affords a very agreeable drink in summer. I have
taken the liberty to call it Fomona wine. Another method of obtaining a
pleasant wine from the apple, is to add to four and twenty gallons of new
cider, three gallons of a syrup made from the expressed juice of sweet apples.
When thoroughly fermented, and kept for some time, it becomes fit for use.
.

4. MELASSES and WATER compose another other excellent substitute for spirits.
It is both cordial and nourishing.

5. The SUGAR MAPLE tree affords a thin JUICE in summer, which is cooling and
refreshing. It has long been used in Connecticut, for this purpose in the time
of harvest. The settlers in the western counties of Pennsylvania and New York,
will do well to suffer a few of the trees which yield this pleasant juice, to
remain in all their fields. They may prove the means, not only of saving their
children and grandchildren many hundred pounds, but of saving their bodies
from disease and death, and their souls from misery beyond the grave.

6. VINEGAR and WATER sweetened with sugar or melasses, is an agreeable drink
in warm weather. I beg leave to recommend this wholesome liquor to reapers in a
particular manner. It is pleasant and cooling. It promotes perspiration, and
resists putrefaction. Vinegar and water constituted the only drink of the
soldiers of the Roman republic; and it is well known that they marched and
fought in a warm climate, and beneath a load of arms that weighed 60lbs. Boaz,
a wealthy farmer in Palestine, we find, treated his reapers with nothing but
bread dipped in vinegar. Under this head, I should not neglect to recommend
BUTTER MILK and WATER, or SOUR MILK (commonly called bonneclabber) and WATER.
It will be rendered more grateful by the addition of a little sugar. PUNCH is
likewise calculated to lessen the effects of heat, and hard labor upon the
body. The spirit in this liquor is blunted by its union with the vegetable
acid. Hence it possesses, not only the constituent parts, but most of the
qualities of cider and wine. To render this liquor perfectly innocent and
wholesome, it must be drank weak, in moderate quantities, and only in warm
weather. Say not, that spirits have become necessary in harvest, from habit and
the custom of the country. The custom of swallowing this liquid fire, is a bad
one, and the habit of it may be broken. Let half a dozen farmers in a
neighborhood, combine to allow higher wages to their reapers than are common,
and a sufficient quantity of any of the liquors I have recommended, and they
may soon abolish the practice of giving them spirits. They will in a little
while be delighted with the good effects of their association. Their grain will
be sooner and more carefully gathered into their barns, and an hundred
disagreeable scenes of sickness and contention will be avoided, which always
follow in a greater or less degree the use of spirituous liquors.

TO enable the body to support the waste of its strength by labor, the stomach
should be constantly, but moderately, stimulated by aliment of a particular
kind. Laborers bear with great difficulty long intervals between their meals.
They should always eat four or five times a day in time of harvest, or at other
seasons of great bodily exertion. The food at these times should be solid,
consisting chiefly of salted meat. The vegetables used with it should possess
some activity. Onions and garlic are of a most cordial nature. These vegetables
composed part of the diet which enabled the Israelites to endure, in a warm
climate, the heavy tasks imposed upon them by their Egyptian masters. They were
likewise eaten by the Roman farmers to repair the waste of their strength by
the toils of harvest. But further; There are certain SWEET SUBSTANCES which
support the body in labor. The negroes in the West Indies grow fat and strong
by drinking the juice of the sugar cane in the season of grinding it. The
Jewish soldiers were invigorated by occasionally eating raisins and figs. A
bread composed of wheat flour, melasses, and ginger, (composing what is called
ginger bread), and taken in small quantities, during the day, is happily
calculated to obviate the debility which is so apt to be brought on by labor.
All these substances, whether of an animal or vegetable nature, which have been
mentioned, should be used by laboring people. They lessen the necessity for
cordial drinks, and they impart equal and durable strength to every part of the
system.

THERE are certain classes of people to whom I beg leave to suggest a caution
or two upon the use of spirituous liquors.

1. VALETUDINARIANS, especially those who labor under disorders of the stomach
and bowels, are very apt to fly to spirits for relief. Let such people be
cautious how they repeat this dangerous remedy. I have known many men and
women, of excellent characters and principles, who have been betrayed by
occasional doses of gin or brandy to ease the cholic, into a love of spirituous
liquors, insomuch that they have afterward fallen sacrifices to their fatal
effects. The different preparations of opium are a thousand times more safe and
innocent than spirituous liquors, in all spasmodic affections of the stomach
and bowels. So apprehensive am I of the danger of contracting a love for
spirituous liquors, by accustoming the stomach to their stimules, that I think
the fewer medicines we exhibit in spirituous vehicles the better.

2. SOME people, from living in countries subject to the intermitting fever,
endeavor to fortify themselves against it by two or three glasses of bitters
made with spirits every day. There is great danger of men becoming sots from
this practice. Besides, this mode of preventing intermittents is by no means a
certain one. A much better security against them is to be found in the Jesuits
bark. A tea-spoonful of this excellent medicine taken every morning during the
sickly season, has in many instances preserved whole families, in the
neighborhood of rivers and mill-ponds, from fevers of all kinds. If Jesuits
bark cannot be had, a gill or half a pint of a strong infusion of centaury,
camomile, wormwood, or rue, in water, with a little calamus mixed with it, may
be taken with nearly the same advantage as the bark, every morning. Those who
live in a sickly pan of the country, and cannot procure the bark, or any of the
bitters which have been mentioned, I would advise to avoid the morning and
evening air in the sickly months -- to kindle fires in their houses on damp
days, and in cool evenings throughout the whole summer, and to put on woollen
clothing about the first week in September. The last part of these directions
applies only to the inhabitants of the middle states. These cautions, I am
persuaded, will be more effectual in preventing autumnal fevers than the best
preparations that can be made from bitters in spirits.

3. MEN, who follow professions that require a constant exercise of the mind or
body, or perhaps both, are very apt to seek relief from fatigue in spirituous
liquors. To such persons I would beg leave to recommend the use of TEA instead
of spirits. This gentle stimulus, by restoring excitement, removes fatigue, and
invigorates the whole system. I am no advocate for the general or excessive use
of tea. When drank too strong, it is hurtful, especially to the female
constitution; but when drank of a moderate degree of strength, and in moderate
quantities, with sugar and cream, or milk, I believe it is in general innocent,
and at all times to be preferred to spirituous liquors. Anthony Benezet, one of
the most industrious schoolmasters I ever knew, told me that he had been
preserved from the love of spirituous liquors by contracting a love for tea in
early life. Three or four dishes taken in an afternoon, carried off the fatigue
of a whole day's labor in his school. This worthy gentleman lived to be 71
years of age, and afterward died of an acute disease in the full exercise of
all the faculties of his mind An old and intelligent sea captain, has left upon
record, the following testimony in favor of tea, coffee, and chocolate, in
preference to spirituous liquors, in supporting the body under fatigue. "I have
always observed (says he) when sailors drink tea it weans them from the
thoughts of drinking strong liquors, and pernicious grog, and with tea they are
soon contented. Not so, with whatever will intoxicate, be it what it will. This
has always been my remark. I therefore always encouraged it without their
knowing why. Coffee has the same good effect. Also cocoa, or chocolate." --
Forest's Voyage from Calcutta to the Merqui Archipelago.
.

TO every class of my readers, I beg leave to suggest a caution against the use
of TODDY. I acknowledge that I have known some men, who, by limiting its
strength constantly by measuring the spirit and water, and who by drinking it
only at their meals, have drunken toddy for many years without suffering in any
degree from it: but I have known many more who have been insensibly led from
drinking toddy for their constant drink, to take drams in the morning, and have
afterward paid their lives as the price of their folly. I shall select one
case from among many, to show the ordinary progress of intemperance in the use
of spirituous liquors. -- A gentleman, once of a fair and sober character, in
the city of Philadelphia, for many years drank toddy as his constant drink.
From this he proceeded to drink grog. After a while nothing would satisfy him
but slings made of equal parts of rum and water, with a little sugar. From
slings he advanced to raw rum -- and from common rum to Jamaica spirits. Here
he rested for a few months; but at last, he found even Jamaica spirits were not
strong enough to warm his stomach, and he made it a constant practice to throw
a table spoonful of ground pepper into each glass of his spirits, in order (to
use his own expression) "to take of their coldness." It is hardly necessary to
add, that he soon afterward died a martyr to his own intemperance.

I shall conclude what has been said of the effects of spirituous liquors with
two observations -- 1. A people corrupted by strong drink cannot long be a free
people. The rulers of such a community will soon partake of the vices of that
mass from which they were secreted, and all our laws and governments will
sooner or later bear the same marks of the effects of spirituous liquors which
were described formerly upon individuals. I submit it therefore to the
consideration of our rulers, whether more laws should not be made to increase
the expense and lessen the consumption of spirituous liquors, and whether some
mark of public infamy should not be inflicted by law upon every man, convicted
before a common magistrate of drunkenness.

THE second and last observation I shall offer, is of a serious nature. It has
been remarked, that the Indians have diminished every where in America since
their connections with the Europeans. This has been justly ascribed to the
Europeans having introduced spirituous liquors among them. Let those men, who
are every day turning their backs upon all the benefits of cultivated society,
to seek habitations in the neighborhood of Indians, consider how far this
wandering mode of life is produced by the same cause which has scattered and
annihilated so many Indian tribes. Long life, and the secure possession of
property, in the land of their ancestors, were looked upon as blessings among
the ancient Jews. For a son to mingle his dust with the dust of his father, was
to act worthy of his inheritance; and the prospect of this honor often
afforded a consolation even in death. However exalted, my countrymen, your
ideas of liberty may be, while you expose yourselves by the use of spirituous
liquors to this consequence of them, you are nothing more than the pioneers, or
in more slavish terms, "the hewers of wood" of your more industrious neighbors.

IF the facts that have been stated, have produced in any of my readers, who
have suffered from the use of spirituous liquors, a resolution to abstain from
them hereafter, I must beg leave to inform them, that they must leave them off
suddenly and entirely. No man was ever gradually reformed from drinking
spirits. He must not only avoid tasting, but even smelling them, until long
habits of abstinence have subdued his affection for them. To prevent his
feeling any inconveniences from the sudden loss of their stimulus upon his
stomach, he should drink plentifully of camomile or of any other bitter tea, or
a few glasses of sound old wine every day. I have great pleasure in adding,
that I have seen a number of people who have been effectually restored to
health -- to character -- and to usefulness to their families and to society,
by following this advice.

AN INQUIRY INTO THE CAUSES AND CURE OF THE PULMONARY CONSUMPTION.

INQUIRY, etc.
IN an Essay, entitled "Thoughts on the Pulmonary Consumption," Medical
Inquiries and Observations.
I attempted to show that this disorder was the effect of causes which induced
general debility, and that the only hope of discovering a cure for it should be
directed to such remedies as act upon the whole system. In the following
inquiry, I shall endeavor to establish the truth of each of those opinions, by
a detail of facts and reasonings, at which I only hinted in my former essay.

THE method I have chosen for this purpose, is to deliver, and afterward to
support, a few general propositions.

I shall begin by remarking,

I. THAT the Pulmonary Consumption is a disease of debility.

THIS I infer, 1st, From the remote and exciting causes which produce it. The
remote causes are pneumony, catarrh, haemoptysis, rheumatism, gout, asthma,
scrophula, nervous and intermitting fevers, measles, repelled humors from the
surface of the body, the venereal disease, obstructed menses, sudden growth
about the age of puberty, grief, and all other debilitating passions of the
mind; hypochondriasis, improper lactation, excessive evacuation of all kinds,
more especially by stool Sir George Baker relates in the second volume of the
Medical Transactions, that Dr. Blanchard had informed him that he had seen the
consumption brought on ten persons out of ninety, by excessive purging used to
prepare the body for the smallpox. I have seen a case of consumption in a
youth of 17, from the spitting produced by the intemperate use of segars.
, cold and damp air, external violence acting upon the body; Dr. Lind says that
out of 360 patients whom he attended between July 1st, 1758, and July 1st,
1760, in consumptions, the disorder was brought on one fourth of them, by
falls, bruises, and strains received a year or two before the disease made its
appearance.
and finally every thing that tends directly or indirectly to impair the vigor
of the system.

THE most frequent exciting cause of consumption is the alternate application
of heat and cold to the whole external surface of the body, but all the remote
causes which have been enumerated, operate as exciting causes of consumption
when they act on previous debility. Original injuries of the lungs seldom
induce this disorder except they first induce a debility of the whole system by
a troublesome and obstinate cough.

2. FROM the occupations and habits of persons who are most liable to this
disorder. These are studious men, and mechanics who lead sedentary lives in
confined places; also women, and all persons of irritable habits, whether of
body or mind.

3. FROM the period in which persons are most liable to be affected by this
disorder. This is generally between the 18th and 36th year of life, a period in
which the system is liable in a peculiar manner to most diseases which induce
the disorder, and in which indirect debility is oftener produced than in any
other stage of life, by the excessive exercises of the body and mind in the
pursuits of business or pleasure.

I have conformed to authors, in fixing the period of consumptions between the
18th and 36th year of life -- but it is well known that it sometimes appears in
children, and frequently in persons beyond the 40th, or even 50th year of life.

II. THE pulmonary consumption is a primary disease of the whole system. This I
infer,

1. FROM the causes which produce it, acting upon the whole system.

2. FROM the symptoms of general debility which always precede the affection of
the lungs. These symptoms are a quick pulse, especially toward evening; a heat
and burning in the palms of the hands; faintness, headache, sickness at
stomach, and an occasional diarrhoea. I have frequently observed each of these
symptoms for several months before I have heard of a single complaint in the
breast.

3. FROM the pulmonary consumption alternating with other diseases which
obviously belong to the whole system. I shall briefly mention these diseases.

THE RHEUMATISM. I have seen many cases in which this disease and the
consumption have alternately, in different seasons or years, affected the
system. In the winter of 1792, three clinical patients in the Pennsylvania
hospital exemplified by their complaints the truth of this observation. They
were relieved several times of a cough by pains in their limbs, and as often,
the pains in their limbs seemed for a while to promise a cure to their pulmonic
complaints.

THE GOUT has often been observed to alternate with the pulmonary consumption,
especially in persons in the decline of life. Dr. Sydenham describes a short
cough continuing through the whole winter, as a symptom of gouty habits. A
gentleman from Virginia died under my care in the spring of 1788, in the 45th
year of his age, with all the symptoms of pulmonary consumption, which had
frequently alternated with pains and a swelling in his feet.

THE pulmonary consumption has been observed to alternate with MADNESS. Of this
I have seen two instances, in both of which, the cough, and expectoration were
wholly suspended during the continuance of the derangement of the mind. Dr.
Mead mentions a melancholy case of the same kind in a young lady; and similar
cases are to be met with in other authors. In all of them the disease proved
fatal. In one of the cases which came under my notice, the symptoms of
consumption returned before the death of the patient.

I have likewise witnessed two cases in which the return of reason after
madness, was suddenly succeeded by a fatal pulmonary consumption. Perhaps the
false hopes, and even the cheerfulness which so universally occur in this
disorder, may be resolved into a morbid state of the mind, produced by a
general derangement of the whole system. So universal are the delusion and
hopes of patients with respect to the nature and issue of this disorder, that I
have never met with but one man, who, upon being asked what was the matter with
him, answered unequivocally, "that he was in a consumption!"

AGAIN -- Dr. Bennet mentions a case of "A phthisical patient who was seized
with a violent PAIN IN THE TEETH for two days, and in whom, during that time,
every symptom of a consumption, except the leanness of the body, altogether
vanished;" and he adds further, "that a desluxion on the lungs had often been
relieved by SALIVARY EVACUATIONS." Treatise of the Nature and Cure of
Consumptions -- Exercitation X.


I have seen several instances in which the pulmonary symptoms have alternated
with HEADACHE and DYSPEPSIA, -- also with pain and noise in one of the EARS.
This affection of the ears sometimes continues throughout the whole disease
without any remission of the pulmonary symptoms. I have seen one case of a
discharge of matter from the left ear without being accompanied by either pain
or noise.

IN all our books of medicine are to be found cases of consumption alternating
with ERUPTIONS ON THE SKIN.

AND who has not seen the pulmonary symptoms alternately relieved, and
reproduced by the appearance or cessation of a diarrhoea, or pains in the
BOWELS?

TO these facts I shall only add, under this head, as a proof of the
consumption being a disease of the whole system, that it is always more or less
relieved by the change which is induced in the system by pregnancy.

4. I infer that the pulmonary consumption is a disease of the whole system
from its analogy with several other diseases which, though accompanied by local
affections, are obviously produced by a morbid state of the whole system.

THE Rheumatism, the Gout, the Measles, Smallpox, the different species of
Cynanche -- all furnish examples of the connection of local affections with a
general disease; but the APOPLEXY, and the PNEUMONY furnish the most striking
analogies of local affection, succeeding a general disorder of the system in
the pulmonary consumption.

THE most frequent cause of apoplexy is a general debility of the system,
produced by intemperance in eating and drinking. The phenomenon of the disease
are produced by an effusion of blood or serum, in consequence of a morbid
distension, or of a rupture of the vessels of the brain. The pulmonary
consumption begins and ends in the same way, allowing only for the difference
of situation and structure of the brain and lungs. After the production of
predisposing debility from the action of the remote causes formerly enumerated,
the fluids are determined to the weakest part of the body. Hence effusions of
serum or blood take place in the lungs. When serum is effused, a pituitous or
purulent expectoration alone takes place; -- when blood is discharged, a
disease is produced which has been called Haemoptysis. An effusion of blood in
the brain, brought on by the operation of general debility, has been called by
Dr. Hoffman, with equal propriety, a haermorrhage of the brain. The effusion of
blood in the lungs in consequence of the rupture of a blood vessel is less
fatal than the same accident when it occurs in the brain, only because the
blood in the former case is more easily discharged from the system. Where no
rupture of a blood vessel is produced, death is nearly as speedy and certain in
the one case as in the other. I have seen two cases of sudden death from
Hemoptysis. In one of them there was very little blood discharged through the
mouth.
Dissections show many cases of suffocation and and death, from the lungs being
preternaturally filled with blood or serum. From this great analogy between the
remote and proximate causes of the two diseases which have been described, I
have taken the liberty to call them both by the name of apoplexy. The only
symptom which does not accord with the derivation of the term, is, that in the
apoplexy of the lungs, the patient does not fall down as if by an external
stroke, which is most frequently the case in the apoplexy of the brain.

THE history of the remote and proximate causes of pneumony will furnish us
with a still more remarkable analogy of the connection between a local
affection, and a general disease of the system. The pneumony is produced by
remote exciting causes, which act on the whole system. The whole arterial
system is frequently agitated by a fever in this disorder before a pain is
perceived in the breast or sides, and this fever generally constitutes the
strength and danger of the disease. The expectoration which terminates the
disorder in health, is always the effect of effusions produced by a general
disease, and even the vomicas, which sometimes succeed a deficiency of bleeding
in this disorder, always depend upon the same general cause. From this view of
the analogy between pneumony and pulmonary consumption, it would seem that the
two diseases differed from each other only by the shorter or longer operation
of the causes which induce them, and by the greater or less violence and
duration of their symptoms. The pnuemony appears to be an acute consumption,
and the consumption a chronic pneumony. From the analogy of the pulmonary
consumption with the diminutive term of certain fevers, I have taken the
liberty of calling it a PNEUMONICULA.

5. I infer that the pulmonary consumption is a disease of the whole system,
from its existence without ulcers in the lungs. Of this there are many cases
recorded in books of medicine.

DR. Leigh informs us in his natural history of Lancashire, that the
consumption was a very common disease on the sea coast of that country; but
that it was not accompanied either by previous inflammation or ulcers in the
lungs. It was generally attended, he says, by an unusual peevishness of temper.

6. AND lastly, I infer, that the pulmonary consumption is a disease of the
whole system, from its being relieved, or cured, only by remedies which act
upon the whole system. This will appear, I hope, hereafter, when we come to
treat of the cure of this disorder.

LET us now inquire how far the principles I have laid down will apply to the
supposed proximate causes of consumption. These causes have been said to be --
an abscess in the lungs, haemoptysis, tubercles, catarrh, hereditary diathesis,
contagion, and the matter of cutaneous eruptions or sores repelled, and thrown
upon the lungs. I shall make a few observations upon each of them.

1. AN abscess in the lungs is generally the consequence of a neglected, or
half cured pneumony. It is seldom fatal, where it is not connected with a
predisposition to consumption from general debility, or where general debility
is not previously induced by the want of appetite, sleep, and exercise, which
sometimes accompanies that disorder of the lungs. This explanation of the
production of consumption by an abscess in the lungs, will receive further
support from attending to the effects of wounds in the lungs. How seldom are
they followed by pulmonary consumption; and this only because they are as
seldom accompanied by predisposing general debility. I do not recollect a
single instance of this disorder having followed a wound in the lungs, either
by the bayonet, or a bullet, during the late war. The recoveries which have
succeeded such wounds, and frequently under the most unfavorable circumstances,
show how very improbable it is that a much slighter affection of the lungs
should become the cause of a pulmonary consumption.

A British officer, whom I met in the British camp, a few days after the battle
of Brandywine, in September, 1777, informed me that the surgeon general of the
royal army had assured him, that out of twenty-four soldiers who had been
admitted into the hospitals, during the campaign of 1776, with wounds in their
lungs, twenty-three of them had recovered. Even primary diseases of the lungs
often exist with peculiar violence, or continue for many years without inducing
a consumption. I have never known but one instance of the hooping cough ending
in consumption, and all our books of medicine contain records of the asthma
continuing for 20 and 30 years without terminating in that disorder. The reason
in both cases, must be ascribed to those two original disorders of the lungs
not being accompanied by general debility. One fact more will serve to throw
still further light upon the subject. Millers are much afflicted with a cough
from floating particles of flour constantly irritating their lungs, and yet
they are not more subject to consumptions than other laboring people. Hence "a
miller's cough," is proverbial in some places, to denote a cough of long
continuance without danger.

2. THE haemoptysis is either a local disease, or it is the effect of general
debility of the whole system. When it is local, or when it is the effect of
causes which induce a temporary or acute debility only in the system, it is
seldom followed by consumption. The accidental discharge of blood from the
lungs, from injuries, and from an obstruction of the menses in women, is of
this kind. Many persons are affected by this species of haemorrhage once or
twice in their lives, without suffering any inconvenience from it afterward. I
have met with several cases in which it has occurred for many years every time
the body was exposed to any of the causes which induce sudden, direct, or
indirect debility, and yet no consumption has followed it. The late king of
Prussia informed Dr. Zimmerman that he had been frequently attacked by it
during his seven years war, and yet he lived notwithstanding above twenty years
afterward without any pulmonary complaints. It is only in persons who labor
under chronic debility, that an haemoptysis is necessarily followed by
consumption.

3. I yield to the popular mode of expression when I speak of a consumption
being produced by tubercles. But I maintain that they are the effects of
general debility communicated to the bronchial vessels which cause them to
effuse a preternatural quantity of mucus. This mucus is sometimes poured into
the trachea from whence it is discharged by hawking, more especially in the
morning; for it is effused more copiously during the languid hours of sleep
than in the day time. But this mucus is frequently effused into the substance
of the lungs, where it produces those tumors we call tubercles. When this
occurs, there is either no cough See Med. Com. Vol. II.
or a very dry one. That tubercles are formed in this way, I infer from the
dissections and experiments of Dr. Stark Clinical and Anatomical Observations,
p. 26, 27. See also Morgagni, letter xxii. 21.
, who tells us, that he found them to consist of inorganic matter -- that he
was unable to discover any connection between them and the pulmonary vessels,
by means of the microscope or injections, and that they first opened into the
trachea through the bronchial vessels. It is remarkable that the color and
consistence of the matter of which they are composed, is nearly the same as the
matter which is discharged from the trachea, in the most cough which occurs
from a relaxation of the bronchial vessels.

I am aware that these tumors in the lungs have been ascribed to scropula. But
the frequent occurrence of consumptions in persons in whom no scrophulous taint
existed, is sufficient to refute this opinion. I have frequently directed my
enquiries after this disorder in consumptive patients, and have met with very
few cases which were produced by it. It is probable that it may frequently be a
predisposing cause of consumption in Great Britain, but I am sure it is not in
the United States of America.

4. THE catarrh is of two kind -- acute and chronic, both of which are
connected with general debility, but this debility is most obvious in the
chronic catarrh: hence we find it increased by every thing which acts upon the
whole system, such as cold and damp weather, fatigue, and above all by old age,
and relieved or cured by exercise, and every thing else which invigorates the
whole system. This species of catarrh often continues for twenty or thirty
years without inducing pulmonary consumption, in persons who pursue active
occupations.

5. IN the hereditary consumption there is either an hereditary debility of the
whole system, or an hereditary mad-conformation of the breast. In the latter
case, the consumption is the effect of weakness communicated to the whole
system, by the long continuance of difficult respiration, or of such injuries
being done to the lungs as are incompatible with health and life. It is
remarkable, that the consumptive diathesis is more frequently derived from
paternal than maternal ancestors.

6. PHYSICIANS the most distinguished for accurate observations have agreed,
that the pulmonary consumption may be communicated by contagion. However
doubtful it may be in temperate, it cannot be controverted in warm climates.
Morgagni informs us that, Valsalva (who was predisposed to the consumption) was
so satisfied of its contagious nature, that he constantly avoided being present
at the dissection of the lungs of persons who had died of that disorder. I know
that its progress in whole families has been ascribed to a sameness of original
constitution, or mal-conformation of the breast in the members of the same
family, or the fatigue which is incurred by attending, and the grief which
follows the loss of relations who perish by that disorder. Perhaps many of the
cases of consumption, which have been ascribed to contagion, may be accounted
for by calling in the debilitating operation of one or both of those causes;
but there are cases of the disease being communicated by contagion, which
cannot be resolved into the influence of either fatigue or grief.

THE late Dr. Beardsley, of Connecticut, informed me that he had known several
black slaves, affected by a consumption which had previously swept away several
of the white members of the family to which they belonged. In those slaves no
suspicion was entertained of the most distant relationship to the persons from
whom they had had contracted the disorder; nor had fatigue or grief, from the
causes beforementioned, been supposed to have had the least share in
debilitating their bodies. Admitting then contagion to act as a remote cause of
consumption, it does not militate against the theory which I have aimed to
establish; for if the contagion follow the analogy of all the other contagions
that we are acquainted with, it must act by debilitating the whole system. The
approach of the jail fever and the plague is often indicated by general
languor. The influenza and the measles are always accompanied by general
debility, but the small pox furnishes an analogy to the case in question more
directly in point. The contagion of this disorder, whether received by the
medium of the air or the skin, never fails of producing a disease of the whole
system, before it discovers itself in affections of those parts of the body on
which the contagion produced its first operation. -- I am disposed to believe,
from several cases which have come under my notice, that the contagion which
produces the consumption seldom acts in less than two or three months after it
is received into the system. I once attended a lady, in whom the contagion did
not discover itself in the lungs for nearly a year after she had been exposed
to it, by attending a sister who had died of the consumption. In this case the
effects of fatigue, and of grief were entirely worn away from the system by
time, as well as by cheerful society.

7. I GRANT that cutaneous humors, and the matter of old sores, when repelled,
or suddenly healed, have in some cases fallen upon the lungs, and produced
consumption. But I believe, in every case where this has happened, the
consumption was preceded by general debility, or that it was not induced, until
the whole system had been previously debilitated by a tedious and distressing
cough.

IF the reasonings founded upon the facts which have been mentioned be just,
then it follows,

III. THAT the cough, tubercles, ulcers, and purulent or bloody discharges
which occur in the pulmonary consumption, are the effects and not the causes of
the disease; and, that all attempts to cure it, by inquiring after tubercles
and ulcers, or into the quality of the discharges from the lungs, are as
fruitless as an attempt would be to discover the causes or cure of dropsies, by
an examination of the qualities of collections of water, or to find out the
causes and cure of fevers by the quantity or quality of the discharges which
take place in those diseases from the kidneys and skin. I admit that the cough,
ulcers, and tubercles, after they are formed, increase the danger of the
disease, by becoming new causes of stimulus to the system, but in this they are
upon a footing with those effusions in the viscera, which take place in the
intermitting fever, which though they constitute no part of its cause,
frequently produce symptoms and a termination which are wholly unconnected with
the original disease.

THE tendency of general debility to produce a disease of the lungs appears in
many cases, as well as in the pulmonary consumption. Dr. Lind tells us, that
the last stage of the jail fever was often marked by a cough. I have seldom
been disappointed in looking for a cough and a copious excretion of mucus and
phlegm after the 14th or 15th days of the nervous fever. Two cases of
hypocondriasis under my care, ended in fatal disorders of the lungs. The
debility of old age is generally accompanied by a troublesome cough, and the
debility which precedes death, generally discovers its last symptoms in the
lungs, -- hence, most people die with what are called the Rattles. They are
produced by a sudden and copious effusion of mucus in the bronchial vessels of
the lungs.

SHOULD it be asked, why does general debility terminate by a disorder in the
lungs, rather than in any other part of the body? -- I answer, -- that it seems
to be a law of the system, that general debility should always produce as a
symptom some local disease. This local disease sometimes manifests itself in
dyspepsia, as in the general debility which follows grief; -- sometimes it
discovers itself in a diarrhoea as in the general debility which succeeds to
fear. -- Again it appears in the brain, -- as in the general debility which
succeeds intemperance, and the constant or violent exercise of the
understanding, or of stimulating passions; but it more frequently appears in
the lungs, as the consequence of general debility. It would seem as if the
debility in the cases of consumption is seated chiefly in the blood vessels,
while that debility which terminates in diseases of the stomach and bowels, is
confined chiefly to the nerves, -- and that the local affections of the brain
arise from a debility, invading alike the nervous and arterial systems. What
makes it more probable, that the arterial system is materially affected in the
consumption is, that the disorder most frequently occurs in those periods of
life, and in those habits in which a peculiar state of irritability or
excitability is supposed to be present in the arterial system; also in those
climates in which there are the most frequent vicissitudes in the temperature
of the weather. It is remarkable, that that the debility in the inhabitants of
the West Indies, whether produced by the heat of the climate, or the excessive
pursuits of business or pleasure, generally terminates in dropsy, or in some
disorder of the alimentary canal.

I HAVE said, that it seemed to be a law of the system, that general debility
should always produce as a symptom some local affection. But to this law there
are sometimes exceptions: The Atrophy appears to be a consumption without an
affection of the lungs. -- This disorder is frequently mentioned by the writers
of the 16th and 17th centuries by the name of Tabes. I have seen several
instances of it in adults, but more in children, and a greater number in the
children of black than of white parents. The hectic fever, and even the night
sweats, were as obvious in several of these cases, as in those consumptions
where general debility had discovered itself in an affection of the lungs.

I COME now to make a few observations upon the CURE of consumption; and here I
hope it will appear, that the theory which I have delivered admits of an early
and very important application to practice.

IF the consumption be a disease of general debility, it becomes us to attempt
the cure of it in its first stage, -- that is, before it produce the symptoms
of cough, bloody or purulent discharges from the lungs, and inflammatory or
hectic fever. The symptoms which mark this first stage, are too seldom
observed; or if observed, they are too often treated with equal neglect by
patients and physicians. I shall briefly enumerate these symptoms. They are a
slight fever increased by the least exercise, -- a burning and dryness in the
palms of the hands, more especially toward evening, -- rheumy eyes upon waking
from sleep, -- an increase of urine, -- a dryness of the skin, more especially
of the feet in the morning, The three last mentioned symptoms are taken notice
of by Dr Bennet, in his Treatise upon the Nature and Cure of the Consumption as
precursors of the disorder. Dr. Boerhaave used to tell his pupils that they had
never deceived him.
-- an occasional flushing in one, and sometimes in both cheeks, -- a
hoarseness I have seen the hoarseness in one case the first symptom of
approaching consumption. In this symptom it preserves the analogy of pneumony,
which often comes on with a hoarseness, and sometimes with paraphonia.
-- a slight or acute pain in the breast, -- a fixed pain in one side, or
shooting pains in both sides, -- headache, -- occasional sick and fainty fits,
-- a deficiency of appetite, and a general indisposition to exercise or motion
of every kind.

IT would be easy for me to mention cases in which every symptom that has been
enumerated has occurred within my own observations. I wish them to be committed
to memory by young practitioners; and if they derive the same advantages from
attending to them, which I have done, I am sure they will not regret the
trouble they have taken for that purpose. It is probable, while a morbid state
of the lungs is supposed to be the proximate cause of this disorder, they will
not derive much reputation or emolument from curing it in its forming stage;
but let them remember, that in all attempts to discover the causes and cures of
diseases, which have been deemed incurable, a physician will do nothing
effectual until he acquire a perfect indifference to his own interest and fame.

THE remedies for consumption in this stage of the disorder are simple and
certain. They consist, in a desertion of all the remote, and exciting causes of
the disorder, particularly sedentary employments, damp or cold situations, and
whatever tends to weaken the system. When the disease has not yielded to this
desertion of its remote and exciting causes, I have recommended the cold bath,
steel, and bark with great advantage. However improper or even dangerous these
remedies may be after the disease assumes an inflammatory or hectic type, and
produces an affection of the lungs, they are perfectly safe and extremely
useful in the state of the system which has been described. The use of the bark
will readily be admitted by all those practitioners who believe the pulmonary
consumption to depend upon a scrophulous diathesis. Should even the lungs be
affected by scrophulous tumors, it is no objection to the use of the bark; for
there is no reason why it should not be as useful in scrophulous tumors of the
lungs, as of the glands of the throat, provided it be given before those tumors
have produced inflammation; and in this case, no prudent practitioner will ever
prescribe it in scrophula when seated even in the external parts of the body.
To these remedies should be added a diet moderately stimulating, and gentle
exercise. I shall hereafter mention the different species of exercise, and the
manner in which each of them should be used so as to derive the utmost
advantage from them. I can say nothing of the use of salt water, or sea-air in
this stage of the consumption from my own experience. I have heard them
commended by a physician of Rhode Island; and if they be used before the
disease has discovered itself in pulmonary affections, I can easily conceive
they may do service.

IF the simple remedies which have been mentioned have been neglected, in the
first stage of the disorder, it generally terminates in different periods of
time, in pulmonary affections; which show themselves under one of the three
following forms. --

1. A fever, accompanied by a cough, a hard pulse, and a discharge of blood, or
mucous matter from the lungs.

2. A fever of the hectic kind, accompanied by chilly fits, and night sweats,
and a pulse full, quick, and occasionally hard. The discharges from the lungs
in this state of the disorder, are frequently purulent.

3. A fever with a weak quick pulse, a troublesome cough, and copious purulent
discharges from the lungs, a hoarse and weak voice, and chilly fits and night
sweats, alternating occasionally with a diarrhoea.

THESE three different forms of the pulmonary affection have been distinguished
by the names of the first, second, and third stages of the consumption; but as
they do not always succeed each other in the order in which they have been
mentioned, I shall hereafter distinguish them by the name of species, in
conformity to our modern nomenclatures of medicine, although it would be more
proper, on some accounts, to consider them as different states of the system.

THE first I shall call the INFLAMMATORY -- the second the HECTIC, and the
third the TYPHUS species. I have seen the pulmonary consumption come on
sometimes with all the symptoms of the second, and sometimes with the most of
the symptoms of the third species; and I have seen two cases in which a hard
pulse, and other symptoms of inflammatory action appeared in the last hours of
life. It is agreeable to pursue the analogy of this disorder with a pneumony,
or an acute inflammation of the lungs. They both make their first appearance in
the same seasons of the year. It is true, the pneumony most frequently attacks
with inflammatory symptoms; but it sometimes occurs with symptoms which forbid
blood-letting, and I have more than once seen it attended by symptoms which
required the use of wine and bark. The pneumony is attended at first by a dry
cough, and an expectoration of streaks of blood -- the cough in the
consumption, in like manner, is at first dry, and attended by a discharge of
blood from the lungs, which is more copious than in the pneumony, only because
the lungs are more relaxed in the former than in the latter disorder. There are
cases of pneumony in which no cough attends. I have seen cases of pulmonary
consumption, in which nothing but a difficulty of breathing discovered a morbid
state of the lungs, and one in which there was an entire absence of cough. In
the year 1785, I attended a young lady who had complained of a pain in her
right side, and had frequent chills with a fever of the hectic kind. They all
gave way 10 frequent and gentle bleedings. In the summer of 1786, she was
seized with the same complaints, and as she had great objections to bleeding,
she consulted a physician who gratified her, by attempting to cure her by
recommending exercise and country air. In the autumn she returned to the city
much worse than when she left it. I was again sent for, and found her confined
to her bed with a pain in her right side, but without the least cough or fever.
Her pulse was preternaturally slow. She could lie only on her left side. She
sometimes complained of acute flying pains in her head, bowels, and limbs.
About a month before her death, which was on the 3d of May 1787, her pulse
became quick, and she had a little hecking cough, but without any discharge
from her lungs. Upon my first visit to her in the preceding autumn, I had told
her friends that I believed she had an abscess in her lungs. The want of fever
and cough afterward however gave me reason to suspect that I had been
mistaken. The morning after her death, I received a message from her father,
informing me that it had been among the last requests of his daughter, that the
cause of her death should be ascertained by my opening her body. I complied
with this request, and in company with Dr. Hall, examined her thorax. We found
the left lobe of the lungs perfectly sound; the right lobe adhered to the
pleura, in separating of which, Dr. Hall plunged his hand into a large sac
which contained about half a pint of purulent matter, and which had nearly
destroyed the whole substance of the right lobe of the lungs.

I have met with only two other cases of consumption in which there was an
absence of a quick pulse. In both of them the pulse was regular to the last day
of life.




THE pneumony terminates in different periods according to the degrees of
inflammation, or the nature of the effusions which take place in the lungs --
the same observation applies to the pulmonary consumption. The symptoms of the
different species of pneumony frequently run into each other; so do the
symptoms of the three species of consumption which have been mentioned. In
short, the pneumony and consumption are alike in so many particulars, that they
appear to resemble shadows of the same substance. They differ only as the
protracted shadow of the evening does from that of the noonday sun.

I KNOW that it will be objected here that the consumption is sometimes
produced by scrophula, and that this creates an essential difference between it
and pneumony. I formerly admitted scrophula to be one of the remote causes of
the consumption; but this does not invalidate the parallel which has been given
of the two diseases. The phenomena produced in the lungs are the same as to
their nature, whether they be produced by the remote cause of scrophula, or by
the sudden action of cold and heat upon them.

NO more happens in the cases of acute and chronic pneumony, than what happens
in dysentery and rheumatism. These two last diseases are for the most part so
acute, as to confine the patient to his bed or his room, yet we often meet with
both of them in patients who go about their ordinary business, and, in some
instances, carry their diseases with them for two or three years.

THE parallel which has been drawn between the pneumony and consumption, will
enable us to understand the reason why the latter disorder terminates in such
different periods of time. The less it partakes of pneumony, the longer it
continues, and vice versa. What is commonly called in this country a galloping
consumption, is a disease compounded of different degrees of consumption and
pneumony. It terminates frequently in two or three months, and without many of
the symptoms which usually attend the last stage of pulmonary consumption. But
there are cases in which patients in a consumption are suddenly snatched away
by an attack of pneumony. I have met with one case only, in which, contrary to
my expectation, the patient mended after an attack of an acute inflammation of
the lungs, so as to live two years afterward.

IT would seem from these facts, as if nature had preferred a certain gradation
in diseases, as well as in other parts of her works. There is scarcely a
disease in which there is not a certain number of grades, which mark the
distance between health and the lowest specific deviation from it. Each of
these grades has received different names, and has been considered as a
distinct disease, but more accurate surveys of the animal economy have taught
us, that they frequently depend upon the same original causes, and that they
are only greater or less degrees of the same disease.

I SHALL now proceed to say a few words upon the cure of the different species
of pulmonary consumption. The remedies for this purpose are of two kinds, viz.
PALLIATIVE and RADICAL. I shall first mention the palliative remedies which
belong to each species, and then mention those which are alike proper in them
all. The palliative remedies for the

I. OR INFLAMMATORY SPECIES, ARE

1. BLOOD-LETTING. It may seem strange to recommend this debilitating remedy in
a disease brought on by debility. Were it proper in this place, I could prove
that there is no disease in which bleeding is prescribed, which is not induced
by predisposing debility in commmon with the pulmonary consumption. I shall
only remark here, that in consequence of the exciting cause acting upon the
system (rendered extremely excitable by debility) such a morbid and excessive
excitement is produced in the arteries as to render a diminution of the
stimulus of the blood, absolutely necessary to reduce it. I have used this
remedy with great success in every case of consumption, attended by a hard
pulse, or a pulse rendered weak by a laborious transmission of the blood
through the lungs. In the months of February and March in the year 1781, I bled
a Methodist minister, who was affected by this species of consumption, fifteen
times in the course of six weeks. The quantity of blood drawn at each bleeding
was never less than eight ounces, and it was at all times covered with an
inflammatory crust. By the addition of country air, and moderate exercise, to
this copious evacuation, in the ensuing spring he recovered his health, so
perfectly as to discharge all the duties of his profession for many years, nor
was he ever afflicted afterward with a disorder in his breast. I have in
another instance, bled a citizen of Philadelphia eight times in two weeks, in
this species of consumption, and with the happiest effects. The blood drawn at
each bleeding was always sizy, and never less in quantity than ten ounces. To
these cases I might add many others of consumptive persons who have been
perfectly cured by frequent, and of many others whose lives have been prolonged
by occasional bleedings. -- But I am sorry to add, that I could relate many
more cases of consumptive patients, who have died martyrs to their prejudices
against the use of this invaluable remedy. A common objection to it is, that it
has been used without success in this disorder. When this has been the case, I
suspect that it has been used in one of the other two species of pulmonary
consumption which have been mentioned, for it has unfortunately been too
fashionable among physicians to prescribe the same remedies in every stage and
species of the same disorder; and this I take to be the reason why the same
medicines, which in the hands of some physicians, are either inert, or
instruments of mischief, are, in the hands of others, used with more or less
success in every case in which they are prescribed. Another objection to
bleeding in the inflammatory species of consumption, is derived from the
apparent and even sensible weakness of the patient. The men who urge this
objection, do not hesitate to take from sixty to an hundred ounces of bood from
a patient in a pneumony in in the course of five or six days, without
considering that the debility in the latter case is such as to confine a
patient to his bed, while in the former case, the patient's strength is such as
to enable him to walk about his house, and even to attend to his ordinary
business. The difference between the debility in the two diseases, consists in
its being acute in the one, and chronic in the other. It is true, the
preternatural or convulsive action of the arteries is somewhat greater in the
pneumony, than in the inflammatory consumption; but the plethora on which the
necessity of bleeding is partly founded, is certainly greater in the
inflammatory consumption than in pneumony. -- This is evident from women, and
even nurses, discharging from four to six ounces of menstrual blood every
month, while they are laboring with the most inflammatory symptoms of the
disorder; nor is it to be wondered at, since the appetite is frequently
unimpaired, and the generation of blood continues to be the same, as in perfect
health.

DR. CULLEN recommends the use of bleeding in consumptions in order to lessen
the inflammation of the ulcers in the lungs, and thereby to dispose them to
heal. From the testimonies of the relief which bleeding affords in external
ulcers and tumors accompanied by inflammation, I am disposed to expect the same
benefit from it in inflamed ulcers and tumors in the lungs: Whether, therefore,
we adopt Dr Cullen's theory of consumption, and treat it as a local disease, or
assent to the one which I have delivered, still repeated bleedings appear to be
equally necessary and useful.

I HAVE seen two cases of inflammatory consumption, attended by an hoemorrhage
of a quart of blood from the lungs. I agreed at first with the friends of these
patients in expecting a rapid termination of their disorder in death, but to
the joy and surprise of all connected with them, they both recovered. I
ascribed their recovery wholly to the inflammatory action of their systems
being suddenly reduced by a spontaneous discharge of blood. These facts, I
hope, will serve to establish the usefulness of blood-letting in the
inflammatory state of consumption, with those physicians who are yet disposed
to trust more to the fortuitous operations of nature, than to the decisions of
reason and experience.

I HAVE always found this remedy to be more necessary in the winter and first
spring months, than at any other season. We obtain by means of repeated
bleedings, such a mitigation of all the symptoms as enables the patient to use
exercise with advantage as soon as the weather becomes so dry and settled, as
to admit of his going abroad every day.

THE relief obtained by bleeding, is so certain in this species of consumption,
that I often use it as a palliative remedy, where I do not expect it will
perform a cure. I was lately made happy in finding, that I am not singular in
this practice. Dr. Hamilton, of Lynn Regis, used it with success in a
consumption, which was the effect of a most deplorable scrophula, without
entertaining the least hope of its performing a cure Observations on
scrophulous affection.
. In those cases where inflammamatory action attends the last scene of the
disorder, there is often more relief obtained by a little bleeding than by the
use of opiates, and it is always a more humane prescription, in desperate
cases, than the usual remedies of vomits and blisters.

I ONCE bled a sea captain, whom I had declared to be within a few hours of his
dissolution, in order to relieve him of uncommon pain, and difficulty in
breathing. His pulse was at the same time hard. The evacuation, though it
consisted of only four ounces of blood, had the wished for effect, and his
death, I have reason to believe, was rendered more easy by it. The blood, in
this case, was covered with a buffy coat.

THE quantity of blood drawn in every case of inflammatory consumption, should
be determined by the force of the pulse, and the habits of the patient. I have
seldom taken more than eight, but more frequently only six ounces at a time. It
is much better to repeat the bleeding once or twice a week, than to use it less
frequently, but in larger quantities.

FROM many years experience of the efficacy of bleeding in this species of
consumption, I feel myself authorized to assert, that where a greater
proportion of persons die of consumption when it makes it first appearance in
the lungs, with symptoms of inflammatory diathesis, than die of ordinary
pneumonies, (provided exercise be used afterward) it must in nine cases out of
ten, be ascribed to the ignorance, or erroneous theories of physicians, or to
the obstinacy or timidity of patients.

IN speaking thus confidently of the necessity and benefits of bleeding in the
inflammatory species of consumption, I confine myself to observations made
chiefly in the state of Pennsylvania. It is possible the inhabitants of
European countries and cities, may so far have passed the simple ages of
inflammatory disorders, as never to exhibit those symptoms on which I have
founded the indication of blood-letting. I am disposed to believe moreover that
in most of the southern states of America, the inflammatory action of the
arterial system is of too transient a nature to admit of the repeated bleedings
in the consumption which are used with so much advantage in the middle and
northern states.

IN reviewing the prejudices against this excellent remedy in consumptions, I
have frequently wished to discover such a substitute for it as would with equal
safety and certainty take down the morbid excitement, and action of the
arterial system. I believe in the existence of such a remedy; but until it be
discovered, it becomes us to combat the prejudices against bleeding; and to
derive all the advantages from it which have been mentioned.

2. A SECOND remedy for the inflammatory species of consumption should be
sought for in a MILK and VEGETABLE DIET. In those cases where the milk does not
lie easy on the stomach, it should be mixed with water, or it should be taken
without its cheesy or oily parts, as in whey, or butter-milk, or it should be
taken without skimming; for there are cases in which milk will agree with the
stomach in this state, and in no other. The oil of the milk probably helps to
promote the solution of its curds in the stomach. It is seldom in the power of
physicians to prescribe asses or goats milk in this disorder; but a good
substitute may be prepared for them by adding to cows milk a little sugar, and
a third or fourth part of water, or of a weak infusion of green tea. The
vegetables which are eaten in this state of the disorder, should contain as
little stimulus as possible. It would seem if the moderate portion of sacharine
matter which is contained in certain fruits such as strawberries, grapes, and
sweet apples were peculiarly agreeable and useful, for each of these fruits has
been said to have cured the consumption. In those cases where the stomach is
disposed to dyspepsia, a little animal food, also soft boiled eggs, may be
taken with safety, mixed with vegetable aliment. Where there is no morbid
affection of the stomach, I have seen the white meats eaten without increasing
the inflammatory symptoms of the disease. The transition from a full diet to
milk and vegetables should be gradual, and the addition of animal to vegetable
aliment, should be made with the same caution. From the neglect of this
direction, much error, both in theory and practice, has arisen in the treatment
of consumptions.

IN every case it will be better for the patient to eat four or five, rather
than only two or three meals in a day. A less stimulus is by this means
communicated to the system, and less chyle is mixed with the blood in a given
time. Of so much importance do I conceive this direction to be, that I seldom
prescribe for a chronic disease of any kind without enforcing it.

3. VOMITS have been much commended by Dr. Read in this disorder. From their
indiscriminate use in every species of consumption, I am satisfied they have
oftener done harm than good. In cases where a patient objects to bleeding, or
where a physician doubts of its propriety, vomits may always be substituted in
its room with great advantage.

4. NITRE in moderate doses of ten or fifteen grains taken three or four times
a day, has sometimes done service in this disorder; but I believe it has been
only when the disease has appeared with inflammatory symptoms. Care should be
taken not to persevere too long in the use of this remedy as it is apt to
impair the appetite. I have known one case in which it produced an obstinate
dyspepsia, and a disposition to the colic; but it removed at the same time, the
symptoms of pulmonary consumption.

5. COLD and dry air, when combined with the exercise of walking, deserves to
be mentioned as an antiphlogistic remedy. I have repeatedly prescribed it in
this species of the consumption with advantage, and have often had the pleasure
of finding a single walk of two or three miles in a clear cold day, produce
nearly the same diminution of the force and frequency of the pulse, as the loss
of six or eight ounces of blood.

I COME now to treat of the palliative remedies which are proper in the

II. OR HECTIC SPECIES of Consumption. Here we begin to behold the disorder in
a new and more distressing form than in the species which has been described.
There is in this species of consumption the same complication of inflammatory
and typhus diathesis which occurs in the typhoid and puerperile fevers, and of
course the same difficulty in treating it successfully; for the same remedies
do good and harm, according as the former or latter diathesis prevails in the
system.

ALL that I shall say upon this species is, that the treatment of it should be
accommodated to the predominance of inflammatory or typhus symptoms, for the
hectic species presents each of them alternately every week, and sometimes
every day to the hand or eye of a physician. When a hard pulse with acute pains
in the side and breast occur, bleeding and other remedies for the inflammatory
species must be used; but when the disease exhibits a predominance of typhus
symptoms, the remedies for that species to be mentioned immediately, should be
prescribed in moderate doses. There are several palliative medicines which have
been found useful in the hectic species, but they are such as belong alike to
the other two species; and therefore will be mentioned hereafter in a place
assigned to them.

I AM sorry, however, to add, that where bleeding has not been indicated, I
have seldom been able to afford much relief by medicine in this species of
consumption. I have used alternately the most gentle, and the most powerful
vegetable and metallic tonics to no purpose. Even arsenic has failed in my
hands of affording the least alleviation of the hectic fever. I conceive the
removal of this fever, to be the great desideratum in the cure of consumption,
and should it be found after all our researches to exist only in exercise, it
will be no departure from a law of nature; for I believe there are no diseases
of equal degrees of chronic debility, in which medicines are of any more
efficacy, than they are in the hectic fever of the pulmonary consumption.

I PROCEED now to speak of the palliative remedies which are proper in the

III. OR, TYPHUS SPECIES of the Pulmonary Consumption.

THE first of these are STIMULATING MEDICINES. However just the complaints of
Dr. Fothergill may be against the use of balsams in the inflammatory and mixed
species of consumption, I am satisfied that they are not only safe, but useful
likewise in mitigating the symptoms of weak action in the arterial system. I
have therefore frequently prescribed the balsam of copaivae, of Peru, the oil
of amber, and different preparations of turpentine and tar in moderate doses
with obvious advantage. Garlic, the juice of dandelyon, a strong tea made of
horehound, and a decoction of the inner bark of the wild cherry tree; Prunus
Virginiana.
also bitters of all kinds, have all been found safe and useful tonics in this
species of the consumption. Even the Peruvian bark itself so often and so
generally condemned in consumptions is always an innocent and frequently an
active medicine where there is a total absence of inflammatory diathesis in
this disorder. With these medicines should be combined

2. A CORDIAL and STIMUMATING DIET. Milk and vegetables so proper in the
inflammatory, are improper when taken alone in this species of consumption. I
believe they often accelerate that decay of appetite and diarrhoea, which form
the closing scene of the disorder. I think I have seen advantages from the use,
not only of fresh, but of salted animal food when prescribed in the total
absence of inflammatory diathesis. Oysters, it has been said, have performed
cures of consumption. If they have, it must have been only when they were eaten
in that species of it which is now under consideration. They are a most savoury
and wholesome article of diet in all diseases attended with symptoms of general
debility. I have found the same advantage from dividing the meals here that I
mentioned under a former head. The exhibition of food in this case, should not
be left to the calls of appetite, any more than the exhibition of a medicine.
Indeed food may be made to supply the place of cordial medicines, by keeping up
a constant and gentle action in the whole system. For this reason, I have
frequently advised my patients never to suffer their stomachs to be empty, even
for a single hour. I have sometimes aimed to keep up the influence of a gentle
action in the stomach upon the whole system, by advising them to eat in the
night, in order to obviate the increase of the excretion in the lungs and of
the cough in the morning, which are brought on in part by the increase of
debility from the long abstraction of the stimulus of aliment during the night.

HOWEVER safe and even useful the cordial medicines and diet which have been
mentioned may appear, yet I am sorry to add, that I have never seen any other
advantages from them than a mitigation of distressing symptoms, except when
they have been combined with suitable and long continued exercise. Even under
this favorable circumstance, they are often ineffectual; for there frequently
occurs in this species of consumption, such a destruction of the substance and
functions of the lungs, as to preclude the possibility of a recovery by the use
of any of the remedies which have been discovered.

I HAVE said formerly that the three species of consumption do not observe any
regular course in succeeding each other. They are not only complicated in some
instances, but they often appear and disappear half a dozen times in the course
of the disease, according to the influence of the weather, dress, diet, and the
passions, upon the system. The great secret, therefore, of treating this
disorder consists in accommodating all the remedies that have been mentioned to
the predominance of either of the three species, or to the different states of
the system, as manifested chiefly by the pulse. It is in consequence of having
observed the evils which have resulted from the ignorance or neglect of this
practice, that I have sometimes wished that it were possible to abolish the
seducing nomenclature of diseases altogether, in order thereby to oblige
physicians to conform exactly to the fluctuating state of the system in all
their prescriptions; for it is not more certain, that in all cultivated
languages, every idea has its appropriate word, than that every state of a
disease has its appropriate dose of medicine, the knowledge and application of
which, can alone constitute rational, or ensure uniformly, successful practice.

I COME now to say a few words upon those palliative remedies which are alike
proper in every species of the Pulmonary Consumption.

THE first Remedy under this head is a DRY SITUATION. A damp air, whether
breathed in a room, or out of doors, is always hurtful in every species of this
disorder. A kitchen or a bed room below the level of the ground has often
produced, and never fails to increase a pulmonary consumption. I have often
observed a peculiar paleness, (the first symptom of general debility) to show
itself very early in the faces of persons who work or sleep in cellar kitchens
or shops.

2. COUNTRY AIR. The higher and dryer the situation which is chosen for the
purpose of enjoying the benefit of this remedy, the better. Situations exposed
to the sea, should be carefully avoided; for it is a singular fact, that while
consumptive persons are benefited by the sea air, when they breathe it on the
ocean, they are always injured by that portion of it which they breathe on the
seashore. I shall not pause to inquire, why a mixture of land and sea-air is
so hurtful in the consumption, and at the same time so agreeable to persons in
health, and so medicinal in many other diseases, but shall dismiss this head by
adding a fact which was communicated to me by Dr. Matthew Irvine of
South Carolina, and that is, That those situations which are in the
neighborhood of Bays or Rivers, where the salt and fresh waters mix their
streams together, are more unfavourable to consumptive patients than the
seashore; and therefore should be more carefully avoided by them in exchanging
city for country air.

3. LOOSE DRESSES, AND A CAREFUL ACCOMMODATION OF THEM TO THE CHANGES IN THE
WEATHER. Many facts might be mentioned to show the influence of compression and
of tight ligatures of every kind, upon the different parts of the body; also of
too much, or too little clothing, in producing, or increasing diseases of
every kind, more especially those which affect the lungs. Tight stays, garters,
waistbands, and collars, should all be laid aside in the consumption, and the
quality of the clothing should be suited to the weather. A citizen of Maryland
informed me, that he had twice had a return of a cough and spitting of blood,
by wearing his summer clothes a week after the weather became cool in the month
of September. But it is not sufficient to vary the weight or quality of dress
with the seasons. It should be varied with the changes which take place in the
temperature of the air every day, even in the summer months, in middle
latitudes. I know a citizen of Philadelphia, who has labored under a
consumptive diathesis near thirty years, who believes that he has lessened the
frequency and violence of pulmonic complaints during that time, by a careful
accommodation of his dress to the weather. He has been observed frequently to
change his waistcoat and short clothes twice or three times in a day, in a
summer month.

A REPETITION of colds, and thereby an increase of the disorder, will be
prevented by wearing flannel next to the skin in winter, and muffin in the
summer, either in the form of a shirt or a waistcoat: where these are objected
to, a piece of flannel, or of soft sheepskin, should be worn next to the
breast. They not only prevent colds, but frequently remove chronic pains from
that part of the body.

4. ARTIFICIAL EVACUATIONS by means of BLISTERS and ISSUES. I suspect the
usefulness of these remedies to be chiefly confined to the inflammatory and
hectic species of consumption. In the typhus species, the system is too weak to
sustain the discharges of either of them. Fresh blisters should be preferred to
such as are perpetual, and the issues, to be useful should be large. They are
supposed to afford relief by diverting a preternatural secretion and excretion
of mucus or pus from the lungs, to an artificial emunctory in a less vital part
of the body.

5. CERTAIN FUMIGATIONS and VAPORS. An accidental cure of a pulmonary affection
by the smoke of rosin, in a man who bottled liquors, raised for a while the
credit of the first of those remedies. I have tried it, but without much
permanent effect. I think I have seen the pain in the breast relieved by
receiving the vapor from a mixture of equal parts of tar, bran, and boiling
water into the lungs. The sulphurous and saline air of Stabiae, between Mount
Vesuvius and the Mediterranean sea, and the effluvia of the pine forests of
Lybia, were supposed in ancient times to be powerful remedies in consumptive
complaints; but it is probable, the exercise used in traveling to those
countries, contributed chiefly to the cures which were ascribed to foreign
matters acting upon the lungs.

6. LOZENGES, SYRUPS, and DEMULCENT TEAS. These are too common and too numerous
to be mentioned.

7. OPIATES. It is a mistake in practice, founded upon a partial knowledge of
the qualities of opium, to administer it only at night, or to suppose that its
efforts in composing a cough, depend upon its inducing sleep. It should be
given in small doses during the day, as well as in larger ones at night. The
dose should be proportioned to the degrees of action in the arterial system.
The less this action, the more opium may be taken with safety and advantage.

8. DIFFERENT POSITIONS OF THE BODY have been found to be more or less
favorable to the abatement of the cough. These positions should be carefully
sought for, and the body kept in that which procures the most freedom from
coughing. I have heard of an instance, in which a cough which threatened a
return of an hoemorrhage from the lungs, was perfectly composed for two weeks,
by keeping the patient nearly in one posture in bed; but I have known more
cases in which relief from coughing was to be obtained only by an erect posture
of the body.

9. CONSIDERABLE relief will often be obtained from the patient's SLEEPING
BETWEEN BLANKETS in winter, and on a MATTRESS in summer. The former prevent
fresh colds from night sweats; the latter frequently checks them altogether. In
cases, where a sufficient weight of blankets, to keep up an agreeable warmth,
cannot be borne without restraining easy and full acts of inspiration, -- the
patient should sleep under a light feather bed, or an eider down coverlit. They
both afford more warmth than double or treble their weight of blankets.

HOWEVER comfortable this mode of producing warmth in bed may be it does not
protect the lungs from the morbid effects of the distant points of temperature
of a warm parlour in the day time, and a cold bedchamber at night. To produce
an equable temperature of air at all hours, I have frequently advised my
patients, where going to a warm climate, was not practicable, to pass their
nights as well as days in an open stove room, in which nearly the same degrees
of heat were kept up at all hours. I have found this practice, in several
cases, a tolerable substitute for a warm climate.

10. THE MODERATE use of the lungs, in READING, PUBLIC SPEAKING, LAUGHING, and
SINGING. The lungs, when debilitated, derive equal benefit with the limbs, or
other parts of the body, from moderate exercise. I have mentioned in another
place An account of the effects of common salt in the care of hoemoptysis.

Med. Inquiries and Observations.


several facts which support this opinion. But too much pains cannot be taken
to inculcate upon our patients, to avoid all excess in the use of the lungs, by
long, or loud reading -- speaking -- or singing -- or by sudden and violent
bursts of laughter. I shall long lament the death of a female patient, who had
discovered many hopeful signs of a recovery from a consumption, who relapsed,
and died in consequence of bursting a blood-vessel in her lungs, by a sudden
fit of laughter.

11. ARE there any advantages to be derived from the excitement of certain
PASSIONS in the treatment of consumptions? Dr. Blane tells us, that many
consumptive persons were relieved, and that some recovered, in consequence of
the terror which was excited by a hurricane in Barbados, in the year 1780. It
will be difficult to imitate, by artificial means, the accidental cures which
are recorded by Dr. Blane; but we learn enough from them to inspire the
invigorating passions of hope and confidence in the minds of our patients, and
to recommend to them such exercises as produce exertions of body and mind
analogous to those which are produced by terror. Van Swieten and Smollet relate
cures of consumptions, by patients falling into streams of cold water. Perhaps
in both instances, the cures were performed only by the fright and consequent
exertion produced by the fall. This is only one instance out of many which
might be mentioned, of partial and unequal action being suddenly changed into
general and equal excitement in every part of the system. The cures of
consumptions which have been performed by a camp life Medical Inquiries and
Observations.
, have probably been much assisted by the commotions in the passions which were
excited by the various and changing events of war.

BEFORE I proceed to speak of the radical cure of the consumption, it will be
necessary to observe, that by means of the palliative remedies which have been
mentioned, many persons have been recovered, and some have had their lives
prolonged by them for many years. In all these cases I have found, upon
inquiry, that the disorder was attended with but little general debility, and
that it frequently recurred as soon as the patient left off the use of his
remedies, unless it were prevented by necessary or voluntary exercise.

IT is truly surprising to observe how long some persons have lived, who have
been affected by a consumptive diathesis, and by frequent attacks of many of
the most troublesome symptoms of this disorder. Van Swieten mentions the case
of a man, who had lived thirty years in this state. Morton relates the history
of a man, in whom the symptoms of consumption appeared with but little
variation or abatement from his early youth till the 70th year of his age; and
Bennet says, he knew an instance of this disorder which continued sixty years.
I prescribed for one of my pupils four and twenty years ago, in a consumption,
who, during the greatest part of the time that has clapsed since, has seldom
passed a year without spitting blood, nor a week without coughing, who now
enjoys a tolerable share of health. In this case, the fatal tendency of the
disorder was constantly opposed by rural exercises, by a cordial, but temperate
diet, and (during the absence of inflammatory action in his pulse) by the
occasional use of Peruvian bark.

I AM led here to mention another instance of the analogy between pneumony and
the pulmonary consumption. We often see the same frequency of recurrence of
both disorders in habits which are predisposed to them. I have attended a
German citizen of Philadelphia, in several fits of the pneumony, who has been
confined to his bed eight and twenty times, by the same disorder, in the course
of the same number of years. He has, for the most part, enjoyed good health in
the intervals of those attacks, and always appeared, till lately, to possess a
good constitution. In the cases of the frequent recurrence of pneumony, no one
has suspected the disease to have originated in a morbid state of the lungs; on
the contrary, it appears evidently to be produced by the sudden influence of
the same causes, which by acting with less force, and for a longer time,
produce the pulmonary consumption. The name of pneumony is taken from the
principal symptom of this disorder, but it is as certainly a disease of the
whole arterial system as the consumption; and I add further, that it is as
certainly produced by general predisposing debility. The hardness and fullness
of the pulse do not militate against this assertion, for they are altogether
the effects of a morbid and convulsive excitement of the sanguiferous system.
The strength manifested by the pulse is moreover partial, for every other part
of the body discovers, at the same time, signs of extreme debility.

IT would be easy, by pursuing this subject a little further, to mention a
number of facts which, by the aid of principles in physiology and pathology,
which are universally admitted, would open to us a new theory of fevers, but
this would lead us too far from the subject before us. I shall only remark,
that all that has been said of the influence of general debilitating causes
upon the lungs, both in pnuemony and consumption, and of the alternation of the
consumption with other general diseases, will receive great support from
considering the lungs only as a part of the whole external surface of the body,
upon which most of the remote and exciting causes of both diseases produce
their first effects. This extent of the surface of the body, not only to the
lungs, but to the alimentary canal, was first taken notice of by Dr. Boerhaave;
but was unhappily neglected by him in his theories of the diseases of the lungs
and bowels. Dr. Keil supposes, that the lungs, from the peculiar structure of
the bronchial vessels, and air vesicles, expose a surface to the action of the
air, equal to the extent of the whole external and visible surface of the body.

THUS have I mentioned the usual palliative remedies for the consumption. Many
of these remedies have, under certain circumstances, been said to have cured
the disease, but I suspect that such cures have taken place only when the
disorder has partaken of an intermediate nature between a pnuemony and a true
pulmonary consumption. Such connecting shades appear between the extreme points
of many other diseases. In a former essay, Inquiry into the diseases and
remedies of the Indians of North America; and a comparative view of their
diseases and remedies with those of civilized nations. P. 43.
I endeavored to account for the transmutation (if I may be allowed the
expression) of the pneumony into the consumption, by ascribing it to the
increase of the debilitating refinements of civilized life. This opinion has
derived constant support from every observation I have made connected with this
subject, since its first publication, in the year 1772.

I COME now to treat of the RADICAL REMEDIES for the pulmonary consumption.

In an essay formerly alluded to Thoughts upon the pulmonary consumption. Med.
Inq. and Observations.
, I mentioned the effects of labor, and the hardships of a camp or naval life,
upon this disorder. As there must frequently occur such objections to each of
those remedies, as to forbid their being recommended or adopted, it will be
necessary to seek for substitutes for them in the different species of
exercise. These are, active, passive, and mixed. The active, includes walking,
and the exercise of the hands and feet in working or dancing. The passive
includes rocking in a cradle, swinging, sailing, and riding in carriages of
different kinds. The mixed is confined chiefly to riding on horseback.

I HAVE mentioned all the different species of exercise, not because I think
they all belong to the class of radical remedies for the consumption, but
because it is often necessary to use those which are passive, before we
recommend those of a mixed or active nature. That physician does not err more
who advises a patient to take physic, without specifying its qualities and
doses, than the physician does who advises a patient, in a consumption, to use
exercise, without specifying its species and degrees. From the neglect of this
direction, we often find consumptive patients injured instead of being relieved
by exercises, which, if used with judgment, might have been attended with the
happiest effects.

I HAVE before suggested that the stimulus of every medicine, which is intended
to excite action in the system, should always be in an exact ratio to its
excitability. The same rule should be applied to the stimulus of exercise. I
have heard a well attested case of a young lady, upon whose consumption the
first salutary impression was made by rocking her in a cradle; and I know
another case in which a young lady, in the lowest state of that debility which
precedes an affection of the lungs, was prepared for the use of the mixed and
active exercises, by being first moved gently backwards and forwards in a
chariot without horses, for an hour every day. Swinging appears to act in the
same gentle manner. In the case of a gardener, who was far advanced in a
consumption, in the Pennsylvania hospital, I had the pleasure of observing its
good effects, in an eminent degree. It so far restored him, as to enable him to
complete his recovery by working at his former occupation.

IN cases of extreme debility, the following order should be recommended in the
use of the different species of exercise.

1. Rocking in a cradle, or riding on an elastic board -- commonly called a
chamber horse.

2. Swinging.

3. Sailing.

4. Riding in a carriage.

5. Riding on horseback.

6. Walking.

7. Running -- Dancing, etc.

IN the use of each of those species of exercise great attention should be paid
to the degree or force of action with which they are applied to the body. For
example, -- in riding in a carriage, the exercise will be less in a four-wheel
carriage than in a single horse chair, and less when the horses move in a
walking, than a trotting gait. In riding on horseback, the exercise will be
less or greater according as the horse walks, paces, canters, or trots, in
passing over the ground.

I HAVE good reason to believe, that an English sea captain, who was on the
verge of the grave with the consumption, in the spring of the year 1790, owed
his perfect recovery to nothing but the above gradual manner, in which, by my
advice, he made use of the exercises of riding in a carriage and on horseback.
I have seen many other cases of the good effects of thus accommodating exercise
to debility; and I am sorry to add, that I have seen many cases in which from
the neglect of this manner of using exercise, most of the species and degrees
of it, have either been useless, or done harm. However carelessly this
observation may be read by physicians, or attended to by patients, I conceive
to direction to be more necessary in the cure of consumptions. I have been thus
particular in detailing it, not only because I believe it to be important, but
that I might atone to society for that portion of evil which I might have
prevented by a more strict attention to it in the first years of my practice.

THE more the arms are used in exercise the better. One of the proprietary
governors of Pennsylvania, who labored for many years under a consumptive
diathesis, derived great benefit from frequently rowing himself in a small
boat, a few miles up and down the river Schuilkill. Two young men, who were
predisposed to a consumption, were perfectly cured by working steadily at a
printing press in this city. Perhaps the superior advantages of riding on
horseback, in this disorder, may arise in part from the constant and gentle use
of the arms in the management of the bridle and the whip.

MUCH has been said in favor of sea voyages in consumptions. In the mild
degrees of the disorder they certainly have done service, -- but I suspect the
relief given, or the cures performed by them, should be confined chiefly to
seafaring people, who add to the benefits of a constant change of pure air, a
share of the invigorating exercises of navigating the ship. I have frequently
heard of consumptive patients reviving at sea, probably from the transient
effects of sea sickness upon the whole system, and growing worse as soon as
they came near the end of their voyage. It would seem as if the mixture of land
and sea airs was hurtful to the lungs in every situation and condition in which
it could be applied to them. Nor is this peculiar and morbid operation of land
and sea airs upon the human body confined only to consumptive people. I crossed
the Atlantic ocean in the year 1766, with a sea captain, who announced to his
passengers the agreeable news that we were near the British coast before any
discovery had been made of our situation by sounding, or by a change in the
color of the water. Upon asking him upon what he founded his opinion, -- he
said, that he had been sneezing, which he added, was the sign of an approaching
cold, and that in the course of upwards of twenty years, he had never made the
land (to use the seaman's phrase) without being affected in a similar manner. I
have visited many sick people in Philadelphia soon after their arrival from
sea, who have informed me, that they had enjoyed good health during the
greatest part of their voyage, and that they had contracted their
indispositions after they came within sight of the land. I mention these facts
only to show the necessity of advising consumptive patients, who undertake a
sea voyage for the recovery of their health, not to expose themselves upon deck
in the morning and at night, after they arrive within the region in which the
mixture of the land and sea airs may be supposed to take place.

I SUBSCRIBE, from what I have observed, to the bold declaration of Dr.
Sydenham, in favor of the efficacy of riding on horseback, in the cure of
consumption. I do not think the existence of ulcers, or even tubercles in the
lungs, when recent, or of a moderate size, the least objection to the use of
this excellent remedy. Ulcers in the lungs are not necessarily fatal, and
tubercles have no malignity in them which should render their removal
impracticable by this species of exercise. The first question, therefore, to be
asked by a physician who visits a patient in this disorder should be, not, what
is the state of his lungs, but, is he able to ride on horseback.

THERE are two methods of riding for health in this disorder. The first is by
short excursions; the second is, by long journies. In slight consumptive
affections, and after a recovery from an acute illness, short excursions are
sufficient to remove the existing debility; but in the more advanced stages of
consumption, they are seldom effectual, and frequently do harm by exciting an
occasional appetite without adding to the digestive powers. They moreover keep
the system constantly vibrating by their unavoidable inconstancy, between
distant points of tone and debility The bad effects of inconstant exercise have
been taken notice of in the goat. Dr. Sydenham says, when it is used only by
fits and starts in this disorder, it does harm.
, and they are unhappily accompanied at all times from the want of a succession
of fresh objects to divert the mind, by the melancholy reflection that they are
the sad, but necessary conditions of life.

IN a consumption of long continuance or of great danger, long journies on
horse back are the the most effectual modes of exercise. They afford a constant
succession of fresh objects and company, which divert the mind from dwelling
upon the danger of the existing malady; they are moreover attended by a
constant change of air, and they are not liable to be interrupted by company,
or transient changes in the weather, by which means appetite and digestion,
action and power all keep pace with each other. It is to be lamented that the
use of this excellent remedy is frequently opposed by indolence and narrow
circumstances in both sexes, and by the peculiarity of situation and temper in
the female sex. Women are attached to their families by stronger ties than men.
They cannot travel alone. Their delicacy, which is increased by sickness, is
liable to be offended at every stage, -- and lastly, they sooner relax in their
exertions to prolong their lives than men. Of the truth of the last
observation, Sir William Hamilton has furnished us with a striking
illustration. He tells us, that in digging into the rums produced by the late
earthquake in Calabria, the women who perished in it, were all found with their
arms folded as if they had abandoned themselves immediately to despair and
death; whereas, the men were found with their arms extended, as if they had
resisted their fate to the last moment of their lives. It would seem from this
fact, and many others of a similar nature which might be related; that a
capacity of bearing pain and distress with fortitude and resignation, was the
distinguishing characteristic of the female mind; while a disposition to resist
and overcome evil belonged in a more peculiar manner to the mind of man. I have
mentioned this peculiarity of circumstances and temper in female patients, only
so the sake of convincing physicians that it will be necessary for them to add
all the force of eloquence to their advice, when they recommend journies to
women in preference to all other remedies, for the recovery of their health.

PERSONS, moreover, who pursue active employments, frequently object to
undertaking journies, from an opinion that their daily occupations are
sufficient to produce all the salutary effects we expect from artificial
exercise. It will be highly necessary to correct this mistake, by assuring such
persons that, however useful the habitual exercise of an active, or even a
laborious employment may be to preserve health, it must always be exchanged for
one which excites new impressions, both upon the mind and body in every attempt
to restore the system from that debility which is connected with pulmonary
consumption.

AS traveling is often rendered useless, and even hurtful in this disease from
being pursued in an improper manner, it will be necessary to furnish our
patients with such directions as will enable them to derive the greatest
benefit from their journies. I shall therefore, in this place, mention the
substance of the directions which I have given in writing for many years to
such consumptive patients as undertake journies by my advice.

1. TO Avoid Fatigue. Too much cannot be said to enforce this direction. It is
the hinge on which the recovery or death of a consumptive patient frequently
turns. I repeat it again, therefore, that patients should be charged over and
over when they set off on a journey, as well as when they use exercise of any
kind to avoid fatigue. For this purpose, they should begin by traveling only a
few miles in a day, and increase the distance of their stages as they increase
their strength. By neglecting this practice, many persons have returned from
journies much worse than when they left home, and many have died in taverns, or
at the houses of their friends on the road. Traveling in stage-coaches is
seldom safe for a consumptive patient. They are often crowded; they give too
much motion; and they afford by their short delays and distant stages, too
little time for rest, or for taking the frequent refreshment which was formerly
recommended.

2. TO Avoid traveling too soon in the Morning, and after the Going down of
the Sun in the Evening; and if the weather be hot, never to travel in the
middle of the day. The sooner a patient breakfasts after he leaves his bed the
better; and in no case should he leave his morning stage with an empty stomach.

3. IF it should be necessary for a patient to lie down, or to sleep in the day
time, he should be (...) to undress himself, and to cover his body between
sheets or blankets. The usual ligatures of garters, stocks, kneebands,
waistcoats and shoes, are very unfriendly to sound sleep; hence persons who lie
down with their clothes on, often awake from an afternoon's nap in terror from
dreams, or in a profuse sweat, or with a headache or sick stomach; and
generally out of humor. The surveyors are so sensible of the truth of this
remark, that they always undress themselves when they sleep in the woods. An
intelligent gentleman of this profession informed me that he had frequently
seen young woodsmen who had refused to conform to this practice, so much
indisposed in the morning, that after the experience of a few nights, they were
forced to adopt it.

GREAT care should be taken in sleeping, whether in the day time, or at night,
never to lie down in damp sheets. Dr. Sydenham excepts the danger from this
quarter, when he speaks of the efficacy of riding on horseback in curing the
consumption.

4. PATIENTS who travel for health in this disorder should avoid all large
companies, more especially evening and night parties. The air of a contaminated
room, phlogisticated by the breath of fifteen or twenty persons, and by the
same number of burning candles, is poison to a consumptive patient. To avoid
impure air from every other source, he should likewise avoid sleeping in a
crowded room, or with curtains around his bed, and even with a bedfellow.

5. TRAVELING, to be effectual in this disororder, should be conducted in such
a manner as that a patient may escape the extremes of heat and cold. For this
purpose he should pass the winter, and part of the spring in Georgia or
South Carolina, and the summer in New Hampshire, Massachusetts, or Vermont, or
if he pleases, he may still more effectually shun the summer heats by crossing
the lakes, and traveling along the shores of the St. Lawrence to the city of
Quebec. He will thus escape the extremes of heat and cold, particularly the
less avoidable one of heat; for I have constantly found the hot month of July
to be as unfriendly to consumptive patients in Pennsylvania, as the variable
month of March. By these means too he will enjoy nearly an equable temperature
of air in every month of the year; and his system will be free from the
inconvenience of the alternate action of heat and cold upon it. The autumnal
months should be spent in New Jersey or Pennsylvania.

IN these journies from north to south, or from south to north, he should be
careful, for reasons before mentioned, to keep at as great a distance as
possible from the sea coast. Should this inquiry fall into the hands of a
British physician, I would beg leave to suggest to him, whether more advantages
would not acrue to his consumptive patients from advising them to cross the
Atlantic ocean, and afterward to pursue the tour which I have recommended,
than by sending them to Portugal, France, or Italy -- Here they will arrive
with such a mitigation of the violence of the disorder, in consequence of the
length of their sea voyage, as will enable them immediately to begin their
journies on horseback. Here they will be exposed to fewer temptations to
intemperance, or to unhealthy amusements, than in old European countries. And,
lastly, in the whole course of this tour, they will travel among a people
related to them by a sameness of language and manners, and by ancient or modern
ties of citizenship. Long journies for the recovery of health under
circumstances so agreeable, should certainly be preferred to traveling among
strangers of different nations, languages, and manners on the continent of
Europe.

6. TO render traveling on horseback effectual in a consumption, it should be
continued with moderate intervals from six to twelve months. But the cure
should not be rested upon a single journey. It should be repeated every two or
three years, till our patient has passed the consumptive stages of life. Nay,
-- he must do more, he must acquire a habit of riding constantly, both at home
and abroad, or to use the words of Dr. Fuller "he must, like a Tartar, learn to
live on horseback, by which means he will acquire in time the constitution of a
Tartar Medicina Gymnastica, p. 116.
."

WHERE benefit is expected from a change of climate, as well as from
traveling, patients should reside at least two years in the place which is
chosen for that purpose. I have seldom known a residence for a shorter time in
a foreign climate do much service.

TO secure a perfect obedience to medical advice, it would be extremely useful
if consumptive patients could always be acompanied by a physician. Celsus says,
he found it more easy to cure the dropsy in slaves than in freemen, because
they more readily submitted to the restraints he imposed upon their appetites.
Madness has become a curable disorder in England, since the physicians of that
country have opened private mad-houses, and have taken the entire and constant
direction of their patients into their own hands. The same successful practice
would probably follow the treatment of consumptions, if patients were
constantly kept under the eye and authority of their physicians. -- The
keenness of appetite, and great stock of animal spirits, which those persons
frequently possess, hurry them into many excesses which defeat the best
concerted plans of a recovery; -- or, if they escape these irregularities, they
are frequently seduced from our directions by every quack remedy which is
recommended to them. Unfortunately the cough becomes a signal of their
disorder, at every stage of their journey, and the easy or pleasant
prescriptions of even hostlers and ferrymen, are often substituted to the
self-denial and exertion which have been imposed by physicians. The love of
life in these cases seems to level all capacities; for I have observed persons
of the most cultivated understandings to yield in common with the vulgar to the
use of these prescriptions.

I CANNOT conclude this inquiry without adding, that the author of it derived
from his paternal ancestors a predisposition to the pulmonary consumption, and
that between the 18th and 43d years of his age, he has occasionally been
afflicted with many of the symptoms of that disorder which he has described: --
By the constant and faithful use of most of the remedies which he has
recommended, he has enjoyed for several years nearly an uninterrupted exemption
from pulmonary complaints. In humble gratitude, therefore, to that BEING, who
condescends to be called the preserver of men, he thus publicly devotes the
result of his experience and inquiries to the benefit of such of his fellow
creatures as may be afflicted with the same disorder, sincerely wishing that
they may be as useful to them, as they have been to the author.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE SYMPTOMS and CURE OF DROPSIES.

OBSERVATIONS, etc.
WHETHER we admit the exhaling and absorbing vessels to be affected in general
dropsies by preternatural debility -- palsy -- or rupture, or by a retrograde
motion of their fluids, it is certain that their exhaling and absorbing power
is materially affected by too much, or too little action in the arterial
system. That too little action in the arteries should favor dropsical
effusions, has been long observed, but it has been less obvious that the same
effusions are sometimes promoted, and their absorption prevented, by too much
action in these vessels. That this fact should have escaped our notice, is the
more remarkable, considering how long we have been accustomed to seeing serous
swellings in the joints in the acute rheumatism, and copious, but partial
effusions of water in the form of sweat, in every species of inflammatory fever.

IT is nothing new that the healthy action of one part, should depend upon the
healthy action of another part of the system. We see it in many of the diseases
of the nerves and brain. The tetanus is cured by exciting a tone in the
arterial system; madness is cured by lessening the action of the arteries by
copious bloodletting, and epilepsy and hysteria are often mitigated by the
moderate use of the same remedy.

BY too much action in the arterial system, I mean a certain morbid excitement
in the arteries, accompanied by preternatural force, which is obvious to the
sense of touch. It differs from the morbid excitement of the arteries, which
takes place in inflammatory fevers, in being of a less irregular or convulsive
nature, and in being attended by less febrile heat, and with little or no pain
in the head or limbs. The thirst is nearly the same in this species of dropsy,
as in inflammatory fevers. I include here those dropsies only in which the
whole system is affected by what is called an hydropic diathesis.

THAT debility should, under certain circumstances, dispose to excessive
action, and that excessive action should occur in one part of the body, at the
same time that debility prevailed in every other, are abundantly evident from
the history and phenomenon of many diseases. Inflammatory fever, active
haemorrhages, tonic gout, asthma, apoplexy, and palsy, however much they are
accompanied by excessive action in the arterial system, are always preceded by
original debility, and are always accompanied by obvious debility in every
other part of the system.

BUT it has been less observed by physicians that an undue force or excess of
action occurs in the arterial system in certain dropsies, and that the same
theory which explains the union of predisposing and nearly general debility,
with a partial excitement and preternatural action in the arterial system, in
the diseases before mentioned, will explain the symptoms and cure of certain
dropsies.

THAT debility predisposes to every species of dropsy, is evident from the
history of all the remote and occasional causes which produce them. It will be
unnecessary to mention these causes, as they are to be found in all our systems
of physic. Nor will it be necessary to mention any proofs of the existence of
debility in nearly every part of the body. It is too plain to be denied. I
shall only mention the symptoms which indicate a morbid excitement and
preternatural action in the arterial system. These are

1. A hard, full, and quick pulse. This symptom I believe, is more common in
dropsies than is generally supposed, for many physicians visit and exexamine
patients in these disorders, without feeling the pulse. Dr. Home mentions the
frequency of the pulse, in the patients whose cures he has recorded, Medical
Facts.
but he takes no notice of its force except in two cases. Dr. Zimmerman, in his
account of the dropsy which terminated the life of the late king of Prussia,
tells us that he found his pulse hard and full. I have repeatedly found it full
and hard in every species of dropsy, and more especially in the first stage of
the disorder. Indeed I have seldom found it otherwise in the beginning of the
dropsy of the breast.

2. SIZY BLOOD. This has been taken notice of by many practical writers, and
has very justly been ascribed under certain circumstances of bloodletting, to
an excessive action of the vessels upon the blood.

3. ALTERNATION of dropsies with certain diseases which were evidently
accompanied by excess of action in the arterial system. I have seen anasarca
alternate with vertigo, and both ascites and anasarca alternate with tonic
madness. A case of nearly the same kind is related by Dr. Mead.

4. THE occasional connection of certain dropsies with diseases evidently of an
inflammatory nature, particularly pneumony, rheumatism, and gout.

5. SPONTANEOUS haemorrhages, from the lungs, haemorrhoidal vessels, and nose,
cases of which shall be mentioned hereafter, when we come to treat of the cure
of dropsies.

6. THE appearance of dropsies in the winter and spring, in habits previously
affected by the intermitting fever. The debility produced by this species of
fever, frequently disposes to inflammatory diathesis, as soon as the body is
exposed to the alternate action of heat and cold, nor is this inflammatory
diathesis always laid aside, by the transition of the intermitting fever into a
dropsy, in the succeeding cold weather.

7. THE injurious effects of stimulating medicines in certain dropsies, prove
that there exists in them, at times, too much action in the blood vessels. Dr.
Tissot, in a letter to Dr. Haller, De Variolis, apoplexia, et hydrope, condemns
in strong terms, the use of opium in the dropsy. Now the bad effects of this
medicine in dropsies, must have arisen from its having been given in cases of
too much action in the arterial system; for opium, we know, increases, by its
stimulating qualities, the action and tone of the blood vessels, and hence we
find, it has been prescribed with success in dropsies of too little action in
the system.

BUT the existence of too much action in the arterial system in certain
dropsies, will appear more fully from the history of the effects of the
remedies which have been employed either by design or accident in the cure of
these disorders. I shall first mention the remedies which have been used with
success in tonic dropsies; and afterward mention those which have been given
with success in dropsies of a contrary state of the system. I have constantly
purposed to treat only of the theory and cure of dropsies in general, without
specifying any of the numerous names it derives from the different parts of the
body in which they may be seated; but in speaking of the remedies which have
been used with advantage in both the tonic and atonic species, I shall
occasionally mention the name or seat of the dropsy in which the remedy has
done service.

THE Is It. Remedy that I shall mention for dropsies is Blood Letting. Dr.
Hoffman and Dr. Home both cured dropsies accompanied by pulmonic congestion by
means of this remedy. Dr. Monroe quotes a case of dropsy from Sponius, in which
bleeding suceeeded, but not till after it had been used twenty times Treatise
on the Dropsy.
. Mr. Cruikshank relates a case Treatise on the Lymphatics.
of accidental bleeding, which confirms the efficacy of blood-letting in these
disorders. He tells us that he attended a patient with dropsical swellings in
his legs, who had had a hoarseness for two years. One morning in stooping to
buckle his shoes, he bursted a blood-vessel in his lungs, from which he lost a
quart of blood; in consequence of which, both the swellings and the hoarseness
went off gradually, and he continued well two years afterward. I have known
one case in which spontaneous haemorrhages from the haemorrhoidal vessels, and
from the nose, suddenly reduced universal dropsical swellings. In this patient
there had been an uncommon tension and fullness in the pulse.

TO these facts, I can with pleasure add, that I have cured one person of
ascites, and three of anasarca, (in the course of the three last years) by
means of blood-letting. It has been used with equal success by Dr. Rawlings, of
Maryland, in a case of anasarca which had resisted nitre, and other powerful
medicines commonly prescribed for that disorder.

IN those deplorable cases of Hydrothorax, which do not admit of a radical
cure, I have given temporary relief, and thereby protracted life by taking away
occasionally a few ounces of blood. -- Had Dr. Zimmerman used this remedy in
the case of the king of Prussia, I cannot help thinking from the account which
the Doctor gives us of the diet, and pulse of his royal patient, that he would
have lessened his sufferings much more than by plentiful doses of dandelyon;
for I take it for granted, from the candor and integrity which the Doctor
discovered in all his visits to the king, that he did not expect that
dandelyon, or any other medicine would cure him.

ALTHOUGH a full and tense pulse is always an indication of the necessity of
bleeding; yet I can easily conceive there may be such congestions, and such a
degree of stimulus to the arterial system, as to produce indirect debility, and
a low or weak pulse. Two cases of this kind are related by Dr. Monroe, one of
which was cured by bleeding. The same symptom of a low and weak pulse is often
met with in the first stage of pneumony, and apoplexy, and is only to be
removed by the plentiful use of the same remedy.

II. VOMITS have often been given with advantage in dropsies. Dr. Home says,
that squills were useful in these disorders only when they produced a vomiting.
The ultimate action of vomits is certainly debilitating; but in producing a
diminution of excitement and action in the arterial system, they dispose the
lymphatics to absorb and discharge large quantities of water. -- The efficacy
of vomits in promoting the absorption of stagnating fluids is not confined to
dropsies. Mr. Hunter was once called to visit a patient in whom he found a bubo
in such a state that he purposed to open it the next day. In the mean while,
the patient went on board of a vessel where he was severely affected by
sea-sickness and vomiting; in consequence of which the bubo disappeared, and
the patient recovered without the use of the knife.

MR. CRUIKSHANK further mentions a case Letter to Mr. Clare, p. 16^
of a swelling in the knee being nearly cured by a patient vomiting eight and
forty hours in consequence of his taking a large dose of the salt of tartar
instead of soluble tartar.

III. PURGES. The efficacy of this remedy in the cure of dropsies, has been
acknowledged by physicians in all ages and countries. Jalap, calomel, scammony
and gamboge, are often preferred for this purpose; but I have heard of two
cases of ascites being cured by a table spoonful of sweet oil taken every day.
It probably acted only as a gentle laxative. The cream of tartar so highly
commended by Dr. Home, seems to act chiefly in the same way. Gherlius, from
whom Dr. Home learned the use of this medicine, says, that all the persons whom
he cured by it were in the vigor of life, and that their diseases had been only
of a few months continuance. From these two circumstances, it is most probable
they were dropsies of excessive action in the arterial system. He adds further
that the persons who were cured by this medicine, were reduced very low by the
use of it. Dr. Home says that it produced the same effect upon the patients
whom he cured by it, in the Infirmary of Edinburgh. Dr. Sydenham prefers gentle
to drastic purges, and recommends the exhibition of them every day. Both
drastic and gentle purges act by diminishing the action of the arterial system,
and thereby promote the absorption and discharge of water. That purges promote
absorption, we learn not only from their effects in dropsies, but from an
experiment related by Mr. Cruikshank Letter to Mr. Clare, p. 117.
, of a man who acquired several ounces of weight after the operation of a
purge. The absorption in this case was from the atmosphere. So great is the
effect of purges in promoting absortion, that Mr. Hunter supposes the matter of
a gonorrhoea, or of topical venereal ulcers to be conveyed by them in some
instances into every part of the body.

IV. Certain Medicines, which by lessening the action of the arterial system,
favor the absorption and evacuation of water. The only medicines of this class
which I shall name are nitre, cream of tartar, and foxglove.

1. TWO ounces of nitre dissolved in a pint of water, and a wine-glass full of
it taken three times a day have performed perfect cures, in two cases of
ascites, which have come under my notice. I think I have cured two persons of
anasarca, by giving one scruple of the same medicine three times a day for
several weeks. The two last cures were evidently dropsies of too much action in
the arterial system. Where nitre has been given in atonic dropsies it has
generally been useless, and sometimes done harm. I have seen one instance of an
incurable diarrhoea after tapping, which I suspected arose from the destruction
of the tone of the stomach and bowels, by large and long continued doses of
nitre, which the patient had previously taken by the advice of a person who had
been cured by that reremedy. To avoid this, or any other inconvenience from the
use of nitre in dropsies, it should be given at first in small doses, and
should always be laid aside, if it should prove ineffectual after having been
given two or three weeks.

2. I CAN say nothing of the efficacy of cream of tartar in dropsies from my
own experience, where it has not acted as a purge. Perhaps my want of decision
upon this subject has arisen only from my not having persisted in the use of it
for the same length of time which is mentioned by Dr. Home.

3. THERE has been much inquiry into the manner in which foxglove acts in
curing dropsies. It has been supposed to exert a specific action on the kidneys
as a diuretic; but I am rather disposed to believe, that it acts only by
lessening the action of the arterial system by a sedative quality which appears
to reside in it. I am led to adopt this opinion by the facts which are related
by Dr. Darwin, who says, that he had seen it do service in the dropsy, without
producing any immediate dicharge of water, and that it seldom succeeded until
it had previously debilitated the body.

DR. WARREN says, that he seldom found tonics necessary after he had discharged
the water in the dropsy by this medicine, probably because he reduced the
arterial system by it, from an excessive to a healthy state of action. And even
Dr. Withering, who supposes the foxglove to be improper in plethoric habits,
confesses that tonics, after its use "very often deceived his expectations,"
probably by reproducing the same morbid and excessive action in the arterial
system, which he had just before removed by means of the foxglove. I am the
more disposed to adopt this opinion of the manner in which this medicine acts,
from observing the good effects which are ascribed to it in vertigo -- madness
-- hoemorrhages Ferria^.
-- and pulmonary consumption, when these diseases are accompanied by too much
action in the arterial system.

THERE are different opinions concerning the efficacy of this medicine in
dropsies. From the the cases related by Dr. Withering, it appears to have done
good; but from those related by Dr. Lettsom Medical Memoirs, vol. II.
it seems to have done harm. I suspect the different accounts of those two
gentlemen have arisen from their having given it in different states of the
system. In dropsies of too much action, I believe it has sometimes been used
with success, but in atonic dropsies, I am satisfied that it is not only an
useless but a dangerous medicine. I am sorry to add further, that after many
trials of this medicine I have failed in most of the cases in which I have
given it. I have discharged the water in three instances by it, but the disease
returned, and my patients finally died. -- I can ascribe only one complete cure
to its use which was in the year 1789, in a young man in the Pennsylvania
hospital, of five and thirty years of age, of a robust habit, and plethoric
pulse.

WHERE medicines have once been in use, and afterward fall into disrepute, as
was the case with the Foxglove, I suspect the cases in which they were useful,
to have been either few or doubtful, and that the cases in which they had done
harm, were so much more numerous and unequivocal, as justly to banish them from
the materia medica.

V. HARD LABOR, or exercise in such a degree as to produce fatigue, have in
several instances cured the dropsy. A dispensary patient in this city was cured
of this disorder by sawing wood, And a patient in an ascites under my care in
the Pennsylvania hospital, had his belly reduced seven inches in circumference
in one day, by the labor of carrying wood from the yard into the hospital. A
second patient belonging to the Pennsylvania Dispensary was cured by walking to
Lancaster, 66 miles from the city, in the middle of winter. The efficacy of
traveling in this disorder in cold weather, is taken notice of by Dr. Monroe,
who quotes a case from Dr. Haller, of a French merchant, who was cured of a
dropsy by a journey from Paris to England, in the winter season. It would seem,
that in these two cases, the cold cooperated as a sedative with the fatigue
produced by labor or exercise, in reducing the tone of the arterial system.

VI. LOW DIET. I have heard of a woman who was cured of a dropsy by eating
nothing but boiled beans for three weeks, and drinking nothing but the water in
which they had been boiled. Many other cases of the good effects of low diet in
dropsies are to be found on the records of medicine.

VII. THIRST. This cruel remedy acts by debilitating the system in two ways;
1st, By abstracting the stimulus of distention; and, 2dly, By preventing a
fresh supply of water to replace that which is discharged by the ordinary
emunctories of nature.

VIII. FASTING. An accidental circumstance related by Sir John Hawkins, in the
life of Dr. Johnson, first led me to observe the good effects of fasting in the
dropsy. If the fact alluded to stood alone under the present head of this
essay, it would be sufficient to establish the existence of too much action,
and the efficacy of debilitating remedies in certain dropsies. I am the more
disposed to lay a good deal of stress upon this fact, as it was the clue which
conducted me out of the labyrinth of empirical practice, in which I had been
bewildered for many years, and finally led me to adopt the principles and
practice which I am now endeavoring to establish. The passage which contains
this interesting fact is as follows. A few days after (says Sir John) he
[meaning Dr. Johnson] sent for me, and informed me, that he had discovered in
himself the symptoms of a dropsy, and indeed, his very much increased bulk, and
the swollen appearance of his legs, seemed to indicate no less. It was on
Thursday that I had this conversation with him, in the course thereof, he
declared that he intended to devote the whole of the next day to fasting,
humiliation, and such other devotional exercises as became a man in his
situation. On the Saturday following I made him a visit, and upon entering his
room, I observed in his countenance such a serenity as indicated, that some
remarkable crisis of his disorder had produced a change in his feelings. He
told me, that pursuant to the resolution he had mentioned to me, he had spent
the preceding day in an abstraction from all worldly concerns -- that to
prevent interruption he had in the morning ordered Frank, [his servant] not to
admit any one to him, and the better to enforce the charge, had added these
awful words, for your master is preparing himself to die. He then mentioned to
me, that in the course of this exercise he found himself relieved from the
disorder which had been growing upon him, and was becoming very oppressive,
viz. the dropsy, by the gradual evacuation of water, to the amount of twenty
pints, a like instance whereof he had never before experienced. Sir John
Hawkins ascribes this immense discharge of water to the influence of Dr.
Johnson's prayers; but he neglects to take notice, that these prayers were
answered in this instance, us they are in many others, in a perfect consistence
with the common and established laws of nature.

TO satisfy myself that this discharge of water, in the case of Dr. Johnson,
was produced by the fasting only, I recommended it soon after I read the above
account to a gentlewoman whom I was then attending in an ascites. I was
delighted with the effects of it. Her urine, which for some time before had not
exceeded half a pint a day, amounted to two quarts on the day she fasted. I
repeated the same prescription once a week for several weeks, and each time was
informed of an increase of urine, though it was considerably less in the last
experiments than in the first. Two patients in an ascites, to whom I prescribed
the same remedy, in the Pennsylvania Hospital, the one in the winter of 1790,
and the other in the winter of 1792, exhibited proofs in the presence of many
of the students of the university, equally satisfactory of the efficacy of
fasting in suddenly increasing the quantity of urine.

IX. FEAR. This passion is evidently of a debilitating nature, and therefore,
it has frequently afforded an accidental aid in the cure of dropsies, of too
much action. I suspect, that the fear of death, which was so distinguishing a
part of the character of Dr. Jonhson, added a good deal to the efficacy of
fasting, in procuring the immense discharge of water beforementioned. In
support of the efficacy of fear simply applied, in discharging water from the
body in dropsies, I shall mention the following facts.

IN a letter which I received from Dr. John Pennington, dated Edinburgh, August
3. 1790, I was favored with the following communication. Since the
conversation I had with you on the subject of the dropsy, I feel more and more
inclined to adopt your opinion. I can furnish you with a fact which I learned
from a Danish sailor, on my passage to this country, which is much in favor of
your doctrine. A sailor in an ascites, fell off the end of the yard into the
sea; the weather being calm, he was taken up unhurt, but to use the sailor's
own words, who told me the story, he was frightened half to death, and as soon
as he was taken out of the water, he discharged a gallon of urine or more. A
doctor on board ascribed this large evacuation to sea bathing, and accordingly
ordered the man to be dipped in the sea every morning, much against his will,
for my informant adds, that he had not forgotten his fall, and that in four
weeks he was perfectly well. I think this fact can only be explained on your
principles. The sedative operation of fear, was no doubt the cause of his cure
There is an account of an ascites being cured by a fall from an open chaise
recorded in the third volume of the medical Memoirs by Mr. Lowdell. I have
heard of a complete recovery from cropsy, having suddenly followed a fall from
a horse. In both these cases may not fear have contributed very much to the
cures?
.

DR. HALL, of York-town in Pennsylvania, informed me, that he had been called
to visit a young woman of 19 years of age, who had taken all the usual remedies
for ascites without effect. He at once proposed to her the operation of
tapping. To this she objected, but so great was the fear of this operation,
which the proposal of it suddenly excited in her mind, that it brought on a
plentiful discharge of urine, which in a few days perfectly removed her
disorder.

On the 27th of August, 1790, I visited a gentlewoman in this city with the
late Dr. Jones, in an ascites. We told her for the first time, that she could
not be relieved without being tapped. She appeared to be much terrified upon
hearing our opinion, and said that she would consider of it. I saw her two days
afterward, when she told me with a smile on her countenance, that she hoped
she should get well without tapping, for that she had discharged two quarts of
water in the course of the day after we had advised her to submit to that
operation. For many days before, she had not discharged more than two or three
gills in twenty-four hours. The operation, notwithstanding, was still
indicated, and she submitted to be tapped a few days afterward.

I TAPPED the same gentlewoman a second time in January 1791- She was much
terrified while I was preparing for the operation, and fainted immediately
after the puncture was made. The second time that I visited her after the
operation was performed, she told me (without being interrogated on that
subject) that she had discharged a pint and an half of urine, within twenty
minutes after I left the room on the day I tapped her. What made this discharge
the more remarkable was, she had not made more than a table spoonful of water
in a day for several days before she was tapped.

I HAVE seen similar discharges of urine in two other cases of tapping which
have come under my notice, but they resembled so nearly those which have been
mentioned, that it will be unnecessary to record them.

BUT the influence of fear upon the system in the dropsy, extends far beyond
the effects which I have ascribed to it. Dr. Currie, of this city, informed me
that he called about four years ago, by appointment to tap a woman. He no
sooner entered the room than he observed her, as he thought, to faint away. He
attempted to recover her, but to no purpose. She died of a sudden paroxysm of
fear.

IT is a matter of surprise, that we should have remained so long ignorant of
the influence of fear upon the urinary organs in dropsies, after having been so
long familiar with the same effect of that passion in the hysteria.

IN recommending the antiphlogistic treatment of certain dropsies, I must here
confine myself to the dropsies of such climates as dispose to diseases of too
much action in the system. I am satisfied that it will often be proper in the
middle and eastern states of America; and I have lately met with two
observations, which show that it has been used with success at Vienna in
Germany. Dr. Stoll tells us, that in the month of January, 1780, Hydropic and
asthmatic patients discovered more or less marks of inflammatory diathesis, and
that blood was drawn from them with a sparing hand with advantage; and in the
month of November of the same year, he says, The stronger diuretics injured
dropsical patients in this season; but an antiphlogistic drink, composed of a
quart of the decoction of grass, with two ounces of simple oxymel, and nitre
and cream of tartar of each a dram did service. Ra^o Medend. (...).
Vindobonensi. Vol. iv. p. 56 and ^^
It is probable that the same difference should be observed between the
treatment of dropsies in warm and cold climates that is observed in the
treatment of inflammatory fevers. The tonic action probably exists in the
system in both countries. In the former it resembles the tides which are
suddenly produced by a shower of rain, and as suddenly disappear; whereas, in
the latter, it may be compared to those tides which are produced by the slow
and gradual addition of water from numerous streams, and which continue for
days and weeks together to exhibit marks of violence in every part of their
course.

I COME now to say a few words upon Atonic Dropsies. They may easily be
distinguished from those which have been described, by occurring in habits
naturally weak; by being produced by the operation of chronic causes; by a weak
and quick pulse, and by little or no preternatural heat or thirst.

THE Remedies for Atonic Dropsies are all such stimulating substances as
increase the action of the arterial system, or determine the fluids to the
urinary organs. These are,

I. BITTER and AROMATIC substances of all kinds exhibited in substance or in
infusions of wine, spirit, beer or water.

II. CERTAIN ACRID VEGETABLES, such as scurvy grass, horseradish, mustard,
watercresses, and garlic. I know an old man who was perfectly cured of an
anasarca, by eating watercresses, on bread and butter.

III. OPIUM. The efficacy of this medicine in dropsies has been attested by Dr.
Willis, and several other practical writers. It seems to possess almost an
exclusive power of acting alike upon the arterial, the lymphatic, the
glandular, and the nervous systems.

IV. METALLIC TONICS, such as chalybeate medicines of all kinds, and the mild
preparations of copper and mercury. I once cured an incipient ascites and
anasarca by large doses of the rust of iron; and I have cured many dropsies by
giving mercury in such quantities as to excite a plentiful salivation. I have,
it is true, often given it without effect, probably from my former ignorance of
the tonic action of the arteries, which so frequently occurs in dropsies, and
in which cases, mercury must necessarily have done harm.

V. DIURETICS, consisting of alkaline saits, nitre, and the oxymels of squills
and colchicum. It is difficult to determine how far these medicines produce
their salutary effects by acting directly upon the kidneys. It is remarkable
that these organs are seldom affected in dropsies, and that their diseases are
rarely followed by dropsical effusions in any part of the body.

VI. GENEROUS DIET, consisting of animal food, rendered cordial by spices; also
sound old wine.

VII. DILUTING DRINKS taken in such large quantites as to excite the action of
the vessels by the stimulus of distension. This effect has been produced, Sir
George Baker informs us, by means of large draughts of simple water, and of
cider and water The remark upon this fact by Sir George, is worthy of notice,
and implies much more than was probably intended by it. When common means have
failed, success has sometimes followed a method directly contrary to the
established practice. -- -- Medical Transactions, Vol. II.
. The influence of distention in promoting absorption is evident in the urinary
and gall bladders, which frequently return their contents to the blood by the
lymphatics, when they are unable to discharge them through their usual
emunctories. Is it not probable that the distention produced by the large
quantities of liquids which we are directed to administer after giving the
foxglove, may have been the means of performing some of those cures of
dropsies, which have been ascribed to that remedy?

VIII. PRESSURE. Bandages bound tightly around the belly and limbs, sometimes
prevent the increase or return of dropsical swellings. The influence of
pressure upon the action of the lymphatics appears in the absorption of bone
which frequently follows the pressure of contiguous tumors, also in the
absorption of flesh which follows the long pressure of certain parts of the
body upon a sick bed.

IX. FRICTIONS, either by means of a dry, or oiled hand, or with linen or
flannel impregnated with volatile and other stimulating substances. I have
found evident advantages from following the advice of Dr. Cullen, by rubbing
the lower extremities upwards, and that only in the morning. -- I have been at
a loss to account for the manner in which sweet oil acts when applied to
dropsical swellings. If it act by a sedative power upon the blood vessels, it
will be more proper in tonic than atonic dropsies; but if it act by closing the
pores, and thereby preventing the absorption of moisture from the air, it will
be very proper in the species of dropsy which is now under consideration. It is
in this manner that Dr. Cullen supposes that sweet oil, when applied to the
body, cures that species of diabetes in which nothing but insipid water is
discharged from the bladder.

X. HEAT applied either separately or combined with moisture in the form of
warm or vapor baths, has often been used with success in dropsies of too little
action. Dampier in his voyage round the world was cured of a dropsy by means of
a copious sweat excited by burying himself in a bed of warm sand. Warm
fomentations to the legs rendered moderately stimulating by the addition of
saline or aromatic substances, have often done service in the atonic dropsical
swellings of the lower extremities.

XI. THE COLD-BATH. I can say nothing in favor of the efficacy of this remedy
in dropsies, from my own experience. Its good effects seem to depend wholly on
its increasing the excitability of the system to common stimuli, by the
diminution of its excitement. If this be the case, I would ask, whether FEAR
might not be employed for the same purpose, and thus become as useful in
atonic, as it was formerly proved to be in tonic dropsies.

XII. WOUNDS, whether excited by cutting instruments, or by fire, provided they
excite inflammation, and action in the arteries, frequently cure atonic
dropsies. The good effects of inflammation, and action in these cases appear in
the cure of hydrocele by means of the needle, or the caustic.

XIII. EXERCISE. This is probably as necessary in the atonic dropsy, as it is
in the consumption, and should never be omitted when a patient is able to take
it. The passive exercises of swinging, and riding in a carriage are most proper
in the lowest stage of the disorder; but as soon as the patient's strength will
admit of it, he should ride en horseback. A journey should be preferred in this
disorder, to short excursions from home.

IN the application of each of the remedies which has been mentioned for the
cure of both tonic and atonic Dropsies, great care should be taken to use them
in such a manner, as to accommodate them to the strength and excitability of
the patient's system. The most powerful remedies have often been rendered
hurtful by being given in too large doses in the beginning; and useless by
being given in too small doses, in the subsequent stages of the disorder.

I HAVE avoided saying any thing of the usual operations for discharging water
from different parts of the body, as my design was to treat only of the
symptoms and cure of those dropsies which affect the whole system. I shall only
remark, that if taping and punctures have been more successful in the early,
than in the late stage of these disorders, it is probably because the sudden or
gradual evacuation of water takes down that excessive action in the arterial
system, which is most common in their early stage, and thereby favors the
speedy restoration of healthy action in the exhaling or lymphatic vessels.

THUS have I endeavored to prove, that two distinct and opposite states of
action take place in dropsies, and have mentioned the remedies which are proper
for each of them under separate heads. But I suspect that dropsies are often
connected with a certain intermediate or mixed action in the arterial system
analogous to the typhoid action which takes place in certain fevers. I am led
to adopt this opinion, not only from having observed mixed action to be so
universal in most of the diseases of the arterial and nervous system, but
because I have so frequently observed dropsical swellings to follow the
scarlatina, and the puerperile sever, two diseases which appear to derive their
peculiar character from a mixture of excess and deficiency of force, combined
with irregularity of action in the arterial (...). In dropsic, of mixed action
where too much force prevails in the action of some, and too little in the
action of other of the arterial fibers, the remedies must be debilitating or
stimulating, according to the greater or less predominance of tonic or atonic
diathesis in the arterial system.

I SHALL conclude this history of dropsies, and of the different and opposite
remedies which have cured them, by the follewing observations.

WE learn, in the first place, from what has been said, the impropriety and
even danger of prescribing stimulating medicines indiscriminately in every case
of dropsy.

2. WE are taught by the facts which have been mentioned, the reason why
physicians have differed so much in their accounts of the same remedies, and
why the same remedies have operated so differently in the hands of the same
physicians. It is because they have been given without a reference to the two
different states of the system, which have been described. Dr. Sydenham says,
that he cured the first dropsical patient he was called to, by frequent purges.
He began to exult in the discovery, as he thought, of a certain cure for
dropsies, but his triumph was of short duration. The same remedy failed in the
next case in which he prescribed it. The reason probably was, the dropsy in the
first case, was of a tonic, but in the second, of an atonic nature; for the
latter was an ascites from a quartan ague. It is agreeable, however, to
discover, from the theory of dropsies which has been laid down, that all the
different remedies for these disorders have been proper in their nature, and
improper only in the state of the system in which they have been given. As the
discovery of truth in religion reconciles the principles of the most opposite
sects; so the discovery of truth in medicine, reconciles the most opposite
modes of practice. It would be happy if the inquirers after truth in medicine
should be taught by such discoveries, to treat each other with tenderness and
respect, and to wait with patience till accident, or time, shall combine into
one perfect and consistent system, all the contradictory facts and opinions
about which physicians have been so long divided.

3. IF a state of excessive action in the arteries has been demonstrated in
dropsies, both from its symptoms and remedies, and if these dropsies are
evidently produced by previous debility, who will deny the existence of
excessive action in certain haemorrhages, in gout, palsy, apoplexy, and
madness, notwithstanding they are all the offspring of predisposing debility?
And who will deny the efficacy of bleeding, purges, and other debilitating
medicines in certain states of those disorders, that has seen the same
medicines administered with success in certain dropsies? To reject bleeding,
purging, and the other remedies for excessive action in the system, in either
of the above diseases, because that action was preceded by general debility,
will lead us to reject them in the most acute inflammatory fevers, for these
are as much the offspring of previous debility as dropsies or palsy. The
previous debility of the former, differs from that of the latter diseases, only
in being of a more accute, or, in other words, of a shorter duration.

4. FROM the symptoms of tonic dropsy which have been mentioned, it follows,
that the distinction of apoplexy into serous and sanguineous, affords no
rational indication for a difference in the mode of treating that disorder. If
an effusion of serum in the thorax, bowels, or limbs, produce a hard and full
pulse, it is reasonable to suppose that the same symptom will be produced by
the effusion of serum in the brain. But the dissections collected by Lieutaud,
Historia Anatomico Medica. Vol. ii.
place this opinion beyond all controversy. They prove that the symptoms of too
much, and too little action, as they appear in the pulse, follow alike the
effusion of serum and blood in the brain. This fact will admit of an important
application to the disease, which is to be the subject of the next inquiry.

5. FROM the influence which has been described, of the different states of
action of the arterial system, upon the lymphatic vessels, in dropsies, we are
led to reject the indiscriminate use of bark, mercury, and salt water, in the
scrophula. When the action of the arteries is weak, those remedies are proper;
but when an opposite state of the arterial system occurs, and above all, when
scrophulous tumors are attended with inflammatory ulcers, stimulating
medicines of all kinds are hurtful. By alternating the above remedies with a
milk and vegetable diet, according to the tonic, or atonic states of the
arterial system, I have lately succeeded in a case of scrophula, attended by
large ulcers in the inguinal glands, which had for several years resisted the
constant use of the three stimulating remedies which have been mentioned.

6. NOTWITHSTANDING I have supposed dropsies to be connected with a peculiar
state of force in the blood vessels, yet I have not ventured to assert, that
dropsies may not exist from an exclusive affection of the exhaling and
absorbing vessels. I conceive this to be as possible, as for a fever to exist
from an exclusive affection of the arteries, or an hysteria, from an exclusive
affection of the nervous system. Nothing, however, can be said upon this
subject, until physiology and pathology have taught us more of the structure
and diseases of the lymphatic vessels. Nor have I ventured further to assert,
that there are not medicines which may act specifically upon the lymphatics
independently of the arteries. This, I conceive to be as possible as for
affafoetida to act chiefly upon the nerves, or ipecacuana and jalap upon the
alimentary canal, without affecting other parts of the system. Until such
medicines are discovered, it becomes us to avail ourselves of the access to the
lymphatics, which is furnished us through the medium of the arteries by means
of most of the remedies which have been mentioned.

7. IF it should appear hereafter, that we have lessened the mortality of
certain dropsies by the theory and practice which have been proposed, yet many
cases of dropsy must still occur in which they will afford us no aid. The cases
I allude to, are dropsies from enclosing cysts, from the ossification of
certain arteries, from schirri of certain viscera, from large ruptures of
exhaling or lymphatic vessels, from a peculiar and corrosive acrimony of the
fluids, and lastly, from an exhausted state of the whole system. The records of
medicine furnish us with instances of death from each of the above causes. But
let us not despair. It becomes a physician to believe, that there is no disease
necessarily incurable; and that there exist in the womb of time, certain
remedies for all those disorders which elude the present limits of the healing
art.

AN INQUIRY INTO THE CAUSES AND CURE OF THE INTERNAL DROPSY OF THE BRAIN.

INQUIRY, etc.
HAVING for many years been unsuccessful in all the cases, except two, of
internal dropsy of the brain, which came under my care, I began to entertain
doubts of the common theory of this disorder, and to suspect that instead of
being considered as an idiopathic dropsy, the effusion of water should be
considered only as the effect of a primary inflammation or congestion of blood
in the brain.

I MENTIONED this opinion to my colleague Dr. Wistar in the month of June 1788,
and taught it the winter following in my lectures. The year afterward I was
confirmed in it by hearing that the same idea had occurred to Dr. Quin. I have
since read Dr. Quin's treatise on the dropsy of the brain with great pleasure,
and consider it as the first dawn of light which has been shed upon the theory
of this disorder. In pursuing this subject, therefore, I shall avail myself of
Dr. Quin's discoveries, and endeavor to arrange the facts and observations I
have collected in such a manner, as to form a connected theory from them, which
I hope will lead to a new and more successful mode of treating this disease.

I SHALL begin this Inquiry by delivering a few general propositions.

1. THE Internal Dropsy of the Brain is a disorder confined chiefly to children.

2. IN children the brain is larger in proportion to other parts of the body,
than it is in adults; and of course a greater proportion of blood is sent to it
in childhood, than in the subsequent periods of life. -- The effects of this
determination of blood to the brain appear in the mucous discharge from the
nose, and in the sores on the head and behind the ears, which are so common in
childhood.

3. IN all febrile diseases there is a preternatural determination of blood to
the brain. This occurs in a more especial manner in children; hence the reason
why they are so apt to be affected by convulsions in the eruptive fever of the
smallpox, in dentition, in the diseases from worms, and in the first paroxysm
of intermitting fevers.

4. IN fevers of every kind, and in every stage of life, there is a disposition
to effusion in that part to which there is the greatest determination. Thus in
inflammatory fever, effusions take place in the lungs and in the joints. In the
bilious fever they occur in the liver, and in the gout in every part of of the
body. The matter effused is always influenced by the structure of the part in
which it takes place.

THESE propositions being premised, I should have proceeded to mention the
remote causes of this disorder; but as this inquiry may possibly fall into the
hands of some gentlemen who may not have access to the description of it as
given by Dr. Whytt, Dr. Fothergill, and Dr. Quin, I shall introduce a history
of its symptoms taken from the last of those authors. I prefer it to the
histories by Dr. Whytt and Dr. Fothergill, as it accords most with the ordinary
phenomenon of this disorder in this country.

IN general the patient is at first languid and inactive, often drowsy and
peevish, but at intervals cheerful and apparently free from complaint. The
appetite is weak, a nausea, and in many cases a vomiting occurs once or twice
in the day, and the skin is observed to be hot and dry toward the evenings:
soon after these symptoms have appeared, the patient is affected with a sharp
headache, chiefly in the forepart, or if not there, generally in the crown of
the head: it is sometimes, however, confined to one side of the head, and, in
that case, when the posture of the body is erect, the head often inclines to
the side affected. We frequently find also, that the headache alternates with
the affection of the stomach; the vomiting being less troublesome when the pain
is most violent, and vice versa; other parts of the body are likewise subject
to temporary attacks of pain, viz. the extremities, or the bowels, but more
constantly the back of the neck, and between the scapulae; in all such cases
the head is more free from uneasiness.

THE patient dislikes the light at this period; cries much, sleeps little, and
when he does sleep, he grinds his teeth, picks his nose, appears to be uneasy,
and starts often, screaming as if he were terrified; the bowels are in the
majority of cases very much confined, though it sometimes happens that they are
in an opposite state: the pulse in this early stage of the disorder, does not
usually indicate any material derangement.

WHEN the symptoms above mentioned have continued for a few days, subject as
they always are in this disease to great fluctuation, the axis of one eye is
generally found to be turned in toward the nose; the pupil on this side is
rather more dilated than the other; and when both eyes have the axes directed
inwards, (which sometimes happens,) both pupils are larger than they are
observed to be in the eyes of healthy persons: the vomiting becomes more
constant, and the headache more excruciating; every symptom of fever then makes
its appearance, the pulse is frequent, and the breathing quick; exacerbations
of the fever take place toward the evening, and the face is occasionally
flushed; usually one cheek is much more affected than the other; temporary
perspirations likewise break forth, which are not followed by any alleviation
of distress; a discharge of blood from the nose, which sometimes appears about
this period, is equally inefficacious.

DELIRIUM, and that of the most violent kind, particularly if the patient has
arrived at the age of puberty, now takes place, and with all the preceding
symptoms of fever, continues for a while to increase, until about fourteen
days, often a much shorter space of time shall have elapsed since the
appearance of the symptoms, which were first mentioned in the above detail.

THE disease then undergoes that remarkable change, which sometimes suddenly
points out the commencement of, what has been called its second stage: the
pulse becomes slow but unequal, both as to its strength, and the intervals
between the pulsations; the pain of the head; or of whatever part had
previously been affected, seems to abate, or at least the patient becomes
apparently less sensible of it; the interrupted slumbers, or perpetual
restlessness which prevailed during the earlier periods of the disorder, are
now succeeded by an almost lethargic torpor, the strabismus, and dilatation of
the pupil increase, the patient lies with one, or both eyes half closed, which,
when minutely examined, are often found to be completely insensible to light;
the vomiting cases; whatever food or medicine is offered is usually swallowed
with apparent voracity; the bowels at this period generally remain obstinately
costive.

IF every effort made by art fails to excite the sinking powers of life, the
symptoms of what has been called the second stage are soon succeeded by others,
which more certainly announce the approach of death. -- The pulse again becomes
equal, but so weak and quick, that it is almost impossible to count it; a
difficulty of breathing, nearly resembling the Stertor Apoplecticus, is often
observed; sometimes the eyes are suffused with blood, the flushing of the face
is more frequent than before, but of shorter duration, and followed by a deadly
paleness; red spots, or blotches sometimes appear on the body and limbs;
deglutition becomes difficult, and convulsions generally close the scene. In
one case, I may observe, the jaws of a child of four years of age were so
firmly looked for more than a day before death, that it was impossible to
introduce either food or medicine into his mouth; and in another case, an
haemiplegia, attended with some remarkable circumstances, occurred during the
two days preceding dissolution.

HAVING thus given as exact an history of Apoplexia Hydrocephalica as I could
compile from the writings of others, and from my own observations, I should
think myself guilty of imposition on my readers if I did not caution them that
it must be considered merely as a general outline; the human brain seems to be
so extremely capricious (if the expression may be allowed) in the signals it
gives to other parts of the system, of the injury it suffers throughout the
course of this disease, that although every symptom above mentioned does
occasionally occur, and indeed few cases of the disease are to be met with,
which do not exhibit many of them; yet it does not appear to me, that any one
of them is constantly, and inseparably connected with it.

TO this history I shall add a few facts, which are the result of observations
made by myself, or communicated to me by my medical brethren. -- These facts
will serve to show that there are many deviations from the history of the
disorder which has been given, and that it is indeed as Dr Quin has happily
expressed it, of "a truly proteiform" nature.

I HAVE not found the dilated and insensible pupil, the puking, the delirium,
or the strabismus, to attend universally in this disease.

I SAW one case in which the appetite was unimpaired from the first to the last
stage of the disorder.

I HAVE met with one case in which the disorder was attended by blindness, and
another by double vision.

I HAVE observed an uncommon acuteness in hearing to attend two cases of this
disorder. In one of them the noise of the sparks which were discharged from a
hiccory fire, produced great pain and startings which threatened convulsions.

I HAVE seen three cases in which the disease terminated in hemiplegia. In two
of them it proved fatal in a few days -- in the third it has continued for
nearly eighteen months.

I HAVE met with one case in which no preternatural slowness, or intermission
was ever perceived in the pulse.

I HAVE seen the disease in children of nearly all ages. I once saw it in a
child of six weeks old. It was preceded by the cholera infantum.

IN the month of March 1771, I obtained a gill of water from the ventricles of
the brain of a neero girl of nine years of age, who died of this disorder, who
complained in no stage of it of a pain in her head or limbs, nor of a sick
stomach. The disorder in this case was introduced suddenly by a pain in the
breast, a fever, and the usual symptoms of a catarrh.

DR. WISTAR informed me that he had likewise met with a case of internal dropsy
of the brain, in which there was a total absence of pain in the head.

DR. CARSON informed me that he had attended a child in this disorder that
discovered, for some days before it died, the symptom of hydrophobia.

DR. CURRIE obtained, by dissection, seven ounces of water from the brain of a
child which died of this disorder; in whom he assured me no dilatation of the
pupil, strabismus, sickness, or loss of appetite had attended, and but very
little headache.

THE causes which induce this disease, act either directly on the brain, or
indirectly upon it, through the medium of the whole system.

THE causes which act directly on the brain are falls or bruises upon the head,
certain positions of the body, and childish plays which bring on congestion or
inflammation, and afterward an effusion of water in the brain.

THE indirect causes of this disorder are more numerous, and more frequent,
though less suspected, than those which have been mentioned. The following
diseases of the whole system appear to act indirectly in producing an internal
dropsy of the brain.

1. INTERMITTING, remitting, and continual fevers. Of the effects of these
fevers in inducing this disorder, many cases are recorded by Lieutaud. Historia
Anatomi^o Medica. Vol. II


MY former pupil, Dr. Woodhouse, has furnished me with a dissection in which
the disease was evidently the effect of the remitting fever. That species or
state of continual fever which has been distinguished by the name of typhus, is
often the remote cause of this disorder. The languor and weakness in all the
muscles of voluntary motion, the headache, the inclination to rest and sleep,
and the disposition to be disturbed, or terrified by dreams, which are said to
be the precursors of water in the brain, I believe are frequently symptoms of a
typhus fever which terminates in an inflammation, or effusion of water in the
brain. -- The history which is given of the typhus state of fever in children
by Dr. Butter Treatise on the Insantile Remitting Fever.
, seems to favor this opinion.

2. THE Rheumatism. Of this I have known two instances. Dr. Lettsom has
recorded a case, from the same cause Medical Memoirs, vol. I. p. 174.
. The pains in the limbs, which are supposed to be the effect, I suspect, are
frequently the cause of the disorder.

3. THE Pulmonary Consumption. Of the connection of this disease with an
internal dropsy of the brain, Dr. Percival has furnished us with the following
communication Essays Medical, Philosophical, and Experimental. vol. II. p. 3^^,
340.
: Mr. C -- 's daughter, aged nine years, after laboring under the phthisis
pulmonalis four months, was affected with unusual pains in her head. These
rapidly increased so as to occasion frequent screamings. The cough, which had
before been extremely violent, and was attended with stitches in the breast,
now abated, and in a few days ceased almost entirely. The pupils of the eyes
became dilated, a strabismus ensued, and in about a week death put an end to
her agonies. Whether this affection of the head arose from the effusion of
water or of blood, is uncertain, but its influence on the state of the lungs is
worthy of notice. Dr. Quin likewise mentions a case from Dr. Cullen's private
practice, in which an internal dropsy of the brain followed a pulmonary
consumption. Lieutaud mentions, three cases of the same kind Historia
Anatomica-Medica, Vol. II. Lib. tertius. Obs. 380, 394, 1121.
, and two in which it succeeded a catarrh Obs. 383, 431.
.

4. Eruptive Fevers. Dr. Odier informs us Medical Journal.
, that he had seen four cases in which it had followed the small pox, measles,
and scarlatina. Dr Lettsom mentions a case in which it followed the small pox
Medical Memoirs, Vol. I. p. 171.
, and I have seen one in which it was obviously the effects of debility induced
upon the system by the measles.

5. WORMS. Notwithstanding the discharge of worms gives no relief in this
disorder, yet there is good reason to believe, that it has, in some instances,
been produced by them.

6. FROM the dissections of Lieutaud, Quin, and others, it appears further,
that the internal dropsy of the brain has been observed to succeed each of the
following disorders -- viz. The colic -- palsy -- melancholy -- dysentery --
dentition -- insolation -- scrophula -- and the sudden healing of old sores. I
have seen two cases of it from the last cause, and one in which it was produced
by the action of the vernal sun alone upon the system.

FROM the facts which have been enumerated, and from dissections to be
mentioned hereafter, it appears, that the disease in its first stage is the
effect of causes which produce a less degree of that inflammation which
constitutes phrenitis, and that its second stage is the effect of a less degree
of that effusion, which produces serous apoplexy in adults. The former partakes
of the nature of the chronic inflammation of Dr. Cullen, and of the asthenic
inflammation of Dr. Brown. I have taken the liberty to call it Phrenicula, from
its being a diminutive species or state of phrenitis. It bears the same
relation to phrenitis when it arises from indirect causes, which pneumonicula
does to pneumony, -- and it is produced nearly in the same manner as the
pulmonary consumption, by debilitating causes which act primarily on the whole
system. The peculiar size and texture of the brain, seem to invite the
inflammation and effusions which follow debility, to that organ in childhood,
just as the peculiar structure and situation of the lungs invite the same
morbid phenomenon, after the body has acquired its growth, in youth and middle
life. In the latter stage which has been mentioned, the internal dropsy of the
brain partakes of some of the properties of apoplexy. It differs from it in
being the effect of a slow, instead of a sudden effusion of water or blood, and
in being the effect of causes which are of an acute instead of a chronic
nature. The more advanced persons are in life who are affected by this
disorder, the more it approaches to the nature of the common apoplexy, by a
speedy termination in life or death. Dr. Cullen has called it simply by the
name of "apoplexia hydrocephalica." I have preferred for this stage of the
disorder the term of chronic apoplexy; for I believe with Dr. Quin, that it has
no connection with an hydropic diathesis of the whole system. I am forced to
adopt this opinion, from my having never seen it accompanied by dropsical
effusions in other parts of the body, nor a general dropsy accompanied by an
internal dropsy of the brain. No more occurs in this disease than takes place
when hydrothorax follows an inflammation of the lungs, or when serous effusions
follow a inflammation of the joints. I do not suppose that both inflammation,
and effusion always attend in this disorder; on the contrary, dissections have
shown some cases of inflammation, with little or no effusion, and some of
effusion without inflammation. Perhaps this variety may have been produced by
the different stages of the disease in which death and the inspection of the
brain took place. Neither do I suppose, that the two stages which have been
mentioned, always succeed each other in the common order of inflammation and
effusion. In every case where the full tense -- slow and intermitting pulse
occurs, I believe there is inflammation; and as this state of the pulse occurs
in most cases in the beginning of the disorder, I suppose the inflammation, in
most cases, to precede the effusion of water. I have met with only one case in
which the slow and tense pulse was absent; and out of six dissections of
patients whom I have lost by this disorder, the brains of four of them
exhibited marks of inflammation.

HAVING adopted the theory of this disease, which I have delivered several
years ago, I resolved upon such a change in my practice as should accord with
it. The first remedy indicated by it was

I. BLOOD-LETTING. I shall briefly mention the effects of this remedy in all
the cases in which I have prescribed it.

CASE I.
ON the 15th of November, 1790, I was called to visit the daughter of W -- W --
--, aged four years, who was indisposed with a cough -- a pain in her bowels --
a coma -- great sensibility of her eyes to light -- costiveness -- and a
suppression of urine -- a slow and irregular, but tense pulse -- dilated
pupils, but no headache. I found upon inquiry, that she had received a hurt on
her head by a fall, about seven weeks before I saw her. From this information,
as well as from her symptoms, I had no doubt of the disorder being the internal
dropsy of the brain. I advised the loss of five ounces of blood, which gave her
some relief. The blood was sizy. The next day she took a dose of jalap and
calomel, which operated twelve times. On the 18th she lost four ounces more of
blood, which was more sizy than that drawn on the 15th. From this time she
mended rapidly. Her coma left her on the 20th, and her appetite returned; on
the 21st, she made a large quantity of turbid dark colored urine. On the 22d
her pulse became again a little tense, for which she took a gentle puke. On the
23d she had a natural stool. On the 24th her pupils appeard to be contracted to
their natural size, and on the 30th I had the pleasure of seeing her seated at
a tea-table in good health. Her pulse, notwithstanding, was a little more
active and tense than natural.

CASE II.
Ox the 24th of the same month, I was called to visit the son of J -- C -- --,
aged 4 years, who had been hurt about a month before, by a wound on his
forehead with a brick bat, the mark of which still appeared. He had been ill
for near two weeks with coma, headache, colic, vomiting, and frequent startings
in his sleep. His evacuations by stool and urine were suppressed; he had
discharged three worms, and had had two convulsion (...) just before I saw him.
The pupil of the right eye was larger than that of the left. His pulse was
full, tense, and slow, and intermitted after every fourth stroke. The symptoms
plainly indicated an internal dropsy of the brain. I ordered him to lose four
or five ounces of blood. Only three ounces of blood were drawn, which produced
a small change in his pulse. It rendered the intermission of a pulsation
perceptible only after every tenth stroke. On the 25th he lost five ounces of
blood, and took a purge of calomel and jalap. On the 26th he was better. On the
27th, the vomiting was troublesome, and his pulse was still full and tense, but
regular. I ordered him to lose four ounces of blood. On the 28th, his puking
and headache continued, -- his pulse was a little tense, but regular, -- and
his right pupil less dilated. On the 29th, his headache and puking ceased --
and he played about the room. On the 4th of December he grew worse -- his
headache and puking returned, with a hard pulse, for which I ordered him to
lose five ounces of blood. On the 5th he was better, but on the 6th his
headache and puking returned. On the 7th I ordered his forehead to be bathed
frequently with vinegar, in which ice had been dissolved. On the 8th he was
much better. On the 9th his pulse became soft, and he complained but little of
headache. After appearing to be well for near three weeks, except that he
complained of a little headache, on the 29th his pulse became again full and
tense, for which I ordered him to lose six ounces of blood, which for the first
time discovered a bussy coat. After this last bleeding, he discharged a large
quantity of water. From this time he recovered slowly, but his pulse was a
little fuller than natural on the 19th of January following. He is now alive,
and in good health.

CASES III. AND IV.
IN the month of March 1792, I attended two children of three years of age, the
one the daughter of W -- K --, the other the daughter of W -- B --: each of
whom had most of the symptoms of the inflammatory stage of the internal dropsy
of the brain. I prescribed the loss of four ounces of blood, and a smart purge
in both cases, and in the course of a few days had the pleasure of observing
all the symptoms of the disease perfectly subdued in each of them.

CASE V.
IN the months of July and August 1792, I attended a female slave of a lady
from one of the West India islands, who had an obstinate headache, coma,
vomiting, and a tense, full, and slow pulse. I believed it to be the
phrenicula, or internal dropsy of the brain, in its inflammatory stage. I bled
her five times in the course of two months, and each time with obvious relief
of all the symptoms of the disorder. Finding that her headache, and a
disposition to vomit, continued after the tension of her pulse was nearly
reduced, I gave her as much calomel as excited a gentle salivation, which in a
few weeks completed her cure.

CASE VI.
THE daughter of R -- M --, aged eight years, in consequence of the suppression
of an habitual discharge from sores on her head, in the month of April 1793,
was affected by violent headache, puking, great pains and weakness in her
limbs, and a full, tense, and slow pulse. I believed these symptoms to be
produced by an inflammation of the brain. I ordered her to lose six or seven
ounces of blood, and gave her two purges of jalap and calomel, which operated
very plentifully. I afterward applied a blister to her neck. In one week from
the time of my first visit to her she appeared to be in perfect health.

CASE VII.
A YOUNG woman of 18 years of age -- a hired servant in the family of Mrs. E.
S. had been subject to a headache every spring for several years. The unusually
warm days which occurred in the beginning of April 1793, produced a return of
this periodical pain. On the eighth of the month, it was so severe as to
confine her to her bed. I was called to visit her on the 9th. I found her
comatose, and when awake, delirious. Her pupil was unusually dilated, and
insensible to the light. She was constantly sick at her stomach, and vomited
frequently. Her bowels were obstinately costive, and her pulse was full, tense,
and so slow as seldom to exceed, for several days, from 56 to 60 strokes in a
minute. I ordered her to loose ten ounces of blood every day for three days
successively, and gave her, on each of those days, strong doses of jalap and
aloes. The last blood which was drawn from her was sizy. The purges procured
from three to ten discharges every day from her bowels. On the 12th, she
appeared to be much better. Her pulse was less tense, and beat 80 strokes in a
minute. On the 14th, she had a fainting fit. On the 15th, she sat up, and
called for food. The pupils of her eyes now recovered their sensibility to
light, as well as their natural size. Her headache left her, and on the 17th,
she appeared to be in good health. Her pulse, however, continued to beat
between 50 and 60 strokes only in a minute, and retained a small portion of
irregular action for several days after she recovered.

I AM the more disposed to pronounce the cases which have been described to
have been internal dropsy of the brain, from my having never been deceived in a
single case in which I have examined the brains of patients whom I have
suspected to have died of it.

I BELIEVE, with Dr. Quin, that this disorder is much more frequent than is
commonly supposed. I can recollect many cases of anomalous fever and headache
in children, which have excited the most distressing apprehensions of an
approaching internal dropsy of the brain, but which have yielded in a few days
to bleeding, or to purges and blisters. I think it probable, that some, or
perhaps most of these cases, might have terminated in an effusion of water in
the brain, had they been left to themselves, or not been treated with the above
remedies. I believe further, that it is often prevented by all those physicians
who treat the first stage of febrile diseases in children with evacuations,
just as the pulmonary consumption is prevented by bleeding, and low diet, in an
inflammatory catarrh.

I AM sorry, however, to add in this place, that I have failed in five cases,
in which I used the remedy of blood-letting in the phrenicula, or in the
inflammatory stage of this disorder; perhaps it was not used so copiously as
the disease required. If the relation of this disorder to pneumonicula be the
same in its cure, that I have supposed it to be in its cause, then I am
persuaded, that the same excess in blood-letting is indicated in it, above what
is necessary in phrenitis, that has been practiced in pneumonicula, above what
is necessary in the cure of an acute inflammation of the lungs. The
continuance, and in some instances, the increase of the appetite in the
internal dropsy of the brain, would seem to favor this opinion no less in this
disorder, than in the inflammatory state of pulmonary consumption. Where the
internal dropsy is obviously the effect of a fall, or of any other cause which
acts directly on the brain, there can be no doubt of the safety of very
plentiful bleeding; all practical writers upon surgery concur in advising it.
Dr. Penington has favored me with an extract from Mr Cline's manuscript
lectures upon anatomy, delivered in London in the winter of 1792, which places
the advantage of blood-letting, in that species of inflammation which follows a
local injury of the brain, in a very strong point of light. I know (says he)
that several practitioners object to the use of evacuations, as remedies for
concussions of the brain, because of the weakness of the pulse, but in these
cases, the pulse is depressed. Besides experience shows, that evacuations are
frequently attended with very great advantages. I remember a remarkable case of
a man in this [St. Thomas's hospital] who was under the care of Mr. Baker. He
lay in a comatose state, for three weeks after an injury of the head. During
that time, he was bled twenty times, that is to say, he was bled once every day
upon an average. He was bled twice a day plentifully, but toward the
conclusion, he was bled more sparingly, and only every other day; but at each
bleeding, there were taken, upon an average, about sixteen ounces of blood. In
consequence of this treatment, the man perfectly recovered his health and
reason.

A II. remedy to be used in the first stage of this disorder is PURGES. I have
constantly observed all the patients whose cases have been related, to be
relieved by plentiful and repeated evacuations from the bowels. I was led to
the use of frequent purges, by having long observed their good effects in
palsies, and other cases of congestion in the brain, where blood letting was
unsafe, and where it had been used without benefit. In the Leipsic
Commentaries, Vol. xxix. p. 139.
there is an account of a case of internal dropsy of the brain, which followed
the measles, being cured by no other medicines than purges and diuretics. I can
say nothing in favor of the latter remedy, in this disorder, from my own
experience. The digitalis purpurea, has been used in this city, by several
respectable practitioners, but I believe, in no one instance with any advantage.

III. BLISTERS have been uniformly recommended by all practical writers upon
this disease. I have applied them to the head, neck and temples, and generally
with obvious relief to the pain in the head. They should be omitted in no stage
of the disorder; for even in the inflammatory stage, the discharge they
occasion from the vessels of the head, greatly overbalances their stimulating
effects upon the whole system.

IV. MERCURY was long considered as the only remedy, which gave the least
chance of a recovery from this formidable disorder. Out of all the cases in
which I gave it, before the year 1790, I succeeded in only two -- one of them
was a child of three years old, the other was a young woman of 26 years of age.
I am the more satisfied that the latter case was internal dropsy of the brain,
from my patient having relapsed, and died between two and three years
afterward, of the same disorder. Perhaps my repeated failures in the use of
this remedy, were occasioned by my giving it before the inflammatory action of
the system was sufficiently subdued, by previous evacuations. The same rule
should probably be observed in giving it in this disorder, which is practiced
in administering it in effusions of water in other parts of the body, and in
all other diseases of diminished action in the system. In none of the cases,
except the 5th, in which I used bleeding and purging with success, did I
prescribe calomel with any other view than to increase the evacuation from the
bowels.

V. LINEN CLOTHS wetted with cold vinegar or water, and applied to the
forehead, contribute very much to relieve the pain in the head. In the case of
I. C. Case II.
the solution of ice in the vinegar appeared to afford the most obvious relief
of this distressing symptom.

A PUNCTURE in the brain has been proposed by some writers to discharge the
water from its ventricles. If the theory I have delivered be true, the
operation promises nothing, even though it could always be performed with
perfect safety. In cases of local injuries, or of inflammation from any cause,
it must necessarily increase the disorder; and in cases of effusion only, the
debilitated state of the whole system forbids us to hope for any relief from
such a local remedy.

BARK, wine, and opium promise much more success in the last stage of the
disorder. I can say nothing in their favor from my own experience; but from the
aid they afford to mercury in other diseases, I conceive they might be made to
accompany it with advantage.

CONSIDERING the nature of the indirect causes which induce the disease, and
the case of a relapse, which has been mentioned, after an interval of near
three years, as well as the symptoms of slow convalescence, manifested by the
pulse, which occurred in the first and seventh cases, I submit it to the
consideration of physicians, whether the use of moderate exercise, and the
cold bath, should not be recommended to prevent a return of the disorder in
every case where it has yielded to the power of medicine.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE MEASLES, AS THEY APPEARED IN PHILADELPHIA, IN THE SPRING OF
1789.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE MEASLES, etc.
THE weather, in December 1788, and in January 1789, was variable, but seldom
very cold. On the first of February 1789, at 6 oclock in the morning, the
mercury in Farenheit's thermometer, fell five degrees below 0 in the city of
Philadelphia. At twenty miles from the city, on the Schuylkill, it fell 120
below 0, at the same hour. On the 19th and 20th of this month, there fell a
quantity of snow, the depth of which, upon an average, was supposed to be about
eight or ten inches. On the 23d, 24th, 25th and 27th, the weather was very
cold. The mercury fluctuated during these days between 4 and 100 above 0.

IN the intervals between these cold days, the weather frequently moderated, so
that the Delaware was frozen and thawed not less than four times. It was not
navigable till the eighth of March. There were in all, during the winter and
month of March, sixteen distinct falls of snow.

IN April and May there were a few warm days; but upon the whole, it was a very
cold and backward spring. The peaches failed almost universally. There were no
strawberries or cherries on the 24th of May, and every other vegetable product
was equally backward. A country woman of 84 years of age, informed me, that it
was the coldest spring she had ever known. It was uncomfortable to sit without
fire till the first of June.

THE measles appeared first in the Northern Liberties, in December. They spread
slowly in January, and were not universal in the city till February and March.

THIS disease, like many others, had its precursor. It was either a gum-boil,
or a sore on the tongue. They were very common, but not universal. They
occurred in some instances, several days before the fever, but in general, they
made their appearance during the eruptive fever, and were a sure mark of the
approaching eruption of the meazles. I was first led to observe this fact, from
having read Dr. Quin's accurate account of the measles in Jamaica. I shall now
proceed to mention the symptoms of the measles as they appeared in the
different parts of the body.

1. IN the HEAD, they produced great pain, swelling of the eyelids, so as to
obstruct the eyesight, toothache, bleeding at the nose, tinnitus aurium, and
deafness; also coma for two days, and convulsions. I saw the last symptom only
in one instance. It was brought on by a stoppage of a running from the ear.

2. IN the THROAT and LUNGS, they produced a soreness and hoarseness, acute or
dull pains in the breast and sides, and a painful or distressing cough. In one
case, this cough continued for two hours without any intermission, attended by
copious expectoration. In two cases, I saw a constant involuntary discharge of
phlegm and mucus from the mouth, without any cough. One of them terminated
fatally. Spitting of blood occurred in several instances. The symptoms of
pneumonia vera notha and typhoides were very common. I saw two fatal cases from
pneumonia notha, in both of which, the patients died with the trunk of the body
in an erect posture. I met with two cases in which there was no cough till the
eruption made its appearance on the fourth day, and one which was accompanied
by all the usual symptoms of the cynanche trachealis humoralis.

3. IN the STOMACH the measles produced, in many instances, sickness and
vomiting. And,

4. IN the BOWELS, griping, diarrhoea, and in some instances, bloody stools.
The diarrhoea occurred in every stage of the disorder, but it was bloody and
most painful in its decline. I attended a black girl who discharged a great
many worms, but without the least relief of any of her symptoms.

THERE was a great variety in this disease -- 1st, In the time of the attack of
the fever, from the time of the reception of the contagion. In general the
interval was fourteen days, but it frequently appeared before and sometimes
later than that period.

2nd. IN the time of the eruption, from the beginning of the fever. It
generally appeared on the third and fourth days. In one case, Dr. Waters
informed me, it did not appear till the eighth day.

3d. IN the abatement or continuance of the fever after the eruption.

4th. IN the color and figure of the eruption. In some it put on a pale red,
in others a deep, and in a few a livid color, resembling an incipient
mortification. In some there appeared red blotches, in others an equally
diffused redness, and in a few, eruptions like the small pox, called by Dr.
Cullen, rubiola varioloides.

5. IN the duration of the eruption on the skin. It remained in most cases only
three or four days; but in one, which came under my care, it remained nine days.

6. IN the manner of its retrocession. I saw very few cases of its leaving the
branny appearance so generally spoken of by authors on the skin.

7. IN not affecting many persons, and even families who were exposed to it.

THE symptoms which continued in many after the retrocession of the measles,
were cough, -- hoarseness, -- or complete aphonia, which continued in two cases
for two weeks; also diarrhoea, opthalmy, a bad taste in the mouth, a defect or
excess of appetite, and a fever, which in some instances was of the
intermitting kind, but which in more assumed the more dangerous form of the
typhus mitior. I attended two cases of internal dropsy of the brain soon after
it. One was evidently excited by a fall. They both ended fatally.

DURING the prevalence of the disease, I observed several persons (who had had
the measles, and who were closely confined to the rooms of persons ill with
them) to be affected with a slight cough, sore throat, and even sores in the
mouth. I find the same fact taken notice of by Dr. Quier.

BUT I observed further, many children to be affected by a fever, cough, and
all the other symptoms of the measles which have been mentioned, except a
general eruption, for, in some, there was a trifling efflorescence about the
neck and breast. I observed the same thing in 1773 and 1783. In my note book, I
find the following account of the appearance of this disease in children in the
year 1773. The measles appeared in March, a catarrh (for by that name I then
called it) appeared at the same time, and was often mistaken for them, the
symptoms being nearly the same in both. In the catarrh there was in some
instances a trifling eruption. A lax often attended it, and some who had it,
had an extremely sore mouth.

I WAS the more struck with this disease, from finding it was taken notice of
by Dr. Sydenham. He calls it a morbillous fever. I likewise find an account of
it in the 2d article of the 5th volume of the Edinburgh Medical Essays. The
words of the author who is anonymous, are as follow. During this measley
season, several persons, who never had the measles, had all the symptoms of
measles, which went off in a few days without any eruptions. The same persons
had the measles months or years afterward. Is this disease a common fever,
marked by the reigning epidemic, and produced in the same manner, and by the
same causes, as the variolous fever described by Dr. Sydenham, which he says
prevailed at the same time with the small pox? I think it is not. My reasons
for this opinion are as follow.

1. I NEVER saw it affect any but children, in the degree that has been
mentioned, and such only as had never had the measles.

2. IT affected whole families at the same time. It proved fatal to one of
three children whom it affected on the same day.

3. IT terminated in a pulmonary consumption in a boy of ten years old, with
all the symptoms which attend that disease when it follows the regular measles.

4. IT affected a child in one family on the same day that two other members of
the same family were affected by the genuine measles.

5. IT appeared on the usual days of the genuine measles, from the time the
persons affected by it were exposed to its contagion. And,

6. It communicated the disease in one family, in the usual time in which the
disease is taken from the genuine measles.

THE measles then appear to follow the analogy of the small pox, which affects
so superficially as to be taken a second time, and which produce on persons who
have had them what are called the nurse pock. They follow likewise the analogy
of another disease, viz. the scarlatina anginosa. In the account of the
epidemic for 1773, published in the third volume of the Edinburgh Medical
Essays, we are told, that such patients as had previously had the scarlet fever
without sore throats, took the sore throat, and had no eruption, while those
who had previously had the sore throat had a scarlet eruption, but the throat
remained free from the distemper. All other persons who were affected had both.

FROM these facts, I have taken the liberty of calling it the Internal Measles,
to distinguish it from that species which is external. I think the discovery of
this new species of this disorder of some application to practice.

1. IT will lead us to be cautious in declaring any disease to be the external
measles in which there is not a general eruption. From my ignorance of this, I
have been led to commit several mistakes which were dishonorable to the
profession. I was called during the prevalence of the measles in the
abovenamed season, to visit a girl of twelve years old, with an eruption on
the skin. I called it the measles. The mother told me, it was impossible, for
that I had in 1783 attended her for the same disorder. I suspect the anonimous
author beforementioned has fallen into the same error. He adds to the account
before quoted the following words. Others who had undergone the measles
formerly, had at this time, a fever of the erisipelatous kind, with eruptions
like to which nettles cause, and all the previous and concomitant symptoms of
the measles from the beginning to the end of the disease.

2. IF inoculation, or any other mode of lessening the violence of the disease
should be adopted, it will be of consequence to know what persons are secure
from the attacks of it, and who are still exposed to it.

I SHALL now add a short account of my method of treating this disorder.

MANY hundred families came through the disease without the help of a
physician. But in many cases it was attended with peculiar danger, and in some
with death. I think it was much more fatal than in the years 1773 and 1783,
probably owing to the variable weather in the winter, and the coldness and
dampness of the succeeding spring. Dr. Huxham says, he once saw the measles
attended with peculiar mortality, during a late cold and damp spring in
England. It was much more fatal (caeteris paribus) to adults than to young
people.

THE remedies I used were,

1. BLEEDING, in all cases where great pain and cough with a hard pulse
attended. In some I found it necessary to repeat this remedy. But I met with
many cases in which it was forbidden by the weakness of the pulse, and by other
marks of great debility.

2. VOMITS. These were very useful in removing a nausea; they likewise favored
the eruption of the measles.

3. DEMULCENT and DILUTING drinks. These were barley water, bran, and flaxseed
tea, dried cherry and raw apple water, also beverage, and cider and water. The
last drink I found to be the most agreeable to my patients of any that have
been mentioned.

4. BLISTERS to the neck, sides, and extremities, according to the symptoms.
They were useful in every stage of the disorder.

5. OPIATES. These were given not only at night, but in small doses during the
day, when a troublesome cough or diarrhoea attended.

6. WHERE a catarrhal fever ensued, I used bleeding and blisters. In those
cases in which this fever terminated in an intermittent, or in a typhus, I gave
the bark with evident advantage. In that case of measles, formerly mentioned,
which was accompanied by symptoms of cynanche trachialis humoralis, I gave
calomel with the happiest effects. In the admission of fresh air I observed a
medium as to its temperature, and accommodated it to the degrees of action in
the system. In different parts of the country, in Pennsylvania and New Jersey,
I heard with great pleasure of the cold air being used as freely and as
successfully in this disorder as in the inflammatory small pox. The same people
who were so much benefited by cool air, I was informed, drank plentfully of
cold water during every stage of the disorder. One thing in favor of this
country practice deserves to be mentioned, and that is, evident advantage arose
in all the cases which I attended, from patients leaving their beds in the
febrile state of this disease. But this was practiced only by those in whom
inflammatory diathesis prevailed, for these alone had strength enough to bear
it.

THE convalescent state of this disease required particular attention.

1. A DIARRHAEA often continued to be troublesome after other symptoms had
abated. I relieved it by opiates and demulcent drinks. Bleeding has been
recommended for it, but I did not find it necessary in a single case.

2. AN OPTHALMIA which sometimes attended, yielded to astringent collyria and
blisters.

3. WHERE a cough or fever followed so slight as not to require bleeding, I
advised a milk and vegetable diet, country air, and moderate warmth; for
whatever might have been the relation of the lungs in the beginning of the
disease to cold air, they were now evidently too much debilitated to bear it.

4. IT is a common practice to prescribe purges after the measles. After the
asthenic state of this disorder they certainly do harm. In all cases, the
effects of them may be better obviated by diet, full or low, suitable clothing,
and gentle exercise, or country air. I omitted them in several cases, and no
eruption or disease of any kind fallowed their disuse.

I SHALL only add to this account of the measles, that in several families, I
saw evident advantages from preparing the body for the reception of the
contagion, by means of a vegetable diet.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE INFLUENZA, AS IT APPEARED IN PHILADELPHIA, In the Autumn of
1789 -- In the Spring of 1790 -- and in the Winter of 1701

AN ACCOUNT OF THE INFLUENZA, etc.
THE latter end of the month of August in the summer of 1789, was so very cool
that fires became agreeable. The month of September was cool, dry, and
pleasant. During the whole of this month, and for some days before it began,
and after it ended, there had been no rain. In the beginning of October, a
number of the members of the first Congress, that had assembled in New York,
under the present national government, arrived in Philadelphia, much indisposed
with colds. They ascribed them to the fatigue and night air to which they had
been exposed in traveling in the public stages; but from the number of persons
who were affected, from the uniformity of their complaints, and from the
rapidity with which it was propagated through our city, it soon became evident
that it was the disease so well known of late years, by the name of the
Influenza.

THE symptoms which ushered in the disease, were generally a hoarseness,
sore-throat, a sense of weariness, chills, and a fever. After the disease was
formed, it affected more or less the following parts of the body. Many
complained of acute pains in the HEAD. These pains were frequently fixed
between the eye balls, and in three cases which came under my notice, they were
terminated by abscesses in the frontal sinus, which discharged themselves
through the nose. The pain, in one of these cases, before the rupture of the
abscess, was so exquisite, that my patient informed me, that he felt as if he
should lose his reason. Many complained of a great itching in the EYELIDS. In
some, the eyelids were swelled. In others, a copious effusion of water took
place from the EYES; and in a few, there was a true ophthalmia. Many complained
of great pains in one EAR, and some of pains in both EARS. In some these pains
terminated in abscesses, which discharged for some days a bloody or purulent
matter. In others, there was a swelling behind each ear without a suppuration.
SNEEZING was an universal symptom. In some it occurred not less than fifty
times in a day. The matter discharged from the nose, was so acrid as to inflame
the nostrils, and the upper-lip, in such a manner as to bring on swellings,
sores, and scabs in many people. In some, the nose discharged drops, and in a
few, streams of blood, to the amount, in one case, of twenty ounces. In many
cases, it was so much obstructed, as to render breathing through it difficult.
In some there was a total defect of TASTE. In others there was a bad taste in
the mouth, which frequently continued through the whole course of the disease.
In some there was a want of APPETITE. In others it was perfectly natural. Some
complained of a soreness in their mouths, as if they had been inflamed by
holding pepper in them. Some had SWELLED JAWS, and many complained of the
TOOTHACHE. I saw only one case in which the disease produced a COMA.

MANY were affected with pains in the BREAST and SIDES. A difficulty of
breathing attended in some, and a COUGH was universal. Sometimes this cough
alternated with a pain in the head. Sometimes it preceded this pain, and
sometimes it followed it. It was at all times distressing. In some instances it
resembled the chin cough. One person expired in a fit of coughing, and many
persons spat blood in consequence of its violence. I saw several patients in
whom the disease affected the trachea chiefly, producing great difficulty of
breathing, and, in one case, a suppression of the voice, and I heard of one
case in which the disease, by falling on the trachea, produced a cynanche
trachealis. In most of the cases which terminated fatally, the patients died of
pneumonia notha.

THE STOMACH was sometimes affected by nausea, and vomiting; but this was far
from being an universal symptom.

I MET with four cases in which the whole force of the disease fell upon the
BOWELS and went off in a diarrhoea; but in general the bowels were regular or
costive.

THE LIMBS were affected with such acute pains as to be mistaken for the
rheumatism, or for the break-bone-fever of 1780. The pains were most acute in
the back and thighs.

PROFUSE SWEATS appeared in many over the whole body in the beginning, but
without affording any relief. It was in some instances accompanied by
erysipelatous, and in four cases which came to my knowledge, it was followed by
miliary eruptions.

THE pulse was sometimes tense, and quick, but seldom full. In a great majority
of those whom I visited it was quick, weak, and soft.

THERE was no appearance in the urine different from what is common in all
fevers.

THE disease had evident remissions, and the fever seldom continued above three
or four days; but the cough, and some other troublesome symptoms, sometimes
continued two or three weeks.

IN a few persons, the fever terminated in a tedious and dangerous typhus.

IN several pregnant women it produced uterine haemorrhages and abortions. It
is remarkable that abortions are produced chiefly by contagious fevers, such as
the plague, the smallpox, and the measles, while inflammatory and bilious
fevers, and even the dysentery which frequently agitate the female system more
violently, seldom induce those effects.


IT affected adults of both sexes alike. A few old people escaped it. It passed
by children under eight years old with a few exceptions. Out of five and thirty
maniacs in the Pennsylvania hospital, only three were affected by it. No
profession or occupation escaped it. The smell of tar and tobacco did not
preserve the persons who worked in them from the contagion -- nor did the use
of tobacco, in snuff, smoking, or chewing afford a security against it. Mr.
Howard informs us that the use of tobacco is not a preservative against the
plague as has formerly been supposed; of course that apology for the use of an
offensive weed should not be admitted.


EVEN previous and existing diseases did not protect patients from it. It
insinuated into sick chambers, and blended itself with every species of chronic
complaint.

IT was remarkable that persons who worked in the open air, such as sailors,
and long-shore-men (to use a mercantile epithet) had it much worse than
tradesmen who worked within doors. A body of surveyors in the eastern woods of
Pennsylvania, who caught it all at once from one of their attendants, suffered
extremely from it. Even the vigor of constitution, which is imparted by the
savage life, did not mitigate its violence. Mr. Andrew Ellicot, the geographer
of the United States, informed me that he was a witness of its affecting the
Indians in the neighborhood of Niagara with peculiar force. The cough which
attended this disorder, was so new and so irritating a complaint among them,
that they ascribed it to witchcraft.

IT proved most fatal on the seashore of the United States.

MANY people who had recovered, were affected a second time with all the
symptoms of the disorder. I should have ascribed this second attack to the
sensible qualities of the atmosphere, had I not observed it to affect those
persons chiefly who had occasionally changed their place of residence during
the prevalence of the disorder. I met with a woman, who after recovering from
it in Philadelphia, took it a second time in New York, and a third time upon
her return to Philadelphia.

MANY thousand people had the disorder who were not confined to their houses,
but transacted business as usual out of doors. -- A perpetual coughing was
heard in every street of the city. -- Buying and selling were rendered tedious
by the coughing of the farmer and the citizen who met in market places. It even
rendered divine service scarcely intelligible in the churches.

A FEW persons who were exposed to the contagion escaped it, and some had it so
lightly as scarcely to be sensible of it. Of the persons who were confined to
their houses, not a fourth part of them kept their beds.

IT proved fatal (with few exceptions) only to old people, and to persons who
had been previously debilitated by consumptive complaints. It likewise carried
off several hard drinkers. It terminated in asthma in three persons whose cases
came under my notice, and in pulmonary consumption, in many more. I met with an
instance in a lady, who was much relieved of a chronic complaint in her liver;
and I heard of another instance of a clergyman whose general health was much
improved by a severe attack of this disorder.

THE contagion was not wholly confined to the human species. It affected two
cats, two house-dogs, and one horse within the sphere of my observations. One
of the dogs disturbed his mistress so much by coughing at night, that she gave
him ten drops of laudanum for several nights, which perfectly composed him. One
of the cats had a vomiting with her cough. The horse breathed as if he had been
affected by the cynanche trachialis.

THE scarlatina anginosa, which prevailed during the summer, disappeared after
the first of October; but appeared again after the influenza left the city. Nor
was the remitting fever seen during the prevalence of the reigning epidemic.

I INOCULATED about twenty children for the smallpox during this prevalence of
the Influenza, and never saw that disease exhibit a more favoraable appearance.

IN the treatment of the Influenza I was governed by the state of the system.
Where inflammatory diathesis discovered itself by a full or tense pulse, or
where great difficulty of breathing occurred, and the pulse was low and weak in
the beginning of the disorder, I ordered moderate bleeding. In a few cases in
which the symptoms of pneumony attended, I bled a second time with advantage.
In all these instances of inflammatory affection I gave the usual
antiphlogistic medicines. I found that vomits did not terminate the disorder,
as they often do a common catarrh, in the course of a day, or of a few hours.

IN cases where no inflammatory action appeared in the system, I prescribed
cordial drinks and diet, and forbad every kind of evacuation. I saw several
instances of persons who had languished for a week or two with the disorder,
who were suddenly cured by eating a hearty meal, or by drinking half a pint of
wine, or a pint of warm punch. In all these cases of debility, liquid laudanum
gave great relief, not only by suspending the cough, but by easing the pains in
the bones.

I MET with a case of an old lady who was suddenly and perfectly cured of her
cough by a fright.

THE duration of the disorder in our city was about six weeks -- It spread from
New York and Philadelphia in all directions, and in the course of a few months
pervaded every state in the union. It was carried from the United States to
several of the West India islands. It prevailed in the island of Grenada in the
month of November 1789, and it was heard of in the course of the ensuing winter
in the Spanish settlements in South America.

THE following winter was unusually mild, insomuch that the navigation of the
Delaware was not interrupted during the whole season, only from the 7th to the
24th of February. The weather on the 3d and 4th days of March was very cold,
and on the 8th and 9th days of the same month, the mercury in Fahrenheit's
thermometer stood at 4 at 7 o'clock in the morning. On the 10th and 11th, there
fell a deep snow. The weather during the remaining part of the month was cold,
rainy, and variable. It continued to be variable during the month of April.
About the middle of the month, there fell an unusual quantity of rain. The
showers which fell on the night of the 17th, will long be connected in the
memories of the citizens of Philadelphia with the time of the death of the
celebrated Dr. Franklin. Several pleurisies appeared during this month; also a
few cases of measles. In the last week of the month, the influenza made its
appearance. It was brought to the city from New England, and affected, in its
course, all the intermediate states. Its symptoms were nearly the same as they
were in the preceding autumn, but in many people it put on some new
appearances. Several persons who were affected by it, had symptoms of madness,
one of whom destroyed himself by jumping out of a window. Some had no cough,
but very acute pains in the back and head. It was remarked that those who had
the disease chiefly in the breast the last year, complained now chiefly of
their heads, while those whose heads were affected formerly, now complained
chiefly of their breasts. In many, it put on the type of an intermitting fever.
Several complained of constant chills, or constant sweats; and some were much
alarmed by an uncommon blue and dark color in their hands. I saw one case of
ischuria, another of an acute pain in the rectum, a third of anasarca, and a
fourth of a palsy in the tongue and arms; all of which appeared to be anomalous
symptoms of the Influenza. Sneezing, and pains in the ears and frontal sinus,
were less common now than they were in the fall; but a pain in the eye balls
was an universal symptom. Some had a pain in the one eye only, and a few had
sore eyes, and swellings in the face. Many women who had it, were affected by
an irregular appearance of the catamenia. In two persons whom I saw, the cough
was incessant for three days, nor could it be composed by any other remedy than
plentiful bleeding. A patient of Dr. Samuel Duffield's informed me after his
recovery, that he had had no other symptom of the disease than an efflorescence
on his skin, and a large swelling in his groin, which terminated in a tedious
abscess.

THE prisoners in the goal who had it in the autumn, escaped it this spring.

DURING the prevalence of this disorder, I saw no sign of any other epidemic.

IT declined sensibly about the first week in June, and after the 12th day of
this month, I was not called to a single patient in this disorder.

THE remedies for it were the same as were used in the fall.

I USED bleeding in several cases on the second, third, and fourth days of the
disorder, where it had appeared to be improper in its first stage. The cases
which required bleeding were far from being general. I saw two instances of
syncope of an alarming nature, after the loss of ten ounces of blood; and I
heard of one instance of a boy who died in half an hour after this evacuation.

I REMARKED that purges of all kinds worked more violently than usual in this
disorder.

THE convalescence from it was very slow, and a general languor appeared to
pervade the citizens for several weeks after it left the city.

THE month of December 1790 was extremely and uniformly cold. In the beginning
of the month of January 1791, the weather moderated, and continued to be
pleasant, till the 17th, on which day the navigation of the Delaware, which had
been completely obstructed by the ice, was opened so as to admit of the arrival
of several vessels. During the month of December many people complained of
Colds; but they were ascribed wholly to the weather. In January four or five
persons in a family were affected by colds at the same time; which created a
suspicion of a return of the influenza. This suspicion was soon confirmed by
accounts of its prevailing in the neighboring counties of Chester and
Montgomery in Pennsylvania, and in the distant states of Virginia and
Rhode Island. It did not affect near so generally as in the two former times of
appearance. There was no difference in the method of treating it. While the
common inflammatory diseases of the winter, bore the lancet as usual, it was
remarked that patients who were attacked by the influenza, did not bear
bleeding in a greater proportion, or in a larger quantity than in the two
former times of its appearance in the city.

I SHALL conclude this account of the Influenza by the following observations.

1. IT is as certainly a contagious disease as the measles or small pox, and
exists independently of the sensible qualities of the air. This is proved by
its prevailing in every species of weather, and in successive periods in
neighbourhoods, which have been exposed in the same instant to the same
atmosphere; also by whole families, and the tenants of gaols and hospitals
frequently escaping it. It is not peculiar to the influenza not to be affected
by the different states of the weather. Dr. Patrick Russel has proved, that the
contagion of the plague is equally independent of the influence of the
atmosphere.

2. THE Influenza infects at the greatest distance, passes with the utmost
rapidity through a country, and affects the greatest number of people in a
given time, of any contagious disease in the world.

3. IT appears from the histories of it which are upon record, that neither
climate, nor the different states of society, have produced any material change
in the disorder. This will appear from comparing the account I have given, with
the histories of it which have lately been given by Dr. Gray, Dr. Hamilton, Dr.
A. Fothergill, Mr. Chisholm, and other modern physicians. It appears further,
that even time itself has not been able materially to change the type of this
disorder. This is evident, from comparing modern accounts of it with those
which have been handed down to us by ancient physicians.

I HAVE hinted in a former essay at the diminutives of certain diseases. There
is a species of Influenza, which is less violent and more local, than that
which has been described. It generally prevails in the winter season. It seems
to originate from a morbid matter, generated in crowded and heated churches,
and other assemblies of the people. I have seen a cold, or influenza,
frequently universal in Philadelphia, which I have distinctly traced to this
source. It would seem as if the same species of diseases resembled pictures,
and that while some of them partook of the deep and vivid nature of mosaic
work, others appeared like the feeble and transient impressions of water
colors.

AN INQUIRY INTO THE CAUSES OF THE INCREASE OF Bilious and Intermitting Fevers
IN PENNSYLVANIA, Read in the AMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY, December 16, 1785.

AN INQUIRY, etc.
IT has been remarked, that Pennsylvania for some years past, has become more
sickly than formerly. Fevers, which a few years ago appeared chiefly on the
banks of creeks and rivers, and in the neighborhood of mill-ponds, now appear
in parts remote from them all, and in the highest situations. This change with
respect to the healthiness of our country, may be traced to the three following
causes.

1. THE establishment and increase of mill-ponds. There are whole counties in
Pennsylvania in which intermittents were unknown, until the waters in them were
dammed, for the purpose of erecting mill-ponds.

2. THE cutting down of wood, under certain circumstances, tends to render a
country sickly. It has been remarked, that intermittents on the shores of the
Susquehannah, have kept an exact pace with the passages which have been opened
for the propagation of marsh effluvia, by cutting down the wood which formerly
grew in its neighborhood. I remember the time, when intermittents were known
only within half a mile, in some places, of that river. They are now to be met
with ten miles from it, in the same parts of the state.

I BEG a distinction to be made here between clearing and cultivating a
country. While clearing a country makes it sickly, in the manner that has been
mentioned, cultivating a country, that is, draining swamps, destroying weeds,
burning brush, and exhaling the unwholesome and superfluous moisture of the
earth, by means of frequent crops of grain, grasses, and vegetables of all
kinds, render it healthy. I could mention, in support of these facts, several
countries in the United States, which have passed through each of the stages
that have been described. The first settlers received these countries from the
hands of nature pure and healthy. A Physician who traveled through part of
Bedford county, in Pennsylvania, in the year 1782, informed me that he was
witness of some country people having traveled twenty miles, to see whether it
was possible for a German girl, who labored under an intermittent, to be HOT
and COLD at the same time. Even the swamps in the United States are healthy
before they are cleared. In the Delaware State, laborers pass whole summers
and autumns in making shingles in the cedar swamps, without being affected by
fevers or sickness of any kind. Persons who spend the warm months in the cedar
and pine swamps in North Carolina, are likewise equally free from diseases.
Fevers soon followed their improvements, nor were they finally banished, until
the higher degrees of cultivation that have been named took place. I confine
myself to those countries only where the salutary effects of cultivation were
not rendered abortive by the neighborhood of mill-ponds.

A third cause of the late increase of bilious and intermitting fevers, must be
sought for in the different and unequal quantities of rain which have fallen
within these last seven years. While our creeks and rivers, from the uniformity
of our seasons, were confined to steady bounds, there was little or no
exhalation of febrile miasmata from their shores. But the dry summers of 1780,
1781, and 1782, by reducing our creeks and rivers far below their ancient
marks; while the wet springs of 1784 and 1785, by swelling them both beyond
their natural heights, have, when they have fallen, as in the former case, left
a large and extensive surface of moist ground exposed to the action of the sun,
and of course to the generation and exhalation of febrile miasmata. The history
of epidemics in foreign countries, favors this opinion of the cause of their
increase in Pennsylvania. The inhabitants of Egypt are always healthy during
the overflowing of the Nile. Their fevers appear only after the recess of the
river. It is remarkable that a wet season is often healthy in low, while it is
sickly in hilly countries. The reason is obvious. In the former the rains
entirely cover all the moist grounds, while in the latter, they fall only in
sufficient quantity to produce those degrees of moisture which favor febrile
exhalations. The rains which fall in the summer are rendered harmless only by
covering the whole surface of marshy ground. The rains which fall in our state
after the middle of September, are so far from producing fevers, that they
generally prevent them. The extraordinary healthiness of the last autumn, I
believe, was occasioned by nothing but the extraordinary quantity of rain that
fell during the autumnal months. The rain probably acts at this season by
diluting, and thus destroying, the febrile miasmata that were produced by the
heat and moisture of the preceding summer. In support of the truth of this
third cause of the increase of fevers in Pennsylvania, I have only to add a
fact lately communicated to me by Dr. Franklin. He informed me, that in his
journey from Passey to Havre de Grace, last summer, he found the country
through which he traveled, unusually sickly with fevers. These fevers, it was
generally supposed, were produced by the extrordinary dry weather, of which the
public papers have given us such melancholy and frequent accounts.

I COME now to suggest a few hints for obviating and preventing fevers, and for
rendering our country again healthy. For this purpose, I beg leave to
recommend, in the first place, the planting of trees around all our mill ponds,
(besides cleaning them occasionally) in order to prevent the diseases that have
justly been ascribed to them. Let the trees be planted in the greatest number,
and closest together, to leeward of the ordinary current of the summer and
autumnal winds. I have known several instances of families being preserved from
fevers by an accidental copse of wood standing between a mill-pond and a
dwelling house, and that in cases too where the house derived no advantage from
an high situation. The trees around or near a mill-pond, act perhaps in a small
degree mechanically. By sheltering the pond from the action of the sun, they
lessen exhalation, as well as obstruct the passage of the vapors that are
raised, to the adjacent parts. But they act likewise chemically. It has been
demonstrated that trees absorb unhealthy air, and discharge it in a highly
purified state in the form of what is now called "dephlogisticated" air. The
willow tree, according to Mr. Ingenhauzs, has been found to purify air the most
rapidly of any tree that he has subjected to his experiments. The rapidity of
its growth, its early verdure, and the late fall of its leaf, all seem to mark
it likewise as a tree highly proper for this purpose.

A SECOND method of preventing fevers, is to let the cultivation always keep
pace with the clearing of our lands. Nature has in this instance, connected our
duty, interest, and health together. Let every spot covered with moisture from
which the wood has been cut, be carefully drained, and afterward ploughed and
sowed with grass seed; let weeds of all kinds be destroyed, and let the waters
be so directed as to prevent their stagnating in any part of their course.

THESE are the two principal means of extirpating intermitting and bilious
fevers from our country, but as these means are slow in their operation, I
shall subjoin a few directions for preventing fevers till the above remedies
can take effect.

1. WHETHER the matter which produces fevers be of an organic nature, I do not
pretend to determine, but it is certain, that fire, or the smoke or heat which
issue from it, destroy the effects of marsh miasmata upon the human body; hence
we find cities more healthy than country places, and the center of cities more
healthy than their suburbs in the sickly months. To derive the utmost possible
benefit from this method of preventing sickness, I would advise large fires to
be made every evening, of brush, between the spots from whence the exhalations
are derived, and the dwelling house, and as near to the latter as is safe, and
not disagreeable. This practice should be continued till the appearance of two
or three frosts, for frosts, as well as heavy rains in the autumnal months,
never fail to put a stop to the progress of intermittents.

DURING the sickly season, fires should be likewise kept in every room in the
dwelling house, even in those cases where the heat of the weather makes it
necessary to keep the doors and windows open.

2. LET me advise my countrymen in sickly situations, to prefer woollen and
cotton to linen clothes in the summer and autumnal months. The most sickly
parts of the island of Jamaica have been rendered more healthy, since the
inhabitants have adopted the use of woollen and cotton garments instead of
linen.

DURING the late war, I knew many officers, both in the British and American
armies, who escaped fevers in the most sickly places, by wearing woollen shirts
or waistcoats constantly next to their skins. I have heard the present
diminution of the human body in strength and size, compared with its ancient
vigor and form, ascribed in part to the introduction of linen garments. I am
not disposed to controvert this opinion, but I am sure of the efficacy of
woollen clothes in wet and cold climates in preventing fevers of all kinds. The
parliament of Great Britain compels every body that dies within the island to
be buried in a woollen shirt or winding sheet. The law would be much wiser if
it compelled every body to wear woollen garments next to their skins during
life, and linen after death.

3. THE diet in the sickly months should be generous. Wine and beer should be
the drinks of this season instead of spirits and water. I do not think that
fruit and vegetables of any kind produce fevers, but as the season of the year
produces languor and weakness, a larger quantity of animal food than usual is
best calculated to oppose them. Salted meat, for this reason, is preferable to
fresh meat. Food of all kinds eaten during the sickly months, should be well
seasoned.

4. THE evening air should be avoided as much as possible. Even the morning air
before the sun rises, should not be breathed, until the body has been fortified
with a little solid aliment, or a draught of bitters. These bitters should be
made of centaury, wormwood, camomile, or the bark of the willow or dogwood
trees infused in water. Bitters made with spirits, or even wine, cannot be
taken in a sufficient quantity to do service without producing intoxication, or
the deadly habit of loving and drinking spirituous liquors.

5. TOO much cannot be said in favor of cleanliness, as means of preventing
fevers. The body should be bathed or washed frequently. It has been proved in
the highlands of Jamaica, that adding salt to water, renders it more powerful
in preventing diseases when applied to the body. Equal pains should be taken to
promote cleanliness in every species of apparel. Offal matters, especially
those which are of a vegetable nature, should be removed from the neighborhood
of a dwelling house. The dung of domestic animals, during its progress toward
manure may be excepted from this direction. Nature, which made man and these
animals equally necessary to each others subsistence, has kindly prevented any
inconvenience from their living together. On the contrary, to repay the
husbandman for affording a shelter to these useful and helpless animals, nature
has done more. She has endowed their dung with a power of destroying the
effects of marsh exhalations, and of preventing fevers. The miserable cottagers
in Europe who live under the same roof, and in some instances in the same room
with their cattle, are always healthy. In Philadelphia, fevers are less known
in the neighborhood of livery stables, than in any other part of the city. I
could mention a family that has lived near thirty years near a livery stable in
a sickly part of the city, that has never known a fever but from the measles or
smallpox.

AN INQUIRY INTO THE CAUSES AND CURE OF SORE LEGS.

AN INQUIRY, etc.
HOWEVER trifling these complaints may appear, they compose a large class of
the diseases of a numerous body of people. Hitherto the persons afflicted by
them have been too generally abandoned to the care of empirics, either because
the disease was considered as beneath the notice of physicians, or because they
were unable to cure it. I would rather ascribe it to the latter, than to the
former cause, for pride has no natural fellowship with the profession of
medicine.

THE difficulty of curing sore legs has been confessed by physicians in every
country. As far as my observations have extended, I am disposed to ascribe this
difficulty to the uniform and indiscriminate mode of treating them, occasioned
by the want of a theory which shall explain their proximate cause. I shall
attempt in a few pages to deliver one, which however imperfect, will I hope lay
a foundation for more successful inquiries upon this subject hereafter.

I SHALL begin my observations upon this disorder, by delivering and supporting
the following propositions.

I. SORE LEGS are a disease of general debility, which, for the most part, is
of the indirect kind. This I infer from the occupations and habits of the
persons who are most subject to them. They are day-labourers, and sailors, who
are in the habit of lifting great weights; also washer-women, and all other
persons, who pass the greatest part of their time upon their feet. The blood
vessels, and muscular fibers of the legs are thus overstretched, by which means
either a rupture, or such a languid action in the vessels is induced, as that
an accidental wound from any cause, even from the scratch of a pin or the bite
of a mosquito, will not easily heal. But laborers, sailors, and washer-women,
are not the only persons who are afflicted with sore legs. Hard-drinkers of
every rank and description are likewise subject to them. Where strong drink,
labor, and standing long on the feet are united, they more certainly dispose
to sore legs, than when they act separately. In China, where the labor which
is performed by brutes in other countries is performed by men, varices on the
legs are very common among the laboring people. Perhaps, the reason why the
debility induced in the legs produces varices instead of ulcers in these
people, may be owing to their not adding the debilitating stimulus of strong
drink to that of excessive labor.

IT is not extraordinary that the indirect debility produced by intemperance in
drinking ardent spirits, should appear first in the lower extremities. The
indirect debility produced by intemperance in the use of wine, makes its first
appearance in the form of gout, in the same part of the body. The gout, it is
true, discovers itself most frequently in pain only, but there are cases in
which it has terminated in ulcers, and even mortifications on the legs.

II. SORE LEGS are a disease of the whole system. This I infer,

1. From the causes which induce them, all of which act more or less upon every
part of the body.

2. FROM their following or preceding diseases which obviously belong to the
whole system. Fevers and dysenteries often terminate critically in this
disorder; and the pulmonary consumption and apoplexy have often been preceded
by the suppression of an habitual discharge from a sore leg. The two latter
diseases have been ascribed to the translation of a morbific matter to the
lungs or brain: But it is more rational to ascribe them to a previous debility
in those organs, by which means their vessels were more easily excited into
action and effusion by the stimulus of the plethora, induced upon the system in
consequence of the confinement of the fluids formerly discharged from the leg
in the form of pus. This plethora can do harm only where there is previous
debility; for I maintain that the system (when the solids are exactly toned)
will always relieve itself of a sudden preternatural accumulation of fluids by
means of some natural emunctory. This has been often observed in the
menorrhagia, which accompanies plentiful living in women, and in the copious
discharges from the bowels and kidneys which follow a suppression of the
perspiration.

3. I INFER it, from their appearing almost universally in one disease, which
is evidently a disease of the whole system, viz. the scurvy.

4. FROM their becoming in some cases the outlets of menstrual blood, which is
discharged in consequence of a plethora which affects more or less every part
of the female system.

5. I INFER it from the symptoms of sore legs, which are in some cases febrile,
and affect the pulse in every part of the body with preternatural frequency or
force. These symptoms were witnessed, in an eminent degree, in two of the
patients who furnished subjects for clinical remarks in the Pennsylvania
hospital in the course of the last winter.

6. I INFER that sore legs are a disease of the whole system, from the manner
in which they are sometimes cured by nature and art. They often prove the
outlets of many general diseases, and all the remedies which cure them, act
more or less upon the whole system.

IN all cases of sore legs there is a tonic and atonic state of the whole
system. The same state of excessive or deficient action takes place in the
parts which are affected by the sores. The remedies to cure them, therefore,
should be general and local.

IN cases where the arterial system is affected by too much tone, the general
remedies should be,

I. BLOOD-LETTING. Of the efficacy of this remedy in disposing ulcers suddenly
to heal, the two clinical patients beforementioned, exhibited remarkable proofs
last winter, in the presence of all the students of medicine in the university.
The blood drawn was sizy in both cases. I have not the merit of having
introduced this remedy into practice in the cure of ulcers. I learned it from
Sir John Pringle. I have known it to be used with equal success in a sore
breast, attended by pain and inflammation, after all the usual remedies for
that disorder had been used to no purpose. I anticipate here a repetition of an
objection to this remedy by persons who cannot, at first sight, reconcile
excessive action in the arterial system with the debility which predisposes to
it. I refer the reader for a defense of it, to what was said upon the subject
of bleeding in the inflammatory species of consumption. It will only be
necessary to add in this place, that indirect, like direct debility, when of
short duration, never fails to produce such a degree of excitability, or
vibratility (if I may be allowed to coin a word) in the blood vessels, as to
dispose them to be thrown into excessive action by the least increase in the
force or number of the stimuli which act upon the human body.

II. GENTLE PURGES.

III. NITRE. From fifteen to twenty grains of this medicine should be given
three times a day.

IV. A TEMPERATE diet, and a total abstinence from fermented and distilled
liquors.

V. COOL and pure air.

THE local remedies in this state of the system should be,

I. COLD water. Dr. Rigby has written largely in favor of this remedy when
applied to local inflammations. From its good effects in allaying the
inflammation which sometimes follows the puncture which is made in the arm in
communicating the small pox, and from the sudden relief it affords in the
inflammatory species of the ophthalmia and in the piles, no one can doubt of
its efficacy in sore legs, accompanied by inflammation in those vessels, which
are the immediate seat of the disorder.

II. SOFT poultices of bread and milk, or of bread moistened with lead water.
Dr. Underwood's method of making a poultice of bread and milk should be
preferred in this case. He directs us first to boil the milk, then to powder
the bread, and throw it into the milk, and after they have been intimately
mixed, by being well stirred and boiled together, they should be poured out and
spread upon a rag, and a knife dipped in sweet oil or lard, should be run over
them. The solidity and consistence of the poultice is hereby better preserved,
than when the oil or lard is mixed with the bread and milk over the fire.

III. When the inflammation subsides, dry lint should be applied to the sore,
and confined by means of a soft plaster of wax and sweet oil.

IV. ABOVE all, rest, and an horizontal posture of the leg. Too much cannot be
said in favor of this remedy in this species of sore legs. Nannoni, the famous
Italian surgeon, sums up the cure of sore legs in three words, viz. "Tempo,
riposo, e pazienza;" that is, in time, rest and patience. A friend of mine, who
was cured by this surgeon, of a sore leg, about thirty years ago, informed me,
that he confined him to his bed, during the greatest part of the time that he
was under his care.

IN sore legs, attended by too little general and local action, the following
remedies are proper.

I. BARK. It should be used plentifully, but with a constant reference to the
state of the system; for the changes in the weather, and other accidental
circumstances often produce such changes in the system, as to render its disuse
for a short time frequently necessary.

II. MERCURY. This remedy has been supposed to act by altering the fluids, or
by discharging a morbid matter from them, in curing sore legs. But this is by
no means the case. It appears to act as an universal stimulant; and if it prove
most useful when it excites a salivation, it is only because in this way it
excites the most general action in the system.

III MINERAL TONICS -- such as the different preparations of iron, copper, and
zinc.

IV. GENTLE EXERCISE. Rest, and a recumbent posture of the body, so proper in
the tonic, are both hurtful in this species of sore legs. The efficacy of
exercise, even of the active kind, in the cure of sore legs, accompanied by
deficient action in the vessels, may easily be conceived from its good effects
after gunshot wounds which are mentioned by Dr. Jackson. Medical Journal, 1790.
He tells us, that those British soldiers who had been wounded at the battle of
Guilford, in North Carolina, who were turned out of the military hospitals and
followed the army, soonest recovered of their wounds. It was remarkable that if
they delayed only a few days on the road, their wounds grew worse, or ceased to
heal.

IN the use of the different species of exercise the same regard should be had
to the state of the system which was recommended in a former disorder.

V. A NUTRITIOUS and moderately stimulating diet, consisting of milk,
saccharine vegetables, animal food, malt-liquors, and wine.

WORT has done great service in sore legs. I am at a loss to determine whether
it acts by conveying a quantity of gently stimulating and nutritious matter
into the system, or by correcting a scorbutic diathesis in the blood. The
manner in which I have directed it to be prepared and taken is as follows -- To
three or four (...) table-spoonsful of the malt, finely powdered and sifted,
add two table spoonsful of brown sugar, and three or four of Madeira, Sherry,
or Lisbon wine, and a quart of boiling water. After they have stood a few
hours, it may be drunken liberally by the patient, stirring it each time before
he takes it, so that the whole substance of the malt may be conveyed into the
stomach. A little lime-juice may be added, if the patient requires it, to make
it more pleasant. The above quantity may be taken once, twice, or three times a
day at the pleasure of the patient, or according to the indication of his
disorder.

VI. OPIUM. This remedy is not only useful in easing the pain of a sore leg,
but co-operates with other cordial medicines in invigorating the whole system.

THE local applications should consist of such substances as are gently
escarotic, and which excite an action in the torpid vessels of the affected
part. Arsenic, precipitate, and blue vitriol, have all been employed with
success for this purpose. Dr. Griffitts informed me, that he has frequently
accomplished the same thing in the Dispensary by applications of tartar emetic.
They should all be used, if necessary, in succession to each other; for there
is often the same idiosyncrasy in a sore leg to certain topical applications,
that there is in the stomach to certain aliments. After the use of these
remedies, astringents and tonics should be applied, such as an infusion of
Peruvian, or white-oak bark; the water in which the smiths extinguish their
irons, limewater, bread dipped in a weak solution of green vitriol (so much
commended by Dr. Underwood) and compresses wetted with brandy, or ardent
spirits of any kind.

TIGHT bandages are likewise highly proper here. The laced stocking has been
much used. It is made of strong coarse linen. Dr. Underwood gives several good
reasons for preferring a flannel roller to the linen stocking. It sets easier
on the leg, and yields to the swelling of the muscles in walking.

IN scorbutic sores on the legs, navy surgeons have spoken in high terms of an
application of a mixture of lime-juice and melasses. Mr. Gillespie commends the
use of lime or lemon-juice alone, and ascribes many cures to it in the British
navy during the late war, after every common application had been used to no
purpose. Medical Journal, Vol. VI.


IT is of the utmost consequence in the treatment of sore legs, to keep them
clean, by frequent dressings and washings. The success of old women is oftener
derived from their great attention to cleanliness, in the management of sore
legs, than to any specifics they possess which are unknown to physicians.

WHEN sore legs are kept from healing by affections of the bone, the treatment
should be such as is recommended by practical writers on surgery.

I SHALL conclude this inquiry by four observations, which are naturally
suggested by what has been delivered upon this disorder.

1. IF it has been proved that sore legs are, in most cases, diseases of the
whole system, is it not proper to inquire, whether many other diseases supposed
to be local are not in like manner diseases of the whole system? And if sore
legs have been cured by general remedies, is it not proper to use them more
frequently in other local diseases? -- I am led to make this remark by having
seen two instances of tumors, the one on the breast, and the other in the
prostate gland, nearly cured by long journies.

2. IF there be two states of action in the arteries in sore legs, it becomes
us to inquire, whether the same opposite states of action do not take place in
many diseases in which they are not suspected. I have before observed, that
they occur in the scrofula. It would be easy to prove, that they exist in
several other local diseases.

3. IF the efficacy of the remedies for sore legs which have been mentioned,
depends upon their being accommodated exactly to the state of the arterial
system, and if this system be liable to frequent changes, does it not become us
to be more attentive to the state of the pulse in this disorder than is
commonly supposed to be necessary by physicians? -- Indeed, if one of the
principles I have aimed to establish in this and several of the foregoing
essays be just, that is, that all prescriptions should be suited to the state,
and not to the name, of a disease, it follows that success in the practice of
physic will depend chiefly upon the occasional change of the dose, or quality
of a medicine with the changing state of the whole system.

4. IT has been a misfortune in medicine, as well as in other sciences, for men
to ascribe effects to one cause, which should be ascribed to many. Hence
diseases have been attributed exclusively to morbid affections of the fluids by
some, and of the muscles, and nerves by others. Unforfortunately the morbid
states of the arterial system, and the influence of those states upon the brain
-- the nerves -- the muscles -- the lymphatics -- the glands -- the viscera --
the alimentary canal -- and the skin, as well as the reciprocal influence of
the morbid states of each of those parts of the body upon the arteries, and
upon each other, have been too much neglected in most of our systems of physic.
I consider the pathology of the arterial system as a mine. It was first
discovered by Dr. Cullen. The man who attempts to explore it, will probably
impoverish himself by his researches; but the men who come after him, will
certainly obtain from it a treasure which cannot fail of adding greatly to the
riches of medicine.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE State of the BODY and MIND in OLD AGE; WITH OBSERVATIONS ON
ITS DISEASES, and their REMEDIES.

An ACCOUNT, etc.
MOST of the facts which I shall deliver upon this subject, are the result of
observations made during the last five years, upon persons of both sexes, who
had passed the 80th year of their lives. I intended to have given a detail of
the names -- manner of life -- occupations -- and other circumstances of each
of them; but, upon a review of my notes, I found so great a sameness in the
history of most of them, that I despaired, by detailing them, of answering the
intention which I have purposed in the following essay. I shall, therefore,
only deliver the facts and principles which are the result of the inquiries and
observations I have made upon this subject.

I. I SHALL Mention the circumstances which favor the attainment of longevity.

II. I SHALL mention the phenomenon of body and mind which attend it: and,

III. I SHALL enumerate its peculiar diseases, and the remedies which are most
proper to remove, or moderate them.

I. THE circumstances which favor longevity, are,

1. Descent from long-lived Ancestors. I have not found a single instance of a
person, who has lived to be 80 years old, in whom this was not the case. In
some instances I found the descent was only from one, but in general, it was
from both parents. The knowledge of this fast may serve, not only to assist in
calculating what are called the chances of lives, but it may be made useful to
a physician. He may learn from it to cherish hopes of his patients in chronic,
and in some acute diseases, in proportion to the capacity of life they have
derived from their ancestors. Dr. Franklin, who died in his 84th year, was
descended from long-lived parents. His father died at 89, and his mother at 87.
His father had 17 children by two wives. The Doctor informed me that he once
sat down as one of 11 adult sons and daughters at his father's table. In an
excursion he once made to that part of England from whence his family migrated
to America, he discovered in a grave-yard, the tomb-stones of several persons
of his name, who had lived to be very old. These persons he supposed to have
been his ancestors.


2. Temperance in Eating and Drinking. To this remark I found several
exceptions. I met with one man of 84 years of age, who had been intemperate in
eating; and four or five persons who had been intemperate in drinking ardent
spirits. They had all been day-labourers, or had deferred drinking until they
began to feel the languor of old age. I did not meet with a single person who
had not, for the last forty or fifty years of their lives, used tea, coffee,
and bread and butter twice a day as part of their diet. I am disposed to
believe that those articles of diet do not materially affect the duration of
human life, although they evidently impair the strength of the system. The
duration of life does not appear to depend so much upon the strength of the
body, or upon the quantity of its excitability, as upon an exact accommodation
of stimuli to each of them. A watch spring will last as long as an anchor,
provided the forces which are capable of destroying both, are always in an
exact ratio to their strength. The use of tea and coffee in diet seems to be
happily suited to the change which has taken place in the human body, by
sedentary occupations, by which means less nourishment and stimulus are
required than formerly, to support animal life.

3. THE Moderate exercise of the Understanding. It has long been an established
truth, that literary men (other circumstances being equal) are longer lived
than other people. But it is not necessary that the understanding should be
employed upon philosophical subjects to produce this influence upon human life.
Business, politics, and religion, which are the objects of attention of men of
all classes, impart a vigor to the understanding, which, by being conveyed to
every part of the body, tends to produce health and long life.

4. Equanimity of temper. The violent and irregular action of the passions
tends to wear away the springs of life.

PERSONS who live upon annuities in Europe have been observed to be longer
lived, in equal circumstances, than other people. This is probably occasioned
by their being exempted, by the certainty of their subsistence from those fears
of want which so frequently distract the minds, and thereby weaken the bodies
of old people. Life-rents have been supposed to have the same i^^^^ence in
prolonging life. Perhaps the desire of life, in order to enjoy for as long a
time as possible, that property which cannot be enjoyed a second time by a
child or relation, may be another cause of the longevity of persons who live
upon certain incomes. It is a fact, that the desire of life is a very powerful
stimulus in prolonging it, especially when that desire is supported by hope.
This is obvious to physicians every day. Despair of recovery, is the beginning
of death in all diseases.

BUT obvious and reasonable as the effects of equanimity of temper are upon
human life, there are some exceptions in favor of passionate men and women
having attained to a great age. The morbid stimulus of anger, in these cases,
was probably obviated by less degrees, or less active exercises of the
understanding, or by the defect, or weakness of some of the other stimuli which
keep up the motions of life.

5. Matrimony. In the course of my inquiries, I met with only one person beyond
eighty years of age who had never been married. -- I met with several women who
had borne from 10 to 20 children, and suckled them all. I met with one woman, a
native of Herefordshire in England, who is now in the 100th year of her age,
who bore a child at 60, menstruated till 80, and frequently suckled two of her
children (though born in succession to each other) at the same time. She had
passed the greatest part of her life over a washing-tub.

6. I HAVE not found Sedentary Employments to prevent long life, where they are
not accompanied by intemperance in eating or drinking. This observation is not
confined to literary men, nor to women only, in whom longevity without much
exercise of body has been frequently observed. I met with one instance of a
weaver; a second of a silver-smith; and a third of a shoemaker, among the
number of old people, whose histories have suggested these observations.

7. I HAVE not found that acute, nor that all chronic diseases shorten human
life. Dr. Franklin had two successive vomicas in his lungs before he was 40
years old. I met with one man beyond 80, who had survived a most violent attack
of the yellow fever; a second who had had several of his bones fractured by
falls, and in frays: and many who had been frequently affected by
intermittents. I met with one man of 86, who had all his life been subject to
syncope; another who had for 50 years been occasionally affected by a cough;
This man's only remedy for his cough, was the fine powder of dry Indian turnip,
and honey.
and two instances of men who had been afflicted for forty years with obstinate
head-achs. Dr. Thiery says, That he did not find the itch, or slight degrees of
the leprosy to prevent longevity. Observations de Physique, et de Medicine
faites en differens leaux de L'Espagne. Vol. II. p. 171.
I met with only one person beyond 80, who had ever been affected by a disorder
in the stomach; and in him, it arose from an occasional rupture. Mr. John
Strangeways Hutton, of this city, who died last year, in the 109th year of his
age, informed me, that he had never puked in his life. This circumstance is the
more remarkable as he passed several years at sea when a young man. The
venerable old man, whose history first suggested this remark, was born in
New York in the year 1684 -- His grandfather lived to be 101, but was unable to
walk for thirty years before he died, from an excessive quantity of fat. His
mother died at 91. His constant drinks were water, beer, and cider. He had a
fixed dislike to spirits of all kinds. His appetite was good, and he ate
plentifully during the last years of his life. He seldom drank any thing
between his meals. He was never intoxicated but twice in his life, and that was
when a boy, and at sea, where he remembers perfectly well to have celebrated by
a feu de joye the birth day of Queen Ann. He was formerly afflicted with the
headache, and giddiness, but never had a fever, except from the smallpox, in
the course of his life. His pulse was slow, but regular. He had been twice
married. By his first wife he had 8, and by his second 17 children. One of them
lived to be 83 years of age. He was about five feet nine inches in height, of a
slender make, and carried an (...) to the last year of his life
These facts may serve to extend our ideas of the importance of a healthy state
of the stomach in the animal economy; and thereby to add to our knowledge in
the prognosis of diseases, and in the choices of human life.

8. I HAVE not found the loss of teeth to affect the duration of human life, so
much as might be expected. Edward Drinker, who lived to be 103 years old, lost
his teeth thirty years before he died from drawing the hot smoke of tobacco
into his mouth through a short pipe.

DR. SAYRE, of New Jersey, to whom I am indebted for several very valuable
histories of old persons, mentions one man aged 81, whose teeth began to decay
at 16, and another of 90, who lost his teeth thirty years before he saw him.
The gums, by becoming hard, perform, in part, the office of teeth: But may not
the gastric juice of the stomach, like the tears and urine, become acrid by
age, and thereby supply, by a more dissolving power, the defect of mastication
from the loss of teeth? Analogies might easily be adduced from several
operations of nature, which go forward in the animal economy, which render
this supposition highly probable.

9. I HAVE not observed Baldness, or Gray Hairs, occurring in early or middle
life, to prevent old age. In one of the histories furnished me by Dr. Sayre, I
find an account of a man of 81, whose hair began to assume a silver color when
he was only one and twenty years of age.

I SHALL conclude this head by the following remark --

NOTWITHSTANDING there appears in the human body a certain capacity of long
life, which seems to dispose it to preserve its existence in every situation;
yet this capacity does not always protect it from premature destruction; for
among the old people whom I examined, I scarcely met with one who had not lost
brothers or sisters, in early and middle life, who were born under
circumstances equally favorable to longevity with themselves.

II. I COME now to mention some of the phenomenon of the body and mind which
occur in old age.

1. THERE is a great sensibility to cold in all old people. I met with an old
woman of 84, who slept constantly under three blankets and a coverlit during
the hottest summer months. The servant of prince de Beaufremont, who came from
Mount Jura to Paris at the age of 121, to pay his respects to the first
national assembly of France, shivered with cold in the middle of the dog days,
when he was not near a good fire. The national assembly directed him to sit
with his hat on, in order to defend his head from the cold.

2. IMPRESSIONS made upon the ears of old people, excite sensation and
reflection much quicker than when they are made upon their eyes. Mr. Hutton
informed me, that he had frequently met his sons in the street without knowing
them until they had spoken to him. Dr. Franklin informed me that he rcognized
his friends, after a long absence from them, first by their voices. This fact
does not contradict the common opinion, upon the subject of memory, for the
recollection in these instances, is the effect of what is called reminiscence,
which differs from memory in being excited only by the renewal of the
impression which at first produced the idea which is revived.

2. THE appetite for food is generally increased in old age. The famous Parr,
who died at 152, ate heartily in the last week of his life. The kindness of
nature, in providing this last portion of earthly enjoyments for old people,
deserves to be noticed. It is remarkable, that they have, like children, a
frequent recurrence of appetite, and sustain with great uneasiness the
intervals of regular meals. The observation, therefore, made by Hippocrates,
that middle-aged people are more affected by abstinence than those who are old,
is not true. This might easily be proved by many appeals to the records of
medicine; but old people differ from children, in preferring solid to liquid
aliment. From inattention to this fact, Dr. Mead has done great mischief by
advising old people, as their teeth decayed or perished, to lessen the quantity
of their solid, and to increase the quantity of their liquid food. This advice
is contrary to nature, and experience, and I have heard of two old persons who
destroyed themselves by following it. The circulation of the blood is supported
in old people chiefly by the stimulus of aliment. The action of liquids of all
kinds upon the system is weak, and of short continuance, compared with the
durable stimulus of solid food. There is a gradation in the action of this food
upon the body. Animal matters are preferred to vegetable; the fat of meat, to
the lean, and salted meat to fresh, by most old people. I have met with but few
old people who retained an appetite for milk. It is remarkable, that a less
quantity of strong drink produces intoxication in old people than in persons in
the middle of life. This depends upon the recurrence of the same state of the
system, with respect to excitability, which takes place in childhood. Many old
people, from an ignorance of this fact, have made shipwreck of characters which
have commanded respect in every previous stage of their lives. From the same
recurrence of the excitability of childhood in their systems, they commonly
drink their tea and coffee much weaker than in early or middle life.

3. THE pulse is generally full, and frequently affected by pauses in its
pulsations when felt in the wrists of old people. A regular pulse in such
persons indicates a disease, as it shows the system to be under the impression
of a preternatural stimulus of some kind. This observation was suggested to me
above twenty years ago by Morgagni, and I have often profited by it in
attending old people. The pulse in such patients is an uncertain mark of the
nature or degree of an acute disease. It seldom partakes of the quickness or
convulsive action of the arterial system, which attends fever in young or
middle-aged people. I once attended a man of 77 in a fever of the bilious kind,
which confined him for eight days to his bed, in whom I could not perceive the
least quickness or morbid action in his pulse until four and twenty hours
before he died.

4. THE marks of old age appear earlier, and are more numerous in persons who
have combined with hard labor, a vegetable or scanty diet, than in persons who
have lived under opposite circumstances. I think I have observed these marks of
old age to occur sooner, and to be more numerous in the German, than in the
English or Irish citizens of Pennsylvania. They are likewise more common among
the inhabitants of country places, than of cities, and still more so among the
Indians of North America, than among the inhabitants of civilized countries.

5. OLD men tread upon the whole base of their feet at once in walking. This is
perhaps one reason why they wear out fewer shoes, under the same circumstances
of constant use, than young people, who by treading on the posterior, and
rising on the anterior part of their feet, expose their shoes to more unequal
pressure and friction. The advantage derived to old people from this mode of
walking is very obvious. It lessens that disposition to totter which is always
connected with weakness: -- hence we find the same mode of walking is adopted
by habitual drunkards, and is sometimes from habit practiced by them, when they
are not under the influence of strong drink.

6. THE memory is the first faculty of the mind which fails in the decline of
life. While recent events pass through the mind without leaving an impression
upon it, it is remarkable that the long forgotten events of childhood and youth
are recalled and distinctly remembered.

I MET with a singular instance of a German woman, who had learned to speak the
language of our country after she was forty years of age, who had forgotten
every word of it after she had passed her 80th year, but spoke the German
language as fluently as ever she had done. The memory decays soonest in hard
drinkers. I have observed some studious men to suffer a decay of their
memories, but never of their understandings. Among these, was the late Anthony
Benezet of this city. But even this infirmity did not abate the cheerfulness,
or lessen the happiness of this pious philosopher, for he once told me, when I
was a young man, that he had a consolation in the decay of his memory, which
gave him a great advantage over me. "You can read a good book (said he) with
pleasure but once, but when I read a good book, I so soon forget the contents
of it, that I have the pleasure of reading it over and over; and every time I
read it, it is alike new and delightful to me." -- The celebrated Dr. Swift was
one of those few studious men, who have exhibited marks of a decay of
understanding in old age; but it is judiciously ascribed by Dr. Johnson to two
causes which rescue books, and the exercise of the thinking powers, from having
had any share in inducing that disease upon his mind. These causes were, a rash
vow which he made when a young man, never to use spectacles, and a sordid
seclusion of himself from company, by which means he was cut off from the use
of books, and the benefits of conversation, the absence of which left his mind
without its usual stimulus -- hence it collapsed into a state of fatuity. It is
probably owing to the constant exercise of the understanding, that literary men
possess that faculty of the mind in a vigorous state in extreme old age. The
same cause accounts for old people preserving their intellects longer in
cities, than in country places. They enjoy society upon such easy terms in the
former situation, that their minds are kept more constantly in an excited state
by the acquisition of new, or the renovation of old ideas, by means of
conversation.

7. I DID not meet with a single instance in which the moral or religious
faculties were impaired in old people. I do not believe, that these faculties
of the mind are preserved, by any supernatural power, but wholly by the
constant and increasing exercise of them in the evening of life. In the course
of my inquiries, I heard of a man of 101 years of age, who declared that he had
forgotten every thing he had ever known, except his GOD. I found the moral
faculty, or a disposition to do kind offices, to be exquisitely sensible in
several old people, in whom there was scarcely a trace left of memory or
understanding.

8. DREAMING is universal among old people. It appears to be brought on by
their imperfect sleep, of which I shall say more hereafter.

9. I MENTIONED formerly the sign of a second childhood in the state of the
appetite in old people. It appears further, -- 1. In the marks which slight
contusions or impressions leave upon their skins. 2. In their being soon
fatigued by walking or exercise, and in being as soon refreshed by rest. 3. In
their disposition, like children, to detail immediately every thing they see
and hear. And, 4. In their aptitude to shed tears; hence they are unable to
tell a story that is in any degree distressing without weeping. Dr. Moore takes
notice of this peculiarity in Voltaire, after he had passed his 80th year. He
wept constantly at the recital of his own tragedies. This feature in old age
did not escape Homer. Old Menelaus wept ten years after he returned from the
destruction of Troy, when he spoke of the death of the heroes who perished
before that city.

10. IT would be sufficiently humbling to human nature, if our bodies exhibited
in old age the marks only of a second childhood; but human weakness descends
still lower. I met with an instance of a woman between 80 and 90, who exhibited
the marks of a second infancy, by such a total decay of her mental faculties as
to lose all consciousness in discharging her alvine and urinary excretions. In
this state of the body, a disposition to sleep, succeeds the wakefulness of the
first stages of old age. Dr. Haller mentions an instance of a very old man who
slept twenty, out of every twenty-four hours during the few last years of his
life.

11. THE disposition in the system to renew certain parts in extreme old age,
has been mentioned by several authors. Many instances are to be met with in the
records of medicine of the sight There is a remarkable instance of the sight
having been restored after it had been totally destroyed in an old man near
Reading in Pennsylvania. My brother, Jacob Rush, furnished me with the
following account of him in a letter from Reading, dated June 23, 1792. --

"AN old man of 84 years of age, of the name of Adam Riffle, near this town,
gradually lost his sight in the 68th year of his age, and continued entirely
blind for the space of twelve years. About four years ago his sight returned,
without making use of any means for the purpose, and without any visible change
in the appearance of the eyes, and he now sees as well as ever he did. I have
seen the man, and have no doubt of the fact. He is at this time so hearty, as
to be able to walk from his house to Reading, (about three miles) which he
frequently does in order to attend church. I should observe, that during both
the gradual loss, and recovery of his sight, he was no ways affected by
sickness, but on the contrary enjoyed his usual health. I have this account
from his daughter and son in-law, who live within a few doors of me."


and hearing having been restored, and even of the teeth having been renewed in
old people a few years before death. These phenomena have led me to suspect,
that the antediluvian age was attained by the frequent renovation of different
parts of the body, and that when they occur, they are an effort of the causes
which support animal life, to produce antediluvian longevity, by acting upon
the revived excitability of the system.

12. THE fear of death appears to be much less in old age, than in early, or
middle life. I met with many old people who spoke of their dissolution with
composure, and with some who expressed earnest desires to lie down in the
grave. This indifference to life, and desire for death (whether they arise from
satiety in worldly pursuits and pleasures, or from a desire of being relieved
from pain) appear to be a wise law in the animal economy, and worthy of being
classed with those laws which accommodate the body and mind of man to all the
natural evils, to which, in the common order of things, they are necessarily
exposed.

III. I COME now briefly to enumerate the diseases of old age, and the remedies
which are most proper to remove, or to mitigate them.

THE diseases are chronic and acute. The CHRONIC are,

1. WEAKNESS of the knees and ankles, a lessened ability to walk, and tremors
in the head and limbs.

2. PAINS in the bones, known among nosological writers by the name of
rheumitalgia.

3. INVOLUNTARY flow of tears, and of mucus from the nose.

4. DIFFICULTY of breathing, and a short cough, with copious expectoration. A
weak, or hoarse voice generally attends this cough.

5. COSTIVENESS.

6. AN inability to retain the urine as long as in early or middle life. Few
persons beyond 60 pass a whole night without being obliged to discharge their
urine I met with an old man who informed me, that if from any accident he
retained his urine after he felt an inclination to discharge it, he was
affected by a numbness, accompanied by an uneasy sensation in the palms of his
hands.
. Perhaps the stimulus of this liquor in the bladder may be one cause of the
universality of dreaming among old people. It is certainly a frequent cause of
dreaming in persons in early and middle life: this I infer, from its occurring
chiefly in the morning when the bladder is most distended with urine. There is
likewise an inability in old people to discharge their urine as quickly as in
early life. I think I have observed this to be among the first symptoms of the
declension of the strength of the body by age.

7th. WAKEFULNESS. This is probably produced in part by the action of the urine
upon the bladder; but such is the excitability of the system in the first
stages of old age, that there is no pain so light, no anxiety so trifling, and
no sound so small, as not to produce wakefulness in old people. It is owing to
their imperfect sleep, that they are sometimes as unconscious of the moment of
their passing from a sleeping to a waking state, as young and middle aged
people are of the moment in which they pass from the waking to a sleeping
state. Hence we so often hear them complain of passing sleepless nights. This
is no doubt frequently the case, but I am satisfied, from the result of an
inquiry made upon this subject, that they often sleep without knowing it, and
that their complaints in the morning, of the want of sleep, arise from
ignorance, without the least intention to deceive.

8. Giddiness.

9. Deafness.

10. Imperfect vision.

THE ACUTE diseases most common among old people, are

1. Imflammation of the eyes.

2. THE pnuemonia notha, or bastard peripneumony.

3. THE colic.

4. Palsy and apoplexy.

5. THE piles.

6. A difficulty in making water.

7. Quartan fever.

ALL the diseases of old people, both chronic and acute, originate in debility.
The remedies for the former, where no morbid action takes place in the system,
are stimulants. The first of these is,

I. HEAT. The ancient Romans prolonged life by retiring to Naples, as soon as
they felt the infirmities of age coming upon them. The aged Portuguese imitate
them, by approaching the mild sun of Brazil, in South America. But heat may be
applied to the torpid bodies of old people artificially -- 1st. By means of the
warm bath. Dr. Franklin owed much of the cheerfulness and general vigor of body
and mind which characterized his old age, to his regular use of this remedy. It
disposed him to sleep, and even produced a respite from the pain of the stone,
with which he was afflicted during the last years of his life.

2. HEAT may be applied to the bodies of old people by means of stove rooms.
The late Dr. Dewit of Germantown, who lived to be near an 100 years of age,
seldom breathed an air below 72, after he became an old man. He lived
constantly in a stove room.

3. Warm clothing, more especially warm bed-clothes, are proper to preserve or
increase the heat of old people. From the neglect of the latter, they are often
found dead in their beds in the morning, after a cold night, in all cold
countries. The late Dr. Chovet, of this city, who lived to be 85 slept in a
baize night gown, under eight blankets, and a coverlet, in a stove room, many
years before he died. The head should be defended in old people by means of
woollen, or fur caps, in the night, and by wigs and hats during the day, in
cold weather. These artificial coverings will be the more necessary, where the
head has been deprived of its natural covering. Great pains should be taken
likewise to keep the feet dry and warm, by means of thick shoes. I met with one
man above 80, who defended his feet from moisture by covering his shoes in wet
weather with melted wax; and another who, for the same purpose, covered his
shoes every morning with a mixture composed of the following ingredients melted
together -- Lintseed oil a pound, mutton suet eight ounces, beeswax six
ounces, and rosin four ounces. The mixture should be moderately warmed, and
then applied not only to the upper leather, but to the soles of the shoes. This
composition, the old gentleman informed me, was extracted from a book entitled
"The complete Fisherman," published in England in the reign of queen Elizabeth.
He had used it for twenty years in cold and wet weather, with great benefit,
and several of his friends who had tried it, spoke of its efficacy in keeping
the feet dry, in high terms.
To these modes of applying and confining heat to the bodies of old people, a
young bedfellow has been added; but I conceive the three artificial modes
which have been recommended, will be sufficient without the use of one, which
cannot be successfully employed without a breach of delicacy or humanity.

II. TO keep up the action of the system, generous diet and drinks should be
given to old people. For a reason mentioned formerly, they should be indulged
in eating between the ordinary meals of families. Wine should be given to them
in moderation. It has been emphatically called the milk of old age.

III. YOUNG COMPANY should be preferred by old people to the company of persons
of their own age. I think I have observed old people to enjoy better health and
spirits, when they have passed the evening of their lives in the families of
their children, where they have been surrounded by grand children, than when
they lived by themselves. Even the solicitude they feel for the welfare of
their descendants contributes to invigorate the circulation of the blood, and
thereby to add fuel to the lamp of life.

IV. GENTLE EXERCISE. This is of great consequence in promoting the health of
old people. It should be moderate, regular, and always in fair weather.

V. CLEANLINESS. This should by no means be neglected. The dress of old people
should not only be clean, but more elegant than in youth or middle life. It
serves to divert the eye of spectators from observing the decay and deformity
of the body, to view and admire that which is always agreeable to it.

VI. TO abate the pains of the chronic rheumatism, and the uneasiness of the
old man's cough (as it is called); also to remove wakefulness, and to restrain,
during the night, a troublesome inclination to make water, OPIUM may be given
with great advantage. Chardin informs us, that this medicine is frequently used
in the eastern countries to abate the pains and weaknesses of old age, by those
people who are debarred the use wine by the religion of Mahomet.

I HAVE nothing to say upon the acute diseases of old people, but what is to be
found in most of our books of medicine, except to recommend BLEEDING in those
of them which are attended with plethora, and an inflammatory action in the
pulse. The degrees of appetite which belong to old age, the quality of the food
taken, and the sedentary life which is generally connected with it, all concur
to produce that state of the system, which requires the above evacuation. I am
sure that I have seen many of the chronic complaints of old people mitigated by
it, and I have more than once seen it used with obvious advantage in their
inflammatory diseases. These affections I have observed to be more fatal among
old people than is generally supposed. An inflammation of the lungs, which
terminated in an abscess, deprived the world of Dr. Franklin. Dr. Chovet died
of an inflammation in his liver. The blood drawn from him a few days before his
death was sizy, and such was the heat of his body, produced by his fever, that
he could not bear more covering, (notwithstanding his former habits of warm
clothing) than a sheet in the month of January.

DEATH from old age is the effect of a gradual palsy. It shows itself first in
the eyes and ears in the decay of sight and hearing -- it appears next in the
urinary bladder, in the limbs and trunk of the body, then in the sphincters of
the bladder and rectum, and finally in the nerves and brain, destroying in the
last, the exercise of all the faculties of the mind.

FEW persons appear to die of old age. Some one of the diseases which have been
mentioned, generally cuts the last thread of life.

THE END.
The READER is requested to correct the following ERRORS.
Page 2, line 2 from the bottom of the page, for science read conscience.

P. 6, l. 14 from the top of the page, for faculties read qualities.

P. 39, l. 2 from the bottom, for ( it is were) read virtue, without a
parenthesis; and for sciences read science,

P. 48, l. 11 from the top of the page, for mem^irs read memories.

P. 63, l. 5 from the bottom, for effifications for ossifications.

P. 66, l. 16 -- 17 from in the top, strike out in itself.

P. 91. l. 7 from the top, for ears read ear.

P. 100 l. 6 from the top, for kind read kinds.

P. 133, l. 3 from the bottom, for short read small.

P. 134, l 1 from the bottom, for it read them.

P. 177, l. 7, from the bottom for Dr. Haller read Dr. Holler.

P. 178, l 6 from the top, for on read in.

P. 207, l 1 from the top, for cases read ceases, and in l. 7 from the bottom,
for lo^ked read lo^ked.

P. 210, l 6 from the top, for ne^ro read negro.

P. 215, l. 15 from the top, after phenomena read to them.

P. 222, l. 9 -- 10 from the top, for pupil was read pupils were.

P. 2^^ l 9 from the top, after ^yran^he read trachcalis.

P. 304, l, 1 from the top, after life read and.


