AN ENQUIRY INTO THE ORIGIN OF THE LATE EPIDEMIC FEVER IN PHILADELPHIA: IN A
LETTER TO DR. JOHN REDMAN, PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS, FROM DOCTOR
BENJAMIN RUSH.

PHILADELPHIA: FROM THE PRESS OF MATTHEW CAREY. December 11, 1793.

AN ENQUIRY, etc.
DEAR SIR,
HAVING publicly asserted, that I believed our late Epidemic Fever to have
been generated in our city, I herewith enclose you my reasons for that opinion,
accompanied by a wish that they may be laid before the public; for I conceive
they are extremely interesting, both to our city, and to the United States.

These reasons are, as follows: --

1. The Yellow Fever in the West Indies, and in all other countries where it is
endemic, is the offspring of vegetable putrefaction.

2. The same causes (under like circumstances) must always produce the same
effects. There is nothing in the air of the West Indies above other hot
countries, which disposes it to produce a yellow fever. Similar degrees of heat
acting upon dead and moist vegetable matters, are capable of producing it,
together with all its various modifications, in every part of the world. In
support of this opinion, I shall transcribe a part of a letter I received a few
weeks ago from Dr. Miller, of the Delaware state -- a gentleman whose authority
in medicine is second to no man's in the United States.

Dover, Nov. 5, 1793. Dear Sir,
Since the middle of last July, we have had a Bilious Colic epidemic in this
neighborhood which exhibits phoenomena very singular in this climate; and so
far as I am informed, unprecedented in the medical records, or popular
tradition of this country. To avoid unnecessary details, it will suffice at
present to observe, that the disease, on this occasion, has assumed not only
all the essential characters, but likewise all the violence, obstinacy and
malignity described by the East and West Indian practitioners. If any
difference can be observed, it seems here to manifest higher degrees of
stubbornness and malignity, than we usually meet in the histories of tropical
writers. In the course of the disease, not only extreme constipation, frequent
vomiting, and the most excruciating pains of the bowels and limbs, harrass the
unhappy patient; but to these succeed paralysis, convulsions, etc. and almost
always uncommon muscular debility, -- oppression of the praecordia, etc. are
the consequence of a severe attack. Bile discharged in enormous quantities,
constantly assumes the most corrupted and acrimonious appearances, commonly
aeruginous in a very high degree, and sometimes quite atrabilious.

The inference I mean to draw from the phoenomena of this disease, as it
appears in this neighborhood, and which I presume will also apply to your
epidemic, is THIS, that from the uncommon protraction, and intenseness of our
summer and autumnal heats, but principally from the unusual drought; we have
had since the middle of July, a near approach to a TROPICAL season, and that of
consequence we ought not to be surprised if tropical diseases, even of the most
malignant nature, are ANGENDERED amongst us.


To the above information, it may be added, that the bilious fever and
dysentery, which prevailed during the late autumn in several of the villages of
Pennsylvania, particularly in Harrisburgh and Hummilstown, were attended with a
malignity and mortality unknown before in any part of the state. I need not
pause to remark, that this dysentery arose from putrid exhalations, and that it
is like the bilious cholic, only a modification of one original Genus of
bilious fever.

But further -- a malignant fever, resembling that which has prevailed in our
city, has appeared on Pensocken and on Walkill creeks, in New Jersey; at
NewGalloway, in the state of New York -- and at Weathersfield in Connecticut,
during the late autumnal months, into none of which places was there a
suspicion of the disease having been imported from abroad, or conveyed by an
intercourse with the city of Philadelphia.

It is no objection to the inference which follows from these facts, that the
common remitting fever was not known during the above period in the
neighborhood of this city, and in many other parts of the state, where it had
usually appeared in the autumnal months. There is a certain combination of
moisture with heat, which is essential to the production of the remote cause of
a bilious fever. Where the heat is so intense, or of such long duration, as
wholly to dissipate moisture, or when the rains are so great as totally to
overflow the marshy ground, or to wash away putrid masses of matter, no fever
can be produced.

Dr. Dazilles, in his treatise upon the diseases of the negroes in the West
Indies, informs us, that the RAINY season is the most healthy at Cayenne, owing
to the neighboring morasses being DEEPLY overflowed -- whereas at St. Domingo,
a DRY season is most productive of diseases; owing to its favoring those
degrees of moisture which produce morbid exhalations. These facts will explain
the reason why, in certain seasons, places which are naturally healthy in our
country, become sickly, while those places which are naturally sickly escape
the prevailing epidemic* Previously to the dissipation of the moisture from the
putrid masses of vegetable matters in our streets, and in the neighborhood of
the city, there were (as several practitioners can testify) many cases of mild
remittents, but they all disappeared about the first week in September.

3. A quantity of damaged coffee, was exposed at a time (July the 24th) and in
a situation (on a wharf, and in a dock) which favored its putrefaction, and
exhalation. Its smell was highly putrid and offensive, insomuch that the
inhabitants of the houses in Water and Front Streets, who were near it, were
obliged in the hottest weather to exclude it, by shutting their doors and
windows. Even persons, who only walked along those streets, complained of an
intolerable foetor, which upon enquiring was constantly traced to the putrid
coffee. It should not surprise us, that this seed, so inoffensive in its
natural state, should produce, after its putrefaction, a violent fever. The
records of medicine furnish instances of similar fevers being produced, by the
putrefaction of many other regetable substances. Fourteen men out of sixteen,
perished by a malignant fever, a few years ago, at the island of Tortola, from
the effluvia generated by some putrefied Potatoes, which were taken out of the
hold of a Liverpool vessel. "The effluvia (says Dr. Zimmerman) from a little
heap of flax, has been known to occasion a malignant fever, which proved fatal
to the family, in which it first began, and afterward spread its contagion
through a whole country." Dr. Rodgers in his treatise upon the diseases of
Cork, mentions a malignant fever which swept away a great number of the
Students of Wadham College in Oxford. "The singularity of the case (adds the
Doctor) engaged all the gentlemen of the faculty, in a serious inquiry into the
causes of so remarkable an effect, and all agreed that the contagious infection
arose from the putrefaction of a vast quantity of Cabbages thrown into a heap
out of the several gardens near the College." Lancissi relates, that one end of
the city of Rome was nearly desolated by the effluvia of some rotted hemp,
which lay in the neighborhood of the city. The same author remarks, that
"fevers often prevail at Constantinople, which owe their origin to the hemp
which is brought from Cairo, and which is put wet into the public granaries,
and suffered to ferment during the summer. It is afterward sold, and the seeds
of those diseases are afterward spread among the people." -- Many other facts
might be adduced of radishes, turnips, garlic, and sundry other vegetables,
generating by putrefaction, fevers, similar to those which have been mentioned.

4. The rapid progress of the fever from Water street, and the courses through
which it traveled into other parts of the city, afford a strong evidence that
it was at first propagated chiefly by exhalation from the putrid coffee. It is
remarkable that it passed first through those alleys and streets, which were in
the course of the winds that blew across the dock and wharf where the coffee
lay, and that persons were affected at a much greater distance from Water
street by that means, than was afterward known by means of the contagion which
was generated by infected persons.

5. Many persons who had worked, or even visited in the neighborhood of the
exhalation from the coffee, early in the month of August, were indisposed
afterward with sickness, puking, and yellow sweats, long before the air of
Water street was so much impregnated with the contagion, at to produce such
effects; and several patients whom I attended in the yellow fever declared to
me, or to their friends, that their indispositions began exactly at the time
they inhaled the offensive effluvia of the coffee.

6. The strictest inquiry, accompanied with the greatest solicitude for proofs,
has not been able to discover any other cause of our late Epidemic. Every
account of the importation of the disease, has been discovered upon examination
to be inaccurate, contradictory and without foundation. The first cases of the
yellow fever have been clearly traced to the sailors of the vessel who were
first exposed to the effluvia of the Coffee. Their sickness commenced with the
day on which the coffee began to emit its putrid smell. The disease spread with
the increase of the poisonous exhalation. A journeyman of Mr. Peter Brown's,
who worked near the corner of Race and Water streets, caught the disease on the
27th of July. Elizabeth Hill the wife of a fisherman was infected by only
sailing near the pestilential wharf, about the first of August, and died at
Kensington on the 14th of the same month. Many other names might be mentioned
of persons who sickened during the last week in July or the first week in
August, who ascribed their illnesses to the smell of the coffee. From two of
those persons who came under my notice, the disease was evidently propagated by
contagion: from one of them, to nearly a whole family -- and from the other to
a girl of eight years old, who was led by curiosity to examine the low color
which it was said had appeared in the face of the infected person, after death.

7. It has been remarked that this fever did not spread in the country, when
carried there by persons who were infected, and who afterward died with it.
This I conceive was occasioned, in part by the contagion being deprived of the
aid of miasmata from the putrid matter which first produced it in our city, and
in part, by its being diluted, and thereby weakened by the pure air of the
country. During four times in which it prevailed in Charleston, in no one
instance, according to Dr. Lining, was it propagated in any other part of the
state.

8. It is very remarkable that in the histories of the disorder which have been
preserved in this country, it has seven times appeared about the first or
middle of August, and declined, or ceased about the middle of October -- viz.
in 1732, 1739, 1745 and 1748 in Charleston -- in 1791 in New York, and in 1762
and 1793 in Philadelphia. This frequent occurrence of the yellow fever at the
usual period of our common bilious remittents, cannot be ascribed to accidental
coincidence, but must be resolved in most cases into the combination of more
active miasmata with the predisposition of a tropical season. In speaking of a
tropical season, I include that kind of weather in which rains and heats are
alternated with each other, as well as that, which is uniformly warm.

9. Several circumstances attended the late epidemic, which do not occur in the
West India yellow fever. It affected children as well as adults in common with
our annual bilious fevers. In the West Indies Dr. Hume tells us it never
attacked any person under puberty. It had moreover many peculiar symptoms (as I
hope to show in a future publication) which are not to be met with in any of
the histories of the West India yellow fever.

10. Why should it surprise us to see a yellow fever generated amongst us? It
is only a higher grade of a fever which prevails every year in our city, from
vegetable putrefaction. It conforms, in the difference of its degrees of
violence and danger, to season, as well as climate, and in this respect it is
upon a footing with the smallpox, the measles, the sore throat, and several
other diseases. There are few years pass, in which a plethoric habit, and more
active but limited miasmata, do not produce Sporadic Cases, of true yellow
fever in Philadelphia. It is very common in South and North Carolina and in
Virginia, and there are facts which prove, that not only strangers, but native
individuals, and in one instance, a whole family have been carried off by it in
the state of Maryland. It proved fatal to One hundred persons in the city of
New York, in the year of 1791, where it was evidently generated by putrid
exhalation. The yellow color of the skin, has unfortunately too often been
considered as the characteristic mark of this fever, otherwise many other
instances of its prevalence might be discovered, I have no doubt in every part
of the United States. I wish with Dr. Mosely, the term yellow, could be
abolished from the titles of this fever, for this color is not only frequently
absent, but sometimes occurs in the mildest bilious remittents. Dr. Haller in
his pathology describes an epidemic of this kind in Swisserland, in which this
color generally attended, and I have once seen it almost universal in a common
bilious fever which prevailed in the Americam army in the year 1776.

If any thing could surprise me after reading the public report of our late
fever having been imported, in spite of every possible evidence to the
contrary, it would be, the opinion which has been publicly delivered by
several medical gentlemen (...) no fever produced by vegetable putrefaction and
ex^^^^tion had ever been contagious. The fevers generated by putrid cabbage
mentioned by Dr. Rodgers, and by putrid flax mentioned by Dr. Zimmerman, were
both contagious. The late Dr. Wilson of Lewestown, in Delaware state, in his
history of a malignant fever, in Sussex county, published in the United States
Magazine for April, 1775, after tracing its cause to exhalations from savannahs
or ponds, after a dry season, expressly mentions that it was contagious. "Some
(he says) were taken ill a few days after they had seen the sick, but
especially after they had been at the interring the dead. Some went a week, and
some perhaps a fortnight, and a few took it from the air, without going nigh
the sick." I have seen a bilious fever, received by contagion, in a case which
came under my notice in September, 1778; and there are many facts which make it
probable, that the bilious, or, as it was commonly called, the break-bone-fever
of 1780, was propagated, in many instances, through our city, by means of
contagion. The malignant fever, which was lately generated at Wethersfield, in
Connecticut, it is said was evidently contagious. -- Even the intermitting
fever, according to Doctor Clarke, has, in some instances, generated a morbid
matter which has produced the disease in persons who had not been exposed to
the usual remote cause of that disorder. A similar instance of an intermittent
being propagated by contagion in Virginia was communicated to me a year ago by
a medical gentleman in that country. In all the five last mentioned cases, the
original disease which produced the contagion was generated by exhalations from
putrid vegetable matters.

I am far from denying that this disease, has not sometimes been imported into
our country. From the authority of Dr. Lind, and Dr. Mitchell, it appears that
this has been the case in several instances. In this respect, it is upon a
footing with the plague, which is both an imported and a generated disease, in
the cities of the East. I am disposed however to believe that the instances of
the yellow fever, being imported, are very few compared with those of its being
generated in our country. What makes this opinion probable, is, that neither
Great Britain, nor Ireland, have ever to my knowledge been infected by this
fever, notwithstanding their long and frequent commercial intercourse with the
West India islands. The summers in each of those countries, though sedom hot
enough to generate a contagious yellow, or bilious fever, are notwithstanding
warm enough, to favor the propagation of an imported contagion of that
disorder. The jail fever which has more than once been introduced into our city
in crowded ships from Holland, I suspect has been sometimes mistaken for the
yellow fever of the West Indies.

I am aware that the opinion and facts which I have stated, are not popular
with our citizens; but I have not concealed them during the whole course of the
disease, nor shall I cease to impress them upon the public mind at every
hazard, not only as the result of my judgment, but as the dictates of my
conscience, for I am persuaded they involve in their consequences the lives of
millions that are yet unborn. -- Commerce can no more be endangered than
Religion, by the publication of Philosophical truth. On the contrary it must
suffer most by the adoption of the traditional error which I have endeavored
to refute; for while the cause of a malignant fever is obvious to the senses,
it will be easy to guard against it; but while it is believed that the disease
may be imported, and no body know from what place, at what time, and in what
manner; we shall not only be careless in the midst of filth and danger, but our
city will always hold its character for health by a timid and precarious
tenure. I am the more disposed to expect forgiveness from my fellow citizens
for this attempt to serve them, by the recollection of the sudden change in the
health of our city which followed the arching the offensive dock between Front
and Third streets in the year 1782. By advising that measure (in which I stood
nearly alone) I incurred the censure of several valuable citizens. The bills of
mortality however soon showed that the measure was right, and I have since seen
with great pleasure, the extraordinary healthiness of our city, ascribed by
indifferent people, to that, among other causes.

The climate of our country can no more suffer than the commerce of our city,
by this investigation, for it fixes the late fever, and all the other malignant
fevers of the United States, upon putrid vegetable exhalation. Without the
matrix of putrid vegetable matters, there can no more be a bilious, or yellow
fever generated amongst us, than there can be vegetation without earth, water,
or air. To ascribe our late disease therefore to the exclusive influence of the
atmosphere, is a reflection upon our climate, which is equally unphilosophical
and unjust.

Let it only be clearly proved, and boldly asserted, that a bilious yellow
fever has been, and may be generated in our country, under the circumstances
before mentioned, and the return of it, at also of common bilious; and
intermitting fevers may every where be prevented by a due attention to the
cleanliness of the wharves, and Suburbs, as well as the streets of our cities,
and towns; by draining and cultivating marshy grounds in their neighborhood,
and in the neighborhood of farm houses, -- and where the last cannot be done,
by sheltering them from the current of vegetable exhalations by means of a body
of trees that are of speedy growth. In this manner, malignant and deadly fevers
have been banished from most of the cities in Europe.

It has been said, that the opinion I have delivered upon the origin of our
late fever has been accommodated to my mode of treating it: this is not true:
my treatment of it would have been the same had I believed it to have been an
imported disease.

I shall conclude this long letter with two observations.

1st. The principle of self love which is so extensive in its influence upon
human actions, has unhappily corrupted the science of medicine; hence we find
dangerous and loathsome diseases are considered by all nations, as of foreign
extraction. Even the yellow fever itself in some parts of the West Indies, is
denied to be a native of the Islands. It is said by many of their writers to
have been imported from Siam in the East Indies.

2d. Medical, like religious superstition cleaves so closely to the human mind,
that it often exists under new forms, and names, in spite of the cultivation
and progress of reason: hence we find that malignant fevers, which in former
ages were ascribed to celestial, planetary and demoniacal influence, are now
with the same superstitious indolence, and with as little truth, ascribed to
importation, or to an unknown something in the air.

With great respect, and esteem, I am, Dear Sir, your sincere friend and former
pupil,

BENJAMIN RUSH.
December 7th, 1793.
DR. JOHN REDMAN.

