THE TRAVELS OF CYRUS. TO WHICH IS ANNEXED, A DISCOURSE UPON THE THEOLOGY AND
MYTHOLOGY OF THE PAGANS.

BY THE CHEVALIER RAMSAY.

THE TENTH EDITION. -- FIRST AMERICAN.

BURLINGTON, PRINTED BY ISAAC NEALE, OCT. 1, M,DCC,XCIII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD LANSDOWN.
MY LORD,
THE most amiable virtues and the brightest talents formed the character of
that HERO, whose travels I relate: And to whom could I offer a picture of so
fine a genius and so generous a mind, but to a person of YOUR LORDSHIP'S TASTE?

THE singular friendship with which your Lordship honors me, gave rise to this
undertaking; and my obligations are of such a nature, that to let pass the
present opportunity of acknowledging them, would be the highest injustice, as
well as ingratitude. Accept this mark of the inviolable attachment and profound
respect of,

MY LORD, YOUR LORDSHIP'S MOST OBLIGED, MOST OBEDIENT, AND MOST HUMBLE SERVANT,
ANDREW RAMSAY.

PREFACE.
EVER since the first edition of THE TRAVELS OF CYRUS, the author has listened
with respect and deference to the judgment of the Public; and as several
specious objections have been made to the work, and many real faults discovered
in it, his design in this preface is to give the best answer he can to the one,
and to acquaint the reader with what he has done to correct the other.

THE most general defect in the former editions is the inaction of Cyrus, who
through the whole course of his travels has too much of the indolent
Philosopher, and too little of the Hero, who was one day to be the conqueror of
Asia. The nature of this work not requiring the action of an epic poem, this
fault might have been excused; the author has nevertheless submitted to the
judgment of the Public, and has made Cyrus act in the several countries through
which he passes; and this without departing from the character of a young hero
upon his travels, or shocking the reader with tales and fictions that have no
foundation in antiquity. Besides this general defect there are (...) peculiar
to each book.

(...), the narration is too hasty and concise: the reader feels a tender
concern for Cassandana, loves her and fears to lose her; nevertheless she
disappears on a sudden, and this episode concludes too abruptly. It has been
likewise observed, that there is no relation between the virtuous love of Cyrus
for Cassandana, and the criminal passion of Stryangeus for Zarina. Nor is this
all, Cambyses and Mandana consent to their son's marriage contrary to all the
rules of good policy. The author hopes he has corrected these faults, by the
additions made to the first book, where he gives a view of the political state
of Asia in Cyrus's time.

IN the second book the author had not assigned a proper motive for Cyrus's
journey to see Zoroaster; the occasion of it at present is this. The Prince of
Persia begins to entertain a contempt for Religion, and in order to guard him
against this danger, Hystaspes, his governor, engages him to make a visit to
the Magi: the representation which Zoroaster makes of the wonders of nature,
and the amiable ideas he gives him of the Divinity, satisfy his doubts, and
settle his mind; and while he is thus instructed by philosophical reasonings,
which could not be supposed very agreeable to a young Princess accustomed to
the gayeties and diversions of the court of Ecbatan, the author to amuse
Cassandana has introduced the wives of the Magi celebrating the festival of the
Goddess Mythra; this description relaxes the mind, serves for an introduction
to the Theology of the Persians, and makes a proper division of Zoroaster's
discourse upon natural philosophy and religion.

THE third book was all narration, there was no action; the episode of
Amenophis was thought interesting enough, but Cyrus seemed to be forgotten, and
was remembered only by reflection. The author has found means to make this
Prince present at the revolutions of Egypt, without becoming a prisoner with
Apries, or countenancing the usurpation of Amasis, displaying occasionally his
military virtues and heroic sentiments.

IN the fourth and fifth books the Spartans and Athenians were put to a great
expense of men and ships only to amuse Cyrus. Virgil kills and maims some of
the Athletae in the games in order to give a luster to his heroes, but the
author had exceeded the liberty taken by the Latin poet. To correct this fault
he has related in his fourth book the war between the Lacedaemonians and
Tegeans, mentioned by Herodotus, and which happened precisely at the time when
Cyrus is supposed to be at Sparta. This episode has given the author occasion
to unfold, in a more extensive manner, the political state of Sparta, and the
different opinions of Polybius and Plutarch concerning the designs of Lycurgus
in his Laws and institutions of government. In the fifth book a sea fight is
supposed between Megacles and Pisistratus, when the Persian Prince went into
Attica.

IN the sixth book Pythagoras showed clearly, that Thought could not be a
property of Matter; but it was necessary some pages should be added, to evince
that we have no reason to believe that extension and thought are properties of
the same substance; and that the system of Spinoza, (who is meant by
Anaximander) is a series of loose suppositions without any demonstrations.

THE author has made a considerable addition to the seventh book with regard to
the religion of the Tyrians and the death of Adonis. He thought he might take
advantage of this beautiful part of mythology, to explain the ancient tradition
common to almost all nations concerning a middle God, who was to expiate and
destroy moral evil by his own great sufferings. As the Phoenicians lived near
Judea, they might possibly have clearer ideas of religion than other nations,
and this bare possibility may perhaps justify that new episode. However it
would be unreasonable to expect, that what is put in the mouth of each
philosopher relating to the religion of his own country, should be found word
for word in the ancients. The author of Cyrus has only wrought into a connected
system, the most beautiful hints of antiquity, in order to unfold the great
principles of religion, and show that all nations had from the beginning some
ideas of those principles more or less confused.

IN the last book, several important reflections are added, to give more
accuracy to the reasonings of Eleazar; and more strength to the discourse of
Daniel: the latter proves the supernatural establishment of religion by the
only proper method for it, that is to say, by a relation of facts; but his
discourse at present contains several corroborative hints, so show that these
facts are incontestible. And lastly, he refers Cyrus to the accomplishment of
the prophecies in his own person, as an invincible proof of all the truths he
had told him.

THE author has made several additions to his discourse on the ancient
mothology, in order to show, that as all the fictions of the Pagans suppose the
reality of the three states of the world, so all the Pagan divinities may be
reduced to one supreme God, the principle of all beings, a Goddess his wife,
sister or daughter, and a middle God who is his son, his representative or
vicegerent. Besides these additions, which are the most important, there are
many others less considerable, which the author thought necessary, to render
the transitions more easy and natural, the narration more connected, the
principles more palpable, and the reasonings more conclusive. This is what the
author has done, to correct the real faults in the former editions of his work.
The objections, to which he thinks he can give a solid answer, without changing
any thing in his plan, are as follow.

I. To begin with the least important of them, It has been objected, that the
author is a plagiary, and that he has in several places transcribed whole pages
from the Bishop of Meaux's universal history, M. de Tourreil's historical
preface, Dr. Cudworth's intellectual system, and the life of Hay-Ebn-Yokdan,
translated from the Arabic.

THESE pretended thefts imposed at first upon those who were not in a condition
to consult the originals, but upon a strict examination, the injustice and
ignorance of the critics appeared. The third took which treats of ancient Egypt
contains several remarks, of which there is not the least trace in the Bishop
of Meaux's universal history. The author has indeed in some places followed the
translation made by that Prelate of certain passages in Diodorus Siculus,
Herodotus and Strabo: But is a man a plagiary because in his citations from the
ancients he chooses rather to follow a good translation than a bad one? So in
comparing M. de Tourreil's preface with the fourth and fifth books of his work,
the reader will find nothing common to them, except certain passages purely
historical. The life of Hay-Ebn-Yokdan, translated from the Arabic into Latin
by Dr. Pocock, has no resemblance with the author's history of Hermes the
second, unless it be the general idea of a savage brought up in a desert; there
is not the least likeness either in the matter or in the method of reasoning.
The Arabian philosopher begins with very refined disquisitions in anatomy,
passes thence to metaphysical discussions, and concludes, with the dreams of
the Mohammedan contemplatives. All the author's reasonings are, on the contrary,
so managed, that they do not exceed the capacity of a common good
understanding, who has no other instructor than nature: he has endeavored so to
introduce his ideas as not to transgress the bounds of probability, to range
each truth in its proper place, to mix speculation with sentiment, and to raise
the soul by easy and natural gradations to the knowledge and love of the first
Being. Lastly, as to Dr. Cudworth, notwithstanding his mistakes and want of
method, he had penetrated farther into the mysteries of antiquity than the most
part of critics: nevertheless this learned man says nothing of the three states
of the world, which are the foundation of all that the author of Cyrus advances
upon religion. Far from being a plagiary he had not consulted enough the
Doctor's excellent remarks concerning the three forms of the Divinity; he has
made more use of them in this edition, but has always quoted him or the
originals.

II. IT is thought that the episodes, in which the author speaks of love, are
related with two much rapidity, so that the reader has not time enough to be
touched, moved and transported.

To this it may be answered, that those stories are related by persons who
ought not to launch out into love-speeches, tender sentiments and sprightly
images. The ancients are very sparing in words when the situation and
circumstances speak sufficiently of themselves. When Homer is to paint the
charms of Helen, he does it by a single stroke; she goes into the council of
the old men, they fix their eyes upon her, are discomposed and suspend their
deliberations. When Virgil makes Dido speak, her words are few, but each word
is a sentiment: the tender passions lose their force and their delicacy when
they become too eloquent. Besides, all the author's fictions, where love is the
object, are in the two first books, and tend to preserve Cyrus from the follies
of youth, by showing him, not so much the sweets of love, as the bitter effects
of it: as soon as he attains to a riper age, Cassandana dies, and the hero
begins his travels. Thus history simply relates facts as they happen, without
endeavoring after the intrigues, speeches and surprising adventures of romance.

III. SOME object that the travels of Cyrus are not well imagined, and that any
other hero would have suited better with the author's project than the
conqueror of Asia.

Conquerors have generally no other view in extending their dominions, than to
satisfy their unbounded ambition: Cyrus on the contrary made use of his
victories to procure the happiness of the conquered nations. The author's
intention in making choice of such a Prince was to show, that courage, great
exploits and military talents may indeed excite our admiration, but do not form
the character of a true hero, without the addition of wisdom, virtue and noble
sentiments. In order to form such a hero, it was thought allowable to make him
travel; and the silence of Xenophon, who says nothing in his Cyropaedia of what
happened to Cyrus from his sixteenth to his fortieth, year, leaves the author
at liberty to imagine this fiction. The relation of the Prince's travels
furnishes an occasion to describe the religion, manners and politics of the
several countries through which he passes. These travels cannot surely appear
unnatural; a prudent Prince like Cambyses, a father who is supposed to be
informed of the oracles concerning the future greatness of his son, a tributary
King who knows the danger of sending the young Prince a second time to the
court of Ecbatan, ought to be sensible that Cyrus at twenty-five years of age
could not better employ his time during the interval of a profound peace, than
by traveling into Egypt and Greece. It was necessary to prepare a Prince who
was to be one day the founder and lawgiver of a mighty empire, to accomplish
his high destiny by acquiring in each country some knowledge worthy of his
great genius. Is there any thing strained in all this? No other hero could
answer the author's intention; had he made any other Prince travel, he would
have lost all the advantages he has drawn from the choice of Cyrus, as the
deliverer of the people of God, as contemporary with the great men with whom he
consults, and as living in an age, the learning, manners and events of which,
could alone be suitable to the design of this work.

IV. THOSE who make no distinction between the plan of Telemachus and that of
Cyrus, continually cry out that there is no unity of action in the latter.

NOTHING is more unreasonable than to compare two works of such different
natures; instruction is indeed the aim of both, but they are not formed upon
the same originals; the author of Telemachus writes a continuation of an epic
poem; the author of Cyrus fills up the chasm in a philosophical history; the
one has imitated Homer with success, the other has taken Xenophon for his
model. M. de Cambray strews every where the richest flowers of poesy; he paints
nature in all her variety, and the objects themselves become visible, he
describes all the motions of the heart of man, and makes us feel them
successively; he renders the most sublime truths palpable, and never fatigues
the mind with abstracted ideas; he passes from beautiful images to noble
sentiments, and finding a shorter way to the heart than by reasoning; he walks,
he flies, he sighs, he thunders, he mourns, he rejoices, he assumes all forms
by turns, and never fails to transform us with him.

THE author's utmost ambition was to unfold the principles of his master,
without daring to attempt an imitation of his graces; he chose a subject more
proportioned to his capacity, a work in which he was to compare the
philosophical ideas of others rather than exert a poetic invention; he did not
pretend to write an epic poem: in this kind of fiction the hero should never
disappear; it is he whom we listen to, it is he only whom we love; the poet
grows tiresome when he personates too much the philosopher: he is to instruct
only by hints, and not by long and elaborate discussions. The observation of
these rules was incompatible with the author's views; his design was to show
the gradual progress of the mind in the search of truth, to compare the
religions, governments, and laws of different nations, and to form the
legislator rather than the conqueror; unity of action is by no means necessary
in a work of this nature, it is sufficient if there be unity of design. All the
author's episodes tend to instruction, and the instructions are, as he
apprehends, proportioned to the age of Cyrus: in his youth he is in danger of
being corrupted by vanity, love and irreligion; Mandana, Hystaspes and
Zoroaster preserve him from these snares. The history of Apries lays open to
him all the artifices of a perfidious courtier; that of the Kings of Sparta,
the dangers of an excessive confidence in favorites, or of an unjust diffidence
of ministers; that of Periander, the fatal mischiefs which attend despotic
power and the dispensing with ancient laws; that of Pisistratus, the punishment
of a base and crafty policy, and that of Nabuchodonosor, the dreadful
consequences of relapsing into impiety, after due light and admonition. The
Prince is at first instructed by fables, to preserve him from the passions of
youth; he afterward instructs himself by his own reflections, by the examples
he sees, and by all the adventures he meets with in his travels; he goes from
country to country, collecting all the treasures, conversing with the great men
he finds there, and performing heroic exploits as occasion presents.

V. SOME persons, to discredit the author's work, have insinuated that far from
doing homage to religion he degrades it.

HE should think himself very unhappy to have produced a work so contrary to
his intentions. All that he advances upon religion may be reduced to two
principal points: the first is to prove against the Atheists the existence of a
supreme Deity, who produced the world by his power, and governs it by his
wisdom. To this end Zoroaster unvails to us all the wonders of nature, Hermes
consults the native and genuine tendency of the heart, and Pythagoras ascends
to first principles: and thus the author endeavors to unite the strength of all
that sense, natural sentiment, and reason can afford us for the proof of the
first and most important of all truths. Tradition strikes in with philosophy:
the author has endeavored to show that the earliest opinions of the most
knowing and civilized nations come nearer the truth than those of latter ages;
that the theology of the Orientals is more pure than that of the Egyptians,
that of the Egyptians less corrupted than that of the Greeks, and that of the
Greeks more exalted than that of the Romans: that the primitive system of the
world was that of one supreme Deity; that in order to adapt this idea to the
capacity of the vulgar, the divine attributes were represented by allegories
and hieroglyphics; that mankind sinking into matter quickly forgot the meaning
of those sacred symbols, and fell into idolatry; that idolatry brought forth
irreligion; that rash and inconsiderate minds not being able to distinguish
between principles and the abuses of them, ran from one excess to another. Such
have been the variations of the human mind, with regard to the Deity in almost
all times and countries. The author's intention throughout his whole system was
to show the wild extravagance of those who maintain that the doctrines of
religion are only the effects of the ignorance and stupidity of the infant
world; that the first men not knowing the physical causes, had recourse to
invisible powers to explain the phenomenon of nature; and lastly, that
politicians refined and improved these indigested ideas, in order to compose a
system of religion useful and necessary to society.

THE second point is to show, in opposition to the Deists, that the principal
doctrines of revealed religion, concerning the state of innocence, corruption
and renovation, are as ancient as the world; that they were the foundation of
Noah's religion; that he transmitted them to his children; that these
traditions were thus spread throughout all nations; that the Pagans disfigured,
degraded, and obscured them by their absurd fictions; and lastly, that these
primitive truths have been no where preserved in their purity except in the
true religion. When we see diverse nations agree concerning the beginning, the
decline and the re-establishment of a monarchy, the birth, exploits and virtues
of the hero who is the restorer of it, is not this a sufficient proof of these
principal facts, though the circumstances should be related differently and be
even fabulous? The author in unfolding the ancient traditions has distinguished
between fable and truth, philosophical hypotheses and doctrines of faith,
essence and form, the spirit and the letter which ought never to be separated,
but which cannot be confounded without disguising and dishonoring Christianity;
he hoped thereby to have given a plan of religion, equally amiable and
reasonable, and to have showed that its principles are beautiful, its
consequences natural, and its original ancient; that it enlightens the mind,
comforts the heart and establishes the welfare of society.

VI. THOSE who degraded the wisdom and Goodness of God, under the pretense of
extolling his Power and Justice, have thought that Eleazar's discourse too
plainly favored the opinions of Origin concerning the pre-existence of souls
and the restitution of all spirits. One may venture to say, that whoever makes
this objection does not understand the plan of the work; it is as follows: Each
philosopher speaks to Cyrus the language of his own religion and country. The
Orientals, Egyptians, Greeks and Tyrians all agree in the original purity,
present corruption and future restoration of mankind, but they wrap up these
truths in different fables, each according to the genius of their nation.
Eleazar clears their system from the Pagan fictions, but retains in his own the
opinions of his sect. The errors which prevail at this day resemble those of
former times. The mind of man sees but a small number of ideas, reviews them
continually, and thinks them new only because it expresses them differently in
different ages. The Magi in Cyrus's time were fallen into a kind of Atheism
like that of Spinoza; Zoroaster, Hermes and Pythagoras adored one sole Deity,
but they were Deists; Eleazar resembled the Socinians, who are for subjecting
religion to philosophy; Daniel represents a perfect Christian, and the Hero of
this book a young Prince who began to be corrupted by the maxims of irreligion.
In order to set him right, the different philosophers with whom he converses
successively unfold to him new truths mixed with errors. Zoroaster, confutes the
mistakes of the Magi; Pythogoras those of Zoroaster; Eleazar those of
Pythagoras; Daniel rejects those of all others, and his doctrine is the only
one which the author adopts. The order of these conversations shows the
progress of the mind, the matter being so disposed, that the Atheist becomes
Deist, the Deist Socinian, and the Socinian Christian, by a plain and natural
chain of ideas. The great art in instructing is to lead the mind gradually on,
and to take advantage even of its errors to make it relish truth. That Cyrus
might thus be conducted step by step, it was necessary to introduce a person of
the religion of the Hebrews, who should confute by reason, all the objections
drawn from reason; Daniel could not act this part, it would not have become him
to solve difficulties by uncertain conjectures; the philosopher might prepare
the Prince by bare hypotheses, to submit and to distrust his understanding: but
it was necessary that the phrophet should disengage Cyrus from all bold
speculations, how refined and bright soever they might appear, and lead him to
the belief of a supernatural religion, not by a philosophical demonstration of
its doctrines, but by proving them to be divinely revealed. In a word, he
should fix the mind of the young hero by indisputable facts, which strike much
more forcibly than abstract ideas. And it is for this reason that the author
introduces in his last book two persons of very different characters, a
philosopher and a phrophet; the one employs the powers of reason against
incredulity, the other imposes silence on all reasonings by a supernatural
authority. This is the only use which the author would make of the opinions of
Origin; they answer the objections of the incredulous concerning the beginning
and duration of evil; they show, that since the weak reason of the philosophers
can find a plausible solution of those great difficulties, we may well conclude
that the infinite Wisdom will be able one day to justify his ways, which are
now impenetrable. So long as it is allowable to philosophise, the author
exposes the most probable systems and hypotheses; but when the question is of
faith, he reasons only upon palpable facts; in order to discover whether God
has spoken to his creatures or not: the moment we were convinced of this, all
doubtful opinions are lost and absorbed in the depth of the divine
incomprehensibility.

VII. THOSE who thought the sketches of natural philosophy in this work
misplaced, pretending that the ancients are represented more knowing than they
really were, will be much more shocked to see those philosophical descriptions
augmented in the present edition. It is not surprising to hear this objection
made by empty, superficial minds, who laugh at the Mosaic history, while they
adopt the Greek fables concerning the origin of mankind; but it is astonishing
to hear the same cavils from those who reverence revealed religion, who do not
believe that man was created originally wild and savage, that he wandered in
the woods and deserts without knowledge, religion or law, and who have
philosophy enough to discern that the world could not come out of the hands of
a wife, good, and powerful Creator in its present ignorance, disorder, and
corruption. These persons might easily be persuaded that the first men had
knowledges of God and nature, which are lost in these latter ages; that the
sacred writers did not talk at random when they extolled the profound learning
of the Orientals and Egyptians, even in the time of Moses; and lastly, that See
Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 8. Beras ibid. at Voss. de Phil. sect. cap. 1. p. 3.
Josephus was not a visionary, when he said that the Pagans of his time had an
ancient tradition, that Abraham who was famous in Asia communicated many
sublime discoveries in natural philosophy to the Chaldeans and Egyptians. The
author however has no need of these pretexts to justify the philosophical
descriptions in this work. His aim being to set before the eyes of a young
Prince those elements of science which might help to form his understanding and
his heart, he thought those physical pictures more proper than poetical
paintings to give his pupil a general idea of nature, inspire him with a taste
of philosophy, and awaken his desire of knowledge. In pursuing this design he
has taken the liberty to depart from strict truth, content himself with
probability and make anachronisms in natural as well as civil history.

VIII. SOME pretend that the author has but lightly touched a great many
subjects, without going to the bottom of every one; that this book is rather a
summary than a work; that he steps too quick from one subject to another; and
that his style is every where too laconic, sometimes too metaphysical and
abstruse, and often too void of ornament.

To this it may be answered, that profound reasoning does not consist in a
multiplicity of words; it is perhaps easier to write a great volume than a
little one; the labor is not the less real because it is concealed. It was
intended that each intelligent reader should have the pleasure of drawing the
consequences from the principles, unfolding those first seeds of truth,
cultivating them and gathering thence a harvest of knowledge, of which the
author himself had perhaps no idea. We have a sufficient number of books which
convey instruction by diffusive reasonings, ingenious aphorisms and florid
illustrations. The author's design was to habituate the mind of a young Prince
to judge by principles, discover the connection of essential truths and unite
them under one view. He says to him upon each subject what is necessary to
show, that all nations had originally the same fundamental principles, that the
duties of religion, morality and good policy flow from the same source,
conspire to the same end, and mutually support and fortify each other: and in a
word, that all the civil and human virtues, the laws of nature and nations are,
so to speak, but consequences of THE LOVE OF ORDER, which is the eternal and
universal law of all intelligences. In a work of this nature, it is necessary
to unbend the mind of the reader, without carrying it off from its principal
object; all the flowers should be thoughts, the graces noble and tender
sentiments, the paintings characters, and the descriptions such pictures as
make us acquainted with nature, and admire the Creator. The author ^s sensible
that he is far from having executed this vast design, but in the attempt he has
made toward it, he was obliged to avoid all foreign embellishments, labored
connections, and the ambitious ornaments of the Greek and Latin poesy.

To speak more clearly: poesy has had the same fate with philosophy. The
Orientals, the Chaldeans, and above all, the Hebrews, painted nature without
disguising it, and gave life to every thing without deifying it. According to
them every thing proceeds from God, and ought to flow back to him again. All
the visible wonders of nature are faint images of his greatness, and the
innumerable orders of spirits emanations from his wisdom. Mankind are all but
one family of that immense republic of intelligences, of which God is the
common Father. Each man is as a ray of light separated from its source, strayed
into a corner of disordered nature, tossed about by the tumultuous wind of
passion, transported from climate to climate by restless desires, purified by
all the misfortunes it meets with, till it becomes like a subtle vapor
reascending to the superior regions from whence it fell. We have here a
fruitful source of ideas, beautiful images and sublime expressions, such as we
find in the holy scripture, and in Milton who has copied them. The Egyptians
corporalized too much these ideas by their sensible symbols; but the Greek
poets, and their imitators the Roman poets, entirely mangled and degraded them.
The Divinity is no longer a sovereign wisdom but a blind destiny, man is but a
mass of atoms, of which nothing remains after death but an empty shade,
immortality is a dream, the Elysian fields a mere subterraneous cavern, and the
habitation of the Gods a mountain of Greece: by this means a dark vail is drawn
over the whole universe, the source of noble ideas is dried up, and reason
becomes a barren field: the imagination, destitute of principles, seeks to
supply its indigence by creating a new world; it transforms all objects in
order to embellish them, it exalts men into Gods, and debases Gods into men, it
gives body to spirits and spirit to bodies; its descriptions are florid but
false, and its mavelous degrades the divine Nature; the agreeable and the gay
take the place of the true and sublime, and of that diviner poetry, which first
leads man into his own heart, and then raises him above himself. Such is the
Greek poesy, always poor in the midst of its seeming abundance; had the author
been able to imitate it, it is what he ought to have avoided, as improper in a
book of principles.

IT is not pretended by all that has been said, that this work, as now given to
the public, is free from faults; there will no doubt always remain a great
number; nor would the author have troubled the reader with these reflections,
but to justify his main design and explain more fully the plan of his book.

THE TRAVELS OF CYRUS.
FIRST BOOK.
THE Assyrian empire having been for many ages extended over all Asia, was at
length dismembered, upon the death of Sardanapalus Diod. Sic. lib. 2. Athen.
lib. 12. Herod. lib. 1. Just. lib. 1. cap. 3.
Arbaces governor of Media entered into a league with Belesis governor a
Babylon, to dethrone that effeminate monarch: they besieged him in his capital,
where the unfortunate Emperor, to avoid being made a prisoner, and to hinder
his enemies from becoming masters of his immense riches, set fire to his
palace, threw himself into the flames, and perished with all his treasures.
Ninus the true heir succeeded him in the throne, and reigned at Nineveh; but
Arbaces took possession of Media, with all its dependencies, and Belesis of
Chaldea, with the neighboring territories This happened many years before the
foundation of Rome, and the institution of the Olympiads. It was in the time of
Ariphron, 9th perpetual Archon of Athens, and almost 900 years before the
christian area.
And thus was the ancient empire of the Assyrians divided into three
monarchies, the capitals of which were Ecbatan, Babylon and Nineveh. It was not
long before the last became a prey to the ambitious successors of Belesis; nor
did those of Arbaces fail to push their conquests; they brought several of the
neighboring nations under tribute, and particularly Persia; so that the kings
of Media and Babylon became the two great potentates of the East. Such was the
state of Asia when Cyrus was born: his father Cambyses was king of Persia,
Mandana his mother was the daughter of Astyages king of the Medes.

He was educated from his tender years after the manner of ancient Persia,
where the youth were inured to hardship and fatigue; hunting and war were their
only exercises; out confiding too much in their natural courage, they neglected
military discipline. The Persians were hitherto rough, but virtuous; they were
not versed in those arts and sciences which polish the mind and manners; but
they were great masters of the sublime science of being content with simple
nature, despising death for the love of their country, and flying all pleasures
which emasculate the mind, and enervate the body. Being persuaded that sobriety
and exercise prevent almost every disease, they habituated themselves to a
rigorous abstinence and perpetual labor: Xen. Cyr. p. 18. Ed. ^xon. Turpe enim
apud Pers^s ha^et^r (...), nasum (...), etc;.
the lightest indispositions proceeding from intemperance were thought
shameful. The youth were educated in public schools, where they were early
instructed in the knowledge of the laws, and accustomed to hear causes, pass
sentence, and mutually to do one another the most exact justice; and hereby
they discovered their dispositions, penetration and capacity for employments in
a riper age. The virtues, which their masters were principally careful to
inspire into them, were the love of truth, humanity, sobriety, and obed^ence:
the two former make us resemble the Gods; the two latter are necessary to the
preservation of order. The chief aim of the laws in ancient Persia was to
prevent the corruption of the heart: and for this reason the Persians punished
ingratitude Cyrop. Xen. p. 10.
; a vice against which there is no provision made by the laws of other nations:
whoever was capable of forgetting a benefit was looked upon as an enemy to
society.

Cyrus had been educated according to these wise maxims; and though it was
impossible to conceal from him his rank and birth, yet he was treated with the
same severity as if he had not been heir to a throne; he was taught to practice
an exact obedience, that he might afterward know how to command. When he
arrived at the age of fourteen, Astyages desired to see him: Mandana could not
avoid complying with her father's orders, but the thought of carrying her son
to the court of Ecbatan exceedingly grieved her.

For the space of three hundred years the kings of Media had by their bravery
extended their conquests; and conquests had be got luxury, which is always the
forerunner of the fall of empires. VALOR, CONQUEST, LUXURY, ANARCHY, this is
the fatal circle, and these are the different periods of the politic life, in
almost all states. The court of Ecbatan was then in its splendour; but this
splendour had nothing in it of solidity. The days were spentin effeminacy, or in
flattery; the love of glory, strict probity, severe honor, were no longer in
esteem; the pursuit of solid knowledge was thought to argue a want of taste;
agreeable trifling, fine spun thoughts, and lively sallies of imagination, were
the only kinds of wit admired there. No sort of writings pleased, but amusing
fictions where there was a perpetual success on of events, which surprised by
their variety, without improving the understanding or ennobling the heart. Love
was without delicacy; blind pleasure was its only attractive charm: the women
thought themselves despised, when no attempts were made to ens^are them. That
which contributed to increase this corruption of mind, manners and sentiments,
was the new doctrine spread every where by the ancient Maji, that pleasure is
the only moving spring of man's heart: for as each man placed his pleasure in
what he liked best, this maxim authorized virtue or vice according to every
one's taste, humor, or complexion. This depravity, however, was not then so
universal as it became afterward. Corruption takes its rise in courts, and
extends itself gradually through all the parts of a state. Military discipline
was yet in its vigor in Media; and there were in the provinces many brave
soldiers, who not being infected by the contagious air of Ecbatan, preserved in
themselves all the virtues which flourished in the reigns of Dejoces and
Phraortes.

Mandana was thoroughly sensible of all the dangers to which she should expose
young Cyrus, by carrying him to a court, the manners of which were so different
from those of the Persians; but the will of Cambyses, and the orders of
Astyages, obliged her, whether she would or not, to undertake the journey. She
set out attended by a body of the young nobility of Persia under the command of
Hystaspes, to whom the education of Cyrus had been committed: the young Prince
was seated in a chariot with her, and it was the first time that he had seen
himself distinguished from his companions. Mandana was a Princess of uncommon
virtue, a well cultivated understanding, and a superior genius. She made it her
business during the journey to inspire Cyrus with the love of virtue, by
entertaining him with fables according to the Eastern manner. The minds of
young persons are not touched by abstracted ideas, they have need of agreeable
and familiar images; they cannot reason, they can only feel the charms of
truth; and to make it lovely to them, it must be presented under sensible and
beautiful forms.

Mandana had observed that Cyrus was often too full of himself, and that he
discovered some tokens of a rising vanity, which might one day obscure his
great qualities. She endeavored to make him sensible of the deformity of this
vice, by relating to him the fable of Sozares, a Prince of the ancient empire
of Assyria. It resembles the story of the Grecian Narcissus, who perished by
the foolish love of himself. For thus it is that the Gods punish; they only
give us over to our own passions, and we immediately commence unhappy. She then
painted forth the beauty of those noble virtues which lead to heroism, by the
generous forgetting of one's self, and related to him the fable of the first
Hermes. This was a divine youth, who had wit and beauty without knowing it, and
was unacquainted with his own virtue, because he knew not that there were any
vices: the Gods to reward this happy ignorance endowed him with such sublime
wisdom as made him the oracle of all Egypt. It was thus that Mandana instructed
her son during the journey; one fable gave rise to another. The questions of
the Prince furnished the Queen with new matter to entertain him, and with
opportunity of teaching him the hidden meaning of the Egyptian fables, the
taste for which had prevailed very much in the East, since the conquests of
Sesostris.

As they passed one day by a mountain, consecrated to the great Cromazes The
great God of the Persians. See the discourse. p. 281.
, Mandana stopped her chariot, alighted, and drew near to the sacred place. It
was the day of a solemn festival, and the high priest was already preparing the
victim, crowned with flowers; he was of a sudden seized with the divine Spirit,
and interrupting the silence and solemnity of the sacrafice, cried out in a
transport: I see a young laur^l rising, it will soon spread its branches over
all the East, the nations will come in crowds to assemble together under its
shadow Isaiah's prophery may be supposed to have been spread abroad in the East.
Mandana made deep reflections upon this oracle, and when she was got up again
into her chariot, said to her son: the Gods give sometimes these happy presages
to animate heroic souls: but the event of such predictions, as far as they are
personal, depends upon our virtue: the designs of the great Oromazes never fail
of their accomplishment, but he changes the instruments of them, when those
whom he had chosen render themselves unworthy of his choice.

As soon as they arrived upon the frontiers of Media, Astyages with all his
court came out to meet them. He was a Prince of great beneficence and humanity,
but his natural goodness made him often too easy, and his propensity to
pleasure had brought the Medes into the taste of luxury and effeminacy. Cyrus,
soon after his arrival at the court of Ecbatan, gave proofs of a wit and
judgment far beyond his age. Astyages put diverse questions to him concerning
the manners of the Persians, their laws, and their method of educating youth.
He was struck with astonishment at the sprightly and noble answers of his
grandson. Young Cyrus was the admiration of the whole court, insomuch that he
began to be intoxicated with praise; a secret presumption stole into his heart;
he talked a little too much, and did not hearken enough to others; he decided
with an air of sufficiency, and seemed too fond of it. Mandana, to remedy this
fault, contrived to set before him his own picture by certain passages of
history; for the proceeded in his education upon the same plan on which she had
begun it. She related to him the story of Logis and Sygeus.

My son, said she, it was formerly the custom at Thebes in Boeotia, to raise to
the throne, after the death of the king, him of all his children who had the
best understanding. When a Prince has sine parts he can choose able ministers,
make proper use of their talents, and govern those who govern under him; this
is the great secret of the art of reigning. Among the King's sons there were
two who seemed of a superior genius. The elder, named Logis, loved talking; the
younger, who was called Sygeus, was a man of few words. The first made himself
admired by the charms of his wit, the second made himself loved by the goodness
of his heart. Logis showed plainly, even while he endeavored to conceal it,
that he spoke only to shine; Sygeus hearkened readily to others, and looked
upon conversation as a sort of commerce, where each person ought to furnish
something of his own. The one made the most thorny and perplexed affairs
agreeable by the lively and shining strokes of wit he intermixed in all he
said; the other threw light upon the obscurest points, by reducing every thing
to simple principles. Logis affected mystery without being secret, and his
politics were full of stratagems and artifice; Sygeus, impenetrable without
being false, surmounted all obstacles by his prudence and courage. The one
never displayed his talents but to serve his ambition; the other frequently
concealed his virtues that he might taste the secret pleasure of doing good for
its own sake.

After the King's death, all the people got together in haste to choose a
successor to the throne: twelve old men presided at the assembly to correct the
judgment of the multitude, who seldom fail to be carried away by prejudice,
appearances, or passion. The eloquent Prince made a long but fine harangue,
wherein he set forth the duties of a King, in order to insinuate, that one who
was so well acquainted with them, would undoubtedly fulfill them: Prince (...)
in a few words represented to the assembly the great hazards in the exercise of
sovereign authority, and confessed an unwillingness to expose himself to them.
It is not, added he, that I would shun any difficulties or dangers to serve my
country, but I am afraid of being found unequal to the task of governing. The
old men decided in favor of Sygeus; but the young people, and those of
superficial understanding, took the part of the elder brother, and raised by
degrees a rebellion, under pretext that injustice had been done to Logis.
Troops were levied on both sides; Sygeus proposed to yield his right to his
brother, in order to hinder the effusion of the blood of his countrymen, but
his army would not consent to it.

The chief men of both parties seeing the miseries with which the state was
ready to be overwhelmed, proposed the expedient of letting both the brothers
reign, each a year, by turns. This form of government has many inconveniences,
but it was preferred before a civil war, the greatest of all calamities. The
two brothers applauded the proposal for peace, and Logis ascended the throne.
He changed in a little time all the ancient laws of the kingdom; he was always
listening to new projects; and to have a lively imagination was sufficient to
raise a man to the highest employments: that which seemed excellent in
speculation could not be executed without difficulty and confusion; his
ministers, who had no experience, knew not that precipitate changes, how useful
soever they may appear are always dangerous. The neighboring nations took
advantage of this weak administration to invade the country; and had it not
been for the prudence and bravery of Sygeus, all had been L^^t, and the people
must have submitted to a foreign yoke. His brother's year being expired he
ascended the throne, gained the confidence and love of hi^ people,
re-established the ancient laws, and by his wise conduct, even more than by his
victor (...), drove the enemy out of the country. From that time Sygeus reigned
alone, and it was decided in the supreme council of the old men, that the King
to be chosen for the future should not be the person who gave proofs of the
quickest parts, but of the soundest judgment. They were of opinion that to talk
eloquently, or to be fruitful in expedients and stratagems were not talents so
essential to a good governor, as a just discernment in choosing, and a
steadiness and courage in pursuing the best and wisest councils.

Cyrus usually confessed his faults without seeking to excuse them: he listened
to this story with attention, perceived the design of Mandana in telling it,
and resolved to correct himself.

Soon after this, he gave a notable proof of his genius and courage. He was
scarce sixteen years of age when Merodac, son of Nabuchodonosor King of
Assyria, assembled some troops, and under pretense of a great hunting, made a
sudden irruption into Media: he marched in person with twelve thousand men
toward the first strong places belonging to the Medes, encamped near them, and
from thence sent out detachments every day to scour and ravage the country.
Astyages had notice of it, and having given the necessary orders for assembling
his army, he set out with his son Cyaxares and young Cyrus, followed only by
some troops levied in haste, to the number of eight thousand men. When he was
come near the borders of his own country, he encamped upon a rising ground,
from whence he could discover the plain which the detachment of Merodac were
laying waste. Astyages ordered two of his general officers to go and observe
the enemy; Cyrus desired leave to accompany them, in order to inform himself of
the situation of the country, the advantageous posts and the strength of the
Assyrian army: having made hi^ observations he came back, and gave an (...)
account of all he had seen.

The next day Merodac left his camp and advanced toward the Medes; whereupon
Astyages assembled a council of war to deliberate upon the motions he should
make. The general officers, fearing the numbers of the enemy, thought it most
advisable to retire, or at least to suspend all action till the arrival of
fresh troops. Cyrus, who was impatient to engage, heard their opinions with
uneasiness, but observed a profound silence out of respect to the Emperor, and
so many experienced commanders; at length Astyages ordered him to speak. He
then rose up in the midst of the assembly, and with a noble and modest air,
said: Merodac is now in full march, but he cannot come up with us without
passing between a wood to his right and a morass to his left: Let the army
advance to attack him in that place, where he will not be able to extend his
troops and surround us. In the mean time I will convey myself with five hundred
young Medes through this deep narrow valley, and line the wood. I have just
caused it to be viewed, and find that the enemy have neglected this post.

He said no more, blushed, and feared to have spoken two much. All admired his
genius for war at such tender years; and Astyages surprised at his ready
thought and judgment, immediately commanded that his counsel should be
followed. Cyaxares marched strait to meet the enemy, while Cyrus accompanied by
Hystaspes filed off with a body of volunteers, and without being discovered
seized an angle of the wood. The Prince of the Medes attacked the Assyrians in
the narrowest part of the pass, and while Astyages advanced to sustain him,
Cyrus sallied out of the wood, fell upon the enemy in flank, and with his voice
animated the Medes, who all followed him with ardour; he covered himself with
his shield, pierced into the thickest of the battalions, and spread terror and
slaughter where ever he came. The Assyrians, seeing themselves thus attacked on
all sides, lost courage, and fled in disorder. As soon as the battle was over,
generosity and humanity resumed their empire in the breast of Cyrus: he was
sensibly touched with seeing the field covered with dead bodies: he took the
same care of the wounded Assyrians as of the Medes, and gave the necessary
orders for their cure. They are men, said he, as well as we, and are no longer
enemies when once they are vanquished. The Emperor having taken his precautions
to prevent such irruptions for the future, returned to Ecbatan.

Mandana, being soon after obliged to leave Media and return to Cambyses, would
have taken her son with her, but Astyages opposed it: Why, said he, will you
deprive me of the pleasure of seeing Cyrus? He will here learn military
discipline which is not yet known in Persia. I conjure you, by the tenderness
which I have always shown you, not to refuse me this consolation. Mandana could
not yield her consent but with great reluctance. She dreaded the leaving her
son in the midst of a court which was the seat of voluptuousness. Being alone
with Cyrus: My son, said she, Astyages desires that you should continue here
with him; yet I cannot without concern resolve to leave you: I fear least the
purity of your manners should be stained, and you should be intoxicated with
foolish passions. The first steps to vice will seem to be only innocent
amusements, a well-bred compliance with received customs, and a liberty which
you must allow yourself in order to please. Virtue may come by degrees to be
thought too severe an enemy to pleasure and society, and even contrary to
nature, because it opposes inclination; in a word, you will perhaps lo^k upon
it as a matter of mere decency, a politic phantom, a popular prejudice, from
which men ought to get free, when they can indulge their passions in secret.
Thus you may go from one step to another, till your understanding be
infatuated, your heart led astray, you run into all sorts of crimes.

Leave Hystaspes with me, replied Cyrus; he w^^ teach me to avoid all these
dangers. Friendship (...) long accustomed me to open my heart to him, and (...)
is not only my counselor, but the confident of (...) weaknesses; Hystaspes was
an experienced commander who had served many years under Astyages, in (...)
wars against the Scythians and the king of Lydia and had all the virtues of the
ancient Persians, together with the politeness of the Medes. Being a great
politician and a great philosopher, a man equally able and disinterested, he
had risen to the first employments of the state without ambition, and possesses
them with modesty. Mandana being persuaded o^ the virtue and capacity of
Hystaspes; as well as of the advantages her son might find by living in a court
that was no less brave and knowing in the art of war than polite, obeyed
Astyages with the less regret. She began her journey soon after, and Cyrus
accompanied her some leagues from Ecbatan; at parting she embraced him with
tenderness; My son, said she, remember that your virtue alone can make me
happy. The young Prince melted into tears, and could make no answer; this was
his first separation from her: he followed her with his eyes til^ she was out
of sight, and then returned to Ecbatan.

Cyrus continued at the court of Astyages without being infected by it. This
however was not owing to the precautions of Mandana, the counsels of Hystaspes,
or his own natural virtue, but to love. There was then at Ecbatan a young
Princess named Cassandana, related to Cyrus, and daughter of Pharnaspe^ who was
of the race of the Achemenides. Her mother dying, her father, who was one of
the principal Satrapes of Persia, had sent her to the course of Astyages, to be
there educated under the eye of Ariana the Queen of the Medes. Cassandana had
all the politeness of that court without any of its faults; her wit was equal
to her beauty, and her modesty heightened the charms of both; her imagination
was lively, but directed by her judgment; a justness of thought was as natural
to her as a gracefulness of expression and manners; the delicate strokes of
wit, with which her easy cheerful conversation abounded, were unstudied and
unaffected; nor were the acquired accomplishments of her mind inferior to her
natural graces and virtues; but she concealed her talents with so much care, or
discovered them with so much reserve, that every thing in her seemed the work
of pure nature. She had entertained a particular regard for Cyrus from the
first moment she had seen him, but had so carefully hid her sentiments as not
to be suspected.

Proximity of blood gave Cyrus frequent opportunities of seeing her, and
discoursing with her. Her conversation polished the manners of the young
Prince, who insensibly acquired by it a delicacy with which till then he had
been unacquainted. The beauties and virtues of the Princess produced by degrees
in his soul all the motions of that noble passion, which softens the heart of
heroes without lessening their courage, and which places the principal charm of
love in the pleasure of loving. Precepts, maxims and severe lessons, do not
always preserve the mind from the poisoned arrows of sensuality. Virtue does
not render the heart insensible, but it often happens that well-placed love is
the only security from dangerous and criminal passions.

Cyrus enjoyed in the conversation of Cassandana all the pleasures of the
purest friendship, without daring to declare his love; his youth and his
modesty made him timorous. Nor was it long before he felt all the pains,
disquiets and alarms, which ever attend upon such passions, even when they are
most innocent. Cassandana's beauty created him a rival; Cyaxares felt the power
of her charms; he was much about the same age with Cyrus, but of a very
different character; he had wit and courage, but was of an impetuous, haughty
disposition, and showed already but too great a propensity to all the vices
common to young Princes. Cassandana could love nothing but virtue, and her
heart had made its choice. She dreaded more than death a marriage which should
naturally have flattered her ambition. Cyaxares was unacquainted with the
delicacy of love: his high rank augmented his natural haughtiness, and the
manners of the Medes authorized his presumption; so that he used little
precaution or ceremony in letting the Princess know his passion for her. He
immediately perceived her indifference, sought for the cause of it, and was not
long in making the discovery. In all public diversions she appeared gay and
free with him, but was more reserved with Cyrus. The guard she kept upon
herself gave her an air of constraint, which was not natural to her. She
answered to all the civilities of Cyaxares with ready and lively strokes of
wit; but when Cyrus spoke to her, she could hardly conceal her perplexity.

The Prince of Persia, being little skilled in the secrets of love, did not
interpret the conduct of Cassandana in the same manner with his rival. He^
imagined that she was pleased with the passion of Cyaxares, and that her eyes
were dazzled with the luster of that Prince's crown. He experienced alternately
the uncertainly and hope, the pains and pleasures of a lively passion: his
trouble was to great to be long concealed; Hystaspes perceived and said to him:
For some time past I have observed that you are thoughtful and absent; I
believe I (...) into the cause of it, you are in love, Cyrus; (...) is no way
to vanquish love, but to crush it in (...) birth. You are ignorant of its
wiles, and the dangers into which it leads; at first it enchants with its
sweetness, but in the end it poisons: it passes in the beginning for nothing
more than an homage paid to merit, and a sentiment worthy of a tender and
generous heart; by little and little the soul loses its vigor, the
understanding is bewildered, and the intoxication augments; that which seemed
in its birth an innocent inclination and a lovely passion, becomes on a sudden
all fury and madness. Cyrus, touched to the quick by these words, hearkened to
them with great uneasiness; he frequently changed color, but durst not make
any answer. Hystaspes knowing that examples make a deeper impression than
reasoning, related to him the history of Zarina and Stryangeus; in which we
have an instance of the fatal consequences of a violent passion; and at the
same time of the possibility of surmounting it.

This story has its foundation in (...) and is taken from Nicolaus of Dam.
(...) and Diod. Sic.
In the reign of Cyaxares son of Phraortes, said he, a bloody war was kindled
between the Sacae and the Medes. The troops of Cyaxares were commanded by his
son-in-law Stryangeus, the bravest and most accomplished Prince of all the
East. He had married Rhetea the Emperor's daughter, who had both wit and
beauty, and was of a most amiable temper. Nothing had hitherto either lessened
or disturbed their mutual passion. Zarina, Queen of the Sacae, put herself at
the head of her own troops; for she was not only adorned with all the charms of
her sex, but was mistress of the most heroic virtues: having been educated at
the court of Media, she had there contracted an (...) friendship with Rhetea
from her childhood. For two whole years the war was carried on with equal
advantages on both sides. Truces were often made in order to treat of peace;
and during these cessations of arms, Zarina and Stryangeus had frequent
interviews. The great qualities which he discovered in this Princess
immediately produced esteem; and under the cover of that esteem, love soon
insinuated itself into his heart. He no longer endeavored to put an end to the
war, for fear of being separated from Zarina; but he made frequent truces, in
which love had a greater share than policy.

The Emperor at length sent express orders to give a decisive battle. In the
heat of the engagement the two commanders met each other; Stryangeus would have
avoided Zarina; but she, whose heart was yet free from any thing which should
restrain her, attacked him; and obliged him to defend himself: Let us spare,
cried she, the blood of our subjects: it belongs to us alone to put and end to
the war. Love and glory by turns animated the young hero; he was equally afraid
of conquering and of being conquered; he frequently exposed his own life by
sparing Zarina's but at length found means to gain the victory; he threw his
javelin with a skilful hand, yet scarce had he let it fly when he repented, and
would have recalled it; the Queen's horse was wounded; the horse fell, and the
Queen with him: Stryangeus flew instantly to her relief, and would have no
other fruit of his victory, than the pleasure of saving what he loved. He
offered her peace with all sorts of advantages, preserved her dominions to her,
and, in the name of the Emperor, swore a perpetual alliance with her at the
head of the two armies. After this he begged permission to wait upon her to her
capital, and she consented to it; but their motives were very different. Zarina
thoughts were wholly taken up with the care of testifying her gratitude, while
Stryangeus sought only an opportunity of discovering his love; he accompanied
the Princess in her chariot, and they were conducted with pomp to R^^anacia.
Stryangeus easily found means to prolong his stay there. It was necessary that
the Emperor should ratify by a treaty the engagements into which his general
had entered; and the Prince by his address caused several difficulties to be
started which might make his presence requisite at the court of Zarina. He
artfully made advantage of these negociations to let Queen see how much he had
her interest at heart; he at first concealed his designs that he might secure
her friendship. Virtuous souls do not easily entertain distrust, their very
innocence helps to betray them when they are ignorant of the wiles of love.
Zarina was all gratitude, and her esteem for Stryangeus began by little and
little to grow into affection, without her perceiving it. She often suffered
her sentiments to break forth, in the most conspicuous manner, because she knew
not as yet the source of them; she tasted the secret sweets of a young and
growing passion, and was unwilling to examine into the motions of her own
heart; but at length she discovered, that love had too great a share in them;
she blushed at her weakness, and resolved to get the better of it; she pressed
the departure of Stryangeus, but the young Mede could not leave Roxanacia: he
was no longer mindful of glory, he forgot all his affections for Rhetea, he
yielded himself up entirely to a blind passion, sighed, complained, and being
no longer master of himself, declared his love to Zarina in the strongest and
most passionate terms.

The Queen d^d not seek to hide the situation of her mind, but shunning all
affected evasions and mystery, answered with a noble frankness: I am indebted
to you for my life and for my crown; my love is equal to my gratitude, and my
heart is no less touched than yours; but I will sooner die than betray my
virtue, or suffer that your glory should receive the least blemish. Consider,
dear Stryangeus, that you are the husband of Rhetea, whom I love; honor and
friendship oblige me equally to sacrafice a passion which would prove my shame
and her misfortune. As she ended these words she retired. Stryangeus remained
confounded, and in despair; he shut himself up in his apartment, and felt by
turns all the contrary motions of an heroic soul that is combated, conquered,
and insulted by a violent and tyrannical passion. One while he is jealous of
Zarina's glory and resolves to imitate her; the next moment cruel love sports
with his resolutions, and even with his virtue. In this tempest of passions his
understanding is clouded, his reason forsakes him, and he resolves to kill
himself; but he first writes these words to Zarina. I saved your life, and you
take away mine; I fall the victim of my love and of your virtue, being unable
to conquer the one or to imitate the other. Death alone can put an end to my
crime, and to my torment. Farewell for ever. He sent this letter to the Queen,
who instantly flew to the apartment of the young Mede; but he had already
plunged the dagger into his breast; she saw him weltering in his blood, fell in
a swoon, came again to herself, and by her tears called back his soul that was
ready to take its flight. He sighed, opened his eyes, beheld the grief of
Zarina, and consented to have his wound taken care of, which for many days was
thought mortal.

Rhetea, being informed of this tragical adventure, soon arrived at Roxanacia,
Zarina related to her all that happened, without concealing either her weakness
or her resistance. Such noble simplicity cannot be understood or relished but
by great souls. Though the war between the Sacae and the Medes had interrupted
the correspondence of these two Princesses, i^ had not in the least diminished
their friendship; they knew and esteemed each other too well to be susceptible
of distrust or jealousy. Rhetea always beheld Stryangeus with the eyes of a
lover: she lamented and compassionated his weakness, because she saw it was
involuntary. His wound was at length healed but he was not cured of his love:
Zarina in vain pressed his departure, he was not able to tear himself away from
that fatal place, his passion and his torments were renewed. Rhetea perceived
it, and fell into a deep sadness; she suffered all the most cruel agitations of
soul; grief for being no longer loved by a man whom alone she loved;
commiseration for a husband given up to despair; esteem for a rival whom she
could not hate. She saw herself every day between a lover hurried away by his
passion, and a virtuous friend whom she admired; and that her life was the
misfortune of both. How cruel a situation for a generous and tender heart! The
more she concealed her pain, the more she was oppressed by it. She sunk at last
under the weight, and fell dangerously sick. One day when she was alone with
Zarina and Stryangeus, she dropped these words: I am dying; but I die content,
since my death will make you happy.

Zarina melted into tears at these words and withdrew: these words pierced the
heart of Stryangeus: he looked upon Rhetea and beheld her pale, languishing,
and ready to expire with grief and love. The Princess's eyes were fixed
immoveably upon the Prince; his own at length were opened; he was like a man
who awakes from a profound sleep, or comes out of a delirium, where nothing had
appeared in its natural shape. He had seen Rhetea every day without perceiving
the cruel condition to which he had reduced her; he saw her at present with
other eyes, it awakened all his virtue, and kindled again all his former
tenderness. ^e acknowledged his error, threw himself at her feat, and embracing
her, repeated often these words, interrupted by tears and sighs; Live, my dear
^hetea, live to give me the pleasure of repairing my fault; I am now acquainted
with all the value of your heart. These words brought her again to life: her
beauty returned by degrees with her strength: she departed soon after with
Stryangeus for Ecbatan, and from the time nothing ever disturbed their union.

You see by this continued Hystaspes, to what extremities love may reduce the
greatest heroes; you see likewise the power of resolution and courage in
conquering the most violent passions, when we have a sincere desire to get the
victory. I should fear nothing for you if there were at this court such persons
as Zarina; but heroic virtue like hers would now be thought romantic, or rather
a savage insensibility. The manners of the Medes are very much changed:
Cassandana, continued he with design, is the only person I see who is worthy of
your affection -- He was going on, when Cyrus interrupting him cried out -- You
have named the dear object of my heart; Cassandana has rendered me insensible
to every thing that could have seduced my virtue, I love her, but I am not
loved. The Prince stopped here, fearing to have said too much; he looked upon
Hystaspes to see whether he approved of his love.

Hystaspes, overjoyed to have discovered the Prince's passion by this innocent
artifice, resolved instantly to employ all his endeavors to cure him of it, but
yet to manage him with delicacy and tenderness; h^ dissembled his concern, and
embracing the young Prince, with a serene countenance said to him, Cassandana's
beauty is the least of her charms, her heart is as pure as her understanding is
bright: I cannot however approve of your passion, you know that Cambyses has
other views for you. He designs you (...) the daughter of Croesus, one of the
most potent (...) of the East. It is by this marriage that you must begin to
verify the oracles; Persia is a tributary province, too inconsiderable to be
the center o^ a vast empire, and the scene of those great expl^^^ to which the
Gods have destined you; do not oppose their decree; you cannot without a crime
give your heart to any other but her whom Cambyses has chosen for you; remember
the story of Stryangeus, and the excesses to which that hero was hurried by his
love. This discourse threw Cyrus back into his former sadness; but out of
friendship for Hystaspes he concealed his pains without disguising his
sentiments. If the great Oromazes, said he with a submissive tone of voice,
decrees me for the daughter of the King of Lydia, he will doubtless give me the
strength to get the mastery of my passion. But, alas, can you compare my love
to Cassandana with that of Stryangeus for Zarina? That Prince's love, answered
Hystaspes, was criminal, but yours cannot be innocent, if it be not approved of
by Cambyses. He durst not say any more, well knowing, that opposition for the
most part serves only to irritate the minds of young persons. He contented
himself with observing for some days all the Prince's motions, and at length
concluded that the only means to cure him of his passion was to separate him
from the obect of it. He informed Cambyses of Cyrus's affection for Cassandana,
and as the King of Persia had other views for his son, which suited better with
his politics, he recalled him into Persia.

The young Prince received his father's orders with a concern that was suitable
to the violence of his love. Cassandana on the other hand could not support the
thought of a separation, which left her wholly exposed to the importunities of
Cyaxares, and she gave herself up to grief; even love itself obliged her to fly
what she loved; she was afraid of contributing to the misfortunes of Cyrus by
approving of his passion: but while she carefully avoided him, he sought for
her with eagerness; and decency at length required she should see him to
receive his last adieu. The Prince was no longer able to hide his sentiments,
he discovered at the same time both the violence of his passion and the excess
of his affliction. Some te^^^ dropped from the Princess's eyes, and in spite of
her reservedness these words escaped her: Ah Gods, why have you given me a
heart capable of tenderness, if you forbid me to love? She blushed as she
uttered these words and retired. Cyrus durst not follow her; the joy of finding
that he was loved by Cassandana and the fear of losing her, excited such a
(...) of contrary motions in his soul as exceedingly distressed him. After long
struggle and violent agitations of mind he at length flattered himself, that
when he arrived at the court of Persia he might be able to move Cambyses, by
the help of Mandana, and this hope hindered him from sinking under the weight
of so cruel a separation.

The young nobility would accompany him to the frontiers of Media. As he we
(...), he often stopped to look back upon the place where he had left
Cassandana; at length he le^^ (...) of that stately city, and continued his
way. When he came to the frontiers where the young Medes were to leave him, he
made then all (...) presents, but with admirable distinction, preferring merit
and service to birth and rank. During the rest of the journey, the hope of
engaging Mandana in the interest of his love seemed entirely to calm his mind,
and diffused an air of contentment upon his face which he had not before. His
return into Persia was celebrated by public feasting and rejoicings; and when
these were over, he left his father's palace, and retired to the place allotted
for the education of the young Persian mobility, where he continued till he was
eighteen. The young Satrapes seeing Cyrus returned, find one to another, he has
been living (...) at the court of Media, ^e will never be able (...) custom
himself to our simple and laborious manner of life* but when they saw that he
was content with (...) ordinary diet, that he was more temperate and abstemious
than they themselves, and that he showed more skill and courage in all his
exercises, they were struck with admiration, and confessed, that he had yet a
juster title to the throne by his merit than by his birth.

Some days after his return Cambyses sent for him, and seeming ignorant of his
passion for Cassandana, imparted to him the design he had of speedily marrying
him to Candaules, daughter of the King of Lydia. Cyrus made no answer but by a
deep sigh and a respectful silence; but the moment he left the King he ran to
the queen's apartment to disclose to her the secret of his heart. I have
followed your counsels, said he, at the court of Ecbatan, I have lived
insensible to all the most (...) charms of voluptuousness; but I owe nothing to
myself on this account, I owe all to the daughter of Pharnaspes; I love her,
and this love has preserved me from all the errors and extravagances of youth:
do not think that my attachment to her is only a transient liking which may
soon be over; I have never loved any other than Cassandana, and I feel that I
never can love but her alone; will you suffer the happiness of my life to be
made a sacrifice to political views? It is pretended that my marriage with the
daughter of Croesus is the first step I must take to enlarge my empire, but
surely the Gods can make me a conqueror without making me miserable. Mandana
perceived that her son's passion was yet too strong to suffer any remonstrances
against it, and hoping that time and absence would insensibly weaken it, (...)
in the mean time soothed and encouraged him.

Cassandana lived still at the court of Ecbatan, but she always received
Cyax^res with great coldness. He owed all the complaisance she had shown him to
Cyrus's presence. The pleasure of seeing Cyrus, of loving him, and being loved
by him, filled her (...) with a secret joy that diffused itself through all her
actions: but after the departure of the young Prince, her conversation, which
had been so sprightly and cheerful, was changed into a mournful silence: she
languished, her lively wit seemed to be extinguished and all her natural charms
to disappear. In the mean while Pharnaspes ^ell dangerously ill at the court of
Persia, and desired to see his daughter; upon this news she left E^batan in
haste, to pay the last duties to her father. Several ladies of the court
regretted her, but the greater part rejoiced at the absence of a Princess,
whose manners were too perfect a model of discreet conduct. Cyaxares saw the
departure of Cassandana with inexpressible dissatisfaction; spite, jealousy,
hatred to his rival, all the passions which arise from slighted love, tyranized
over his heart. He gave orders to young Araspes, the son of Harpagus, to go
privately through by ways and stop Cassandana, and to conduct her to a solitary
place on the borders of the Caspian sea.

Araspes, though he had been educated amidst all the pleasures of a voluptuous
court, had nevertheless preserved noble and generous sentiments, and sincerely
abhorred every thing that was dishonorable. Whatever faults he had, proceeded
rather from easiness and complaisance, than viciousness; he was of an amiable
temper and a sound understanding: and being born for arms, as well as formed
for a court, was qualified for any employment civil or military. -- He
communicated the orders given him by Cyaxares, to his father Harpagus, who
loved Cyrus. Harpagus, having long signalized his courage in war, lived at the
court of Ecbatan, without being corrupted by it: he beheld with concern the
manner of the age, but said little choosing rather to condemn by his conduct
than by his discourse. I foresee, said he to Araspes, all the misfortunes which
virtue will bring upon us; but beware of gaining the Prince's favor by a crime:
go, my son, and instead of oppressing innocence, make haste to its succor.
Araspes departed with expedition, overtook the Princess near Aspadana, told her
the orders of Cyaxares, and offered to conduct her into Persia. She wept for
joy to see the generosity of the young Mede, and made haste to gain the
frontiers of her own country. Pharnaspes died before his daughter could reach
the court of Cambyses. When the Princess had mourned for the death of her
father as nature and decency required, she at length saw Cyrus, and informed
him of the generous proceeding of Araspes. The Prince from that moment
conceived a tender friendship for him which lasted to the end of their lives.
But Cyaxares resolved to avenge himself of Araspes, and this in so cruel a
manner as was a dishonor to human nature. He caused Harpagus's second son to
be murdered, and his mangled limbs to be served up before the unhappy father at
a feast. The report of so horrible a cruelty stirred up the indignation of all
the Medes: but Astyages, being blinded by paternal affection, would not see nor
punish his son's crime: and thus a Prince, who was naturally beneficent,
countenanced vice by a shameful weakness: he knew not the value of virtue, and
was only good by complexion. Harpagus, being utterly disconsolate, retired from
the court of Ecbatan, and went privately into Persia, where Cambyses granted
him all the advantages and honors he could offer him to compensate his losses
in Media.

Cassandana, being not without hopes that Cambyses would be prevailed on to
alter his designs, lived at the court of Persia in great tranquillity. By her
virtue, wit and good sense she had gained the heart of Mandana, whose
sentiments in relation to her son's marriage were altered by the death of
Pharnaspes. Cassandana's mother was daughter of the King of Armenia, and the
young Princess might one day be heiress of that crown; an alliance with Croesus
would probably excite the jealousy of the Eastern Princes against Cyrus, and
Lydia was at too great a distance to have speedy succors from thence; even the
oracles themselves seemed to be against this alliance, seeing they foretold
that Lydia was to be Cyrus's first conquest. All these reasons joined together,
determined Mandana to oppose no longer her son's inclination; however, she
durst not for the present discover her thoughts to Cambyses, because he was
still eagerly bent upon an alliance with the king of Lydia.

Croesus had long formed the design of extending his dominions in Asia. His
numerous troops, and his prodigious wealth had inspired him with these
ambitions thoughts. He had drawn into his service, or into his alliance, the
Egyptians, the Thracians, the Greeks, and diverse nations that were settled in
Asia minor; he beh^ld with a jealous eye the conquests of Nabuchodonosor, and
was seeking all means to stop the progress of them; he knew that Cyrus would be
heir to the crown of Media in case Cyaxares died without children; the Persians
had acquired the reputation of a warlike people, and their country was
conveniently situated for making incursions upon the territories of the king of
Babylon if ever that Prince should begin a war with Lydia. These considerations
made Croesus very desirous of informing himself by his own eyes of the
respective forces of the Kings of Media and Babylon, and of the advantages of
an alliance with the one and with the other: and having more artifice and
ambition than skill and prudence, he rashly resolved to leave his dominions,
which were not then very distant from Media Sir Isaac Newton's Chronology, p.
316. Herod. lib. 1. cap. 73, 7^.
, and convey himself with all his court, into the very heart of Asia. In order
to conceal his real views, he raised several difficulties concerning the
marriage of his daughter with Cyrus, which could not be well adjusted by
embassies, and he proposed a conferrence with Cambyses on the confines of
Persia: Suza being a neutral city, was chosen for the congress; it was at this
time under the government of Phraortes, a tributary Prince to the Babylonians,
and father of Abradates, who was afterward so remarkable for his devotion to
Cyrus. Croesus carried the Queen of Lydia and his daughter with him, under
pretense of letting them see Cyrus before the conclusion of the marriage. He
sent notice to the court of Persia of his departure for Suza, upon which
Cambyses prepared likewise for his journey thither: But this news threw the
young Prince of Persia into the utmost despair, and Cassandana into a terrible
consternation. She had no distrust of Cyrus's constancy, but she dreaded the
ambition of Cambyses. Mandana who was steady in her views, desired that
Cassandana might go with the court to Suza: Cambyses at first opposed it, but
fearing to heighten his son's passion for that Princess by a forced separation,
he at length yielded to the dexterous insinuations of the Queen; he flattered
himself with the hope of changing his son's inclination by the new object he
should present him with, and which, indeed, would have been capable of stealing
away the heart of Cyrus, had he been of that fickle humor so natural to young
Princes.

The two courts being met at Suza, the first days were spent in feastings and
rejoicings. Croesus, who was naturally vain, affected a pompous show of
magnificence. Cambyses, like a wise Prince, placed all his glory in the genius
and military virtues of his subjects. The extraordinary concourse of men of two
nations, so different in their manners, created a wonderful diversity in all
the public shows and entertainments, and a perfect contrast of courtiers and
warriors. The Lydians, though grown not quite effeminate, made a shining figure
by the magnificence of their dress, the delicacy of their manners, and the
sprightliness of their conversation: but the Persians, who were rough without
ferocity, humane without politeness, and haughty notwithstanding their
simplicity, carried all the prizes in the games by their superior address and
strength of body. The negotiations were soon begun; and while the two Kings
employed all the art of policy to promote their designs attentive love set all
his engines at work to disconcert them, and render them fruitless.

The daughter of Croesus no sooner appeared at Suza, but all eyes were dazzled
with her charms, and the Persians universally cried out that she alone was
worthy of Cyrus, and the only Princess who could make him happy. She had a
manner and a turn of mind which were perfectly agreeable to the taste and
genius of that people; her noble and sprightly air was tempered with a majestic
sweetness; she loved hunting and other masculine exercises, and never showed
any token of the weaknesses natural to her sex: the more she was seen, the more
she discovered of rare accomplishments. Her superior graces and wit eclipsed
those of all the Lydian, Suzan and Persian ladies. Cassandana's beauty
maintained its prerogative no where but in the heart of Cyrus. One bashful,
tender, modest look from that Princess was sufficient to render him insensible
to all the charms of Candaules. He behaved himself however with so much
discretion in public, that the fair Lydian did not perceive his indifference;
but he was no sooner alone with her than he became pensive, and seemed quite
absent; she was far from guessing the cause of it, and made him sometimes call
home his thoughts by delicate strokes of raillery, to which he seldom gave her
any answer; when he did, he seemed always embarassed and at a loss; the
Princess imputed this to a want of sense rather than of sensibility, and she
began to repent of her journey. The negociations went on, but Cyrus sought all
means to retard them; neither the anger of Cambyses, nor the counsels of
Hystaspes made any impression on his mind. Nevertheless he inwardly condemned
himself for his rebellion against his father's will; he begged time to vanquish
his passion, and promised to use (...) utmost efforts to get the mastery of it;
nay, he thought himself sincere in the promises he made, but he saw Cassandana,
and all his resolutions vanished. He pressed, importuned, made his tears plead
with Mandana, and used all his arguments with Cambyses; he justified his
passion to himself by the oracles, and would needs believe, that the Gods, by
calling him to the conquest of Lydia, were secretly averse from his father's
designs; he left no pretext unemployed to keep off the marriage, and love
savored his endeavors.

The Lydian Princess had known Cassandana at the court of Ecbatan, and she
loved her with true affection -- She never once imagined herself to be her
rival. Cassandana on the other hand felt no regret nor jealousy to see the
homage that was paid to her friend's beauty, but she could not consent to lose
the heart of Cyrus; she never saw the young Lydian without uneasiness; she
would not deceive her, and she durst not speak to her; she was afraid of
dropping the least word which might either be unworthy of her love, or impose
upon her friend; her trouble and her alarms were daily augmented, the
amusements of the court became insipid to her, she scarce appeared any more in
public; she retired at length to a solitary place upon the frontiers of Persia
where the Princes of her family used ordinarily to reside. It was about twenty
furlongs from Suza The description of B^darides, near the fountain of (...),
fam^^^ for the amors of Laura and Petrarch.
, in a pleasant vale watered by three rivers, whose copi^^^ streams being
multiplied by the industrious inhabitants, and distributed into several canals,
fertilized the meadows and kept them in a perpetual verdure. On one side the
little hills which rose one above another were covered with olive, pomegranate
and orange trees; nature showed herself there in her richest and gayest dress:
the lofty mountains which appeared at a greater distance all around, and with
their craggy tops seemed to touch the sky, served as a barrier against the
winds. Through the middle of a garden less beautified by art than nature, ran a
crystal stream, which falling on a bed of pebbles, formed a cascade, whose
agreeable murmur soothed the soul to sweet musings. Not far from hence a wild
vine, interweaving its branches with many odoriferous shrubs, afforded all the
day long a cool and refreshing shade. Pharnaspes had brought from Babylon the
statues of Pyramus and Thisbe, on the pedestals of which was represented in
Bas-relief the history of their misfortunes, which had made that city famous
before it became so by its conquest: he had placed these statues in a bower,
and they were almost the only ornament with which art had beautified this
peaceful abode.

Candaules being informed of her friend's retreat went in all haste to make her
a visit. Cassandana was retired into the bower of Pyramus and Thisbe. The
Princess of Lydia intending to surprise her, stole softly along behind the
trees and beheld her prostrate before the statues; she drew near unseen, and
listening to what she said, heard her thus deplore her misfortunes. O ye manes
of chaste lovers, if ye ever come into these places hear my complaints, be
witnesses of my passion, and soften the God of love in favor of two the most
unhappy of his votaries, whose fortune resembles yours; let him either perfect
our union, or put an end to my life, which serves only to be an obstacle to the
happiness of Candaules and grandeur of Cyrus. The Princess of Lydia could
refrain no longer, but entered the bower; the two friends embraced each other,
and remained a long time without words or motion. Candaules was capable of
strong and generous friendship, she had never felt the power of love, she had
seen Cyrus with other eyes than Cassandana, and continued at the court of Suza
more out of obedience than inclination, so that her heart had no sacrifice to
make; she at length broke silence with these words: Ah Cassandana, why did you
conceal from me your sentiments and your affliction; Banish your fears, Cyrus
had made no impression on my heart, I will soon put an end to your misfortunes
without giving offense either to Croesus or Cambyses. After this they passed
several hours together, made a mutual vow of eternal friendship, and then
Candaules returned to Suza.

Cyrus was informed of what had passed, and being now no longer in any fear of
injuring his love, began to contract a very strict friendship with the Lydian
Princess. She very soon perceived the wrong judgment she had made of his
understanding, and became fully sensible of the superiority of his genius. They
jointly concerted measures to disturb the negotiations, and he resumed his
easy, frank and cheerful air. Cambyses was rejoiced at this change, imputed it
to another cause, and pressed the conclusion of the marriage; but then Croesus
began to dissemble: he had discerned that it would be much more advantageous
for him to have an alliance with the King of Babylon than with the King of
Persia: and while he was privately sounding the dispositions of Nabuchodonosor,
raised several difficulties which it was impossible for Cambyses to have
foreseen. Candaules had seen Merodac, the Assyrian Prince, at the court of
Lydia, and though she was not susceptible of the soft passion of love, she was
much better pleased with this match than with the other; her ambition struck in
with her friendship for Cassandana, and she used all her endeavors to engage
her father in this design. Mandana having learned how Candaules stood inclined,
the more easily persuaded herself, that the oracles were against the intended
marriage, and endeavored to make Cambyses indifferent about the success of the
negotiations. Cyrus, who knew how every one was disposed drew thence all
possible advantage to break off the treaty. Thus religion, love and policy made
each act a different part; the conferences were spun out to a great length, and
nothing was determined. But now Croesus receiving intelligence that the King of
Babylon was not averse from an alliance with him, left Suza on a sudden without
declaring the reasons of his conduct. Cambyses was picqued at this proceeding,
but like a wife Prince dissembled his resentment and went back to his capital.

Cassandana returned soon after to the court of Persia, and Cyrus pressed
Mandana to speak to his father. Cambyses who did not easily forsake his first
opinions, was for renewing the negotiations with Croesus; but the queen
represented to him, that Cassandana by her mother's side was granddaughter to
the King of Armenia, who was far advanced in years, and had but one son; that
in case this Prince should die she would be heiress of that crown; that the
oracle seemed to discountenance her son's marriage with the daughter of
Croesus; having foretold that Cyrus should begin his conquests by that of
Lydia. Let us leave to the Gods, said she, the care of accomplishing their own
decrees, without prescribing to them the means they shall employ; they often
fulfill their designs by such methods as to us would seem calculated to
disappoint them. Two considerable events wrought that effect upon the King's
mind, which the Queen's solicitations would never have done. Advice came that
the daughter of Croesus was promised to the son of the King of Babylon, and
that these two Princes had entered into a strict alliance: This news
disconcerted his schemes; but what determined him at length to comply with his
son's wishes, was the death of the Prince of Armenia, by which Cassandana
became presumptive heiress of that crown.

The nuptials were celebrated according to the manner of the age and of the
country. Cyrus and Cassandana were conducted to the top of a high mountain
consecrated to the great Oromazes; a fire of odoriferous wood was lighted; the
high priest bound together the flowing robes of the two lovers as a symbol of
their union: then holding each other by the hand and surrounded by the Estals
Esta is a Chaldee word which signifies fire. Hyde. Rel. Ant. Pers. cap. 7.
, they danced about the sacred fire, singing, according to the religion of the
ancient Persians, the love of Oromazes for his daughter Mithra before the
beginning of time; the picture which she presented him, containing the ideas of
all things; the production of innumerable worlds resembling those ideas: the
birth of the pure Genii, appointed to inhabit these worlds; the revolt of
Arimanius against the God Mythras; the origin of the chaos, and how it was
reduced to order; the fall of spirits into mortal bodies; the labors of
Mythras to raise them again to the Empyreum; and lastly, the total destruction
of the evil principle, who diffuses every where hatred, discord, and the
hellish passions.

The young Prince's happiness increased daily; the more he was acquainted with
the mind and heart of Cassandana, the more he discovered there of those ever
new and ever blooming charms which are not to be found in beauty alone. Neither
marriage which often weakens the strongest passions, nor that almost invincible
fondness for novelty, so universal in mankind, diminished in the least the
mutual affection of these happy lovers.

SECOND BOOK.
THE Prince of Persia was so enamored with Cassandana, and his thoughts were so
entirely employed in furnishing amusements for her, that there were great
reason to fear he would give himself up to an indolent life. He was daily
inventing new shows and entertainments unknown before in Persia, and introduced
all the diversions in vogue at the court of Ecbatan: he gave no attention to
business, and even neglected military exercises: this kind of life exposed him
continually to be seduced by the discourses, of the young Satrapes who were
about him. The Gymnosophists were beginning at this time to spread abroad in
Persia their pernicious doctrine concerning the two principles, which make men
virtuous without merit, or vicious without fault, by the force of an invincible
fatality. All the younger sort readily adopted this opinion because it favored
their passions: the deadly poison was stealing by degrees into the heart of
Cyrus, and even Araspes helped to cherish in his breast these rising prejudices
against religion.

On the borders of the Persian gulf there had been lately settled a famous
school of Magi, whose doctrine was entirely opposite to those fatal errors.
Cyrus had a taste and a genius which led him to the study of the sublimest
science; and Hystaspes, without letting the Prince perceive his views, laid
hold of this advantage to raise a desire in him of conversing with those sages:
as they never left their solitude, shunning the courts of Princes, and had
little intercourse with other men; Cyrus resolved to go see them in their
retreat.

He undertook this journey with Cassandana, accompanied by Hystaspes, Araspes,
and several of the Persian nobles. They crossed the plain of Passagarda,
traveled through the country of the Mardi and arrived upon the banks of the
Arosis. They entered by a narrow pass into a large valley encompassed with high
mountains, the tops of which was covered with oaks, fir-trees, and lofty
cedars; below were rich pastures, in which all forts of cattle were feeding;
the plain looked like a garden watered by many rivulets, which came from the
rocks all around and emptied themselves into the Arosis. This river lost itself
between two little hills, which, as they opened, presented to the view
successive scenes of new objects, and discovered at distances fruitful fields,
vast forests, and the Persian gulf, which bounded the horison. Cyrus and
Cassandana, as they advanced in the valley, were invited into a neighboring
grove by the found of harmonious music. There they beheld, by the side of a
clear fountain, a great number of men of all ages, and over against them a
company of women, who formed a concert. They understood that it was the school
of the Magi, and were surprised to see, instead of austere, melancholy, and
thoughtful men, an agreeable and polite people.

These Philosophers looked upon music as something heavenly, and proper to calm
the passions, for which reason they always began and finished the day by
concerts Strab. lib. 17.
After they had given some little time in the morning to this exercise, they
led their disciples through delightful walks to the sacred mountain, observing
all the way a profound silence; there they offered their homage to the Gods,
rather by the voice of the heart, than of the lips. Thus by music, pleasant
walks and prayer, they prepared themselves for the contemplation of truth, and
put the soul into a serenity proper for meditation; the rest of the day was
spent in study. Their only repast was a little before sun set, at which time
they eat nothing but bread, fruits, and some portion of what had been offered
to the Gods concluding all with concerts of music Strab. lib. 17.
Other men begin not the education of their children till after they are born,
but the Magi seemed to do it before. While their wives were with child, they
took care to keep them always in tranquillity, and a perpetual cheerfulness, by
sweet and innocent amusements, to the end that from the mother's womb the fruit
might receive no impressions, but what were pleasing, peaceful and agreeable to
order.

Each sage had his province in the empire of Philosophy; some studied the
virtues of plants, others the metamorphoses of insects; some again the
formation of animals, and others the course of the stars: but the aim of all
their researches was to come to the knowledge of the Gods, and of themselves.
They said, that the sciences were no father valuable than they served as steps
to ascend to the great Oromazes, and from thence to descend to man. Though the
love of truth was the only bond of society among these philosophers, yet they
were not without a head; they called him the Archimagus. He, who then possessed
that honor, was named Zardust or Zoroaster; he surpassed the rest more in
wisdom than in age, for he was scarce fifty years old; nevertheless he was a
consummate master in all the sciences of the Chaldeans and Egyptians, and had
even some knowledge of the religion of the Jews, whom he had seen at Babylon.
Having observed the corruption which had crept in among the Magi, he had
applied himself to reform their manners and their doctrine Agathias de Zor. and
Sir Isaac Newton, Chron. p. 348.
.

When Cyrus and Cassandana entered the grove, the assembly rose up and
worshipped them, bowing themselves to the earth, according to the custom of the
East; and then retiring left them alone with Zoroaster. This philosopher led
them to a bower of myrtle, in the midst of which was the statue of a woman,
which he had carved with his own hands. They all three sat down in this place
upon a seat of verdant turf, and Zoroaster entertained the Prince and Princess
with a discourse of the life, manners, and virtues of the Magi.

While he was speaking he frequently cast a look upon the statue, and as he
beheld it his eyes were bathed in tears. Cyrus and Cassandana observed his
sorrow at first with a respectful silence, but afterward the Princes could not
forbear asking him the reason of it. That statue, answered he, is the statue of
Selima, who heretofore loved me, as you now love Cyrus. It is here that I come
to spend my sweetest and my bitterest moments. In spite of wisdom, which
submits me to the will of the Gods; in spite of the pleasures I taste in
philosophy; in spite of the insensibility I am in, with regard to all human
grandeur, the remembrance of Selima often renews my regrets and my tears. True
virtue, though it regulates the passions, does not extinguish tender
sentiments. These words gave Cyrus and Cassandana a curiosity to know the
history of Selima. The philosopher would have excused himself, but he had
already betrayed his secret by the sensibility he had shown, and could not go
back without failing in due respect, to persons of such high rank: having
therefore wiped away his tears he thus began his narration. I am not afraid of
letting you know my weakness; but I should avoid the recital I am going to
make, if I did not foresee that you may reap some useful instructions from it.
I was born a Prince; my father was sovereign of a little territory in the
Indies, which is called the country of Sophites. Having lost my way one day
when I was hunting, I chanced to see in the thick part of a wood a young maid,
who was there reposing herself. Her surprising beauty immediately struck me; I
became immovable, and dust not advance; I imagined she was one of those aerial
spirits, who descend sometimes from the throne (...) Oromazes, to conduct souls
back to the empyreus Seeing herself alone with a man, she fled, and (...)
refuge in a temple that was near the forest. I dust not follow her; but I
learned that her name was Selima, that she was daughter of an old Brachma^, who
dwelt in that temple, and that she was consecrated to the worship of the fire.
The Estals may quit celibacy and marry: but while they continue priestesses of
the fire, the laws are so severe among the Indians, that a father thinks it an
act of religion to throw his daughter alive into the flames, should she ever
fall from that purity of manners which she has sworn to preserve.

My father was yet living, and I was not in a condition to force Selima from
that asylum; may had I been King, Princes have no right in that country (...)
persons consecrated to religion. However, (...) these difficulties did but
increase my passion; and the violence of it quickened my ingenuity: I left my
father's palace; I was young, a Prince, and I did not consult reason. I
disguised myself in the habit of a girl, and went to the temple, where the old
Brachman lived. I deceived him by a feigned story, and became one of the
Estals, under the name of Amana. The King, my father, who was disconsolate for
my sudden leaving him, ordered search to be made for me every where, but to no
purpose. Selima not knowing my sex, conceived a particular liking and
friendship for me. I never left her; we passed our lives together in working,
reading, walking, and serving at the altars. I often told her sables and
affecting stories, in order to point forth the wonderful effects of friendship
and of love. My design was to prepare her by degrees for the final discovery of
my intentions. I sometimes forgot myself while I was speaking, and was so
carried away by my vivacity, that she often interrupted me, and said, one would
think, Amana, to hear you speak, that you feel in this moment all that you
describe. I lived in this manner several months with her, and it was not
possible for her to discover either my disguise or my passion. As my heart was
not corrupted, I had no criminal view; I imagined, that if I could engage her
to lose me, she would forsake her state of life to share my crown with me: I
was continually waiting for a favorable moment, to reveal to her my
sentiments; but alas! that moment never came.

It was a custom among the Estals, to go diverse times in the year upon a high
mountain, there to kindle the sacred fire, and to offer sacrifices: we all went
up thither one day, accompanied only by the old Brachman. Scarce was the
sacrifice begun, when we were surrounded by a body of men, armed with bows and
arrows, who carried away Selima and her father. They were all on horseback; I
followed them some time, but they entered into a wood, and I saw them no more.
I did not return to the temple, but stole away from the Estals, changed my
dress, took another disguise, and forsook the Indies. I forgot my father, my
country, and all my obligations; I wandered over all Asia in search of Selima:
what cannot love do in a young heart given up to its passion? One day, as I was
crossing the country of the Lycians, I stopped in a great forest to shelter
myself from the excessive heat. I presently saw a company of hunters pass by,
and a little after several women, among whom I thought I discovered Selima: she
was in a hunting dress, mounted upon a proud courser, and distinguished from
all the rest by a coronet of flowers. She passed by me so swiftly, that I could
not be sure whether my conjectures were well founded; but I went strait to the
capital.

The Lycians were at that time governed by women, which form of government was
established among them upon the following occasion. Some years ago the men
became so effeminate during a long peace, that their thoughts where wholly
taken up about their dress. They affected the discourse, manners, maxims, and
all the imperfections of women, without having either their sweetness or their
delicacy; and while they gave themselves up to infamous laziness, the most
abomiable vices took the place of lovely passions; they despised the Lycian
women, and treated them like slaves: a foreign war came upon them; the men
being grown cowardly and effeminate were not able to defend their country, they
fled and hid themselves in caves and caverns; the women being accustomed to
fatigue, by the slavery they had undergone, took arms, drove away the enemy,
became mistresses of the country, and established themselves in authority by an
immutable law. From that time the Lycians habituated themselves to this form of
government, and found it the mildest and most convenient. Their Queens had a
council of senators, who assisted them with their advice: the men proposed good
laws, but the executive power was in the women. The sweetness and softness of
the sex prevented all the mischiefs of tyranny; and the counsel of the wise
senators qualified that inconstancy, with which women are reproached.

I understood that the mother of Selima having been dethroned by the ambition
of a kinswoman, her first minister had fled to the Indies with the young
Princess; that he had lived there several years as a Brachman, and she as an
Estal; that this old man having always maintained a correspondence with the
friends of the royal family, the young Queen had been restored to the throne
after the death of the usurper; that she governed with the wisdom of a person
who had experienced misfortunes; and lastly, that she had always expressed an
invincible dislike to marriage. This news gave me an inexpressible joy; I
thanked the Gods for having conducted me by such wonderful ways near the object
of my heart; I implored their help, and promised never to love but once, if
they would favor my passion.

I then considered by what method I should introduce myself to the Queen; and
finding that war was the most proper, I entered into the service. There I
distinguished myself very soon; for I refused no fatigue, I avoided no danger,
I sought the most hazardous enterprises. Upon a day of battle, on the success
of which, the liberty of Lycia depended, the Carians put our troops into
disorder; it was in a large plain, out of which there was but one narrow pass
for the fugitives to escape. I gained this pass, and threatened to pierce with
my javelin whoever should attempt to force it, In this manner I rallied our
troops, and returned to charge the enemy; I routed them and obtained a complete
victory. This action drew the attention of all the army upon me: nothing was
spoken of but my courage; and all the soldiers called me the deliverer of their
country. I was conducted to the Queen's presence, who could not recollect me;
for we had been separated six years, and grief and fatigue had altered my
features. She asked me my name, my country, my family, and seemed to examine my
face with a more than common curiosity. I thought I discovered by her eyes an
inward emotion, which she endeavored to hide. Strange capriciousness of love!
Heretofore I had thought her an Estal of mean birth; yet I had resolved to
share my crown with her. This moment I conceived a design of engaging her to
love me as I loved her; I concealed my country and my birth, and told her I was
born in a village of Bactria, of a very obscure family; upon this she suddenly
withdrew without answering me.

Not long after, she gave me, by the advice of her senators, the command of her
army; by which I had free access to her person. She used frequently to send for
me, under pretense of business, when she had nothing to say; she took a
pleasure in discoursing with me. I often painted forth my own sentiments to her
under borrowed names; the Greek and Egyptian mythology, which I had learned in
my travels, furnished me with abundant arguments to prove that the Gods were
heretofore enamoured with mortals, and that love makes all conditions equal. I
remember, that one day while I was relating to her a story of this kind she
lest me in a great emotion; I discovered by that her hidden sentiments; and it
gave me an inexpressible pleasure to find that she then loved me as I had loved
her. I had frequent conversation with her, by which her confidence in me daily
increased: I sometimes made her call to mind the misfortunes of her early
youth; and she then gave me an account of her living among the Estals, her
friendship for Amana, and their mutual affection. Scarce was I able to contain
myself when I heard her speak; I was just ready to throw off my disguise; but
my false delicacy required yet farther, that Selima should do for me what I
would have done for her. I was quickly satisfied; an extraordinary event made
me experience all the extent and power of her love.

By the laws of Lycia the person who governs is not permitted to marry a
stranger. Selima sent for me one day, and said to me: My subjects desire that I
would marry; go tell them from me, that I will consent, upon condition that
they leave me free in my choice. She spoke these words with a majestic air, and
almost without looking upon me. At first I trembled, then flattered myself,
then fell into doubt; for I knew the Lycians to be strongly attached to their
laws: I went nevertheless to execute the commands I had received. When the
council was assembled I laid before them the Queen's pleasure, and after much
dispute it was agreed, that she should be left free to choose herself a
husband. I carried Selima the result of their deliberation: she then directed
me to assemble the troops in the same plain where I had obtained the victory
over the Carians, and to hold myself ready to obey her farther orders; she
likewise commanded all the principal men of the nation to repair to the same
place. A magnificent throne being there erected, the Queen appeared upon it
encircled with her courtiers, and spoke to the assembly in the following
manner: People of Lycia, ever since I began my reign I have strictly observed
your laws; I have appeared at the head of your armies, and have obtained
several victories; my only study has been to make you free and happy -- Is it
just that she who has been the preserver of your liberty should be herself a
slave? Is it equitable that she who continually seeks your happiness should be
herself miserable? There is no unhappiness equal to that of doing violence to
one's own heart. When the heart is under a constraint, grandeur and royalty
serve only to give us a quicker sense of our slavery: I demand therefore to be
free in my choice.

This discourse was applauded by the whole assembly, who immediately cried out,
you are free, you are dispensed from the law. The Queen sent me orders to
advance at the head of the troops. As soon as I was come near the throne she
rose up, and, pointing to me with her hand -- There, said she, is my husband;
he is a stranger, but his services make him the father of the country; he is
not a Prince, but his merit puts him on a level with Kings. She then ordered me
to come up to her; I prostrated myself at her feet, and took all the usual
oaths; I promised to renounce my country for ever, to look upon the Lycians as
my children, and, above all, never to love any other than the Queen. After this
she stepped down from the throne, and we were conducted back to the capital
with pomp, amidst the acclamations of the people. As soon as we were alone, Ah
Selima! said I, have you then forgot Amana? It is impossible to express the
Queen's surprise or the transport of affection and joy which these words gave
her. She knew me, and conjectured all the rest; I had no need to speak, and we
were both a long time silent: I at length told her my family, my adventures,
and all the effects that love had produced in me. She very soon assembled her
council, and acquainted them with my birth; ambasiadors were sent to the
Indies; I renounced my crown and country for ever, and my brother was confirmed
in the possession of my throne.

This was an easy sacrifice; I was in possession of Selima, and my happiness
was complete: but alas! this happiness was of short continuance. In giving
myself up to my passion, I had renounced my country, I had forsaken my father
whose only consolation I was, I had forgot all my duty: my love, which seemed
so delicate, so generous, and was the admiration of men, was not approved of by
the Gods; accordingly they punished me for it by the greatest of all
misfortunes; they took Selima from me, she died within a few days after our
marriage. I gave myself up to the most excessive sorrow; but the Gods did not
abandon me. I entered deeply into myself; wisdom descended into my heart, she
opened the eyes of my understanding, and I then comprehended the admirable
mystery of the conduct of Oromazes. Virtue is often unhappy, and this shocks
the reason of short-sighted men; but they are ignorant that the transient
sufferings of this life are designed by the Gods to expiate the secret faults
of those who appear the most virtuous. These reflections determined me to
consecrate the rest of my days to the study of wisdom. Selima was dead, my
bonds were broken, I was no longer tied to any thing in nature; the whole earth
appeared to me a desert; I could not reign in Lycia after the death of Selima,
and I would not remain in a country where every thing continually renewed the
remembrance of my loss. I returned to the Indies, and went to live among the
Brachmans, where I formed a new plan for happiness. Being freed from that
slavery which always accompanies grandeur, I established within myself an
empire over my passions and desires, more glorious and satisfactory than the
false luster of royalty. But now notwithstanding my retreat and the distance I
was at, my brother conceived a jealousy of me, as if I was ambitious of
ascending the throne, and I was obliged once more to leave the Indies. My exile
proved a new source of happiness to me; it depends upon ourselves to reap
advantage from our misfortunes. I visited the wise men of Asia, and conversed
with the philosophers of different countries: I learned their laws and their
religion, and was charmed to find, that the great men of all times, and of all
places, had the same ideas of the Divinity, and of morality. At last I came
hither upon the banks of the Arosis, where the Magi have chosen me for their
head.

Here Zoroaster ended; Cyrus and Cassandana were too much affected to be able
to speak. After some moments of silence, the philosopher discoursed to them of
the happiness which faithful lovers enjoy in the empyreum when they meet again
there; he then concluded with these wishes: May you long feel the happiness of
mutual and undivided love! may the Gods preserve you from that depravity of
heart which makes pleasures lose their relish when once they become lawful! may
you, after the transports of a lively and pure passion in your younger years,
experience in a more advanced age, all the charms of that union which
diminishes the pains of life, and augments its pleasures by sharing them! may a
long and agreeable old age let you see your distant posterity multiplying the
race of heroes upon earth! may at last one and the same day unite the ashes of
both, to exempt you from the misfortune of bewailing like me the loss of what
you love! my only comfort is the hope of seeing Selima again in the sphere of
fire, the pure element of love. Souls make acquaintance only here below; it is
above that their union is consummated. O Selima, Selima! we shall one day meet
again, and our flames will be eternal: I know, that in those superior regions
your happiness will not be complete till I shall share it with you; those who
have loved each other purely will love so for ever; true love is immortal.

The history which Zoroaster had given of his own life made a strong impression
upon the Prince and Princess; it confirmed them in their mutual tenderness, and
in their love of virtue; they spent some time with the sage in his solitude
before they returned to the court of Cambyses. It was during this retreat that
Zoroaster initiated Cyrus into all the mysteries of the eastern wisdom. The
Chaldeans, the Egyptians and the Gymnosophists had a wonderful knowledge of
nature, but they wrapped it up in allegorical fables^ and this doubtless is the
reason that venerable antiquity has been reproached with ignorance in natural
philosophy. Zoroster laid open before Cyrus the secrets of nature, not merely
to gratify his curosity, but to make him observe the marks of an infinite
wisdom diffused throughout the universe, and thereby to guard his mind against
irreligion.

One while he made him admire the structure of the human body, the springs of
which it is composed, and the liquors that flow in it; the canals, the pumps
and the bason^ which are formed by the mere interweaving of the fibers, in
order to separate, purify, conduct and reconduct the liquids into all the
extremities of the body; then the levers and the cords, formed by the bones and
muscles, in order to the various motions of the members. It is thus, said the
Philosopher, that our body is a surprising contexture of tubes, branched out
into endless divisions and subdivisions, which have a communication with one
another, while different and suitable liquors are insinuated into them, and are
there parpared according to the rules of the most exact mechanism. An infinity
of small imperceptible springs, the construction and motions of which we are
ignorant of, are continually playing in our bodies; and it is therefore evident
that nothing but a sovereign intelligence could produce, adjust and preserve so
compounded, so delicate, and so admirable a machine. The life of this machine
depends on the freedom and amenity with which the liquids flow in the various
canals; all our diseases on the other hand proceed from the thickness of the
liquids, which stopped in those imperceptible vessels, choke them up, swell and
relax them; or from the acrimony of the juices, which prick, (...) and tear
those delicate fibers. Indolence occasions (...) first, and intemperance the
second; for which reason the Persian laws have wisely enjoined sobriety and
exercise, as necessary to prevent the enfeebling (...) of the political and
natural body.

At another time he explained to him the configuration of plants, and the
transformation of insects. They had not our optic glasses to magnify objects
and bring them near; but the penetrating spirit of Zoroaster saw farther than
the eye can reach by their help; because he was acquainted not only with all
the experiments of the ancients and their traditions, but also with the occult
See Boar^aave Chem. p. 2, and. 7
sciences revealed by the Gen^i to the first men. Each seed, said he, contains
within it a plant of its own species, this plant another seed, and this seed
another little plant, and so on without end. These organic moulds cannot be
formed by the simple laws of motion: they are the production of the great
Oromazes, who originally enclosed within each seed all the bodies to be derived
from it. None but he alone could thus conceal innumerable wonders in a single
imperceptible atom. The growth of vegetables is but the unfolding of the
fibers, membranes and branches by the moisture of the earth, which in an
admirable manner insinuates itself into them. Every plant has two sorts of
pipes; the one filled with air like lungs to it, the other filled with sap may
be compared to arteries. In the day time the heat of the sun rarefies, swells
and dilates the air contained in the first sort, so that they compress the
other, and thereby break the particles of the sap, refine it and make it rise,
in order to the production of leaves, flowers and fruits. The same air growing
cool during the night is condensed and contracted, and no longer presses upon
the alimentary tubes; so that these being opened and dilated, receive the
moisture of the earth, pregnant with salts, sulphurs, and minerals, which the
pressure of the atmosphere forces in through the roots: it is thus that the
plants feed in the night and digest in the day; the nutritive sap being
distributed through all the branches, at length perspires, and, spurting out of
their small delicate pipes with an incredible force, forms an infinite number
of jets d' eau: these spouts, meet, mix, cross one another, and perhaps serve
for an entertainment of the aerial Genii, before whom the wonders of nature lay
all unveiled. One blade of grass presents more various and amazing objects to
their view, than all the waterworks in the enchanted gardens of the King of
Babylon. If poets were philosophers, the bare description of nature would
furnish them with more agreeable pictures than all their allegorical paintings;
the poor resource of a hood-winked imagination, when reason does not lend it
eyes to discern the beauty of the works of Oromazes. Zoroaster then showed the
Prince the trees, plants, and roots, the gums, bitters, and aromatics, which
help to dissolve, attenuate, and liquify our juices when they grow too thick;
to pound, blunt, and absorb the humors when too sharp; to fortify, repair, and
give a new tension to the fibers when weakened, torn and relaxed. Heroes were
in former times philosophers, and conquerers were fond of knowing themselves
how to repair in part the mischiefs occasioned by their battles and victories.

After this the philosopher gave Cyrus a view of the wonderful art discoverable
in the formation of insects. Their eggs, said he, scattered in the air, upon
the earth, and in the waters, meet in each with proper receptacles, and wait
only for a favorable ray of the sun to hatch them. Sometimes they are worms
crawling upon the earth; then fishes swimming in liquors, and at last they get
wings and rise into the air. These almost invisible machines have in each of
them numberless springs at work, which furnish and prepare liquors suited to
their wants. What mechanism, what art, what fresh and endless proofs have we
here of an infinite wisdom which produces all.

At another time, the sage carried the thoughts of Cyrus up into the higher
regions, to contemplate the various phenomenon which happen in the air. He
explained to him the wonderful qualities of the subtle and invisible fluid
which encompasses the earth in order to compress all the parts of it, keep each
of them in its proper place, and hinder them from disuniting; how necessary it
is to the life of animals, the growth of plants, the flying of birds, the
forming of sounds, and numberless other useful and important effects. This
fluid, said he, being agitated, heated, cooled again, compressed, dilated, one
while by the rays of the sun, or the subterraneous fires, sometimes by the
salts and sulphurs which float in it, at other times by nitres which fix and
congeal it, sometimes by clouds which compress it, and often by other causes
which destroy the equilibrium of its parts, produces all sorts of winds, the
most impetuous of which serve to dispel the noxious vapors, and the softer
breezes to temper the excessive heats. At other times the rays of the sun,
insinuating themselves into the little drops of dew which water the surface of
the earth, rarefy them, and thereby make them lighter than the air, so that
they ascend into it, form vapors, and float there at different heights,
according as they are more or less heavy. The sun having drawn up these vapors
loaded with sulphur, minerals, and different kinds of salts, they kindle in the
air, put it into a commotion, and cause thunder and lightening. Other vapors
that are light gather into clouds and float in the air; but when they become
too heavy they fall in dews, showers of rain, snow and hail, according as the
air is more or less heated. Those vapors which are daily drawn from the sea,
and carried in the air by the winds to the tops of mountains, fall there, soak
into them, and meet in their inward cavities, where they increase and swell
till they find a vent, or force a passage, and so become plenteous springs of
refreshing water. By these are formed rivulets of which the smaller rivers are
composed; and these latter again form the great rivers which return into the
sea to repair the loss it had suffered by the ardent rays of the sun. Thus it
is that all the irregularities and intemperature of the elements which seem to
destroy nature in one season, serve to revive it in another: the immoderate
heats of summer, and the excessive cold of winter, prepare the beauties of the
spring, and the rich fruits of autumn. All these vicissitudes, which seem to
superficial minds the effects of a fortuitous concourse of irregular causes,
are regulated according to weight and measure, by that sovereign wisdom who
weighs the earth as a grain of sand, and the sea as a drop of water.

Then Zoroaster raised his thoughts to the stars, and explained to Cyrus how
they all float in an active, uniform and infinitely subtle fluid, which fills
and pervades all nature. This invisible matter, said he, does not act by the
necessary law of a blind mechanism. It is, as it were the Those who are
unacquainted with the style of antiquity imagine that Zoroaster and Pythagoras
make the Deity corporeal by this expression, and that it gave occasion to the
error of the Stoics, who believed the divine essence an aetherial matter; but
the contrary (...) by the definitions which those two philosophers give of the
Divinity. (Disc. p. 276, and p. 284. 285.) It seems to me, that by the body of
God, they mean nothing more than what Sir Isaac Newton expresses by these
words: Deus ubique pra^sens voluntate sua corpora omnia in infinito suo
uniformi SENSORIO movet, adeoque cunctas mundi universi parts ad arbitrium
suum singit et refingit, multo magis quam anima nostra voluntate sua ad
corporia nostri membra movenda valet. Opt. p. 411.
body of the great Oromazes, whose soul is truth. By the one he acts upon all
bodies, and by the other he enlightens all spirits. His vivifying presence
gives activity to this pure ether, which becomes thereby the primary
machanical spring of all the motions in the heavens and upon the earth: it
causes the fixed stars to turn upon their axes while it makes the planets
circle round those stars; it transmits with an incredible velocity the light of
those heavenly bodies, as the air does sounds; and its vibrations as they are
more or less quick, produce the agreeable variety of colors, as those of the
air do the melodious notes of music. Lastly, the fluidity of liquids, the
cohesion of solids, the gravitation, elasticity, attraction, and fermentation
of bodies, the sensation of animals, and the vegetation of plants come all from
the action of this exceedingly subtle These are the very words of Sir Isaac
Newton, Adjicere jam licet nonnulla de SPIRITU quodam SUBTILISSIMO corpora
crass a pervadente, et in iisdem latente, cujus vi et actionibus particulae
corporum ad minimas distantias se mutuo ATTRAHUNT, et contiguae factae,
COHAERENT, et, corpora ELECTRICA agunt ad distantias majores; et LUX emittitur,
reflectitur, refringitur, inflectitur, et calefacit; et SENSATIO omnis
excitatur, et MEMBRA ANIMALIUM ad voluntatem moventur. He never denied a
subtle matter in this sense, and it is in this sense that I always understand
it. See disc. at the end.
SPIRIT which diffuses itself throughout all the immensity of space. The same
simple cause produces numberless, and even contrary effects, yet without any
confussion in so infinite a variety of motions.

We are struck with surprise continued the Philosopher, to see all the wonders
of nature, which discover themselves to our short and feeble sight; but how
great would be our amazement, if we could transport ourselves into those
aetherial spaces; and pass through them with a rapid flight? Each star would
appear an atom in comparison of the immensity with which it is surrounded: what
would our wonder be, if descending afterward upon earth, we could accommodate
our eyes to the minuteness of objects, and pursue the smallest grain of sand
through its infinite divisibility? Each atom would appear a world, in which we
should doubtless discover new beauties. There is nothing great, nothing little
in itself; both the GREAT and the LITTLE disappear by turns to present every
where an image of infinity through all the works of Oromazes. What a folly is
it then to go about to explain the Philosophiae naturalis id revera praecipuum
est et officium et ^^nis ut ex phaenominis sine fictis hypothesibus arguamus,
et ab effectis ratiocinatione progrediamur ad causus, donec adip sum demum
perveniamus causam primam, quae sine omni dubio mechanica non est.....atque his
quidem rite expeditis, ex phaenomenis constabit effe Entem incorpereum
viventem, intelligentem, ^mnipraesentem qui in spatio inf^nito tanquam Sensorio
suo res ipsas intime cernat, (...) perspeciat, totasque intra se praesentes
comple (...) Newt. Opt. p. 273.
original of things by the mere laws of matter and motion? The universe is the
work of the great Oromazes: he preserves and governs it by general laws, but
these laws are free, arbitrary, and even diversified in the different regions
of immensity, according to the effects he would there produce, and the various
relations he would establish between bodies and spirits. It is from him that
every thing slows; it is in him that every thing exists; it is by him that
every thing lives; and to him alone should all things be referred. Without him
all nature is an inexplicable aenigma; with him the mind conceives every thing
possible, even at the same time that it is sensible of its own ignorance and
narrow limits.

Cyrus was charmed with this instruction; not worlds seemed to be unveiled
before him; where have I lived, said he, till now? The simplest objects contain
wonders which escape my sight: every thing bears the mark of an infinite wisdom
and power. The great Oromazes ever present to his work, give to all bodies
their forms and their motions, to all spirits their reason and their virtues;
he beholds them all in his immensity; he governs them, not by any necessary
laws of mechanism; he makes and he changes the laws by which he rules them, as
it best suits with the designs of his justice and goodness.

While Cyrus was thus entertained with the conversation of Zoroaster,
Cassandana assisted, with the wives of the Magi, in celebrating the festival of
the Goddess Mythra. The ancient Persians adored but one sole supreme Deity, but
they considered the God Mythras and the Goddess Mythra, sometimes as two
emanations from his substance, and at other times at the first productions of
his power. Every day was sacred to the great Oromazes, because he was never to
be forgotten: but the festival of the Goddess Mythra was observed only toward
the end of the spring, and that of Mythras about the beginning of autumn.
During the first, which lasted ten days, the women performed all the priestly
functions, and the men did not assist at it: as on the other hand the women
were not admitted to the celebration of the last. This separation of the two
sexes was thought necessary, in order to preserve the soul from all
imaginations which might profane its joys in these solemn festivals.

The ancient Persians had neither temples nor altars; they sacrificed upon high
mountains and eminencies; nor did they use libations, or music, or hallowed
bread. Zoroaster had made no change in the old rites, except by the
introduction of music into divine worship. At break of day all the wives of the
Magi being crowned with myrtle and clothed in long white robes, walked two and
two with a slow grave pace to the mount of Mythra; they were followed by their
daughters clad in fine linen and leading the victims adorned with wreaths of
all colors. The summit of the hill was a plain covered with a sacred wood;
several vistas were cut through it, and all centred in a great circus, which
had been turned into a delightful garden. In the middle of this garden there
sprang a fountain, whose compliant waters took all the forms which art was
pleased to give them. After many windings and turnings these crystal streams
crept on to the declivity of the hill, and there falling down in a rapid
torrent from rock to rock frothed and foamed, and at length lost themselves in
a deep river which ran at the foot of the sacred mount.

When the procession arrived at the place of sacrifice, two sheep white as snow
were led to the brink of the fountain; and while the priestess offered the
victims, the choir of women struck their lyres, and the young virgins joined
their voices singing this sacred hymn, Oromazes is the first of incorruptible
natures, eternal, unbegotten, self-sufficient, of all that is excellent most
excellent, the wisest of all intelligences; he beheld himself in the mirror of
his own substance, and by that view produced the Goddess Mythra; Mythra the
living image of his beauty, the original mother and the immortal virgin; she
presented him the ideas of all things, and he gave them to the God Mythras to
form a world resembling those ideas. Let us celebrate the wisdom of Mythra, let
us do her homage by our purity and our virtues, rather than by our songs and
praises. During this act of adoration, three times the music paused, to denote
by a profound silence that the divine nature transcends whatever our words can
express. The hymn being ended, the priestess lighted by the rays of the sun a
fire of odoriferous wood, and while she there consumed the hearts of the sheep,
sung alone with a loud voice, Mythra desires only the soul of the victim. Then
the remainder of the sacrifice was dressed for a public feast, of which they all
eat sitting on the brink of the sacred fountain, where they quenched their
thirst. During the repast twelve young virgins sung the sweets of friendship;
the charms of virtue, the peace, innocence, and simplicity of a rural life.

After this regale, the mothers and daughters all assembled upon a large green
plot encompassed with lofty trees, whose shady tops and leafy branches were a
defense against the scorching heat of the sun and the blasts of the north wind:
here they diverted themselves with dancing, running, and concerts of music.
Then they represented the exploits of heroes, the virtues of heroines, and the
pure pleasures of the primaeval state before Arimanius invaded the empire of
Oromazes, and inspired mortals with deceitful hopes, false joys, perfidious
disgusts, credulous suspicions, and the inhuman extravagancies of profane love.
These sports being over, they dispersed themselves about the garden, and by way
of refreshment bathed themselves in the waters. Toward sunset they descended
the hill and joined the Magi, who led them to the mountain of Oromazes, there
to perform the evening sacrifice; the victims which were offered served every
family for supper, (for they had two repasts on festival days, and they
cheerfully passed the time till sleepiness called them to rest.

It was in this manner that Cassandana amused herself, while Zoroaster was
discovering to Cyrus all the beauties of the universe, and thereby preparing
his mind for matters of a more exalted nature, the doctrines of religion. The
philosopher at length conducted the Prince with Hystaspes and Araspes into a
gloomy and solitary forest, where perpetual silence reigned, and where the
attention could not be diverted by any sensible object; and then said; It is
not to enjoy the pleasures of solitude that we thus forsake the society of men;
to retire from the world in that view would be only to gratify a trifling
indolence, unworthy of the character of wisdom: but the aim of the Magi in this
retreat is to disengage themselves from matter, rise to the contemplation of
celestial things, and commence an intercourse with the pure spirits, who
discover to them all the secrets of nature. When mortals have gained a complete
victory over all the passions, they are thus favored by the great Oromazes: it
is however but a very small number of the most purified sages who have enjoyed
this privilege. Impose silence upon your senses, raise your mind above all
visible objects, and listen to what the Gymnosophists have learned by their
commerce with the Genii. Here he was silent for some time, seemed to collect
himself inwardly, and then continued.

In the spaces of the empyreum a pure and divine fire expands itself; by the
means of which, not only bodies but spirits become visible. See the disc. at
the end, and parag. about Pythagoras.
In the midst of this immensity is the great Oromazes, first principle of all
things. He diffuses himself every where; but it is there that he is manifested
after a more glorious manner. Near him is seated the God Mythras, or the second
It Is thus that Mythras is called in the oracles which pass under Zoroaster's
name. Doubtless they are not genuine; but they contain the most ancient
traditions, and the style of the Eastern theology, according to (...), Pletho,
Plotinus, and all the Platonists of the third century.
Spirit, and under him Psyche, or the Goddess Mythra: around their throne in
the first rank are the Jynges, the most sublime intelligences; in the lower
spheres are an endless number of Genii of all the different orders.

Arimanius chief of the Jynges aspired to an equality with the God Mythras, and
by his eloquence persuaded all the spirits of his order to disturb the
universal harmony, and the peace of the heavenly monarchy. How exalted soever
the Genii are, they are always finite, and consequently may be dazzled and
deceived. Now the love of one's own excellence is the most delicate and most
imperceptible kind of delusion. To prevent the Genii from falling into the like
crime, and to punish those audacious spirits, Oromazes only withdrew his rays,
and immediately the sphere of Arimanius became a chaos and a perpetual night,
in which discord, hatred, confusion, anarchy, and force alone prevail. Those
aetherial substances would have eternally tormented themselves, if Oromazes had
not mitigated their miseries; he is never cruel in his punishments, nor acts
from a motive of revenge, for it is unworthy of his nature; he had compassion
on their condition, and lent Mythras his power to dissipate the choas.
Immediately the mingled and jarring atoms were separated, the elements
disintangled and ranged in order. In the midst of the abyss was amassed
together an ocean of fire, which we now call the sun; its brightness is but
obscurity, when compared with that pure ether which illuminates the empyreum.
Seven globes of an opaque substance roll about this flaming center, to borrow
its light. The seven Genii, who were the chief ministers and companions of
Arimanius, together with all the inferior spirits of his order, became the
inhabitants of these new worlds, which the Greeks call Saturn, Jupiter, Mars,
Venus, Murcury, the Moon, and the Earth. The slothful, gloomy and malicious
Genii, who love solitude and darkness, retired into Saturn. From hence flow all
black and mischievous projects, perfidious treasons, and murderous devices. In
Jupiter dwell the impious and learned Genii, who broach monstrous errors, and
endeavor to persuade men that the universe is not governed by an eternal
Wisdom; that the great Oromazes is not a luminous principal, but a blind
nature, which by a continual agitation within itself produces an eternal
revolution of forms. In Mars are the Genii who are enemies of peace, and blow
up every where the fire of discord inhuman vengeance, implacable anger,
distracted ambition, false heroism, insatiable of conquering what it cannot
govern, furious dispute which seeks dominion over the understanding, would
oppress where it cannot convince, and is more cruel in its transports than all
the other vices. Venus is inhabited by the impure Genii, whose affected graces
and unbridled appetites are without taste, friendship, noble or tender
sentiments, or any other view than the enjoyment of pleasures which engender
the most fatal calamities. In Mercury are the weak minds ever in uncertainty,
who believe without thinking and doubt without reason; the enthasiasts and the
free-thinkers, whose credulity and incredulity proceed equally from a
disordered imagination; it dazzles the sight of some, so that they see that
which is not; and it blinds others in such a manner, that they see not that
which is. In the Moon dwell the humorsome, fantastic and capricious Genii, who
will and will not, who hate at one time what they loved excessively at another;
and who by a false delicacy of self-love are ever distrustful of themselves and
of their best friends.

All these Genii regulate the influence of the stars. They are subject to the
Magi, whose call they obey, and discover to them all the secrets of nature.
These spirits had all been voluntary accomplices of Arimanius's crime. There
yet remained a number of all the several kinds who had been carried through
weakness, inadvertency, levity and (if I may venture so to speak) friendship
for their companions. Of all the Genii these were of the most limited
capacities, and consequently the least criminal. Oromazes had compassion on
them, and made them descend into mortal bodies; they retain no remembrance of
their former state, or of their ancient happiness; it is from this number of
Genii that the earth is peopled, and it is hence that we see here minds of all
characters. The God Mythras is incessantly employed to cure, purify and exalt
them, that they may be capable of their first felicity. Those who follow virtue
fly away after death unto the empyreum, where they are reunited to their
origin. Those who debase themselves by vice, sink deeper and deeper into
matter, fall successively into the bodies of the meanest animals, and run
through a perpetual circle of new forms, till they are purged of their crimes
by the pains which they undergo. The evil principle will confound every thing
for nine thousand years; but at length there will come a time, fixed by
destiny, when Arimanius will be totally destroyed and exterminated; the Earth
will change its form, universal harmony will be restored, and men will live
happy without any bodily want. Until that time Oromazes reposes himself, and
Mythras combats; this interval seems long to mortals, but, to a God, it is only
as a moment of sleep.

Cyrus was seized with astonishment at the hearing of these sublime things, and
turning to Araspes said to him: what we have been taught hitherto of Oromazes,
Mythras and Arimanius, of the contention between the good and the evil
principle, of the revolutions which have happened in the higher spheres, and of
souls precipitated into mortal bodies, was mixed with so many absurd fictions,
and wrapped up in such impenetrable obscurity, that we looked upon those
doctrines as vulgar and contemptible notions unworthy of the eternal Being. I
see now that we confounded the abuses of those principles with the principles
themselves, and that a contempt for religion can proceed only from ignorance.
All flows out from the Deity and all must be absorbed in him again. I am then a
ray of light emitted from its principle, and I am to return to it. O Zoroaster,
you put within me a new and inexhaustible source of pleasures; adversities may
hereafter distress me, but they will never overwhelm me; all the misfortunes of
life will appear to me as transient dreams; all human grandeur vanishes; I see
nothing great but to imitate the immortals, that I may enter after death into
their society. O my father, tell me by what way it is that heroes re-ascend to
the empyreum. How joyful am I, replied Zoroaster, to see you relish these
truths; you will one day have need of them. Princes are oftentimes surrounded
by impious and profane men, who reject every thing that would be a restraint
upon their passions: they will endeavor to make you doubt of eternal
Providence, from the miseries and disorders which happen here below; they know
not that the whole earth is but a single wheel of the great machine; their view
is confined to a small circle of objects, and they see nothing beyond it, yet
they will dispute and pronounce upon every thing; they judge of nature and of
its author like a man born in a deep cavern who has never seen the beauties of
the universe, nor even the objects that are about him, but by the faint light
of a dim taper. Yes, Cyrus, the harmony of the universe will be one day
restored, and you are destined to that sublime state of immortality; but you
can rise to it only by virtue; and the great virtue for a Prince is to make
other men happy.

These discourses of Zoroaster made a strong impression on the heart of Cyrus;
he would have staid much longer with the Magi in their solitude, if his duty
had not called him back to his father's court. Scarce was he returned thither
when every body perceived a wonderful change in his discourse and behavior.
His conversation with the Archimagus had stifled his rising prejudices against
religion. He gradually removed from about him all the young Satrapes who were
sond of the principles of impiety. Upon looking nearly into their characters he
discovered not only that their hearts were corrupt, void of all noble and
generous sentiments, and incapable of friendship; but that they were men of
very superficial understandings, full of levity and little qualified for
business. He then applied himself chiefly to the study of the laws and of
politics; the other sciences were but little cultivated in Persia. A sad
misfortune obliged him at length to leave his country and travel: Cassandana
died, though in the flower of her age, after she had brought him two sons and
two daughters.

None but those who have experienced the force of true love, founded upon
virtue, can imagine the disconsolate condition of Cyrus. In loosing Cassandana,
he lost all. Taste, reason, pleasure and duty, had all united to augment his
passion for her: in loving her he had experienced all the charms of love,
without knowing either its pains or the disgusts with which it is often
attended: he felt the greatness (...) his loss, and refused all consolation. It
is not the sudden revolutions in states, nor the heaviest strokes of adverse
fortune, which oppress the minds of heroes; noble and generous souls are little
moved by any misfortunes but what concern the objects of their softer passions.
Cyrus first gave himself wholly up to grief, not to be alleviated by weeping or
complaining; this silent sorrow was at length succeeded by a torrent of tears.
Mandana and Araspes, who never left him, endeavored to comfort him no other way
than by weeping with him. Reasoning and persuasion furnish no cure for grief;
nor can friendship yield relief in affliction but by sharing it. After he had
long continued in this dejection, he returned to see Zoroaster, who had
formerly suffered a misfortune of the same kind. The conversation of that great
man contributed much to molify the anguish of his mind; but it was only by
degrees that he recovered himself, and not till he had traveled for some years.

THIRD BOOK.
THE empire of the Medes was at this time in a profound peace. Cambyses being
sensible of the danger to which he must expose his son, should he send him
again to the court of Ecbatan, and thinking that Cyrus could not better employ
the present season of tranquillity, than in traveling to learn the manners,
laws, and religion of other nations, he sent for him one day, and said to him;
you are destined by the great Oromazes to stretch your conquests over all Asia;
you ought to put yourself into a condition to make those nations happy by your
wisdom, which you shall subdue by your valor. I design, therefore, that you
travel into Egypt which is the mother of the sciences, pass thence into Greece
where are many famous republics, go afterward into Crete to study the laws of
Minos, and return at last by Babylon, that so you may bring back into your own
country all the kinds of knowledge necessary to polish the minds of your
subjects and to make you capable of accomplishing your high destiny. Your stay
in this place serves only to nourish your grief; every object here quickens the
melancholy remembrance of your loss. Go, my son, go see and study human nature
under all its different forms; this little corner of the earth, which we call
our country, is too small and imperfect a picture, to form thereby a true and
adequate judgment of mankind.

Cyrus obeyed his father's orders, and very soon left Persia, accompanied by
his friend Araspes. Two faithful slaves were all his attendants, for he desired
to travel unknown. He went down the river Agradatus, embarked upon the Persian
gulf, and soon arrived at the port of Gerra, upon the coast of Arabia Felix.
Thence he continued his way toward the city of The present Mecca, a place
which has ever been esteemed holy by the Arabians.
Macorabia. The serenity of the sky, the mildness of the climate, the perfumes
which embalmed the air, the variety, the fruitfulness and smiling appearance of
nature in every part, charmed all his senses. While Cyrus was unweariedly
admiring the beauties of the country, he saw a man walking with a grave and
slow pace, and who seemed buried in some profound thought. He was already come
near the Prince, without having perceived him. Cyrus interrupted his
meditations to ask him the way to Badeo, where he was to embark for Egypt.

Amenophis (for that was his name) saluted the travelers with great civility,
and having represented to them, that the day was too far spent to continue
their journey, hospitably invited them to his rural habitation. He led them
through a by-way to a little hill not far off, where he had formed with his own
hands several rustic grottoes. A spring, which rose in the side of the hill,
watered with its stream a little garden at some distance, and formed a rivulet,
whose sweet murmur was the only noise that was heard in this abode of peace and
tranquillity. Amenophis set before his guests some dried fruits of all sorts,
the clear water of the spring serving them for drink, and he entertained them
with an agreeable conversation during their repast. An unaffected and serene
joy dwelt upon his countenance; his discourse was full of good sense, and of
noble sentiments, and he had all the politeness of a man educated at the courts
of Kings. Cyrus observing this, was curious to know the cause of his
retirement, and in order to engage Amenophis to the greater freedom, he
discovered to him who he was, and the design of his travels; he then intimated
to him his desire, but with that modest respect which one ought to have for the
secret of a stranger. Amenophis understanding that his guest was the Prince of
Persia, immediately conceived hopes of improving this acquaintance to the
advantage of his master Apries King of Egypt; he made no delay therefore to
satisfy the Prince's curiosity, and endeavored to move him by the history of
his life and misfortunes, which he related in the following manner.

Though the family from which I am descended be one of the ancientest in Egypt,
nevertheless by the sad vicissitude of human things our branch of it fell into
great poverty. My father lived near Diospolis, a city of Upper-Egypt, and
cultivated his little paternal farm with his own hands; he bred me up to relish
true pleasures in the simplicity of a country life, to place my happiness in
the study of wisdom, and to make agriculture, hunting, and the liberal arts my
sweetest occupations. It was the custom of King Apries, from time to time to
make a progress through the different provinces of his kingdom -- One day as he
passed through a forest near the place where I lived, he perceived me under the
shade of a palm tree, where I was reading the sacred books of Hermes. I was
then but sixteen years of age; my youth and something in my air drew the King's
attention; he came up to me, asked me my name, my condition, and what I was
reading; being pleased with my answers, and having my father's consent, he
ordered me to be conducted to his court, where he neglected nothing in my
education. The liking which Apries had for me changed by degrees into a
confidence, which seemed to augment in proportion as I advanced in years; and
my heart was full of affection and gratitude. Being young, and without
experience, I thought that Princes were capable of friendship; and I did not
know that the Gods have refused them that sweet consolation.

After having attended him in his wars against the Sidonians and Cyprians, I
became his only favorite; he communicated to me the most important secrets of
the state, and honored me with the chief posts about his person. I never lost
the remembrance of that obscurity from whence the King had drawn me. I did not
forget that I had been poor, and I was afraid of being rich. Thus I preserved
my integrity in the midst of grandeur, and I went from time to time to see my
father, in Upper-Egypt, of which I was governor, I visited with pleasure the
grove where Apries had found me: blessed solitude, said I within myself, where I
first learned the maxims of true wisdom! How unhappy shall I be, if I forget
the innocence and simplicity of my first years, when I ^elt no mistaken
desires, and was unacquainted with the objects that excite them. I was often
tempted to quit the court, and stay in his charming solitude; it was doubtless
a pre-sentiment of what was to happen to me, for Apries soon after suspected my
fidelity.

See Herod. lib. 1 and 2.
Amasis, who owed me his fortune, endeavored to inspire him with this
distrust; he was a man of mean birth, but great bravery; he had all sorts of
talents, both natural and acquired, but the hidden sentiments of his heart were
corrupt: when a man has wit and parts, and esteems nothing sacred, it is easy
for him to gain the favor of Princes. Suspicion was far from my heart; I had no
distrust of a man whom I had loaded with benefits; and the more easily to
betray me, he concealed himself under the veil of a profound dissimulation.
Though I could not relish gross flattery, I was not insensible to delicate
praise; Amasis soon perceived my weakness, and artfully made his advantage of
it; he affected a candor, a nobleness of soul, and a disinterestedness which
charmed me; in a word, he gained my confidence to such a degree, that he was to
me the same that I was to the King. I presented him to Apries, as a man very
capable of serving him; and it was not long before he was allowed a free access
to the Prince.

The King had great qualities, but he would govern by his arbitrary will; he
had already freed himself from all subjection to the laws, and hearkened no
longer to the council of the thirty judges. My love for truth would not always
suffer me to follow the rules of strict prudence, and my attachment to the King
led me often to speak to him in two strong terms, and with too little
management. I perceived by degrees his coldness to me, and the confidence he
was beginning to have in Amasis. Far from being alarmed at it, I rejoiced at
the rise of a man, whom I thought not only my friend, but zealous for the
public good. Amasis often said to me, with a seemingly sincere concern; I can
taste no pleasure in the Prince's favor since you are deprived of it. No
matter, answered I, who does the good, provided it be done.

About this time all the principal cities of UpperEgypt addressed their
complaints to me upon the extraordinary subsidies which the King exacted; and I
wrote circular letters to pacify the people. Amasis caused these letters to be
intercepted, and counterfeiting exactly my handwriting, sent others in my name
to the inhabitants of Diospolis, my native city, in which he told them, that if
I could not gain the King by persuasion, I would put myself at their head, and
oblige him to treat them with more humanity. These people were naturally
inclined to rebellion; and believing that I was the author of those letters,
imagined they were in a secret treaty with me, Amasis carried on this
correspondence in my name for several months. At length, thinking that he had
sufficient proofs, he went and threw himself at the Prince's feet, laid open to
him the pretended conspiracy, and showed him the forged letters.

I was immediately arrested, and put into a close prison; the day was fixed
when I was to be executed in a public manner. Amasis came to see me; at first
he seemed doubtful and uncertain what he should think, suspended in his
judgment by the knowledge he had of my virtue, yet shaken by the evidence of
the proofs, and much affected with my misfortune. After having discoursed with
him some time, he seemed convinced of my innocence, promised me to speak to the
Prince, and to endeavor to discover the authors of the treachery. The more
effectually to accomplish his black designs, he went to the King, and by
faintly endeavoring to engage him to pardon me, made him believe that he acted
more from gratitude and compassion for a man to whom he owed all, than from a
conviction of my innocence. Thus he artfully confirmed him in the persuasion of
my being criminal; and the King being naturally suspicious was inexorable.

The report of my perfidiousness being spread throughout all Egypt, the people
of the different provinces flocked to Sais, to see the tragical spectacle which
was preparing; but when the fatal day came, several of my friends appeared at
the head of a numerous crowd, and delivered me by force from the death which
was ordained me; the King's troops made some resistance at first, but the
multitude increased and declared for me. It was then in my power to have caused
the same revolution which Amasis has done since; nevertheless, I made no other
use of this happy conjuncture, than to justify myself to Apries. I sent one of
my deliverers to assure him, that his injustice did not make me forget my duty,
and that my only design was to convince him of my innocence. He ordered me to
come to him at his palace, which I might safely do, the people being under
arms, and surrounding it. I found Amasis with him; this perfidious man,
continuing his dissimulation, ran to meet me with eagerness, and presenting me
to the King, how joyful am I, said he to him, to see that the conduct of
Amenophis leaves you no room to doubt of his fidelity! I see very well,
answered Apries coldly, that he does not aspire to the throne, and forgive him
his desire of bounding my authority, in order to please his countrymen. I
answered the King, that I was innocent of the crime imputed to me, and was
ignorant of the author of it. Amasis then endeavored to make the suspicion
fall upon the King's best friends, and most faithful servants. I perceived that
the Prince's mind was not cured of his distrust, and therefore to prevent any
new accusations, having first persuaded the people to disperse themselves, I
retired from court, and returned to my former solitude, whither I carried
nothing back but my innocence and poverty. Apries sent troops to Diospolis, to
prevent an insurrection there, and ordered that my conduct should be observed.
Doubtless he imagined, that I should never be able to confine myself to a quiet
and retired life, after having been in the highest employments. In the mean
while Amasis gained an absolute ascendant over the King's mind; this favorite
made him suspect and banish his best friends, in order to remove from about the
throne those who might hinder the usurpation which he was projecting. An
occasion very soon offered to put his wicked design in execution.

See Herodotus, lib. 1. and 2.
The Cyrenians, a colony of Greeks who were settled in Africa, having taken
from the Lybians a great part of their lands, the latter submitted themselves
to Apries, in order to obtain his protection. The King of Egypt sent a great
army into Lybia, to make war against the Cyrenians. This army, in which were
many of those malcontents whom Amasis was solicitous to remove from court,
being cut in pieces, the Egyptians imagined that the King had sent it thither
only to be destroyed, that he might reign the more despotically. This thought
provoked them, and a league was formed in Lower-Egypt, which rose up in arms.
The King sent Amasis to them to quiet them, and make them return to their duty;
and then it was that the designs of this perfidious minister broke out. Instead
of pacifying them, he incensed them more and more, put himself at their head,
and was proclaimed King. The revolt became universal; Apries was obliged to
leave Sais, and make his escape into Upper-Egypt. He retired to Diospolis,
where I prevailed upon the inhabitants to forget the injustices he had done
them, and to succor him in his misfortunes. All the time that he continued
there, I had free access to his person; but I carefully avoided saying any
thing which might recall to his mind the disgraces he had made me undergo.

Apries soon fell into a deep melancholy; that haughty spirit, which had been
so vain as to imagine it was not in the power of the Gods themselves to
dethrone him, could not support adversity; that Prince, so renowned for his
bravery, had no true fortitude of soul; he had a thousand and a thousand times
despised death, but he could not contemn fortune. I endeavored to calm and
support his mind, and to remove from it those melancholy ideas which
overwhelmed him. I frequently read to him the books of Hermes; he was
particularly struck with that famous passage: When the great Osiris loves
Princes, he pours into the cup of fate a mixture of good and ill, that they may
not forget that they are men. These reflections alleviated by degrees his
vexations; and I felt an unspeakable pleasure in seeing that he began to relish
virtue, and that it gave him inward peace in the midst of his misfortunes.

He then applied himself with vigor and courage, to get out of the unhappy
situation into which he was fallen. He got together all his faithful subjects
who had followed him in his exile; and these, being joined by the inhabitants
of the country-whom I engaged in his service, formed an army of fifteen
thousand men. We marched against the usurper, and gave him battle near Memphis;
but being overpowered by the enemy's numbers, we were entirely defeated. Apries
escaped to the mountains of UpperEgypt, with the remains of his shattered
troops: but as for me I was taken with a crowd of other prisoners, and without
being known confined in a high tower at Memphis. When Amasis had put garrisons
in all the cities of Upper-Egypt, and had given directions to guard the passes
into the mountains in order to shut up Apries there, and destroy him by famine,
he returned in triumph to Sais.

The usurper, by the favor and protection of Nabuchodonosor King of Babylon,
was soon after solemnly crowned, but on condition that Egypt should be
tributary to that conqueror. Scarce were the people quieted, when they gave way
to that inconstancy which is natural to the multitude; they began to despise
the new King for his mean birth, and to murmur against him; but this able
politician successfully made use of his address to pacify them and prevent a
revolt. The Kings of Egypt were wont to invite their courtiers to solemn
feasts, and on these occasions the guests washed their hands with the King in a
golden cistern kept always for that use; Amasis caused this cistern to be made
into a statue of Serapis, and exposed it to be worshipped; he was overjoyed to
see with what eagerness the people ran from all parts to pay their homage to
it, and having assembled the Egyptians, harangued them in the following manner:
Hearken to me, countrymen; this statue which you now worship served you
heretofore for the meanest uses; thus it is that all depends upon your choice
and opinion; all authority resides originally in the people; you are the
absolute arbiters of religion and of royalty, and create both your Gods and
your Kings: I set you free from the idle fears both of the one and of the
other, by letting you know your just rights: all men are born equal, it is your
will alone which makes a distinction; when you are pleased to raise any one to
the highest rank, he ought not to continue in it but because it is your
pleasure, and so long only as you think fit: I hold my authority from you
alone; you may take it back and give it to another who will make you more happy
than I; show me that man, and I shall immediately descend from the throne, and
with pleasure mix among the multitude.

Amasis by this impious harangue, which flattered the people, solidly
established his own authority; they conjured him to remain upon the throne, and
he seemed to consent to it as doing them a favor: he is adored by the
Egyptians, whom he governs with mildness and moderation; good policy requires
it, and his ambition is satisfied. He lives at Sais in a splendour which dazzles
those who approach him; nothing seems wanting to his happiness; but I am
assured, that inwardly he is far different from what he appears outwardly; he
thinks that every man about him is like himself, and would betray him as he
betrayed his master: these continual distrusts hinder him from enjoying the
fruit of his crime, and it is thus that the Gods punish him for his usurpation:
cruel remorses rend his heart, and dark gloomy cares hang upon his brow; the
anger of the great Osiris pursues him every where; the splendour of royalty
cannot make him happy, because he never tasted either peace of mind, or that
generous confidence in the friendship of men, which is the sweetest charm of
life.

Amenophis was going on with his story, when Cyrus interrupted it, to ask him
how Amasis could get such an ascendant over the mind of Apries? The King,
replied Amenophis, wanted neither talents nor virtues; but he did not love to
be contradicted; even when he ordered his ministers to tell him the truth, he
never forgave those who obeyed him; he loved flattery while he affected to hate
it; Amasis perceived this weakness, an managed it with art. When Apries made
any difficulty of giving into the despotic maxims which that perfidious
minister would have inspired him with, he insinuated to the King that the
multitude, being incapable of reasoning, ought to be governed by absolute
authority; and that Princes, being the vicegerents of the Gods, may act like
them without giving a reason of their conduct: he seasoned his counsels with so
many seeming principles of virtue, and such delicate praise, that the Prince
being seduced made himself hated by his subjects without perceiving it.

Here Cyrus, touched with this melancholy account of an unfortunate King, could
not forbear saying to Amenophis: Methinks Apries is more to be pitied than
blamed; how should Princes be able to discover treachery, when it is concealed
with so much art? The happiness of the people, answered Amenophis, makes the
happiness of the Prince; their true interests are necessarily united, whatever
pains are taken to separate them. Whosoever attempts to inspire Princes with
contrary maxims, ought to be looked upon as an enemy of the state. Moreover,
Kings ought always to be apprehensive of a man who never contradicts them, and
who tells them only such truths as are agreeable. There needs no farther proof
of the corruption of a minister, than to see him prefer his master's favor to
his glory. In short, a Prince should know how to make advantage of his
minister's talents, but he ought never to follow their counsels blindly; he may
lend himself to men, but not yield himself absolutely to them.

Ah! how unhappy, cried out Cyrus, is the condition of Kings! you say they must
only lend themselves to men, they must not give themselves up without reserve
to them; they will never then be acquainted with the charms of friendship: how
much is my situation to be lamented, if the splendour of royalty be incompatible
with the greatest of all felicities? When a Prince, replied Amenophis, whom
nature has endowed with amiable qualities, does not forget that he is a man, he
may find friends who will not forget that he is a King: but even then, he ought
never to be influenced by personal inclination in affairs of state. As a
private man, he may enjoy the pleasures of a tender friendship, but as a
Prince, he must resemble the immortals who have no passions.

After these reflections, Amenophis at the request of Cyrus, continued his
story in the following manner: I was forgotten for some years in my prison at
Memphis. My confinement was so close, that I had neither the conversation nor
the sight of any person; being thus left in solitude, and without the least
comfort, I suffered the cruel torments of tiresome loneliness. Man finds
nothing within himself but a frightful void, which renders him utterly
disconsolate; his happiness proceeds only from those amusements which hinder
him from feeling his natural insufficiency. I ardently desired death, but I
respected the Gods, and durst not procure it myself; because I was persuaded,
that those who gave me life had the sole right to take it away.

One day, when I was overwhelmed with the most melancholy reflections, I heard
of a sudden a noise, as if somebody was breaking a way through the wall of my
prison. It was a man who endeavored to make his escape; and in a few days he
made the hole wide enough to get into my chamber. This prisoner, though a
stranger, spoke the Egyptian tongue perfectly well; he informed me that he was
of Type, his name Arobal, that he had served in Apries's army, and had been
taken prisoner at the same time with me. I never saw a man of a more easy,
witty, and agreeable conversation; he delivered himself with spirit, delicacy,
and gracefulness. When he repeated the same things, there was always something
new and charming in the manner. We related to each other our adventures and
misfortunes -- The pleasures which I found in the conversation of this stranger
made me forget the loss of my liberty, and I soon contracted an intimate
friendship with him. At length we were both brought out of prison, but it was
only to undergo new sufferings, for we were condemned to the mines; and now we
had no longer any hopes of freedom but in death. Friendship however, softened
our miseries, and we preserved courage enough to create ourselves amusements,
even in the midst of misfortunes, by observing the wonders hidden in the bowels
of the earth.

The The present mines of Vilisca, five miles from Cracow, resemble those which
are here described.
mines are of a prodigious depth and extent, and are inhabited by a kind of
subterraneous republic, whose members never see the day. They have,
nevertheless, their polity, laws, government, families, houses and highways,
horses to assist them in their labors, and cattle to feed them. There one may
behold immense arches, supported by rocks of salt hewn into the shape of
pillars. The salts are white, blue, green, red, and of all colors, so that an
infinite number of lamps hanging against these huge pillars, form a luster
which dazzles the eyes, like that of diamonds, rubies, emeralds, sapphires, and
all precious stones. What seems incrediable, a rivulet of fresh water flows
through these salt mines, and furnishes drink to the inhabitants. This water is
distributed into canals, cascades, basins and reservatories to adorn these
places where the sun never shines, and to be made use of in the works which are
here carried on.

After some years hard and painful labor, we were appointed masters of the
slaves. I had read the books of Hermes, knew his whole doctrine about the
mysteries of nature, and had been instructed in the occult sciences. We applied
ourselves to study those wonders by experiments; to descend from known effects
to those which are more hid, to re-ascend from thence to first causes. When we
had examined, compounded and decompounded bodies of all kinds that are sound in
those subterran^ous regions, we at last discovered that in the visible universe
there were but two principles, the one active, and the other passive: an
elementary fire, uniform, universal, and infinitely subtle, and an original
virgin earth which is hard, solid, and the substance of all bodies.

Before Typhon broke the egg of the world, and introduced the evil principle
there, the etherial matter penetrated all the parts of the virgin earth; by
compressing some of them it gave compactness to solids, and by making others of
them float produced liquids, the former were the canals through which the
latter flowed, in order to an universal and regular circulation in all the
parts of the universe; the waters enclosed in the center of the earth not only
perspired through its pores, and supplied that moisture which is necessary to
vegetation, but sprang out in fountains, whose united streams flowed in rivers
great and small to beautify the face of nature. The inward constitution of
bodies was then visible, because every thing was luminous or transparent; the
earth receiving or reflecting the rays of light, produced the agreeable variety
of colors, and there was nothing dark or dazzling.

After the fall of spirits and the revolt of Typhon, this beautiful order was
destroyed. The active principle which bound together all the parts of our
globe, withdrawing itself, the waters burst forth from their abyss, and
overflowed the face of the earth; the common mass was totally dissolved, it was
all a dark choas and an universal confusion. The Goddess Isis, beholding the
ruin of her work, resolved to repair it, yet without restoring it to its first
perfection. She laid the plan of a new world, very different indeed from the
former, but such a one as was proper to be the habitation of degraded spirits.
She spoke, nature obeyed her voice, and the shapeless chaos took a form, yet
so, as that art and seeming chance, light and darkness, order and confusion
were mingled throughout. The earth was now opaque, ugly and irregular, like the
intelligences that inhabit it. Diamonds, rubies, emeralds and the other
precious stones, are but the ruins of the primitive earth which was all
composed of such materials. Some say that the choas happened a long time before
the deluge, that the first ensued upon the fall of the Genii, and that the
other was the punishment of the crimes of men: be that as it will, we have
every where convincing proofs of the universal dissolving Dr. Woodward's system
is very ancient, and is to ^e found among the Abyssinians. See Patritio della
Rhetorica, p. 7.
of the common mass. We find in the inmost bowels of the earth, in mines and
upon the highest mountains, fishes, birds, and all sorts of animals which
floated in the water, and are petrified since that inundation.

See Boerhaave.
At present all fluids and solids result from the irregular combination of the
active and passive principle, and it is the philosopher's province to discover
the general laws of this combination. One may consider the particles of the
pure elementary fire as invisible points, and those of the earth as lines, as
surfaces, or as grosser corpuscles; when the etherial matter sticks to those
terrestrial particles that are long and pointed, it produces spears, darts, and
winged arrows, which are the principles of salts; when it brings together,
unites and compresses several surfaces, and penetrates them without being
absorbed in them, it engenders the principles of crystals; when it is
imprisoned in the cavities of opaque corpuscles, it forms spunges of fire, or
the principles of sulphurs; and hence results the first elements of all solids:
when the terrestrial particles float in the etherial matter, and wear
themselves round by rubbing against one another, these invisible spheres become
the principles of all fluids; little balls of mercury when they are opaque and
heavy, drops of water when they are transparent and light, bubbles of air when
they are endued with elasticity by the incessant egress and regress of the
etherial matter throughout their pores.

From the combination of these three solids, and three fluids, which are not
themselves simple but compounded, all other bodies are engendered. The mixture
of sulphur with mercury makes the basis of metals, which are more or less pure,
as there are more or less of the terrestrial particles in their composition.
Precious stones are formed by the incorporating of metals with crystal, gold
makes rubies, mercury diamonds, copper emeralds. The grosser and more irregular
particles of earth, when cemented by water, constitute the opaque and common
stones. Lastly, sulphurs, salts, mercury and earth blended together in one
common mass, without rule or proportion, produce minerals, half metals, and all
kinds of fossils; while the more subtle and volatile parts being diluted with
water and air, turn into liquors and vapors of all sorts.

We frequently amused ourselves with imitating these operations of nature,
dissolving solids, fixing liquids, and then reducing them to their first forms;
with mixing sulphurs, salts and minerals together, in order to make them
^erment and thereby engender exhalations, clouds, wind, thunder, and all sorts
of meteors, with making transparent bodies opaque, and opaque bodies
transparent; with suddenly cha^ging colors into their opposites by barely
mixing with them certain fluids that have no color. Being thus entertained
with the sports of nature and art, we were beginning to make ourselves
tolerably easy under our misfortunes, when heaven restored us to liberty, by a
stroke equally terrible and unexpected.

The subterraneous fires sometimes break their prisons with a violence that
seems to shake nature even to its foundations; like the thunder which bursts
the clouds, vomiting out flames and filling the air with its roarings. We
frequently felt those terrible convulsions. One day the shocks redoubled, the
earth seemed to groan, and we expected nothing but death, when the impetuous
fires opened a passage into a spacious cavern, and that which seemed to
threaten us with a loss of life procured us liberty. We walked a long time by
the light of our lamps before we saw day; but at length the subterraneous
passage ended at an old temple, which we knew by the bas-reliefe upon the
altar, to have been consecrated to Osiris. We prostrated ourselves and adored
the Divinity of the place; we had no victims to offer, nor any thing wherewith
to make libations, but instead of all sacrifice, we made a solemn vow, for ever
to love virtue.

This temple was situated near the Arabian gulf. We embarked in a vessel which
was bound for Muza, landed there, crossed a great part of Arabia Felix, and at
length arrived in this solitude. The Gods seem to have concealed the most
beautiful places of the earth, from those who know not how to prize a life of
peace and tranquillity. We found men, in these woods and forests, of sweet and
humane dispositions, full of truth and justice. We soon made ourselves famous
among them; Arobal taught them how to draw the bow, and throw the javelin to
destroy the wild beasts which ravaged their flocks; I instructed them in the
laws of Hermes, and cured their diseases by the help of simples. They looked
upon us as divine men; and we every day admired the ^^otions of beautiful
nature, which we observed in them; their unaffected joy, their ingenious
simplicity, and their affectionate gratitude. We then saw that great cities and
magnificent courts have only served too much to corrupt the manners and
sentiments of mankind; and that by uniting a multitude of men in the same
place, they often do but unite and multiply their passions. We thanked the Gods
for our being undeceived with regard to those false pleasures, and even false
virtues both political and military, which selflove has introduced into
numerous societies, and which only serve to delude men, and to make them slaves
to their ambition. But, alas! how inconstant are human things! how weak is the
mind of man! Arobal, that virtuous, affectionate, and generous friend, who had
supported imprisonment with so much courage, and slavery with so much
resolution, could not content himself with a simple and uniform life. Having a
genius for war, he sighed after great exploits, and being more a philosopher in
speculation than in reality, confessed to me, that he could no longer bear the
calm of retirement; he left me, and I have never seen him since.

I seem to myself a being left alone upon the earth; Apries persecuted me,
Amasis betrayed me, Arobal forsakes me; I find every where a frightful void. I
experience that friendship, the greatest of all felicities, is hard to be met
with; passions, frailties, a thousand contrarieties either cool it or disturb
its harmony. Men love themselves too much to love a friend well; I know them
now, and I cannot esteem them; however I do not hate men; I have a sincere
benevolence for them, and would do them good without hope of recompense. Whilst
Amenophis was speaking, one might see upon the Prince's countenance the
different sentiments and passions, which these various events would naturally
raise in a generous mind. The Egyptian having finished the relation of his
misfortunes, Cyrus asked him, whether he knew what was become of Apries.
Amenophis answered, I am informed that the King is yet alive, and that after
having wandered a long time in the mountains, he has at length got together an
army of Carians and Ionians, who during his reign and by his permission,
settled in Upper-Egypt, and has made himself (...) of the city of Diospolis.

Cyrus then said to the Egyptian, I admire (...) constancy and courage with
which you have (...) the shocks of fortune, but I cannot approve of (...)
remaining in this inaction: it is not lawful to (...) repose so long as we are
in a condition to labor (...) the good of our country; man is not born for
(...) self alone, but for society; Egypt has still need (...) your assistance,
and the Gods present you a new ^^portunity of being useful to her; why do you
continue a moment in this solitude? An ordinary virtue (...) disheartened by
ill success and adverse fortune, (...) heroic virtue is never discouraged: let
us fly to (...) assistance of Apries, and deliver him from the opp^^sion of an
usurper. Amenophis to increase the (...) of Cyrus seemed very unwilling at
first to (...) to Egypt, and suffered himself to be long entreat (...) before
he yielded to the Prince's solicitations.

Cyrus, before he left Arabia, dispatched (...) to Nabuchodonosor King of
Babylon, who had (...) Amytis the sister of Mandana, to solicit his (...) in
favor of Apries; then having concerted (...) Amenophis all the necessary
measures to make (...) designs succeed, they set out together, crossed (...)
country of the Sabeans with great expedition, (...) arrived upon the shore of
the Arabian gulf and embarked for Egypt. Cyrus was surprised to find here a new
kind of beauty which he had not seen in Arabia: there, all was the effect of
simple nature, but here, every thing was improved by art.

It seldom rains in Egypt, but the Nile by its regular overflowings supplies it
with the rains and mel^^^ snows of other countries. This river, by the means of
an infinite number of canals, made a communication between the cities, joined
the great sea with the red sea, and thus promoted both foreign and domestic
commerce. The cities of Egypt, ^ere numerou^ ^arge, well peopled, full of
magnificent temples and ^ately palaces; they rose like Islands in the midst of
the waters, and overlooked (...) plains, which appeared all fruitful, gay and
smiling; there one might see hamlets neat and commodious, villages sweetly
situated, pyramids that served for the sepulchers of great ^^en, and obelisks
which contained the history of their exploits. Agriculture, the mechanic arts,
and com^erce, which are the three supports of a state, flourished every where
and proclaimed a laborious and (...) people, as well as a prudent, steady, and
mild government.

The Prince of Persia, could but take a cursory view of these things in the
haste he was in to get to diospolis, where he joined the army of Apries. The
King, touched with the generosity of Cyrus, embraced him affectionately, and
then said to him, looking at the same time upon Amenophis; Prince, let my
example teach you to know men, and to love those who have the honesty and
courage to tell you truth when it is disagreeable. The presence of the young
hero revived the hopes of Apries, and that of Amenophis contributed much to
augment his army; it soon increased to the number of thirty thousand men. The
two Princes accompanied by Amenophis and Araspes left Diospolis, marched
against the usurper, and came in sight of his army, which was strongly encamped
near Memphis.

Apries was a Prince of great experience in the art of war, and was thoroughly
acquainted with the country; he seized all the advantageous posts, and pitched
his camp over against that of Amasis. The usurper, not imagining that the King
of Egypt could have got together such a numerous body of troops in so short a
time, had marched from Sa^s with only twenty thousand men. When Apries had in
person taken a view of the enemy, and had discovered that they were much
inferior in number, he resolved to attack them in their camp. The next day
Cyrus a^^ Araspes, at the head of ten thousand Carians, foro^^ the advanced
guards of Amasis, and approached (...) lines, and being soon after joined by
Apries and Amenophis, broke through the intrenchments, and vigorously attacked
and Egyptians; the engagement was bloody, and the victory for a long time
doubtful. Cyrus impatient to finish the battle by some remarkable exploit, put
himself at the head of a choice bo^^ of cavalry, sought every where for Amasis,
and found him. The usurper being a brave general, as well as able politician,
was flying from rank to tank, encouraging some, and hindering others from
running away. Cyrus lanced his javelin at him, crying out Tyrant, it is time to
put an end to thy crimes and thy usurpation. The javelin pierced the cuirass of
Amasis, and entered his body; a stream of blood flowed form his wound; furious
as a wild boar pierced by the hunter's spear, he came up to Cyrus with his
drawn sabre, and raising his arm, Rash youth, he cried, receive the reward of
thy audaciousness: the Prince of Persia avoided the blow, but when he would
have taken his revenge he found himself surrounded by a troop of young
Egyptians, who came to the relief of Amasis. Then Cyrus, like a young lion just
robbed of his prey, made himself a passage through the enemy; every blow he
gave was mortal, he defended himself a long time, but was at last ready to be
overpowered when Amenophis came to his succor, and then the battle was
renewed. Amasis notwithstanding his wound did not quit the field, but raised
the drooping courage of his men, and made Cyrus admire both his bravery and
conduct. Night at length put an end to the action; Apries remained master of
the field, yet Amasis retired in good order with his troops, repassed the Nile,
and gained the neighboring mountains; the passes into these mountains were
narrow and difficult, and he resolved therefore to continue in this secure post
till he was recovered of his wounds, and had reinforced his army.

Apries took advantage of the enemy's inaction to make himself master of
Memphis, which he carried by assault in a few days. Upon this Amasis, without
waiting till he was perfectly cured, got together with incredible expedition an
army of sixty thousand men, and gave a second battle. As Apries troops were
already much weakened, the usurper overpowered them by numbers, and took the
King of Egypt prisoner. Cyrus, Araspes and Amenophis fearing to be surrounded,
retired with the bravest of the Carian and Ionian troops to the city of
Memphis; those who did not follow them were either put to the sword, or made
prisoners of war.

Amasis, understanding who the young hero was that had wounded him, was
apprehensive of his credit at the court of Babylon, and dispatched couriers
thither; till their return he contented himself with blocking up the city, and
retired with the greatest part of his army to Sais, whither he likewise
conducted the captive King. Amasis paid him great honors for some days, and in
order to ^ound the inclinations of the people, proposed to them the replacing
him on the throne, but at the same time secretly formed a design of taking away
his life. The Egyptians were all earnest to have the Prince put to death,
Amasis yielded him to their pleasure, he was strangled in his own palace, and
the unfortunate remains of the royal family were massacred the same day. Cyrus
heard with grief the melancholy news of the fate of Apries, and understood at
the same time by the return of his couriers the dispositions of Nabuchodonosor.
This conqueror sent Cyrus word to abandon Apries to his fa^e, but commanded
Amasis to obey the orders of the Prince of Persia. Cyrus sighed within himself,
and could not forbear saying, I fear that the God will one day severely punish
Nabuchodonosor for (...) insatiable thirst of dominion, and above all, reve^^^
upon him his protection of Amasis.

As soon as the usurperund erstood the King of B^^^lon's pleasure, he ordered
his troops to retire from ^^fore Memphis, and set out in person from Sais to
(...) upon the Prince of Persia. He advanced towa^^^ Memphis with all his
court, but Cyrus refused to (...) him, and only wrote him this letter: "The
faults Apries are punished by the crimes of Amasis; it is th^^ that the just
Gods sport with mortals, and seem (...) leave crowns to the disposal of chance:
Thy (...) will come; in the mean time I send Amenophis (...) declare to thee my
will and pleasure. Had thou (...) feeling of virtue, the sight of him alone
would overwhelm thee with reproaches that I disdain (...) make thee."

Amenophis, followed by some Carians, hastened (...) meet Amasis, and found him
not many furlongs from Memphis. He was surrounded by all the chief (...) of
Egypt; 'twas an assembly of old courtiers, (...) had betrayed Apries through
ambition, and of young men corrupted by pleasures. Amenophis, approached Amasis
with a resolute, noble and modest air, and delivered him Cyrus's letter; the
usurper read (...) and immediately a dark cloud overspread his face; the
remembrance of his crimes confounded him, and struck him dumb; he endeavored to
summon up all his confidence but in vain; he cast a look upon Amenophis, yet
without during to fix his eyes upon him; shame and remorse were succeeded by
rage and indignation, but the dread of Cyrus forced him to dissemble; laboring
under the conflict of so many different passions, he turned pale and trembled;
he would have spoke, but utterance failed him: it is thus that vice, even when
triumphant, cannot support the presence of virtue; though in adversity and
disgrace. Amenophis perceived his confusion and perplexity, and only said to
him, it is the will of Cyrus that all the prisoners of war be set at liberty,
and be suffered, together with the troops that are in Memphis, to return to
their former habitations in Upper-Egypt, and to live there without molestation.
O Amasis, I have nothing to demand of thee for myself, the present disposition
of thy soul will not suffer me to put thee in mind of my former affection, and
my ingratitude! may thou one day see the beauty of virtue, repent of having
forsaken her, and divert the anger of heaven which threatens thee. This (...),
he retired, and left Amasis covered with shame and confusion; he hastened back
to Memphis, and the usurper returned to Sais, after he had given orders to put
Cyrus's commands in execution. From this time to his death Amasis was always
plunged in a gloomy sadness.

Cyrus, seeing the war at an end, applied himself to learn the history, policy,
and laws of ancient Egypt: he stayed sometime at Memphis, and conversed every
day with the priests of this city, in presence of Amenophis and Araspes. He
found that the Egyptians had composed their history of an almost unbounded
succession of ages; but that the fictions with which they had filled their
annals about the reign of Ammon, Osiris, Isis and Orus, were only allegories to
express the first state of souls before the great change which happened upon
the revolt of Typhon: they believed, that after the origin of evil, their
country was the least disfigured, and the soonest inhabited of any. Their first
King was named Menes; and their history from his reign is reduced to three
ages; the first which reaches to the time of the Shepherd-Kings, takes in eight
hundred years; the second from the Shepherd-Kings to Sesostris, five hundred;
the third, from Sesostris to Amasis, contains more than seven centuries.

During the first age, Egypt was divided into several dynasties or governments,
which had each i^ King. She had then no foreign commerce, but confined herself
to agriculture, and a pastoral life; shepherds were heroes, and Kings
philosophers. In those days lived the first Hermes, who penetrated into (...)
the secrets of nature and divinity; it was the age (...) occult sciences. The
Greeks, say the Egyptians imagine that the world in its infancy was ignorant,
but they think so, only because they themselves are always children See the
disc. at the end.
; they know nothing of the o^igin (...) the world, its antiquity, and the
revolutions wh^^^ have happened in it. The men of Mercury's (...) had yet a
remembrance of the reign of Osiris, (...) had diverse traditional lights which
we have lost. The arts of imitation, poesy, music, painting, and every thing
within the province of the imagination, are ^ut sports of the mind, in
comparison of the subli^^ sciences known by the first men. Nature was then
obedient to the voice of the sages; they could put all its hidden springs in
motion; they produced the most amazing prodigies whenever they pleased; the
(...) Genii were subject to them See Jamblichus de Mysteriis Aegyptiorum.
; they had frequent intercourse with the etherial spirits, and sometimes with
the pure intelligences that inhabit the empyreum. We have lost, said the
priests to Cyrus, this exalted kind of knowledge. We have only remaining some
traces of it upon our ancient obelisks, which may be called, the registers of
our divinity, mysteries, and traditions relating to the Deity and to nature,
and in no wise the annals of our civil history, as the ignorant imagine.

The second age was that of the Shepherd-Kings, who came from Arabia; they
overran Egypt with an army of two hundred thousand men. The ignorance and
stupidity of these uncivilized Arabians occasioned the sublime and occult
sciences ^o be despised and forgotten; their imagination could receive nothing
but what was material and sensible. From their time the genius of the Egyptians
was entirely changed and turned to the study of architecture, war, and all
those vain arts and sciences which are useless and hurtful to those who can
content themselves with simple nature. It was then that idolatry came into
Egypt: sculpture, painting and poesy obscured all pure ideas, and transformed
them into sensible images; the vulgar stop there, without seeing into the
hidden meaning of the allegories. Some little time after this invasion of the
Arabians, several Egyptians, who could not support the yoke of foreigners, left
their country, and settled themselves in colonies in all parts of the world.
Hence those great men famous in other nations; the Belus of the Babylonians,
the Cecrops; of the Athenians, and the Cadmus of the Boeotians; and hence it
is, that all the nations of the universe owe their laws, sciences, and religion
to Egypt. In this manner spoke the priests to Cyrus. In this age lived the
second Hermes, called Trismegistus; he was the restorer of the ancient
religion; he collected the laws and sciences of the first Mercury in forty-two
volumes, which were called THE TREASURE OF REMEDIES FOR THE SOUL, because they
cure the mind of its ignorance, the source of all evils.

The third age was that of conquests and luxury. Arts were perfected more and
more: cities, edifices, and pyramids multiplied. The father of Sesostris caused
all the children, who were born the same day with his sons, to be brought to
court, and educated with the same care as the young Prince. Upon the death of
the King, Sesostris levied a formidable army, and appointed the young men who
had been educated with him, to be the officers to command it; there were near
two thousand of them, who were able to inspire all the troops with courage,
military virtues, and attachment to the Prince, whom they considered both as
their master and their brother. He formed a design of conquering the whole
world, and penetrated into the Indies farther than either Bacchus or Hercules;
the Scythians submitted to his empire; Thrace and Asia Minor are full of the
monuments of his victories; upon these monuments are to be seen the proud
inscriptions of Sesostris King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Having extended his
conquests from the Ganges to the Danube, and from the river Tanais to the
extremities of Africa, he returned after nine years' absence, loaded with the
spoils of all the conquered nations, and drawn in a chariot by the Kings, whom
he had subdued. His government was altogether military and despotical; he
lessened the authority of the Pontifs, and transferred their power to the
commanders of the army. After his death dissentions arose among those chiefs,
and continued for three generations. Under Anisis the blind, Sabacan the
Ethiopian took advantage of their discords and invaded Egypt. This religious
Prince re-established the power of the priests, reigned fifty years in a
profound peace, and then returned into his own country, in obedience to the
oracles of his Gods. The kingdom thus forsaken, fell into the hands of Sethon
the high priest of Vulcan; he entirely destroyed the art of war among the
Egyptians, and despised the military men. The reign of superstition, which
enervates the minds of men, succeeded that of despotic power, which had too
much sunk their courage. From that time Egypt was supported only by foreign
troops, and it fell by degrees into a kind of anarchy. Twelve Normarchs, chosen
by the people, shared the kingdom between them, till one of them, named
Psammeticus, made himself master of all the rest: then Egypt recovered itself a
little, and continued pretty powerful for five or six reigns; but at length
this kingdom became tributary to Nabuchodonosor King of Babylon. The conquests
of Sesostris were the source of all these calamities. Cyrus perceived by this,
that Princes who are insatiable of conquering, are enemies to their posterity;
by seeking to extend their dominion too far, they sap the foundation of their
authority.

The ancient laws of Egypt lost much of their force even in the reign of
Sesostris; in Cyr^s's time nothing remained but the remembrance of them: this
Prince collected all he could learn of them from his conversation with the
great men and old sages who were then living. These laws may be reduced to
three, upon which all the rest depend; the first relates to Kings, the second
to polity, and the third to civil justice.

The kingdom was hereditary, but the Kings were subject to the laws. The
Egyptians esteemed it a criminal usurpation upon the rights of the great
Osiris, and as a mad presumption in a man to give his will for a law. As soon
as the King rose in the morning, which was at the break of day, when the
understanding is clearest, and the soul most serene, all matters upon which he
was to decide that day, were plainly and distinctly laid before him; but before
he pronounced judgment, he went to the temple to invoke the Gods and to offer
sacrifices. Being there surrounded by all his court, the victims standing at
the altar, he assisted at a prayer full of instructions, the form of which was
as follows: Great Osiris! Eye of the world and the light of spirits, grant to
the Prince, your image, all royal virtues, that he may be religious toward the
Gods, and benign toward men, moderate, just, magnanimous, generous, an enemy
of falsehood, master of his passions, punishing less than the crime deserves,
and rewarding beyond merit. After this the high priest represented to him the
faults he had committed against the laws; but it was always supposed that he
fell into them by surprise, or through ignorance; and the ministers who had
given him evil counsels, or had disguised the truth, were loaded with
imprecations. After the prayer and the sacrifice, they read to him actions of
the heroes and great Kings, that the monarch might imitate their example, and
maintain the laws which had rendered his predecessors illustrious, and then
people happy. What is there that might not be hoped for from Princes
accustomed, as an essential p^^^ of their religion, to hear daily the strongest
and mo^^ salutary truths? Accordingly, the greatest number of the ancient Kings
of Egypt were so dear to their people, that each private man bewailed their
(...) like that of a father.

The second law related to polity, and the subordination of ranks. The lands
were divided into three parts; the first was the King's domain, the second
belonged to the chief priests, and the third to the military men. The common
people were divided into three classes, husbandmen, shepherds and artizans:
these three sorts made great improvements, each in their profession; they
profited by the experience of their ancestors; each father transmitted his
knowledge and skill to his children; no person was allowed to forsake his
hereditary profession: by this means arts were cultivated and brought to a
great perfection; and the disturbances, occasioned by the ambition of those who
seek to rise above the rank in which they are born, were prevented. To the end
that no person might be ashamed of the lowness of his state and degree, the
mechanic arts were held in honor. In the body politic, as in the natural, all
the members contribute something to the common life. In Egypt it was thought
madness to despise a man because he serves his country in a laborious
employment. And thus was a due subordination of ranks preserved, without
exposing the nobler to envy, or the meaner to contempt.

The third law regarded civil justice. Thirty judges, drawn out of the
principal cities, composed the supreme council, which administered justice
throughout the kingdom; the Prince assigned them revenues sufficient to free
them from domestic cares, that they might give their whole time to the
composing of good laws, and enforcing the observation of them; they had no
farther profit of their labors, except the glory and pleasure of serving their
country. That the judges might not be imposed upon, so as to pass unjust
decrees, the pleaders were forbidden that delusive eloquence which dazzles the
understanding; and moves the passions; they exposed the matters of fact with a
clear and nervous brevity, stripped of the false ornaments of reasoning; the
president of the senate wore a collar of gold and precious stones, at which
hung a small figure without eyes, which was called truth; he applied it to the
forehead and heart of him who gained his cause; for that was the manner of
pronouncing sentence. There was in Egypt a sort of justice unknown in other
nations: as soon as a man had yielded his last breath, he was brought to a
trail, and the public accuser was heard against him. In case it appeared that
the behavior of the deceased had been culpable, his memory was branded, and he
was refused burial; if he were not convicted of any crime against the Gods, or
his country, he was entombed with marks of honor, and a panegyric made upon
him, without mentioning any thing of his birth and descent. Before he was
carried to the sepulcher, his bowels were taken out and put into an urn, which
the pontif held up toward the sun, making this prayer in the name of the
deceased Porphyry de Abs^inentia, lib. 4. sect. 10.
. Great Osiris! Life of all beings! Receive my manes, and reunite them to the
society of the immortals; whilst I lived, I endeavored to imitate you by truth
and goodness; I have never committed any crime contrary to social duty; I have
respected the Gods of my fathers, and have honored my parents; if I have
committed any fault through human weakness, intemperance, or a taste for
pleasure, these base sports of my mortal nature have been the cause of it.
(...) he pronounced these last words, he threw the (...) into the river, and
the rest of the body when embal^^^ed, was deposited in the pyramids. Such were
(...) notions of the ancient Egyptians: being full of the hopes of immortality,
they imagined that human frailties were expiated by our separation from (...)
mortal body; and that nothing but crimes committed against the Gods and
society, hindered the soul from being reunited to its origin.

All these things raised in Cyrus a great desire (...) instruct himself
thoroughly in the religion of ancient Egypt; and for this purpose he went to
Thebes-Zoroaster had directed him to Sonchis the high priest of this city, to
be instructed by him in all the religious mysteries of his country. Sonchis
conducted him into a spacious hall, where there were three hundred statues of
Egyptian highpriests. This long succession of pontifs gave the Prince a high
notion of the antiquity of the religion of Egypt, and a great curiosity to know
the principles of it. To make you acquainted, said the pontif, with the origin
of our worship, symbols and mysteries, I must give you the history of Hermes
Trismegistus, who was the founder of them.

Siphoas, or Hermes, the second of the name, was of the race of our sovereigns.
While his mother was with child of him, she went by sea to Lybia, to offer a
sacrifice to Jupiter Hammon. As she coasted along Africa, a sudden storm arose,
and the vessel perished near a desert island. She escaped by a particular
protection of the Gods, and was cast upon this island alone; there she lived a
solitary life, until her delivery, at which time she died. The infant remained
exposed to the inclemencies of the weather, and the ^ury of the wild beasts;
but heaven, which designed him for great purposes, preserved him in the midst
of these misfortunes- A young she-goat, hearing his cries, came and suckled him
till he was past infancy. For some years he fed upon the tender grass with his
nurse, but afterward upon dates and wild fruits, which seemed to him a more
proper food. He perceived by the first rays of reason which began to shine in
him, that he was not of the same make with the beasts; that he had more
understanding, invention and address than they; and then conjectured, that he
might be of a different nature.

The she-goat, which had nourished him, died of old age. He was much surprised
at this new phenomenon, of which he never observed the like before; he could
not comprehend why she continued so long cold and without motion; he considered
her for several days; he compared all he saw in her with what he felt in
himself, and perceived that he had a beating in his breast, and a principle of
motion in him which was no longer in her. The mind speaks to itself, without
knowing the arbitrary names which we have affixed to our ideas. Hermes reasoned
thus: the goat did not give herself that principle of life, since she has lost
it and cannot restore it to herself.

As he was endowed by nature with a wonderful sagacity, he sought a long time
for the cause of this change; he observed that the plants and trees seemed to
die, and to revive every year, by the going away and return of the sun; he
imagined that this star was the principle of all things, and he exposed the
carcass to its rays, but life did not return: on the contrary he saw it
putrify, grow dry and fall to pieces, nothing remained but the bones; it is not
the sun then, said he within himself, that gives life to animals. He examined
whether it might not be some other star; but having observed that the stars
which shined in the night had neither so much heat no^ light as the sun, and
that all nature seemed to la^guish in the absence of the day, he concluded that
the stars were not the first principles of life.

As he advanced in age, his understanding ripened and his reflections became
more profound. He (...) remarked that inanimate bodies could not move of
themselves, that animals did not restore motion (...) themselves, when they had
lost it, and that the (...) did not revive dead bodies; hence he inferred, that
there was in nature a first mover more powerful than the sun or the stars, and
which gave activity and motion to all bodies.

Reflecting afterward upon himself, he observed that there was something in
him which felt, which thought, and which compared his thoughts together.
Dissipating minds wandering about in vain pursu^^ and lost in amusements, never
enter into themselves; their nobler faculties are benumbed, stupefied and
buried in matter. Hermes not being diverted by prejudices and passions, from
listening to the still voice of wisdom, which incessantly calls us into
ourselves, obeyed that divine whisper without knowing it; he retired more and
more into his spiritual nature, and by a simplicity of heart attained to the
discovery of those truths, which others arrive at by subtilty of reasoning.
After having meditated several years on the operations of his own mind, without
knowing or imagining that there was any difference between the soul and the
body, he concluded that he himself was not the first cause of thought, any more
than of motion; that he derived both the one and the other from the same
source, and consequently that the first mover must have intelligence as well as
power.

Scare had he got a glimpse of these truths when transported with joy he said
within himself, Since the first mover has so much power and wisdom, he must
also abound in goodness; he cannot but be ready to succor those who have need
of his assistance; as I endeavor to relieve the animals that want my help, my
power, my reason, and my goodness, which can only be emanations from his. Man,
in the midst of beings that can give him no succor, is in a wretched
situation; but when he discovers the idea of a being who is able to make him
happy, there is nothing can compare with his hoped and his joy.

The desire of happiness inseparable from our nature, made Hermes wish to see
that first mover, to know him, and converse with him. If I could said (...),
make him understand my thoughts and my desires, doubtless he would render me
more happy than ^'am. His hopes and his joy were soon disturbed by great
doubts. Alas! said he, if the first mover be as good and benficent as I imagine
him, why do I not (...) him? And above all, why am I in this melancholy
solitude, where I see nothing like myself, nothing that seems to reason as I
do, nothing that can give me any assistance! In the midst of these
perplexities, his weak reason was silent, and could make no answer. His heart
spoke, and turning itself to the first principle, said to him in that mute
language which the Gods understand better than words: Life of all beings! show
thyself to me: make me to know who thou art, and what I am; come and succor me
in this my solitary and miserable state.

The great Osiris loves a pure heart, and is always attentive to its desires.
He ordered the first Her^^es, or Mercury, to take a human form, and to go and
instruct him. One day, when young Trismegistus was sleeping at the foot of a
tree, Hermes came and sat down by him. Trismegistus when he awakened was
surprised to behold a figure like his own: he uttered some sounds, but they
were not articulate; he discovered all the different motions of his soul, by
those transports, that earnestness, those ingenious and artless sighs, whereby
nature teaches men to express what they strongly feel. Mercury in a little time
taught the savage philosopher the Egyptian language. He then informed him what
he was, and what (...) was to be, and instructed him in all the sciences which
Trismegistus afterward taught the Egyptians. He now began to discern several
marks, which he had not observed before, of an infinite wisdom and power
diffused throughout all nature; and thereby perceived the weakness of human
reason when left to itself and without instruction. He was astonished at his
former ignorance, but his new discoveries produced new perplexities. One day,
when Mercury (...) speaking to him of the noble destiny of man, the dignity of
his nature, and the immortality which awaits him, he answered; If the great
Osiris ordains mortals to so perfect a felicity, whence is it that they are
born in such ignorance? Whence comes it that he does not show himself to them,
and dispel their darkness? Alas! if you had not come to enlighten me, I should
have sought long without discovering the first principle of all things, such as
you have made him known to me. Upon this Mercury unfolded to him all the
secrets of the Egyptian theology, in the following manner.

See the Egyptian theology, in the Disc.
The primitive state of man was very different from what it is at present.
Without, all the parts of the universe were in a perfect harmony; within, all
was in subjection to the immutable laws of reason; every one carried his rule
within his own breast, and all the nations of the earth were but one republic
of sages. Mankind lived then without discord, ambition, or pomp, in a perfect
peace, equality and simplicity: each man however had his particular qualities
and inclinations, but all inclinations were subservient to the love of virtue,
and all talents applied to the discovery of truth: the beauties of nature, and
the perfection of its author, were the entertainment and study of the first
men. The imagination presented nothing then but just and pure ideas; the
passions, being in subjection to reason, raised no tumult in the heart, and the
love the pleasure was always regulated by the love of order. The God Osiris,
the Goddess Isis, and their son Orus, ^ame often and conversed with men, and
taught them all the mysteries of wisdom. This terrestrial life, how happy
soever, was nevertheless but the infancy of our beings in which souls were
prepared for a successive unfolding of intelligence and happiness. When they
had lived a certain time upon the earth, men changed their form without dying,
and flew away to the stars, where with new faculties and new lights they
discovered new truths and enjoyed new pleasures; from thence they were raised
to another world, thence to a third, and so traveled through the immense
spaces by endless metamorphoses.

A whole age, and according to some, many ages passed in this manner at length
there happened a sad change both in spirits and in bodies. Typhon, chief of
Genii and his companions had formerly inhabited our happy dwelling; but being
intoxicated with pride, and forgetting themselves so far as to attempt to scale
heaver, they were thrown down headlong, and buried in the center of the earth.
They came out of their abyss, broke through the egg of the world, diffused the
evil principle over it, and corrupted the minds, hearts and manners of its
inhabitants. The soul of the great Osiris forsook his body, which is NATURE,
and it became a carcass. Typhon tore it in pieces, dispersed its members and
blasted all its beauties.

From that time the body became subject to diseases and to death, the mind to
error and to passions; the imagination of man presents him now with nothing but
chimeras; his reason serves only to contradict (...) inclinations, without
being able to correct them; the greatest part of his pleasures are false and
deceitful and all his pains, even imaginary ones are real evils, his heart is
an abundant source of restless desires, ^^^volous fears, vain hopes, disorderly
inclination, which successively torment him; a crowd of (...) thoughts and
turbulent passions cause an intesti^^ war within him, make him continually take
arms against himself, and render him at the same time both an idolater and an
enemy of his own nature. That which each man feels in himself, is a lively
image of what passes in human society. Three different empires are risen in the
world, and share among them all characters, the empire of OPINION, that the
AMBITION, and that of SENSUALITY: error presides in the first, force has the
dominion in the second, and vanity reigns in the third. Such is the present
state of human nature. The Goddess Isis goes over all the earth, seeking the
dispersed, deluded souls, to conduct them back to the empyreum, while the God
Orus continually attacks the evil principles. It is said, that he will at last
re-establish the reign of Osiris, and will banish for ever the monster Typhon;
until that time good Princes may alleviate the miseries of men, but they cannot
entirely cure them. You, continued. Mercury, are of the race of the ancient
Kings of Egypt, and are destined by the great Osiris to reform that kingdom by
your wise laws. He has preserved you only that you may one day make other men
happy; you will very soon see your own country. He said, and of a sudden rose
into the air, his body became transparent and disappeared by degrees like the
morning star, which flies at the approach of Aurora. He had a crown upon his
head, wings at his feet, and held in his hand a caduceus; upon his flowing robe
were all the hieroglyphics which Trismegistus afterward made use of to express
the mysteri^^ of theology and of nature.

Meris the first, who then reigned in Egypt, being admonished by the Gods in a
dream of all that passed in the desert island, sent thither for the savage
philosopher, and perceiving the conformity between his story and the divine
dream, adopted him for his son. Trismegistus, after the death of that Prince,
ascended the throne, and made Egypt for a long time happy by his wise laws. He
wrote several books, which contained the divinity, philosophy and policy of the
Egyptians. The first Hermes had invented the ingenious art of expressing all
sorts of ^ounds by the different combinations of a few letters; an invention
most wonderful for its simplicity, but not sufficiently admired, because it is
common. Besides this manner or writing there was another, which was consecrated
to divine things, and which few persons understood. Trismegistus expressed the
virtues and the passions of the soul, the actions and attributes of the Gods,
by the figures of animals, insects, plants, stars and diverse other symbolical
characters: hence it is that we see sphynxes, serpents, birds and crocodiles in
our ancient temples, and upon our obelisks; but they are not the objects of our
worship, as the Greeks foolishly imagine. Trismegistus concealed the mysteries
of religion under hieroglyphics and allegories, and exposed nothing to the eyes
of the vulgar but the beauties of his morality. This has been the method of the
sages in all times, and of the great legislators in all countries. These divine
men were sensible that corrupted minds could have no relish for heavenly truths
till the heart was purified from its passions; for which reason they spread
over religion a secret vail, which opens and vanishes when the eyes of the
understanding are able to support its brightness.

Cyrus perceived by this history of Hermes, that the Osiris, Orus and Typhon of
the Egyptians, were the same with the Oromazes, Mythras and Arima^^ us of the
Persians; and that the Mythology of these two nations was founded upon the same
principles. The notions of the Orientals were only more simple clear and
undisguised by sensible images; those of the Egyptians more allegorical,
obscure and wrap^ up in fiction.

After Souchis had discoursed with Cyrus in this manner, he conducted him to
the temple, where he let him into all the ceremonies and mysteries of the
Egyptian worship; a privilege which had never been granted before to any
stranger, till he had gone through a severe probation. The temple was
consecrated to the Goddess Isis, and built in an oval form to represent the egg
of the world; over the great gate was this inscription, Inscription upon a
temple of Isis, which is yet to be seen at Capua.
TO THE GODDESS WHO IS ONE, AND WHO IS ALL. The altar was a great obelisk of
porphyry, on which were engraven several hieroglyphics containing the secrets
of the Egyptian religion. Toward the top appeared three dark clouds, which
seemed to meet in a point; somewhat lower a tree planted in a muddy marsh, upon
whose branches, which reached up to the clouds, sat an hawk; by the side of
this tree was a winged globe with a serpent coming out of it; at the bottom of
all, a crocodile without a tongue hid itself in the waters of an abyss, a
sphynx at the same time walking upon the surface. On one side of this altar
stood the statue of the Goddess, covered with a vail, upon which were
represented the figures of the celestial and terrestrial bodies; on the other
side was the statue of Harpocrates, holding one hand upon his mouth, and
pointing to the Goddess with the other. These hieroglyphics are all Egyptian,
and are, to be found, with the explication here given of them in Plutarch,
Jamblichus Dammascius and Hocus Apollo, quoted by Kircher and Cudworth.


The high priest, clothed in his pontifical robes explained to Cyrus the
meaning of these symbols, before he began the sacrifice. We adore, said he, no
other but the great Ammon, that is to say the unknown God; we consider him
sometimes as he is in himself, and at other times as manifested by nature. In
the first sense we call him Eicton, Emeph, Ptha, Life, Light, and Love, all
whose operations, thoughts and affections being concentred in himself, he
remains in his solitary unity incomprehensible to mortals; thus considered This
famous expression of the Egyptians is preserved by Dammascius.
we adore him only by silence, or by the name of INCOMPREHENSIBLE DARKNESS
thrice repeated; and we represent him by the clouds which you see toward the
top of the obelisk.

Then we consider him as he has manifested himself in the multiplicity of
nature, by a diffusive Goodness that communicates itself every where, by a
sovereign Wisdom which forms within itself the ideas of all things, and by an
infinite Power that produces, animates, preserves and governs whatever has a
being. We call these three forms of the divinity, Osiris, Isis, Orus, and we
represent them by many different symbols: sometimes by an hawk, which having of
all birds the most piercing eye and the most rapid flight, serves to express
the divine intelligence and activity. This bird sits upon the top of a tree, to
signify that the Eternal Nature is infinitely exalted above matter, which is as
dirt in comparison of the pure essence of the Deity. The globe denotes the
indivisible Unity without beginning or end; the serpent, the supreme Wisdom,
and the wings, that active Spirit which animates and gives life to all. The
crocodile which appears under a deep water, and without a tongue, represents
the great Osiris hidden in the abyss of nature, and doing all in a profound
^^lence; but you see, walking upon the surface of this abyss, a sphynx, which,
being half man and half lion, signifies the wisdom and strength of the two
other principles. Lastly the Goddess Isis covered with ^vail, and having, as
you see, this inscription on her pedestal, I AM ALL THAT IS, HAS BEEN, OR SHALL
BE, AND NO MORTAL CAN REMOVE THE VAIL THAT COVERS ME, declares that universal
nature is but a vail which covers the divinity, and that no one, can behold the
splendour of his pure and naked essence. The posture of the God Harpocrates,
denotes that we ought never to speak of the incomprehensible essence of Isis,
but only of her manifestations. The Egyptians in all other places have
forgotten the original and sublime meaning of these sacred symbols; they adore
the animals whose representations you see here, and pay contributions for their
nourishment; but the inhabitants of Thebes refuse to do it: they acknowledge no
mortal Gods, and adore but one sole Deity uncreated and eternal See Plutarch in
his Isis and Osiris.


Cyrus no sooner understood the meaning of these hieroglyphics, but he was the
more desirous of seeing the Egyptian ceremonies, and the sacrifice began. While
the victims were offering, and their blood streaming at the foot of the altar,
there was heard the most delicious music: on a sudden the high priest rising
up, cried with a loud voice, Let us adore the great Ammon the unknown God, the
incomprehensible darkness; thrice he repeated these words, and thrice the
people fell prostrate; the music stopped, an universal silence reigned, every
one was afraid to breath, left he should disturb the stillness and tranquillity
of the place; then the voice, joining the instruments, began this sacred hymn,
See Cudw. p. 410
Let us celebrate the praises of the immortal Isis, she is the mother of
nature, the origin of all things, the sum of all the divine virtues, the
uniform face of the Gods and Goddesses; by one single look she enlightens the
stars; at her command soft zephyrs refresh the earth; she cherishes mortals,
and shows them the affection of a mother in their afflictions; she calms the
tempests of fortune, she restrains the noxious influences of the stars;
celestial deities prostrate themselves before her, the infernal powers obey
her; all the universe adore her under different names, and by different rites.
The service being ended, forty priests walked two and two from the temple in
processions, singing hymns in honor of the God See Clem. Alex. Strom. 6. p. 633.
: the high priest came last with Cyrus at his right hand, and Amenophis at his
left, encompassed by a vast throng of people, who attended them in a respectful
silence without tumult, and conducted the Prince back to the palace of the
Pontif.

Cyrus stayed some days with Sonchis, and then prepared to pass into Greece.
This country had filled all the East with the fame of her excellent laws, brave
warriors, and wise philosophers. The Prince would gladly have engaged Amenophis
to accompany him in his travels; and in order to prevail upon him, promised
that he would return by Babylon, and endeavor to persuade Nabuchodonosor to
alter his resolutions. O Cyrus, replied Amenophis, you are a stranger to the
politics of that conqueror; he resolves to have none but tributary Kings in
Egypt, mere slaves to his will; Amasis is a man for his purpose; Apries is
dead, the race of our ancient Kings (...) extinct, the usurper governs with
gentleness and moderation; Egypt is in peace and tranquillity, and there is no
longer any pretense for revolting (...) I am, going back to my solitude, where
I shall find those pure pleasures, which are not to be met with at the courts
of Kings, nor in the hurry of business. Go, Prince, go, render yourself worthy
to accomplish the oracles; and never forget in the midst of your successes that
you have seen a Monarch, who was heretofore triumphant and glorious, driven on
a sudden from his throne, and become the sport of fortune. They parted soon
after; Amenophis returned to his former solitude in Arabia, and Cyrus left
Egypt without seeing Amasis, whose character and usurpation he abhorred.

FOURTH BOOK.
CYRUS resolving to go the shortest way into Greece, went down the Nile from
Memphis to the mouth of that river, and embarked upon the great sea in a
Phoenician vessel, that was bound for Argolis. Araspes, during the voyage, was
sometimes sad and thoughtful, which Cyrus perceiving, asked him the reason.
Araspes answered, you are a Prince, I dare not speak my heart to you; let us
forget the Prince, said Cyrus and converse like friends. Well then, said
Araspes, I obey: Every thing that Amenophis has said upon the instability of
the heart of man in friendship, terrifies me; I often feel those contrarieties
he has spoken of; your manners, which are two averse to pleasure, sometimes
offend me; and, without doubt, my imperfections make you uneasy in their turn;
how unhappy should I be, if this difference of character could alter or
diminish our friendship. All men have their frailties, replied, Cyrus; whoever
looks for a friend without imperfections, will never find what he seeks; we are
not always equally content with ourselves, how should we be so with our friend?
We love ourselves nevertheless with all our faults, and we ought to love our
friend in like manner; you have your failings, and I have mine, but our candor
in mutually confessing our errors, and our indulgence in excusing each other,
ought to remove your fears of any breach in our friendship. It is treating
one's friend like another self, thus to show him our soul quite naked, and this
ingenuity makes all imperfections vanish. With other men it is sufficient to be
sincere by never affecting to appear what we are not; but with a friend we must
be simple, so as to show ourselves even such as we are.

Cyrus then changed the conversation, and discoursed with his friend of all
they had seen in Egypt: when he had dwelt a good while upon the beauties of
that country, its revolutions, sciences, religion and form of government, he
thus concluded; I admire the wisdom of all the laws of ancient Egypt, except
that which forbids the Egyptians to quit their paternal professions: We see in
almost all countries and all ages, that the greatest men have not always had
the advantage of an high birth. There are in all states superior geniuses that
would be rendered useless if confined to the sphere in which they were born; in
political establishments we should avoid every thing whereby nature may be
constrained and genius cramped. The noblest prerogative of a King (...) to be
able to repair the injustice of fortune, by doing justice to merit.

While a favorable wind filled the sails, Araspes, calling to mind the notions
of Zoroaster and the Magi, discoursed with Cyrus upon all the wonders which are
discoverable in the vast empire of the waters; of the comformation of its
inhabitants, which is suit^^ to their element; of the use of their sins, which
the employ sometimes as oars to divide the water, and sometimes as wings to
stop themselves by extending them; of the delicate membranes which they have in
their bodies, and which they distend or contract to make themselves more or
less heavy, according as they would go upwards or downwards in the water of the
admirable structure of their eyes, which are perfectly round, to refract and
unite more readily the rays of light, without which they could not see in the
humid element. After this they discoursed of the beds of salts and bituminous
matter, hid in the bottom of the sea. The weight of each particle of these
salts is regulated in such a manner, that the sun cannot draw them upwards;
whence it is, that the vapors and rains which fall again upon the earth, not
being overcharged with them, become plenteous sources of fresh water. Then they
reasoned upon the ebbing and flowing of the tide, which are not so discernible
in the great sea as in the ocean: of the influence of the moon which causes
those regular motions, and of the distance and magnitude of that planet, which
are wisely adjusted to answer all our wants; if it were bigger or nearer to us,
or if there were many of them, the pressure being thereby augmented would raise
the tides two high, and the earth would be every moment overflowed by deluges;
if there were no moon, or if it were less or at a greater distance, the ocean
would soon become a mass of stagnated waters, and its pestiferous exhalations
diffusing themselves every where, would destroy plants, beasts and men. At
length they came to discourse of that sovereign Power, which has disposed all
the parts of the universe with so much symmetry and art.

After some days failing the vessel entered the Sa^onic ^ulph, and soon arrived
at Epidaurus, from whence the prince made haste to get to Sparta. This famous
city was of a circular form, and resembled a camp. It was situated in a wild
and barren valley through which the Eurotas flows, an impetuous river which
often lays waste the whole country by its inundations. This valley is hemmed in
on one side by inaccessible mountains, and on the other side by little hills,
which scarcely produced what was necessary to supply the real wants of nature.
The situation of the country had contributed very much to the warlike and
savage genius of its inhabitants.

As Cyrus entered this city he beheld only plain and uniform buildings, very
different from the stately palaces he had seen in Egypt; every thing still
spoke the primitive simplicity of the Spartans: but their manners were upon the
point of being corrupted un^^^ the reign of Ariston and Anaxandrides, if Chilo
one of the seven sages of Greece had not prevented it. These two Kings of the
ancient race of the He^^clides, shared the sovereign power between them; one
governed the state, the other commanded the troops. They received Cyrus with
more politeness ^^an was usual for the Spartans to show to strangers. They
seemed to have very little curiosity about the manners, sciences and customs of
other nations; their great concern was to make the Prince of Persia admire the
wisdom of their lawgiver, and the excellence of his laws. To this end they
presented Chilo to him. This philosopher had by his talents acquired great
credit with the Kings, the senate and the people, and was looked upon as a
second Lycurgus; nothing was done at Lacedaemon without him. The Spartan sage,
in order to give Cyrus a lively notion of their laws, manners and form of
government, first led him to the council of the Gerontes, instituted by
Lycurgus. This council, where the two Kings presided, was held in a hall hung
with mat, that the magnificence of the place might not divert the senators'
attention. It consisted of about forty persons, and was not liable to that
tumult and confusion which frequently reigned in the debates of the people at
Athens.

Till Lycurgus's time the Kings of Sparta had been absolute: but Eurytion, one
of those Kings, having yielded some part of his prerogatives to please the
people, a republican party was thereupon formed, which became audacious and
turbulent. The Kings would have resumed their ancient authority, but the people
would not suffer it; and this continual struggle between opposite powers rent
the state to pieces. To establish an equal balance of the regal and popular
power, which leaned alternately to tyranny and anarchy, Lycurgus, in imitation
of Minos, instituted a council of twenty-eight old men, whose authority keeping
a mean betwixt the two extremes, delivered Sparta from its domestic
dissentions. An hundred and thirty years after him, Theopompus having observed,
that what had been resolved by the Kings and their council, was not always
agreeable to the multitude, established certain annual magistrates called
Ephori, who were chosen by the people, and consented in their name to whatever
was determined by the King and Senate; each private man looked upon these
unanimous resolutions as made by himself; and in this union of the head with
the members consisted the life of the body politic at Sparta.

After Lycurgus had regulated the form of government, he gave the Spartans such
laws as were proper to prevent the disorders occasioned by avarice, ambition
and love. In order to expel luxury and envy from Sparta, he resolved to banish
for ever both riches and poverty. He persuaded his countrymen to make an equal
distribution of all their wealth and of all their lands, decried the use of
gold and silver, and ordained that they should have only iron money, which was
not current in foreign countries. He chose rather to deprive the Spartans of
the advantages of commerce with their neighbors, than to expose them to the
misfortune of bringing home from other nations those instruments of luxury
which might corrupt them.

The more firmly to establish an equality among the citizens, they eat together
in public halls; each company had liberty to choose its own guests, and no one
was admitted there but with the consent of the whole, to the end that peace
might not be disturbed by a difference of humors; a necessary precaution for
men naturally fierce and warlike. Cyrus went into these public halls, where the
men were seated without any distinction but that of their age; they were
surrounded by children who waited on them: their temperance and austerity of
life was so great, that other nations used to say, it was better to die, than
to live like the Spartans. During the repast they discoursed together on grave
and serious matters, the interests of their country, the lives of great men,
the difference between a good and bad citizen, and of whatever might form youth
to the taste of military virtues. Their discourses contained much sense in few
words, for which reason the Laconic style has been admired in all nations; by
imitating the rapidity of thoughts, it said all in a moment, and gave the
hearer the pleasure of discovering a profound meaning which was unexpressed;
the graceful, fine and delicate turns of the Athenians were unknown at
Lacedaemon; the Spartans were for strength in the mind as well as in the body.

Upon a solemn festival, Cyrus and Araspes were present at the assemblies of
the young Lacedaemonians, which were held within a large enclosure, surrounded
with diverse seats of turf raised one above another, in form of an amphitheatre.
Young girls almost naked contended with boys in running, wrestling, dancing,
and all sorts of laborious exercises, the young men were not permitted to marry
any (...) such as they had vanquished at these games. Cyrus was shocked to see
the liberty which reigned in these public assemblies, between persons of
different sexes and could not forbear representing it to Chilo. There seems,
said he, to be a great inconsistency in the laws of Lycurgus; his aim was to
establish a republic which should consist only of warriors, inured to all sorts
of labors, and at the same time he made no scruple to expose them to
sensuality, the most effectual means to sink their courage.

The design of Lycurgus in instituting these festivals, replied Chilo, was to
preserve and perpetuate military virtue in his republic. That great law gives
was well acquainted with human nature; he knew what influence the inclinations
and dispositions of mothers have upon their children; his intention was to make
the Spartan women heroines, that they might bring the republic none but heroes.
Besides, continued Chilo, gross sensuality and delicate love are equally
unknown at Lacedaemon; it is only in these public festivals that the
familiarity which so much offends you is allowed. Lycurgus thought it possible
to deaden the fire of voluptuous desires, by accustoming the eye sometimes to
those objects which excite them. At all other times the women are very
reserved; nay by our laws new married persons are permitted to see one another
but rarely, and that in private; and thus our youth are formed to temperance
and moderation, even in the most lawful pleasures. By this means also are
prevented those disgusts which frequently arise from the permission of an
unbounded liberty in the marriage state. The constraint, which the Spartans are
under, keeps up the ardor of their first flame; so that marriage does not make
them cease to be lovers. On the other hand, stolen amors and jealousy are
banished from Sparta; husbands who are sick, or advanced in years, ^and their
wives to others, and afterward take them again without scruple. Wives look
upon themselves as belonging to the state more than to their husbands. The
children are educated in common, and often without knowing any other mother
than the republic, or any other father than the senators.

Here Cyrus, struck with a lively remembrance of Cassandana and of the pure
pleasures of their mutual love, sighed within himself, and felt an abhorrence
of these odious maxims. He despised effeminacy, but he could not relish the
savage fierceness of the Spartans, which carried them to sacrifice the sweetest
charms of society to ambition, and to think that military virtues were
inconsistent with tender passions; however, as he was sensible that Chilo would
little understand what he meant by these delicate sentiments, he contented
himself with saying; Paternal love seems to me a source of great advantages to
a state: fathers are careful of the education of their children, and this
education obliges children to gratitude; these are the original bands of
society. Our country is nothing else but many families united; if family-love
be weakened, what will become of the love of one's country, which depends upon
it? Ought we not to be afraid of such establishments as destroy nature, under
pretense of improving it? The Spartans, answered Chilo, all constitute but one
family. Lycurgus had experienced, that fathers are often unworthy, and
children, ungrateful; that both are wanting to their reciprocal duties, and he
therefore trusted the education of the children, to a number of old men, who
considering themselves as the common fathers, have (...) equal care of all.

In reality, children were no where better educated than at Sparta: they were
chiefly taught to obey, to undergo labor, to conquer in combats, and to face
pain and death with courage. They (...) with their heads and feet naked, lay
upon rushes, and eat very little; and this little they were obliged to procure
by dexterity in the public banqueting rooms. Not that the Spartans authorized
thefts and robberies, for as all was in common in that republic, those vices
could have no place there; but the design was to accustom children who were
distined for war, to surprise the vigilance of those who watched over them, and
to expose themselves courageously to the severest punishments, in case they
failed of that dexterity which was exacted of them.

Lycurgus had remarked, that subtle speculations, and all the refinements of
science, served often only to spoil the understanding and corrupt the heart;
and he therefore made little account of them. Nothing however was neglected to
awaken in children the taste of pure reason, and to give them a strength of
judgment; but all kinds of studies, which were not serviceable to good manners,
were looken upon as useless and dangerous occupations. The Spartans were of
opinion, that in the present state of human nature, man is rather formed for
action than knowledge, and better qualified for society than contemplation.

Cyrus went afterward to the Gymnasia, where the youth performed their
exercises; Lycurgus had renewed the Olympic games instituted by Hercules, and
had dictated to Iphitus the statutes and ceremonies observed in them. Religion,
warlike genius and policy, all contributed to perpetuate the custom of
solemnizing these games; they served not only to do honor to the Gods, to
celebrate the virtues of heroes, to prepare the body for the fatigues of a
military life, but also to draw together from time to time in the same place,
and unite by common sacrifices, diverse nations whose strength was in their
union. The Spartans employed themselves in no sort of labor but the exercises
necessary to qualify them to dispute the prizes in the Olympic games. The
Helots, who were their slaves, manured their lands, and were the only mechanics
among them; for they esteemed every employment as mean and ignoble, which
regarded only a provision for the body.

Cyrus, having learned this maxim of the Lacedaemonians, said to Chilo:
Agriculture and the mechanic arts appear to me absolutely necessary to preserve
the people from idleness, which begets discord, effeminacy, and all the evils
destructive of society: Lycurgus seems to depart a little too much from nature
in all his laws. The tranquillity and sweet leisure of a rural life, replied
Chilo, were thought by Lycurgus to be contrary to a warlike genius; besides the
Spartans are never idle; they are continually employed in all those exercises
that are images of war, in marching, encamping, ranging armies in order of
battle, defending, attacking, building and destroying fortresses. By this means
a noble emulation is kept up in their minds without enmity, and the desire of
conquest preserved without shedding blood: every one disputes the prize with
ardor, and the vanquished take a pride in crowning the victors; the pleasures
which accompany these exercises make them forget the fatigue, and this fatigue
prevents their courage from suffering any prejudice in times of peace See
T^urreil's Pref. Hist. aux Philip. de Demost


This discourse raised in Cyrus a curiosity to know the military discipline of
the Spartans, and he soon found an opportunity to inform himself in it. The
Tegeans, who inhabited a part of Peloponnesus, having entered into a league
with several cities of Greece had raised troops, and were coming to attack the
Spartans upon their frontiers. The latter prepared to repulse the enemy, and
Cyrus resolved (...) signalize his courage on this occasion, but he would first
know the reasons of the war, and Chilo explained them to him in the following
manner.

The Spartans, said he, being arrived to a flourishing condition by a strict
observance of the laws of Lycurgus, laid a scheme first to make themselves
masters of Peloponnesus, and then of all Greece Courage and success begot in
them a thirst of dominion, contrary to the original design See Plutarch.
of our great lawgiver: his intention of forming a republic of warriors, was
not to disturb the peace of other cities, but to preserve his own in union,
independence and liberty. That we might never entertain the unjust, ambition of
making conquests, he forbad us the use of money, commerce and fleets, three
helps absolutely requisite for those who set up for conquerors. The
Lacedaemonians therefore departed from the spirit of Lycurgus, when they
resolved to attack their neighbors; their first design was to fall upon the
Arcadians, but having consulted the oracle of Delphos, the Pythian priestess
advised them to turn their arms against the Tegeans. The Spartans, depending on
a deceitful oracle, marched out of their city, and carried chains with them in
full assurance of reducing their enemies to slavery. Several battles were
fought without victory's declaring for either side. At length, in the beginning
of the present reign, our army was put to flight; our prisoners loaded with the
same chains which we had prepared for the Tegeans, were yoked like beasts, and
condemned to draw the plough. The bad conduct of our Princes was the source of
these calamities: I should be far from discovering to you their faults if they
had not had the courage to correct them.

Ariston, who governed the state, was naturally of a sweet disposition, affable
and beneficent; he put an equal confidence in all those who were about him;
Anaxandrides who commanded the troops was of a quite contrary character, dark,
suspicious and distrustful. Prytanis the favorite of Ariston had been educated
at Athens, and had given himself up to pleasure; having a great deal of fine
wit, he had the secret of making even his faults agreeable; he knew how to suit
himself to all tastes, and to all characters; he was sober with the Spartans,
polite with the Athenians, and learned with the Egyptians; he put on all shapes
by turns, not to deceive (for he was not ill-natured) but to gratify his
prevailing passion, which was the desire of pleasing, and of being the idol of
men; in a word, he was a compound of whatever is most agreeable and irregular.
Ariston loved him, and was entirely governed by him. This favorite led his
master into all sorts of voluptuousness; the Spartans began to grow effeminate;
the King bestowed his favors without distinction or discernment.

Anaxandrides observed a quite different conduct, but equally ruinous to the
state: as he knew not how to distinguish sincere and honest hearts, he believed
all men false, and that those who had the appearance of probity were only
greater hypocrites than the rest. He entertained suspicions of the best
officers of his army, and especially of Leonidas, the principal and most able
of his generals, a man of strict honor and distinguished bravery. Leonidas
loved virtue sincerely, but had not enough of it to bear with the faults of
other men; he despised them too much, and was regardless both of their praises
and favors: he humored neither princes nor their ^^^^ers; his hatred of vice
was such, that it rendered (...) manners fierce and rugged, like those of the
(...) Spartans; he looked for perfection in every body and as he never found
it, he had no intimate friendship with any person; no body loved him, but all
^steemed and feared him; for he had all those virtue which make men most
respected and most avoid^. Anaxandrides grew weary of him and banished him;
thus did this Prince weaken the strength of Spar^^, while Ariston corrupted her
manners.

Our enemies drew advantage every day from (...) divisions and disorders.
Perceiving the misfortu^^ which threatened our country, I went to the (...)
Princes, and spoke to them in the following ^^^^ner: My age, my long services,
and the care I have taken of your education, give me a right to tel^ you
freely, that you both ruin yourselves by contrary faults; Ariston exposes
himself to be often (...) by flattering favorites, and you, Anaxandrides,
expose yourself to the misfortune of never having a true friend. To treat men
always with the (...) rigor they deserve, is brutality and not justice; (...)
on the other hand to have so general a goodness, and such an easiness of temper
as not to be able to (...) crimes with firmness, or to reward merit with
distinction, is not a virtue but a weakness, and is frequently attended with as
bad consequences as severity and ill nature itself. As for you, Anaxan drides,
your distrust does more hurt to the state than the (...) easy goodness of
Ariston. Why do you entertain (...) diffidence of men upon bare surmises, when
their talents and capacities have rendered them necessary to you? When a Prince
has once honored a minister with his confidence, for good reasons, he ought
never to withdraw it without manifest proofs of perfidiousness. It is
impossible for him to do every thing himself, and he must therefore have the
courage^ hazard sometimes the being deceived, rather than miss the
opportunities of acting; he should know how to make a wise use of men, without
blindly yielding himself up to them like Ariston; there is a medium between an
excessive diffidence, and a blind confidence; without this medium no government
can long subsist. Reflection and experience rectified by degrees the faults of
Ariston, and he dismissed Pryta^is; but the morose temper of Anaxandrides could
be corrected only by misfortunes; he was often defeated in his wars with the
Tegeans, and at length found the necessity of recalling Leonidas. Our troops
since that time have been more successful; we have recovered our prisoners and
obtained several victories; but these advantages have made the Tegeans more
jealous of us, and we are become the object not only of their hatred, but of
that of all the Greeks.

Cyrus listened with attention to this account given him by Chilo, and then
said to him, looking upon Araspes: The history of your Kings will be an eternal
lesson to me to avoid two faults very common with Princes. As for the rest, I
observe that the republic of Sparta is like a camp always subsisting, an
assembly of warriors always under arms; how great a respect soever I have for
Lycurgus, I cannot admire this form of government. You assure me that your law
giver in constituting such a republic had no other design but to preserve it in
union and liberty; but would a legislator who has only these pacific views
banish from a state all other professions except that of war? Would he enjoin
that no member of it should be bred to any other exercise, study or occupation,
but that of making himself dextrous in destroying other men? Lycurgus has
indeed prohibited the use of money, commerce and fleets, but are these
necessary to the conquest of Greece? I rather be^ieve, that he made these
prohibitions only out of policy, in order to conceal from the neighboring
cities his ambitious designs, hinder the Spartans from becoming soft and
luxurious, and deprive them of (...) means of dividing their forces by foreign
and distant wars Polybius is of this opinion.
. Your lawgiver has again departed both from nature and justice; when he
accustomed each private citizen to frugality, he should have taught the whole
nation to confine her ambition. An (...) politician ought to provide not only
for the liberty of his own state, but for the safety of all the neighboring
ones. To set ourselves loose from the (...) of mankind, to look upon ourselves
as made to conquer them, is to arm all nations against us. Why do not you
reform these unjust maxims. Why (...) not you put an end to the war? Why have
you not recourse to the supreme council of the Amphictions to terminate your
differences with the Tegeans! The reason, replied Chilo, is the obstinacy of
the Tegeans; they are so enraged against us, that they refuse to submit to the
arbitration of that council; they breathe nothing but our destruction; they
have engaged several cities of Peloponnesus in a league against us. The notion
which is entertained of our designing to conquer all Greece, has excited the
hatred and distrust of our neighbors. Such is the present state of Sparta.

Not many days after this, the Lacedaemonians, having advice that the Tegeans
were advancing toward their frontiers, marched out of Sparta to give them
battle. Anaxandrides appeared at their head in his military habit, his casque
was adorned with three birds, of which that in the middle was the crest, upon
this cuirass he bore the head of Medusa, all the insign^a of the God Mars were
represented upon his shield, which was an hexagon; and he held in his hand a
staff of command. Cyrus marched by his side; his buckler resembled that of
Achilles; upon his casque was an eagle, whose plume and tail overspread his
shoulders; upon his cuirass was engraven in basrelief the Goddess, Pallas wise
and warlike, to express the inclinations of the Prince. Araspes and Leonidas
less magnificently accoutred accompanied the two Princes, who thus left the
city followed by the Lacedaemonian troops. The whole army formed into a square
battallion, a double rank of cavalry enclosed a third rank of archers, which
encompassed three inner ranks of pikemen and slingers, and left an empty space
in the center for the provisions, ammunition and baggage. All the soldiers
marched to the sound of flutes, and singing the hymn of Castor. The Spartan
general, knowing how fond the Prince of Persia was of information, entertained
him in the way after the following manner.

Greece is divided into several republics, each of which maintains an army in
proportion to its extent. We do not affect to bring prodigious armies into the
field like the Asiatics, but to have well disciplined troops; numerous bodies
are difficult to manage, and are too expensive to a state; our invariable rule
is to encamp so, that we may never be obliged to fight against our will; a
small army well practiced in war may, by entrenching itself advantageously,
oblige a very numerous one to disperse its troops, which would otherwise soon
be destroyed for want of provisions. When the common cause of Greece is to be
defended, all these separate bodies unite, and then no state dare attack us. At
Lacedaemon all the citizens are soldiers; in other republics the dregs of the
people are not admitted into the soldiery, but the best men are chosen out for
the army, such as are bold, robust, in the (...) of their age, and inured to
laborious occupations; the qualities required in their leaders are birth,
intrepidity, temperance and experience; they are obliged to pass through the
most rigid trials, before they can be raised to a command; they must have given
signal proofs of all the different sorts of courage, by greatly enterprising,
executing with vigor, and above all by showing themselves superior to the most
adverse fortune. By this means each republic has always a regular militia, able
officers, soldiers well disciplined and inured to fatigues. The Spartans in
time of war, abate somewhat of the severity of their exercises and austerity of
life; we are the only people in the world to whom war is a kind of repose; we
then enjoy all those pleasures which are forbidden us in time of peace. Upon a
day of battle we dispose our troops in such a manner, that they do not all
fight at once like the Egyptians, but succeed and support one another without
confusion. We never draw up our men in the same manner as the enemy, and we
always place our bravest soldiers in the wings, that they may extend
themselves, and enclose the opposite army. When the enemy is routed, Lycurgus
has required us to exercise all acts of clemency toward the vanquished, not
only out of humanity but policy; for hereby we render our enemies less fierce.
The hope of being well treated, if they surrender their arms, prevents their
giving way to that desperate fury which often proves fatal to the victorious.

While Leonidas was speaking, they arrived in the plain of Mantinea, where they
discovered the camp of the Tegeans, which was covered on the one side by a
forest, and on all the other by a terrass, with parapets, palisadoes and towers
at certain distances. Anaxandrides encamped on the banks of the river Eurotas:
Leonidas gave orders, and immediately the soldiers hung their casques on their
pikes struck in the ground, and fell to work without putting of their
cuirasses. The river made the camp inaccessible on one side, the other three
were surrounded by lines of circumvalliation; the waters of the Eurotas quickly
filled the ditches; portable houses were erected, the different quarters of the
officers regularly disposed, the cavalry put under shelter, a moveable city was
raised with four gates, several large streets crossed one another, and had
likewise a communication by others that were less.

The river Eurotas ran between the two camps, and was a security against any
surprise: Leo^idas took this opportunity to show Cyrus the military exercise in
use among the Greeks, and made his troops often pass in review before the
Prince: they were divided into diverse bodies of horse and foot; at their head
were the Pelemarchi, and the commanders of the several corpse. The soldiers were
clothed in red, that in the heat of action the sight of their blood might not
terrify either the wounded or their companions A^r^ma^ of A^l^anus.
. Upon the least signal of their commandders, the different cohorts separated,
reunited, extended themselves, doubled, opened, closed their ranks and ranged
themselves by various evolutions and windings into perfect squares, oblong
squares, lozenges and triangular figures.

The Spartans waited several days in their camp to take advantage of the
enemy's motions. In the mean time divisions arose among the allies; the wisest
of them desired peace but the greater number were eagerly bent on war. Cyrus
understanding their dispositions, offered to go in person to the camp of the
Tegeans, and speak with their leaders. The King consented, and the young Prince
passed the Eurota, and advanced to the confederates; their chief officers
assembled about him and he addressed them in the following manner.

People of Greece, I am a stranger, the desire of knowing your laws, sciences
and military discipline has engaged me to travel among you. Your wit is every
where extolled, but I cannot admire your wisdom. The Spartans would be much in
the wrong to make any attempt upon your liberties, but neither is it just in
you to endeavor their destruction. They are not afraid of war, they love
fatigues and dangers, and are prepared for all events; but they do not refuse
to grant you peace upon honorable conditions. I understand that you have in
Greece a wise council, whose business it is to terminate the differences that
arise between your (...). Why have you not recourse to this council! The mutual
war you make upon each other, and your domestic jealousies, will weaken you by
degrees, and you will fail a pray to some conqueror emboldened by your
divisions.

All the old men looked upon one another while he was speaking, and seemed to
approve of what he said; their General, on the contrary, fearing lest the
Prince's advice should be followed, murmured within himself; he was a young
impetuous hero, a martial fire sparkled in his eyes, he had a sprightly, a
masculine and captivating eloquence, capable of inspiring courage into the most
timorous. When Cyrus had done speaking he raised his voice and answered him
thus. Whoever you are, O stranger, you are unacquainted with the boundless
ambition of the Spartans; their fundamental constitution tends to destroy all
the neighboring states. Lycurgus their lawgiver laid the foundations in
Lacedaemon of an universal monarchy, and inspired his countrymen with a desire
of domination, under pretense that Greece cannot maintain her freedom and
independency while divided into so many petty republics. Ever since that time
the avaricious Spartans are greedy of what they have not, while they refuse
themselves the enjoyment of what they have; when they are weakened and brought
low, they moderate their ambitious desires; but they have no sooner recovered
their strength, (...) they return to their old maxims; we can have no security
but in their total destruction. Scarce had he pronounced these words, when a
confused murmur rose among the soldiers, the fire of disorder was kindled (...)
in their breasts, and they all cried out, war, (...), let the Spartans be
destroyed.

Cyrus perceiving the fury which animated them, and that they would no longer
hearken to him, returned to the camp of the Lacedaemonians. They immediately
called a council of (...), and it was resolved to attack the enemy in their
entrenchments. Cyrus offered to pass the river at the head of a cho^^^ body of
cavalry, and this being agreed to, he ^^^ted for night to put his design in
execution; he passed without any opposition; and at break of day the infantry
followed him on rafts and buck-skin boats. The Tegeans taking the alarm left
their ^amp and drew up in battalia^. The two armies advanced with their pikes
ported, each phalanx in the closest order, buckler struck to buckler, helmet to
helmet, man to man; the battle began; the left wing of the Lacedaemonians
commanded by Cyrus quickly broke the right wing, of the Tegeans; Araspes
pursued the fugitives warmly, and put them out of a condition to rally; they
fled to a neighboring (...). Cyrus returned with his troops to sustain the
center of the Spartan army which began to give way; but while he was putting
the enemy into disorder, the right wing of the Spartans fled before the left of
the allies; Leonidas who commanded it gained an eminence, from which he could
discover all that passed; when he saw the happy success of Cyrus's skill and
bravery he encouraged his men, called them and returned to charge the enemy.
The Tegeans, finding themselves, attacked both in front and rear, dispersed and
fled, and where almost all cut in pieces (...) taken prisoners: the few that
escaped in the night took refuge in the same fortress with the others.

The battering engines and other machines, which have since been used in
attacking of towns, were not then known to the Greeks; on these occasions (...)
disposed their men in a certain form which they called a Tortoise. The next day
Leonidas gave the word of command, the Spartans drew up and mar^^ed to the
fortress; the foremost ranks covered themselves with their square bucklers, the
rest raised them over their heads, pressed them against one another, and then
gradually bending formed a kind of sloping roof impenetrable to arrows. A
trible (...) of this sort raised the assailants to the height of the walls. The
besieged rained down a shower of (...) and darts; but in the end the besiegers
made themselves masters of the fortress. Four thousand Tegeans were slain in
the two actions, and three thousand^ taken prisoners.

After the battle a new council of war was called Leonidas by the King's orders
made encomiums upon Cyrus in presence of all the commanders, and ascr^bed the
victory to his conduct and courage. All the soldiers sent up shouts of joy, and
looked upon the Prince of Persia as a divine man sent by the Gods (...) save
Sparta in her weak and tottering condition. It was afterward proposed in the
council to carry the Tegean prisoners to Lacedaemon, and to treat them like
slaves, as they had done the Spartans. Cyrus then rose up in the midst of the
assembly, a divine fire darted from his eyes, wisdom descended into his heart,
and he said: You are going, in my opinion to violate one of the principal and
wisest laws of Lycurgus; he has enjoined you to treat the vanquished with
clemency; the right of conquest even in a lawful war is the least of all
rights, and is never just but when it is made use of to render the conquered
happy. A conqueror who seeks only to domineer, ought to be deemed an usurper
upon the rights of nations, and an enemy of mankind who sports with their
miseries only to gratify his brutal and unnatural passions. It is by reason
alone that man should subdue man; no one deserves to be a King but he who
engages in the toils of empire, and subjects himself to the slavery of
governing purely out of compassion to men incapable of governing themselves. If
therefore you desire to become masters of Greece, let it be only by showing
yourselves more humane, and more moderate than all the other cities. The rest
of the Grecian states, when they see your wisdom, your courage, and your
excellent laws, will be eager to put themselves under your protection, and with
emulation sue to be received as members of your republic. It is by this means
that you will sweeten all minds, and captivate all hearts. Anaxandrides
influenced by this discourse granted peace, on condition that the Tegeans
should for the future be tributary to Lacedaemon. He detained the chief men
among them as hostages, and carried them to Lacedaemon, where he granted them
all the privileges of citizens.

Cyrus at his return to Sparta revolved in his mind all that he had seen and
heard, and formed great ideas relating to the art of war, which he resolved to
improve one day in Persia. After he had thoroughly studied the laws, manners
and military discipline of the Spartans, he left Lacedaemon to visit the other
republics of Greece. Chilo and Leonidas conducted him to the frontiers of their
country. He swore an eternal friendship to them, and promised to be always a
faithful ally of their republic; and he was true to his word for the Persians
had never any war with the Greeks in that conqueror's time.

Cyrus resolved before he left Peloponnesus, to visit all its principal cities.
He went first to Argos, then to Mycenae, afterward to Sicyon, and at length
stopped at Corinth, which was the most flourishing republic of Greece, after
those of Sparta and Athens. As he entered the town, he beheld with surprise all
the people in mourning; several players upon flutes mar^^ed at the head of a
funeral procession, and increased the public sorrow by their plaintive sounds:
forty young girls barefooted, their hair disheveled, and clothed in long white
robes surrounded the bier, and melted into tears while they sung the praises of
the dead; a little after followed the soldiers with a slow pace, a sorrowful
air, their eyes upon the ground and their pikes reversed; at their head marched
a venerable old man; his noble and military air, his tall (...) majestic
stature, and the bitter grief that was paint^^ upon his face, drew the
attention of Cyrus. The young Prince having asked his name, understood th^^ it
was King Periander, who was conducting his so^ Lycophron to his tomb.

Cyrus and Araspes joined themselves to the crowd which was going to a fortress
called Acro-Corinthus it was built upon the summit of an high mountain from
whence might be seen the Aegean and Ionian seas; for which reason it was called
The Eye of Greece. Being come to the fortress, which was the burial place of
the Kings, Periander first of all poured wine, milk and honey upon the body of
his son; he then lighted with his own hands the funeral pile, upon which had
been poured in ense, aromatics and odoriferous oils; he remained mute,
immovable, and with his eyes drowned in tears, while the devouring flames
consumed the body; after having sprinkled the yet smoking ashes with perfumed
liquors, he gathered them together into a golden ^urn, and then making a sign
to the people that he was going to speak, he thus broke silence. People of
Corinth, the Gods themselves have taken care to revenge you of my usurpation,
and to deliver you from slavery; Lycophron is dead, my whole race is extinct. I
will reign no longer; countrymen, resume your rights and your liberties. As
soon as he said these words, he ordered all the assembly retire, cut off his
hair to denote his sorrow, and shut himself up in the tomb with his son. Cyrus
being extremely affected with this sight, was very desirous to learn the reason
of it, and he received the following account See Herod. lib. 3. and Diog.
Laertius's life of Periander.
; Corinth was at first governed by Kings, but monarchy being abolished,
prytanes or annual ma^^^^tes were established in their place. The popular
government continued for a whole age, and Corinth was daily increasing in
wealth and splendour, when Cypselus, the father of Periander, usurped the (...)
authority. Having reigned above thirty years, (...) his passions being
satisfied, he began to be trou^^^ with remorse. Reason resumed its empire, he
(...) with horror upon the crime he had commit^^^ and resolved to free the
Corinthians from their (...); but death prevented him. A little before (...)
expired, he called Periander to him, and made (...) swear to restore his
countrymen their liberty. The young Prince blinded by his ambition quickly
forgot his oath; and this was the source of all his misfortunes. The
Corinthians sought to dethrone (...), and rose in arms against him several
times; but (...) subdued the rebels, and strengthened his authority more and
more. His first wife being dead, he, in order to secure himself against these
popular insults, courted an alliance with Melissa heiress of Arcadia, and
married her; she was the most beautiful Princess of her time, a woman of
consummate virtue and great courage.

Several years after this marriage, Periander declared war against the
Corcyreans, and put himself at ^he head of his troops. The Corinthians in his
absence revolted anew. Melissa shut herself up in the fortress, vigorously
sustained the siege of it, and (...) to demand succor of Procles tyrant of
Epida^^^ who had always seemed a faithful ally of Perian^^^ Procles, who had
long formed a project of extend his dominion over all Greece, took advantage of
(...) juncture to seize upon Corinth; he considered it (...) city very proper
to be the capital of a great (...) he came before it with a numerous army, and
(...) himself master of it in a few days. Melissa, (...) was ignorant of his
design, opened the gates of (...) fortress, and received him as her deliverer,
and (...) friend of her husband. The tyrant, seeing (...) master of Corinth,
established his residence there, (...) gave Periander to understand that he
must (...) himself with reigning at Corcyra, which this (...) had just
conquered.

Melissa quickly found that usurpation was not (...) only crime of which
Procles was guilty. He (...) entertained a violent passion for her, and he
tried (...) means to satisfy it: after having in vain employ^^ both caresses
and threatenings, he inhumanly (...) her to be shut up with her son Lycophron in
a (...) tower, situated upon the borders of the sea. In (...) mean while
Periander was informed of Procles treachery, and of his love for Melissa, he
was at the same time assured, that she had not only favored the perfidious
designs of the tyrant, but that she answered his passion. The King of Corinth
listened too readily to these calumnies; possessed with the rage of jealousy he
equipped a great fleet, and embarked for Corinth before Procles could put
himself in a posture of defense. He was just entering the port when a violent
storm rose and dispersed his ships. Melissa knew not the sentiments of
Periander, and was already blessing the Gods for her approaching deliverance,
when she saw part of the fleet perish before her eyes; the rest being driven on
the coast of Africa were there cast away; the only vessel that escaped (...)
fury of the tempest, was that which Periander (...) on board.

He returned to Corcyra, where he fell into a deep melancholy; his courage had
enabled him to bear up under the loss of his-dominions, but he could not
support the thoughts of Melissa's imagined crime. He (...) loved her, and her
only; he sunk under the weight of his grief, and his mind was disturbed to a
agree of distraction.

In the mean while Melissa, who was still shut up (...) the tower, believed
Periander dead, and wept bit^^ely for him; she saw herself exposed afresh to
the (...) of a barbarous Prince, who could commit the ^^eatest crime without
horror. While she was im^^^ing the help of the Gods, and conjuring them to
^^^tect her innocence, the person under whose charge (...) had left her, being
touched with her misfortunes, informed her that Periander was living, and (...)
to conduct her with her son to him. They (...) three escaped, and traveling in
the night through ^^ways got in a few days out of the territory of Co^^^th; but
they wandered long upon the coasts of (...) Ionian sea, before they could pass
over to Corcyr^. Procles mad with rage and despair at the escape of the Queen,
contrived means to confirm Periander (...) his suspicions, and to make him
believe that Melissa who would very soon be with him intended to ^^ison him.
The unfortunate King of Corinth listened with greediness to every thing that
could inflame his jealousy, and increase his rage.

In the mean while Melissa and Lycophron arrived with their conductor in
Corcyra, and hastened to see Periander; he was not in his palace, but in a
gloomy forest, whither he often retired to indulge his grief; he no sooner
perceived the Queen at a great distance, ^ut it awakened all his jealousy and
made him furious; he ran toward her; the stretched out her arms to receive
him, but as soon as he came near her, he drew his dagger and plunged it in her
bosom. (...) fell with these words, Ah, Periander! is it thus (...) reward my
love and my fidelity? She would (...) proceeded but death put an end to all her
mis^^^tunes, and her soul flew away to the Elysian (...) there to receive the
recompense of her virtue. Lycophron beheld his mother weltring in her bloo^,
(...) burst into tears and cried out: Revenge, just (...) revenge the death of
an innocent mother, (...) barbarous father, whom nature forbids me to (...).
This said, he ran away into the woods, resolving ^^ver to see his father more.
The faithful Corinth (...) who had accompanied the Queen and Prince to Corcyra,
let Periander then know the innocence ^^delity of Melissa, and all the miseries
which (...) had made her suffer in her imprisonment.

The wretched King perceived his credulity ^^^^late, gave way to his despair,
and would have (...) himself with the same poinard, but was preven^^^ (...) he
threw himself upon the body of Melissa, and (...) ten repeated these words:
Great Jupiter (...) by thy thunderbolts the punishments which men ^^der me from
finishing! Ah Melissa! Melissa! (...) the tenderest love to have concluded thus
with (...) most barbarous cruelty? It was with great diffic^^^ that he was
forced away from that fatal place (...) led to his palace; he continued to
refuse all cons^^tion, and reproached his friends with cruelty, (...) seeking
to preserve a life which he detested. The^^ was no way to quiet his mind but by
representing (...) him that he alone could punish the crimes of Proce^^ this
hope soothed the anguish of his soul, and (...) grew calm. He went among all
his allies, representing his misfortunes and the usurper's crimes; the Thebans
lent him troops, he besieged Corinth, (...) Procles prisoner, and sacrificed
him upon Melissa tomb. But Lycophron remained still at Corcyra and refused to
return to Corinth, that he might (...) see a father who was the murderer of a
virtuous mother, whom he had tenderly loved. Periander dragged on the rest of
his unhappy life without enjoying his grandeur; he had stabbed a wife whom he
adored; he loved a son who could not endure the sight of him. At length he
resolved to lay down his royalty, crown his son, and retire into the island of
Corcyra, there for ever to lament his misfortunes, and expiate in retirement
the crimes he had committed. With these views he ordered a vessel to Corcyra to
bring Lycophron to Corinth. The King impatient for his son's arrival, went
often to the seaside, the (...) at length appeared, Periander run with
eagerness upon the shore to embrace his only son, but (...) was his surprise
and grief, when he beheld Lycophron in a coffin! The Corcyreans groaning under
(...) yoke of Periander, whose cruelties they abhorred; and to extinguish for
ever the tyrant's race, those barbarous islanders had assassinated the young
Prince, and had sent his dead body in the vessel, as a testimony of their
hatred. Periander struck with this sad spectacle entered deeply into himself,
discerned the wrath of heaven and cried out, I have violated the oath made to a
dying father; I have refused to restore liberty to my countrymen. O Melissa! O
Lycophron! O vengeful Gods! I have but too well deserved all these calamities
which overwhelm me! he then appointed a pompous funeral, and commanded all the
people to be present at it: some days after he ordered two slaves to go by
night to a certain place, and kill the first man they should meet, and then
throw his body into the sea; the King went thither himself and was murdered;
his body could never be found to receive the honors of burial, nor could his
shade which wanders upon the banks of Styx ever enter the mansion of heroes.
What a dreadful series of crimes and misfortunes! The husband stabs his wife,
rebellious subjects assassinate their Prince, the tyrant procures his own
murder, and the avenging justice of the Gods pursues him beyond the grave. How
dreadful a spectacle, and how instructive a lesson for Cyrus? He made haste to
leave; place so full of horror.

FIFTH BOOK.
CYRUS leaving Corinth and crossing Boeotia, entered Attica, and soon after
arrived at Athens, where Pisistratus then reigned: the young Prince was seized
with admiration when he beheld the edifices, temples and splendid riches of a
city where the liberal arts flourished: he came at length to the King's palace:
It was of a noble but plain kind of architecture; all the ornaments of the
building seemed necessary parts of it; upon the freezes were represented, in
bas-relief, the labors of Hercules, the exploits of Theseus, the birth of
Pallas and the death of Codrus. A vast portico of pillars, of the Ionic order,
led into a great gallery adorned with paintings, brass and marble statues, and
with every thing which could engage the eye and charm the sight.

Pisistratus received the Prince with joy, and made him sit down by him: the
principal senators, with several young Athenians, seated themselves round them
upon rich carpets. A magnificent repast according to the mode of the country,
was served up: the most delicious wines were poured into golden cups finely
wrought, but the Athenian politeness which seasoned the conversation of
Pisistratus, was the principal delicacy of the feast. During the regale the
King entertained Cyrus with a general account of the revolutions which had
happened in the state in his time; of his exile, misfortunes and restoration,
after having been twice dethroned. He dexterously painted forth in the most
odious colors all the disorders of a popular government, that he might create
in abhorrence of it. He seasoned his discourse with historical remarks and
lively strokes of wit, which delighted all the assembly. Thus Pisistratus
artfully made use of the charms of conversation, and of the freedom usual at
banquets, to confirm his authority and gain the good will of the Athenians. The
senators and young men who heard him, seemed to forget their natural aversion
to monarchy. Cyrus by this example perceived with pleasure the empire which
Princes, by their amiable qualities, may gain over the hearts even of those who
are the greatest enemies to their power.

The next day Cyrus signified to Pisistratus, his impatience to be acquainted
with Solon, whose reputation was spread over all Asia. This Philosopher after
his travels, had refused at first to return to Athens, because Pisistratus had
got himself declared King; but having understood with how much wisdom and
moderation he governed, he was reconciled to him. The Sage had chosen his
habitation upon Mars-Hill, where was held the famous council of Areopagus, near
the tomb of the Amazons. Pisistratus would himself conduct the young Prince
thither, and present him to the Athenian lawgiver. Solon, though in a very
advanced age, still preserved the remains of his sprightly genius, that
cheerfulness and those beauties of the mind which never grow old. He embraced
Cyrus with the affectionate tenderness which is natural to old men, when young
person seek their counsels and conversation in order to learn wisdom.
Pisistratus knowing that the Prince's design in visiting Solon was to inform
himself thoroughly of the Athenian laws, retired and left them alone.

That they might discourse with the greater liberty, and more agreeably, the
sage conducted him to the top of the hill, where they found a delight^^^
verdure, and seated themselves at the foot of a sacred oak. From this place
they beheld the fertile plain and craggy mountains of Attica, which bounded the
view on one side with an agreeable mixture of every thing most smiling and wild
in nature: on the other side the Saronic gulf widen^^g by degrees, (...) a
prospect of several islands, which appeared to seat upon the waves. At a
greater distance the rising coasts of Argolis seemed to lose themselves in the
clouds, while the great sea, which looked as if it touched the skies,
terminated the view, and relieved the eye, weary with surveying so great a
variety of objects. Below was the city of Athens, which extended itself upon
the declivity of a hill; the numerous buildings rose one above another, and
their differer structure showed the different ages of the republic; its first
simplicity in the heroic ages, and it rising magnificence in the time of Solon:
in one part might be seen temples with sacred groves, magnificent palaces with
gardens, and a great number of stately houses of a regular architecture: in
another a great many towers, high walls and little irregular buildings, which
discovered the warlike and rustic taste of ancient times; the river Ilissus
which flowed near the city, and winded through the meadows, added a thousand
natural beauties to those of art. It was in this agreeable place that Cyrus
desired Solon to give him an account of the state of Greece, and particularly
of Athens; and the wise lawgiver satisfied his curiosity in the following
manner.

All the Grecian families are descended from Hellan, son of Deucalion, whose
three children gave their names to the three nations of Greeks, the Aeo^^^^,
Dorians and Ionians. These built themselves several cities, and from those
cities came Hercules, Theseus, Minos, and all those first heroes to whom divine
honors are paid, in order to show that virtue (...) be fully rewarded only in
heaven. Egypt first inspired the Greeks with a taste for arts and sciences,
^^tiated them into her mysteries, and gave them both Gods and laws. Greece,
being thus civilized, formed herself by degrees into several republics. The
supreme council of the Amphictions, composed of the deputies of the principal
cities, united them all in the same view, which was to preserve independence
abroad, and union at home. This excellent conduct kept them clear of an
unbridled licentiousness, and inspired them with the love of a liberty
regulated by laws, but these pure maxims did not always subsist: every thing
degenerates among men; wisdom and virtue have their vicissitudes in the body
politic, as health and strength have in the natural.

Amongst all these republics, Athens and Lacedaemon are without comparison the
principal. The character of Athens is wit, elegance, politeness, all the
amiable and social virtues. That of the Spartans is fortitude, temperance,
military virtue, and reason stripped of all ornament. The Athenians love the
sciences and pleasures, their great propensity is to voluptuousness. The life
of the Spartans is laborious and severe; all their passions have a turn to
ambition. From the different genius of these nations have proceeded the
different forms and revolutions of their governments. Lycurgus followed the
austerity of his natural temper, and consulted the savage fierceness of his
fellow citizens in his reformations at Lacedaemon: he considered the happiness
of his country as placed in conquest and dominion; and upon that plan formed
all the laws of Sparta, in which you have been instructed: it was impossible
for me to imitate him.

Athens in the beginning had Kings, but they were such only in name, and not
absolute as at Lacedaemon. The genius of the Athenians was so different from
that of the Lacedaemonians, that it made regal power insupportable to them. The
authority of their Kings being almost wholly confined to the command of their
armies, vanished in time of peace: we reckon ten from Cecrops to Theseus, and
seven from Theseus, to Codrus, who made a sacrifice of himself to the safety of
his country: his children Medon and Nileus, disputed for the throne. The
Athenians took this occasion to abolish entirely the regal power, and declared
Jupiter sole King of Athens; a specious pretext to favor rebellion and to shake
off the yoke of all settled authority. In the place of Kings, they created
perpetual governors, under the name of Archons; but even this faint image of
royalty appeared odious. That they might not leave so much as a shadow of regal
power, they established Decennial Archons; nor was their restless humor yet
satisfied: they reduced the duration of these magistracies to one year, that
they might the oftener take into their own hands the supreme authority, which
they never transferred to their magistrates but with regret. So limited a power
was but ill qualified to keep such restless spirits within bounds; factions,
intrigues and cabals sprung up every day: each man with a book of laws in his
hands, was for disputing about the sense of them. Men of the most lively
imaginations are commonly the least solid, and the most apt to create broils;
they think every thing due to their superficial talents: under pretense that
all men are born equal, and endeavor to confound all ranks, and preach up a
chimerical equality only that they themselves may get the ascendant. The
council of Areopagus, instituted by Cecrops, reverenced throughout all Greece,
and so famous for its integrity, that the Gods are said to have respected its
decisions, had no longer any authority; the people judged of every thing in the
last resort, but their resolutions were not fixed and steady, because the
multitude is always humour^^^e and inconstant. The smallest umbrages heightened
the presumption, provoked the folly, and armed the fury of a multitude
corrupted by an excessive liberty. Athens continued thus a long time under an
impossibility of extending her dominion; happy in being able to preserve
herself from total destruction, amidst dissentions which rent her in pieces.
Such was the situation of my country when I undertook to remedy its calamities.

Plut. life of Solon.
In my first years I gave myself up to luxury, intemperance and all the
passions of youth, and was cured of them by the love of science, for which the
Gods had given me a taste from my infancy. I applied myself to the study of
morality and policy, in which I found charms that soon gave me a disgust for a
loose and a disorderly life. The intoxication of my passions being dispelled by
serious reflections, I beheld with concern the sad condition of my country; I
turned my thoughts to provide a remedy, and communicated my scheme to
Pisistratus, who was likewise come off from the follies of youth. You see, said
I to him, the miseries which threaten us: an unbridled licentiousness has taken
the place of true liberty; you are descended from Cecrops and I from Codrus: we
have more right to pretend to the royal power than any other, but let us take
care not to aspire to it. It would be a dangerous exchange of passions, to
forsake sensuality, which hurts only ourselves, in order to pursue ambition,
which might be the ruin of our country: let us endeavor to be ^^viceable to her
without attempting to bring her under our dominion.

An occasion soon presented to facilitate my ^^^jects. The Athenians chose me
to be chief of an ^^pedition against the Megarians, who had seized (...) island
of Salamis. I embarked with five hundred men, made a descent upon the island,
took the (...) and drove away the enemy. They still insisted (...) the justice
of their pretensions, and chose the Lacedaemonians to be judges of it; I
pleaded the common cause and gained it. Having by these actions (...) ^^red
credit among my countrymen, they pressed (...) to accept of the regal dignity,
but I refused it, applied myself to cure the public evils in quality (...)
Archon.

The first source of all those evils was the (...) power of the people.
Monarchial authority ^^derated by a senate, was the primitive form of
government in all wise nations. I was desirous to ^^^tate Lycurgus in the
establishment of it, but was (...) well acquainted with the natural temper of
my countrymen to undertake it. I knew that if they suffered themselves to be
stripped of the sovereign power they would soon take it back again by open
violence; I therefore contented myself with setting bounds to it. I was
thoroughly sensible that no state can subsist without some subordination: I
distributed the people into four classes, and chose an hundred man out of each
class, whom I added to the council of Areopagus; I showed these chiefs that
sovereign authority of what kind soever is but a necessary evil for preventing
greater evils; and that it ought only to be employed to restrain men's
passions. I represented to the people the mischiefs they had suffered by giving
themselves up to their own fury: by this means I disposed the one to command
with modera^ion and the other to obey with readiness.

I caused those to be punished severely who taught, that all men are born
equal, that merit only ought to regulate ranks, and that the greatest merit a
man can have is wit. I made the Athenians sensible of the fatal consequences of
such false maxims. I pro^^^ to them that the natural equality, which those
(...) talk of, is a chimera founded upon the poetical (...) of the companions
of Cadmus and the children of Deucalion; that there never was a time, in which
(...) rose in that manner out of the earth, in a state of perfect manhood; that
it was ridiculous to offer (...) sports of the imagination for principles; that
e^^^ since the golden age, the order of generation had made a necessary
dependence and inequality a^^^^ men; and lastly, that paternal authority had
(...) the first model of all governments. I made a (...) by which every man who
had given no other proof of his good sense, than lively sallies of imagination,
florid discourses, and the talent of talking upon all subjects, without going,
to the bottom of anything, was declared incapable of public employments.

Here Cyrus interrupted Solon, and said to him: But after all, methinks merit
is what ought to make the distinction among men. Wit is the lowest sort of
merit, because it is always dangerous when alone; but wisdom, virtue and valor
give a natural right to govern. He alone ought to command others who has most
wisdom to discover what is just, most virtue to adhere to it, and most courage
to put it in execution. Merit, replied Solon, essentially distinguishes men,
and ought solely to determine ranks: but ignorance and passions often hinder us
from discerning it; self-love makes each man pretend to it; the most deserving
are the most modest, and never seek to rule. Besides, that which appears to be
virtue, is sometimes nothing but a deceitful mask. Disputes, discord and
illusion would be endless, if there was not some (...) more fixed, certain and
palpable than merit alone, whereby to settle ranks and degrees. These ranks are
regulated in small republics by election, and (...) great monarchies by birth.
I confess it is an evil (...) grant dignities where there is no real merit, but
it is a necessary evil, and this necessity makes the difference between the
natural and civil right: the (...) is always conformable to the most perfect
justice, the other is often unjust in the consequences, but it is necessary to
prevent confusion.

It was not so See disc.
under the reign of Saturn; in (...) golden age God was the universal Prince
and common father of all; he himself took care of the su^^nance of men and
governed them; he was their guardian and shepherd; there were then no
magistrates nor civil polity as now, every one followed THE LAW WHICH IS, and
not that WHICH (...) BEEN MADE. Under the reign of Jupiter, the mass of the
universe having, as it were quitted the rei^^ of his empire, hid himself in an
inaccessible retreat the foundation of the world was shaken by motion contrary
to its principle and its end, and it lost (...) beauty and its luster; then it
was that good and (...) were mingled together; ignorance and passions (...)
civil laws and civil magistrates necessary; these laws are often imperfect, and
these magistrates are not always good; but we are obliged to observe the (...)
and submit to the other, left the world should fall into perpetual anarchy. All
men are brethren and each man has a right to whatever he has need of they are
children of the same father, and no one should lord it over another; but if
there were not laws established to settle ranks and property among men, the
avarice and ambition of the strongest would invade all: these laws are not
always founded upon what is best in itself, but upon what is least mischievous
to society. Such is the source of almost all political establishments. Astrea
must return upon earth before merit alone will determine the fortunes of men;
at present we must often content ourselves with less equitable decisions. Ranks
and dignities are, after all, but the shadows of real grandeur. The external
respect which is paid to them, is likewise but the shadows of that esteem which
belongs to virtue alone. Is it not an instance of great wisdom in the first
lawgivers, to have preserved order in society by establishing such regulations,
that those, who have only the shadow of virtue are satisfied with the shadow of
esteem?

I understand you, said Cyrus, sovereignty and ranks are necessary evils to
keep the passions within bounds. The lower sorts should be content with
meriting the internal esteem of men, by their plain and modest virtue; and that
the great should be persuaded that nothing but outward homage will be paid them
unless they have true merit. By this means the one sort will not be dejected or
repine at their low condition, nor the other pride themselves in their
grandeur; men will become sensible that Kings are necessary, and Kings will not
forget that they are men; each man will keep himself within his own sphere, and
the order of society will not be disturbed. I see clearly the beauty of this
principle, and am very impatient to know your other laws.

The second source of the miseries of Athens, said Solon, was the excessive
riches of some, and the extreme poverty of others; this terrible inequality in
a popular government occasioned eternal discord: I durst not attempt to remedy
this mischief by establishing a community of goods as at Sparta; the genius of
the Athenians, which carries them to luxury and pleasures, would never have
suffered such an equality; but in order to diminish our evils I cancelled all
debts; I began by remitting those which were due to me; I enfranchised all my
slaves, and forbid any one for the future to pledge his liberty for what he
borrowed. I never tasted so much pleasure as in ^^lieving the miserable; I was
still rich, but I thought myself poor, because I had not enough to distribute
something to all the unfortunate; I established at Athens this useful maxim
that all the members of the same commonwealth ought to feel and compassions the
miseries of one another, as parts of the same body.

The third source of our calamities was the multiplicity of laws, which is as
evident a token of the corruption of a state, as a diversity of medicines of
the distempers of bodies. Here again I could not imitate Lycurgus; community of
goods and an equality of all the members of a republic, render useless a great
many laws and forms, which are absolutely necessary where there is an
inequality of ranks and property. I contented myself with abolishing all those
laws which served only to exercise the subtle genius of the sophists, and skill
of the lawyers, reserving only a small number of such as were simple, short and
clear; by this means I put a stop to contentious chicane, that monstrous
invention of crafty knaves to elude justice; I fixed certain times for the
final determination of lawsuits, and ordained severe and disgraceful
punishments for the magistrates, who should lengthen them beyond the bounds
prescribed; lastly I repealed the too severe laws of Draco, which punished the
smallest transgressions and the greatest crimes equally with death; and I
proportioned the punishment to the offense.

The fourth source of our misfortunes was the bad education of children; none
but superficial qualities, wit, bright imagination and gallantry were
cultivated in young persons; the heart, reason, noble sentiments and solid
virtues were neglected; the value both of men and things was rated by
appearances and not by reality; the Athenians were serious about trifles, and
looked upon solid matters as too abstracted. In order to prevent these
mischiefs, I ordained that the council of Areopagus should superintend the
education of children: I would not have them educated in such ignorance as the
Spartans, nor confined as before to the study of eloquence, poesy and those
sciences, which serve only to adorn the imagination. I would have them apply
their thoughts to all those ^^nds of knowledge which help to fortify reason,
ha^^tuate the mind to attention, and are serviceable for acquiring penetration
and judgment; the proportion of numbers, the calculation of the celestial
motions, the structure of the universe, the great art of know^^^g how to mount
up to first principles, descend to consequences, and discover the whole series
of truths, with their dependence upon one another. These ^peculative sciences,
nevertheless, serve only to exercise and cultivate the mind in early youth. The
Athenians in a riper age apply themselves to the study of the laws, policy and
history, to learn the revolutions of empires, the causes of their rise, and the
occasions of their fall; in a word, to every thing which may contribute to the
knowledge of man and of then Pisistratus established a kind of academy for
cultivating all (...) sciences, and erected a library containing a collection
of all the ancient Poets, Philosophers and Historians.


The fifth and last source of our evils was an immoderate fondness for
pleasures; I knew that the temper of the Athenians required amusements and
public shows; I was sensible that I could not subdue those republican and
untractable souls, but by making use of their inclinations toward pleasure, to
captivate and instruct them. In these public shows I caused to be represented
the fatal consequences of their disunion, and of all the vices prejudicial to
society; by this means multitudes of men assembled in the same place, were
induced to spend whole hours in hearing lessons of a sublime morality; they
would have been disgusted with dry precepts and cold maxims; and there was no
way to instruct, unite and correct them, but under pretense of amusing them.
Such were my laws and institutions.

I see very well, said Cyrus, that you have consulted nature more than Lycurgus
has done; but on the other hand, have you not been too indulgent to human
weakness? It seems dangerous in a republic, which has always been inclined to
voluptuousness, to endeavor the uniting of men by their taste for pleasures. I
could not, replied Solon, change the nature of my countrymen; my laws are not
perfect, but are the best which they could bear. Lycurgus found in his Spartans
a genius apt to all heroic virtues; I found in the Athenians a bent toward all
the vices, which make men effeminate. I will venture to say, that the laws of
Sparta by carrying the virtues to an extreme, transform them into faults; my
laws, on the contrary, tend to render even the weaknesses of men useful to
society. This is all that policy can do it does not change men's hearts, it only
makes the (...) advantage of their passions.

I thought, continued Solon, to have prevented or cured the greatest part of
our evils by the establishment of these laws, but the restlessness of (...)
people accustomed to licentiousness occasioned me daily vexations: some blamed
my regulations, others pretended not to understand them; some were for making
additions to them, others for retrenching them. I perceived then how useless
the most excellent laws are without a fixed and stable authority to put them in
execution. How unhappy is the (...) of mortals! By endeavoring to avoid the
terrible evils of popular government they run a risque of falling into slavery;
by flying the inconveniences of regal power they become exposed by degrees to
anarchy. The path of just policy is bordered on both sides with precipices. I
saw that as yet I had done nothing: I went therefore to Pisistratus and said to
him: You see all the endeavors I have used to cure the distempers of the state;
my remedies are all useless for want of a physician to apply them. This people
is so impatient under a yoke, that they dread the empire of reason itself; all
subjection to laws is insupportable to them; every one is for reforming them
after his own fashion; I am going to absent myself from my country for ten
years; I shall avoid by that means the perplexity and trouble to which I am
daily exposed, of spoiling the simplicity of my laws by adding to them and
multiplying them: endeavor to accustom the Athenians to them in my absence, and
suffer no alteration in them. I have refused to accept the regal dignity which
has been offered me; a true legislator ought to be disinterested; but for you,
Pisistratus, your military virtues qualify you for government, and your natural
humanity will hinder you from abusing your authority: make the Athenians
subject without making them slaves, and restrain their licentiousness without
taking away their liberty; avoid the title of King and content yourself with
that of Archon. Having taken this resolution, I went to travel in Egypt and
Asia. Pisistratus, in my absence, mounted the throne notwithstanding the
aversion of the Athenians to regal power; his address and his courage raised
him to it, and his mildness and moderation maintain him on it; he distinguishes
himself from his countrymen chiefly by an exact submission to the laws; and his
manner of life is plain, without pageantry and pomp. Besides, the Athenians
respect him as he is descended from Cecrops, and because he has only resumed
the authority of his ancestors for the good of his country. As for me, I spend
my days here in solitude without meddling with the government; I content myself
with presiding in the Areopagus, and explaining my laws when an^ dispute arises
about their meaning. The Prince of Persia saw clearly, by the discourse of
Solon, the inconveniences of a popular government, and the despotic power in
the multitude is more insupportable than absolute authority in a single person.

Cyrus having instructed himself in the laws of Solon and the government of the
Athenians, applied himself afterward to learn their military strength it
consisted chiefly in their fleets. Pisistratus conducted him to Phalerus a
maritime town situated at the mouth of the Ilissus; this was the ordinary place
of retreat for the Athenian ships; for the famous port of ^yraceus was made
afterward by Themistocles. They went down the river accompanied by Araspes and
several Athenians in a bark made on purpose; while delightful music charmed the
ear and governed the notion of the oars, the Prince desired the King of Athens
to give him a more particular account than he had done at first, of the various
revolutions which had happened under his reign. Pisistratus satisfied his
curiosity in the following manner:

See Herod. lib. 1. and Plut. life of Solon.
You know that when I first formed the design of making myself King, the state
was rent in pieces by two factions; Megacles was the head of one party and
Lycurgus led the other; Solon put an end to our divisions by his wife laws, and
went soon after into Asia. In his absence I gained the hearts of the people,
and by artifice and address obtained guards for my person; I made myself master
of the fortress and was proclaimed King. In order to engage more thoroughly the
good will of the people, I slighted any alliance with the Princes of Greece and
married Phya daughter of a rich Athenian of the Paeanean ^^ibe. Love united
with policy: besides her surprising beauty, she had all the qualities worthy of
a throne, and all the virtues of a noble soul: I had loved her in my youth, but
ambition had diverted my passion.

I governed in peace for some years, but at length the inconstancy of the
Athenians signally showed itself anew. Lycurgus raised a general murmuring
against me, under pretense that I was exhausting the public treasury to
maintain useless fleets; he artfully spread it abroad, that my only design in
augmenting our naval strength, was to make myself master of Greece, that I
might afterward invade the liberty of the Athenians; and he laid a plot to
take away my life; he communicated his design to Megacles who abhorred the
treason and gave me notice of it. I took all possible precautions to avoid
falling a victim to the jealousy of Lycurgus. The traitor however found means
to raise an insurrection, and the fury of the people grew to such a height,
that they set fire to my palace in the night; I ran to the apartment of Phya,
but it was already consumed by the flames, and I had but just time enough to
save myself with my son Hippias; I escaped in the dark, and fled to the island
of Salamis, where I concealed myself two whole years: I doubted not but that
Phya had perished in the flames; and how great soever my ambition was, her
death affected me infinitely more than the loss of my crown.

During my exile the animosity of Megacles against Lycurgus revived, and their
differences threw the city again into the utmost confusion; I gave Megacles
notice of the condition I was in, and the place of my retreat; he sent a
proposal to me to return to Athens, and offered me his daughter in marriage: in
(...) engage the Athenians to come into our measures, we had recourse to
religion, and corrupted the priests of Minerva; I left the island of Salamis;
Megacles came and joined me at a temple some furlongs from Athens; he was
accompanied by several senators and a crowd of people; sacrifices were offered,
and the entrails of the victims examined, upon which the high priest declared
in the name of the Goddess, that her city could not be happy but by my
restoration, whereupon I was crowned with solemnity. The better to impose upon
the people, Megacles chose out from among the young priestesses, her who was of
the most majestic stature, and armed her like the daughter of Jupiter; she wore
the dreadful Aegis upon her breast, and held in her hand a shining lance, but
her face was veiled: I seated myself with her in a triumphal chariot, and we
were conducted to the city; trumpeters and heralds went before, and cried with
a loud voice, People of Athens receive Pisistratus, whom Minerva resolving to
honor above all other mortals, brings back to you by her priestess Hered lib. 1.
The gates of the town were immediately opened, and we went directly to the
fortress where my marriage was to be celebrated; the Priestess stepped down from
her chariot, and taking me by the hand, led me into the inner apartment of the
palace: as soon as we were alone she took off her vail, and I perceived that it
was Phya; imagine the transports of my joy; my love and my ambition were both
crowned the same day; she gave me a brief account of her escaping the flames,
and of her retiring to the temple of Minerva upon the report of my undoubted
death.

Megacles, seeing all his projects disconcerted by the Queen's return, employed
his thoughts to disposses me again; he persuaded himself that I had acted in
concert with Phya to deceive him by false hopes: he spread a rumor at Athens
that I had corrupted the Pontif, and had abused religion to impose upon the
people: they rose in arms against me a second time, and besieged the fortress;
Phya seeing the cruel extremities to which I was reduced, and apprehending the
effects I might feel of the fury of a superstitious and enraged multitude
resolved to leave me; she thought herself obliged to sacrifice her own
happiness to that of her country, and Minerva without doubt inspired her to
make this sacrifice. So great an example of generosity filled me with
admiration, overwhelmed me with sorrow, and redoubled my love. Megacles, being
informed of Phya's flight, offered me peace, upon condition that I would
divorce the Queen and marry his daughter; but I resolved to renounce my crown,
rather than be false to my duty and my love. The siege was renewed with more
vigor than ever, and after a long resistance I was obliged to give way to the
storm; I left Attica and made my escape into Euboea.

I wandered a great while (...) that country, till being discovered and
persecuted by Megacles, I retired into the island of Naxos; I entered into the
temple of Minerva to pay my devotion to the protectress of Athens; just as I
had ended my prayer, I perceived an urn upon the altar, and going near it, I
read this inscription: Here rest the ashes of Phya, whose love to Pisistratus
and her country made her a willing victim to their happiness. This wonderful
spectacle renewed all my sorrows, yet could I not tear myself away from that
fatal place: I often went to the temple to bewail my misfortunes; it was my
only remaining consolation in this lonely condition, in which I suffered
hunger, thirst, the inclemency of the seasons, and all sorts of misery. One day
while I was plunged in the most melancholy reflections and in a profound
silence, I know not whither in a vision or a divine dream, but the temple
seemed to shake, and the top of it to open; I beheld Minerva in the air in the
same form as when she came out of the (...) of Jupiter, and I heard her
pronounce these words in a majestic and threatening tone: It is thus the Gods
punish those who abuse religion, by making it subservient to their ambition. My
soul was (...) with a sacred horror: the presence of the Goddess confounded me,
and laid open before my eyes all my crimes; I continued a great while without
sense or motion; from that time my heart was changed; I discerned the true
source of all my misfortunes; I detested that false policy which makes use of
wiles artifice and mean dissimulation; I resolved for the future to employ no
methods but what were noble, just and magnanimous, and to make it my endeavor
to render the Athenians happy, in case the Gods should be appeased, and should
suffer me to re-ascend the throne: the Gods were appeased, and delivered me
from my exile. My son Hippias engaged the Argians and several cities of Greece
to assist me; I went and joined him in Attica; I first took Marathon and then
advanced toward Athens; the Athenians came out of the city to give me battle;
I sent some children on horseback to them, to assure them that I did not come
to invade their liberties, but to restore the laws of Solon: this moderation
removed their fears, they received me with acclamations of joy, and I ascended
the throne a third time. My reign has never since been disturbed; but I
understand that Megacles who is retired to Corinth has engaged the Corinthians
to lend him a fleet, and I am daily making preparations to withstand the
invasion with which he threatens me.

Pisistratus was in this manner discoursing with Cyrus, when they arrived at
Phalerus; the haven stretched itself in form of a crescent; great chains went
from one side to the other to be a barrier to the ships, while several towers
at certain distances served to defend the mole. The two Princes went (...) with
Araspes to a temple of Venus built upon the ^^^mit of mount Colias, from whence
they discovered a fleet under full sail, making toward Phalerus. Pisistratus
presently discerned the Corinthian flag, and going down to the port went aboard
his fleet, giving orders to weigh anchor and meet the enemy. The wind changed
on a sudden and favored Pisistratus the two fleets came up with each other, and
(...) ranged in order of battle: a forest of masts (...) on one side three
lines of a vast length, whilst a ^riple line of Athenian vessels, bending into
the fi^^re of a half moon, presented an opposite forest upon the water; the
heavy armed soldiers were posted (...) the decks, the bowmen and slingers at
the prow (...) poop. The trumpet gave the signal to begin the attack; the
galleys on both sides first drew back, then advanced and struck against each
other with violence; they pierced and to^^e each other with their iron beaks;
some struck against the prow, others against the poop, and others against the
sides, while those vessels which were attacked presented their oars to break
the violence of the shock. The two fleets mixed, grappled and came to a close
fight; here the Athenian soldiers flung themselves from one ship to another,
there the Corinthians threw bridges to board the enemy.

Cyrus followed Pisistratus every where, and by his courage supplied his want
of experience in this sort of fight. Giving way to his ardor he would have
thrown himself into one of the enemies ships, but fell into the sea: several
arrows were shot at him, but he plunged into the water, saved himself by
swimming, and got on board an Athenian galley, which Pisistratus sent to his
assistance. Ashamed of his want of dexterity, he resolved to perish or repair
his misfortune: he ordered the rowers to advance to the vessel where Megacles
was in person, he came up with it, and with a flaming dart set fire to it; the
Athenian rebel endeavored to escape, but perished in the fire. Pisistratus and
his captains followed the example of Cyrus; the wind freshened and (...) high;
the flames mixed with the waves; the Corinthians threw themselves into the
water to escape: the sea was soon covered with men swimming among rudders and
rowers seats: this sad spectacle continued till the Corinthian fleet was quite
dispersed with the wind, or consumed by the flames. After the action Cyrus was
wholly employed in saving the lives of those who were upon the point of
perishing: then he returned into the port, and spent some days at Phalerus to
observe the manner of building ships, and to learn the names and uses of all
their different parts.

When Pisistratus had given all the necessary orders for repairing his galleys,
to took Cyrus with him in a chariot, and returned to Athens by a terrass which
run along the banks of the river Ilissus. By the way he discoursed with the
Prince of the naval force of the Athenians, the schemes he had laid to augment
it, the advantages which might be drawn from it for the security of Greece
against foreign invasions, and lastly of the usefulness of commerce with regard
to the navy. Hitherto, said he, the Athenians have applied their thoughts
rather to grow rich than great, and this has been the source of our luxury,
licentiousness and popular discord: where ever a people carry on commerce only
to increase their wealth, the state is no longer a republic, but a society of
merchants, who have no other bond of union but the desire of gain. The generous
love of their country is no longer thought of when the public good interferes
with their private interest. I have endeavored to prevent these mischiefs; our
ships subsist by their trade in time of peace, and are of service in defending
our country in time of war; by this means commerce contributes not only to
enrich the subjects, but to augment the strength of the state; the public good
unites with the interest of each private subject, and trade does not in the
least diminish military virtue.

When Cyrus was returned to Athens, Pisistratus and Solon carried him to see
their dramatic entertainments. Magnificent theaters, pompous decorations, and
the nice rules which have been since observed, where not then known. Tragedy
was not in that perfection to which it was brought by Sophocles, but it
answered all the views of policy for which it had been introduced. The Greek
poets, in their dramatic pieces, usually represented the tyranny of Kings, in
order to strengthen the aversion of the Athenians to regal government; but
Pisistratus directed the deliverance of Andromeda to be acted. The poet has
scattered throughout this tragedy several strokes of panegyric, which were the
more ingenious, as they might be applied not only to Perseus, but to Cyrus who
was descended from him. After this entertainment Solon led the young Prince to
his retreat on Mars-hill to take a repast there; it was more frugal than that
at the palace of Pisistratus, but not less agreeable. During this repast Cyrus
desired the wise old man to explain to him the political design and principal
parts of tragedy, which he did not yet understand.

Solon, who was himself a poet, answered: The theater is a living picture of
the virtues and passions of men; imitation deceives the mind into a belief that
the objects are really present and not represented. You have formerly read our
poet Homer, the drama is only an abridgement of epic poesy; the one is an
action recited, the other an action represented; the one recounts the
successive triumphs of virtue over vice and fortune, the other represents the
unforeseen mischiefs caused by the passions; the one may abound with the
mavelous and supernatural, because it treats of heroic exploits, which the
Gods alone inspire; but in the other the natural must be joined with the
surprising, to show the genuine effects (...) play of human passions; the
heaping of wonders ^^on wonders transports the mind beyond the limits of
nature, but it only excites admiration; on the contrary, by describing the
effects of virtue and (...) both without us and within us, man is brought to
(...) and know himself, the heart is touched while (...) mind is delighted and
amused. To reach the (...) lime the poet must be a Philosopher; the most
beautiful flowers, graces and paintings only please their imagination, without
satisfying the heart or impro^^^ the understanding; solid principles, noble
sentime^^^ and various characters must be dispersed through (...) in order to
display to us truth, virtue, and nature. Man must be represented as he is and
as he appears in his native colors, and under his disguises, that the picture
may resemble the original, in which there is always a contrast of virtues and
imperfections. (...) the same time it is necessary to conform to the we^^ness
of mankind; too much moralizing tires, (...) much reasoning chills the mind; we
must turn (...) into action, convey noble sentiments by a single stroke, and
instruct rather by the manners of the here than by his discourse.

These are the great rules founded upon human nature, and the springs which
must be put in motion to make pleasure serviceable to instruction. I foresee
that one day these rules may be improved; hitherto I have contented myself with
making the theater (...) school of philosophy for the young Athenians, and
useful to their education. It argues an ignorance of human nature to think of
leading it to wisdom at once by constraint and severity: during the
sprightliness and fire of youth, there is no fixing the attention of the mind
but by amusing it; this age is always upon its guard against precepts, and
therefore that they may be relished it is necessary to disguise them under the
form of pleasure.

Cyrus admired the great designs both political and moral of the theater, and
saw clearly at the same time that the principal rules of tragedy are not
arbi^^ry, but taken from nature. He thought he could (...) better show his
thankfulness to Solon for his instructions, than by letting him see the
impression they had made upon him. I now perceive, said he, that the Egyptians
are much in the wrong to despise the Greeks, and especially you Athenians: they
look upon your graces, your delicacies, and your ingenious ^^ns as frivolous
thoughts, superfluous ornaments, ^^d childish prettinesses, which denotes a
puerility of mind and a weakness of genius, which will not suffer you to rise
higher. But I see that you have a nicer taste than other nations, that you are
better acquainted with human nature, and know how to make pleasures
instructive. The people of other countries are mostly affected with bold
flights, violent transports, and bloody catastrophes: it is for want of
sensibility that we do not distinguish like you the different shades of human
thought and passion; we are not acquainted with those soft and sweet pleasures
that arise from delicate sentiments. Solon touched with the politeness of the
Prince's discourse, could not forbear embracing him and saying: Happy the
nation that is governed by a Prince who travels over the earth and seas, to
carry back into his own country all the treasures of wisdom! Cyrus soon after
prepared to leave Athens, and at parting made the same promise to Pisistratus
and Solon which he had made to Chilo and Leonidas, of being ever a faithfully
ally to Greece: he embarked with Araspes at the port of Phalerus in a Rhodian
vessel which was bound for Crete.

The Prince's design in going thither was not only to study the laws of Minos,
but likewise to see Pythagoras who had stopped there in his way to Croton: all
the Eastern Magi, whom that sage had seen in his travels had spoken of him to
the Prince with encomiums; he was esteemed the greatest Philosopher of his age,
and to understand best of all men the ancient religion of Orpheus: his dispute
with Anaximander the naturalist had filled all Greece with his same, and
divided all the learned. Araspes had been informed of this matter by the
Philosophers of Athens, and during the voyage gave Cyrus the following account
of it.

Pythagoras, who was descended from the ancient Kings of the island of Samos,
had been captivated with the charms of wisdom from his tenderest years; he
discovered even from that time a superior genius and a sovereign taste for
truth. Not finding at Samos any Philosopher who could satisfy his eager thirst
for knowledge, he left it at eighteen years of age, to seek elsewhere what he
could not meet with in his own country; after having traveled for several
years in Egypt and Asia, he returned home fraught with all the sciences of the
Chaldeans, Egyptians, Gymnosophists and Hebrews; the sublimity of his genius
was equal to the extent of his learning, and the excellent qualities of his
heart surpassed both; his lively and fertile imagination did not hinder the
justness of his reasoning.

Anaximander had gone from his own country Miletus to the island of Samos; he
had all the talents which can be acquired by study, but his understanding was
more subtle than profound, his notions more glittering than solid, and his
deluding eloquence full of sophistry; he was impious in the very bottom of his
soul, yet affected all the outward appearances of an extravagant superstition;
he held as divine truths all the fables of the poets, and stuck to the literal
sense of their allegories; he adopted all vulgar opinions as principles, in
order to degrade religion, and make it monstrous.

Pythagoras loudly opposed these mischievous maxims, and endeavored to clear
religion of those absurd opinions which dishonored it. Anaximander had known
Pythagoras from his infancy, he had instructed him in all the secrets of
natural philosophy and had loved him with the affection of a father; but after
the young Samian returned from his travels, the Milesian became jealous of his
talents, and resolved to ruin him as an ingrate, who usurped upon his rights,
obscured his glory, and was like to be the oracle of Greece; he covered himself
with the vail of hypocrisy, and accused Pythagoras of impiety; he secretly made
use of all arts to incense the people and alarm Polycrates, who then reigned at
Samos; he addressed himself to all the sects of Philosophers, and to the
Priests of the different Divinities, to persuade them that the Samian Sage, by
teaching the unity of one sole principle, destroyed the Gods of Greece: the
King esteemed and loved Pythagoras, yet he suffered himself to be deceived by
the artful representations of Anaximander: the Sage was banished from court,
and obliged to quit his country. He leads at present a retired life in the
island of Crete, and there studies wisdom without books or conversation. Having
searched deep into all the mysteries of nature, and discerned those marks of an
infinite Wisdom and Power, with which every part of the universe abounds, he
soars upon the wings of contemplation, that he may unite himself to the
sovereign truth, whose impressions he receives without the medium of words or
sounds. See the notion of Simmias the Philosopher in Plutarch concerning
Socrates's genius.
: this inspiration as I am told, is nothing like that enthusiasm which heats
the mind and agitates the body; but it gradually stills the noise of the senses
and imagination, imposes silence on all vain reasonings, and brings the soul to
an inward calm, that resembles the repose of the Gods themselves, whose
infinite activity does not in the least diminish their perfect tranquillity. In
this sublime state Pythagoras practices all the human and social virtues, but
it is with an ultimate regard to the Gods, and in imitation of their veracity
and goodness; he is modest, affable, polite, delicate in all his sentiments,
disinterested in all his actions, speaks little, and never displays his talents
but to inspire the love of virtue. This account of the Samian Philosopher gave
Cyrus a great desire to see him, and to learn the particulars of his dispute.
The wind continued favorable, and the vessel in a few days made the island of
Crete.

SIXTH BOOK.
CYRUS no sooner arrived at Crete, but he went strait to Gnossus, the capital
of the island, famous for the wonderful labyrinth made by Dedalus, and the
stately temple of Jupiter Olimpius. This God was there represented without
ears, to show that the sovereign Lord of the universe has no need of bodily
organs to hear the complaints and prayers of men Plut. of Osis and Osiris.
. The temple stood within a large enclosure in the midst of a sacred wood; the
entrance into it was through a portico of twenty pillars of oriental granate;
the gate was of brass finely carved, and was adorned on the sides with two
large figures, the one representing Truth, and the other Justice. The fabric
was an immense arch, which let in light only at the top, in order to hide from
the eye all objects abroad except the heavens. The inside was a peristyle of
porphyry and Numidian marble: At certain distances one from another were
several alters consecrated to the celestial Gods, with the statues of
terrestrial Divinities between the pillars; the dome was covered on the outside
with plates of silver, and adorned on the inside with the images of heroes, who
had been deified for their merit.

Cyrus entered this temple; the silence and majesty of the place filled him
with awe and respect: he pro^^ated himself and adored the Divinity present: he
had learned from Zoroaster that the Jupiter Olympius of the Greeks was the same
with the Oromazes of the Persians, and the Osiris of the Egyptians. He then
cast his eye over all the wonders of art which beautified this place; he was
less struck with the richness and magnificence of the altars, than with the
nobleness and expression of the statues: as he had learned the Greek mythology,
he could easily distinguish all the Divinities, and discern the mysteries
couched in all the allegorical figures that were before him. What drew his
attention more especially, was to see that each of the celestial Deities held
in his hand a golden tablet; upon these tablets were written the exalted ideas
of Minos in religion, and the several answers which the oracles had given that
lawgiver when he consulted them about the nature of the (...), and the worship
they required.

Upon the tablet of Jupiter Olympius were to be read these words: I give being,
life, and motion to all creatures See Hammond on Acts of Apost. chap. xvii.
ver. 28.
; no one can know me but he (...) seeks to resemble me Flat. Epin^m.
. Upon that of Pallas: The Gods make themselves known to the heart and conceal
themselves from those who endeavor to comprehend them by the understanding
alone Ibid.
Upon that of the Goddess Urania: The divine laws are not chains to fetter us,
but wings to raise us to the bright Olympius Plat. de Rep.
. Upon that of the Pyth^^^ an Apollo was this ancient oracle: The Gods take
less delight to dwell in heaven than in the souls of the just, which is their
true temple Hierocl. aur. carm.
. While Cyrus was meditating on the sublime sense of these inscriptions, a
venerable old man entered the temple, prostrated himself before the statue of
Harpocrates, and remained there a long time in profound silence. Cyrus
suspected it to be Pythagoras, but durst not interrupt his devotion. Pythagoras
(for it was he) having paid his homage to the Gods, rose up and perceived the
two strangers: he imagined, that in the air and mein of Cyrus he saw the same
marks which Solon had described, when he gave him notice of the young Prince's
intended voyage to Crete: he acco^^ed him with a salutation, and made himself
known.

The Samian Sage, that he might not disturb the silence which ought to be
observed in a place dedicated to the adoration of the immortal Gods, led Cyrus
and Araspes into the sacred wood adjoining to the temple. Cyrus then said to
him: What I have seen upon the golden tablets gives me a high notion of your
religion; I made haste to come hither, not only to be instructed in the laws of
Minos, but to learn from you the doctrine of Orpheus about the golden age; I am
told that it resembles that of the Persians concerning the empire of Oromazes,
and that of the Egyptians relating to the reign of Osiris; it is a pleasure to
see the traces of those great truths in all nations; vouchsafe to unfold to me
your ancient traditions. Solon, replied Pythagoras, acquainted me with your
design of coming into this island; I was going to Croton, but I have put off my
voyage to have the pleasure of seeing a hero, whose birth and conquests have
been foretold by the oracles of almost all nations: I will conceal nothing from
you of the mysteries of wisdom, because I know that you will one day ^e the
lawgiver of Asia as well as its conqueror. After this they sat down near a
statue of Minos in the sacred wood, and the Philosopher rehearsed to them all
the Mythology of the first Greeks, making use of the poetic style of Orpheus,
which by its painting and images rendered sensible the sublimest truths.

See the disc.
In the golden age the inhabitants of the earth lived in perfect innocence:
such as are the Elysian fields for heroes, such was then the happy abode of
men; the intemperature of the air, and the war of the elements were unknown;
the North winds were not yet come forth from their deep grottoes; the Zephyrs
only enlivened all things with their soft and gentle breezes; neither the
scorching heats of summer, nor the severities of winter were ever felt; the
spring crowned with flowers, and the autumn loaded with fruits, reigned
together; death, diseases and crimes durst not approach these happy places. The
soul was not then imprisoned in a gross mortal body as it is now; it was united
to a luminous, heavenly, ethereal body See Cudworth, p. 785, to p. 800.
which served it as a vehicle to fly through the air, rise to the stars, and
wander over all the regions of immensity. Sometimes those first men reposing
themselves in odoriferous groves, tasted all the purest pleasures of
friendship; sometimes they sat at the tables of the Gods, and were feasted with
nectar and ambrosia; at other times Jupiter, attended by all the Divinities,
mounted his winged chariot, and conducted them above the heavens. The poets
have not celebrated nor known that See disc.
HIGHEST PLACE; it was there that the soul beheld truth, justice and wisdom in
their source; it was there that with the eyes of the pure spirit they
contemplated the first Essence of whose brightness Jupiter and the other God^
are but so many rays; there they were nourished with beholding that object,
till being no longer able to support its splendour, they descended again to
their ordinary abode. The Deities at that time took a pleasure in conversing,
with men; the shepherdesses were loved by the Gods, and the Goddesses did not
disdain the love of shepherds; the graces accompanied them every where, and
these graces were the virtues themselves! but alas! this golden age was of no
long duration.

One day men neglected to follow Jupiter's chariot, stayed in the fields of
Hecate, got drunk with nectar, lost their taste for pure truth, and separated
the love of pleasure from the love of order. The shepherdesses viewed
themselves in fountains, and became idolaters of their own beauty; each had her
thoughts wholly taken up about herself: love forsook the earth, and together
with him all the celestial Divinities disappeared: the Sylvan Gods were changed
into Satyrs, the Napaeae into Bacchae, and the Nayads into Sirens; the virtues
and the graces were no longer the same; and self-love, the parent of all vices,
begot sensuality, the source of all miseries. Nature was quickly transformed in
this lower sphere: the sun had no longer the same force, nor the same mildness,
its light was obscured; our globe fell to ruins, the abyss was opened and
overflowed; it was divided by seas into islands and continents; the fruitful
(...) became craggy rocks, and the delightful valleys frightful precipices:
nothing remained but ^^ins of the old world drowned in the waters. The wings of
the soul were clipped; its subtle vehicle was ^^oken, and spirits were thrown
down into mortal bodies, where they undergo diverse transmigrations, all they
are purged of their crimes by expiatory (...). See disc.
The ethereal body was contracted, impri^^ned, and buried in a living
sepulcher, a coarse covering, which is ever changing, which does not con^^^ue
one moment the same, and is something merely ^^cidental to our substance: the
immortal seed, the ^^orruptible body, the subtle vehicle is at present the
seat of the soul, and the channel of communication between the pure spirit and
the gross body, the ^^den spring of all the motions and operations of our
walking carcass. It was thus that the iron age succeeded to the golden, and it
will last ten thousand years; during which time Saturn conceals himself in
(...) inaccessible retreat; but in the end he will resume the reins of his
empire, and restore the universe to its original splendour: all souls will then
be reunited to their principle. This, continued Pythagoras, is the allegory by
which Orpheus has made us understand the first condition of man, and the misery
into which he is fallen. Our mortal body is the punishment of our crimes, and
the disorder of our hearts is an evident proof of our being degraded.

I perceive, said Cyrus, that the principles of Zoroaster, Hermes and Orpheus
are the same: their allegories abound with the sublimest truth; why then will
your priests reduce all to an outward worship? They have spoken to me of
Jupiter only as of a lawgiver, who promises his nectar and ambrosia, not to to
solid virues, but to the belief of certain opinions and the observance of some
ceremonies which are (...) no use either to enlighten the mind, or to purify
the heart. The corruption and avarice of priests, replied Pythagoras, is the
source of all these misch^^^. The ministers of the Gods, who were established
at first to make men good, turn the priesthood into a vile trade; they mind
only the outward show of religions. The vulgar, not understanding the
mysterious meaning of the sacred rites, fall into a gross superstiti^^, while
the bold wits give themselves up to impre^^. Some despise even the purest
antiquity; others deny the necessity of an outward worship; others a^raign the
eternal Wisdom, because of the evils and crimes which happen here below.
Anaximander and his audacious school actually spread abroad at (...) time
throughout all Greece, that God and Nature are the same thing. Every one forms
a system after his own fashion, without respecting the doctrine of the ancients.

When Cyrus heard him name Anaximander, he said to him, I have been informed of
the cause of your disgrace and exile; and have a great desire to know the
particulars of your dispute with that Milesian Philosopher; tell me in what
manner you combated this doctrine; it may help very much to preserve me from
those dangerous maxims. I have already seen at Ecbatan several Magi who talked
the same language with Anaximander: the errors of the human mind are pretty
near the same in all countries and in all times. The particulars of that
dispute, answered Pythagoras, will be long, but I shall not affect to shorten
them lest I should become obscure. Upon my return to Samos, continued the
Philosopher, after my long travels, I found that Anaximander, who was now
advanced in years, had spread every where his impious doctrine: the young
people had embraced it; the love of novelty, the inclination to flatter their
passions, the vanity of thinking themselves wiser than other men, had blinded
their understandings and drawn them into these errors. In order to remedy the
mischiefs, I attacked the principles of the Milesian; he made me be cited
before a tribunal of Pontifs in the temple of Apollo, where the King and all
the people of the city were assembled; he began by representing my doctrine
under the most odious form, he gave false and malicious (...) to my words, and
endeavored to make me suspected of the impiety of which he himself was guilty:
I then rose up and spoke in the following manner.

O King! image of the great Jupiter, priests of Apollo and you citizens of
Samos! hearken to me and judge of my innocence; I have traveled among all the
different nations of the universe to learn wisdom, which is only to be found in
the tradition of the ancients; I have discovered, that from the origin of
things men adored but one sole eternal Principle; that all the Gods of Greece
are but different names to express the attributes of the Deity, or the
properties of Nature, which is the image of him. All that we can conceive of
the supreme Essence presents itself to the mind under the three forms of
goodness, wisdom and power; the sovereign good, the principle of all beings,
the intelligence which designed the plan of the world, and the energy which
executed it. The Orientals call these three forms See disc.
OROMAZES, MYTHRA and MYTHRAS; the Egyptians OSIRIS, ISIS and ORUS; the
Thracians URANUS, URANIA and LOVE; the Tyrians BELUS, VENUS and THAMMUS; the
Greeks JUPITER, MINERVA and APOLLO. Sometimes we represent these three forms of
divinity by the principal parts of nature, as the sun, the moon and the earth,
and we style them VULCAN, JUNO and NEPTUNE; one while by that prolific virtue
which produces wine, corn and fruits, and they are called BACCHUS, CERES and
VERTUMNUS; and often by the justice they exercise in the ^^fernal region, and
they bear the names of PLUTO, PROSERPINE and MINOS: moreover the first (...) of
the divinity is represented by his eternity as he is the most ancient of all
beings, and we call it COELU^ CHRONUS and SATURN: the second Form by his
^egundity as containing the seeds of all things, and we style it RHEA, VESTA
and CYBELE: the third Form by the authority he exercises in the government of
the world, and we call it MARS as the arbiter of war, MERCURY as the ambassador
of the supreme God, HERCULES as a hero who purges the earth of monsters. Thus
we express the three attributes of the Deity which comprehend the totality of
his nature by the original Father the author of all beings, the immortal Virgin
the mother of nature, and the son of Jupiter the emanation from these two
principles. See disc.
All these names nevertheless denote but one and the same power which drew all
beings visible out of nothing; but mankind have confounded the work with the
artificer, the image with the original, the shadow with the substance; they
have forgotten the ancient doctrine, they have lost the meaning of our
allegories, and stopped at the outward symbols without entering into the spirit
of them: this is the source of those numberless errors which prevail at present
throughout all Greece, degrade religion, and render it contemptible. Moreover I
find that it is a steadfast maxim in all nations, that men are debased, and that
religion is the only means to restore the soul to its original grandeur, to
make her wings grow again, and to raise her to the ethereal regions from whence
she is fallen. It is necessary first to become man by civil and social virtues,
and then to resemble the Gods by that love of the SOVEREIGN BEAUTY, ORDER and
PERFECTION, which makes us love virtue for itself: this is the only worship
worthy of the immortals, and this is all my doctrine.

Anaximander then rose up in the midst of the assembly; his age, talents and
reputation gained him a silent and universal attention. Pythagoras, said he,
destroys religion by his refinements; his love of ORDER is a chimera; let us
consult nature, let us search into all the secret recesses of man's heart, let
us interrogate men of all nations, we shall find that self-love is the source
of all our actions, all our passions, and even all our virtues: Pythagoras
loses himself in his abstract reasonings; I keep to simple nature, and there I
find my principles: the feeling and sentiment of all hearts authorizes my
doctrine, and this kind of proof is the shortest and most convincing.

Anaximander, answered I, substitutes irregular passions in the room of noble
sentiments, he always represents what men ordinarily do, as the standard of
what they ought to do; but the weakness of nature blinded and enfeebled by the
passions, is not the rule of nature enlightened and fortified by the sovereign
reason; he affirms boldly, but he proves nothing; this is not my method, my
proofs are these, they seem to me clear and solid; the sovereign will of the
great Jupiter ought to be the universal rule of our will; he loves all beings
more or less, in proportion to their resemblance with him; it is the degree of
this resemblance which constitutes the beauty, truth and goodness of each
intelligence. The Father of Gods and men loves himself as the sovereign good,
and all other beings as his emanations; and this should be our rule: self-love,
to be regular, must be the effect and not the cause of our love for the supreme
good; the love of the INFINITELY GREAT should be the ground of our love for the
INFINITELY LITTLE; the love of the original, the motive of our love for the
pictures. This is the eternal law, the immutable order, and the love of the
sovereign beauty.

Anaximander interrupted me with a disdainful smile and answered; Pythagoras
imposes upon you by words without meaning, by abstracted ideas that are of no
use in social life, by chimeras hatched in the empty brain of idle sophists who
exhaust themselves in vain speculations; what is this eternal law? this order
conformable to it? this love of the sovereign beauty with which he continually
dazzles our eyes? let him explain himself clearly, and all his fine-spun
notions will vanish into smoke.

See Hierocles on the golden verses of Pythag. p. 14.
The law, replied I, is the intelligence which produced all things, the
sovereign reason of the great Jupiter, the divine Minerva who incessantly
springs from his head. The order conformable to this law is founded upon the
different degrees of reality which the All-producing Spirit has given to his
works, the immutable relations and essential differences which are between
them. The love conformable to this order, is to prefer that which is more
perfect to that which is less so, not only in all kinds but in the several
species and individuals See Plat. fest. ed. Steph. p. 211.
Lastly, the sovereign beauty has no perfect similitude with any thing we
behold on earth, or in the heavens; whatever else is beautiful is only so by a
participation of its beauty; all other beauties may increase, decay, change or
perish, but this is still the same in all times and in all places; it is by
contemplating the different degrees of transient, variable and finite beauty,
and by carrying our thoughts beyond them all, that we at length reach to that
supreme Beauty which is simple, pure, uniform, immutable, without color,
figure or human qualities. Anaximander pretends this doctrine is a chimerical
idea, and a vain refinement which has no influence in social life, but all the
philosophers and legislators have thought otherwise; Hermes, Orpheus and Minos
laid it down as a fundamental principle, that a man must prefer the public good
to his private interest from the sole love of goodness, justice and perfection;
it was to this order that Codrus thought himself bound to sacrifice not only
his crown but his life; his view in conforming to this order was not to render
himself happy, on the contrary he believed it his duty to devote himself to
death, and to make no account of himself because the love of order exacted
(...). If we can love nothing but with reference to ourselves, each member of
society will come by degrees to consider himself as an independent being ^^de
for himself; there will be no reason to sacrifice private interest to public
good; noble sentiments and heroic virtues will be destroyed: nor is this all,
every concealed crime will soon be authorized; if virtue be not amiable for
itself, each man will forsake it when he can hide himself from the eyes of the
public, he will commit all crimes without remorse when interest carries him to
it, and he is not withheld by fear; and thus is also society dissolved;
whether therefore you consider religion or policy, both conspire to prove my
doctrine.

Here Anaximander answered: Pythagoras is unacquainted with the nature of the
soul; the desire of happiness constitutes the essence of the will; pleasure is
the great law both of mortal and immortal natures, its attractive force is
irresistible, and it is the only moving spring of man's heart; the sight of
perfection acts upon us only by the pleasing sensation it causes in us.

We always love with pleasure, answered I, but we do not always love for the
sake of pleasure. As the delight which accompanies the perception of truth is
not the reason why we acquiesce in truth, so the pleasure which accompanies the
view of order is not the reason why we love justice. That which determines the
pure act of the will, both in the one and the other case, is the perception of
the immutable relations, and essential differences between beings; (...) know
these relations, and these differences is Truth, to act according to these
relations and differences (...) Virtue. We may follow justice for the good it
procures us, but we cannot love it but for itself, that only, for the sake of
which we love, being properly the object of our love See plat, Rep. lib. 2. p.
36.
As the most unjust of all men would be he, who, while he committed all sorts
of crimes, should pass for just, and so enjoy the honors of virtue and the
pleasures of vice; so the perfectly just man would be he who should love
justice for itself; and not for the honors and pleasures which accompany it;
who should pass for unjust while he practiced the most exact justice; who
should not suffer himself to be moved by ingnominy, distress, or the most cruel
sufferings, but should continue steadfast in the love of justice, not because it
is delightful, but because it is just. It is thus that the Gods do good from
the pure love of good; the soul is an image of their substance, consequently
she may imitate them, and love virtue for itself; the perception of truth may
act as strongly upon her as the sensation of pleasure.

Ever since the iron age began, men are so blinded that they do not comprehend
this sublime love of virtue; the Philosophers themselves arrive to it but by
slow degrees; wisdom, in purifying the heart, accommodates herself to the
weakness of our distempered and imperfect nature See Platinus, Psellus,
Jamblichus, Porphyry, and the Platonists of the third century, when they speak
of the purification of the soul.
The divine Themis inebriates us at first with heavenly delights to
counterbalance in us the weight of terrestrial pleasures. She allures us by a
sweet smile, enchants us by her looks all charming, transports us by the
amiable truths she presents to the mind; we then adhere to virtue for the sake
of those sweets that accompany it: but in proportion as the soul withdraws from
outward objects, her love becomes more exalted, more delicate and more
generous; she enters deeply into herself, concenters all her powers, and
retires into her spiritual nature; she sees all the windings and turnings of
the heart, she discovers all the enormities of her self-love, which made her
refer all her virtues to herself, and practice them only out of vanity, that
she might become the idol of men by an usurpation upon the rights of the Gods;
she suffers inexpressible pains to expiate these secret iniquities; she at
length gets out of herself, rises above herself, separates and disengages
herself from every thing, that she may be ^nited to the immutable Beauty, and
behold him with that eye with which alone he can be seen; then it is that she
brings forth not the shadows of virtue, but the virtues themselves, she becomes
immortal and the friend of God Plato's feast, p. 212.
Such is the immutable law of Themis, the human virtues are acquired with
pleasure, but deification only by sufferings, and by being stripped of every
thing that is mortal and terrestrial in us. It was thus that Hercules found
exquisite pleasures in his twelve labors, and in all the exploits of an heroic
virtue; but he was no deified till he had passed through the purifying flames o
Themis, which your poets have represented by those of his several pile on mount
Oeta. They consumed the ^^^soned robe of the Centaur, of the monster Typhon,
and of the evil principle, which that son of Jupiter had put on to give us an
example of perfect virtue; in the midst of the devouring flames he rejoiced at
the destruction of all that he had received from his mother Alcmene: the fight
of the immutable order so ravished and transported him out of himself, that her
could not give a thought to his own happiness.

Here Anaximander cried out with fury, Pythagoras is ignorant of the history of
the Gods, he says we must resemble them, they swim in delights above, and
descend upon earth only to please themselves with terrestrial Goddesses;
Jupiter himself is an instance of it; to imitate them is to pursue pleasure;
Pythagoras artfully endeavored to create in you a brutal indifference for the
fear of the Gods, make you despise nectar and ambrosia, and destroy in you the
invincible desire of happiness natural to all intelligences; I gave you warning
of the horrible consequences of his system, beware of his sophistry.

See the disc.
Justice, replied I with an intrepid (...) is amiable of itself; if we love it
only for the advantages it procures us, we are not good but politic; it is the
highest injustice to love justice only for the sake of reward; to as^ire to the
table of the Gods merely to please and delight ourselves, is not to love the
sovereign good, it is to degrade it and make if subservient to our interest. It
was thus that souls fell from the sublime place in heaven, they loved nectar
and ambrosia more than truth, and separated the love of pleasure from the love
of order. To love the sovereign BEAUTY only as beneficent, is to love him for
the finite participation of his gifts, it is to love him for what he does in
us, and not for what he is in himself; it is to separate the sovereign goodness
from the supreme justice; to love the immutable BEAUTY for his perfection is to
love him for his immense totality; it is to love him for what we know of him,
and not for what we feel of him; it is to love without measure the Being
without limits, and it is this love which ^^ates, elevates, deifies, and gives
a kind of immensity to the soul. I maintain therefore with all the ancients
that we are not to desire admittance to the table of the Gods, but as a state
in which we are united to the sovereign BEAUTY, transformed into his image and
perfected in his love. Is Olympus less the object of our desire, because we
desire it from a motive worthy of the Gods? Do we love the Gods the less,
because we prefer their friendship to the nectar that is drunk at their table?

O Samians! Anaximander endeavors not only to ^loud your minds, but to corrupt
your manners; he deceives you by sticking to the literal sense of your
Mythology. The Gods who are exempt from human frailties do not descend upon
earth to satisfy any passions; all that wise antiquity tells us of the amors
of Jupiter and the other Divinities, are but an ingenious allegory to represent
the pure communications of the Gods with mortals since the iron age. Your
Philosophers, always describe virtue to us as divine energy descending from
heaven, they continually speak of guardian Deities, who inspire, enlighten and
strengthen us, to show that heroic virtues can proceed from the Gods alone; but
those poets who seek only to please and to strike the imagination by heaping
wonders upon wonders, have disfigured your Mythology by their fictions.

Here Anaximander cried out again with an air of zeal and enthusiasm; Will you
suffer, O Samians, your religion to be thus destroyed, by turning its mysteries
into allegories, blaspheming against the sacred books of your poets, and
denying the mo^^ undoubted facts of tradition? Pythagoras overthrows, your
altars, your temples and your priesthood, that he may lead you to impiety,
under pretense of destroying superstition. A confused murmur immediately arose
in the assembly; they were divided in their sentiments: the greatest part of
the priests called me impious, and an enemy of religion. Perceiving then the
deep dissimulation of Anaximander, and the blind zeal of the people who were
deluded by sophistry, it was impossible for me to contain myself, and rising my
voice I said:

O King, priests and Samians, hearken to me for the last time. I would not at
first lay open the mysteries of Anaximander's monstrous system, nor endeavor in
a public assembly to render his person odious as he has labored to do mine:
hither^o I have respected his gray hairs, but now that I see the pit of
destruction into which he seeks to hurry you, I can no longer be silent without
being false to the Gods and to my country. Anaximander seems to you to be
zealous for religion, but in reality he endeavors to destroy it. Hear what his
principles are, which he teaches in secret to those who will listen to him.
There is nothing in the universe but matter and motion; in the fruitful bosom
of an infinite matter every thing is produced by an eternal revolution of
forms; the destruction of some is the birth of others; the different rangings
of the atoms is what alone makes the different sorts of minds, but all is
dissipated and plunged again into the same abyss after death. According to
Anaximander, that which is now stone, wood, metal, may be dissolved and
transformed not only into water, air and pure flame, but into rational spirit;
according to him our own idle fears have dug the infernal pit, and our own
scared imagination is the source of those famous rivers which flow in gloomy
Tartarus; our superstition has peopled the celestial regions with Gods and
Demigods, and it is our vanity which makes us imagine that we shall one day
drink nectar with them; according to him goodness and malice, virtue and vice,
justice and injustice, are but the names which we give to things as they please
to displease us; men are born virtuous or vicious, ^s tigers are born fierce,
and lambs mild; all is the effect of an invincible fatality, and we think that
we choose only because the sweetness of pleasure hides the force which
irresistibly draws us. This, O Samians, is the precipice to which he would lead
you.

While I was speaking, the Gods declared themselves. Before the dispute the
high priest of Delphos had been consulted about my doctrine; his decisions are
always agreeable to the will of the great Apollo; the answer he sent to the
priests of Samos was this; You accuse Pythagoras of erring through an excess of
love for the supreme Beauty, and I accuse you of erring through a friendship
for your fellow citizen; the God whom I serve, equally abhors those who aspire
not to the pleasures of Olympus, and those who desire them only to gratify
their passions; mortals have often need to think of nectar and ambrosia, in
order to reject the enchanting cup of Circe, which transforms men into hogs;
but when the Goddess Minerva descends into heroes, they perform noble actions
from noble motives; pure pleasures accompany them, glory environs them,
immortality follows them, but virtue is alone their object. Scarce had they
read this answer of the pontif, when a divine voice seemed to come from the
innermost part of the temple, and to say: See Hier aur. carm.
The Gods do good for the sole love of good, you cannot honor them worthily but
by resembling them. The priests and the multitude, who were more struck with
the prodigy than they had been with the truth, changed their sentiments and
declared in my favor. Anaximander perceived it, and imagining that I had
corrupted the pontifs in order to delude the people, hid himself under a new
kind of hypocrisy, and said to the assembly, The Oracle has spoken and I must
be silent: I believe, but I am not yet enlightened; my heart is touched, but my
understanding is not convinced; I desire to discourse with Pythagoras in
private, and to be instructed by his reasonings. Being moved and softened with
Anaximander's seeming sincerity, I embraced him with tears of joy in presence
of the King and the pontifs, and conducted him to my own house. The impious
wretch, imagining that it was impossible for a man of sense not to think as he
did, believed that I affected this zeal for religion only to throw a mist
before the eyes of the people and gain their suffrages. We were no sooner alone
than he changed his style and said to me:

The dispute between us is reduced to this question; whether the eternal Nature
acts with wisdom or design, or takes all sorts of forms by a blind necessity:
let us not dazzle our eyes with vulgar prejudices; a Philosopher cannot believe
but when he is forced to it by a complete evidence; I reason only upon what I
see, and I see nothing in all nature but an immense matter and an infinite
activity; this active matter is eternal; now an infinite active force must, in
an eternal duration, of necessity give all sorts of forms to an immense matter;
it has had other forms than what we see at present, and it will take new ones;
every thing has changed, and does change, and will change, and this is
sufficient for the production not only of this world, but of numberless worlds
invisible to us.

What you offer, replied I, is nothing but sophistry instead of proof. You see
nothing in all nature, say you, but an infinite activity and an immense matter;
I allow it; but does it follow from thence, that the infinite activity is a
property of matter? Matter is eternal (add you) and it may be so, because the
infinite force which is always acting may have always produced it; but do you
conclude from thence that it is the only existing substance? I shall agree also
that an all-powerful, active force may in an eternal duration give all sorts of
forms to an immense matter; but is this a proof that force acts by a blind
necessity and without design? Though I should admit your principles, I must
deny your consequences, which seem to me absolutely false. My reasons are these:

The idea which we have of matter does not include that of active force; matter
does not cease to be matter when in perfect rest; it cannot restore motion to
itself when it has lost it; from whence I conclude that it is not active of
itself, and consequently that infinite force is not one of its properties.
Further, I perceive in myself and in several beings with which I am
encompassed, a reasoning principle which feels, thinks, compares and judges;
motion only changes the situation or figure of bodies; now it is absurd to
suppose that matter without thought and sensation can become insensible and
intelligent merely by shifting its place, or changing its figure; there is no
connection between these ideas; I allow that the quickness of our sensations
depends often upon the motion of the humors in the body, and this proves that
spirit and body may be united, but by no means that they are the same; and from
the whole I conclude, that there is in nature another substance besides matter,
and consequently that there may be a sovereign intellect much superior to mine,
to yours, and to those of all other men. In order to know whether there be such
an intellect, I sally out of myself, I run over all the wonders of the
universe, I observe the constancy and regularity of its laws, the fruitfulness
and variety of its productions, the conection and suitableness of its parts,
the conformation of animals, the structure of plants, the order of the elements
and the revolutions of the heavenly bodies: I cannot doubt but all is the
effect of art, contrivance and a supreme wisdom. I then draw a vail over all
the beings with which I am encompassed; I consider them only as phantoms, mere
appearances and illusions; I shut my eyes, I stop my ears, I return again into
myself, to consider that reasoning principle which I have already proved not to
be material, which might subsist though all bodies were annihilated, and which
shows me all objects without presenting itself to my view. Since there cannot
be an eternal succession of effects without a cause, it follows necessarily
that he who made this intelligent principle must be himself intelligent; hence
I conclude that the INFINITE FORCE which you acknowledge to be in nature, is a
SOVEREIGN INTELLIGENCE. When I thus return into myself, I again perceive the
great Jupiter whom you would hide from my eyes; I find myself at present alone
with him, he is sufficient to me, he continually acts upon me, he is the cause
of all my sensations and of all my thoughts; he can represent numberless worlds
to me, though there were nothing in all nature but he and I. Earth, air and
heaven, planets and stars, universal nature, I behold you no more; vain
shadows, imperfect images, disfigured pictures, you are vanished away, I
perceive nothing but your original and your cause, I am swallowed up, I lose
myself in his bosom, and I need only feel my own being to be convinced of his.

I remember, said Cyrus, that Zoroaster laid open to me all these truths: a
superficial veiw of the wonders of the universe might leave the mind in some
uncertainty, but when we descend to particulars, when we enter into the
sanctuary of nature, and study its secrets, laws and effects to the bottom,
when we are well acquainted with ourselves, and compare what we feel within us
with what we see without us, it is impossible any longer to hesitate: I do not
see how Anaximander could resist the force of your arguments.

He answered me, Your reasoning is plausible, but has no solidity in it; you
always shun the main question by the dextrous agility of your mind. I agree
with you, that there cannot be an eternal succession of effects without a
Spinoza never supposed an eternal succession of second causes without a first.
He confutes that opinion by Mr Wol^aston's argument, which is the same that
Anaximander uses here. See Spin. Epist. 29.
first cause; this would be an infinite chain hanging upon nothing, an immense
weight without a support; I likewise allow that the idea of the matter does not
include that of active force, as the idea of active force does not include that
of wisdom; because the different attributes of one and the same essence may be
separately conceived. Lastly, I grant that bodies do not become intelligent by
changing of place and figure; but you ascribe to matter properties which it has
not; matter and extension are the same thing Descartes.
now you know that extension has neither color, nor smell, nor taste; and I
add, that it has neither fixed bounds, nor distinct parts, nor real motions:
all these qualities are but ideas Dr. Berkley.
or perceptions of the soul, caused by the action of the immense F. Mclebranche.
extension, which shows itself successively to us under different forms: this
principle being laid down, my real doctrine is this. We cannot banish from our
minds the ideas of eternity, immensity and infinity, they every where present
themselves to us; we can explain nothing without them; these three poperties
are therefore the attributes of some eternal, immense and Spinoza says
expressly the same things, Deus est Ens absolute infinitum.
absolutely infinite Being; there can be no other Praeter Deum nullu dari neque
concipi potest substantia.
substance but his, it is one and it is all; it is the universal being and is
both Cogitatio est attributum Dei, five Deus est res cogitans. Extensio est
attributum Dei, five Deus est res extensa. Substantia cogitans et substantia
extensa una eademque est substantia, quae jam sub hoc jam sub illo attributo
concipitur.
extended and intellectual; what makes the Res particulares nihil sunt nisi Dei
attributorum modi.
diversity of beings is not any real distinction of substance, but the
difference of form; the Ex necessitate naturae divinae infinita infinitis modis
sequi debent. Deus est omnium rerum causa immanens, non vero transitus.
eternal nature acts continually within itself, by itself, and upon itself,
according to the whole extent of its infinite power, and thereby necessarily
produces all sorts of forms; this boundless Intellectus, valuntas, amor ad
modos Dei five entia particularia pertinent, non ad substantiam aeternam et
infinitam. Vid. Spin. Eth. Part 1. Def. 6. Prop. 8. 13, 16, 18, 25, 31. et Part
2 Prop. 1, 2, 7, 10. et Scholia,
power is not restrained by those rules which are called wisdom, goodness and
justice, for these belong to finite beings, and by no means to the infinite.
Let me see you attack this system with solid reasons, without seeking to dazzle
my eyes with metaphors, allegories and the loose declamations of an orator.

I answered; If you only maintained, that all essences are but different forms
of the divine essence, that our souls are portions of the soul of the world,
and our bodies parts of his immense extension, you would not be an atheist, but
you would hold absurdities with many other It was the opinion of the Stoics,
of some of the disciples of Orpheus, and of the ancient Pantheists, and is held
by some of the modern Chinese. See disc.
philosophers who have a sincere abhorrence of all impiety. They suppose as you
do that there is in all nature but one substance, that the whole universe is an
emanation from the divine essence, or an expansion of it; but they believe that
there is an infinite Spirit who presides over all spirits, a sovereign wisdom
that governs the world, a supreme goodness that loves all its productions; they
never imagined as you do, that the only substance acts without intelligence or
justice, without knowing or having any regard to the immutable relations and
essential differences between beings; your atheism lies there: and what proof
do you offer for your opinion? In order to demonstrate and convince, is it
enough to heap proposition upon proposition, take for granted, and affirm
boldly!

He replied with an haughty assurance, my whole system turns upon this single
All Spinoza's book, his definitions, axioms, propositions, corollaries and
scholia tend to prove this principle or flow from it; this once destroyed, all
this system falls to the ground.
principle, that there is but one only substance in nature; this being
demonstrated, all the rest follows by necessary and unavoidable consequence.
Now this great principle I prove thus; when the eternal Being produces new
substances, he gives them something or nothing; if he gives them nothing, he
will never produce any thing, if he gives them a part of his own essence, he
does not produce a new substance, but a new form, this is demonstration:
provided the unity of substance be not destroyed, it is indifferent to me how
it is called, whether soul or body, spirit or matter, intelligent or
intelligible extension This is the use which the Spinozists have made of the
system maintained by Descartes, Malebranche, and Dr. Berk^^y, contrary to the
intention of these three Philosophers. The first says, that matter and
extension are the same thing; the second affirms, that the immediate object of
our sensations is an intelligible, eternal, immutable, infinite extension; the
third endeavors to prove, that there is no such thing as body, that all is
spirit. Malebranche thinks that Descartes does not extend his principle far
enough; and Berkley accuses Malebranche of stopping too soon: the Spinozists
pretend to reconcile all three by admitting but one only substance: it must
nevertheless be allowed that there is an essential difference between these
three Philosophers and Spinoza, since they teach that there is a real
distinction between the infinite essence and created essence.
.

When the great Jupiter, said I, creates, he does not draw a being out of
nothing, as out of a subject which contains in it some reality, neither does he
divide his essence to make a separate substance of it, but he makes something
exist which did not exist before: now to make a substance exist which was not
before, has nothing in it more inconceivable than to make a form exist which
was not before; since in both cases there is a new reality produced and
whatever difficulties there are in conceiving the passage from nonexistence to
Being, there are as puzzling in the one as in the other: you cannot deny a
creating energy without denying for the same reason all active force. Thus your
eternal nature is reduced to a formless mass, or to an infinite space without
action and power, as well as without wisdom and goodness. Where will you find
an active Deity to reduce that chaos to order, or to fill that immense space:
but I will restore you, out of compassion, that active principle and that
moving force, which you have need of to form your world; I will suppose,
contrary to all reason and evidence, that your eternal nature acts as
necessarily as it exists, you will gain nothing by this concession, you will
only plunge yourself into a new abyss of contradictions more absurd and more
frightful than the first. You cannot deny that there are in nature beings who
suffer, and others that do not suffer, intelligences that are ignorant, and
others who have knowledge; some who deny, others who affirm, and others who
doubt of the same things; intelligences who love and hate the same objects, and
who often change their thoughts, sentiments and passions: now is it conceivable
that the same immutable, immense, infinite Substance should be at the same time
knowing and ignorant, happy and unhappy, a friend and an enemy of its own
nature? Does this monstrous assemblage of variable, bounded, fantastical and
jarring forms square with the attributes you ascribe to the eternal Nature? You
may weaken your understanding by too much refining, you may exhaust yourself by
spinning a thin web of sophisms, you may wrap yourself up in these cobwebs, and
endeavor to entangle light fluttering minds in them; but I defy you to consider
attentively the consequences of your system without horror and shame: what
motive is it that could induce you to prefer the system of a blind nature to
that of a wise intelligence? Do but ascend to first principles, make use of
that accuracy in which you formerly excelled, and you will find that the
infinite being, which you admit equally with me, is not a universal being, but
a being vastly distinct from all others; that he has produced new substances as
well as forms: that he knows himself and all his productions; that he loves
himself essentially, and all other beings in proportion to the degrees of
reality he has communicated to them; that he is by consequence supremely
powerful, wise and good; that it is absurd to conceive what is only power,
wisdom and goodness, under the form of length, breadth and thickness; that he
may exist every where without succession of thoughts; that infinite extension
is not his immensity, as infinite time is not his eternity; that space is only
the manner in which bodies exist in him, as time is only the manner in which
created beings exist with him; and lastly, that variable and finite beings are
not different forms of his substance, but free effects of his power. Examine
geometrically this chain of consequences drawn from the idea of the eternal,
immense, infinite Being; descend from the first to the last, remount from the
last to the first, and you will see that they are all of them necessarily
linked together; every step you will discern new rays of light, which, when
they are all united, form a complete evidence: I challenge you to show me where
it fails.

Thrice he essayed to speak, and thrice his perplexed mind endeavored in vain
to rally its confused ideas; at length he collected all the powers of his
understanding, and answered me thus: The universe is full of defects and vices,
I see every where beings that are unhappy, and wicked; now I cannot conceive
how sufferings and crimes can begin or subsist under the empire of a being
supremely good, wise and powerful: if he be wise he must have foreseen them,
and if he be good he would have prevented them. Here is therefore as manifest a
contradiction in your system as in mine; you must deny that there are crimes
and miseries in the universe, or that there is a sovereign Wisdom and Goodness
that governs it; take your choice.

How, answered I, will you deny what you see clearly because you do not see
further? The smallest light induces us to believe, but the greatest obscurity
is not a sufficient reason for denying: in this dawn of human life the lights
of understanding are too feint to show us truth with a perfect evidence; we
only get a glimpse of it by a chance ray, which suffices to conduct us; but it
is not such a broad daylight as dispels all obscurity. You deny a creating
power because you do not conceive how it operates; you reject an eternal Wisdom
because you know not the secret reasons of its conduct: you refuse to
acknowledge a sovereign Goodness because you do not comprehend how evil can
subsist under its government. O Anaximander! is this reasoning? A thing is not
because you do not see it! All your difficulties are reduced to this.

You do me injustice, replied the wretched old man, who began to wave and to
change his style, I neither affirm nor deny any thing, but I doubt of every
thing, because I see nothing certain, nothing but what is wrapped up in darkness;
and this obscurity reduces me to the necessity of fluctuating for ever in a sea
of uncertainties; there is no such thing as demonstration See disc.
. It does not follow that a thing is true because it appears so; a mind which
is deceived often, may be deceived always, and this possibility is alone
sufficient to make me doubt of every thing.

Such is the nature of our understanding, replied I, that we cannot refuse to
do homage to truth when it is clearly discerned, we are forced to acquiesce, we
are no longer free to doubt: now this impossibility of doubting is what men
call conviction, evidence, demonstration: the mind of man can go no farther.
This light strikes with equal force upon all minds, it has an irresistible
power over Scythians and Indians, Greeks and Barbarians, Gods and men; and it
can therefore be nothing else but a ray of that eternal Wisdom which enlightens
all intelligences. This light is the last tribunal for trying our ideas, we
cannot appeal from it without ceasing to be reasonable. To doubt contrary to
all reason is extravagance; to pretend to doubt when the evidence makes
doubting impossible is adding insincerity to folly. See to what a dilemma you
are reduced by too much refining; observe the inconstancy of your mind and the
inconsistency of your reasoning; you were at first for demonstrating that there
is no sovereign Intelligence; when I showed you that your pretended
demonstrations were only loose suppositions, you then took refuge in a general
doubting; and now at last your philosophy terminates in destroying reason,
rejecting all evidence, and maintaining that there is no rule whereby to make
any settled judgments: it is to no purpose therefore to reason longer with you.

Here I left off speaking that I might listen to what he would answer, but
finding that he did not open his mouth, I imagined that he began to be moved,
and I continued thus: I suppose that you doubt seriously, but is it want of
light, or the fear of being convinced, which causes your doubts? Enter into
yourself; truth is better felt than understood; hearken to the voice of nature
that speaks within you, she will soon rise up against all your refined
sophistry; your heart which is born with an insatiable thirst of happiness will
give your understanding the lie, when it rejoices in the unnatural hope of its
approaching extinction; once again, I say, enter into yourself, impose a
silence upon your imagination, let not your passions blind you, and you will
find in the inmost of your soul an inexpressible feeling of the Divinity which
will dispel your doubts: it is by hearkening to this internal evidence that
your understanding and your heart will be reconciled; on their reconcilement
depends the peace of the soul, and it is in this tranquillity alone that we can
hear the voice of wisdom, which supplies the defects of our reasonings. O my
father, my dear father, where are you? I seek you in yourself without finding
you. What is become of that divine man who formerly carried me through all the
regions of immensity, who taught me to run back through all times to eternity
itself? What then is become of that sublime, subtle and extensive
understanding? What cloud of passions has obscured it? What midnight of
prejudice is cast over it? Here I fixed my eyes upon him to see whether my
arguments or sentiments had made any impression on his mind, but he looked upon
me with the disdainful smile of a haughty soul that hides her weakness and
despair under an air of contempt. I then held my peace and invoked the heavenly
Minerva in a profound silence; I prayed to her to enlighten him, but she was
deaf to me because he was deaf to her; he saw not the truth because he loved it
not.

Here Pythagoras ceased and Cyrus said to him: You join the most affecting
considerations with the most solid arguments; whether we consult the idea of
the first cause or the nature of its effects, the happiness of man or the good
of society, reason or experience, all conspire to prove your system; but to
believe that of Anaximander we must take for granted what can never with the
least reason be imagined, that motion is an essential property of matter, that
matter is the only existing substance, and that the infinite force acts without
knowledge or design, notwithstanding all the marks of wisdom that shine
throughout the universe. I do not conceive how men can hesitate between the two
systems; the one is obscure to the understanding, denies all consolation to the
heart, and is destructive of society; the other is full of light and of
comfortable ideas, produces noble sentiments, and confirms us in all the duties
of civil life. One of the two systems must be true; the eternal Being is either
blind, or a wise intelligence; there is no medium; you have shown that the
first opinion is false and absurd, the other therefore is evidently true and
solid. Your arguments have darted a pure light into the inmost of my soul: you
seem nevertheless to have left your adversary's objection concerning the origin
of evil in its full strength; help me to answer this grand difficulty. Here
Pythagoras ran through all the different opinions of the Philosophers without
being able to satisfy Cyrus; the Prince found a solution of this difficulty no
where but among the Hebrews; but though he was not content with the answers of
the Samian on this (...) he would not make him feel the weakness of that, nor
let him perceive that he himself was sensible (...) it; he dexterously shifted
the question, and returning to his dispute, make haste to tell me, said he, O
(...) Pythagoras! what impression your discourse made upon Anaximander.

He withdrew, answered the Philosopher, in confusion and despair, and with a
resolution to ruin (...). As weak eyes, which the sun dazzles and blinds, (...)
was the heart of Anaximander; neither prodigies, nor proofs, nor touching
considerations can move the soul, when errors has seized upon the understanding
by the corruption of the heart. Since my departure from Samos, I hear that he
has fallen into the wild extravagance which I had foreseen: being resolved to
believe nothing which could not be demonstrated with geometrical evidence, he
is come not only to doubt of the most certain truths, but to believe the
greatest absurdities. He maintains, without any allegory, that all he sees is
but a dream; that all the men who are about him are phantoms; that it is he
himself that speaks to and answers himself, when he converses with them; that
the heaven and the earth, the stars and the elements, plants and trees, are
only illusions; and in a word, that there is nothing real but himself: at first
he was for destroying the divine Essence to substitute a blind nature in its
place; at present he has destroyed that nature itself, and maintains that he is
the only existent being The language of the modern Egomists and of Carneades
heretofore. See disc.
. Thus ended the conversation between Cyrus and Pythagoras. The Prince was
touched with the consideration of the weakness of human understanding; he few
by the example of Anaximander, that the most ^^btile geniuses may go gradually
from impiety to extravagance, and fall into a philosophical delirium, which is
as real madness as any other. Cyrus went the next day to see the Sage, in order
to put some questions to him about the laws of Minos.

The profound peace, said he to Pythagoras, which is at present in Persia,
gives me leisure to travel; I am going over the most famous countries to
collect useful knowledge; I have been in Egypt where I have informed myself in
the laws and government of that kingdom; I have traveled over Greece to
acquaint myself with the different republics which compose it, especially those
of Lacedaemon and Athens. The ancient laws of Egypt seem to me to have been
excellent and founded in nature, but its form of government was defective: the
Kings had no bridle to restrain them; the thirty judges did not share the
supreme authority with them; they were but the interpreters of the law.
Despotic power and conquests at last destroyed that empire. I fear that Athens
will be ruined by a contrary fault; its government is too popular and
tumultuous: the laws of Solon are good, but he had not sufficient authority to
reform the genius of a people that have an unbounded inclination for liberty,
luxury and pleasure. Lycurgus has provided a remedy for the defects which
ruined Egypt and will destroy Athens; but his laws are too contrary to nature:
equality of ranks and community of goods cannot subsist long; as soon as the
Lacedaemonians shall have extended their dominion in Greece, they will
doubtless throw off the yoke of these laws; they restrain the passions on one
side but indulge them too much on another, and while they proscribe sensuality
they favor ambition. None of these three forms of government from to me to be
perfect; I have been told that Minos heretofore established one in this island,
which was free from the defects I have mentioned.

Pythagoras admired the young Prince's penetration, and conducted him to the
temple where the laws of Minos were kept in a gold box; they contained all that
regarded religion, morality and policy, and whatever might contribute to the
knowledge of the Gods, ourselves and other men; Cyrus found in this sacred book
all that was excellent in the laws of Egypt, Sparta and Athens, and thereby
Perceived, that as Minos had borrowed from the Egyptians, so Lycurgus and Solon
were indebted to the Cretan lawgiver, for the most valuable parts of their
institutions; and it was upon this model also that Cyrus formed those admirable
laws which he established in his empire after he had conquered Asia.

Pythagoras after this explained to him the form of government of ancient
Crete, and how it provided eqally against despotic power and anarchy. One would
think, added the Philosopher, that a government so perfect in all its parts,
should have subsisted for ever, but there hardly remain any traces of it. The
successors of Minos degenerated by degrees; they did not think themselves great
enough while they were only guardians of the laws; they would substitute their
arbitrary will in the place of them. The Cretans opposed the innovation from
thence sprang discords and civil wars; in these tumults the Kings were
dethroned, exiled, or put to death, and usurpers took their place; those
usurpers to flatter the people weakened the authority of the nobles; the Comes
or deputies of the people invaded the sovereign authority; the monarchy at
first shaken and then despised was at last abolished, and the government became
popular. Such is the condition of human things. The desire of unbounded
authority in Princes, and the love of independence in the people, expose all
kingdoms to inevitable revolutions; nothing thing is fixed or stable among men.
Cyrus perceived by this, that the safety and happiness of a kingdom do not
depend so much upon the wisdom and laws as upon that of Kings. All sorts of
government are good when those who govern seek only the public welfare, but
they are all defective; because the governors being but men, are imperfect.

After several such conversations with the wise Samian, the Prince prepared to
continue his travels, and at parting said to him, I am extremely concerned to
see you abandoned to the cruelty of capricious fortune! How happy should I be
to spend my life with you in Persia! I will not offer you pleasures or riches
which allure other men; I know you would be little moved by them: you are above
the favors of Kings, because you see the vanity of human grandeur, but I offer
you in my dominions, peace, liberty, and the sweet leisure which the Gods grant
to those who love wisdom. I should have a sincere joy, replied Pythagoras, to
live under your protection with Zoroafter and the Magi, but I must follow the
orders given me by the oracle of Apollo; a mighty empire is rising in Italy,
which will one day become master of the world; its form of government is like
that established in Crete by Minos; the genius of the people is as warlike as
that of the Spartans; the generous love of their country, the esteem of
personal poverty in order to augment the public treasure, the noble and
disinterested sentiments which prevail among the citizens, their contempt of
pleasure, and their ardent zeal for liberty, render them fit to conquer the
whole world; I am to introduce there the knowledge of the Gods and of laws. I
must leave you, but I will never forget you; my heart will follow you every
where; you will doubtless extend your conquests as the oracles have for told;
may the Gods preserve you then from being intoxicated by sovereign authority!
may you long feel the pleasure of reigning only to make other men happy! Fame
will inform me of your successes: I shall often ask, has not grandeur made a
change in the heart of Cyrus? Does he still love virtue? Does he continue to
fe^ the Gods? Though we now part we shall meet again in the abode of the just;
I shall doubtless descend thither before you; I will there expect your manes.
Ah Cyrus! how joyful shall I be to see you again after death among the good
Kings, who are crowned by the Gods with an immortal glory! Farewell, Prince,
farewell, and remember that you never employ your power but to execute the
dictates of your goodness.

Cyrus was so much affected, that he could not answer; he respectfully embraced
the old man, and bedewed his face with tears; but in short they must separate;
Pythagoras embarked very soon for Italy, and the Prince in a Phoenician vessel
for Tire. As Cyrus was failing from Crete, and the coasts of Greece began to
disappear, he felt an inward regret, and calling to mind all he had seen, said
to Araspes: What! is this the nation that was represented to me as so
superficial and trifling; I have found there great men of all kinds, profound
philosophers, able captains, wise politicians, and geniuses capable of reaching
to all heights, and of going to the bottom of things. Other nations methinks do
not do the Greeks justice.

I cannot admire, answered Araspes, either their talents or their sciences; the
Chaldeans and Egyptians surpass them exceedingly in all solid knowledge.
Lycurgus, Solon, Thales and Pythagoras would never have known any thing, if
they had not traveled in Egypt and the East: all that they have added to our
philosophy has been only so much allay to it. The doctrine of He introduced
mathematics and physics into Greece, as Descartes revived the taste of them in
Europe.
Thales is a series of loose suppositions; his ethereal fluid is a mere whim
and not at all geometrical; what comparison between his philosophy and that of
He was the first that taught the atomical doctrine, not in the sense of
Democritus and Epicurus, but in that of Sir Isaac Newton. See Opt. page 407.
Moschus the Phoenician? Besides I do not find any thing of the original,
creating, masculine genius in the Greek poets and orators, but a diffused
style, superfluous flowers, ideas that seem dear and transparent only because
they are light and thin; their pretty thoughts, ingenious turns and pretended
delicacies, proceed wholly from the infant weakness of their understanding,
which cannot rise to the sublime, and continually hovers above the surface of
objects: in a word, all that I admire in the Greeks is their politeness, their
conversible qualities, their taste for pleasure and their continual joy; they
purchase happiness at a cheaper rate than other nations.

It is true, replied Cyrus, we find sublime ideas and useful discoveries among
the Chaldeans and Egyptians, but their depth of science is often full of
obscurity; they know not like the Greeks how to come at hidden truths by a
chain of known and easy ones; that ingenious method of ranging each idea in its
proper place, of leading the mind by degrees from the most simple truths to the
most compounded, with order, perspicuity and accuracy, is a secret with which
the Chaldeans and Egyptians, who boast of having more of original genius, are
little acquained. This nevertheless is the true science by which man is taught
the extent and bounds of his own mind, and this is what we owe to Thales; his
works and his travels spread this taste in the East; what ingratitude and
injustice to make no other use of his great discoveries than to despise him
because he did not discover all! It is true his philosophy is not exact; but
Moschus, the great Moschus, has not he himself had recourse to an ethereal
fluid in order to explain his principle of attraction, which, as at first
represented by his disciples, was wholly unintelligible, a mere occult quality.
I know that the Greeks love the agreeable kinds of knowledge more than abstract
ideas; the arts of imitation more than nice speculations; but they do not
despise the sublime sciences; on the contrary, they excel in them when they
apply their minds to the study of them. Have we in all the East such a A kind
of history like that of the academy of sciences in France.
history of physic as that written by Anaximenes? Do not you find beauties in
Homer, the fables of Aesop, Archilochus's satyrs, and in the dramatic pieces
which are acted at Athens to render vi^^ odious and ridiculous? I repeat what I
said to Solon, the Greeks have a finer taste than other nations. It is for want
of sensibility that we do not sufficiently admire the delicate thoughts, the
tender passions, (...) natural and unaffected graces in their writings. The
poem of Abaris the Scythian, concerning the It might be somewhat like Milton's
Paradise lost.
ruin of the garden of the Hesperides would have been more perfect if the
author had been a Greek. We see there all the efforts of a genius that can rise
to the highest heaven, descend to the lowest abyss, and fly with a rapid wing
from one end of immensity to the other: yet Abaris, the admirable Abaris, does
he always distinguish between the natural and the low, sublimity and bombast,
enthusiasm and fury, delicacy and subtility? I grant that the Greeks seem to be
sometimes taken up too much with trifles and amusements; but the great men
among them have the secret of preparing the most important affairs, even while
they are diverting themselves: they are sensible that the mind has need now and
then of rest; but in these relaxations they can put in motion the greatest
machines by the smallest springs; they look upon life as a kind of sport, but
such as resembles the Olympic games, where mirthful dancing is mixed with
laborious exercises. They love strangers more than other nations, and their
country deserves to be styled the common country of mankind. It is for these
qualities that I prefer the Greeks to other nations, and not because of their
politeness.

True politeness is common to delicate souls of all nations, and is not
peculiar to any one people. External civility is but the form established in
the different countries for expressing that politeness of the soul. I prefer
the civility of the Greeks to that of other nations, because it is more simple
and less troublesome; it excludes all superfluous formality; its only aim is to
render company and conversation easy and agreeable: but internal politeness is
very different from that superficial civility. You were not present that day
when Pythagoras spoke to me upon this head; I will tell you his notion of
politeness to which his own practice is answerable. It is an evenness of soul
which excludes at the same time both insensibility and too much earnestness; it
supposes a quickness in discerning what may suit the different characters of
men; it is a sweet condescension by which we adapt ourselves to each man's
taste, not to flatter his passions, but to avoid provoking them. In a word, it
is a forgetting of ourselves in order to seek what may be agreeable to others,
but in so delicate a manner as to let them scarce perceive that we are so
employed: it knows how to contradict with respect, and to please without
adulation, and is equally remote from an insipid complaisance and a low
familiarity. Cyrus and Araspes were discoursing together in this manner when
they discovered the coasts of Phoenicia, and they soon after arrived at Tire.

SEVENTH BOOK.
THE King of Babylon having destroyed ancient Tire, the inhabitants had built a
new city in a neighboring island, thirteen leagues from the shore This island
stretched itself in form of a crescent, and enclosed a bay where the ships lay
in shelter from the winds; diverse rows of cedar beautified the port; and at
each end of it was a fortress for the security of the town and of the shipping.
In the middle of the mole was a portico of twelve rows of pillars, where, at
certain hours of the day, the people of all nations assembled to buy and sell;
there one might hear all languages spoken, and see the manners and habits of
all the different nations; so that Tire seemed the capital of the universe. A
prodigious number of vessels were floating upon the water, some going, others
arriving; here the mariners were furling their fails while the weary rowers
enjoyed repose; there one might see new built vessels launched; a vast
multitude of people covered the port; some were busy in unloading ships, others
in transporting merchandise, and others in filling the magazines; all were in
motion, earnest at work, and eager in promoting trade.

Cyrus observed a good while with pleasure this scene hurry and business, and
then advancing toward one end of the mole met a man whom he thought he knew:
Am I deceived, cried out the Prince, or is it Amenophis who has left his
solitude to come into the society of men? It is I, replied the Egyptian Sage; I
have changed my retreat in Arabia for another at the foot of mount Libanus.
Cyrus surprised at this alteration asked him the reason: Arobal, said
Amenophis, is the cause of it; that Arobal of whom I spoke to you formerly, who
was prisoner with me at Memphis and my fellow-slave in the mines of Egypt, was
son to the King of Tire, but knew not his birth; he has ascended the throne of
his ancestors and his true name is Ecnibal; I enjoy a perfect tranquillity in
his dominion; come and see a Prince who is worthy of your friendship. I have
always had a concern for him, replied Cyrus, on account of your friendship for
him, but I could never forgive his leaving you: I rejoice with you on your
finding him again, I long impatiently to see him, and to testify to him the
satisfaction I feel.

Amenophis conducted the Prince to the royal palace and presented him to the
King, noble souls make acquaintance at first sight, nor does it require time to
form strict friendships, where a sympathy of thoughts and sentiments have
prepared the way for them. The King of Tire asked Cyrus diverse questions about
his country, his travels, and the manners of the different nations he had seen:
he was charmed with the noble sentiments and delicate taste which discovered
themselves in the young Prince's discourse, who on the other hand admired the
good sense and virtue of Ecnibal; he spent some day at his court, and at length
desired Amenophis to relate to him the misfortunes of the King of Tire, and by
what means he had ascended the throne.

The Egyptian Sage retired one day with Cyrus and Araspes into the hollow of a
rock beautified with shell-work; from thence they had a view of the sea, the
city of Tire, and the fertile country about it; on one side mount Libanus
bounded the prospect, and on the other the isle of Cyprus seemed to fly away
upon the waves; they all three sat down upon a bed of moss on the brink of a
fountain whose still waters seemed to sleep in their very source. When they had
reposed themselves awhile the Egyptian Sage began thus:

While Ecnibal was yet a child in his cradle his father died; his uncle Itobal
aspiring to the throne resolved to rid himself of the young Prince: but Bahal,
to whom his education was committed, spread a report of his death to preserve
him from the cruelty of the tyrant, and sent him to a solitary part of the
country at the foot of mount Libanus, where he made him pass for his own son
under the name of Arobal, without discovering his birth even to the Prince
himself. When Ecnibal was in his fourteenth year, Bahal formed the design of
putting him upon the throne: the usurper being apprised of it, clap^ up the
royal Tyrian in prison and threatened him with the most cruel death, if he did
not deliver up the young Prince into his hands. Bahal would make no discovery,
being resolved to die rather than fail in his duty and affection to Ecnibal. In
the mean while the tyrant, knowing the heir of the crc^^n to be yet living, was
greatly disturbed and incensed. To satiate his rage and calm his disquiets he
ordered all Bahal's children to be put to death: but a faithful slave, having
notice of it, contrived to save Ecnibal; so that he left Phoenicia without
knowing the secret of his birth. Bahal escaped out of prison by throwing
himself from a high tower into the sea; he gained the shore by swimming, and
retired to Babylon, where he made himself known to Nabuchodonosor. To revenge
himself for the murder of his children, he stirred up that conqueror to make
war upon Itobal, and to undertake the long siege of Tire. The King of Babylon,
being informed of the bravery and capacity of Bahal, chose him to command in
chief in this expedition. Itobal was killed, and after the taking of the town
Bahal was raised to the throne of Tire by Nabuchodonosor, who in that manner
recompensed his services and fidelity. Bahal did not suffer himself to be
dazzled by the luster of royalty: having learned that Ecnibal had escaped the
rage of the tyrant, his first care was to send over all Asia to seek him, but
he could learn no news of him; for we were then in the mines of Egypt.

Arobal having wandered a long time in Africa and last the slave, his
conductor; engaged himself in Apries's troops, being resolved either to end his
days, or to distinguish himself by some glorious action. I have formerly given
you an account of our first acquaintance, our mutual friendship, our common
slavery, and our separation. Upon his leaving me he went to Babylon, where he
was informed of the revolution which had happened at Tire, and that Bahal, whom
he believed his father, was raised to the throne; he left the court of
Nabuchodonosor without delay, and soon arrived in Phoenicia where he was
introduced to Bahal. The good old man loaded with years was reposing himself
upon a rich carpet; joy gave him strength; he got up, ran to Arobal, examined
him, recalled all his features, and in a word knew him to be the same; he could
no longer contain himself, he fell upon his neck, embraced him, bedewed his
face with tears, and cried out with transport: It is then you whom I see, it is
Ecnibal himself, the son of my master, the child whom I saved from the tyrant's
hands, the innocent cause of my disgrace and the subject of my glory; I can
then show my gratitude toward the King who is no more, by restoring his son.
Ah Gods! it is thus that you recompense my fidelity, I die content. He
immediately dispatched ambassadors to the court of Babylon to ask permission of
the King to resign the crown and recognize Ecnibal for his lawful master. It
was thus that the Prince of Tire ascended the throne of his ancestors, and
Bahal died soon after.

As soon as Arobal was restored he sent a Tyrian to me in my solitude to inform
me of his fortune, and to press me to come and live at his court: I was charmed
to hear of his happiness and to find that he still loved me; I expressed my joy
in the warmest manner, and signified to the Tyrian that all my desires were
satisfied since my friend was happy; but I absolutely refused to leave my
retirement: he sent to me again to conjure me to come and assist him in the
labors of royalty; I answered, that he was sufficiently knowing to fulfill all
his obligations, and that his past misfortunes would enable him to shun the
dangers to which supreme authority is exposed. At last, seeing that nothing
could move me, he left Tire under pretense of going to Babylon to do homage to
the Assyrian King, and arrived very soon at my solitude. We tenderly embraced
each other a long while; doubtless you thought, said he to me, that I had
forgotten you, that our separation proceeded from the cooling of my friendship,
and that ambition had seduced my heart; but you were deceived: it is true that
when I left you I could no longer support retirement, I had no peace in it:
this restlessness no doubt proceeded from the Gods themselves; they drew me
away to accomplish the designs of their wisdom; I could enjoy no repose while I
resisted them: it was thus that they conducted me to the throne by unknown
paths; grandeur has not changed my heart; show me that absence has not
diminished your friendship; come and support me in the midst of the toils and
dangers in which an elevated state engages me. Ah! said I to him, do not force
me to quit my solitude; suffer me to enjoy the repose which the Gods have
granted me; grandeur excites the passions; courts are stormy seas, I have been
already shipwrecked and have happily escaped; expose me not to the like
misfortune a second time. I perceive your thoughts replied Ecnibal, you are
afraid of the friendship of Kings, you have experienced their inconstancy, you
have found that their favor is frequently the forerunner of their hatred:
Apries loved you once and deserted you afterward; but alas! should you compare
me with Apries? No, no, replied I, I shall always distrust the friendship of a
Prince brought up in luxury and effeminacy like the King of Egypt; but for you,
who were educated far from a throne and in ignorance of your rank, and have
since been tried by such a variety of adverse fortune, I have no fear that the
regal dignity should alter your sentiments: the Gods have conducted you to the
throne, you must fulfill the duties incumbent upon a King, and sacrifice
yourself to the public good; but for me nothing obliges me to engage anew in
tumult and trouble; I have no thought but to die in solitude, where wisdom
nourishes my heart, and where the hope of being soon reunited to the great
Osiris makes me forget all my past misfortunes.

Here a torrent of tears obliged us to silence, which Ecnibal at length
breaking said to me: Has then the study of wisdom served only to make Amenophis
insensible? Well, if you will grant nothing to friendship, come at least to
defend me from the frailties of human nature; I shall one day perhaps forget
that I have been unfortunate, I may come to be unmoved with the miseries of
men, supreme authority will perhaps poison my heart, and render me like other
Princes; come and preserve me from the errors to which my state is ever liable;
come and confirm me in all those maxims of virtue with which you formerly
inspired me; I feel that I have more need of a friend than ever. Ecnibal melted
me with these words, and I consented to follow him, but upon condition that I
should not live at court, that I should never have any employment there, and
that I should retire into some solitary place near Tire; I have only changed
one retreat for another, that I might have the pleasure of being nearer my
friend. We ^left Arabia Felix, went to Babylon, and saw there Nabuchodonosor;
but alas! how different is he now from what he was heretofore! He is no longer
that conqueror who reigned in the midst of triumphs, and astonished the nations
with the splendour of his glory; for some time past he has lost his reason, he
flies the society of men, and wanders about in the mountains and woods like a
beast; how terrible a fate for so great a Prince! When we arrived at Tyre^
chose my retreat at the foot of mount Libanus, in the same place where Ecnibal
was brought up; I come here sometimes to see him, and he goes frequently to my
solitude; nothing can impair our friendship, because truth is the only bond of
it. I see by this example that royalty is not as I imagined, incompatible with
tender sentiments; all depends on the first education Princes; adversity is the
best schools for them; it is there that heroes are formed; Apries had been
spoiled by prosperity in his youth; Arobal is confirmed in virtue by
misfortunes.

Cyrus's esteem for Ecnibal was much heightened by this relation; he admired
that Prince's constancy in friendship more than all his other great qualities.
During this stay at Tire he was entertained in a very magnificent manner, and
often expressed to the King his astonishment at the splendour which reigned in
that city. Be not surprised at it, answered the Tyrian Prince, wherever
commerce flourishes under the protection of wise laws, plenty becomes quickly
universal, and magnificence costs the state nothing. Cyrus, upon this, desired
the King of Tire to explain to him how he had brought his dominions into such a
flourishing condition in so short a time.

The wisest of the Hebrew Kings, said Ecnibal, showed many ages ago to what a
pitch of splendour and magnificence commerce will raise a little state: his
ships failed even to the remotest islands to import from thence the wealth,
perfumes, and rich commodities of the East; after the ruin and captivity of the
Hebrews we seized upon all the branches of their commerce. Tire is happily
situated; her inhabitants understand navigation; trade was at first perfectly
free there; strangers were treated as citizens of Tire: but in the reign of
Itobal all fell to ruin: instead of keeping our ports open according to the old
custom, he shut them up out of political views, formed a design of changing the
fundamental constitution of Phoenicia, and of rendering a nation warlike, that
had always shunned having any part in the quarrels of her neighbors. By this
means commerce languished, and our strength diminished; Itobal drew upon us the
wrath of the King of Babylon, who razed our ancient city and made us tributary.
As soon as Bahal was placed upon the throne, he endeavored to remedy these
mischiefs; I have but followed the plan which that good Prince left me.

He began by opening his ports to strangers, and by restoring the freedom of
commerce. He declared that his name should never be made use of in it, but to
support its rights and make its laws be observed. The authority of Princes is
too formidable for other men to enter into partnership with them. Commerce was
carried on in the first republics only by exchange of merchandise; but this
method was found troublesome, and subject to many inconveniences; the value of
provisions is not always the same, they cannot be transported without expense,
nor distributed without trouble, nor long kept without spoiling. It was
necessary to have such a common measure of the value of merchandise, as should
be incorruptible, portable and divisible into small parts for the convenience
of the poorest citizens. Metals seemed proper for this use and it is this
common measure which is called money. The public treasure having been exhausted
(...) long wars, there was not money enough in Phoenic^ to set the people to
work; arts languished, and agriculture itself was neglected. Bahal engaged the
principal merchants to advance considerable sums to the artizans, while the
former trafficked together upon safe credit; but this credit never took place
among the laborers and mechanics. Coin is not only a common measure for
regulating the price of (...) several kinds of merchandise, but it is a sure
pled^^ which has intrinsic value, and pretty near the same in all nations.
Bahal would not have this pledge ^^ver taken out of the hands of the people,
because they have need of it to secure themselves against the corruption of
ministers, the oppression of the rich and even the ill use which Kings might
make of the authority. In order to encourage the Tyrians to work, he not only
left every one in the free possession of his gain, but allotted great rewards
for those who should excel by their genius, or distinguish themselves by any
new invention. He built great workhouses for manufactures; he lodged there all
those who were eminent in their respective arts; and that their attention might
not be taken off by uneasy cares, he supplied, all their wants and he flattered
their ambition by granting them such honors and distinctions in his capital, as
were suitable to their condition. He took off the exorbitant imposts, and
forbad all monopolies; so that neither buyers nor sellers are under any
constraint or oppression. Trade being left free, my subjects import hither in
abundance all the best things which the universe affords, and they fell them at
reasonable rates. All sorts of provisions pay me a very small tribute at
entering; the less I fetter trade the more my treasures increase; the
diminution of imposts diminishes the price of merchandise; the less dear things
are, the more are consumed of them, and by this consumption my revenues exceed
greatly what they would amount to by laying excessive duties. Kings, who think
to enrich themselves by their exactions, are not only enemies (...) their own
people, but ignorant of their own interests.

I perceive, said Cyrus, that commerce is a source great advantages in a state;
I believe that is the only secret to create plenty in great monarchies, and
repair the desolations caused there by war: nu^^ous troops quickly exhaust a
kingdom if we can^^ draw subsistence for them from foreign countries (...) a
flourishing trade. Have a care, said Amenophis, (...) you do not mistake.
Commerce ought not to (...) neglected in great monarchies, but it must be
re^^^ated by other rules than in petty republics. Phoenicia carries on
commerce, not only to supply her own wants, but those of foreign states. As her
territories are small, her strength consists in making herself useful and even
necessary to all her neighbors; (...) merchants bring from the remotest
islands the ^^ches of nature, and distribute them afterward among other
nations. It is not her own superfluities, but those of other countries, which
are the foundation of her trade. In a city like Tire where commerce is the only
support of the state, all the principal citizens are traders; the merchants are
the Princes of the republic: but in great empires, where military virtue and
subordination of ranks are absolutely necessary, commerce ought to be
encouraged without being universal. To this end, it is necessary to establish
companies, grant them privileges, and entrust them with the general commerce of
the nation: they should make settlements in remote islands, and maintain a
naval force for their desence against pirates: those who cannot employ
themselves in trade shall lodge their money in these public companies: the
magistrates, priests and military men cannot traffic without neglecting their
proper employments and demeaning themselves; those trading companies shall be
the depositaries of every man's money, which thus united will produce an
hundred sold. In a kingdom that is fruitful, spacious, populous, and abounding
with seaports, if the people are laborious they may draw from the bosom of the
earth immense treasures, which would be lost by the negligence and sloth of its
inhabitants. By improving the productions of nature by manufactures, the
national riches are augmented: and it is by carrying these fruits of industry
to other nations that a solid commerce is established in a great empire: but
nothing should be exported to other countries but its superfluities, nor any
thing imported from them but what is purchased with those superfluities. By
this means the state will never contract any debts abroad, the balance of trade
will be always on its side, and it will draw from other nations wherewith to
defray the expenses of war; great advantages will be reaped from commerce
without destroying the distinction of ranks, or weakening military virtue: one
of the chief accomplishments of a Prince is to know the genius of his people,
the productions of nature in his kingdom, and how to make the best advantage of
them. Cyrus by his conversation with Ecnibal and Amenophis, learned many useful
notions and maxims in government which he had not met with in other countries;
they were great service to him after the taking Sardis, when he ordered gold
money to be coined, and turned the King of Lydia's treasures into specie See
Sir Isaac Newton's Chronol.
.

The next day Cyrus accompanied the King of Tire some furlongs from his
capital, to assist at the annual rites instituted in commemoration of the death
of Adonis. Between Hellopolis and Byblos there was a stately temple consecrated
to Venus: on one side of the portal was placed a statue of the Goddess, she
leaned her declining head on her left hand, grief appeared in her countenance,
and tears seemed to slow from her eyes, which were turned upon the statue of
her lover placed on the other side; a stream of blood seemed to spring from his
heart, and to dye the river Thammuz whose purple waters rolled with impetuosity
toward the sea. The srizes and the architraves were adorned with sculptures in
bas-relief, representing the three metamorphoses of the Goddess, the history of
her unfaithfulness, and of all the effects of Adonis's constancy.

The temple was built of fine Parian marble; its immense vault represented that
of heaven; in the middle of it appeared the chariot of the sun encircled by the
planets, and at a greater distance the empyreum spangled with stars. Upon the
altar stood a statue of the Goddess; she held in her hand the globe of the
world, and upon her wonderful girdle were described the twelve constellations.
The artist had animated the marble in such a manner, that the statue expressed
three different passions according to the different points of view from whence
it was beheld The Venus of Medicis is said in like manner to have three
different aspects, according to the different points of view from which it is
beheld.
; at a distance it was a noble and majestic beauty that seemed to invite with a
soft smile, accompanied with a tender and modest look; upon a nearer view, her
face turned toward the East, proclaimed the peaceful joy of a soul that sees
the beauty of truth, possesses it and is possessed by it; when viewed from the
other side she seemed to turn away her eyes, and despise those who durst
approach her with a profane heart, and impure thoughts. In the sculptures of
the altar, Love Conviv. p. 172, 180.
under the shape of Adonis seemed to descend from heaven, his infant look spoke
nothing but candor, innocence and simplicity; the virtues walked before him,
the muses followed him, and the graces hovered about him; he had no bandage
upon his eyes, and held in his hand a lighted torch, to show that he enlightens
at the same time that he inflames.

When Cyrus entered the temple he found all the people, clad in mourning, in a
cavern, where the image of a young man was lying upon a bed of flowers and
odoriferous herbs; nine days were spent in fasting, prayer and lamentations,
after which the public sorrow was changed into gladness; songs of joy succeeded
to weeping All these Tyrian rites are to be found in ^ucian, St. Jerome, St.
Cyril, Julius Firmicus, Macrobius and Procopius. Sec disc.
, and the whole assembly began this sacred hymn. Adonis is returned to life,
Urania weeps no more, he is reascended to heaven, he will soon come down again
upon earth to banish thence both crimes and miseries for ever.

Cyrus was struck with the august solemnity of the Tyrian rites; he knew
nothing of the history of Venus and Adonis but by the Mythology of the Greeks,
and suspected that they had debased it according to their custom; he desired
Amenophis to explain to him the true meaning of the Phoenician ceremonies. The
wise Egyptian sat down with the young Prince over against the great gate of the
temple, in a place from whence they could see the statues of the God and
Goddess, with all the bass-reliefs that represented their adventures, and then
said: It is not long since the Greeks were utter strangers to letters, the
muses and the sciences; their understanding is still young, they have no true
knowledge of antiquity; they have disfigured all the mysteries of the ancient
religion by their absurd fictions and gross images: the combats of Mythras, the
murder of Osiris, the death of Adonis, and banishment of Apollo, and the
labors of Hercules, represent to us the same truths; but the different nations
have painted them under the different similitudes; what we learn from the
Tyrian annals is as follows:

Before the formation of the elements, the heavens and the earth, an eternal
silence reigned through all the ethereal regions, and the music of the stars
had yet begun: the great God Belus or Baali was anciently one of the names of
the true God among the Hebrews. See Hosea, chap. ii. ver. (...) and Selder de
Diis Syris, cap. i. Syntag. 2.
Belus dwelt in an inaccessible light with the Goddess (...), Minerva and Isis
are the same. Sec Seld. (...). cap. 4.
Urania, who incessantly sprang from his head and with the God See disc.
Adonis whom he had engendered like unto himself. Belus being more and more
charmed with the beauty of his son, desired that there might be several
miniatures and living images of him. Adonis, animated by the power of Belus,
molded some rays of light, and made suns, stars and numberless worlds
invissible to us; but as yet there were no inhabitants for them. He looked upon
his mother, and on a sudden he saw spring out from the vast abyss a beautiful
flower which contained the soul of the world; Adonis breathed upon it; what
cannot the almighty breath of a God? The flower swelled, expanded itself and
was changed into a young Goddess whom he named See disc.
Urania after his mother. Transported with love and pleasure, he would have
presented her to his father, but she was not yet able to support the splendour
of the divine presence, or to breathe the pure air of the empyreum.

Adonis placed the young Goddess in a star, in the center of the universe, from
whence she could see the course of all the heavenly bodies, and hear the music
of the celestial spheres: he then said to her, Beautiful Urania, I love you,
and design you for a more transcendent glory than what you at present enjoy; I
intend to make you my spouse, bless you with a happy race that shall people the
heavens, and conduct you at last with all your children into the sublime place
above the stars where my father dwells: the only condition I require of you is,
that you never wish to know more than what suits your present state, that
unreasonable curiosity would render you both unhappy and criminal: such are the
immutable laws of Belus. Urania thought herself too happy to enjoy her felicity
on such easy terms; she loved Adonis more than all the glory that he promised
her, the sight of her lover made her forget all his gifts; he looked upon her
with complacency and by this look made her pregnant; she became the mother of
all Divinities without ceasing to be the immortal virgin; she quickly peopled
the stars with Gods and Goddesses, who had no other law but that of obeying the
will of Adonis, loving each other tenderly as the children of the same father,
and aspiring by their virtue to become one day worthy of seeing the God Belus.

Urania continued long faithful; she followed Adonis every where, he led her
through the immense spaces to show her the numberless worlds which he had there
produced; he often talked with her of the superior regions, and of the pleasure
which she would one day feel in knowing him of whom all nature is but a feint
image, in comparing the original with its pictures, and in seeing their various
relations. These discourses kindled in her the fatal curiosity, she began to be
weary of her happiness, and had no longer any relish for the pleasures she
enjoyed: she durst not speak, but Adonis perceived the first motions of her
unfaithfulness, and endeavored to stop its progress; she grew pensive,
melancholy, distrustful, and broke out at last in these bitter complaints:
Adonis, cruel Adonis! why did you give me the idea of a happiness which makes
me miserable? You promised to carry me up to the empyreum, show me the kingdom
of your father, and make me partaker of his glory; you should have concealed
your designs from me, or have accomplished them sooner. Imprudent Urania,
replied Adonis, you are going to ruin yourself in spite of me, you are not yet
capable of beholding the God Belus, you would not be able to support the
splendour of his presence, he will be loved as he deserves before he manifests
himself as he is; the smallest desire, the least motion contrary to his order
is an incroachment on his rights.

A vain curiosity and an ambitious desire of knowing overcame the Goddess, she
no longer beheld Adonis with the same complacency, she no longer found the same
charms in his company, she received his caresses with coldness and
indifference; he renewed all his endeavors to cure her distempered mind, but
to no purpose; she forced him at length to leave her: the Gods are delicate in
love, and cannot suffer a divided heart; he reascended to his father and left
her alone, hoping that the pains of absence would recover her from her error.
As soon as he was gone she renewed her complaints, and tormented herself with
new reflections; she began to doubt, and by that doubting she became darkened;
she suspected all that Adonis had said to her of his father and of the superior
regions to be only a chimera; she forgot her origin and her dependent state: to
convince her of her error, she was thrown down, from the ethereal regions into
the sphere of the sun; she drew after her the inhabitants of seven other stars;
these luminous bodies lost their light, became planets, and rolled about the
sun to receive its influences: the Gods who inhabited them became DemiGods, and
the Goddess Urania was condemned to live in the moon; she now enjoyed only a
borrowed light, was clothed with an aerial and transparent body which the
Greeks call the subtle vehicle of the soul; she no longer breathed as formerly
the pure ether, which made her life and nourishment; she lived upon nectar and
ambrosia with the Demi Gods, whom she had drawn after her in her fall. Adonis
ever faithful and ever loving descended into the sun to be nearer to his
beloved Urania; he took the name of Apollo and tried new means to make her
sensible of her fault: sometimes she was softened, she yielded to the sun's
attraction, and brought her silver car near his rays; then on a sudden she
changed her sentiments and wandered from him: she became inconstant and
fantastical, she put on new forms according as she retired from her lover or
approached to him; she at length gave way to her ambition, and made the
inhabitants of the planets adore her under the name of Quid Urania nisi coeli
Regina, Luna, Astarte. Vid. Seldom. de Diis Syris. cap. 2. syntag. 2. See Apul.
Met. II.
Astarte or the Queen of heaven.

By the laws of immutable fate it was necessary that the Goddess should undergo
a new metamorphosis, as a punishment for her new crime: she fell from the moon
to the earth, and took the name of Venus. The inhabitants of the planets did
not all follow her example, she seduced but a small number of them, and these
Demigods became men, but men of the golden age, they were not yet guilty of
gross crimes, they still preserved some marks of their original nature. The
Goddess by changing her element changed her food, instead of ambrosia she fed
only upon fruits, instead of drinking nectar she quenched her thirst in limpid
streams and clear fountains; she did not as yet lost either her transparency or
her a^ility, she could mount into the air when she pleased, but she could not
rise to the superior regions. Adonis left the sun, took the form of a young
man, and came and dwelt with Venus upon earth; at first she did not discover
who he was and fell in love with him; but having felt his divine influences she
knew (...), was afraid and fled from him: he pursued her, he called after her,
and at last stopped her, but she es^aped him again: he could have employed his
almighty power, but the Gods will be loved by choice; he endeavored to touch
her heart by complaints and (...), by caresses and threats, but she had no
longer (...) taste for the refined delights of virtue; her first (...) was now
changed into profane love of pleasure, and she forced Adonis to quit her a
third time.

The inhabitants of the stars saw these repeated in^^nces of Urania's
ingratitude, and began to be sha^en in their obedience: Belus, said they, has
no such aversion to vice as we imagined, since he does not ^inish it; since
rebellion is not followed by misery why are we subject to laws? It is true
Urania is no longer what she was, but she is still a Goddess and ^till happy;
provided we enjoy pleasure it is no matter upon what terms; independence and
liberty heighten the relish of the most vulgar enjoyments. An universal revolt
was breeding through all the celestial regions, the designs of Belus were going
to be frustrated; he called up Adonis into that solitude above the heavens
where he lived with him before the formation of the stars, and said to him: I
repen^^^ me to have drawn the imprudent Urania from he (...) original flower,
you see her ingratitude and her ob^^nacy notwithstanding all your endeavors to
reclaim her; universal harmony is disturbed, the celestial monarchy is shaken,
and the heavenly spirits begin to despise my sovereign laws: should I pardon
the inhabitants of the earth, my clemency would encourage a new revolt, and the
sight of their impunity would have a bad influence on all the inhabitants of
the stars, who already begin to murmur and to suspect my goodness of
indifferency with regard to crimes: I cannot vindicate the honor of my laws,
nor confirm the immortals in their duty, without annihilating the unfaithful
Goddess and all her rebellious children. These terrible words rent the vault of
heaven, resounded even to the abyss, and frighted the kingdom of chaos and
eternal night. Belus at length lifted up his scepter to replunge the earth and
all its inhabitants into their original nothing; Adonis threw himself at his
father's feet, he withheld his avenging arm by these words: I love Urania
notwithstanding her unfaithfulness, I see her errors and follies with grief,
but her children are yours since they are mine; punish them, but do not
entirely destroy them; should they enjoy a happy immortality upon earth, they
would think no more of reascending to to heaven; curse their habitation, blast
its beauty, expose the guilty race to sickness and death, but let your
punishments be remedies; all the celestial and terrestrial Deities who know the
crimes of Urania will see also her misery, and be confirmed in their duty by
her punishment. He spoke, and suddenly the pillars of the earth were shaken,
the poles of the heaven changed their situation, the sun grew pale and retired
to a greater distance, the moon and the five planets altered their motions,
thunder, winds and rain mingled and confounded the elements, the herbs and
flowers faded, the trees dried up and withered, the earth refused its usual
bounty, the fruitfulness of nature degenerated into a horrible barreness.

Venus struck with terror fell into a long swoon, and when she recovered out of
it, beheld nothing but desolation all around her; she found herself in a
frightful desert, upon the banks of the river Thammuz, whose plaintive murmurs
seemed to proclaim Mania's crime: her misfortunes did not change her heart, she
sought to compensate her real miseries by creating to herself imaginary
pleasures; she caused ^^^ples to be erected every where to her honor, she
invented impure sacrifices and a profane worship; her stars were quickly
besmeared with the blood of ^^mless animals; instead of odoriferous herbs and
exquisite fruits, she fed upon the flesh of the victims, he sought for all
sorts of meats which might excite and nourish her sensuality, she gave herself
up to the (...) instinct of pleasure, her blood grew thick, and slowed no
longer in her veins with the same freedom and amenity, the subtle vehicle of
the soul was (...) round with a terrestrial and gross body; Venus could no
longer fly in the air, she lost her lightness and transparency and became
mortal; her children underwent the same fate, she saw many of them expire
before her eyes by intemperance and voluptuousness; others hoping to shun the
decrees of fate heaped mountains upon mountains, and endeavored to scale
heaven; but being struck down and crushed by thunderbolts, they dug themselves
an abyss in the bosom of chaos, where Pluto, their chief, erected his empire,
and Venus was there adored under the name of Proserpine.

The Goddess became frantic, she ran about the mountains and vall^ys, bewailed
her children and worshippers, and blasphemed against Belus. Adonis heard her,
he left the celestial regions and came down upon earth; she perceived him at a
distance, and would have thrown herself into the water to hide herself from his
presence, but he stopped her and sat down by her; she held down her head with
shame and confusion and was afraid to look upon film; finding at last that he
made her no reproach she raised her eyes from the ground, but durst not yet fix
them upon his face; she recovered heart by degrees, she observed him nearly,
she beheld him pale, meagre and disfigured; he had no longer any remains of his
former beauty, he was covered with wounds and bruises; he continued a long time
silent, and she durst not speak; at last he said to her, Ah Venus, inconstant
Venus! you bewail your own miseries, but you are insensible to mine; to what a
condition have you reduced me? JUDGE OF YOUR GUILT BY MY SUFFERINGS: the God
Belus was going to destroy you and all your race if I had not softened him; I
came down myself upon earth to make reparation for your offenses against the
immutable laws of the empyreum, and make war with all the monsters which your
crimes have brought forth. Mythras, Osiris, Adonis, Apollo and Hercules are the
different names of the middle God. See disc.
I have killed the serpent Python, the Nemean lion, the hydra of Lerna which
sprang from your head when you became false, the Centaurs that devoured men,
the Cyclops who forged the thunderbolts, the wild boar of Erymanthus who
wounded me with his murderous tusk, the Symphalian birds that spoiled the
fruits of the earth, and the dragon which had seized the garden of Hesperia; I
have driven them all down into hell, and am going to pursue them thither that I
may complete my conquest: Adonis as he uttered these words fell into a mortal
agony, a stream of blood gushed forth from his heart and dyed the waters of the
river Thammuz. All the children of Venus assembled about him, he opened his
eyes from time to time, and repeated these words with a sigh, JUDGE OF YOUR
GUILT BY MY SUFFERINGS: he continued thus many hours, and at last expired
through an excess of pain. His soul descended into hell to deliver Theseus,
Pirithous, all the heroes vanquished by Pluto, and all the manes that suffered
in those gloomy habitations.

Venus bewailed her lover for nine days and nine nights? she continued
disconsolate near the dead body, and could not tear herself away from it. Being
at length exhausted with grief she fell into a profound sleep, nor did she
awake till her ears were struck by a heavenly voice; she looked up and beheld
Adonis in the air surrounded by all the heroes, and all the shades which he had
brought back from the dark abode. He had resumed his first form and his
pristine beauty; he darted upon her a heavenly ray to restore her strength and
calm her spirit, and then said to her: I have followed you, my dear Urania, I
have followed you in all your wanderings; I descended into the moon, upon
earth, and even into hell to deliver you and your disloyal children; I have
suffered all that a God can suffer in seeing your falsehood and inconstancy; but
you are now no longer insensible to my love, and I don't repent of my
sufferings: I leave you, but my wisdom shall never forsake you if you continue
faithful to me: farewell, dear Urania, you can see me no more till you be
transformed into my image, the Gods are only enamoured with their own beauty:
you must suffer a thousand miseries before this metamorphoses, nor can you
reascend to heaven but by the same way by which you fell from it; you must
first be stripped of your terrestrial body by sufferings, diseases, and death;
you shall then rise to the regions of the moon where you will undergo a See
disc.
second death by the destruction of your aerial body; your pure spirit, free
and disengaged from every thing that could stop it, will fly away to the stars,
where you will resume your former beauty, but you must at length lose even that
before you are transformed into my image. When you have undergone these three
metamorphoses, expiated your guilt by the purifying pains of each new
transformation, practiced upon earth, in the moon and in the stars, all the
human, heroic and divine virtues, you shall ascend with me into the sublime
place above the heavens, where you shall see the God Belus, and the Goddess my
mother; virtue, truth and justice, not as they are here below, but as they
exist in him who is Being itself. Fear nothing, I will be present with you in
all these states, I will help you to support your sufferings if you never cease
to invoke me: those of your children who shall imitate your example shall
reascend with you to the fields of Hecate, the rest shall descend to the gloom
kingdom of Pluto, and be there tormented for their crimes. I have chained up
the fierce Cerberus, henceforward he shall be only the vile instrument of my
justice. I have established judges in hell, who will inflict punishments only
to exterminate vice; they will not annihilate the essence of the soul but
restore it to a true existence by purging it of all irregular passions. When
your children have been Ergo exercentur poenis, veterumque malorum
Supplicia expendunt: aliae panduntur inanes,
Suspensae ad ventos; aliis sub gurgite vasto
Infectum (...) scelus, aut exurgitur igni.
Donec longa dies perfecto temporis orb
Concretam exemit labom, purumque reliquit
Aetherium sensum, et aurai simplicis ignem.
Has omnes ubi mill rotam volvere per annos.
Lethaeum ad stuvium Deus evocat egmine magno
Scilicet immemores supera at convexa revisant.
Aen. 1. 6. ver. 740.
plunged nine times in the purifying waves of the burning Acheron, the chilling
Styx, the black Cocytus and the foaming Phlegeton, they shall at length drink
the waters of the river Lethe, which shall make them forget all their past
miseries and crimes. When there shall be longer any mortal or immortal, in
hell, upon earth, or in the planets that is not purified and prepared to behold
my father, I will then return to banish all evils out of the universe, abolish
hell, and reestablish harmony throughout all the immensity of space; in the
mean time assem^le those of your children who are willing to follow you,
institute festivals to my honor, and let them be annually celebrated with pomp
to perpetuate the memory of your faithfulness and of my love.

Cyrus was overjoyed to see that all nations were agreed in the doctrine of the
three states of the world, the three forms of the Divinity, and a middle God,
who by his conflicts and great sufferings was to expiate and exterminate moral
evil, and restore innocence and peace to the universe.

While he was yet at Tire couriers came from Persia to inform him that Mandana
was dying: this news obliged him to suspend his journey to Babylon, and to
leave Phoenicia in haste: at parting he embraced the king of Tire: O Ecnibal;
said he, I envy neither your riches nor your magnificence; to be perfectly
happy, I desire only such a friend as Amenophis. Cyrus and Araspes crossed
Arabia Deserta, and a part of Chaldea; they passed the Tygris near the place
where it joins the Euphrates, and entering Susiana, arrived in a few days at
the capital of Persia. Cyrus hastened to see his mother; he found her dying,
and gave himself up to grief, which he expressed by the most bitter complaints.
The Queen, being tenderly affected with the sight of her son, endeavored to
moderate his affliction by these words: Comfort yourself, my son; souls never
die; they are only condemned for a time to animate mortal bodies, that they may
expiate the faults they have committed in a former state; the time of my
expiation is at an end; I am going to reascend to the sphere of fire; there I
shall see Perseus, Arbaces, Dejoces, Phraortes, and all the heroes from whom
you are descended; I will tell them that you resolve to imitate them: there I
shall see Cassandana, she loves you still, death changes not the sentiments of
virtuous souls: we shall be always with you though invisible, we will descend
in a cloud and be your protecting genii; we will accompany you in the midst of
dangers; we will engage the Virtues to attend you; we will preserve you from
all the errors and vices which corrupt the hearts of Princes: one day your
dominion shall be extended, and the oracles accomplished; O my son; my dear
son, remember that you ought to have no other view in conquering nations, than
to establish among them the empire of virtue and reason. As she uttered these
last words, she turned pale, a cold sweat spread itself over all her limbs,
death closed her eyes, and her soul flew away to the empyreum: she was long
lamented by all Persia; and Cambyses erected a stately monument to her memory.
Cyrus's grief wore off only by degrees, and as necessity obliged him to apply
himself to affairs of state.

Cambyses was a religious and pacific Prince; he had never been out of Persia,
the manners of which were innocent and pure, but austere and rugged; he knew
how to choose ministers capable of supplying what was defective in his own
talents: but he sometimes yielded himself up too blindly to their conduct, from
a diffidence of his own understanding: he prudently resolved that Cyrus should
himself enter into the administration of affairs; and having sent for him one
day, said to him: Your travels, my son, have improved your knowledge, and you
ought to employ it for the good of your country; you are destined not only to
govern this kingdom, but also, one day, to give laws to all Asia; you should
learn betimes the art of reigning, a study to which Princes seldom apply
themselves; they ascend the throne before they know the duties of a King: I
entrust you with my authority, and will have you exercise it under my
inspection; the talents of Soranes will not be useless to you, he is the son of
an able minister, who served under me many years with fidelity; he is young,
but indefatigable, knowing and qualified for all sorts of employments.

Under the government of Cambyses this minister had found it necessary to
appear virtuous, nay, he thought himself really so, but his virtue had never
been put to the trial: Soranes did not himself know the excess to which his
boundless ambition could carry him. When Cyrus applied himself to learn the
state and condition of Persia, her military strength, and her interests both
foreign and domestic, Soranes quickly saw with concern that he was going to
lose much of his authority, under a Prince who had all the talents necessary
for governing by himself; he endeavored to captivate the mind of Cyrus, and
studied him a long time to discover his weaknesses. The young Prince was not
insensible to praise, but he loved to deserve it; he had a taste for pleasure,
but he was not a slave to it; he did not dislike magnificence, but he could
refuse himself every thing rather than oppress his people: thus he was
inaccessible to flattery, and proof against voluptuousness and pomp. Soranes
perceived that there was no means to preserve his credit with Cyrus, but by
making himself necessary to him by his capacity: he displayed all his talents
both in public and private councils; he showed that he possessed the secrets of
the wisest policy, and at the same time could enter into that sort of detail in
business, the knowledge of which is one of the chief qualifications of a
minister; he prepared and digested matters with so much order and clearness
that he left his master little to do. Any other Prince would have been charmed
to see himself excused from all application to business: but Cyrus resolved to
see every thing with his own eyes; he had a confidence in his father's
ministers, but he would not blindly yield himself up to their counsels. When
Soranes perceived that the ^^^nce would himself see every thing to the bottom,
he studied to throw obscurity over the most important affairs, that he might
make himself yet more necessary. Cyrus observed the crafty conduct of this able
and jealous minister, and managed him with so much delicacy that he drew from
him (...) degrees what he endeavored so artfully to conceal. When the Prince
thought himself sufficiently instructed, he let Soranes see that he would
himself be his father's first minister; and in this manner moderated the
authority of that favorite without giving him any just cause of complaint. The
ambitious Soranes was nevertheless offended at the Prince's conduct, and could
not, without mortal uneasiness, see the fall of his credit and that he was no
longer necessary: this was the first source of his discontent, which might have
proved fatal to Cyrus, if virtue and prudence had not preserved him from its
effects.

Persia had for some ages been in subjection to Media, but upon the marriage of
Cambyses with Mandana, it had been stipulated that the King of Persia should
for the future pay only a small annual tribute as a mark of homage. From that
time the Medes and Persians had lived in perfect amity till the jealousy of
Cyaxares kindled the fire of discord. The Median Prince was incessantly calling
to mind with vexation the oracles which were spread abroad concerning the
future conquests of young Cyrus; he considered him as the destroyer of his
power, and imagined already that he saw him entering Ecbatan to dethrone him;
he was every moment soliciting Astyages to prevent those fatal predictions
weaken the strength of ^ersia, and reduce it to its former dependence. Mandana,
while she lived, had so dexterously managed her father as to hinder an open
rupture between him and Cambyses: but as soon as she was dead, Cyaxares renewed
his solicitations with the Median Emperor.

Cambyses was informed of Cyaxares's designs and sent Hystaspes to the court of
Ecbatan, to represent to Astyages the danger of mutually weakening each other's
power, while the Assyrians, their common enemy, were forming schemes to extend
their domination over all the East. Hystaspes, by his address, put a stop to
the execution of Cyaxares's projects and gained Cambyses time to make his
preparations in case of a rupture. The Prince of Media seeing that the wise
counsels of Hystaspes were favorably listened to by his father, and that there
was no means suddenly to kindle a war, attempted by other ways to weaken the
power of Persia: being informed of Soranes's discontent, he endeavored to gain
him by an offer of the first dignities in the empire. Soranes at first was
shocked at the very thought; but being afterward deceived by ^^s resentment,
he knew not himself the secret motives upon which he acted; his heart was not
yet become insensible to virtue, but his lively imagination transformed
objects, and represented them to him in the colors necessary to flatter his
ambition; at length he got the better of all remorse, by reasoning with
himself, that Cyaxares would one day be his lawful Emperor, and that Cambyses
was but a tributary master. There is nothing which we cannot persuade ourselves
to think when blinded and drawn away by strong passions. Thus he entered by
degrees into a close correspondence with Cyaxares, and secretly employed all
means to render Cyrus's administration odious to the Persians.

Cyrus had raised Araspes to the first dignities in the army, upon account of
his capacity and talent for war; but he would not bring him into the senate,
because it was a law in Persia that no stranger should sit in the supreme
council. The perfidious Soranes nevertheless pressed the young Prince to
infringe their law, knowing that it would be a sure means to excite the
jealousy of the Satrapes, and to stir them up against Cyrus. You have need,
said he to him, of a man like Araspes in your council: I know that good policy
and our rules forbid the intrusting of strangers with the command of an army
and the secrets of state at the same time; but a Prince may dispense with the
laws when he can fulfill the intention of them by more sure and easy ways, and
be ought never to be the slave of rules and customs: men ordinarily act either
from ambition or interest; load Araspes with dignities and riches; by that
means you will make Persia his country: and will have no reason to doubt his
sidelity. Cyrus was not aware of Soranes's secret design, but he loved justice
too well to depart from it. I am persuaded, answered the Prince, of the
sidelity and capacity of Araspes; I love him sincerely, but though my
friendship were capable of making me break the laws in his favor, he is too
much attached to me even to accept a dignity, which might excite the jealousy
of the Persians and give them cause to think that I was influenced by
particular inclination and friendship in affairs of state.

Soranes, having in vain attempted to engage Cyrus to take this false step,
endeavored to surprise him another way, and to create a misunderstanding
between him and his father: he artfully made him observe the King's
imperfection, his want of capacity and genius, and the necessity of pursuing
other maxims than his. The mild and peaceable government of Cambyses, said he
to the Prince, is incompatible with noble views; if you content yourself like
him with a pacific reign, how will you become a conqueror? Cyrus made no other
use of these insinuations than to avoid the rocks upon which Cambyses had
split; he did not lessen his deference and submission to his father whom he
tenderly loved; he respected him even in his failings, which he endeavored to
conceal: he did nothing without his orders, but consulted him in such a manner,
as at the same time to give him a just notion of things: he frequently
discoursed with him in private, that the King might be able to decide in
public. Cambyses had judgment enough to distinguish and made himself master of
the excellent advices of his son, who employed the superiority of his genius
only to make his father's commands respected and never displayed his talents
but to strengthen the king's authority: so admirable a behavior greatly
increased Cambyses's affection and esteem for him, and his confidence in him;
the prince never abused it, but continued the same conduct, in which he thought
he did nothing more than his duty.

Soranes, enraged to see all his schemes frustrated, endeavored secretly to
raise a distrust in the minds of the Satrapes, as if the Prince would incroach
upon their rights and ruin their authority; and in order to augment their
jealousy, he endeavored to inspire Cyrus with despotic principles. You are
destined by the Gods, said he, to stretch your empire one day over all the
East: in order to a happy execution of this design, you should accustom the
Persians to a blind obedience; captivate the Satrapes by dignities and
pleasures; put them under a necessity of frequenting your court if they would
partake of your favors; get the sovereign authority by degrees into your own
hands; abridge the rights of the senate, leave it only the privilege of giving
you counsel: a Prince should not abuse his power, but he ought never to share
it with his subjects; monarchy is the most perfect kind of government; the true
strength of a state, secrecy in councils and expedition in enterprises, depend
upon the sovereign power's being lodged in a single person; a petty republic
may subsist under the government of many heads, but great empires can be formed
only by the absolute authority of one; other principles are the chimerical
ideas of weak minds, who are conscious of their want of capacity to execute
great designs.

The Prince was shocked at this discourse, but concealed his indignation out of
prudence, and dexterously breaking off the conversation, left Soranes in a
persuasion that he relished his maxims. As soon as Cyrus was alone, he made
deep reflections on all that had passed; he called to mind the conduct of
Amasis, and began to suspect Soranes's fidelity; he had not indeed any certain
proofs of his perfidiousness; but a man who had the boldness to suggest to him
such counsels seemed very dangerous at least, though he should not be a
traitor. The young Prince by degrees excluded this minister from the secret of
affairs, and sought for pretenses to remove him from about his person, yet
without doing any thing to affront him openly. Soranes quickly perceived this
change, and carried his resentment to the last extremities; he persuaded
himself that Araspes was going to be put in his place, that Cyrus intended to
make himself absolute master in Persia, and that this was the Prince's secret
view in disciplining his troops with so much exactness. The jealousy and
ambition of Soranes blinded him to such a degree, that he imagined he did his
duty in practicing the blackest treasons. He informed Cyaxares of all that
passed in Persia; the augmentation of her forces, the preparations which were
making for war, and Cyrus's design of extending his empire over all the East,
under pretext of accomplishing certain pretended oracles by which he imposed
upon; the people. Cyaxares made advantage of these advices to alarm Astyages,
and to insinuate uneasiness and distrust into his mind; Hystaspes was ordered
away from the court of Ecbatan, and the Emperor threatened Cambyses with a
bloody war, if he did not consent to pay the ancient tribute, and return to the
same dependence from which Persia had been set free, upon his marriage with
Mandana: Cambyses's refusal was the signal of the war, and preparations were
made on both sides Xenophon has suppressed this war, but Herodotus and other
historians mention it. See M. Freret's letter.
.

In the mean while Soranes endeavored to corrupt the chief officers of the army
and weaken their courage, by insinuating that Astyages was their lawful
Emperor, that the ambitious designs of Cyrus would ruin their country, and that
they could never make head against the Median troops, who would overwhelm them
with numbers. He continued likewise to increase the distrust of the senators,
by artfully spreading a rumor among them, that Cyrus undertook this war
against his grandfather, only to weaken their authority, and to usury an
absolute power. He concealed all his plots with such art, that it was almost
impossible to discover them; every thing he said was with so much caution, that
there was no seeing into his secret intentions; nay, there were certain moments
in which he did not see them himself, but thought he was sincere and zealous
for the public good; his first remorses returned from time to time, but he
stifled them by persuading himself that the ill designs he imputed to the
Prince were real. Cyrus was quickly informed of the murmurs of the people; the
army was ready to revolt, it was doubtful whether the senate would give the
necessary subsidies, and the Emperor of the Medes was upon the point of
entering Persia at the head of sixty thousand men: the Prince was in the
greatest grief to see the cruel extremities to which his father was reduced,
and the necessity of taking arms against his grandfather.

Cambyses observing the Prince's struggles between nature and duty said to him,
You know, my son, all that I have done to stifle the first seeds of our
differences; I have labored to no purpose; the war is inevitable; our country
ought to be preferred to our family; hitherto you have assisted me in business
by your prudence, you must now give proofs of your courage: would my age allow
me to appear at the head of our troops, yet my presence would be necessary here
to keep the people in awe; go, my son, go and fight for your country; show
yourself the defender of its liberty, as well as the preserver of its laws;
second the designs of heaven, render yourself worthy to accomplish its oracles;
begin by delivering Persia before you think of extending your conquests; let
the nations see the effects of your courage, and admire your moderation in the
midst of your triumphs, that they may not hereafter fear your victories. Cyrus
encouraged by the magnanimous sentiments of Cambyses, and aided by the counsels
of Harpagus and Hystaspes, two generals of equal experience, formed an army of
thirty thousand men, composed of commanders with whose fidelity he was well
acquainted, and veteran troops of known bravery. As soon as all preparations
were made, they began by sacrifices and other religious rites. Cyrus after this
drew up his troops in a spacious plain near the capital, assembled the senate
and the satrapes, and with a sweet and majestic air thus harangued the officers
of his army.

War is unlawful when it is not necessary: that which we at present undertake
is not to satisfy ambition or the desire of domination, but to defend our
liberties: it is true our enemies understand military discipline, and they
surpass us in number; but they are softened by luxury and a long peace; your
souls are full of that ardor which makes men despise death when they are to
fight for liberty; your severe life has accustomed you to fatigue; nothing is
impossible to those whom no sufferings nor difficult enterprises can
dishearten: as for me, I will distinguish myself from you in nothing but in
leading the way through labors and dangers; all our prosperities and all our
misfortunes shall hereafter be common. He then turned to the senators, and with
a fierce and severe countenance said, Cambyses is not ignorant of the intrigues
at the court of Ecbatan, to sow jealousy and distrust in your minds; he knows
that you hesitate about giving him subsides, but having foreseen the war he has
taken his precautions, one battle will decide the fate of Persia, he does not
want your assistance: however, remember that the liberty of your country is at
present in question; is not this liberty more secure in the hands of my father
your lawful prince, than in those of the Emperor of the Medes, who holds all
the neighboring Kings in a tributary dependence? If Cambyses should be
vanquished, your privileges are lost for ever; if he proves victorious, they
will be preserved to you, unless you force the justice of a Prince, whom you
have incensed by your secret cabals, to deprive you of them. The Prince by this
discourse intimidated some, confirmed others in their duty, and united all in
one design of contributing to the preservation of their country. -- Soranes
appeared more zealous than any, and earnestly requested to have some command in
the army: but as Cyrus had not concealed from Cambyses his just suspicions of
that minister, the King did not suffer himself to be imposed upon by
appearances: under pretext of providing for the security of the capital, he
kept him near his person, but gave orders to watch his conduct: so that Soranes
was a prisoner without perceiving it.

Cyrus having learned that Astyages had marched his troops through the deserts
of Isatis in order to enter Persia, prevented him by a most surprising
diligence: he crossed over craggy mountains, the passes of which he secured,
and gained the plains of Passagarda by such routs as would have been
impracticable to any other than an army accustomed to fatigue, and conducted by
so active and vigilant a general. Cyrus seized the most advantageous posts, and
encamped near a ridge of mountains which defended him on one side, fortifying
himself on the other by a double entrenchment. Astyages quickly appeared and
encamped in the same plain near a lake, and the two armies continued in the
sight of each other for several days. Cyrus could not without great concern
look forward to the consequences of a war against his grandfather, and
therefore employed this time in sending to Astyages's camp a Satrape, named
Artabasus, who spoke to the Emperor in the following manner: Cyrus, your
grandson, had an abhorrence of the war which he has been forced to undertake
against you; he has neglected nothing to prevent it nor will refuse any means
to put an end to it; he it not deaf to the voice of nature, but he cannot
sacrifice the liberty of the Persians; he would willingly reconcile by an
honorable treaty, the love of his country with filial affection; he is in a
condition to make war, but at the same time is not ashamed to ask peace. The
Emperor, still irritated by Cyaxares, persisted in his first resolution, and
Artabasus returned without succeeding in his negotiation.

Cyrus seeing himself reduced to the necessity of hazarding a battle, and
knowing of what importance it is, in affairs of war, to deliberate with many,
to decide with few, and to execute with speed, assembled his principal officers
and heard all their opinions; he then took his resolution, which he
communicated only to Hystaspes and Harpagus. The day following he caused a
rumor to be spread in the army of the enemy, that he intended to retire, not
daring to engage with unequal forces. Before he left the camp he ordered the
usual sacrifices to be offered; he made libations of wine, and all the chief
officers did the same: he gave for the word, MYTHRAS THE CONDUCTOR AND SAVIOR,
and then mounting his horse commanded every man to his post. The soldiers'
cuirasses were composed of plates of iron of diverse colors, and like the
scales of fish; their casques were of brass, adorned with a great white
feather; over their shields, made of willow twigs interwoven, hung their
quivers; the darts were short, their bows long, their arrows made of canes, and
their scymitars hung upon their right thighs. The royal standard was a golden
eagle with its wings expanded; the Kings of Persia have ever since had the same.

Cyrus decamped by night, and advanced in the plains of Pasagarda; Astyages,
imagining that the Prince fled before him, made haste to come up with him by
sunrising; Cyrus on a sudden drew up his army in order of battle, and only
twelve deep, that the javelins and darts of the last rank might reach the
enemy, and that all the parts might support and assist each other without
confusion: he chose out of each battalion a select company, of which he formed
a trianguler Phalanx after the manner of the Greeks; he placed this body of
reserve behind his army, commanding it not to stir till he himself should give
express orders. The plain was covered with dust and sand, and the North Wind
blew hard. Cyrus by wheeling a little, posted his army so advantageously that
the rising dust was driven full in the faces of the Medes, and favored his
stratagem; Harpagus commanded the right wing, Hystaspes the left, Araspes the
center, and Cyrus was present every where. The army of the Medes was composed
of several square battalions thirty deep, all standing close to be the more
impenetrable; in the front were the chariots, with great scythes fastened to
the axle-trees.

Cyrus ordered Harpagus and Hystaspes to extend the two wings by degrees, in
order to enclose the Medes. While he was speaking he heard a clap of thunder:
We follow thee, great Oromazes, cried he and in the same instant began the hymn
of battle, to which all the troops answered with loud shouts, invoking the God
Mythras. Cyrus's army presented its front in a strait line to deceive Astyages;
but the center marching slower, and the wings faster, (...) whole was soon
formed into a crescent. The Medes broke through the first ranks of the center,
and advanced to the last; they began already to cry, Victory! but then Cyrus
advanced with his body of reserve, while Harpagus and Hystaspes surrouned the
enemy on all sides, and the battle was renewed. The triangular Phalanx of the
Persians pierced the battalions of the Medes, and turned aside their chariots:
Cyrus, mounted on a foaming steed, flew from rank to rank; the fire of his eyes
animated the soldiers, and the serenity of his countenance banished all fear;
in the heat of battle he was active, calm and present to himself; he spoke to
some, encouraged others by signs, and kept every one in his post. The Modes
being surrounded on all sides were attacked in front, in rear and in flank; the
Persians closed in upon them and cut them in pieces; nothing was heard but the
clashing of arms and the groans of the dying; streams of blood covered the
plain; despair, rage and cruelty spread slaughter and death every where: Cyrus
alone felt a generous pity; Astyages and Cyaxares being taken prisoners, he
gave orders to sound a retreat and put an end to the battle.

Cyaxares inflamed with rage and with all the passions that take hold of a
proud mind when fallen from its hopes, would not see Cyrus: he pretended to be
wounded, and sent to ask permission to return to Ecbatan, to which Cyrus
consented. Astyages was conducted with pomp to the capital of Persia, not like
a conquered Prince, but like a victorious one: being no longer importuned by
the evil counsels of his son, he made a peace, and Persia was declared a (...)
kingdom for ever; this was the first service that Cyrus did his country. The
success of this war, so contrary to the expectation of Soranes, opened his
eyes. Had the event been answerable to his desires, he would still have
continued in his perfidiousness; but finding that his projects were
disconcerted, and that it was impossible to conceal them any longer, he trunk
with horror to behold the dreadful condition into which he had brought himself,
the crimes he had committed, and the certain disgrace which would follow: not
able to endure this prospect, he fell into despair, killed himself, and left a
sad example to posterity of the excesses to which boundless ambition may carry
the greatest geniuses, even when their hearts are not entirely corrupted. After
his death Cyrus was informed of all the particulars of his treachery. The
Prince, without applauding himself for having early seen into the character of
this minister, beheld with concern, and lamented the unhappy condition of man,
who often loses all the fruits of his talents, and sometimes precipitates
himself into the greatest crimes, by giving way to an unruly imagination and a
blind passion.

As soon as the peace was concluded Astyages returned into his own dominions.
After his departure Cyrus assembled the senators, satrapes and all the heads of
the people, and said to them in the name of the King: My father's arms have set
Persia free from all foreign dependence; he might now, with a victorious army
at his devotion, destroy your privileges, and govern with absolute authority;
but he abhors such maxims: it is only under the empire of Arimanius that force
alone presides; Princes are the images of the great Oromazes, and ought to
imitate his conduct; his sovereign reason is the rule of his will; how wise and
just soever Princes may be, they are still but men, and consequently have
prejudices and passions; may were they exempt from these they cannot see and
hear every thing; they have need of faithful counselors to inform and assist
them. It Is thus that Cambyses resolves to govern; he will reserve no more power
than is necessary to do good, and chooses to have such restraints as may hinder
him from doing ill: senators, banish your fears; lay aside your distrusts;
recognize your King: he preserves all your rights to you: assist him in making
the Persians happy; he desires to reign over free children, and not over
slaves. At these words joy was diffused through the whole assembly. Some cried
out, Is not this the God Mythras himself come down from the empyreum to renew
the reign of Oromazes? Others dissolved in tears, were unable to speak: the old
men looked on him as their son, the young men called him father; all Persia
seemed but one family. It was thus that Cyrus avoided all the snares of
Soranes, triumphed over the plots of Cyaxares, and restored liberty to the
Persians: he never had recourse to cowardly artifice, or mean dissimulation
unworthy of great souls.

Astyages died soon after his return to Ecbatan, and left the empire to
Cyaxares. Cambyses foreseeing that the turbulet and jealous spirit of that
Prince would soon excite new disturbances, resolved to seek an alliance with
the Assyrians. The Emperor of Media and the King of Babylon had been for an
hundred years past the two rival powers of the East; they were continually
endeavoring to weaken each other in order to become masters of Asia. Cambyses,
who knew his son's abilities, proposed to him that he should go in person to
the court of Nabuchodonosor, to treat with Amytis, the wife of that Prince and
sister of Mandana; she governed the kingdom during the King's madness. Cyrus
had been hindered from going thither some years before by his mother's
sickness: he was exceedingly pleased with a journey to Babylon, not only that
he might serve his country, but that he might likewise have an opportunity of
conversing with the Hebrews, whose oracles (as he had learned from Zoroaster)
contained predictions of his future greatness; and he had no less desire to see
the miserable condition of King Nabuchodonosor, the report of which was spread
over all the East. Having filled the council and senate with men of approved
loyalty and capacity, he left Persia, crossed Sufiana, and soon arrived at
Babylon.

EIGHTH BOOK.
BABYLON, the seat of the Assyrian monarch, had been founded by Semiramis, but
Nabuchodonosor had given it its principal beauties. This conqueror after long
and difficult wars, finding himself in perfect tranquillity; applied his
thoughts to make his capital one of the wonders of the world. It was situated
in a vast plain, watered by the Euphrates; the canals cut from this river made
the fruitfulness of the soil so great, that it yielded the King as much as the
half of his empire See Herod. lib. I. Diod. Sic. lib. 2. Q. Curt. lib. 5. and
Prideaux.
. The walls of the city were built of large brick, cemented together with
bitumen, or a slime arising out of the earth, which in time became harder than
marble; they were fifty cubits thick, two hundred high, and formed a perfect
square twenty leagues in compass; an hundred and fifty towers raised at certain
distances upon these inaccessible walls, commanded all the country round about;
an hundred gates of brass regularly disposed opened to an innumerable multitude
of people of all nations; fifty great streets traversed the city from side to
side, and by crossing each other formed above six hundred large divisions, in
which were stately palaces, delightful gardens and magnificent squares. The
Euphrates flowed through the middle of Babylon, and over that river was a
bridge built with surprising art; at its two extremities were two palaces, the
old one to the East, the new one to the West; near the old palace was the
temple of Belus, from the center of this building rose a pyramid six hundred
foot high, and composed of eight towers one above another; from the top of this
pyramid use Babylonians observed the motions of the stars, which was their
favorite study, and by which they made themselves famous in other nations. At
the other end of the bridge stood the new palace, which was eight miles in
circuit; its famous hanging gardens, which were so many large terrasses one
above another, rose like an amphitheatre to the height of the city walls; the
whole mass was supported by diverse arches built upon other arches, all covered
with broad stones strongly cemented, and over them was first a layer of reed
mixed with bitumen, then two rows of bricks, and over these thick sheets of
lead, which made the whole impenetrable to rain or any other moisture; the
mould which covered all was of that depth as to have room enough for the
greatest trees to take root in it: in these gardens were long walks, which ran
as far as the eye could reach; bowers, green plots and flowers of all kinds;
canals, balons and aqueducts to water and adorn this place of delights; a most
surprising collection of all the beauties of nature and art.

The author, or rather the creator of so many prodigies, equal to Hercules in
bravery, and superior to the greatest men by his genius, was, after incredible
successes, fallen into a kind of madness; he imagined himself transformed into
a beast, and had all the fierceness of one. As soon as Cyrus was arrived at
Babylon, he went to see Queen Amytis: this Princess had for near seven years
been plunged into a deep sadness; but she was beginning to moderate her grief,
because the Hebrews, who were then captives in the city had promised her that
the King should be cured in a few days. The Queen was waiting that happy moment
with great impatience; the wonders she had seen performed by Daniel made her
confide in what he said. Cyrus from a respectful consideration of the
affliction of Amytis, avoided speaking to her concerning the princ^^^^ design
of his journey; he was sensible that it was not a favorable conjuncture to
treat of political a (...) and waited for the King's cure, though with little
hopes: in the mean while he endeavored to satisfy his curiosity touching the
religion and manners of the Israelites. Daniel was not then at Babylon, but was
gone to visit and and console the Hebrews dispersed throughout Assyria. Amytis
made Cyrus acquainted with an illustrious Hebrew named Eleazar: the Prince
being informed that the people of God did not look upon the King's frenzy as a
natural distemper, but as a punishment from heaven, desired the Hebrew
philosopher to tell him the reason of it.

Nabuchodonosor, said the Hebrew sage, being led away by impious men who were
about him, came at length to such an excess of irreligion, that he blasphemed
against THE MOST HIGH; and to crown his impiety, he erected a golden statue of
an enormous size in the plain of Dura, and commanded that it should be adored
by all the nations he had subdued. He was admonished by divine dreams, that he
should be punished for his idolatry and pride, in this life: a Hebrew named
Daniel, a man famous for science, virtue and his knowledge of futurity,
explained to him those dreams, and denounced God's judgments which were ready
to fall upon him. The words of the prophet made at first some impression upon
the King's mind; but being surrounded by profane men who despised the heavenly
powers, he neglected the divine admonition, and gave himself up anew to his
impiety. At the end of the year, while he was walking in his gardens, admiring
the beauty of his own works, the splendour of his glory, and the greatness of
his empire, he exalted himself above humanity, and became an idolater of his
own proud imaginations. He heard a voice from heaven, saying, O King
Nabuchodonosor, to thee it is spoken, The kingdom is departed from thee, and
they shall drive (...) from men, and thou shall ea^ grass as the beas^^ of the
field till seven years are passed, and until (...) know that THE MOST HIGH
rules over all the kingdoms of the universe, and gives them to whomsoever he
will. In the same hour was the thing fulfilled and his reason was taken from
him; he was seized with a frenzy and with fits of raging madness; in vain they
attempted to hold him by chains; he broke all his irons and ran away into the
mountains and plains, roaring like a lion; no one can approach him without
running the hazard of being torn in pieces. He has no repose or intervals of
reason except one day in the week, which is the Sabbath See Megast. and Abyden.
quoted by Josephus. Ant. lib. 10. cap. 11. and by Eusebius. Pra^p. Evang. lib. 9.
cap. 1.
; he then holds discourses which should strike the impious with terror. It is
now almost seven years that he has been in this condition, and we are expecting
his total recovery in a few days, according to the divine prediction.

Here Cyrus sighed, and could not forbear saying, In all the countries through
which I pass, I see nothing but sad examples of the weakness and misfortunes of
princes: in Egypt, Apries suffers himself to be made a sacrifice by his blind
friendship for a persidious favorite; at Sparta two young Kings were going to
ruin the state, if not prevented by the wisdom of Chilo; the deplorable fate of
Periander and his whole family at Corinth, will be a dreadful example to
posterity of the miseries which tyrants and usurpers draw upon themselves; at
Athens Pisistratus is twice dethroned; Polycrates King of Samos suffers himself
to be imposed upon so far as to persecute innocence; in Crete the successors of
Minos have destroyed the most perfect of all governments; here Nabuchodonosor
draws upon himself the wrath of Heaven by his impiety: great Oromazes! was it
only in your anger then that you gave Kings to mortals? Are grandeur and virtue
incompatible?

The morning of the Sabbath, Cyrus accompanied Eleazar, went to the place which
the King of Babylon frequented; they beheld the unfortunate Prince come out of
the Euphrates, and lie down under some willows which were upon the banks of the
river. They approached him in silence; he was stretched upon the grass with his
eyes turned toward heaven; from time to time he sent forth deep sighs,
accompanied with bitter tears; in the midst of his misfortunes there was still
upon his face an air of greatness which showed that THE MOST HIGH in punishing
had not entirely forsaken him; they forbore out of respect to speak to him, or
to interrupt the profound grief in which he seemed to be plunged. Cyrus deeply
struck with the sad situation of this great Prince stood immovable, and on his
countenance appeared all the tokens of a soul seized with terror and
compassion: the King of Babylon observed it, and without knowing who he was
said to him: Heaven suffers me to have intervals of reason, to make me sensible
that I do not possess it as a property; that it comes from another; that a
superior Being takes it from me and restores it when he pleases; and that he
who gives it me is a sovereign intelligence, who holds all nature in his hand,
and can dispose it in order or overturn it according to his pleasure.
Heretofore being blinded by pride and corrupted by prosperity. I said within
myself, and to all the false friends who were about me: We are born as if it
were by chance, and after death we shall be as if we had never been; the soul
is a spark of fire which goes out when the body is reduced to ashes; come, let
us enjoy the present good, let us make haste to exhaust all pleasures; let us
drink the most delicious wines, and perfume ourselves with odoriferous oils;
let us crown ourselves with roses before they wither; let strength be our only
law, and pleasure the rule of our duty; let us make the just fall into our
snares, because he dishonors us by his virtue; let us examine him with affronts
and torments, that we may see whither he be sincere. Thus it was that I
blasphemed against Heaven, and this is the source of my miseries; alas! I have
but too much deserved them. Scarce had he pronounced these words, when he
started up, ran away, and hid himself in the neighboring forest.

The words of Nabuchodonosor augmented the young Prince's respect for the
Deity, and redoubled his desire of being fully instructed in the religion of
the Hebrews; he frequently saw Eleazer, and by degrees contracted a close
friendship with him. The Eternal being watchful over Cyrus, whom he had chosen
to bring about the deliverance of his people, thought fit to prepare him by his
conversation with the Hebrew Sage, to receive soon after the instructions of
the Phrophet Daniel. Ever since the captivity of the Israelites, the Hebrew
Doctors who were dispersed in the several nations, had appplied themselves to
the study of the profane sciences, and endeavored to reconcile religion with
philosophy: in order thereto they embraced or forsook the literal sense of the
sacred books, according as it is suited with their motions, or was repugnant to
them; they taught that the Hebrew traditions were often folded up in
allegories, according to the Eastern custom, but they pretended to explain
them; and this was what gave rise afterward to that famous sect among the
Hebrews called the Allegorists. Eleazar was of the number of those
Philosophers, and was with reason esteemed one of the greatest geniuses of his
age; he was versed in all the sciences of the Chaldeans and Egyptians, and had
held several disputes with the Eastern Magi, to prove that the religion of the
Hebrews was not only the most ancient, but the most conformable to reason.
Cyrus having diverse times discoursed with Eleazar upon all he had learned in
Persia, Egypt and Greece, concerning the great revolutions which had happened
in the universe, desired him one day to explain to him the doctrine of the
Hebrew Philosophers, concerning the three states of the world.

See disc.
We adore, answered Eleazar, but one only God, infinite, eternal, immense: he
has defined himself, HE WHO IS, to denote, that he exists of himself, and that
all other beings exist only by him: being rich by the riches of his own nature,
and happy by his own supreme felicity, he had no need to produce other
substances to augment his glory; nevertheless, by a noble and free effort of
his beneficent will, he has created diverse orders of intelligences to make them
happy. Man first forms the plan of his work before he executes it; but THE
ETERNAL conceives, produces and disposes every thing in order, by the same act,
without labor or succession: he thinks, and immediately all the possible ways
of representing himself outwardly appear before him; a world of ideas presents
itself to the divine intellect. He wills, and instantly real beings resembling
those ideas exist in his immensity; the whole universe and the vast expanse of
nature, distinct from the divine Essence; is produced. The Creator has
represented himself two ways, by simple pictures, and by living images. Hence
there are two sorts of creatures essentially different, material nature and
intelligent nature; the one represents only some perfections of its original,
the other knows and enjoys it; there are an infinite number of spheres full of
such intelligent beings. Sometimes these spirits plunge themselves into the
unfathomable depths of the divine nature to adors its beauties, which are ever
new; at other times they admire the perfections of the Creator in his works;
this is their twofold happiness: they cannot incessantly contemplate the
splendour of the divine Essence; their week and finite nature requires that they
should sometimes vail their eyes; this is the reason why the material world was
created, the refreshment of the intellectual.

Two sorts of spirits lost this happiness by their disloyalty; the one called
Cherubim, were of a superior order, and are now infernal spirits; the other
called Ischim, were of a less perfect nature; these are the souls which
actually inhabit mortal bodies. The chief of the Cherubim approached nearer the
throne than the other spirits: he was crowned with the most excellent gifts of
THE MOST HIGH, but lost his wisdom by a vain complacency in himself: being
enamoured with his own beauty, he beheld and considered himself, and was
dazzled with the luster of his own light; he grew proud, rebelled, and drew
into his rebellion the greater part of the genii of his order. The Ischim
became too much attached to material objects, and in the enjoyment of created
pleasures, forgot the supreme beatitude of spirits; the first were too much
elated with pride, the second debased themselves by sensuality. Upon this there
happened a great revolution in the heavens; the sphere of the Cherubim became a
dark chaos, where those unhappy intelligences deplore, without consolation,
their lost felicity. The Ischim being less guilty, because they had finned
through weakness, were (...) severely punished: that they might forget their
^^rmer state, God suffered them to fall into a kind of ^^thargy or fatal
insensibility, from which they awake only to enter successively into mortal
bodies: the organic moulds of all human bodies were shut up in (...) of Adam,
and the order of generation was established; each soul awakens in such a body,
and in ^^ch time, place and circumstances as suit best with the decrees of
eternal Wisdom: the earth changed its form, it was no longer a garden of
delights, but a place of banishment and misery, where the continual war of the
elements subjected them to diseases and death. This is the hidden meaning of
the great Hebrew lawgiver, when he speaks of the terrestrial paradise, and of
the fall of our first parents. Adam does not represent one single man, but all
mankind. See disc.
Every nation has its allegories, and we have ours: those who do not comprehend
them, look upon our history of the forbidden fruit and of the speaking serpent,
as fables more absurd than the Mythology of the Persians, Egyptians and Greeks
concerning the fall of Arimanius, the rebellion of Typhon, and the golden
apples in the garden of Hesperides: all these allegories are founded upon the
same tradition more or less disguised. The weak and ignorant in every religion
stick to the letter which kills, and the impious scoff at it; but neither the
one nor the other understand the spirit which gives life.

Souls being once disunited from their origin, had no longer any fixed
principle of union; the order of generation, mutual wants and self-love became
here below the only bounds of transient society, and took the place of justice,
friendship and the love of order, which unite the heavenly spirits. Diverse
other changes happened in this mortal abode, suitable to the state of souls who
suffer, and deserve to suffer, and are to be cured by their sufferings. In the
end the great prophet, whom we call the MESSIAH, will come and restore order in
the universe: it is he who is the Head, and the Conductor of all intelligent
natures; he is the first born of all creatures; the Deity united himself to him
in an intimate manner from the beginning of time, and he has united himself to
a portion of matter which serves him for a tabernacle; from this luminous
center incessantly stream rays that enlighten all the regions of immensity;
this glorious body is the sun of the heavenly Jerusalem; the emanations of this
adorable SHECHINAH are the life and light of all bodies, as those of his
Divinity are the reason and happiness of all intelligences: it was this Messiah
who conversed with our fathers under a human form; it was he who appeared to
our lawgiver, upon the holy mount; it was he who spoke to the prophets under a
visible appearance; it is he who will at last come in triumph upon the clouds,
to restore the universe to its primitive splendour and felicity. How august a
thing is religion, how worthy of God, how sublime in its simplicity when the
vail which hides it from profane eyes is removed!

Cyrus transported with these sublime ideas would by no means interrupt the
philosopher; but seeing that he had done speaking he said: I find that your
Theology is perfectly conformable to the doctrine of the Persians, Egyptians
and Greeks, concerning the three states of the world. Zoroaster being versed in
the sciences of the Gymnosophists, spoke to me of the empire of Oromazes before
the rebellion of Arimanius, as of a state in which all spirits were happy and
perfect: in Egypt the religion of Hermes represents the reign of Ofiris, before
the monster Typhon broke through the mundane egg, as a state exempt from
miseries and passions: Orpheus has sung the golden age as a state of simplicity
and innocence. Each nation has formed an idea of this primitive world according
to its genius; the Magi, who are all astronomers, have placed it in the stars;
the Egyptians, who are all philosophers, have fancied it a republic of sages;
the Greeks, who delight in rural scenes, have described it as a country of
shepherds. I farther observe that the traditions of all nations foretell the
coming of a hero, who is to descend from heaven to bring back Astraea to the
earth: the Persians call him Mythras, the Egyptians Orus, the Tyrians Adonis,
the Greeks Apollo, Hercules, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter the Conductor and Savior.
It is true they differ in their description, but all agree in the same truths;
they are all sensible that man is not now what he was, and believe that he will
one day assume a more perfect form; God cannot suffer an eternal blemish in his
work; evil had a beginning and it will have an end; then will be the triumph of
light over darkness; that is the time fixed by destiny for the total
destruction of Typhon, Arimanius and Pluto, the prescribed period in all
religions for re-establishing the reign of Oromazes, Ofiris, Belus and Saturn.
Nevertheless there arises one great difficulty, which no philosopher has yet
been able to solve me. I do not conceive how evil could happen under the
government of a God who is good, wise and powerful; if he be wise, he might
have foreseen it; and if he be good, he would have prevented it: show me which
way to justify the eternal Wisdom: why has God created free beings,
intelligences capable of evil? Why has he bestowed on them so fatal a gift.

Liberty, answered Eleazar, is a necessary consequence of our reasonable
nature. To be free is to be able to choose; to choose is to prefer: every being
capable of reasoning and comparing can prefer, and consequently choose. It is
true, in every choice we necessarily choose what appears to us the best, but we
can suspend our choice, till we have examined whether the good that presents
itself be real good or only an apparent one: the soul is not free to see or not
to see the objects she looks upon, to discern or not discern their differences
when she sees them, or to choose without a reason for choosing; but she is free
to look or not look, to consider objects on one side only or on several, to
choose them for a good or bad reason; we are never invincibly captivated by any
finite good, because we are able to think of a greater good, and so may
discover a superior charm which will carry us away from the less attractive
object; and it is on this activity natural to all rational beings, that liberty
depends; spirits only are active and capable of self motion: God gives them
activity as well as being; an activity different from his, as well as a
substance dictinct from his. One of the essential differences between bodies
and souls is this, the one are necessarily transported where ever the moving
power carries them, the other suffer themselves to be moved only by the reason
that enlightens them. God could not give us intelligence without giving us
liberty.

But could he not, replied Cyrus, have hindered us from abusing our liberty, by
showing us truth with so clear an evidence, that it would have been impossible
to mistake? When the sovereign beauty displays his infinitely attractive
charms, they seize and engross the whole will, and make all inferior
amiableness vanish, as the rising sun dispels the shades of night. -- The
purest light, answered Eleazar, does not illuminite those who will not see; now
every finite intelligence may turn away his eyes from the truth. I have already
told you that spirits cannot incessantly contemplate the splendors of the
divine essence; they are obliged from time to time to cover their faces; it is
then that self-love may seduce them, and make them take an apparent good for a
real one; this false good (...) dazzle them and draw them away from the true
(...). Self-love is inseparable from our nature. -- God in loving himself
essentially loves order, because (...) IS ORDER; but the creature may love
itself without loving order; to what degree of perfection soever we suppose it
raised, it is still finite, and consequently capable of pursuing, contrary to
the will of the Creator, a good which it has not in its possession; hence every
created spirit is necessarily and essentially falible; to ask why God had made
falible intelligences, is to ask why he has made them finite; or why he has not
created gods as perfect as himself: a thing impossible.

Cannot God, continued Cyrus, employ his almighty power, to force free
intelligences to see and relish truth? Under the empire of God himself,
answered Eleazar, despotic rule and liberty are incompatible. God does every
thing he pleases in heaven and upon earth; but he will not employ his absolute
power to destroy the free nature of intelligent beings; if he did, they would
act no longer from choice but necessity; they would obey, but they would not
love: now love is what God demands, and it is the only worship worthy of him;
he does not require it for any advantage to himself, but for the good of his
creatures; he will have them happy and contribute to their own happiness; happy
by love, and by a love of pure choice: it is thus that their merit augments
their felicity.

But could not the Deity, said Cyrus, have employed infallible means to secure
the happiness of intelligent beings, without violating their liberty; Has he
not a sovereign dominion over spirits as well as bodies? Can he not change the
most rebellious and stubborn wills, and make them pliable and submissive to his
orders? In a word, could he not have found expedients in the inexhaustible
treasures of his power, wisdom and goodness, to subject free agents as well as
necessary ones to his eternal purposes? Doubtless, answered Eleazar, we cannot
form too high an idea of the perfections of the infinitely perfect Being; he
wills the happiness of all intelligences, knows all the means requisite to
accomplish his will, and sooner or later will render those means absolutely and
infallibly efficacious without violating the liberty of spirits. The permission
of sin, expiatory pains, and all the fatal consequence of our rebellion, are a
part of those means and of the plan of his adorable providence. God first
exerted all the efforts of his power, he exhausted, so to speak, all the
treasures of his wisdom, he displayed all the charms of his goodness, he
neglected nothing to prevent the fall of spirits. Seeing at last that he could
not keep them in the love of order, without violating their liberty, he left
them for a moment to the fatal consequences of their wanderings, because he
knew not how to make all end in the accomplishment of his decrees. He who calls
being out of nothing can draw an infinite good from a transient evil, order
from confusion, the universal beauty of his work from a slight blemish which he
suffers in it, and the permanent happiness of all spirits from the momentaneous
pains which a small number of intelligences suffer by their own fault. All the
heavenly host are spectators of what passes here below, and are confirmed
forever in the love of order, by seeing the ^errible effects and natural
consequences of our unfaithfulness. This is the reason why God suffers evil for
a moment; our example is an eternal lesson so all spirits. The conduct of God
offends us only because we are finite and mortal: we see not the whole plan of
it, we judge of it only by small pieces. Let us raise our thoughts above the
place of banishment, let us run over all the celestial regions, we shall see
disorder and evil no where but in this corner of the universe. The earth is but
an atom in comparison of immensity; the whole extent of time is but a moment in
respect of eternity: these two infinitely small points will one day disappear;
yet a little moment and evil will be no more; but our limited minds and our
self-love magnify objects, and make us look upon that point which divides the
two eternities as something great.

Could not the infinite goodness of God, said Cyrus, have brought back his
offending creatures to order without making them suffer? A good father will
never make use of punishments when he can gain his children by mildness.

I have already told you, answered Eleazar, that we are capable of a twofold
happiness: should God, after our rebellion, continue to us the full enjoyment
of created pleasure, we should never aspire to an union with the Creator; we
should content ourselves with an inferior happiness, without any endeavors to
attain to the supreme beatitude of our nature. The only means to hinder free
beings from relapsing into disorder, is to make them feel for a time the fatal
consequences of their error. God owes it to his justice to punish the guilty,
that he may not countenance crimes; and his goodness likewise requires it, in
order to correct and reform the criminal. Natural evil is necessary to cure
moral evil; suffering is the only remedy for sin. All will suffer more or less
in proportion as they are more or less gone astray: those who have never
departed from their duty, will forever excel the rest in knowledge and
happiness; those who delay their return to it, will be always inferior to the
other in perfection and felicity.

The return of spirits to their first principle, resembles the motion of bodies
toward their center; the nearer they approach to it, the more their velocity
augments, and consequently those who begin sooner to return to their infinite
center will for ever outstrip the rest in their course. This is the order
established by eternal Wisdom, the immutable law of distributive justice, from
which God cannot deviate, without being essentially wanting to himself,
countenancing rebellion, and exposing all finite and fallible beings to the
danger of disturbing universal harmony. You see in all this the conduct of a
God, of a Creator who drew spirits out of nothing to make them happy, he
punishes them that they may return into order, he suspends the exercise of his
absolute power, that by the secret springs of an immutable wisdom, goodness and
justice, he may make them accomplish freely his eternal purposes.

I comprehend you, said Cyrus; God could not deprive us of liberty without
depriving us of intelligence; nor hinder us from being fallible without making
us infinite, nor prevent our ^wandering without destroying our liberty, nor
(...) us from expiatory pains, without violating his (...) and goodness: exempt
from all passions, he has neither anger nor revenge, he chastises only to
amend, he punishes only to cure, he permits sin only that he may not violate
our liberty, he is tender of that liberty only that he makes us merit, he
exacts that merit only to augment our happiness, he does not employ his
almighty power to force us to be happy, because he will give us the eternal
pleasure of contributing to our own happiness by love, and by a love of pure
choice; he does good for the love of good, without having any need of our
services, without gaining any thing our virtues, or losing any thing by our
crimes. Such is the Glory of the God of the Hebrews, of HIM WHO IS, of the
independent and self sufficient Being. No philosopher ever presented me before
with a chain of principles and consequences, thoughts and sentiments so
conformable to reason.

This, continued Eleazar, is what even the understanding of man can suggest to
render the ways of God intelligible; it is thus that we confound reason by
reason itself; it is by these principles that our doctors silence the
philosophers of the Gentiles, who blaspheme against the sovereign Wisdom,
because of the evils and crimes which happen here below. But yet our religion
does not cons^^t of these speculations; it is not so much a philosophical
system as a supernatural establishment; Daniel will instruct you in it; he is
at this time the prophet of THE MOST HIGH: The eternal often shows him futurity
as present, and lends him his power to work prodigies; he is soon to return to
Babylon, he will show you the oracles contained in our sacred books, and teach
you what are the purposes for which God in^ends you. It was in this manner that
the Hebre^ philosopher instructed Cyrus, vainly striving to ^athom the
unsearchable depths of divine wisdom: what was defective in his opinions, was
set right by the more simple and sublime instructions of Danie^, who came back
to Babylon a few days after.

It was the time fixed by the prophets for the recovery of Nabuchodonosor, his
frenzy ceased and his reason was restored to him. Before he returned to his
capital, he resolved to pay a public homage to the God of Israel in the same
place where he had given the notorious instance of his impiety. He ordered
Daniel to assemble the Princes, magistrates and governors of provinces, and all
the nobles of Babylon, and to conduct them to the plains of Dura, where (...)
had some years before erected the famous golden statue. Clothed with his
imperial robe, he mounted upon an eminence, from whence he might be seen by all
the people; he had no longer any thing fierce or savage in his look;
notwithstanding the dreadful condition to which his sufferings had reduced him,
(...) countenance had a s^rene and majestic air: he turned toward the East,
took of his diadem, prostrated himself with his face to the earth, and
pronounced (...) times the tremendous name of JEHOVAH! having ^^dored the
ETERNAL for some time in a profound ^^lence, he rose up and said: People of all
nations assembled together, it was here that you formerly beheld the
extravagant marks of my impious and ab^minable pride; it was here that I
usurped the rights of the Divinity, and would force you to worship the work of
mens' hand: THE MOST HIGH to punish this excess of irreligion, condemned me to
eat grass with the beasts for seven whole years; the times (...) accomplished;
I have lifted up my eyes to heaven and acknowledged the power of the God of
Israel; my reason and understanding are restored me. Your God, (continued he,
turning toward Daniel) is in truth the GOD OF GODS and KING OF KINGS. All the
inhabitants of the earth are before him as nothing, and he does according to
his will both in heaven and in earth; his wisdom is equal to his power, and all
his ways are full of justice: those that walk in pride he is able to abase, and
he raises again those whom he had humbled: O Princes and people learn to render
homage to his greatness! At these words the assembly sent up shouts of joy and
filled the air with acclamations in honor of the God of Israel --
Nabuchodonosor was conducted back with pomp to his capital and resumed the
government of his kingdom: he raised Daniel to the highest dignities, and ^^
Hebrews were honored with the first posts throughout all the provinces of his
empire.

Some days after, Amytis presented Cyrus to Nab^chodonosor, who received the
young Prince in a most friendly manner, and gave him a favorable au^^ence:
however, the nobles of Babylon, who sat in (...) King's council, represented in
very strong terms, (...) it might be dangerous to provoke the Median ^urt at
the present juncture, when the forces of the kingdom were much lessened and its
treasures ex^^sted by the late troubles during the King's illness; (...) that
it would be better policy to foment the di^^^ions between the Medes and
Persians, in order to ^ake them mutually weaken each other, and so give the
King of Babylon a fair occasion of extending his conquests. But Nabuchodonozor,
who by the misfortunes he had suffered, was cured of all such false maxims, did
not go into these ambitious projects of (...) ministers; and Cyrus observing
his good disposition, took that opportunity to lay before him the advantages he
might find by an alliance with Camby^^; he made the King sensible that the
Medes were ^he only rivals of his power in the East; that it could not be for
his interest to let them grow considerable, by subjecting and oppressing the
Persians: but that he should rather make the latter his friends who might serve
as a barrier to his empire against the enterprises of the Median Prince; and
lastly that Persia lay very convenient for the Babylonian troops to march
through it into Media, in case Cyaxares should resolve upon a rupture. The
Prince of Persia spoke both in public and private assemblies with so much
eloquence and strength of reason, he showed during the course of his
negotiation, which lasted some months, so much candor and truth, he managed
the nobles with so much prudence and delicacy, that in the end he brought them
all over: an alliance was sworn in a solemn manner, and Nabuchodonosor
continued faithful to it the rest of his life.

Cyrus, impatient to see the sacred books of the Hebrews, which contained
oracles relating to his future greatness, conversed every day with Daniel; and
the prophet gladly embraced the opportunity to instruct him in the Hebrew
religion. He at length opened the books of Isaian, who had prophesied of Cyrus
by name an hundred and fifty years before his birth, and the Prince read there
words: Thus says the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus whose right hand I have
hold^^ to subdue nations before him, and put Kings to flight; and I will open
before him the two leaved gates, and the gates shall not be shut. I will go
before thee, I will humble the great ones of the earth, I will break in pieces
the gates of brass, and cut in sunder the bars of iron, and I will reveal to
thee the hidden treasures, and the secret of secrets Arcana Secretorum. Isaiah
xiv. 3. vulg.
, that thou may know that I the Lord who have called thee by thy name, am
the God of Israel. For Jacob my servant's sake, and Israel mine elect, I have
even called thee by thy name, I have surnamed thee, though thou have not known
me. I am the Lord, and there is none else, there is no God besides me. -- I
form the light and create darkness. -- I have made the earth and created man
upon it; I, even my hands have stretched out the heavens, and all their host
have I commanded. I have raised him up in righteousness, and I will direct all
his ways; he shall build my city, and he shall let go my captives, not for
price nor reward, faith the Lord of hosts.

Cyrus was struck with awe and reverence as well as astonishment, to see so
clear and circumstantial a prediction, a thing unknown in other nations; for
there the oracles were always obscure and ambiguous. Eleazar (said he to the
Prophet) has already shown me, that the great principles of your Theology
concerning the three states of the world agree with those of other nations. He
has removed all my difficulties about the origin of evil, by proving the
freedom of intelligent natures; he shuts the mouth of impiety by his sublime
ideas concerning the pre-ex-^^ence of souls, their voluntary fall, and their
total restoration: but he has said nothing to me of the supernatural
establishment of your law. I conjure you, by the God whom you adore, to answer
my questions: Has your tradition the same source with that of other nations?
Has it been transmitted to you by a purer channel? Was your lawgiver a mere
Philosopher, or a divine person?

I know, answered Daniel, the endeavors which our doctors use, to accommodate
religion to the taste of the Philosophers; but they are all bewildered and lost
in a crowd of uncertain opinions: Who can find out the ways of God, or
penetrate into his secret purposes? Our thoughts are weak, and our conjectures
vain; the body, this earthly tabernacle, depresses the soul, and will not
suffer it to reach those heights to which it fondly aspires. It is certain that
God has permitted evil only that he might draw from it an infinite good; but
how he will accomplish his purpose is a secret hidden from the eyes of mortals.
All the systems that can be imagined are either dangerous or defective. The
curiosity of seeing into every thing, explaining every thing, and adjusting it
to our imperfect notions, is the most fatal disease of the human mind. The most
sublime act of our feeble reason is to keep itself silent before the sovereign
reason; let us leave to God the care of justifying one day the incomprehensible
ways of his providence. Our pride and our impatience will not suffer us to wait
for the unraveling; we would go before the light, and by so doing we lose the
use of it. Isaiah xiv.
We unto him that striveth with his Maker, unto him who is but clay and a
potsherd of the earth. Forget therefore all the refined speculations of the
Philosophers. I shall speak to you a more sure and simple language; I shall
propose nothing to you but such truths as are supported by the universal
tradition of all nations, or else palpable facts, of which the eyes, ears and
all the senses of men are judges.

The ETERNAL created our first parents in a state of innocence, happiness and
immortality, but the ambitious desire of increasing their knowledge, and of
being as Gods, carried them to disobey the orders of THE MOST HIGH: they were
driven from their habitation of delights, and their whole race was involved in
their punishment, as it had been in their crime; thus we were degraded in our
origin, and blasted in our source. When mankind discontinued to be just, they
ceased to be immortal; sufferings followed close upon crimes and men were
condemned to a state of pain and misery, in order to make them aspire
perpetually after a better life. For the first ages after the fall, religion
was not written; the mortal part of it was found in reason itself, and the
mysteries of it were transmitted by tradition from the ancients. As men lived
then several ages, it was easy to preserve that tradition in its purity. But
the sublime knowledge of the first men having served only to make them the more
criminal, the whole race of mankind, except the family of Noah, was destroyed,
in order to stop the course of impiety and the increase of vice: the fountains
of the great abyss were broken up, and the waters covered the earth with an
universal deluge, of which there yet are some traces in the traditions of all
nations, and of which we see every day convincing proofs, when we dig into the
bowels of the earth. The constitution of the world, which had suffered by the
fall, was impaired anew See M. de Meaux universal history.
; the juices of the earth were impoverished and spoilt by this inundation; the
herbs and fruits had no longer the same virtue; the air loaded with an
excessive moisture strengthened the principles of corruption, and the life of
man was shortened. The descendants of Noah, who spread themselves over the face
of the whole earth, quickly forgot this terrible effects of the divine
indignation; they corrupt their ways, and gave themselves up to all wickedness.
It was then that the ETERNAL resolved to choose a peculiar people to be the
depositary of religion, morality and all divine truths that they might not be
debased and entirely obscured by the imagination, passions and vain reasonings
of, men. The sovereign Wisdom chose the most stupid and untractable people to
be the guardian of his oracles: the Assyrians, Chaldeans and Egyptians, who
were eminent for subtility of understanding and a superior skill in all the
sciences, might have been suspected of having mixed their own notions and
reasonings with the divine revelations; but the Hebrews, among whom you have
found the sublimest ideas of the Divinity and of morality, have nothing in
their natural genius which can make them suspected of having invented these
truths. Abraham, by his faith and obedience, was found worthy to be the head
and the father of this happy people. THE MOST HIGH promised him, that his
posterity should be multiplied as the stars of heaven, that they should one day
possess the land of Cana^n, and that of his seed should come the DESIRE OF
NATIONS in the fullness of time. The rising family of this Patriarch, feeble in
its beginnings, went down to Egypt, where they became very numerous, awakened
the jealously of the Egyptians, and were reduced to a state of slavery; but
having been tried and purified by all sorts of afflictions for the space of
four hundred years. God raised up Moses to deliver them.

THE MOST HIGH, having first inspired our deliverer with the purest wisdom,
lent him his almighty power to prove his divine mission by the most signed
wonders; these wonders were nothing less than a frequent and instantaneous
changing of the order and course of nature. The haughty King of Egypt refused
to obey the orders of the ALMIGHTY. Moses terrified his court with repeated
signs of the vengeance of heaven: he stretched out his arm, and the whole
kingdom felt its dreadful power; rivers were turned into blood: swarms of
venomous insects spread every where diseases and death; prodigious lightenings
with storms of hail destroyed men, beasts and plants; a thick darkness hid for
three days all the luminaries of heaven; and an exterminating angel destroyed
all the firstborn of Egypt. At length the people of God left the land of their
captivity, and Pharaoh pursued them with a formidable army. A pillar of fire
was their guide by night, and a thick cloud by day concealed their march from
the pursuers. Moses spoke, the sea divided, the Israelites went through it on
dry ground, and were no sooner passed than the returned to its strength, and
its impetuous waves swallowed up the infidel nation. Our fathers wandered in
the desert, where they suffered hunger, thirst and the inclemency of the
seasons: they murmured against God: Moses spoke again, a miraculous flood
descended from heaven; dry rocks became fountains of living waters; the earth
opened and swallowed up those who refused to believe the promises, unless they
might see their accomplishment. It was in this desert that God himself
published his holy law, and dictated all the rites and statutes of our
religion. He called up our conductor to the top of mount Sinai; the mountain
trembled, and the voice of the ETERNAL was heard in thunders and lightenings:
he displayed his dreadful power to (...) an impression upon hearts more
disposed to be affected by fear than love. But the GOD appeared to less in the
wonders of his goodness, than in those of his power. The high and lofty one,
who inhabits eternity, and whom the heaven of heavens cannot contain,
condescended to dwell in a visible manner amongst the children of Israel, and
to direct them in (...) their ways. A moveable sanctuary, with the ark of the
covenant, was formed and erected by his order, and the altar was sanctified by
the presence of the glory of THE MOST HIGH. The rays of a heavenly light
encompassed the tabernacle; and God sitting between the Cherubims from thence
declared his will. Moses by the command of God himself committed to writing our
law and our history, the everlasting proofs of his supreme goodness, and of our
ingratitude; a little before his death he put this book into the hands of all
the people; it was necessary at every instant to consult it, in order to know
not only the religious but civil laws; each Hebrew is obliged to read it over
once a year, and to transcribe the whole at least once in his life. It was
impossible to alter or corrupt these sacred annals, without the imposture's
being discovered and punished as high treason against God, and an attempt
against the civil authority.

Moses died; our fathers left the desert; nature was obedient to the voice of
Joshua, their new conductor; rivers ran back to their fountain head; the fun
stood still; the walls of a strong city fell down at the approach of the ark:
and the most courageous and warlike nations fled before the triumphant armies
of Israel, who at length took possession of the promised land. Miracles however
do not change the heart, even when they convince the understanding. The
strongest conviction is too weak to control the violence of the passions.
Scarce was this ungrateful and inconstant people settled in that land of
delights, but they grew weary of being under the immediate government of
JEHOVAH, and were desirous of having a King to go before them like other
nations. God gave them a King in his anger, and the Hebrew government became
monarchial. Solomon, the wisest and most pacific of our Princes, erected a
magnificent temple at Jerusalem. The God of peace fixed his habitation upon
mount Sion; the miracle of the ark was perpetuated, the glory of the divine
Majesty filled the sanctuary, oracles were given from the most holy place as
often as the High Priest went thither to enquire of the Lord. In order to
perpetuate the memory of so many miracles, and to demonstrate the truth of them
to all future ages, Moses, Joshua, our Judges and our Kings established solemn
festivals and august ceremonies: a numerous nation incredulous and rebellious,
their Kings, their Priests, their tribes which were often divided among
themselves, concurred loudly, universally and successively to give testimony to
those miracles by lasting monuments perpetuated from generation to generation.
While the Israelites persevered in their obedience, THE LORD OF HOSTS was their
protector, and rendered them invincible as he had promised; but as soon as they
departed from the law of their God he gave them up a prey to their fierce
enemies; nevertheless he chastised them like a father, and did not utterly
forsake them. In every age he raised up prophets to threaten, instruct and
reform them. These sages being separated from all terrestrial pleasures united
themselves to the sovereign truth; the eyes of the soul, which have been shut
since the origin of evil, were opened in these divine men to look into the
counsels providence, and to know its secrets. The heavy judgments of God fell
often upon the stubborn and untractable Hebrews, and as often this chosen
people was brought back by the prophets to own and adore the God of their
fathers. At length they were wholly carried away by that wretched inclination
in all morals to corporalize the Deity, and to form to themselves a God with
passions like their own. The God of Abraham, faithful in his threatenings as in
his promises, has humbled us for many years under the sake of Nabuchodonosor;
Jerusalem is become desolite, and the holy temple an heap of stones; vagabonds
and captives in a strange land, we wander upon the banks of Euphrates and
silently mourn when we remember Sion. But God having first raised up he proud
conqueror to accomplish his eternal purposes, then abased him in his anger. You
have been witness both of his punishment and of his deliverance; nevertheless
the measure of the divine Judgments upon the race of Abraham is not filled up;
it is you, O Cyrus, who are ordained by THE MOST HIGH to be their deliverer;
Jerusalem will be repeopled, the house of the Lord rebuilt, and the glory of
the latter temple, which will one day be honored with the presence of the
Messiah, shall be greater than the glory of the former.

But what, said Cyrus, is the design of this law, dictated by God himself with
so much pomp, preserved by your forefathers with so much care, renewed and
confirmed by your prophets with so many miracles? In what does it differ from
the religion of other nations? The design of the law and the prophets, replied
Daniel, is to show, that all creatures were pure in their original; that all
men are at present born distempered, corrupt and ignorant even to the degree of
not knowing their disease, and that human nature will one day be restored to
its perfection. The miracles and prodigies, of which I have made you a recital,
are, so to speak, but the play of wisdom to lead men into themselves, and make
them attend to those three truths which ^hey will find written in their own
hearts, upon all nature, and in the whole plan of Providence. The law of Moses
is but an unfolding of the law of Nature; all its moral precepts are but means
more or less remote, to carry us to what may strength divine love in us, or to
preserve us from what may weaken it. The burntofferings, the purifications, the
abstinences, all the ceremonies of our worship are but symbols to represent the
sarcifice of the passions, and to shadow out the virtues necessary to
re-establish us in our primitive purity; those who stop at the letter find
expressions in our sacred books that seem to humanize the Deity, promises that
do not appear to have any relation to immortality, and ceremonies which they
think unworthy of the sovereign Reason: but the true sage penetrates into their
hidden meaning, and discovers mysteries in them of the highest wisdom. The
foundation of the whole law, and of all the prophecies, is the doctrine of a
nature pure in its original, corrupted by sin, and to be one day restored.
These three fundamental truths are represented in our history under various
images. The bondage of the Israelites in Egypt, their journey through the
desert and their arrival in the promised land, represent to us the fall of
souls, their sufferings in this mortal life, and their return to their heavenly
country. The hidden meaning does not destroy the literal sense, nor does the
letter of the law exclude allegory; it is equally profane to deny the one, or
to despise the other. These three principles, the traces of which are to be
found in all religions, have been transmitted from age to age from the deluge
to our time; Noah taught them to his children, whose posterity spread them
afterward over all the earth; but in passing from mouth to mouth they have
been altered and obscured by the imagination of the poets, the superstition of
the priests, and the different genius of each nation. We find more remarkable
footsteps of them among the Orientals and Egyptians than any where else;
because Abraham See Jos. Ant. lib. 1. cap. 7. and 8, Eupolem. apud Eusebius. and
Voss. de Philosoph. sectis. cap. 1. p. 3.
, our first patriarch, who was famous in Asia, renewed them here, and because
the people of God were a long time in captivity on the banks of the Nile; but
these ancient truths have been no where preserved in their perfect purity,
except in the oracles written by our lawgiver, our historians and our prophets.

But this is not all; there is a mystery which is no where unfolded but in our
religion, and of which I would not speak to you. O Cyrus, if you were not the
anointed of THE MOST HIGH, and his servant chosen for the deliverance of his
people. The prophecies mention two advents of the Messiah, one in suffering,
the other in glory. The GREAT EMANUEL will many ages before his triumphant
appearance in the clouds, live here upon earth in a state of humiliation: he
will expiate sin by the sacrifice of himself before he restores the universe to
its primitive splendour. The ancient tradition from Noah concerning this grand
sacrifice, was what suggested to all nations the first thought of offering
victims to THE MOST HIGH as types of that perfect holocaust: your priests
having lost these primitive ideas foolishly imagined that the friendship of the
immortals was to be gained by shedding the blood of beasts; but what relation
is there between the divine goodness and cruel immolation of harmless animals?
Without our traditions about the great Emanuel, the original of your sacrifices
is a perfect aenigma.

Here Cyrus interrupted Daniel and said: who is this great Emanuel of whom you
speak; is he the same with him whom the Persians call Mythras, the Egyptians
Orus, the Tyrians Adonis, the Greeks Jupiter the Conductor, Apollo and
Hercules? The GREAT EMANUEL, answered the prophet, is he who is called the
DESIRE OF NATIONS; he has been known to them by an ancient tradition, the
source of which they are ignorant of, and which they have degraded by their
fabulous names and impure images. The great Emanuel is not, as some of your
philosophers say, a subordinate God, but equal in glory to the great Jehovah:
he is not a Demi-God, but possesses in himself all the fullness of the Godhead:
he is not a free production of the power of THE MOST HIGH, but a necessary
emanation from his substance. All other beings, how exalted soever, whether
Angels or Archangels, Seraphim or Cherubim were drawn out of nothing and may
return to nothing again; but He is a pure stream flowing from the Glory of the
Almighty, the brightness of the everlasting light, the unspotted mirror of the
majesty of God, and the express image of his goodness: he is of the same
essence, he has the same attributes, but who can declare his generation? Let us
not rashly pry into those impenetrable secrets; it is sufficient to know, that
THE DESIRE OF NATIONS will appear upon the earth to bear our griefs, that he
will be wounded for our transgressions and bruised for our iniquities.

But what necessity is there, cried out Cyrus, for this great sacrifice? Has
God any need of a bloody victim to appease his wrath? Can the infinite Goodness
require such a cruel holocaust? Beware of falling into the same error by which
you reproach our priests. God has no need, replied Daniel, of an inhuman
sacrifice to pacify his vengeance, but he would countenance the rebellion of
spirits, and contradict himself should he pardon the criminal without showing
his abhorrence of the crime, and display the whole extent of his goodness
without asserting the prerogatives of his holiness. The divine Emanuel will
leave the bosom of his Father, and remain long upon earth exiled from his
presence; the living image of the majesty of God will take on him the form of a
servant; the eternal WORD will become a mute babe, a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with grief; the brightness of the uncreated light will suffer an
e^^pse that will terrify the Seraphim and Cherubim; be will show by his
annihilation the homage that is due to the ETERNAL; by his humiliation the
injustice of our pride; by his sufferings the necessity of our expiatory pains;
and lastly, by his agony and the inexpressible anguish which our iniquities
will cause him, the infinite aversion of THE MOST HIGH to the violation of
order. It Is by this means that he will reconcile the justice of God with his
mercy, repair she wrong done to his law, and be at the same time both a
sacrifice for sin and a model of all virtue. -- The history of his conflicts
and triumphs will be forever recorded in the registers of heaven, and give
eternal testimony of the divine Wisdom, Goodness and Justice. I see from afar
that day which will be the consolation of the just and the joy of angels: all
the heavenly powers will be present at this mystery, and adore its depth;
mortals will see nothing but the shall and the outside. Those Hebrews who
expect only a triumphant Messiah will not comprehend this first advent; the
pretenders to wisdom in all nations, who judge only by appearances, will
blaspheme against what they understand not: nay, the most just among men will
in this life see only as in a mystery, the beauty, extent, and necessity of
that great sacrifice.

The Prince of Persia was struck by this discourse and wavered in his thoughts;
he perceived that all the discoveries made by Zoroaster, Hermes, Orpheus and
Pythagoras were but imperfect traces and chance rays of the tradition from
Noah: in Persia, Egypt, Greece and in all other nations he had sound only
obscure, uncertain and loose opinions; but with the Hebrews, he had found
books, prophecies and miracles, the authority of which was incontestible.
Nevertheless, he saw the truth only as through a cloud, his heart was not yet
touched; he waited for the accomplishment of Isaiah's prediction. Daniel was
not ignorant of the fluctuation of his mind, and said to him: O Cyrus, religion
is not a system of philosophical opinions, nor yet a history of miracles, or
supernatural events, but a science that dilates the heart and fills it with
godlike sentiments, a science which God reveals only to pure minds; to know the
secrets of religion, to feel its energy, a superior power to man must descend
into you, become absolute master of you, and ravish you from yourself: your
heart will then feel those truths which your understanding has now but a small
glimpse of. The time for this is not yet come, but it approaches Vide Theodoret
de fide.
; until that happy moment, be content with knowing that the God of Israel loves
you, will go before you, and will accomplish his will by you; this
accomplishment will be an invincible proof of the truth of all I have said to
you. Make haste to verify his oracles, and return with speed into Persia, where
your presence is necessary.

The young hero soon after left Babylon; the year following Nabuchodonosor
died, and his successors broke the alliance sworn between the Assyrians and
Persians. Cyrus spent twenty whole years in war with the Assyrians and their
allies: the several nations of the East observing his moderation in the mid^ of
triumphs, willingly submitted to his empire, and the conquests made by his
humanity were more numerous than those of his sword. Being ever as generous as
invincible, he made no other use of victory than to render the vanquished
happy, and employed his power only to make justice flourish and to establish
and maintain the most excellent laws. The taking of Babylon made him master of
all the East from the river Indus of Greece, and from the Caspian sea to the
extremities of Egypt. Seeing then the entire accomplishment of Isaiah's
prediction, his heart became affected with the truths he had learned from
Daniel; the mist before his eyes was totally dispelled, he openly avowed the
God of Israel, and released the Hebrews from their captivity by this solemn
edict, which was published through the whole extent of his vast dominions. THUS
SAYS CYRUS, KING OF PERSIA. THE LORD GOD OF HEAVEN HAS GIVEN ME ALL THE
KINGDOMS OF THE EARTH, AND HE HAS CHARGED ME TO BUILD HIM A HOUSE AT JERUSALEM
WHICH IS IN JUDAH. WHOEVER AMONG YOU IS OF HIS PEOPLE, HIS GOD BE WITH HIM: AND
LET HIM GO UP TO JERUSALEM AND BUILD THE HOUSE OF THE LORD GOD OF ISRAEL, HE IS
THE GOD.

A DISCOURSE UPON THE THEOLOGY AND MYTHOLOGY OF THE PAGANS.
MY first design was to insert some critical notes in the margin of the
foregoing book; but as the attending to such remarks would have diverted the
reader's mind too much from the principal subject, I thought it better to
digest them into the form of a discourse, which I divide into two parts. In the
first I shall show, that the most celebrated Philosophers of all ages and all
countries have had the notion of a supreme Deity, who produced the world by his
Power, and governs it by his Wisdom. From the second it will appear, that there
are traces of the principal doctrines of revealed religion, with regard to the
three states of the world, to be found in the Mythology of all nations.

PART I. Of the THEOLOGY of the PAGANS.
TO begin with the Magi or Persian Philosophers; according to the testimony of
Herodotus Herod, Clio, lib. 1. p. 56. Sect. 131. Edit. Francos. 1608.
, the ancient Persians had neither statues, nor temples, nor altars: They think
it ridiculous (says this author) to fancy like the Greeks, that the Gods have
an human shape, or derive their original from men. They choose the highest
mountains for the place of their sacrifice: they use neither libations, nor
music, nor hallowed bread; but when any one has a mind to sacrifice, he leads
the victim into a clean place, and wearing a wreath of myrtle about his Tiara,
invokes the God to whom he intends to offer it. The priest is not allowed to
pray for his own private good, but for that of the nation in general; each
particular member finding his benefit in the prosperity of the whole.

Strabo Strabo, lib. 15. p. 732. E^^ Paris,1620.
gives the same account of the ancient Persians. They neither erected statues
nor altars, says this historian; they sacrificed in a clean place and upon an
eminence, where they offered up a victim crowned. When the priest had cut it
into small pieces, every one took his share. They left no portion of it for the
Deities, saying, that Gods desire nothing but the souls of victims. The
Orientals, full of the notion of transmigration imagined, that the victim was
animated by a criminal soul, whose expiatory pains were completed by the
sacrifice.

The Persians indeed, as well as other Pagans, worshipped the fire, the sun,
and the stars: but we shall see that they considered them only as visible
images and symbols of a supreme God, whom they believed to be the sovereign
Lord of nature. Plutarch has left us, in his treatise of Isis and Osiris, a
fragment of the Theology of the Magi. This philosophical historian assures us,
that they called the great God, Oromazes, or the Principle of light, that
produced every thing, and works all in all Plut. de Isid. and Osir. P. 370.
Edit. Paris, 1645.
. They admitted however another God, but of an inferior nature and order, whom
they called Mythras or the Middle God. They speak of him sometimes as a Being
coeternal with the supreme Divinity, and at other times as the first
production of his power See Cudworth's Intell. System. p. 288.
.

The finest definition we have of the Deity among all the writings of the
ancients, is that of Zoroaster. It has been transmitted down to us by Eusebius
in his Praeparatio Evangelica; an author so far from being over favorable to
the Pagans, that he makes it his business continually to expose and degrade
their philosophy. And yet he says, that he had read these express words in a
book of Zoroaster that was extant in his time, and known by the title of, The
sacred collection of Persian monuments.

Eusebius. Praep. Evang. lib. 1. p. 42. Edit. Paris.
God is the first of all incorruptible Beings, eternal and unbegotten: he is
not compounded of parts: there is nothing equal to him, or like him. He is the
author of all good, and entirely disinterested; the most excellent of all
excellent beings, and the wisest of all intelligent natures; the father of
equity, the parent of good laws, self-instructed, self-sufficient, and the
first former of nature.

The modern writers among the Arabians and Persians, who have preserved to us
what remains of the ancient doctrine of Zoroaster among the (...) or
worshippers of fire, maintain, that the first (...) admitted only one eternal
Principle of (...) thing Abulfed^, cited by the famous Dr. (...) according to
the primitive doctrine of the Persians God was prior to both light and
darkness, and had existed from all eternity in an adorable solitude, without
any companion or rival. Saristh^^, quoted by Dr. Hyde, says, That the first
Magi did not look upon the good and evil principles as coeternal; they thought
that light was indeed eternal, but that darkness was produced in time by the
disloyalty of Ahriman, chief of the Genii.

M. Bail affirms in his dictionary, that the ancient Persians were all
Manicheans; but however he came to entertain this notion, he must certainly
have given it up, if he had consulted the original authors: a method which that
famous critic did not always take. He had a genius capable of going to the
bottom of any subject whatever; but he wrote sometimes in a hurry, and treated
superficially the gravest and most important subjects. Besides, there is no
clearing him from the charge of loving too much the dismal obscurity of
skepticism; he is ever upon his guard against all satisfactory ideas in
religion; he shows with are and subtlety all the dark sides of a question, but
he very rarely represents it in that point of light which shines with evidence.
What encomiums would he not have merited, had he employed, his admirable
talents more for the benefit of mankind?

Such was the Theology of the ancient Persians, which in the foregoing work I
have put in the mouth of Zoroaster; and the Egyptians had much the same
principles. There is nothing more absurd than the Pocock Specim. hist. Arab. p.
146.
Hyde. Relig. Ant. Persar. cap. 9. p. 161. and cap. 22. p. 290.
^otion generally given us of their Theology; nor is (...) thing more
improbable than the allegorical sense which certain authors fancy they have
discovered in (...) hieroglyphics. On one hand, it is hard to believe that
human nature could ever sink so low as to adore insects, reptiles and plants
(which they see produced, growing and dying every day) without ascribing
certain divine virtues to them, or considering them as symbols of some
invisible power. (...) the most barbarous countries we still find some
knowledge of a superior Bring, which is the object of the hope and fear of the
most stupid savages. But though we would suppose there are some nations in the
world sunk into so gross an ignorance as to have no notion of a Deity, yet it
is certain that Egypt cannot be charged with such a degree of stupidity. All
historians, as well sacred as profane, agree in speaking of this people as the
wisest of all nations; and one of the encomiums that the holy Spirit gives to
Moses, is, that he was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians. Would the
Holy Ghost ever have spoken in such a manner of a nation so senseless as to
worship onions, crocodiles and the most despicable reptiles? On the other hand,
there are certain modern writers who exalt the Theology of the Egyptians too
high, and fancy that they find in their hieroglyphics all the mysteries of the
Christian religion. After the deluge, Noah doubtless would not leave his
children ignorant of the great principles of religion, with regard to the three
states of mankind; and that tradition might have been spread from generation to
generation over all the nations of the world: but we should not infer from
thence, that the Heathens had as clear notions of the divine Nature and the
Messiah, as the Jews had themselves. Such a supposition, far from doing honor
to Holy Writ, would only derogate from its dignity. I shell endeavor to keep
the just medium between these two extremes.

Plutarch, in his treatise of Isis and Osiris, tells us Plut. de Isid. and
Osir. p. 354.
that the Theology of the Egyptians had two meanings; the one holy and
symbolical, the other vulgar and literal; and consequently that the figures of
animals which they had in their temples, and which they seemed to adore, were
only so many hieroglyphics to represent the divine attributes. Pursuant to this
distinction, he says, that Osiris signifies the active Principle, or the most
holy Being Ibid. p. 373, 374, 375.
; Isis the Wisdom or Rule of his operation; Orus the first production of his
Power, the model or plan by which he produced every thing, or the archetype of
the world. We shall see hereafter whether it be reasonable to think, that the
Pagans had ever any knowledge of a trinity of distinct persons in the
indivisible unity of the divine Nature. Thus much at least is plain, that the
Chaldeans and Egyptians believed all the attributes of the Deity might be
reduced to three, Power, Understanding and Love. In reality, whenever we
disengage ourselves from matter, impose silence on the senses and imagination,
and raise our thoughts to the contemplation of the infinitely infinite Being,
we find that the eternal Essence presents itself to our mind under the three
forms of Power, Wisdom and Goodness. These three attributes comprehend the
totality of his nature, and whatever we can conceive of him. Not to speak
therefore of the primitive traditions, which might possibly be the source of
these three ideas concerning the divine Nature, it is nothing extraordinary, if
the Egyptians and Orientals, who had very refining metaphysical heads should of
themselves have discovered them. The Greeks and Romans were fonder of the
sciences which depend of sense and imagination; and for this reason we find
their Mythology seldom turns upon any thing but the external operations of the
Deity in the productions of nature, whereas that of the former chiefly regards
his internal operations and attributes.

By the help of these principles the Theology of the Pagans may be reduced to
three principal Divinities, without doing violence to original authors, and
without racking one's brain to digest their ideas, which are often very
confused, into an intelligible system. They universally acknowledged one
supreme God, whom they considered as the source of the Divinity, and the author
of all beings; a Goddess his wife, daughter or sister, whom they represented
sometimes as the principle of the divine fecundity, at other times as an
emanation from his wisdom, and often as the companion and subject of his
operations; and lastly, a subordinate God, the son and viceroy of the Supreme.
And thus we find among the Persians the great Oromazes, the Goddess Mythra, and
the God Mythras; among the Egyptians Osiris, Isis and Orus; among the Greeks
Jupiter, Minerva and Apollo.

In proportion as men departed from their primitive simplicity, and as
imagination took the place of reason, the poets multiplied the names and images
of these Gods, and the three superior Divinities were lost in a crowd of
inferior Deities. It is nevertheless certain, that the Sea Huet. Them. Eveng.
Jambl. de. Mys. Egypt. p. 150. Plut. Isis and ^sir. p. 327. Macrob. (...) 1.
Saturn. Cudw. Intell. System. from page 484 to 494.
Philosophers always preserved those three capital ideas. Socrates, Plato,
Pythagoras, Porphyry, Jambliehus, Plutarch, Macrobius and all the philosophical
writers whose works have been transmitted to us, and who speak of the Gods of
Egypt and Greece, assure us that Ptha, Amoun, Osiris, Apis, Serapis and Anubis
are the same; that Mars, Mercury, Apollo, Hercules and Jupiter the Conductor
are also the same; that Cybele, Venue, Urania, Juno, Minerva, Phebe and
Proserpine are in like manner one and the same; whence we may fairly conclude,
without falling into chimerical conjectures, that Oromazes, Osiris, Coelus,
Saturn and Jupiter Olympius are different names to express the one supreme God;
that Mythra, Isis, Cybele, Urania, Juno and Minerva denote the different
attributes of the same Goddess; and lastly, that Mythras, Orus, Mercury,
Apollo, Hercules and Jupiter the Conductor are the several titles of the middle
God, universally acknowledged by the Pagans.

I know that the modern Materialists have endeavored to reduce all the Pagan
Divinities to one God and one Goddess, which according to them, express only
the two principles of nature, whereof one is active or the infinite force, the
cause of all the motions we behold in the universe; the other passive or the
eternal matter, which is the subject of all the forms produced by that moving
force: this idea is by far posterior to that of the Orientals, Egyptians and
first Greeks, concerning the three forms of the Divinity. It was neither
received nor known, in the sense of the Materialists, but by the disciples of
Epicurus, as we shall see hereafter.

This distinction of the Gods into three classes, and that of the world into
three states, may be of great service to clear up the confusion of the ancient
Mythologies. I will venture to say, that neither Scaliger, nor Bochart, nor
Graevius, nor Gronovius, nor M. Huet, could succeed in this enterprise, because
they were men of more learning than philosophy. Grammarians, Critics and those
persons of strong memories, who employ themselves wholly in the study of words
and facts, are rarely remarkable for a nice examination of principles, and are
not always capable of entering into the sense of the philosophers, or
distinguishing the subtilty of their ideas. I confess indeed, that it is
dangerous to be too much attached to systems, but yet without a systematical
genius it is impossible to carry the sciences to any great perfection.

To return to Plutarch. He concludes his treatise of Isis and Osiris in this
manner Page 377 and 378.
; As he who reads the works of Plato, may be said to read Plato, and he who
acts the comedy of Menander may be said to act Menander; so the ancients gave
the name of Gods to the various productions of the Deity. Plutarch had said a
little before, That care should be taken not to transform, dissolve and scatter
the divine Nature into rivers, winds, vegetables, or bodily forms and motions.
This would be as ridiculous as to imagine, that the salts, the cables, the
rigging and the anchor are the pilot; or that the thread, the woof, and shuttle
are the weaver. Such senseless notions are an indignity to the heavenly powers,
whom they blaspheme whilst they give the name of Gods to beings of an
insensible, inanimate and corruptible nature. Nothing, as he goes on, that is
without a soul, nothing that is material and to be perceived by our senses, can
be God. Nor yet must we imagine that there are different Gods, according to the
different countries of Greeks and Barbarians, Northern and Southern people. As
the sun is common to all the world, though called by different names in
different places; so there is but one sole supreme Mind or Reason, and one and
the same Providence that governs the world, though he is worshipped under
different names, and has appointed some inferior powers for his ministers.
Such, according to Plutarch, was the doctrine of the first Egyptians with
regard to the divine Nature.

Origin, who was contemporary with Plutar^^ follows the same principles in his
book against Celsus a Pagan philosopher, who pretended to understand
Christianity, because he understood some ceremonies of that religion, though he
had never entered into the spirit of it. Now Origin expresses himself in this
manner: Orig. contra. Cols. lib. 1. p. 11.
The Egyptian philosophers have sublime motions with regard to the divine
Nature, which they keep secret, and never discover to the people but under a
vail of fables and allegories. Celsus is like a man who has traveled into that
country; and though he has conversed with none but the ignorant vulgar, yet
takes it into his head, that he understands the Egyptian religion. All the
Eastern nations, the Persians, the Indians, the Syrians conceal secret
mysteries under their religious fables. The wise men of all those religions see
into the sense and true meaning of them, whilst the vulgar go no farther than
the exterior symbol, and see only the bark that covers them.

Let us next hear the testimony of Jamblichus, who had studied the religion of
the Egyptians, and understood it thoroughly. He lived in the beginning of the
third century, and was a disciple of the famous Porphyry. As both St. Clement
Strom. l. 6. t. 133.
and St. Cyril of Alexandria Contra. Julian. lib. 1.
assure us, there were at that time a great many Egyptian books extant, which
have been since lost: several of these were highly respected for their
antiquity, and ascribed to Hermes Trismegistus, or one of his first disciples.
Jamblichus had read these books, which had been translated by the Greeks; and
this is the account that he gives of the Theology which they taught. According
to the Egyptians, Eicton, or the first God, existed in his solitary unity
before all Beings Jambl. de. Mist. Egypt. Ed. Lugd. 1552. p. 153, 154.
. He is the fountain and original of every thing that either has understanding
or is to be understood. He is the first principle of all things,
self-sufficient, incomprehensible, and the father of all essences. Hermes says
likewise, That this supreme God has constituted another God, called Emeph, to
be head over all spirits whether ethereal, empyrean or celestial; and that this
second God, whom he styles the guide, is a wisdom that transforms and converts
into itself all spiritual beings. He makes nothing superior to this God-Guide,
but only the first Intelligent, and first Intelligible, who ought to be adored
in silence. He adds, That the Spirit which produces all things has different
names, according to his different properties and operations; that he is called
in the Egyptian language Amoun, as he is wise; Ptha, as he is the life of all
things; and Osiris, as he is the author of all good. Thus, according to
Jamblichus, it is evident that the Egyptians admitted only one principle, and a
middle God, like the Mythras of the Persians.

The notion of a spirit constituted by the supreme God, to be the head and
guide of all spirits, is very ancient. The Hebrew Doctors believed that the
soul of the Messiah was created from the beginning of the world, and appointed
to preside over all the orders of intelligences. This opinion was founded on a
notion that finite natures cannot incessantly contemplate the brightness and
glories of the divine Essence; and must necessarily sometimes turn off their
view, and adore the Creator in his work; that at such times there must be an
Head to lead spirits through all the regions of immensity, and show them all
its beauties and wonders.

To have a more perfect knowledge of the Theology of the Orientals and
Egyptians, it may not be improper to examine that of the Greeks and Romans,
which is derived originally from it. The philosophers of Greece went to study
wisdom in Asia and Egypt -- Thales, Pythagoras, Plato, drew the best of their
knowledge from thence. The traces of Oriental tradition are now indeed in a
manner worn out: but as there are several monuments of the Theology of the
Greeks still preserved, we may judge of the masters by their disciples.

We must however distinguish between the Gods of the poets and those of the
philosophers. Poetry deifies all the various parts of nature, and gives spirit
to bodies as well as body to spirits; it expresses the operations and
properties of matter by the actions and passions of such invisible powers, as
the Pagans supposed to be directors of all the motions and events that we see
in the universe. The poets pass in a moment from allegory to the literal sense,
and from the literal sense to allegory; from real Gods to fabulous Deities; and
this occasions that jumble of their images, that absurdity in their fictions,
and that indecorum in their expressions, which are so justly condemned by the
philosophers. Notwithstanding this multiplication of inferior Deities, these
poets however acknowledged, that there was but one only supreme God. This will
appear from the very ancient traditions which we still have of the philosophy
of Orpheus. I am far from thinking that Orpheus was the author of those works
which go under his name: I believe with the famous Grotius, that those books
were wrote by the Pythagoreans, who professed themselves disciples of Orpheus:
but whoever were the authors of these writings, it is certain that they are
older than Herodotus and Plato, and were in great esteem among the Heathens; so
that by the fragments of them still preserved, we may form a judgment of the
ancient Theology of the Greeks. I shall begin with the abridgement which
Timotheus the Cosmographer gives us of the doctrine of Orpheus. This
abridgement is preserved in Suidas Suidas de Crph. p. 350.
, Cedrenus Cedrenus, p. 47.
and Eusebius.

There is one unknown Being exalted above and prior to all beings, the author
of all things, even of the ether, and of every thing that is below the ether;
this exalted Being is Life, Light and Wisdom; which three names express only
one and the same Power, which drew all beings, visible and invisible, out of
nothing. It appears by this passage, that the doctrine of the creation, (or the
production of substances) and that of the three forms of the divinity were not
unknown to the heathen Philosophers: we shall soon find them in Plato.

Proclus has transmitted down to us this extraordinary passage of the Theology
of Orpheus Proclus de Timaeo, p. 95.
. The universe was produced by Jupiter, the empyreum, the deep Tartarus, the
earth, and the ocean, the immortal Gods and Goddesses; all that is, all that
that has been, and all that shall be, was contained originally in the fruitful
bosom of Jupiter. Jupiter is the first and the last, the beginning and the end.
All beings derive their origin from him. He is the primitive Father and the
immortal Virgin. He is the Life, the Cause, and the Energy of all things. There
is but one only Power, one only God, and one sole universal King of all. This
passage seems to insinuate, that the universe is a substantial emanation from
the divine Essence, and not a mere effect of his power; however this gross
error is no proof of Atheism in him who maintains it, as we shall see hereafter.

I shall conclude the Theology of Orpheus with a famous passage of the author
of the Argonautica, who is looked upon to be a disciple of his Argon. apud
Steph. p. 71. Edit. Fagger. An. 1566.
. We will sing first an hymn upon the ancient chaos; how the heavens, the sea,
and the earth were formed out of it. We will sing likewise that eternal, wise
and self-perfect love, which reduced this chaos into order. It is clear enough
from the doctrine of the theogony or birth of the Gods, that the ancient poets
ascribed all to a first Being, who disintangled the chaos. And it is for this
reason that Ovid thus expresses himself in the first book of his Metamorphoses
Ovid. Metam. l. 1. p. 1.
Before there was a sea and an earth, before there was any heaven to cover the
world, universal nature was but one indigested sluggish mass, called a chaos.
The seeds of all things jumbled together were in a perpetual discord, till a
beneficent Deity put an end to the difference. Words which show plainly that
the Latin poet, who followed the Greek tradition, makes a distinction between
the chaos, and God, who by his Wisdom brought it out of confusion into order. I
ought however in this place to observe, that the Greek and Roman Mythology, in
relation to the chaos, is much more imperfect than that of the Orientals and
Egyptians, who tell us that there was an happy and perfect state of the world
prior to the chaos; that the good Principle could never produce any thing evil;
that his first work could not be confusion and disorder; and in a word, that
Physical evil is nothing else but a consequence of moral evil. It was the
imagination of the Greek poets that first brought forth the monstrous Manichean
doctrine of two coeternal principles; a supreme Intelligence and a blind
matter; light and darkness; an indigested chaos, and a Deity to reduce it into
order.

Let any one read Homer and Virgil with a proper attention, and he will see,
that notwithstanding the wild flights of their imagination, and the indecent
allegories by which they sometimes dishonor the Divine Nature, the marvelous
which runs through their fable is founded upon these three principles. 1. That
there is one supreme God, whom they every where call the Father, and the
sovereign Lord of Gods and men, the Architect of the world, the Prince and
Governor of the universe, the first God, and the great God. 2, That universal
Nature is full of subordinate spirits, who are the ministers of that supreme
God. 3. That good and evil, virtue and vice, knowledge and error, arise from
the different influence and inspiration of the good and evil Genii, who dwell
in the air, the sea, the earth, and the heavens.

The tragic and lyric Poets express themselves after the same manner as the
epic Poets. Euripides expressly acknowledges the dependence of all beings upon
one sole Principle. O Father, and King of Gods and men! says he, why do we
miserable mortals fancy that we know any thing, or can do any thing? Our fate
depends upon thy will Eurip. Supplic. Act. 3. ver. 734, etc. Edit. Cant.
.

Sophocles represents the Deity to us as a sovereign Intelligence, which is
truth, wisdom, and the eternal law of all spirits In Oedip. Tyran.
. It Is not, says he, to any mortal nature that laws owe their origin; they come
from above; they come down from heaven itself; Jupiter Olympius is alone the
father of them.

Plautus introduces an inferior Deity speaking in this manner I ^^ut. Rudens.
I am a citizen of the celestial city, of which Jupiter, the Father of Gods and
men, is the head. He commands the nations, and sends us over all kingdoms, to
take an account of the conduct and actions, the piety and virtue of men. In
vain do mortals endeavor to bribe him with their oblations and sacrifices --
They lose their pains, for he abhors the worship of the impious.

O Muse, says Horace, pursuant to the custom of our ancestors, celebrate first
the great Jove, who rules over Gods and men, the earth, the seas, and the whole
universe: there is nothing greater than he, nothing that is like, nothing that
is equal to him B. 1. Ode 12.
!

I shall conclude my quotations out of the poets with a surprising passage of
Lucan. When Cato, after crossing the deserts of Lybia, arrives at the temple of
Jupiter Ammon, Labienus is for pursuading him to consult the Oracle. Upon which
occasion the poet puts this answer in the mouth of that philosophical hero,
Lu^an. lib. 9. ver. 566.
Why do you, Labienus propose to me to ask the Oracle whether we should choose
to die in a state of freedom with our swords in our hands, rather than see
tyranny enslave our country? Whether this mortal life be only a remora to a
more lasting one? Whether violence can hurt a good man? Whether virtue does not
make us superior to misfortunes? And whether true glory depends upon success?
We know these things already, and the Oracle cannot give us clearer answers
than what God makes us feel every moment in the bottom of our heart. We are all
united to the Deity. He has no need of words to convey his meaning to us; and
he told us at our birth every thing that we have occasion to know. He has not
chosen the parched sands of Lybia to bury truth in those deserts, that it might
be understood only by a small number. He makes himself known to all the world,
he fills all places, the earth, the sea, the air, the heavens; he makes his
particular abode in the soul of the just: why then should we seek him
elsewhere? In the foregoing passage I have omitted this expression, Jupiter est
quodcunque vides; not only because in some manuscripts we read Jupiter est
cocunque vides, but also because the poet by the word quodcunque confounds the
visible world with the etherial matter, which the Stoics and Orientals
considered as the body of the Divinity: however he represents Cato as
acknowledging a sovereign Intelligence, which is all that I would prove.

Let us pass from the poets to the philosophers, and begin with Thales the
Milesian, chief of the Ionic school Flor. Olym. L.
, who lived about six hundred years before the birth of Christ. We have none of
his works now left; but we have some of his maxims, which have been transmitted
down to us by the most venerable writers of antiquity. God is the most ancient
of all Beings; he is the author of the universe, which is full of wonders Diog.
Laert. vita. Thal. lib. 1.
; he is the Mind which brought the chaos out of confusion into order Cicer. de.
Not. Deor. lib. 1. p. 1113. Edit. Amst. 1661.
; he is without beginning and without ending, and nothing is hid from him S.
Clem. Alex. Strom. v.
; nothing can resist the force of Fate; but this Fate is nothing but the
immutable reason and eternal power of Providence Stob. Ecl. Phys. cap. 8.
. What is still more surprising in Thales, is his definition of the soul: he
calls it a self-moving principle Plut. de. Plat. Phyl. lib. 4. c. 2. Stob. Ecl.
Phys. cap. 40.
, thereby to distinguish it from matter.

Pythagoras Floruit Olymp. LX.
is the second great philosopher after Thales, and chief of the Italic school.
Every body knows the abstinence, silence, retirement and great purity of morals
which he required of his disciples. He was very sensible that human
understanding alone could never attain to the knowledge of divine things,
unless the heart was purged of its passions. Now these are the notions which he
has left us of the Deity. Plut. vita Numae and Diog. Laert. lib. 12.
God is neither the object of sense, nor subject to passion; but invisible,
purely intelligible, and supremely intelligent. In his body (...) is like the
light, and in his soul he resembles truth Vit. Pyth. Poryhyr.
. He is the universal Spirit that pervades and diffuseth itself over all
nature. All beings receive their life from him (...). Irs lib. 5.
. There is but one only God, who is not, as some are apt to imagine, seated
above the world, beyond the orb of the universe; but being all in himself, he
sees all the beings that inhabit his Immensity. He is the sole Principle, the
Light of heaven, the Father of all; he produces every thing, he orders and
disposes every thing; he is the reason, the life, and the motion of all beings
Sword^. Cohort. 1. ad Grace. p. 18.
.

He taught that besides the first Principle, there were three sorts of
intelligent beings, Cods, Heroes and Souls Diog. Laert. lib. 8.
. He considered the first as the unalterable images of the sovereign Mind,
human souls as the least perfect of reasonable substances, and heroes as a sort
of middle beings placed between the two others, in order to raise up souls to
the divine union Hiero^l. Com. in Carm. Aurea. Pyth.
. Thus he represents to us the divine Immensity as containing innumerable
worlds inhabited by spirits of different orders. And this is the true sense of
that famous expression ascribed to the Pythagoreans, that unity was the
principle of all things, and that from this infinite Unity there sprung an
infinite duality. We are not by this duality to understand the two principles
of the Manichees; but, as some think, the second and third forms of the Orphean
Trinity and triform Deity, or, rather, a world of intelligent and corporeal
substances, which is the effect whereof unity is the cause Porphyr. vita. Pyth.
. This is the sentiment of Porphyry, and it ought to be preferred before that
of Plutarch, who is for ascribing the Manichean system to Pythagoras, without
producing for it any proof.

Pythagoras agreed with Thales in defining the Soul to be a self-moving
Principle Plut. Plac. l. 4. cap. 2.
. He maintained farther, That when it quits the body, it is reunited to the
soul of the world Cicer. de Senec. cap. 21.
; that it is not a god, but the work of an eternal God Ib. de Not. Deor. l. 2.
; and that it is immortal on account of its principle Tusc. lib. 1. p. 1300.
. This philosopher was of opinion that man was composed of three parts, a pure
spirit, an ethereal matter, (which he called the subtle vehicle of the soul)
and a mortal or gross body. The old Greek poets had dressed up this opinion in
a different guise; they called the ethereal body, the representation, the
image, or the shadow; because they fancied that this subtle body, when it came
down from heaven to animate the terrestrial body, assumed its form just as
melted metal takes that of the mould in which it is cast. They said, that after
death the spirit, still clothed with this subtle vehicle, flew up to the
regions of the moon, where they placed the Elysian fields. And there, as they
imagined, a sort of second death ensued by the separation of the pure spirit
from its vehicles: the one was united to the Gods, the other staid in the abode
of the shades. This is the reason why Ulysses says in the Odysseis, That he saw
in the Elysian fields the divine Hercules, i.e. his image; for as for him, he
is with the immortal Gods, and assists at their banquets Odyss. lib. 11. p. 167.
. Pythagoras did not adopt the poetic fiction of a second death. He held, that
the pure spirit, and its subtle vehicle being born together, were inseparable,
and returned after death to the star from whence they descended. The Platonists
and almost all the ancient philosophers had the same notion Plot. Enn. 4. l. 3.
and Enn. 6. l. 4. Philopon, Proem. in Arist. de Anim. Pro^l. Comm. in Timm. p.
164, 290. Hierocl. aurea Carm. p. 293.
. St. Paul, speaking of the resurrection, seems to favor this distinction of
the celestial and the terrestrial body; but some will say, how are the dead
raised up? and with what body do they come? Thou fool, that which thou sowest
is not that body which shall be, but bare grain. -- So also is the resurrection
of the dead, it is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; it is sown
in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in
power; it is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body. -- Now this I
say, brethren, because that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God
Cor. xv. ver. 35, 42, 50.
. Hence it is, that some of the ancient fathers, as well as our modern divines
Dr. Clarke on the being and attributes of God, p. 357, 358, 359.
have concluded, that the mortal and terrestrial body, which is ever changing,
and does not continue one moment the same is something merely accidental to our
substance, and does not originally belong to it: a thick crust, a coarse
covering cast over the celestial, spiritual, active and glorious body, which
being unvailed and enlarged at the resurrection, will appear in all its beauty;
that this immortal seed, this incorruptible body, this hidden principle, which
is perhaps at present the seat of the soul, will, for reasons known to God
only, remain buried after death in the common mass of matter till the last
manifestation of the divine Power; and that then the face of the earth will be
renewed by purifying flames, which will purge our globe of all that dark and
earthly dross which it has contracted. And this notion renders the doctrine of
the resurrection intelligible and philosophical.

I shall conclude the article of Pythagoras with a summary of his doctrine as
it is given us by St. Cyril. We see plainly, says this Father, that Pythagoras
maintained, that there was but one God, the original and cause of all things,
who enlightens every thing, animates every thing, and from whom every thing
proceeds, who has given being to all things, and is the source of all motion S.
Cyril. contra a Julian. lib. 1. p. 85.
.

After Pythagoras comes Anaxagoras Flor Olym. LXXX.
of the Ionic sect, born at Clazomene, and master to Pericles the Athenian
hero. This philosopher was the first after Thales in the Ionic school who
perceived the necessity of introducing a supreme Intelligence for the formation
of the universe. He rejected with contempt, and with great strength of reason
refuted the doctrine of those who held that Plut. vita Pericl.
a blind necessity and the casual motions of matter had produced the world. He
endeavored to prove that a pure and uncompounded Spirit presides over the
universe.

According to Aristotle's account, the reasoning of Anaxagoras was founded upon
these two principles: 1. That the idea of matter not including that of active
force, motion could not be one of its properties. We must therefore, said he,
seek somewhere else to find out the cause of its activity. Now this active
principle, as it was the cause of motion, he called the soul, because it
animates the universe Arist. de Anim. lib. 1. cap. p. 619. Edit. Paris. 629.
. 2. He distinguished between this universal principle of motion, and the
thinking principle, which last he called the understanding Ibid. p. 260.
. He saw nothing in matter that had any resemblance to this property; and from
thence he inferred, that there was in nature another substance besides matter.
But he added, that the soul and spirit were one and the same substance
distinguished by us only in regard of its different operations; and that of all
essences it was the most simple, the most pure, and the most exempt from all
mixture and composition. This philosopher passed at Athens for an Atheist,
because he denied that the stars and planets were Gods Plat. de Legib. 20. p.
886..
. He maintained, that the first were suns, and the latter habitable worlds; so
very ancient is the system of a plurality of worlds, which has been generally
thought to be modern.

Plato Plat Phaed. p. 73.
condemns Anaxagoras for having explained all the phenomenon of nature by
matter and motion. Descartes has only revived this opinion. I cannot but think
it very unjust to accuse the philosopher of Clazomene, or his follower, of
Atheism, on this account, since they both lay it down for a principle, that
motion is not a property of matter, and consequently, that the moving force is
altogether spiritual. It must nevertheless be allowed, that the French
Philosopher is blameable in supposing that the visible world is the necessary
and unavoidable effect of a mere impulsion given to an indefinite matter. Hence
(...) would follow, 1. That the laws of motion are not arbitrary and dependant
on a sovereign Intelligence who acts with wisdom and design; which totally
destroys the idea of final causes. 2. That the world, such as we see it, with
all its irregularities, defects and disorders, is precisely in the same state
wherein it was at first produced by the Creator: these two principles were the
fatal source of Spinoza's Atheism: believing with Descartes, that matter and
extension are the same thing, and that all the different phenomenon of nature
are the effect of the necessary laws of motion, he presently inferred that
immense extension and infinite force might be properties of the same eternal
substance, which acts by the immutable laws of a blind necessity.

The most sublime genius of our age, being sensible of these monstrous abuses
of Cartesianism, resolved to undermine the foundations of that philosophy. He
demonstrated that the primary laws of motion are purely arbitrary, and
established with knowledge and design by an intelligent Architect, in order to
the preservation of his work, and the accomplishment of such ends as are worthy
of his wisdom. It is with great injustice that this Philosopher has been
accused with throwing us back into the occult qualities of the Peripatetics. I
confess indeed that the obscure and confused ideas which abound in the writings
of some of his disciples, have given too much occasion to certain foreigners to
reject the philosophy of Sir Isaac. Newton, at the same time that they admire
his geometry; but it is clear from his Vis centripeta est, qua corpora versus
punctum aliquid tanquam ad centrum undique tra^untur, impelluntur vel utcunque
tendunt, Phil. Not. Prine. p. 2.
first writings, that he never considered attraction as a cause, but only as an
effect, and that he always supposed that this effect might be produced by
impulsion Qu^m ego attraction em appello, fieri sane potest ut ea efficialur
impulsu, vel aliquo modo nobis ignotoOpt. Ed. Lat. page 380.
. Provided we reject the absolute plenum of the Cartesians, their romantic
elements, and their celestial vortices which are by no means geometrical, this
incomparable philosopher Phil. Not. Princ. (...). ult. Opt. p. 350.
admits that there may be a subtle spirit, or ethereal matter diffused through
all the immense spaces, to be the universal cause and spring of all the motions
of the celestial and terrestrial bodies; of elasticity, electricity, cohesion,
fluidity, vegetation and sensation; of the emission, refraction and reflection
of light, and even of attraction itself, which he looks upon as the immediate
cause of the most part of natural effects; he would not however pretend to
explain the laws of this ethereal fluid, for want of a sufficient number of
experiments to prove them. It was an essential principle with him, that natural
philosophy should be founded upon experiments, and that these should afterward
be applied to geometry, in order to gather from thence something more to be
depended upon than ingenious conjectures. His writings discover a wonderful
sagacity, penetration and depth, and all the marks of a solid understanding,
which allows nothing to imagination in matters of reason; and though Descartes
must be granted to have surpassed him in perspicuity and method, he was
unquestionably neither so profound nor so geometrical a genius, and gave a
greater loose to imagination.

Socrates Floruit Olym. XC.
follows close after Anaxagoras. The common notion is, that he was a martyr for
the Unity of the Godhead, in having refused to pay his homage to the Gods of
Greece; but it is a mistake. In the apology that Plato makes for this
Philosopher, Socrates acknowledges certain subordinate deities, and teaches,
that the sun and the stars are animated by intelligences who ought to be
worshipped with divine honors. The same Plato in his dialogue upon holiness
Plut. Eutyph, p. 5, and 6.
tells us, that Socrates was not punished for denying that there were inferior
gods, but for declaiming openly against the poets who ascribed human passions
and enormous crimes to those deities.

Socrates, however, whilst he supposed several inferior gods, admitted all the
while but only one eternal Principle. Xenophon has lest us an excellent
abridgment of the Theology of that Philosopher. It Is perhaps the most important
piece we have of antiquity. It contains the conversation of Socrates with
Aristodemus, who doubted of the existence of God. Socrates makes him at first
take notice of all the characters of design, of art, of the wisdom that appears
all over the universe, and particularly in the human body. Xen. Mem. Soc. Ed.
Basil. 1579. lib. p. 573.
Do you believe, says he then to Aristodemus, can you believe that you are the
only intelligent being? you know that you possess but a little particle of that
matter which composes the world, a small part of that water which moistens it,
a spark of that flame which animates it. Is understanding peculiar to you
alone? Have you so engrossed and confined it to yourself, that it is to be
found no where else? Does blind chance work every thing, and is there no such
thing as wisdom besides what you have? Aristodemus having replied, that he did
not see that wife Architect of the universe; Socrates answers him, Neither do
you see the soul which governs your own body, and regulates all its motions.
You might as well conclude, that you do nothing yourself with design and
reason, as maintain that every thing is done by blind chance in the universe.
Aristodemus at length acknowledging a supreme Being, is still in doubt as to
Providence; not being able to comprehend how the Deity can see every thing at
once. Socrates replies, If the spirit that resides in your body moves and
disposes it at its pleasure, why should not that sovereign Wisdom which
presides over the universe, be able likewise to regulate and order every thing
as it pleases? if your eye can see objects at the distance of several furlongs;
why should not the eye of God be able to see every thing at once? If your soul
can think at the same time upon what is at Athens, in Egypt, and in Sicily; why
should not the divine Mind be able to take care of every thing, being every
where present to his work? Socrates perceiving at last that the infidelity of
Aristodemus did not arise so much from his reason as from his heart, concludes
with these words; O Aristodemus, apply yourself sincerely to worship God; he
will enlighten you, and all your doubts will soon be removed!

Plato, a disciple of Socrates, follows the same principles. He lived about the
hundredth Olympiad, at a time when the doctrine of Democritus had made a great
progress at Athens. The design of all his Theology is to give us noble
sentiments of the Deity. to show us that souls were condemned to animate mortal
bodies, only in order to expiate faults they had committed in a pre-existent
state; and in fine, to teach that religion is the only way to restore us to our
first glory and perfection, he despises all the tenets of the Athenian
superstition, and endeavors to purge religion of them. The chief object of this
philosopher is man in his immortal capacity: he speaks of him in his politic
one, only to show that the shortest way to immortality is to discharge all the
duties of civil and social life for the pure love of virtue.

Plato in the beginning of his Timaeus distinguishes between being which is
eternally, and being which has been made. And in another of his dialogues he
defines God the efficient cause which makes things exist that had no being
before Plat. Sophist. p. 185, Ed. Franc. 1602.
: a definition which ^ews that he had an idea of the creation. Nor is it at all
surprising that he should have this idea, since it implies no contradiction. In
reality, when God creates he does not draw a being out of nothing, as out of a
subject upon which he works; but he makes something exist that did not exist
before. The idea of infinite power necessarily supposes that of being able to
produce new substances as well as new forms. To make a substance exist which
did not exist before, has nothing in it more inconceivable than the making form
exist which was not before; for in both cases there is a new reality produced;
and whatever difficulties there are in conceiving the passage from nothing to
being, they are as puzzling in the one as in the other. As therefore it cannot
be denied but that there is a moving power, though we do not conceive low it
acts; so neither must we deny that there is a creating power, because we have
not a clear idea of it.

To return to Plato. He first considers the Deity in his eternal solitude
before the production of finite beings. He says frequently like the Egyptians,
That this first source of Deity is surrounded with thick darkness, which no
mortal can penetrate, and that this inaccessible God is to be adored only by
silence. It Is this first Principle which he calls in several places the Being,
the Unity, and the supreme Good De Repub. lib. 6. p. 686.
; the same in the intelligent world, that the sun is in the visible world. He
afterward represents to us this first Being as sallying out of his Unity to
consider all the various manners by which he might represent himself
exteriorly; and thus the ideal world, comprehending the ideas of all things,
and the truths which result thence, was formed in the divine Understanding.
Plato always distinguishes between the supreme Good, and that Wisdom which is
only an emanation from him. That which presents truth to the mind, says he, and
that which gives us reason is the supreme Good. He is the cause and source of
truth De Repub. lib. 6. p. 687.
, He has begotten it like himself. As the light is not the sun, but an
emanation from it; so truth is not the first Principle, but his emanation. And
this is what he calls the Wisdom, or the Logos. And lastly, he considers the
first Mover displaying his power to form real beings, resembling those
archetypal ideas. He styles him Plat. de. Repub. lib. 10. p. 749.
The Energy, or sovereign Architect who created the universe and the gods, and
who does whatsoever he pleases in heaven, on the earth, and in the shades
below. He calls him likewise, Psyche, or the soul which presides over the
world, rather than the soul of the world; to denote that this soul does not
make a part of the universe, but animates it, and gives it all its forms and
movements. Sometimes he considers the three divine attributes as three causes,
at other times as three beings, and often as three Gods: but he affirms that
they are all but one sole Divinity; that there is no essential difference
between them; that the second is the image of the first, and the third of the
second; that they are not three suns, but one: and that they differ only as the
light, its rays, and the reflection of those rays See Cudworth Intellect. Syst.
from p. 580 to 590.
.

In other places, and especially in the Timaeus Locrus Tim. Loc. p. 109.
, Plato speaks of three other Principles, by the first he understands the
archetypal ideas contained in the divine Intellect: by the second, a primary
matter, incorruptible, eternal, uniform, without figure or division, but
capable of receiving all forms and motions: by the third, the visible universe,
bounded, corruptible, consisting of various parts; and this he styles the sun,
the effect and the work of the idea as the primitive father, and of the (...)
as the universal mother of whatever exists. We ought never to confound these
three Principles of nature with the three forms of the Divinity, which he calls
Agathos, Logos and Psyche; the sovereign Good, which is the Principle of Deity,
the Intellect which drew the plan of the world, and the Energy which executed
it.

Though we should suppose that Plato considered the Logos and the Psyche, the
Intellect and the Energy, not only as two attributes, but as two hypostases, or
emanations from the divine Substance, it would not follow that the Christians
took their doctrine of the Trinity from him. He might owe this idea to the
ancient traditions transmitted from the infant world, whence the Orientals,
Chaldeans, Egyptians and Greeks originally drew their soundest notions in
Divinity. The philosophers of all nations seem to have had some ideas, more or
less confused of a certain Triplicity in the supreme Unity Plot. Enn. v. l. 1.
See Cudworth's Intell. Syst. from page 570 to 630.
. -- Christianity has only unfolded this ancient doctrine. It teaches us that
in the divine Essence there is a triple distinction of Father, Son and Holy
Spirit; that the actions of the one are not the actions of the other; that the
Father exists of himself, independently, as the primitive source of Deity; that
the Son comes forth from the Father by an incomprehensible generation; and the
Holy Spirit from both by an inconceivable procession; and lastly, that these
two emanations from the Divinity are necessary, coeternal, consubstantial,
infinite, and in all things equal to the Father, his independance only
excepted. The church has been pleased to express this distinction by the word
Persons; to denote that this Trinity is not a mere division of attributes, as
the Sabellians held; nor yet three different substances, as the Tritheifts
maintain. We have not a sufficiently clear idea of the eternal Nature to be
able to deny, but it may admit of such a distinction. As to finite beings,
indeed, the only distinction we know in them, is that of modes and substances;
but is this a reason to deny the possibility of another in the infinite
Essence? Ignorance may be a reason for doubting, but never for denying.

In order to silence the incredulous, and make this mystery intelligible to
them, a famous Dr. Clarke.
Doctor of the church of England, and as I am assured, the greatest philosopher
Sir Isaac Newton.
of modern times, believed that it would do no prejudice to the faith to
consider the three Persons of the Trinity as three individual Agents, or three
distinct Beings, though of the same substance. This opinion is as far above
Arianism as Arianism is above Socinianism. Pausto-Socini maintained, that the
Son had never any existence before the incarnation. Arius held, that he was
created or produced out of nothing like finite beings, but yet from all
eternity, that is, before all time. The learned Dr. Clarke maintains every
where, that the Word is not a creature, but an emanation from the Father,
coeternal and consubstantial; that this emanation is as essential to the Deity
as his veracity; that it is not possible for the Father to be without the Son,
in any other sense than it is possible for God to lie Observations on Dr.
Waterlands Queries, P. 75.
; and consequently that the Word is not a precarious being which God may
annihilate.

I will not pretend to justify any inconsiderate expressions which may have
dropped from the Doctor; we find such in the Fathers themselves: but charity,
which thinks no evil, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all
things, will never insist upon the literal import of unguarded words, which are
disavowed. It must nevertheless be granted that this doctrine, which is
ascribed originally to sir Isaac Newton, explains nothing, and only plunges us
in new difficulties greater than the first. There may easily be many distinct
beings, of the same divisible and finite substance; but it is impossible to
conceive three distinct beings of the infinite and indivisible substance,
without destroying his nature, and discerping the living and true God. Is it
not better contentedly to join with all Christian antiquity, in saying, that
there is a triple distinction, real but incomprehensible in the Divinity, than
to disturb the peace of the Church with defining the metaphysical nature of
this distinction, by such ideas as lead to Tritheism, contrary to the invention
of those who advance them? How easily are the most extensive geniuses led
astray, when they shake off the yoke of authority to give themselves up to
their speculations? But to proceed: Aristotle, Plato's disciple, and Prince of
the Peripatetic Philosophers, calls God Arist. Ed. Paris. 1629. Metaph. Eb.
xiv. cap. 7. p. 1000.
The eternal and living Being, the most noble of all beings, a substance
entirely distinct from matter, without entension, without division, without
parts, and without succession; who understands every thing by one single act,
and continuing himself immovable, gives motion to all things, and enjoys in
himself a perfect happiness, as knowing and contemplating himself with infinite
pleasure. In his metaphysics he lays it down for a principle, Metaph. lib. xiv.
cap. 10. p. 1005.
That God is a supreme Intelligence which acts with order, proportion and
design; and is the source of all that is good, excellent and just. In his
treatise of the soul, he says, That the supreme Mind Id. de Anim. lib. 1. cap.
7. p. 628.
is by its nature prior to all beings, that he has a sovereign dominion over
all. And in other places he says, Metaph. lib. 1. cap. 2 and 3, p. 844, 845.
That the first principle is neither the fire nor the earth nor the water, nor
any thing that is the object of sense; but that a spiritual substance is the
cause of the universe, and the source of all the order and all the beauties, as
well as of all the motions and all the forms which we so much admire in it. --
These passages show that though Aristotle held matter to be eternal, he
nevertheless considered it as a production of the divine intellect, and
posterior in nature to it. He supposed the eternity of this production, because
he could not conceive how the divine Mind, being all act, and all energy, could
ever be in a state of inactivity. Besides this first and eternal Substance, he
acknowledges several other intelligent beings that preside over the motions of
the celestial spheres. There is, says he, but one only Mover, and several
inferior deities. Met. lib. xiv. cap. 8. p. 1003.
All that is added about the human shape of these deities, is nothing else but
fiction, invented (...) purpose to instruct the common people, and engage them
to an observance of good laws. All must be reduced to one only primitive
Substance, and to several inferior substances, which govern in subordination to
the first. This is the genuine doctrine of the ancients, which has happily
escaped from the wreck of truth, amidst the rocks of vulgar errors and poetic
fables.

Cicero lived in an age when corruption of manners and skepticism were at their
height. The sect of Epicurus had got the ascendant at Rome over that of
Pythagoras; and some of the greatest men, when they were reasoning about the
divine Nature, thought It to suspend their judgment, and waver between the two
opinions of a supreme Intelligence and a Wind matter. Cicero, in his treatise
of the nature of the Gods, pleads the cause of the academic Philosophers who
doubted of every thing. It is however, to be observed, that he refutes Epicurus
with great force of reason in his first book, and that the objections which he
makes in his third, as an academic, are much weaker than the proofs which he
draws from the wonders that appear in nature, which he insists so in his second
book, to demonstrate the existence of a supreme Intelligence.

In his other works, and particularly in his book of laws, he describes the
universe to us Cic. de Leg. Ed. Amst. 1661. lib. 1. p. 1188. 1191. etc.
as a republic of which Jupiter is the Prince and common father. The great law
imprinted in the hearts of all men is to love the public good, and the members
of the common society as themselves. This love of order is supreme justice, and
this justice is amiable for its own sake. To love it only for the advantages it
produces us, may be politic, but there is little of goodness in it. It Is the
highest injustice to love justice only for the sake of recompense. In a word,
the universal, immutable and eternal law of all intelligent beings, is to
promote the happiness of one another like children of the same father. He next
represents God to us as a sovereign Wisdom, from whose authority it is still
more impracticable for intelligent natures to withdraw themselves than it is
for corporeal ones Cic. de Leg. lib. 2. p. 1194.
According to the opinion of the wisest and greatest men, says this
philosopher, the law is not an invention of human understanding (...) the
arbitrary constitution of men, but flows from the eternal Reason that governs
the universe. The rape which Tarquin committed upon Lucretia, continues he, was
not less criminal in its nature, because there was not at that time any written
law at Rome against such sort of violence. The tyrant was guilty of a breach of
the eternal law, the obligation whereof did not commence from the time it was
written, but from the moment it was made. Now its origin is as ancient as the
divine intellect for the true, the primitive, and the supreme law is nothing
else but the sovereign reason of the great Jove. This law, says he in another
place Frag. of the repub. of Cicero preserved by Lactanthes, lib. vi. ^. 8
is universal, eternal, immutable. It does not vary according to times and
places. It is not different now from what it was formerly. The same immortal
law is a rule to all nations, because it has no author but the one only God who
brought it forth and promulged it. Such were the reasonings of Cicero when he
consulted natural light, and was not carried away by a fondness of showing his
wit in defending the doctrine of the Skeptics.

To come at last to Seneca the Stoic. He was Nero's tutor, and lived in an age
when Christianity was not in credit enough to engage the heathens to borrow any
philosophical principles from thence. Senec. Edit. Ant. a Lipsio 1632. de
Benef. lib. iv. p. 311.
It Is of very little consequence, say he, by what name you call the first
Nature, and the divine Reason that presides over the universe, and fills all
the parts of it. He is still the same God. He is called Jupiter Stator, not as
historians say, because he stopped the Roman armies as they were flying, but
because he is the constant support of all beings. They may call him Fate,
because he is the first cause on which all others depend. We Stoics call him
sometimes Father Bacchus, because he is the universal life that animates
nature: Hercules, because his power is invincible: Mercury, because he is the
eternal Reason, Order and Wisdom. You may give him as many names as you please
provided you allow but one sole Principle every where present.

Agreeable to Plato's notions, he considers the divine Understanding as
comprehending in itself the model of all things, which he styles the immutable
and almighty ideas Senec. Epist. 65 p. 493.
, Every workman, says he, has a model by which he forms his work. It signifies
nothing whether this model exist outwardly and before his eyes, or be formed
within him by the strength of his own genius; so God produces within himself
that perfect model, which is the proportion, the order and the beauty of all
beings. Ibid. Nature. (...) lib 2. p. 715
. The ancients, says he in another place, did not think Jove such a being as we
represent him in the capitol, and in our other buildings. But by Jove they
meant the guardian and the governor of the universe, the understanding and the
mind, the Master and the Architect of this great machine. All names belong to
him. You are not in the wrong if you call him Fate, for he is the cause of
causes, and every thing depends on him. Would you call him Providence; you fall
into no mistake, it is by his wisdom that this world is governed. Would you
call him Nature; you will not offend in doing so, it is from him all beings
derive their origin, it is by him that they live and breathe.

There is no reading the works of Epictetus, of Arian his disciple, and of
Marcus Antoninus without admiration. We find in them rules of morality worthy
of christianity; and yet these disciples of Zeno believed like their matter,
that there was but one substance; that the supreme intelligent Being was
material, and that his Essence was a pure ether which filled all by local
diffusion; that whatever was not extended was nothing; and in short, that
infinite extension was the same with the divine Immensity. --

Plat. Tim. and de leg. lib. x. Arist. de Anim. lib. 1. cap. 3. Porphyr. p. 230.
The Platonists represented to them, that it was a gross imagination to suppose
that every thing, which is, exists by local diffusion; that were it so, the
divine Essence would not be equally present every where; that there would be
more of it in a great space than in a little one; that it is absurd to conceive
that which is nothing but power, wisdom and goodness, under the form of length,
breadth and thickness; that all other beings exist in God, but that he exists
only in himself; that immense space is not the divine Immensity, as time
everlasting is not the divine Eternity; that the Immensity of God is the manner
of his existing in himself, without extension of parts, as his Eternity is the
manner of his existing in himself without succession of thoughts; that space is
but the manner wherein bodies exist in him, as time is but the manner in which
finite beings exist with him, that the one measures the bounds of the parts,
and the other the variation of the modes; that we should have no idea of local
extension; if there were no bodies, as we should have no idea of successive
duration if there were no changes; and lastly, that indefinite unbounded
extension is not immense in all senses; as it is not infinite in all respects:
but that God is immense in all senses, as he is in all respects infinite.

It was thus that the Pagan philosophers talked of the divine Immensity before
the rise of scholastic theology. The obscurity of our reasonings on this matter
proceeds from our want of a clear idea of substances: we neither know nor
distinguish them but by their properties: otherwise we should see that the
supreme Unity may exist every where with^^^ extension of parts, as he exists
for ever without succession of thoughts; that he is all in all places, as he
beholds all beings with one glance. The reason of our not having a clear idea
of the divine Immensity, is our not having an adequate idea of infinity; we
ascribe to him certain properties, because we see that they are contained in
the idea we have of him; but we are obliged at the same time, in order to avoid
absurdities, to give him other attributes which we do not comprehend. Thus in
geometry we admit the infinite divisibility of matter, and the doctrine of
asymptotes which follows from it, without having a clear idea of either of them.

But after all, the materialism of the Stoics does not evince that they were
Atheists; a false notion about the Deity being far from proving that they
believed none at all. What constitutes an Atheist, is not the maintaining with
the Orientals, that matter is an expansion of the divine substance nor with the
Stoics, that the infinite Essence is a pure ether; nor with the Platonists,
that the universe is an eternal production of the Deity; but real Atheism
consists in denying that there is a supreme Intelligence, who made the world by
his power, and governs it by his wisdom.

For our suller satisfaction, with regard to the theology of the Heathens, let
us see what the fathers of the church thought of it. They had sufficient
opportunities of knowing it thoroughly, by the frequent disputes which they
held with them. As this is a matter of a very nice nature, it may be dangerous
to indulge any thing to one's own conjectures: let us have recourse to wise
antiquity. Arnobius Arnob. lib. 1. p. 19.
introduces the heathens complaining of the injustice of the Christians. It Is a
mere calumny, say those heathens, to charge us with such a crime, as the
denying of a supreme God. We call him Jove, the supremely great and sovereignly
good, we dedicate our most magnificent structures and our capitols to him, to
show that we exalt him above all other deities. An apocryphal book which then
passed under the name of St. Peter's.
St. Peter in his preaching at Athens, says St. Clement of Alexandria Strom. l.
6. p. 625.
insinuates that the Greeks had a knowledge of the Deity. He supposes that
those people adore the same God as we do, though not in the same manner. He
does not forbid us to adore the same God as the Greeks, but he forbids us to
adore him after the same way. He orders us to change the manner, and not the
object of our worship. The heathens, says Lactantius lib. 1. p. 16.
, who admit several gods, say nevertheless that those subordinate deities,
though they preside over all the various parts of the universe, do it in such a
manner, as that there is still but one sole Ruler and supreme Governor. From
whence it follows, that all other invisible powers are not properly Gods, but
ministers or deputies of the one great and almighty God, who appointed them
executors of his will and pleasure. Eusebius of Cesarea goes farther. Praep.
Ev^ng. l. 3. cap. 13. p. 105.
The heathens own that there is but one only God, who fills, pervades and
presides, over universal nature; but they maintain, that as he is present to
his work only in an incorporeal and invisible manner, they are therefore in the
right to worship him in his visible and corporeal effects. I shall conclude
with a famous passage of St. Austin, who reduces the Polytheism of the heathens
to the unity of one sole Principle. J. Aug. de. Civ. Dei. l. 4. c. 11.
Jupiter, says this father, is according to the philosophers, the soul of the
world, who take different names according to the different effects which he
produces. In the ethereal spaces he is called Jupiter, in the air Juno, in the
sea Neptune, in the earth Pluto, in hell Proserpine, in the element of fire
Vulcan, in the sun Phoebus, in divination Apollo, in war Mars, in the vintage
Bacchus, in the harvest Ceres, in the forests Diana, and in the sciences
Minerva. All that crowd of gods and goddesses are only the same Jupiter, whose
different powers and attributes are expressed by different names. It is
therefore evident by the testimony of profane poets, heathen philosophers, and
fathers of the church, that the Pagans acknowledged one sole supreme Deity. The
Orientals, the Egyptians, the Greeks, the Romans, and all nations agreed
universally in teaching this truth.

About the fiftieth Olympiad, six hundred years before the Christian era, the
Greeks having lost the traditional knowledge of the Orientals, began to lay
aside the doctrine of the ancients, and to reason about the divine Nature from
prejudices, which their senses and imagination suggested. 1. Anaximander lived
at that time, and was the first who set himself to destroy the belief of a
supreme Intelligence, in order to account for every thing by the action of
blind matter, which by necessity assumes all sorts of forms. He was followed by
Leucippus, Democritus, Epicurus, Strato, Lucretius, and all the school of the
atomical philosophers. 2. Pythagoras, Anaxagoras, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle,
and all the great men of Greece opposed this impious doctrine, and endeavored
to re-establish the ancient Theology of the Orientals. These philosophers of a
superior genius observing in nature motion, thought and design, and the idea of
matter including none of these three properties; they inferred from thence,
that there was in nature another substance besides matter. Greece being thus
divided into two sects, they disputed for a long time, without either party
being convinced. 3. At length about the 120th Olympiad, Pyrrho formed a third
sect, whose great principle was to doubt of every thing, and determine nothing.
All the atomists, who had labored in vain to find out a demonstration of their
false principles, presently struck in with the Pyrrhonian sect. They ran wildly
into an universal doubting, and carried it almost to such an excess of frenzy,
that they doubted of the clearest and most palpable truths. They maintained
without any allegory, that every thing we see is only an illusion, and that the
whole series of life is but a perpetual dream, of which those in the night are
only so many images. 4. At last Zeno set up a fourth school about the 130th
Olympiad. This philosopher endeavored to reconcile the disciples of Democritus
with those of Plato, by maintaining that the first Principle was indeed an
infinite Wisdom, but that his essence was only a pure ether, or a subtle
light, which diffused itself every where, to give life, motion and reason to
all beings.

It is plain then that there were four sorts of philosophers among the
ancients; the Atheists or Atomists, the Spiritualists or Theists, the
Materialists or Stoics, the Py^^honians or Academics. In these last ages, the
modern Free thinkers have only revived the ancient errors, disguising them
under new terms.

1. Jordano Bruno, Vannini, and Spinoza have vamped up the monstrous system of
Anaximander; and have added only some artful distinctions to impose upon weak
minds. Spinoza perceiving clearly that thought could not be an effect of
matter, endeavored to prevent all objections against the Materialists, by
maintaining, that Lock of Hum. Under. p. 456.
extention and thought are properties of the same substance; that the ideas of
objects are really nothing different from the objects themselves Berkley's
Dialogues.
; that extention and matter are the same Descartes and Malebranche.
; that infinite space is the immensity of God, as infinite time is his eternity
Dr. Clarke's Letters to Leibnitz, p. 77. 129.
; and consequently that all essences are but different forms of the same
substance The Orientals and Semi-cabalistical writers.
. It must nevertheless be granted, that his atheism does not consist in these
errors, since they have all been maintained by philosophers who had a sincere
abhorrence of impiety. Spinoza's Atheism lies wholly in this, that he makes the
one only Substance, for which he contends, to act without knowledge or design.
2. Descartes, Malebranche, Po^ret, Leibnitz, Sir Isaac Newton, Dr. Bentley, Dr.
Clarke, Dr. Cheyne, and several philosophers of a genius equally subtle and
profound, have endeavored to refute these errors, and brought arguments to
support the ancient theology. Besides the proofs which are drawn from the
effects, they have insisted on others drawn from the idea of the first cause.
They show plainly, that the reasons for believing are infinitely stronger than
those for doubting; and that it is absurd to deny what we see clearly, because
we do not see farther. 3. Mr. Hobbes, and some philosophers of more faith,
Behemen, and several cabalistical writers, have revived the errors of the
Stoics, and pretend that extension is the basis of all substances; that the
soul differs from the body only as being more subtilized; that a spirit is but
a rarefied body, and a body a condensed spirit; and lastly that the infinite
Being, though indivisible, is extended by local diffusion. 4. To conclude,
there are some superficial minds, who not being able to look upon truth with a
steady view, nor to weigh the degrees of evidence, nor to compare the force of
proofs with that of objections, persuade themselves that the mind of man is not
formed for the knowledge of truth, run headlong into an universal doubting, and
fall at length into a senseless kind of Pyrrhonism, called Egomism, where every
one fancies himself to be the only being that exists. The history of former
times is like that of our own: human understanding takes almost the same forms
in different ages, and loses its way in the same labyrinths; there are
periodical diseases of the mind as well as of the body.

PART II. Of the MYTHOLOGY of the PAGANS.
MEN, left to the light of their reason alone, have always looked upon moral
and physical evil as a shocking phenomenon in the work of a Being infinitely
wise, good and powerful. To account for it, the philosophers have had recourse
to several hypothesis. Reason told them all, that what is supremely good could
never produce any thing that was wicked or miserable. From hence they
concluded, that souls are not now what they were at first; that they are
degraded for some fault committed by them in a former state; that this life is
a state of exile and expiation; and in a word, that all beings are to be
restored to their proper order. Tradition struck in with reason, and this
tradition had spread over all nations, certain opinions which they held in
common, with regard to the three states of the world, as I shall show in this
second part, which will be a sort of abridgment of the traditional doctrine of
the ancients.

I begin with the Mythology of the Greeks and Romans. All the Poets, speaking
of the golden age, or reign of Saturn, describe it to us as an happy state, in
which there were neither calamities, nor crimes, nor labor, nor pains, nor
diseases, nor death See Hesiod. de saecul. aurco. Orpheus aqud Proclum. Theol.
Plat. lib. 5. cap. 10. Lucret. lib. 5. Ovid. Metam. lib. 1. fab. 3. Virg.
Georg. lib. 2. lin. 336.
. They represent, on the contrary, the iron age, as the time when physical and
moral evil first appeared; then it was that vices, sufferings, and all manner
of evils came forth of Pandora's box, and overflowed the face of the earth
Ovid. Met. lib. fab. 4, 5, and 6. Virg. Georg. lib. 1. l. 126. Juv. Satir. 6
. They speak to us of the golden age renewed, as of a time when Astraea was to
return upon earth; when justice, peace and innocence were to flourish again
with their original luster; and when every thing was to be restored to its
primitive perfection Virg. Ecl. 4. Scnec. Trag. Oedip. Act. 2.
. In a word, they sing on all occasions the exploits of a son of Jupiter, who
was to quit his heavenly abode and live among men. They give him different
names, according to his different functions; sometimes he is Apollo fighting
against Python and the Titans; sometimes he is Hercules, destroying monsters
and giants, and purging the earth of their enormities and crimes; one while he
is Mercury, or the messenger of Jove, flying about every where to execute his
decrees; and another while he is Perseus, delivering Andromeda or human nature,
from the monster that rose out of the great deep to devour her. He is always
some son of Jupiter, giving battles, and gaining victories. I will not insist
upon these poetical descriptions, because they may perhaps be looked upon as
mere fictions, and a machinery introduced to embellish a poem, and amuse the
mind. Allegorical explications are liable to uncertainty and mistake; so that I
shall go on directly to represent the doctrine of the philosophers,
particularly that of Plato, which is the source from whence Plotinus, Proclus,
and the Platonists of the third century drew their principle notions.

To begin with the dialogue of Phaedo, or of immortality, and give a short
analysis of it: Phaedo gives his friend an account of the condition in which he
saw Socrates at the time of his death. He quitted life, says he, with a serene
joy, and a noble intripidity. His friends asking him the reason of it, I hope,
says Socrates in his answer, to be reunited to the good and perfect Gods, and
to be associated with better men than those I leave upon earth P. 48. 51.
. When Cebes objects to him that the soul vanishes after death like a smoke,
and is entirely annihilated, Socrates sets himself to refute that opinion, and
endeavors to prove that the soul had a real existence P. 57.
in an happy state, before it informed a human body. -- This doctrine he
ascribes to Orpheus Plat. Cratyl. p. 276.
The disciples of Orpheus, says he, called the body a prison, because the soul
is here in a state of punishment till it has expiated the faults that it
committed in heaven. Souls, continued Plato, that are too much given to bodily
pleasures, and are in a manner besotted, wander upon the earth, and are put
into new bodies Phaed. p. 61, 62, 63.
; for all sensuality and passion cause the soul to have a stronger attachment
to the body, make her fancy that she is of the same nature, and render her in a
manner corporeal; so that she contracts an incapacity of flying away into
another life. Being oppressed with the weight of her impurity and corruption,
she sinks again into matter, and becomes thereby disabled to remount toward
the regions of purity, and attain to a reunion with her Principle.

Upon this foundation is built the doctrine of the transmigration of souls,
which Plato represents in the second Timaeus as an allegory, and at other times
as a thing real, where souls that have made themselves unworthy of the supreme
Beatitude, s^^^urn and suffer successively in the bodies of different animals,
till at last they are purged of their crimes, by the pains they undego. This
has made some philosophers believe that the souls of beasts are degraded
spirits. A very ancient doctrine, and common to all the Asiatics, from whom
Pythagoras and Plato derived it; but the poets had much debased it by their
fictions -- They supposed that there was an universal and eternal
metempsychosis; that all spirits were subject to it, without ever arriving at
any fixed state. The philosophers, on the contrary, believed that none but
depraved souls were destined to such a transmigration, and that it would one
day be at an end, when they were purified from their crimes See Cudw. Intel.
System. p. 314.
.

The Pythagoreans and Platonists not being able to persuade themselves that the
brutes were absolutely insensible of pleasure and pain, or that matter was
capable of sensation and consciousness, or that the Divine Justice could
inflict sufferings on intelligences that had never offended, thought the
doctrine of transmigration less absurd than that of mere machines, material
souls, or pure intelligences formed only to animate the bodies of beasts.

The first of these opinions is altogether contrary to experience; and though
we may by general and ingenious hypotheses throw a mist before our eyes, yet
whenever we examine nicely into all appearances of sensation discernible in
beasts, we can never seriously doubt of it. I do not say the appearances of
reflection, but of sensation; I am not unaware that in our own bodies we have
frequent motions of which we are not conscious, and which nevertheless seem to
be the effect of the most exact and geometrical reasonings. I speak therefore
of the marks of pleasure and pain which we observe in the brutes; and I think
that we can have no pretense to reject such evidence, unless it be that we do
not feel what happens to them; but then, for the same reason, we might believe,
that all other men are machines. The second opinion, which is that of material
souls, held by the Peripatetics, tends to destroy all the proofs of the
immateriality of our spirits. If matter be capable of sensation, it may
likewise be capable of reflecting upon its own sensations, and the Materialists
will gain their point. The third opinion destroys all our soundest notions of
the Deity, by supposing that God can create beings which shall be immediately
unhappy, without any previous demerit on their part, degrade pure intelligences
without any reason, and when they for a while have acted in mortal bodies a
part much below the dignity of their nature, reduce them again to nothing.

I will venture to say, that the doctrine of transmigration is less repugnant
not only to reason and experience, but likewise to religion, than either of the
other three. We see in the St. Luke chap. viii.
sacred Oracles that impure spirits may desire sometimes to enter into the
bodies of the viles^ animals. After all, a true philosopher will be prudently
skeptical, with regard to all uncertain conjectures. The only use which I would
make of what has been above advanced, is to show the incredulous that they say
nothing to the purpose against us, when they maintain that our souls die like
those of the brutes; and farther, that the fictions of the ancients, how absurd
soever they at first appear, are often more defensible than the systems of the
moderns, which are so much admired for a depth of penetration.

To return to Plato Pure souls, adds he in his Phaedo, that have exerted
themselves here below to get the better of all corruption, and free themselves
from the impurities of their terrestrial prison, retire after death into an
invisible place, unknown to us, where the pure unites with the pure, the good
cleaves to its like, and our immortal essence is united to the divine. He calls
this place the first earth, where souls made their abode before their
degradation, The earth says he, is immense; we know and we inhabit only a small
corner of it P. 81.
. That ethereal earth, the ancient abode of souls, is placed in the pure
regions of heaven, where the stars are seated. We that live in this low abyss
are apt enough to fancy that we are in an high place, and we call the air the
heavens; just like a man that from the bottom of the sea should view the sun
and stars through the water, and fancy the ocean to be the firmanent itself.
But if we had wings to mount on high, we should see that THERE is the true
heaven, the true light, and the true earth. As in the sea every thing is
altered, and disfigured by the salts that abound in it; so in our present earth
every thing is deformed, corrupted, and in a ruinous condition, if compared
with the primitive earth. Plato gives afterward a pompous description of that
ethereal earth, of which ours is only a broken crust. He says P. 82.
that every thing there was beautiful, harmonious and transparent; fruits of an
exquisite taste grew there naturally; and it was watered with rivers of nectar.
They there breathed the light, as we here breathe the air, and they drank
waters which were purer than air itself. This notion of Plato agrees in a great
measure with that of Descartes, about the nature of the planets; this modern
Philosopher was of opinion that they were at first suns, which contracted
afterward a thick and opaque crust.

This same doctrine of Plato is likewise clearly explained in his Timaeus Tim.
p. 1043.
. There he tells us how Solon in his travels discoursed with an Egyptian priest
about the antiquity of the world, its origin, and the revolutions which had
happened in it according to the Mythology of the Greeks. Upon which the
Egyptian priest says to him, O Solon, you Greeks are always children, and you
never come to an age of maturity; your understanding is young, and has no true
knowledge of antiquity. There have been upon earth several deluges and
conflagrations, caused by changes in the motion of the heavenly bodies. Your
history of Phaeton, whatever air it has of a fable, is nevertheless not without
a real foundation. We Egyptians have preserved the memory of these facts in our
monuments and temples; whereas it is but a very little while that the Greeks
have had any knowledge of letters, of the muses, and of the sciences. This
discourse puts Timaeus upon explaining to Socrates the origin of things, and
the primitive state of the world P, 1047.
. Whatever has been produced, says he, has been produced by some cause. It Is no
easy matter to know the nature of this Maker, and Father of the universe; and
though you should discover it, it would be impossible for you to make the
vulgar comprehend it. This Architect of the world, continues he, had a model by
which he produced every thing, and this model is himself. As he is good, and
what is good has not the least tincture of envy, he made all things as far as
was possible like himself. He made the world perfect in the whole of its
constitution, perfect too in all the various parts that compose it, which were
subject neither to diseases, nor to decay of age. The Father of all things,
beholding this beautiful image of himself, took a complacency in his work, and
this complacency raised in him a desire of improving it to a nearer likeness to
its Model.

In the dialogue which bears the title of Politicus, Plato mentioning this
primitive state of the world, calls it the reign of Saturn, and describes it in
this manner Page 537, 538.
. God was then the Prince and common Father of all; he governed the world by
himself, as he governs it now by inferior deities: rage and cruelty did not
then prevail upon earth; war and sedition were not so much as known. God
himself took care of the sustenance of mankind, and was their guardian and
shepherd; there were no magistrates, nor civil polity as there are now. In
those happy days men sprung out of the bosom of the earth, which produced them
of itself, like flowers and trees. The fertile fields yielded fruits and corn
without the labor of tillage. Mankind stood in no need of raiment to cover
their bodies, being troubled with no inclemency of the seasons; and they took
their rest upon beds of turf of a perpetual verdure. Under the reign of
Jupiter, Saturn, the master of the universe, having quitted as it were the
reins of his empire, hid himself in an inaccessible retreat. The inferior gods
who governed under him retired likewise; the very foundations of the world were
shaken by motions contrary to its principle and its end, and it lost its beauty
and its luster. Then it was that good and evil were blended together. But in
the end, lest the world should be plunged in an eternal abyss of confusion,
God, the author of the primitive order, will appear again and resume the reins
of empire. Then he will change, amend, embellish and restore the whole frame of
nature, and put an end to decay of age, to diseases and death.

In the dialogue under the title of Phaedrus, Plato more distinctly unfolds the
secret causes of moral evil, which brought in physical evil. page 1216.
There are in every one of us, says he, two principal springs of action, the
desire of pleasure, and the love of virtue, which are the wings of the soul.
When these wings are parted, when the love of pleasure and the love of virtue
carry us contrary ways, then souls fall down into mortals bodies. Let us see
here his notion of the pleasures which spirits taste in heaven, and of the
manner how souls fell from the happy state which they enjoyed there. Page 1222.
The great Jupiter, says he, animating his winged chariot, marches first,
followed by all the inferior Gods and Genii, thus they traverse the heavens,
admiring the infinite wonders thereof. But when they go to the great banquet,
they raised themselves to the top of heaven, and mount above the spheres. None
of our poets ever yet sung, or can sing that super-celestial place. It is there
that souls contemplate with the eyes of the understanding, the truly existing
Essence, which has neither color, nor figure, nor is the object of any sense,
but is purely (...). There they see virtue, truth and justice not as they are
here below, but as they exist in him who is Being itself. There they satiate
themselves with that light till they are no longer able to bear the glory of
it, and then they return back to heaven, where they seed again on nectar and
ambrosia -- Such is the life of the Gods. Now continues Plato Page 1223.
, every soul which follows God faithfully into that super-celestial place,
preserves itself pure and without blemish; but if it takes up with nectar and
ambrosia, and does not attend on Jupiter's chariot to go and contemplate truth,
it grows heavy and sluggish, it breaks its wings, it falls upon the earth, and
enters into a human body more or less vile, according as it has been more or
less elevated. Souls less degraded than others dwell in the bodies of
philosophers. The most despicable of all animate the bodies of tyrants and evil
Princes. Their condition alters after death, and becomes more or less happy,
according as they have loved virtue or vice in their life time. After ten
thousand years souls will be reunited to their origin. -- During that space of
time their wings grow again and are renewed This doctrine of Plato's concerning
the fall and restoration of souls, is explained by Macrobius in his commentary
on Scipio's dream, chap. ii. 12, 13.
.

Such was the doctrine which Plato opposed to the profane sect of Democritus
and Epicurus, who denied an eternal Providence on account of the physical and
moral evil which they saw in the world. This Philosopher gives us a fine
description of the universe: he considers it as an immensity filled with free
spirits, which inhabit and inform innumerable worlds. These spirits are
qualified to enjoy a double felicity; the one consisting in the contemplation
of the divine Essence, the other in admiring his works. When souls no longer
make their felicity consist in the knowledge of truth, and when lower pleasures
turn them off from the love of the supreme Essence, they are thrown down into
some planet, there to undergo expiatory punishments till they are cured by
their sufferings. -- These planets are consequently, according to Plato's
notion, like hospitals, or places instituted for the cure of distempered
intelligences. Such is the inviolable law established for the preservation of
order in the celestial spheres. This double employment of the heavenly spirits
is one of the sublimest notions of Plato, and shows the wonderful depth of his
genius. It was the system adopted by the heathen philosophers, whenever they
attempted to explain to us the origin of evil; and thus they reason: -- If
souls could without intermission contemplate the divine Essence by a direct
view, they would be impeccable, the sight of the supreme Good necessarily
engaging all the love of the will. To explain therefore the fall of spirits,
they are forced to suppose an interval, when the soul withdraws from the divine
presence, and quits the super-celestial abode, in order to admire the beauties
of nature, and entertain herself with ambrosia, as a food less delicate, and
more suitable to a finite being. It is in these intervals that she becomes
false to her duty.

Pythagoras had learned the same doctrine among the Egyptians; we have still a
very valuable monument of it left in the commentary of Hierocles upon the
golden verses ascribed to that philosopher Hierocl. Comm. in aurea Carm. p.
187. Edit. Cont. 1709
. As our alienation from God, says this author, and the loss of the wings which
used to raise us up to heavenly things, has thrown us down into this region of
death, which is overrun with all manner of evils; so the stripping ourselves of
earthly affections, and the revival of virtues in us make our wings grow again,
and raise us up to the mansions of life, where true good is to be found without
any mixture of evil. The essence of man being in the middle between beings that
contemplate God without ceasing, and such as are not able to contemplate him at
all, he has it in his power to raise himself up toward the one, or sink down
toward the other Hierocl. Comm. in aurea Carm. p. 187. Edit. Cant. 1709.
. The wicked man, says Hierocles in another place, does not care that the soul
should be immortal, for fear he should live after death only to suffer
punishment. But the judges of the shades below, as they form their judgment
upon the rules of truth, do not decree, that the soul should exist no longer,
but that it should be no longer vicious. Their business is to correct and cure
it, by prescribing punishments for the health of nature, just as physicians
heal the most inveterate ulcers by incisions. These judges punish the crime in
order to extirpate vice. They do not annihilate the essence of the soul, but
bring it back to its true and genuine existence, purifying it from all the
passions that corrupt it. And therefore when we have sinned, we should be glad
to embrace the punishment as the only remedy for vice.

It is therefore evidently the doctrine of the most famous Greek philosophers,
1. That souls had a preexistence in heaven. 2. That the Jupiter who marched at
the head of souls before the loss of their wings, is distinct from the supreme
Essence, and is very like the Mythras of the Persians, and the Orus of the
Egyptians. 3. That souls lost their wings, and were thrust down into mortal
bodies, because that instead of following Jupiter's chariot, they gave
themselves too much up to the enjoyment of lower pleasures. 4. That at the end
of a certain period of time, the wings of the soul shall grow again, and Saturn
shall resume the reins of his empire in order to restore the universe to its
original splendour.

Let us now examine the Egyptian Mythology, the source from whence that of the
Greeks was derived. I shall not offer to maintain the mystical explications
that Kircher gives of the famous table of Isis, and of the obelisks that are to
be seen at Rome: I confine myself to Plutarch, who has preserved to us an
admirable monument of that Mythology. To represent it in its real beauties, it
will be proper to give a short and clear analysis of his treatise of Isis and
Osiris, which is a letter written to Clea, priestess of Isis. Page 354.
The Egyptian Mythology, says Plutarch, has two senses, the one sacred and
sublime, the other sensible and palpable. It Is for that reason that the
Egyptians put Sphinxes before the door of their temples; designing thereby to
signify to us that their theology contains the secrets of wisdom under
enigmatical words. This is also the sense of the inscription upon a statue of
Pallas or Isis, at Sais, I AM ALL THAT IS, HAS BEEN, AND SHALL BE, AND NO
MORTAL HAS EVER YET REMOVED THE VAIL THAT COVERS ME. Page 354.
He afterward relates the Egyptian fable of Isis and Osiris. They were both
born of Rhea and the Sun; whilst they were still in their mother's womb, they
jointly ingendered the God Orus the living image of their substance. Typhon was
not born, but burst violently through the ribs of Rhea. He afterward revolted
against Osiris, filled the universe with his rage and violence, tore the body
of his brother in pieces, mangled his limbs, and scattered them about. Ever
since that time, Isis goes wandering about the earth to gather up the scattered
limbs of her brother and husband. The eternal and immortal soul of Osiris led
his son Orus to the shades below, where he gave him instructions how to fight,
and vanquish Typhon. Orus returned upon earth, sought and defeated Typhon, but
did not kill him; he only bound him, and took away his power of doing mischief.
The wicked one made his escape afterward, and was going to throw all again
into disorder: but Orus fought him in two bloody battles, and destroyed him
entirely. Plutarch goes on thus; Page 358.
Whoever applies these allegories to the divine Nature, ever blessed and
immortal, deserves to be treated with contempt, We must not however believe
that they are mere fables without any meaning, like those of the poets. They
represent to us things that really happened. It would be likewise a dangerous
error, and manifest impiety to interpret what is said of the Gods, as Evemerus
the Messenian did, and apply it to the ancient Kings and great generals. This
would in the end serve to destroy religion, and estrange men from the Deity
Page 358.
. There are others, adds he, much juster in their notions, who have wrote, that
whatever is related of Typhon, Osiris, Isis, and Orus must be understood of
genn and demons. Page 360.
This was the opinion of Pythagoras, Plato, xenocrates and Chrysippus, who
followed the ancient Theologists in this notion. All those great men maintained
that these genii were very powerful, and far superior to mortals; chat they did
not however partake of the Deity in a pure and simple manner, but were composed
of a spiritual and a corporeal nature, and were consequently capable of
pleasures and pains, passions and changes; for there are virtues and vices
among the genii as well as among men. Hence come the fables of the Greeks
concerning the Titans and Giants, the engagements of Python against Apollo, and
the furies and extravagancies of Bacchus, with several other fictions like
those of Osiris and Typhon. Hence it is likewise that Homer speaks of good and
evil demons. Plato calls the first tutelary deities, because they are mediators
between the Deity and men, carry up the prayers of mortals to heaven, and bring
us from thence the knowledge and revelation of secrets and future things.
Empedocles, continues he, says that the evil demons are punished for the faults
they have committed. First the sun precipitates them into the air; the air
casts them into the deep sea; the sea vomits them up upon the land, and from
the earth they are raised at last to heaven. -- thus are they transported from
one place to another, till being in the end punished and purified, they return
to the place adapted to their nature. Plutarch, after having thus given a
theological explanation of the Egyptian allegories, gives likewise the physical
explications of them; but he rejects them all, and returns to his first
doctrine. Page 376.
Osiris is neither the sun, nor the water, nor the earth, nor the heaven; but
whatever there is in nature well disposed, well regulated, good and perfect,
all that is the image of Osiris. Typhon is neither aridity, nor the fire, nor
the sea; but whatever is hurtful, inconstant and irregular. We must observe
that in this Egyptian allegory, Osiris does not signify, as in other places,
the first principle of Deity, the Agathos of Plato, but the son of Ammon, the
Apollo of the Greeks, Jupiter the Conductor, a god inferior to the supreme
Deity. It was an ancient opinion among the Pagans and Hebrews, that the
Divinity had united himself to the first and most perfect production of his
power.

Plutarch goes farther in another treatise, and explains to us the origin of
evil: his reasoning (...) occasion is equally solid and subtle, and is as
follows: Plat. de. Anim. form. p. 1015.
The maker of the world, being perfectly good, formed all things at first, as
far as was possible like himself. The world at its birth received from him who
made it, all sorts of good things; whatever it has at present of unhappy and
wicked, is an indisposition foreign to its nature. God cannot be the cause of
evil, because he is sovereignly good: matter cannot be the cause of evil,
because it has no active force; but evil comes from a third principle, neither
so perfect as God, nor so imperfect as matter. This third being is intelligent
nature, which has within itself a source, a principle, and cause of motion.

I have already shown that the schools of Pythagoras and Plato asserted liberty
of will. The former expresses it by that faculty of the soul, whereby it can
either raise or debase itself; the other by the wings of the soul, that is the
love of virtue and the love of pleasure, which may move different ways.
Plutarch follows the same principles, and makes liberty consist in the activity
of the soul, by which it is the source of its own determinations.

This opinion therefore ought not to be looked upon as modern; it is at once
both natural and philosophical. The soul can always separate and reunite,
recall and compare her ideas, and on this activity depends her liberty. We can
always think upon other goods than those we are actually thinking of. It must
be owned that the passions, by strong sensations they excite in us, sometimes
take up all the capacity of the soul, and hinder it from reflecting; they
darken its discerning faculty, and hurry it on to an assent, they transform
objects, and place them in a wrong light; but strong as they are, they are
never invincible; it is difficult indeed, but not impossible, to surmount them;
it is always in our power gradually to diminish their force, and prevent their
excess. This is the warfare of man on earth, and this is the triumph of virtue.
The heathens feeling this tyranny of the passions, were convinced by the light
of nature alone of the necessity of a celestial power to subdue them: they
always represent virtue to us a^^ divine energy descending from heaven: they
are continually bringing into their poems guardian deities, who inspire,
enlighten and strengthen us; to show that heroic virtues can only proceed from
the gods. These were the principle upon which the wise ancients went, in their
arguments against those notions of fatality, which are alike destructive of
religion, morality and society.

To return to the Egyptians. Their doctrine, according to Plutarch, supposes,
1. That the world was created without any physical or moral evil, by a being
infinitely good. 2. That several genii abusing their liberty, fell into crimes,
and thereby into misery. 3. That these genii must suffer expiatory punishments
till they are purified and restored to their first state. 4. That the God Orus,
the son of Isis and Osiris, and who fights with the evil principle, is a
subordinate deity, like Jupiter the Conductor the son of Saturn.

Let us consult next the Mythology of the Orientals: the nearer we approach the
first origin of nation the more pure shall we find their theology. De Isid. and
Os^id. p. 370.
Zoroaster says Plutarch, taught that there are two gods contrary to each other
in their operations; the one the anthor of all the good, the other of all the
evil in nature. The good Principal he calls Oromazes, the other the demon
Arimanius Ibid.
. He says that the one resembles light and truth, the other darkness and
ignorance. There is likewise a middle God between these two, named Mythras whom
the Persians call the intercessor or Mediator. The Magi add, that Oromazes is
born of the purest light, and Arimanius of darkness; that they make continually
war with one another, and that Oromuzes made six genii, goodness, truth,
justice, wisdom, plenty and joy; and Arimanius made six others to oppose them,
malice, falsehood, injustice, folly, want and sadness. Oromazes having withdrawn
himself to as great a distance from the sphere of Arimanius, as the sun is from
the earth, beautified the heavens with stars and constellations. He created
afterward four and twenty other genii, and put them into an egg (by which the
ancients mean the earth; but Arimanius and his genii broke through this shining
egg, and immediately evil was blended and confounded with good. But there will
come a time appointed by fate, when Arimanius will be entirely destroyed and
extirpated; the earth will change its form, and become plain and even; and
happy men will have only one and the same life, language and government.
Theopompus writes also, that according to the doctrine of the Magi, these gods
must make war for nine thousand years, the one destroying the other's work,
till at last hell shall be no more; then men shall be happy, and their bodies
become transparent. The God who made all things keeps himself concealed that
time; an interval not two long for a God, but rather like a moment of sleep.

We have lost the ancient books of the first Persians; so that in order to
judge of their Mythology, we must have recourse to the oriental philosophers of
our own time, and see if there be still left among the disciples of Zoroaster,
any traces of the ancient doctrine of their master. The famous Dr. Hyde, a
divine of the Church of England, who had traveled into the East, and perfectly
understood the language of the country, has translated the following passages
out of Sharisthani, an Arabian Philosopher of the fifteenth century Hyde Rel.
ant. Pers. cap. 69. p. 13. and cap. 22. p. 294.
The first Magi did not look upon the two Principles as coeternal, but believed
that light was eternal, and that darkness was produced in time: and the origin
of this evil principle they account for in this manner: light can produce
nothing but light, and can never be the origin of evil; how then was evil
produced? Light say they, produced several beings, all of them spiritual,
luminous and powerful; but their chief, whose name was Ahriman or Arimanius,
had an evil though contrary to the light: he doubted, and by that doubting he
became dark. From hence proceeded all evils; dissension, malice, and every
thing else of a contrary nature to the light. These two principles made war
upon one another, till at last peace was concluded upon condition that the
lower world should be in subjection to Arimanius, for seven thousand years:
after this space of time he is to surrender back the world to the light. Here
we see the four notions that I speak of in the foregoing work: 1. A state
before good and evil were blended and confounded together. 2. A state after
they were so blended and confounded. 3. A state when evil shall be entirely
destroyed. 4. A middle God between the good and the evil Principle.

As the doctrine of the Persian Magi is a sequal of the doctrine of the Indian
Brachmans, we must consult the one to put the other in a clear light. We have
but few traces left of the ancient theology of the Gymnosophists, yet those
which Strabo has preserved, suppose the two states of the world, that of nature
in its purity, and that of nature corrupted. -- When this historian has
described the life and manners of the Brachmans, he adds, Lib. 15. p. 713, 714.
Ed. Lut. Par. 1620.
Those philosophers look upon the state of men in this life to be like that of
children in their mothers womb; death according to their notion, being a birth
to a true and happy life. They believe, that whatever happens to mortals here
does not deserve the name either of good or evil. They have many notions in
common with the Greeks; and like them believe that the world had a beginning,
and will have an end: and that God who made it, and governs it, is every where
present to his work. The same author goes on in this manner; Onesecritus being
sent by Alexander the Great to inform himself of the life, manners and doctrine
of those philosophers, found a Brachman named Calanus, who taught him the
following principles. Formerly, plenty reigned over all nature; milk, wine,
honey and oil flowed from fountains, but men having made an ill use of this
felicity, Jupiter deprived them of it, and condemned them to labor for the
sustenance of their lives.

In order to form a better judgment of the doctrine of the ancient
Gymnosophists, I have consulted what has been translated of the Vedam, which is
the sacred book of the modern Bramins; though its antiquity be not perhaps so
great as it is affirmed to be, yet there is no denying but it contains the
ancient traditions of those people, and of their philosophers. It Is plain by
this book, See Abrah. Roger, of the religion of the Bram. Book II. Part 1.
chap. 1. and Kircher Sina Illust.
That the Bramins acknowledge one sole and supreme God, whom they call Vistnou;
that his first and most ancient production was a secondary god, named Brama,
whom the supreme God formed out of a flower that floated upon the surface of
the great deep before the formation of the world; and that Vistnou afterward,
on account of Brama's virtue, gratitude and fidelity, gave him power to form
the universe. They believe moreover. Ibid Roger, Part 2. chap. 7.
That souls are eternal emanations from the divine Essence, or at least that
they were produced long before the formation of the world; that they were
originally in a state of purity, but having sinned, were thrown down into the
bodies of men, or of beasts according to their respective demerits; so that the
body, where the soul resides, is a sort of dungeon or prison. Lastly, they
hold, that after a certain number of transmigrations, all souls shall be
reunited to their origin, readmitted into the company of the Gods, and
deified Abr. Kircher. Sina Illust.
.

I should hardly have thought these traditions authentic, or have brought
myself to trust to the translators of the Vedam, if this doctrine had not been
perfectly agreeable to that of Pythagoras, which I gave an account of a little
before: this philosopher taught the Greeks nothing but what he had learned form
the Gymnosophists.

The discovery of these uniform and agreeing sentiments in Greece, Egypt,
Persia, and the Indies, made me desirous to advance farther into the East, and
to carry my researches as far as China. I applied myself accordingly to such as
understood the language of that country, had spent several years in it, and
were well versed in the original books of that nation. And in this point
particularly I have made great use of the informations I have received from a
gentleman of a superior genius, who does not care to be mentioned till he has
published a large work upon these matters, which will be of service to
religion, and do honor to human understanding. In the mean time he has allowed
me to publish the following passages, which he translated himself out of some
ancient Chinese books that have been brought into Europe; and which may be both
seen at Paris and at Rome; so that all who understand the language may judge of
the faithfulness of the translation. The ancient commentaries on the book
Yking, i.e. the book of Changes, continually speak of a double heaven, a
primitive and a posterior. The first heaven is there described in the following
manner:

All things were then in a happy state, every thing was beautiful, every thing
was good, all beings were perfect in their kind. In this happy age heaven and
earth employed their virtues jointly to embellish nature. There was no jarring
in the elements, no inclemency in the air, all things grew without labor, an
universal fertility reigned every where. The active and passive virtues
conspired together without any effort or opposition, to produce and perfect the
universe. In the books which the Chinese call King or Sacred, we read the
following passage: Whilst the first state of heaven lasted, a pure pleasure and
a perfect tranquillity reigned over all nature. There were neither labor, nor
pains, nor sorrow, nor crimes -- Nothing made opposition to the will of man.
The philosophers who stuck to these ancient traditions, and particularly
Tchouangse, say, that in the state of the first heaven, man was united inwardly
to the superme Reason, and that outwardly he practiced all the works of
justice: The heart rejoiced in truth, and there was no mixture of falsehood;
then the four seasons of the year succeeded each other regularly without
confusion: there were no impetuous winds nor excessive rains; the sun and the
moon, without ever being clouded, furnished a light purer and brighter than at
present. The five planets kept on their course without any inequality. There
was nothing which did harm to man, or which suffered any hurt from him -- An
universal amity and harmony reigned over all nature.

On the other hand, the philosopher Hoainantse speaking of the latter heaven,
says, The pillars of heaven were broken; the earth was shaken to its very
foundations; the heavens sunk lower toward the north; the sun, the moon and
the stars changed their motions; the earth fell to pieces; the waters enclosed
within its bosom, burst forth with violence and overflowed it. Man rebelling
against heaven, the system of the universe was quite disordered; the sun was
eclipsed, the planets altered their course, and the universal harmony was
disturbed. The philosophers Wentse and Lietse, who lived long before
Hoainantse, express themselves almost in the same terms. The universal
fertility of nature, say these ancient authors, degenerated into an ugly
barrenness, the plants faded, the trees withered away, disconsolate nature
refused to distribute her usual bounty. All creatures declared war against one
another; miseries and crimes overflowed the face of the earth. All these evils
arose, says the book Liki, from man's despising the supreme Monarch of the
universe. He would needs dispute about truth and falsehood, and these disputes
banished the eternal Reason. He then fixed his looks on terrestrial objects,
and loved them to excess; hence arose the passions; he became gradually
transformed into the objects he loved, and the celestial reason entirely
abandoned him. Such was the original source of all crimes, which drew after
them all manner of miseries sent by heaven for the punishment thereof.

The same books speak of a time when every thing is to be restored to its first
splendour, by the coming of a hero called Kiun-Tse, which signifies Shepherd and
Prince, to whom they give likewise the names of, the most Holy, the universal
Teacher, and the supreme Truth. He answers exactly to the Mythras of the
Persians, the Orus, or second Osiris of the Egyptians, the Apollo or Mercury of
the Greeks, and the Brama of the Indians.

The Chinese books speak likewise of the sufferings and conflicts of Kiun-Tse,
just as the Persians do of the combats of Mythras, the Egyptians of the murder
of Osiris, the Tyrians of the death of Adonis, and the Greeks of the labors and
painful exploits of a son of Jupiter, who came down upon earth to exterminate
monsters. It looks as if the source of all these allegories was an ancient
tradition common to all nations, that the middle God was not to expiate and put
an end to crimes but by his own great sufferings. In speaking of the death of
Adonis in the foregoing work, I have made advantage of this tradition to pave
the way for what Daniel says afterward to Cyrus concerning the the suffering
Messiah. I shall here give the reader an account of what I find in the religion
of the Tyrians, and in the doctrine of the ancients, to authorize the new
allegory which is added in the present edition. 1. The Tyrians acknowledged one
supreme God, named Bell, who is the same with the Jehovah of the Hebrews
Seldenus de diis Syris, Synt. 2. cap. 1. de Belo.
. 2. They held likewise a subordinate God, whom they called Thammuz, Adon,
Adonis, which signifies the Lord. 3. Adonis, Osiris, Apollo and Hercules, are
the same See above.
. 4. The death of Adonis, killed by a boar, is the same with the murder of
Osiris slain by Typhon, or the evil principle Seld. cap. ii. de Thammuz.
. 5. Solemn days were instituted by the Phoenicians to bewail the death of
Adonis, and to sing praises to him as risen from the dead St. Jer. Comm. 3.
upon Ezekiel. St. Cyril. book ii. Comm. upon Isai. I. ocop. upon the 18 th chap.
of Isai. ^ucian. de Dea Sir. p. 1058. Macrob. Saturn. 1. cap. 21.
. 6. Some ancient and venerable writers among the Christians believed, that the
fable of Adonis was a corruption of an old tradition concerning the suffering
Messiah, and apply all the Tyrian ceremonies to our mysteries Juj. Firmic. de
Mist. p. 151.
. 7. Adonis loved Venus, espoused her, and she became the mother of the Gods
Seld. de Diis Syris, Synt. 2. c. 2. de Astarte and cap. 4. de Ven. Syriac.
. 8. Urania, Astarte, Venus and Proserpine are the same Goddess Ibid.
. 9. Some think that Astarte is the morning star, Lucifer, or a fallen star
Ibid. 224.
. 10. According to the doctrine of the ancients, as well Pagan as Hebrew,
spirits fell not at once, but by degrees, that is to say, from the fixed stars
into the region of the planets, from the planets to the earth, and from the
earth to the infernal regions Phitarch. de Isid. and Osirid. and Rittang. cab.
denud. de revol, anim. part 1 cap. i.
: for which reason I have represented these three different falls of spirits by
the three names of Astarte, venus and Proserpine. These are the foundations on
which I have built the allegory of Adonis and Urania, which Amenophis rehearses
to Cyrus in the seventh book. The only liberty I have taken is to make Urania
represent, not the divine Wisdom, but fallen intelligences; as Psyche in
Apuleius does not represent the soul of the world, but souls unfaithful to
love: these kinds of metonymy are frequent in the allegorical and mythological
writers.

We see then that the doctrines of the primitive perfection of nature, its
fall, and its restoration by a divine Hero, are equally manifest in the
Mythologies of the Greeks, Egyptians, Persians, Indians and Chinese.

Let us now look into the Hebrew Mythology. By this I mean Rabbinism, or the
philosophy of the Jewifh doctors, and particularly of the Essenes. These
philosophers asserted, according to the testimony of Josephus Joseph. de Bello.
Jud. lib. 2. cap. 12.
, that the literal sense of the sacred text was only an image of hidden truths.
They changed, says Philo, the words Phil. de legis alleg. lib. 2. p. 53.
, and precepts of wisdom into allegories, after the custom of their ancestors,
who had left them several books for their instruction in this science. 'Twas
the universal taste of the Orientals to make use of corporeal images to
represent the properties and operations of spirits.

This symbolical style seems in a great measure authorized by the sacred
writers. The prophet Daniel represents God to us under the image of the ANCIENT
OF DAYS. The Hebrew Mythologists and Cabalists, who were a succession of the
schools of the Essenes, took occasion from thence to express the divine
attributes by the members of the body of the ANCIENT OF DAYS. We see this
allegory carried to an extravagance in the books of the Rabbis. They speak
there of the dew that distilled from the brain of the ANCIENT OF DAYS, from his
skull, his hair, his forehead, his eyes, and especially from his wonderful
beard. These comparisons are undoubtedly absurd, and unbecoming the majesty of
God but the cabalistical philosophers pretend to authorize them by some
metaphysical notions.

The creation, according to them, is a picture of the divine perfections: all
created beings are consequently images more or less perfect of the supreme
Being, in proportion as they have more or less conformity with their original.
Hence it follows that all creatures are in some respect like one another, and
that man or the microcosm has a resemblance of the great world or macrocosm;
the material world, of the intelligible world; and the intelligible world, of
the Archetype, which is God. Such are the principles upon which the allegorical
expressions of the Cabalists are founded. If we strip their Mythology of this
mysterious language, we shall find in it sublime notions very like those we
have before admired in the heathen philosophers. I shall mention four, which
are clearly enough expressed in the works of the Rabbin Irira, Moschech and
Jitzack, which Rittangelius has translated in his Cabala denudata.

1. All spiritual substances, angels, human souls, and even the soul of the
Messiah Vision. Ezekiel. Mercav. Exp. apud Rittang. p. 225. tom. 3.
, were created from the beginning of the world: and consequently our first
parent, of whom Moses speaks, represents not an individual person, but all
mankind governed by one sole Head. In that primitive state every thing was
glorious and perfect: there was nothing in the universe that suffered, because
there was no such thing as crime. Nature was a real and a spotless image of the
divine perfections. This answers to the reign of Ammon, Oromazes and Saturn. 2.
Ibid. p. 226.
The soul of the Messiah, by his perseverance in the divine love, came to a
strict union with the pure Godhead The Hellenistic Hebrews call this union of
the Messiah with the Divinity, Hyper-a-zulitical, which signifies
supersubstantial.
, and was deservedly advanced to be the King, the Head, and the Guide of all
spirits. This notion has some resemblance of those which the Persians had of
Mythras, the Egyptians of Osiris and Orus, and the Greeks of Jupiter the Guide,
who led souls into the super-celestial abode. 3. Ibid. de revol. anim. part 1.
cap. 1. p. 244.
The virtue, perfection and beatitude of spirits or Zephirots A general word
which signifies spirits of all kinds.
, consisted in continually receiving and rendering back the rays which flowed
from the infinite center, that so there might be an eternal circulation of
light and happiness in all spirits. Two sorts of Zephirots failed in the
observance of this eternal law. The Cherubim, who were of a superior order, did
not render back this light, but kept it within themselves, swelled, and became
like vessels that are too full; at last they burst in pieces, and their sphere
was changed into a gloomy chaos. The Ischim, who were of an inferior order,
shut their eyes against this light, turning themselves toward sensible objects
Phil. Cabal. dissert. 8. cap. 13. p. 173. Tom. III. Rittang.
; they forgot the supreme beatitude of their nature, and took up with the
enjoyment of created pleasures. They fell thereby into mortal bodies. 4. De
revol. anim. p. 307.
Souls pass through several revolutions before they return to their primitive
state; but after the coming of the Messiah, all spirits will be restored to
order, and to the happiness which they enjoyed before the sin of our first
parent. I shall now leave the reader to judge whether these four notions have
not a great resemblance of those which we have found in China, Persia, Egypt
and Greece, and whether I had not sufficient authority to give the four
mythological pictures which are in the foregoing work.

In all these systems we see that the ancient philosophers, in order to refute
the objections of the impious concerning the origin and duration of evil,
adopted the doctrine of the pre-existence of souls, and their final
restoration. Several Fathers of the Church maintained the first opinion, as the
only philosophical way of explaining original sin; and Origin made use of the
latter, to oppose the libertines of his time. It is far from my intention to
defend these two opinions; all the use I would make of them is to show, that
reason alone furnishes arguments sufficient to confound such philosophers as
refuse to believe unless they can comprehend.

It is for this reason that I make Daniel speak a different language from
Eleazer. The prophet advises Cyrus to lay aside all refined speculations, and
to leave to God the care of justifying the incomprehensible steps of his
providence; he plunges him again in an obscurity, more wholesome and more
suitable to human weakness, than all the conjectures of philosophers; he
reduces what we are to believe on this subject to these four principal truths.

1. God being infinitely good, cannot produce wicked and miserable beings; and
therefore the moral and physical evil, which we see in the universe, must come
from the abuse that men make of their liberty. 2. Human nature is fallen from
the first purity in which it was created; and this mortal life is a state of
trial, in which souls are cured of their corruption, and merit a happy
immortality by their virtue. 3. God united himself to human nature in order to
expiate moral evil by his sacrifice: the Messiah will come at last in his glory
to destroy physical evil, and renew the face of the earth. 4. These truths have
been transmitted to us from age to age, from the time of the deluge till now,
by an universal tradition; other nations have obscured and altered this
tradition by their fables; it has been preserved in its purity no where but in
the Holy Scriptures, the authority of which cannot be disputed with any shadow
of reason.

It is a common notion that all the footsteps of natural and revealed religion
which we see in the heathen poets and philosophers, are originally owing to
their having read the books of Moses; but it is impossible to answer the
objections which are made against this opinion. The Jews and their books were
too long concealed in a corner of the earth, to be reasonably thought the
primitive light of the Gentiles; we must go farther back, even to the deluge.
It is surprising that those, who are convinced of the authority of the sacred
books, have not made advantage of this system to prove the truth of the Mosaic
history concerning the origin of the world, the universal deluge, and the
re-peopling of the earth by Noah. It is hard to account for that uniformity of
sentiments which we find in the religions of all nations, otherwise than by the
doctrine which I have put in the mouth of Daniel.

As the four great principles, which I have mentioned, are the foundation of
our religion, my design was to do homage to it, by endeavoring to defend them
against the vain cavils of audacious critics, and the superstitious prejudices
of weak minds. One of the chief sources of modern incredulity is the false
notion which impious men have entertained of Christianity. Nor indeed can we
think it strange, if, while the Christian mysteries are represented in a wrong
light, the principles of religion confounded with the abuses of those
principles, and scholastic expositions with doctrines of faith, the miracles
should pass for imposture, and the facts for fables. If we would engage those,
who in simplicity of heart seek after truth, to listen to the proofs of
revealed religion, we must begin by showing them that its doctrines are worthy
of God; and this has been my aim throughout the foregoing work. Whether I have
succeeded or not, my intention was upright; and I shall not repine at the
imperfection of this attempt, if I may have given occasion to any person of
more learning and depth to recommend that philosophy, which teaches never to
employ the imagination but as the servant of reason, to direct all improvements
of the understanding to the purification of the heart, and avoiding all
ostentations parade of the sciences, to make use of them only to discover the
beauties of eternal truth to those who are capable of being enamoured with them.

A LETTER FROM M. FRERET (MEMBER OF THE ACADEMY OF INSCRIPTIONS AT PARIS) TO
THE AUTHOR, CONCERNING THE CHRONOLOGY OF HIS WORK.
SIR,
THERE have, perhaps, been more different systems formed, to settle the history
of Cyrus, and the chronology of the Kings of Babylon, than for any other part
of ancient story. But these hypothesis are all so defective, and so ill
connected with contemporary events, that we are stopped almost at every step,
by the contradictions and inconsistencies we meet with in them. This every
man's experience shows him to be true, who reads the writings of Scaliger,
Petau, Usher, Marsham, the bishop of Meaux and Prideaux.

But in your work you have wisely avoided these difficulties, and have hit upon
the best method of reconciling the contradictory accounts which Herodotus,
Ctesias, Xenophon, and other ancient writers, give us of Cyrus. You have
preserved this Prince's war with his grandfather Astyages; a war which the
ancients allow to be certain, and which Xenophon himself acknowledges in his
retreat of the ten thousand; he suppressed this fact in his Cyropaedia, only to
avoid throwing a blemish on Cyrus's character, by a war which he thought
contrary to natural duty: Prideaux has likewise thought fit to suppress it. --
Marsham has invented a mere romance, and supposes that there were two different
kingdoms of the Medes, which were at the same time governed by two Astyages',
one the grandfather and the other the enemy of Cyrus. The method you have taken
is more simple, and more agreeable to ancient story; you have paved the way for
this war, and conducted it in such a manner, that it does in no wise stain the
character of your hero.

The omission of so considerable an event led Xenophon into two anachronisms in
order to find employment for Cyrus in his younger years: this author antedates
the taking of Sardis 25 years, and that of Babylon 28. As this historian had
nothing in view but military virtues and qualities of a true patriot, whereby
to form his hero, his scheme did not furnish him with the same materials to
fill up Cyrus's youth as yours does. He had no thoughts of instilling into his
mind, such principles as would most effectually secure him from the dangers
which beset the virtue of Princes, or of guarding him before hand against the
corruption of false politics and false philosophy, which are, in their
consequences, equally fatal to society. Xenophon, having been educated in
Greece, was acquainted only with the kingdoms of Sparta and Macedon, whose
Kings were, properly speaking, nothing more than the chief persons in their
state; and the magistrates were rather their colleagues than their ministers.
He had no notion of the abuses of despotic power, and therefore could have no
thoughts of preventing them. Whereas your design being to form a King, rather
than a conqueror, a Prince better qualified to make his people happy under his
government, than to force them to submit to his laws; you are thereby enabled
to give Cyrus full employment in his youth by making him travel, and that very
consistent with true chronology.

Cyrus died the 218th year of Nabonassar, and 530 years before the Christian
Era, which I shall not lose time in proving, because acknowledged by all
chronologers. This Prince was then 70 years of age, according to Dinon, the
author of a celebrated history of Persia Cic. de. Divin. lib. 2.
. He was therefore born in the 148th year of Nabonassar, 600, or 599 years
before Christ. He had reigned, according to the astronomical canon, nine years
at Babylon. This city was therefore taken in the 61st year of his age, the
209th of Nabonassar, and the 539th before Christ.

Sardis was taken, according to Sosicrates in Diogenes Laertius Diog. Laer.
lib. 1. Periand.
, and according to Solinus Chap. viii.
, in the fourth year of the 58th Olympiad.; but according to Eusebius, in the
first year of that Olympiad; and consequently either in the 545th or 548th year
before Christ, and the 52d or 55th year of Cyrus's life. He reigned 30 years
over the Medes and Persians, according to Herodotus and Ctesias, and he was 40
years old according to Dinon, when he mounted the throne; which fixes the
beginning of his reign to the 188th year of Nabonassar, the first year of the
55th Olympiad, and the 560th year before Christ. Praepar. Evang. lib. x.
E^sebius tells us, that all chronologists agreed in placing the beginning of
Cyrus's reign over the Medes and Persians in this year of the 55th Olympiad.
But historians have neither told us how many years Cyrus's war with the Medes
lasted, nor any particulars of what happened in the first forty years of his
life: you are therefore at full liberty to fill up this space with whatever you
judge most proper to your design; and your chronology is not only agreeable to
that of the Greeks and Persians, but likewise to that of the Babylonians.

Xenophon indeed has changed all this chronology: According to him Cyrus went
to the court of Media at 12 years, stayed there 4 years, returned in his 16th
year; entered into the class of the Young men in his 17th, and continued in it
10 years. To which he adds, that Astyages died in this interval, but this is
not true; for that Prince reigned till he was conquered by Cyrus in the year
560, and did not die till some years after: you have therefore done well in not
following Xenophon. According to him, Cyrus entered Media at the head of 30000
men when he was 28 year of age; subdued the Armenians at 29; marched against
the Lydians, and took Sardis at 30; and made himself master of Babylon at 33,
about the year 567. This is the 179th year of Nabonassar, and the 36th of
Nabuchodonosor, who reigned 7 years after it; these 7 years added to the 21
years of the four Kings who reigned in Babylon after him, make the 28 years of
the anachronism abovementioned. The rest of Xenophon's chronology is of no
importance to your work. He does not determine the time of the death either of
Mandana or Cambyses, and therefore you are entirely at liberty to place these
events as will best suit with your plan.

The city of Tire was not taken till the 19th year of Nabuchodonosor, after a
thirteen years siege, which began the seventh of that Prince's reign, according
to the Phoenician annals which Josephus had read. In the year Jerusalem was
taken, which was the 18th year of Nabuchodonosor, the phrophet Ezekial
threatens Tire with approaching ruin; it therefore was not taken at that time;
Cyrus was then 15 years of age: now, as his travels are all placed between the
28th and 32d year of his age, and as he does not go to Tire till after his
travels in Greece, you are guilty of no anachronism in this particular;
moreover, what you relate of the history of this city sufficiently fills up the
15 or 16 years from the time of its being conquered by the Babylonians.

We have no where any express passage whereby to fix the time of
Nabuchodonosor's madness; that he was mad is certain from Daniel, and it is
very probable it happened toward the end of his life; my reasons for it are
these. Jehoiachin was carried into capativity in the 8th year of
Nabuchodonosor's reign over Judea, and the 4th of his reign in Babylon; that
is, the 148th year of Nabonassar, 600 years before Christ, and the year Cyrus
was born. We are told in Jeremiah Chap. iii. ver, 31.
, and in the second book of Kings Chap. xxv. ver. 27.
that in the 37th year of Jehoiachin's captivity, Evilmerodach ascended the
throne of Babylon, took Jehoiachin out of prison, admitted him to his own
table, and heaped many honors upon him; this was the 184th year of Nabonassar,
the 564th before Christ, and the 37th (...) Cyrus's age; at which time
Nabuchodonosor was yet alive, since he did not die till the 186th of
Nabonassar, 562 years before Christ, and the 39th of Cyrus; Evilmerodach
therefore did not only mount the throne in his father's lifetime, but he
governed without consulting him, and with so little dependence upon him, as not
to fear provoking him by taking quite different measures from his, and heaping
honors on a Prince, whom his father had all along kept in fetters. Berosus
makes the Prince, whom he calls Evilmerodach, to have reigned 10 years, the
astronomical canon allows him but two, and calls him Hovardam; the Scripture
places him upon the throne three years before the death of his father.

All these difficulties will vanish, if we suppose that Nabuchodonosor's
madness began eight years before his death, and that his son Evilmerodach was
from that time looked upon as King, placed himself at the head of affairs, and
governed the empire with his father's ministers; these eight years, joined with
the two he reigned alone after his father's death, make up the ten years of
Berosus; the holy scriptures begin his reign later, doubtless from the time
that he removed the ministers who made him uneasy, which did not happen till
the third year before the death of Nabuchodonosor. This Prince's madness
continued but seven years; after that time he recovered his senses, reassumed
the government, and published an edict in favor of the Jews, which is related
in Daniel; his name had all along been made use of in the public acts, and for
this reason the astronomical canon makes his son Ilovarodam to have reigned but
two years; this canon was drawn up from the public acts. Nabuchodonosor's
madness must have produced great revolutions in the court of Babylon, and we
may form an idea of them from what passed in the court of France during that of
Charles VI. when the management of affairs was one while lodged in the hands of
the Queen, sometimes in those of his children and at other times in those of
the great Lords and Princes of the blood. Upon this supposition which is both
easy and necessary, Nabuchodonosor's madness will have happened in the 179th
year of Nabonassar, the 569th before Christ, and the 32d of Cyrus's age; this
Prince must have been informed of that event, for it was of great importance to
him to know it; it is not to be doubted but it had its influence in the war of
the Medes and the Persians. The kings of Babylon were allied to those of the
Medes: Nabuchodonosor had married a daughter of Astyages; the Babylonians would
have taken some part in this war, had it not been for the weakness of their
government, occasioned by the King's madness, and for the divisions which
prevailed at court among the different parties that contended for the direction
of affairs. Nay, it is probable that Queen Amytis endeavored to reconcile the
Medes and Persians; because, independently of the ties of blood, it was against
her interest to have either of those nations subdue the other. The sight of so
great a conqueror reduced to so deplorable a condition, must have been a very
proper spectacle for the instruction of Cyrus, and you had great reason not to
neglect it. He returned from his travels, according to your chronology, about
the 32d year of his age, after Nabuchodonosor's madness had already seized him:
Cyrus spent near seven years in Pesia, governing under his father; during which
time all the intrigues between Cyaxares and Soranes were carried on, Cambyses
made war with the Medes and Astyages died; after which Cyrus went to Babylon,
to negotiate affairs with Amytis a little before Nabuchodonosor's madness left
him; this time was judiciously chosen to make the sight more affecting and
instructive.

Your chronology, with regard to political affairs, and the revolutions which
happened in Cyrus's time, is therefore perfectly agreeable to that of the
Greeks, Babylonians and Hebrews; let us now enquire, whether the great men whom
you make Cyrus to have seen in his travels were his contemporaries; you may
indeed be allowed a greater liberty in this case than in the former. You know
how the ancients contradict one another with regard to the time when Zoroaster
lived; which doubtless proceeds from hence, that the name of Zoroaster was
given to all those, who at different times, reformed the religion of the Magi.
The last of these was the most famous, and is the only one who is known by that
name, or by the name of Zardouseht in the East. Prideaux makes him contemporary
with Cambyses and Darius the son of Hystaspes, but it is very probable he lived
some time before them. The Orientals as may be seen in Dr. Hyde's works, make
him to have lived under Gustaspes or Hystespes, the father of Darab, who is the
first Darius according to the Greeks. This Gustaspes was older than Cyrus, and
may have been the same person whom you make his governor. Whence it necessarily
follows, that the reformation of the religion of the Magi must have been made
during his reign, and that Zoroaster lived at that time. The reformation made
by Darius supposes that the Magi had assumed to themselves very great
authority, which he toook away from them. He likewise corrupted the purity of
Zoroaster's religion, by a mixture of foreign idolatry. In his reign the
worship of Anaitis was first brought into Persia, contrary to the hypothesis of
Dr. Prideaux. Your scheme is more agreeable to the course of the history, and
to those facts which are common to the Greek, Persian and Arabian writers.

Cyrus may have married Cassandana at 18 years of age, and have lived with her
nine or ten years; so that he may have traveled into Egypt about the 29th year
of his age. Your chronology agrees exactly with the age of Amasis. All
chronologists concur in fixing the end of his reign to the year before
Cambyses's expedition, that is, about the 525th year before Christ, and the 63d
Olympiad. Herodotus makes his reign to have lasted 44 years; and consequently
places the beginning of it in the 569th year before Christ, and the 52d
Olympiad, and about the 30th year of Cyrus. Diodorus indeed, who makes Amasis
to have reigned 55 years, supposes that he ascended the throne in the 579th or
580th year before Christ, and the 20th year of Cyrus's age: but these two
opinions are easily reconciled. Herodotus begins Amasis's reign at the end of
the revolution which placed him on the throne, and Diodorus at the beginning of
his revolt.

Apries must have lived but a little time after the taking of Jerusalem, since
the prophet Jeremiah Chap. xliv. the last verse.
foretells his death under the name of Pharaoh-Hophra, as what was soon to
happen. Jerusalem was taken in the year 589 before Christ, and the 63d before
Amasis's death, which show that the troubles in Egypt were already begun.
According to your system Amasis governed all Egypt in tranquillity when Cyrus
went thither and Apries had already been dead several years In this new edition
the author has taken the liberty to vary a little from this chronology. Aspires
is yet living when Cyrus goes into Egypt.
; which is agreeable both to profane and sacred history, Cyrus being between 28
and 30 years of age when he traveled.

The Greek chronology indeed will not be so easily reconciled to yours, but the
anachronism will not exceed 12 or 14 years. Chilo was, according to Hermippus,
as quoted by Diogenes Laertius Diog. Laert. Lib. 1.
, advanced in age at the time of the 52d Olympiad. This Olympiad began in the
573d year before Christ, and ended in the 570th, which was the 30th of Cyrus.
This was before his Ephorate, which Pamphyla places in the 56th Olympiad, but
this passage is manifestly corrupted. The anonymous author of the chronology of
the Olympiads, fixes the time of the magistracy of Chilo to that of the
archonship of Euthydemes at Athens, that is, to the 81st year before Xerxes's
passage into Asia, according to the chronology Ma^m. Oxon. Chronol. Attic.
Epoch. 42.
of the Arundelian marbles. This was the 561st year before Christ, and the 38th
of Cyrus, which agrees perfectly well with your chronology; for Cyrus might
have seen Chilo eight years before, as he went to Sparta, and when he was
thirty years of age.

Periander died, according to Sosicrates, at the end of the 48th Olympiad, the
585th year before Christ, and the 16th of Cyrus. The ancients tell us he had
reigned 40 years, and began to flourish about the 38th Olympiad. You postpone
his death 12 or 14 years; but as you do this only to make Cyrus a witness of
his desperate death, the anachronism is a beauty, and is otherwise of little
importance.

Pisistratus's reign over the Athenians did not begin till 560 years before
Christ, 71 before the battle of Marathon, according to Thucydides Lib. 6. p.
449, 452. et lib. 8. p. 601. Arist. Pol. lib. p. 12.
, and 100 before the tyranny of the 400 at Athens. Cyrus was then 40 years old,
so that your anachronism here is only of 9 or 10 years. And with regard to
Solon, you are guilty of no anachronism at all. His Archonship, and his
reformation of the government of Athens were in the year 597 before Christ, and
the 3d year of the 46th Olympiad Diog. Laert. and Plut. life of Solon.
He spent a considerable time in traveling, and did not return to Athens till
he was advanced in years, which would not suffer him to be concerned in public
affairs any more. He died at the age of 80 years, in the second year of
Pisistratus's reign, according to Phanias of Eresa, and in the 41st year of
Cyrus; who might therefore have conversed with him nine or ten years before.

You ought likewise to give yourself as little concern about the bringing
Pythagoras and Cyrus together. Dionysius Halicarnassus tells us D. Hol. lib. 12.
, that the former went into Italy about the 50th Olympiad, that is about the
577th year before Christ. He makes use of the word PATA (about), which show
that this date need not be strictly taken. And indeed Diogenes Laertius shows
us, that he flourished about the 60th Olympiad, that is, about 40 years after:
which if we understand of the time of his death, which was at the age of 80, he
will then have been 50 years old when he went into Italy, and he will appear to
have been born about the 520th year before Christ. If Pythagoras the
philosopher be the same with him who offered to fight at the Olympic games
among the children, and upon being rejected desired to be received among the
men, and gained the prize in the 48th Olympiad; he was 16 or 17 in the year 585
before Christ, and was scarce older than Cyrus. This is the opinion of Dr.
Bentley, who is able to defend himsef against all the objections which have
been made to him. But without entering into this dispute, it is sufficient for
your vindication, that Pythagoras was returned from his travels, and capable of
conferring with Cyrus when this Prince went into Greece, in the year 565 before
Christ; which cannot be denied in any of the different systems which the
learned have formed concerning the time of Pythagoras's life.

You have likewise sufficient foundation for bringing him into a dispute with
Anaximander. This philosopher must have seen Pythagoras though he was older
than he, being, according to Apossodorus in Diogenes Laertius, 64 years of age
in the 2d year of the 48th Olympiad, that is, in the year 585 before Christ.
And it is likewise a beauty in your work to see the young Pythagoras triumphing
over the sophistry of the Materialist. It is not to be doubted but the Milesian
philosopher was the first inventor of the doctrine of the Atomists; as
Aristotle, Cicero, Plutarch and Simplicius (...). The TOU A^BIRON of
Anaximander was an infinite matter: his doctrine is the same with that of
Spinoza.

You see, Sir, that complaisance had no part in my approbation of the
chronology of your book; you were not obliged to adhere so scrupulously to
truth, you might have contented yourself with probability: the nature of your
work did not require more; nevertheless this exactness will, I am persuaded
give it new beauties in the opinion of those who are versed in ancient history.
Exactness is not incompatable with a fine imagination; and (...) into dryness
only when a writer (...) cold and heavy genius.

I am, etc.FRERET.

FINIS.

