A True and Exact RELATION Of the Late Prodigious Earthquake and Eruption OF
Mount Aetna, Or, MONTE-GIBELLO; As it came In a Letter written to His Majesty
from Naples By the Right Honorable The Earl of VVinchilsea, His Majesty's late
Ambassador at Constantinople, who in his Return from thence, Visiting Catania
in the Island of Sicily, was an Ey-witness of that dreadful Spectacle.

Together with a more particular Narrative of the same, as it is Collected out
of several Relations sent from CATANIA.

Published by Authority.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by S. G. and M. I. 1669.

A true and exact Relation of the late prodigious Earthquake and Eruption of
the Mount Aetna, or Monte-Gibello, as it came in a Letter written to His
Majesty from Naples, by the Right Honorable the Earl of Winchilsea, His
Majesty's late Ambassador at Constantinople, who in his return from thence,
visited Catania, and was an Eyewitness of that dreadful Spectacle.
May it please Your Majesty,
IN my Voyage from Malta to this place, wherein I have used all the diligence
the season has given me leave, I touched at the City of Catania in Sicily, and
was there most kindly invited by the Bishop to lodge in his Palace, which I
accepted, that so I might be the better able to inform Your Majesty of that
extraordinary Fire, which comes from Mount Gibel 15 miles distant from that
City; which for its horridness in the aspect, for the vast quantity thereof,
(for it is 15 miles in length, and 7 in breadth) for its monstrous devastation,
and quick progress, may be termed an Inundation of Fire, a Flood of Fire,
Cinders, and burning Stones, burning with that Rage as to advance into the Sea
600 yards, and that to a mile in breadth, which I saw; and that which did
augment my admiration was, to see in the Sea this matter like ragged rocks,
burning in four fathom water, two fathom higher then the Sea it self, some
parts liquid and moving, and throwing off, not without great violence, the
stones about it, which like a crust of a vast bigness, and red hot, fell into
the Sea every moment, in some place or other, causing a great and horrible
noise, smoke, and hissing in the Sea; and thus more and more coming after it,
making a firm foundation in the Sea it self. I stayed there from nine a Clock
on Saturday morning, to seven the next morning, and this Mountain of Fire and
Stones, with Cinders, had advanced into the Sea 20 yards at least in several
places; in the middle of this Fire which burned in the Sea, it has formed a
passage like to a River, with its banks on each side very steep and craggy, and
in this Channel moves the greatest quantity of this Fire, which is the most
liquid, with Stones of the same composition, and Cinders all red hot, swimming
upon the Fire of a great magnitude; from this River of Fire does proceed under
the great Mass of the Stones which are generally three fathom high all over the
Country, where it burns and in other places much more, there are secret
Conduits or Rivulets of this liquid matter, which communicates fire and heat
into all parts more or less, and melts the Stones and Cinders by fits in those
places where it touches them, over and over again; where it meets with Rocks
or Houses of the same matter (as many are) they melt and go away with the fire;
where they find other compositions they turn them to lime or ashes, (as I am
informed.) The composition of this Fire, Stones and Cinders, are Sulphur,
Nitre, Quicksilver, Sal-Armoniac, Lead, Iron, Brass, and all other Metals. It
moves not regularly, nor constantly down Hill; in some places it has made the
Valleys Hills, and the Hills that are not high are now Valleys. When it was
night I went upon two Towers in diverse places, and could plainly see at ten
miles distance, as we judged, the Fire to begin to run from the Mountain in a
direct line, the flame to ascend as high and as big as one of the highest and
greatest Steeples in your Majesty's Kingdoms, and to throw up great Stones
into the Air; I could discern the River of Fire to descend the Mountain of a
terrible fiery or red color, and stones of a paler Red, to swim thereon, and
to be, some as big as an ordinary Table. We could see this fire to move in
several other places, and all the Country covered with Fire, ascending with
great Flames, in many places, smoking like to a violent furnace of Iron
melted, making a noise with the great pieces that fell, especially those which
fell into the Sea. A Cavalier of Malta, who lives there, and attended me, told
me, that the River was as liquid where it issues out of the Mountain, as water,
and came out like a Torrent with great violence, and is five or six fathom
deep, and as broad, and that no stones do sink therein. I assure your Majesty,
no Pen can express how terrible it is, nor can all the Art and Industry of the
world quench, or divert that which is burning in the Country. In 40 days time
it has destroyed the Habitations of 27 thousand persons, made two Hills of
one, 1000 paces high apiece, and one is four miles in compass, as your Majesty
will see by the draught that I take the boldness to send herewith; it was the
best I could get, but has nothing of the progress into the Sea; the confusion
was so great in the City, which is almost surrounded with Mountains of Fire,
that I could not get any to draw one, but I have taken care to have one sent
after me for your Majesty. Of 20000 persons which inhabited Catania, 3000 did
only remain; all their goods are carried away, the Cannons of Brass are
removed out of the Castle, some great Bells taken down, the City-Gates Walled
up next the Fire, and preparation made all to abandon the City.

That night which I lay there, it rained Ashes all over the City, and ten miles
at Sea it troubled my Eyes. This Fire in its progress met with a Lake of four
miles in compass, and it was not only satisfied to fill it up, though it was
four fathom deep, but has made of it a Mountain.

I send also to your Sacred Majesty a Relation in Print which the Bishop gave
me, wherein the Beginning is related, and several curious Passages. I most
humbly beseech your Pardon for the hindering your Majesty so long from your
better Employments: And I beseech you, Great Sir, ever to believe I love and
Reverence your Person above all Expression: for, I am

Naples the 27 of April 7 of May. 1669. Your Majesty's most Obedient, most
Humble, and most Faithful Subject and Servant, Winchilsea.

A Particular NARRATIVE Of the late Dreadful Earthquake and Eruption, As it is
Collected out of several Relations from CATANIA.
MOunt Aetna, or Monte Gibello, a Mountain so Renowned throughout the World for
its height and greatness, but much more for those Prodigious Flames, Smoke, and
Ashes which it has cast out from the top of it, whilst the other parts are
continually (even in the midst of Summer) covered with Snow, has been for many
Ages observed once, or sometimes oftener, in the space of about fifteen years,
to throw up more then ordinary Flames, with much Smoke and Stones, and great
quantities of Ashes* which (though terrible to the neighboring Towns and
Villages) was yet wont, in little time, to abate of its fury, and prove but
seldom more injurious to the Country near it, then by communicating largely its
ashes, which though for the present it did somewhat incommode them, they had
afterward a considerable Compensation in the product of their Lands, which by
this means were rendered more fruitful.

But on Friday the 18/8 of March 1669. the Sun was observed before its setting
to appear of a pale and dead color, which (being contrary to what it ever
before appeared to us) struck no small terror into the inhabitants, all
Objects appearing also of the same color, with a paleness received from that
of the Sun. The same night happened in this City, as well as the whole Country
hereabouts, a terrible and unusual Earthquake, whose strong and unequal
motions, joined with horrible Roarings from Monte Gibello, exceedingly frighted
the inhabitants, but was so extraordinarily violent in the Country adjacent,
that the people were forced to abandon their Houses, and to fly into the fields
to avoid the danger threatened them from the falling of their Houses. The
village of Nicolosi was of all others the most dreadfully handled by this
furious Earthquake, the Houses and other buildings being shaken all in pieces,
and buried in their own Ruins, the poor people (who had preserved their lives
by a timely flight, with such little of their Goods as their hasty fears would
permit them to carry out with them) continued a night or two in the fields,
beholding with grief and astonishment the ruin of their Habitations; but
observing that by these violent Concussions, the Earth began to open in several
places, and to threaten them with inevitable ruin, they fled, though with much
trouble and amazement, to this City. These shakings of the Earth being so
frequent and violent, that the people went reeling and staggering* with such
difficulty supporting one another from falling, insomuch as what with their
want of sleep, the pains they were forced to take in traveling, and the great
terrors imprinted on them by what they had seen and suffered, they appeared at
their arrival in this City, as so many distracted people, wholly insensible of
what they did.

This dreadful convulsion of the Earth was immediately followed on Monday March
11. about ten at night by three terrible Eruptions, much about the same time,
and at little distance one from the other.

These said Eruptions were observed to be on the side of Monte Gibello, about
two miles beyond the Mountain called Montpileri, from whence with a terrible
noise it threw its up flames with much fury and violence about an hundred yards
in height, its noise not roaring only inwards from the Belly of the Mountain
as before, but violently cracking like Peals of Ordnance or Thunder, from the
side of it throwing out vast stones, some of them of 300 pound weight, which
being (as it were) shot through the Air, fell several miles distant from the
place, whilst the whole Air was filled with smoke, burning Cinders, and Ashes,
which fell like a fiery Rain upon the Country.

In the mean time issued from the side of this Prodigious Mountain, a vast
Torrent of Melted and burning Matter; which, like an Inundation, drowned, as in
a Flood of Fire, the Country on this side of it.

This burning River ran down upon the Mountain Montpileri, which, opposing its
direct course, it divided it self into two streams, which encompassed the said
Mountain* one of them taking its way by La Guardia, the Convent of St. Anne,
and Malposfo, the other by the Towns of Montpilori and Falicchi, which in few
hours were wholly destroyed and lost, not so much as any sign of them
remaining, with several lesser villages and Farms, and with them the famous
Image of the blessed Lady of the Annunciata; which, though highly reverenced
throughout the whole Island, esteemed the Wonder of Sicily and the whole World,
and to which the people with much Devotion resorted in Pilgrimage from the
remotest parts, was also swallowed up and consumed by this dreadful Torrent.

This fiery and burning Deluge immediately spread it self to above six miles in
breadth, seeming to be somewhat of the color of melted and burning Glass; but,
as it cools, becomes hard and rocky, and every where in its passage leaves
Hills and Pyramids of that Matter behind it.

At the same time Monte Gibello from its top raged with dreadful Flames, which
with its noise and concussions of the Earth still continuing, added not a
little to the terror of the people, who ran with Cries and Lamentations about
the City and Country, expecting nothing but to be swallowed up, or consumed by
fire, having no other apprehensions but of death, and a general Conflagration.

The two Torrents of Fire forward, destroying all things in their way, and by
Wednesday, March 13. had on the West Side branched it self into several
streams, and overran Campo Rotundo, S. Pietro, and Mostorbianco, with La
Potielli, and S. Antonino; and on the East part ruined the lower part of
Mascalucia, and Le Placchi, taking its way toward this City.

On Thursday the 14th the Wind came Eastwards, on which day fell abundance of
Rain, which abated not the progress of the Fire; which on the East Side had
from Mascalucia made its way to S. Giovanni di Galermo, the lower part whereof
it destroyed; and passing on, seemed to threaten this City on one side, as did
that on the West Side the other.

As the Fire approached, the Religious every where appeared with much Devotion,
carrying in Procession their Relics, especially those of S. Agatha, the
famous Martyr of Catania, in which they reposed no small confidence, followed
by great multitudes of people, some of them mortifying themselves with Whips,
and other signs of Penance, with great complaints and cries, expressing their
dreadful expectation of the Events of those prodigious fiery Inundations.

Whilst the people were thus busied in their Devotions* and astonished by their
fears, News was brought to the Magistrates of the City, that a considerable
number of Thieves and Robbers had taken the opportunity of this general
Distraction, to make a prey of the already distressed people, and that they had
Murdered several of them for their Goods; and that it was to be feared, that
the City of Catania it self might run some danger from the great numbers of
them which were about the Country, and from thence took their opportunities
to get into the Town. Whereupon, consultation being had for the prevention of
further mischief from them, the Commander of the Castle was ordered with a
considerable number of Horse, and a party of Spaniards, to secure the Country
and City against these Robbers; who immediately sent out several parties with
his Provost Marshal, with Order to seize on all suspected persons, and such as
were not able to give a good account of themselves: and, for such as were
taken in the Fact robbing, to Execute them by Martial-Law, without any further
Trial; and accordingly caused three pair of Gallows to be set up for their
speedy Execution; one before the Gate Di Aci, a second in the Marketplace, and
a third before the Gate Della Decima, setting strong Guards upon the Gates of
the City, and causing all suspected Houses to be searched, an account to be
given in of all Lodgers, and such persons to be secured, as could any vvayes
fall under a suspicion.

The poor people out of the Country being by this prodigious Calamity stripped
out of all their Estates, and reduced to great extremity, fled most of them for
refuge and relief to this City, with great Lamentations moving the Charity of
the Magistrates, which was readily inclined to give them the best assistance
they were able; and the Citizens, moved by their Complaints and Sufferings,
freely opened their doors, filling their Houses with as many of those
distressed people, as they could possibly receive; the Bishop, and all persons
of Quality and Estate contributing largely for their support, till better Order
could be taken for the disposing of them.

The City of Messina also, and several other Cities (informed of this
extraordinary Calamity) sent hither large supplies of Provisions, offering
their best assistance to this place, in case of extremity.

All the Elements seemed at this time to make War upon us, and to conspire
together for the punishment of the Inhabitants: The Air was continually
darkened with Clouds and Smoke, agitated by great and violent winds, and
oftentimes showred down great Rains, insomuch as the Sun from the beginning of
these Eruptions, very seldom appeared to us, and when it did, (with
extraordinary paleness) for a little time only, and (as it were, abhorring so
dreadful a spectacle) soon hid its face again under a thick Cloud.

The Sea ran much higher then it was wont to do, and by its extraordinary
roaring, and in some places overflowing its banks, added not a little to our
consternation. The Land every where infested with Thieves, insomuch, that till
by the extraordinary care taken by the Magistrates and Officers, severe
execution was done upon such as were apprehended in the Fact, no person was
able to stir abroad without danger of his life; whilst the Fire by this
prodigious overflowing of the Mountain, threatened to take possession of all.

On Friday the 15th, the stream of fiery Matter which destroyed the lower part
of S. Giovanni de Galerma, divided it self into two parts, one of its branches
taking its way toward Mosterbianco, the other threatening the City of Catania,
but this last was observed to move with more slowness then before, having in 24
hours time scarcely gained 20 paces.

On the 18th, being Monday, the Torrents being still seen to draw nearer and
nearer to this City, the Senate with Monsegnior Cambuchi the Bishop of this
place, followed by all the Clergy Secular and Regular, and an infinite number
of people went in a solemn Procession out of this City to Monte de St. Sofia,
carrying out with greatest Devotion their choicest Relics, and upon an Altar
erected in view of the Mountain, exposed them, where they celebrated Mass, and
used the Exorcisms accustomed upon such extraordinary occasions; all which
time, the Mountain ceased not as before with excessive roaring to throw up its
smoke and flames with extraordinary violence, and abundance of great stones,
which were carried through the Air, some of them falling within their view,
though at ten miles distance from the Eruption; the Ashes which proceeded from
thence were scattered in great abundance, as well on this City as on the
Country adjacent, every where in the Fields with cinders, and the heat of the
said ashes destroying the Grass, which obliged the people to drive away their
cattle to a further distance, which would otherwise have perished for want of
food.

These streams of ruin daily crept nearer and nearer to this City, but by
uneven and irregular motions, according as it was more or less supplied from
its fountain; but on Wednesday the 20th, we perceived that that branch of it
which seemed most to threaten this City from S. Giovanni di Galermo was wholly
extinguished, and the other which bent its course toward Mosterbianco ran but
slowly, and gave us some hopes that its fury was also near spent, but the other
Torrent which had before overflown Mosterbianco, continued its motion with as
much violence as ever, being in breadth above a Musket shot over; but in
probability could not easily overflow to the Westwards, which was defended by
its rocky situation; another branch which ran by S. Pietro was observed to
be much larger then the rest, and its stream more quick and active, but meeting
with some opposition in its way, it made some stop, only sending out a Rivolet
toward the Eastwards about three or four yards vvide, of its most subtle and
active matter, which directed its course toward a small village about a
furlong distant from its main stream; another branch threatened Campo Rotundo,
but bent its course Westwards toward the Farm of Valcorrente, where its fiery
body was scattered into several deep and rocky places, without any
considerable damage.

About this time we had hopes that the violence of this Eruption had been
over, the Mountain not throwing out its flames with that violence as before,
and its noise and roaring in a great measure ceased.

Those who at nearest distance took a view of the Mountain, informed, that the
top of it was fallen in, and the Mountain supposed to want near a mile of its
former height; that the largest of the Mouths from whence these fiery streams
were vented, was about half a mile in compass, but the view of this dreadful
Inundation carried so much terror in it as they were not able to express;
from all these Mouths were vomited Rivers of a thick and fiery substance of
stone and Metals melted, whose depth was various according to the several
places it filled in its passage, in some places 4, in others 8, 12 or 15 yards
and upwards: its breadth in some places six miles, in others much more; its
flame like that of Brimstone, and its motion like that of Quicksilver;
advancing ordinarily very slowly, unless where it was provoked by the addition
of a fresh Torrent, or some considerable descent. Wheresoever it passed, it
left large heaps of its congealed matter, with which it covered and burnt the
Earth, melting the Walls of Castles and Houses, throwing down and consuming all
before it, nothing being yet found able to resist its force, nor any thing able
to quench its burning, Water being observed rather to add to its fury;
wheresoever it has passed, it has left its dreadful marks behind it, levelling
some Hills and raising others, so much changing the situation, that not the
least trace of any place or Town remains, nothing being to be seen but confused
heaps of ragged stone, which yielding a noisome fume, strikes terror and
astonishment into all that behold it.

On Friday the 22, the Mountain again roared with much loudness, and threw up
from its Mouths a vast quantity of matter, which formed two large Hills higher
and larger then that of Montpileri, with a large bank of the same matter to the
eastwards, sending down a violent stream of its liquid matter toward Malpasso,
much enlarging the former current, and passing thence to Campo Rotundo and S.
Pietro, completed the ruins of those Towns, driving furiously toward
Mosterbianco; the other stream by S. Giovanni di Galermo being wholly diverted
and extinguished.

From this time till the 25th, the Mountain continued silent, but then it burst
out again with more force then ever before, its noise much louder, like Peals
of Ordnance, and so forcible and lasting, as for 24 hours it caused a shaking
and trembling in our buildings, the Air so filled with smoke and ashes, as
darkened the face of the sky.

The Birds and Fowl about this time, either through want of food, or illness
of Air, which was corrupted with the noisome smells arising from these
burnings, were observed to lie dead in all places.

On the 28th the grand Current was advanced near the City as far as the old
Capucins, which struck so great a terror into the people, that most of them
left the City, only some Officers remaining with such persons as were under
their command, who have secured and sent away the Magazine, and all the
Artillery from the Castle.

A Later Relation from Catania, bearing date the 27th of April, gives us this
further Account; viz.
THe Dreadful Inundation from Monte Gibello having destroyed many Castles and
Towns, with an infinite loss, and utter ruin to the Inhabitants, arrived
lately with a renewed Force at Mostorbianco, which it has wholly ruined, from
thence passing on to Albanelli, in four Days space destroyed all the Gardens
and Vineyards, with 63 Thousand Vines.

On Wednesday, April. 16. With an Impetuous Fiery Torrent it came toward
Sardanello, where all the remainder of the Inhabitants of this City were
Spectators of it, which resembled a River of melted and burning Brass, about
ten Else wide, running with swiftness to the Arch of Marcus Marcellus, a Famous
Piece of Antiquity, and passing under it ruined about six Else of it, which was
the breadth of the Current in that place: from thence it ran to Madonna di
Monserrato, which it wholly destroyed: then falling down to Madonna delle
Gratie, it entered in at one Gate, and passed through another, without any
considerable hurt, and running through the Gate Della Decima* filled all the
Plain Di Schiara Viva, where it was above 6 Else deep. Then taking its way
toward the Bulwark, on the Seaside, under the Castle of this City, it ran by,
two Else deep into the Sea; in which (to the great wonder of all that saw it)
it has made its Progress a mile in length, and as much in breadth, and is
drawing toward the Gate of the Channel, which gives us great Apprehensions,
lest it may that way Invade the City it self: Nor is there less Danger on the
side Del Tindaro, where there runs a great Torrent of the same Active matter,
which draws near, and seems to threaten the Walls, and is in that place about a
mile in breadth, having over-flowed and destroyed all the Gardens, from the
Gate Della Decima, as far as Madonna delli Amellati.

A LIST of the most considerable* Towns and Places Ruined and Destroyed by the
Dreadful Earthquake and Eruptions.
THe Town of Nicolosi wholly Ruined by the Earthquake. The Towns of Padara,
the greatest part destroyed by the Earthquake. Tree Castagne the greatest part
destroyed by the Earthquake.
The Towns of La Guardia, Wholly Overflowed, Consumed* and lost in this Fiery
Inundation, with all the Lands belonging to them, no Footsteps of them
remaining. Malpasso, Wholly Overflowed, Consumed* and lost in this Fiery
Inundation, with all the Lands belonging to them, no Footsteps of them
remaining. Campo Rotundo, Wholly Overflowed, Consumed* and lost in this Fiery
Inundation, with all the Lands belonging to them, no Footsteps of them
remaining. La Potielli. Wholly Overflowed, Consumed* and lost in this Fiery
Inundation, with all the Lands belonging to them, no Footsteps of them
remaining. St. Antonino, Wholly Overflowed, Consumed* and lost in this Fiery
Inundation, with all the Lands belonging to them, no Footsteps of them
remaining. St. Pietro, Wholly Overflowed, Consumed* and lost in this Fiery
Inundation, with all the Lands belonging to them, no Footsteps of them
remaining. Mostorbianco, Wholly Overflowed, Consumed* and lost in this Fiery
Inundation, with all the Lands belonging to them, no Footsteps of them
remaining. Montpileri, Wholly Overflowed, Consumed* and lost in this Fiery
Inundation, with all the Lands belonging to them, no Footsteps of them
remaining. La Annunciata, Wholly Overflowed, Consumed* and lost in this Fiery
Inundation, with all the Lands belonging to them, no Footsteps of them
remaining. Falicchi, Wholly Overflowed, Consumed* and lost in this Fiery
Inundation, with all the Lands belonging to them, no Footsteps of them
remaining. Flacchi, Wholly Overflowed, Consumed* and lost in this Fiery
Inundation, with all the Lands belonging to them, no Footsteps of them
remaining.
The Towns of Mascalucia Ruined in part. S. Giouanni de Galerma* Ruined in part.
The large Gardens and Vineyards of Albanelli overflown and Destroyed. The
Famous Piece of Antiquity of Marcus Marcellus much Ruined. Madonna de
Monserrato destroyed, besides many Castles, Farms, and other Places, which
have run the same Fortune, whose Names we for brevity pass over.
FINIS.

