GODS TERRIBLE VOICE IN THE CITY OF LONDON Wherein you have the Narration of
the Two late Dreadful Judgments of Plague and Fire,

Inflicted by the LORD upon that CITY; The former in the Year 1665, the latter
in the Year 1666.

By T. V.

To which is added, The General Bill of Mortality, Showing the Number of
Persons which died in every Parish of all Diseases, and of the Plague, in the
Year abovesaid.

Micah 6.9. The Voice of the Lord cries unto the City, and the man wisdom
shall see thy Name: Hear ye the Rod, and who has appointed it. Cambridge:
Printed by Marmaduke Johnson 1663

Psalm. 65, part of the 5th Verse. By terrible things in righteousness will thou
answer us.
INTRODUCTION.
S Hall a Trumpet be blown in the City, and the people not be afraid? Shall
there be evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? The Lion has roared,
who will not fear? The Lord God has spoken, who can but prophecy? Amos 3.
6,8. When the Pharisees spoke to our Savior to rebuke his Disciples for their
loud praises of the Lord with Hosanna's, he tells them, If they should hold
their peace, the stones would immediately cry out, Luke 19. 39,40. And we read
in Habakkuk, Chap. 2. ver. 11. Of the stone crying out of the wall, and the
beam out of the timber making answer. Certainly we in London have lately heard
the cry of stones and walls, of timber and beams in their fall and flames; I
mean in the late Dreadful fire, which has laid our Jerusalem in heaps; or
rather, we have heard the Voice of God in this and other terrible things which
have come upon us.

But I proceed to give a Narration of the late Judgments of Plague and Fire.

GODS Terrible Voice in the City of London: By the late Judgment of the Plague.
THE Plague so great, so lately, should not be forgotten; yet lest the Fire
more lately, and proportionably more great, and the amazing fears, which since
have risen within us, should shuffle former thoughts out of our minds, and
raze out the impressions, which by the Plague we had, and should labor to
retain to our dying hour: Therefore I shall give a brief Narration of this sad
Judgment, and some observations of mine own (who was here in the City from the
beginning to the end of it) both to keep alive in my self and others, the
memory of the Judgment, that we may be the better prepared for compliance with
Gods design in sending the Plague amongst us.

It was in the Year of our Lord 1665, that the Plague began in our City of
London, after we were warned by the great Plague in Holland in the year 1664,
and the beginning of it in some remote parts of our Land the same year; not to
speak any thing whether there was any signification and influence in the
Blazing-Star not long before, that appeared in the view of London, and struck
some amazement upon the spirits of many. It was in the month of May that the
Plague was first taken notice of, our Bills of Mortality did let us know but of
three which died of the Disease in the whole year before; but in the beginning
of May the Bill tells us of nine, which fell by the Plague, one just in the
heart of the City, the other eight in the Suburbs. This was the first arrow of
warning that was shot from Heaven amongst us, and fear quickly begins to creep
upon peoples Hearts* great thoughts and discourse there is in Town about the
Plague, and they cast in their minds whither they should go if the Plague
should increase. Yet when the next weeks Bill signifies to them the decrease
from 9 to 3, their minds are something appeased; discourse of that subject
cools; fears are ^usht, and hopes take place, that the black cloud did but
threaten, and give a few drops, but the wind would drive it away. But when in
the next Bill the number of the dead by the Plague is amounted from 3 to 14,
and in the next to 17, and in the next to 43, and the disease begins so much to
increase, and disperse:

Now secure sinners begin to be startled, and those who would have slept at
quiet still in their nests, are unwillingly awakened. Now a great consternation
seizes upon most persons, and fearful bodings of a desolating judgment. Now
guilty sinners begin to look about them, and think with themselves into what
corner of the Land they might fly to hide them. Now the profane and sensual,
if they have not remorse for their sins, yet dread and terrors, the effect of
guilt, they could not drive from them; and if by company, and carousing, and
soft pleasures, they do intoxicate and smoothen their spirits in the day; yet
we may guess what dread does return upon them, if they give but any room for
retirement, and what hideous thoughts such persons have in the silent night,
through fears of death which they are in danger of. Now those who did not
believe an unseen God, are afraid of unseen arrows; and those which slighted
Gods threatenings of eternal judgments, do tremble at the beginning of His
execution of one, and not the greatest temporal judgment. Now those which had
as it were challenged the God of Heaven, and defied Him by their horrid Oaths
and Blasphemies, when He begins to appear, they retreat, yea fly away with
terror and amazement. The great Orbs begin first to move; the Lords and Gentry
retire into their Countries; their remote Houses are prepared, goods removed,
and London is quickly upon their backs: few ruffling Gallants walk the streets;
few spotted Ladies to be seen at windows: a great forsaking there was of the
adjacent places where the Plague did first rage.

In June the number increases from 43 to 112, the next week to 168, the next
to 267, the next to 470, most of which increase was in the remote parts; few in
this month within, or near the walls of the City; and few that had any note
for goodness or profession, were visited at the first; God gave them warning to
bethink and prepare themselves: yet some few that were choice, were visited
pretty soon, that the best might not promise to themselves a supercedeas, or
interpret any place of Scripture so literally, as if the Lord had promised an
absolute general immunity and defense of his own people from this disease of
the Plague.

Now the Citizens of London are put to a stop in the career of their trade;
they begin to fear whom they converse withal, and deal withal, lest they
should have come out of infected places. Now Roses and other sweet flowers
wither in the Gardens, are disregarded in the Markets, and people dare not
offer them to their noses, lest with their sweet savor, that which is
infectious should be attracted: Rue and Wormwood is taken into the hand; Myrrh
and Zedoary into the mouth; and without some Antidote, few set abroad in the
morning. Now many houses are shut up where the Plague comes, and the
inhabitants shut in, lest coming abroad they should spread infection. It was
very dismal to behold the Red Crosses, and read in great letters. LORD HAVE
MERCY UPON US, on the doors, and Watchmen standing before them with Halberts,
and such a solitude about those places, and people passing by them so gingerly,
and with such fearful looks, as if they had been lined with enemies in ambush,
that waited to destroy them.

Now rich Tradesmen provide themselves to depart; if they have not
Countrey-houses, they seek Lodgings abroad for themselves and Families, and the
poorer Tradesmen, that they may imitate the rich in their fear, stretch
themselves to take a Countrey-journey, though they have scarce wherewithal to
bring them back again. The Ministers also (many of them) take occasion to go to
their Countrey-places for the Summertime; or (it may be) to find out some few
of their Parishioners that were gone before them, leaving the greatest part of
the Flock without food or physic, in the time of their greatest need. (I don't
speak of all Ministers, those which did stay out of choice and duty, deserve
true honor) Possibly they might think God was now Preaching to the City, and
what need their Preaching; or rather, did not the thunder of Gods Voice
affrighten their guilty Consciences, and make them fly away, lest a bolt from
Heaven should fall upon them, and spoil their Preaching for the future? and
therefore they would reserve themselves till the people had less need of them.
I do not blame many Citizens retiring, when there was so little Trading, and
the presence of all might have helped forward the increase and spreading of the
infection: but how did guilt drive many away, where duty would have engaged
them to stay in the place? Now the Highways are thronged with Passengers and
Goods, and London does empty it self into the Country; great are the stirs and
hurries in London by the removal of so many families; fear puts many thousands
on the wing, and those think themselves most safe, that can she furthest off
from the City.

In July the Plague increases and prevails exceedingly, the number of 470,
which died in one week by the Disease, arises to 725 the next week, to 1089
the next, to 1843 the next, to 2010 the next. Now the Plague compasses the
Walls of the City like a flood, and pours it upon it. Now most Parishes are
infected both without and within; yea there are not so many Houses shut up by
the Plague, as by the owners forsaking of them for fear of it; and though the
Inhabitants be so exceedingly decreased by the departure of so many thousands,
yet the number of dying persons increase fearfully. Now the Countries keep
guards, lest infectious persons should from the City bring the Disease unto
them; most of the rich are now gone, and the middle sort will not stay behind;
but the poor are forced (through poverty) to stay, and abide the storm. Now
most faces gather paleness, and what dismal apprehensions do then fill their
minds, what dreadful fears do there possess the spirits, especially of those
whose Consciences are full of guilt, and have not made their peace with God?
The old Drunkards, and Swearers, and Unclean persons are brought into great
straits; they look on the right hand, and on the left, and Death is marching
toward them from every part, and they know not whither to fly that they may
escape it. Now the Arrows begin to fly very thick about their ears, and they
see many fellow-sinners fall before their faces, expecting every hour
themselves to be smitten; and the very sinking fears they have had of the
Plague, have brought the Plague and death upon many; some by the sight of a
Coffin in the streets, have fallen into a shivering, and immediately the
Disease has assaulted them, and Sergeant Death has arrested them, and clapped
too the doors of their Houses upon them, from whence they have come forth no
more, till they have been brought forth to their graves. We may imagine the
hideous thoughts, and horrid perplexity of mind, the tremblings, confusions
and anguish of spirit, which some awakened sinners have had, when the Plague
has broke in upon their houses, and seized upon near Relations, whose dying
groans sounding in their ears, have warned them to prepare; when their doors
have been shut up, and fastened on the outside, with an Inscription, Lord have
mercy upon us, and none suffered to come in but a Nurse, whom they have been
more afraid of, then the Plague it self; when Lovers and Friends, and
Companions in sin have stood aloof, and not dared to come high the door of the
house, lest death should issue forth from thence upon them, especially when the
Disease has invaded themselves, and first began with a pain and diziness in
their head, then trembling in their other members; when they have felt Boils to
arise under their arms, and in their groins, and seen Blains to come forth in
other parts; when the Disease has wrought in them to that height, as to send
forth those Spots which (most think) are the certain Tokens of near-approaching
Death; and now they have received the sentence of death within themselves, and
have certainly concluded, that within a few hours they must go down into the
dust, and their naked souls, without the case of their body, must make its
passage into Eternity, and appear before the highest Majesty, to render their
accounts, and receive their sentence: None can utter the horror which has been
upon the spirits of such, through the lashes and stings of their guilty
Consciences, when they have called to mind a life of sensuality, and
profaneness, their uncleanness, drunkenness, injustice, oaths, curses,
derision of Saints and Holiness, neglect of their own salvation; and when a
thousand sins have been set in order before their eyes, with another aspect
then when they looked upon them in the temptation; and they find God to be
irreconcilably angry with them, and that the day of Grace is over, the door of
Mercy shut, and that pardon and salvation (which before they slighted) is now
unattainable; that the Grave is now opening its mouth to receive their bodies,
and Hell opening its mouth to receive their souls; and they apprehend that they
are now just entering into a place of endless woe and torment, and they must now
take up their Lodgings in the inferior Regions of utter darkness, with Devils,
and their fellow-damned sinners, and there abide for evermore in the extremity
of misery, without any hopes or possibility of a release; and that they have
foolishly brought themselves into this condition, and been the cause of their
own ruin; we may guess that the despairful agonies and anguish of such
awakened sinners, has been of all things the most unsupportable; except the
very future miseries themselves, which they have been afraid of.

In August how dreadful is the increase? from 2010, the number amounts up to
2817 in one week; and thence to 3880 the next; thence to 4237 the next; thence
to 6102 the next: and all these of the Plague, besides other Diseases.

Now the cloud is very black, and the storm comes down upon us very sharp. Now
Death rides triumphantly upon his pale Horse through our streets, and breaks
into every house almost, where any inhabitants are to be found. Now people fall
as thick as leaves from the Trees in Autumn, when they are shaken by a mighty
wind. Now there is a dismal solitude in London-streets, every day looks with
the face of a Sabbath Day, observed with greater solemnity then it used to be
in the City. Now shops are shut in, people rare and very few that walk about,
insomuch that the grass begins to spring up in some places, and a deep silence
in every place, especially within the Walls; no rattling Coaches, no pransing
Horses, no calling in Customers, nor offering Wares; no London-cries sounding
in the ears; if any voice be heard, it is the groans of dying persons,
breathing forth their last; and the Funeral-knells of them that are ready to be
carried to their Graves. Now shutting up of Visited-houses (there being so
many) is at an end, and most of the well are mingled among the sick, which
otherwise would have got no help. Now in some places where the people did
generally stay, not one house in an hundred but is infected; and in many houses
half the Family is swept away; in some the whole, from the eldest to the
youngest; few escape with the death of but one or two; never did so many
Husbands and Wives die together; never did so many Parents carry their Children
with them to the Grave, and go together into the same House under Earth, who
had lived together in the same House upon it. Now the nights are too short to
bury the dead, the whole day (though at so great a length) is hardly sufficient
to light the dead that fall therein, into their Beds.

Now we could hardly go forth, but we should meet with many Coffins, and see
many with sores, and limping in the streets: amongst other fa^^ spectacles,
me-thought two were very affecting; one, of a woman coming alone, and weeping
by the door where I lived (which was in the midst of the Infection) with a
little Coffin under her arm, carrying it to the new Churchyard: I did judge
that it was the Mother of the Child, and that all the Family besides was dead,
and she was forced to Coffin up, and bury with her own hands this her last dead
Child. Another, was of a man at the corner of the Artillery-wall, that as I
judge through the diziness of his Head with the Disease, which seized upon him
there, had dashed his face against the wall; and when I came by, he lay hanging
with his bloody face over the rails, and bleeding upon the ground; and as I
came back, he was removed under a Tree in More-fields, and lay upon his back, I
went and spoke to him, he could give me no answer, but ratled in the throat,
and as I was informed, within half an hour died in the place.

It would be endless to speak what we have seen and heard of some in their
frenzy, rising out of their beds, and leaping about their rooms; others crying
and roaring at their windows; some coming forth almost naked, and running into
the streets; strange things have others spoken and done when the Disease was
upon them: but it was very sad to hear of one, who being sick alone, and it is
like frantic, burnt himself in his bed. Now the Plague had broken in much
amongst my acquaintance; and of about sixteen or more those faces I used to see
every day in our house, within a little while I could find but four or six of
them alive; scarcely a day past over my head for I think a month or more
together, but I should hear of the death of some one or more that I knew. The
first day that they were smitten, the next some hopes of recovery, and the
third day that they were dead.

The September, when we hoped for a decrease, because of the season, because of
the number gone, and the number already dead; yet it was not come to its
height, but from 6102, which died by the Plague the last week of August, the
number is augmented to 6988 the first week in September; and when we conceived
some little hopes in the next weeks abatement to 6544, our hopes were quite
dashed again, when the next week it did rise to 7165, which was the highest
Bill; and a dreadful Bill it was! and of the 130 Parishes in and about the
City, there were but four Parishes which were not infected; and in those, few
people remaining that were not gone into the Country.

Now the Grave does open its mouth without measure; Multitudes! Multitudes! in
the valley of the shadow of Death, thronging daily into Eternity; the
Churchyards are now stuffed so full with dead Corpses, that they are in many
places swelled two or three foot higher then they were before, and new ground
is broken up to bury the dead.

Now Hell from beneath is moved at the number of the guests that are received
into its Chambers; the number of the wicked which have died by the Plague, no
doubt has been far the greatest, as we may reasonably conclude without breach
of charity; and it is certain, that all the wicked which then died in sin, were
turned into Hell: how then are the damned spirits now increased? Some were
damning themselves a little before in their Oaths, and God is now damning their
souls for it, and is passing the irreversible sentence of Damnation upon them.
Some were drinking Wine in Bowls a little before, and strong drink without
measure; and now God has put another Cup into their hands, a Cup of red Wine,
even the Wine of the wrath and fierceness of the Almighty. Some were a little
before, feasting their senses, pleasing their appetite, satisfying the desires
of the flesh, and being past feeling, had given themselves up to
lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness; but now their laughter
is turned into mourning and their joy into howling and woe: now they have
recovered their feeling again, but instead of the pleasures which they felt,
and their sensual delights, which took away the feeling of their Consciences,
they are made to feel the heavy hand of God, and to endure such anguish and
horror, through the sense of Gods wrath, as no tongue can express. Now the
Atheists believe there is a God, and the Anti-scripturists are convinced of the
truth of Gods Word, by the execution of Gods Threatenings in the Word upon them.
Now the covetous and unjust, the malicious and cruel, the scoffers and
profane, begin to suffer the vengeance of Eternal fire; and the ignorant
person with the civil, who are unacquainted with Jesus Christ, are not excused;
yea, the Hypocrites, with all impenitent and unbelieving persons, are sent down
to the place of weeping; and surely Hell wonders to see so many come amongst
them from such a City as London, where they have enjoyed such plenty of such
powerful means of Grace; and place is given to them, even the lowest and
hottest, where Judas and others are of the chiefest note.

Yet Hell does not engross all that die by the Visitation; some there are,
(though not the first or most) who have room made for them in the Mansions
which are above; the Plague makes little difference between the righteous and
the wicked, (except the Lord by a peculiar Providence do shelter some under his
wing, and compass them with his favor, as with a shield, hereby keeping off
the darts that are shot so thick about them) yet as there is little difference
in the body of the righteous, and of others; so this Disease makes little
discrimination, and not a few fearing God are cut off amongst the re^; they die
of the same distemper with the most profane; they are buried in the same
grave, and there sleep together ill the morning of the Resurrection: but as
there is a difference in their spirits whilst they live, so there is a
difference, and the chiefest difference in their place and state after their
separation from the body. Dives is carried to Hell, and Lazarus to Abraham's
bosom, though he died with his body full of sores: Devils drag he souls of the
wicked, after they have received their final doom at the Bar of God, into utter
darkness, where there is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth; but
Angels convey the souls of the righteous into the Heavenly Paradise, the New
Jerusalem which is above, where God is in his glory, and the Lord Jesus Christ
at his right hand, and thousand thousands stand before him, and ten thousand
times ten thousand administer unto him, even an innumerable company of Angels,
and where the spirits of all just men and women made perfect, were before
gathered; where there is fullness of joy, and rivers of Eternal pleasures
running about the Throne of God, the streams of which do make glad all the
Inhabitants of New Jerusalem. Now the weak prison-doors of the body are broken
down, and the strong everlasting Gates of their Fathers Palace are lifted up,
and the Saints are received with joy and triumph, into glory, and they come
with singing into Zion, and everlasting joy in their hearts, and all sorrow and
sighing does fly away like a cloud, which never any more shall be seen. Now
the vail is rent, and they enter the Holy of Holies, where God dwells, not in
the darkness of a thick cloud, as in the Temple of old, but in the brightness
of such mavelous light and glory, as their eyes did never behold, neither
could enter into their heart to conceive; there they have the vision of Gods
face, without any eclipse upon the light of his countenance; there they have
the treasures of Gods love opened, and his arms to receive them with dearest
and sweetest embracements, which kindles in their hearts such a flame of love,
so ravishing and delightful, as words cannot utter; there they are entertained
by the Lord Jesus Christ, whom in the world they have served; and he that
showed them his grace, which they have wondered at when they were in the body,
does now show them his glory, which they wonder at much more, there they are
welcomed by Angels, who rejoice if at their conversion, much more at their
Coronation; there they sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the Kingdom
of their Father; there they find Moses, and David, and Samuel, and Paul, and
all the holy Martyrs and Saints, which have died before them, amongst whom they
are numbered and placed, who rejoice in their increased society.

And as there is a great difference between the condition of the souls of the
righteous and the wicked, who died by the same Disease of the Plague, after
their death and separation; so there is a great difference between the carriage
of their spirits at their death, and upon their sickbed. Some wicked men are
stupid and senseless, and are given up to a judiciary hardness, and die in a
sleep of carnal security, out of which they are not awakened, till they are
awakened in the midst of flames: Others more sensible, and considering what
has been, and what is coming upon them, are filled with inexpressible terror,
through the roarings and tearings of a guilty accusing Conscience, and the
fore-thoughts of that horrible insupportable torment they are so near unto. Now
scaring dreams do terrify them, and fearfulness of the bottomless Pit, and the
burning Lake below, does surprise them, and some breaking forth in the anguish
of their despairing souls, Who can dwell with devouring fire, who can inhabit
everlasting burnings* and however jovial and full of pleasure their life has
been, yet at their latter end they are utterly consumed with terrors: But mark
the perfect man, and behold the upright, the end of that man is peace,
whatsoever storms they have had in their passage through a rough Sea, the wind
blowing, and the waves roaring, and sometimes have been ready to sink through
opposition and discouragement, sometimes have been overwhelmed with grief and
doubtings, sometimes have been dashed upon the Rocks of terror and perplexity;
yet now they are come to the Haven of Death, the winds are hushed and still, the
waves are smooth and silent, the storm is over, and there is a great calm upon
their spirits; they are past the Rocks, and are out of the danger they feared,
when they are in the greatest danger of approaching Death.

It was generally observed amongst us, that Gods people who died by the Plague
amongst the rest, died with such peace and comfort, as Christians do not
ordinarily arrive unto, except when they are called forth to suffer Martyrdom
for the Testimony of Jesus Christ. Some who have been full of doubts, and
fears, and complaints whilst they have lived and been well, have been filled
with assurance, and comfort, and praise, and joyful expectation of glory, when
they have lain on their Deathbeds with this Disease. And not only more grown
Christians, who have been more ripe for glory, have had these comforts, but
also some younger Christians, whose acquaintance with the Lord has been of no
long standing.

I can speak something of mine own knowledge concerning some of my Friends whom
I have been withal: I shall instance only in the house where I lived; We were
eight in family, three Men, three Youths, an old Woman, and a Maid, all which
came to me, hearing of my stay in Town, some to accompany me, others to help
me. It was the latter end of September before any of us were touched; the young
ones were not idle, but improved their time in praying and hearing, and were
ready to receive instruction, and were strongly born up against the fears of
the Disease and Death, every day so familar to the view. But at last we were
visited, and the Plague came in dreadfully upon us, the Cup was put into our
hand to drink, after a Neighbour-Family had tasted it, with whom we had much
sweet society in this time of sorrow. And first our Maid was smitten, it began
with a shivering and trembling in her flesh, and quickly seized on her spirits;
it was a sad day, which I believe I shall never forget: I had been abroad to
see a Friend in the City, whose Husband was newly dead of the Plague, and she
her self visited with it; I came back to see another whose Wife was dead of the
Plague, and he himself under apprehensions that he should die within a few
hours: I came home, and the Maid was on her Deathbed, and another crying out
for help, being left alone in a swearing tainting Fit. What was an interest in
Christ worth then? What a Privilege to have a Title to the Kingdom of Heaven?

But I proceed. It was on the Monday when the Maid was smitten, on Thursday she
died full of Tokens: On Friday one of the Youths had a swelling in his Groin;
and on the Lord's Day died with the marks of the distemper upon him. On the same
day another Youth did sicken, and on the Wednesday following he died. On the
Thursday-night his Master fell sick of the Disease, and within a day or two was
full of Spots, but strangely beyond his own, and others expectations,
recovered. Thus did the Plague follow us, and came upon us one by one, as Job's
Messengers came one upon the heels of another; so the Messengers of Death came
so close one after another, in such dreadful manner, as if we must all follow
one another immediately into the Pit: yet the Lord in mercy put a stop to it,
and the rest were preserved. But that which was very remarkable in this
visitation, was the carriage especially of those Youths that died, who I
believe were less troubled themselves, then others were troubled for them. The
first Youth that was visited, being asked by his Father concerning the
provision he had made for his death and eternity; told him, He hoped if he died
he should go to Heaven; being asked the ground of his hopes, said, The Lord had
enabled him to look beyond the world: and when he was drawing near to his end,
boldly enquired whether the Tokens did yet appear; saying, that he was ready
for them: and so a hopeful Bud was nipt. But let not the Father or the Mother
weep, and be in sadness for him, he is, I don't doubt, with their Father, and
his Heavenly Father, which may be their comfort. The other also was a very
sweet hopeful Youth, so loving and towardly, that it could not but attract love
from those that were acquainted with him, but the grace he had gotten in those
years, being I suppose under seventeen, did above all beautify him, and stand
him in the greatest stead: in his sickness he had much quiet and serenity upon
his spirit, and lay so unconcerned at the thoughts of approaching Death, that I
confess I marvelled to see it; the sting and fear of Death were strangely taken
out, through the hopes which he had of future glory: yet once he told his
Mother he could desire to live a little longer, if it were the will of God: she
asked him why he desired it? he told her, he desired to live till Fire and
Faggot came, and above all he would fain dye a Martyr: She said, if he died
now, he should have a Crown: He answered, But if he died a Martyr, he should
have a more glorious Crown: yet he was not unwilling to receive his Crown
presently, and went away with great peace and sweetness in his looks, to his
Fathers house; and I could not blame the Mothers grief for the loss of such an
only Son, but to be so immoderate, was not well: Now I am sure it is time to
dry up tears, and lay aside sorrows for the loss of him who has been so long
filled with joys in the Heavenly Mansions.

I might speak of the carriage of the Master in his sickness, under the
apprehensions of death: when the spots did appear on his body, he sent for me,
and desired me to pray with him; told me he was now going home, desired me to
write to his friends, and let them know, That it did not repent him of his stay
in the City, though they had been so importunate with him to come away; but he
had found so much of Gods presence in his abode here, that he had no reason to
repent: He told me where he would be buried, and desired me to preach his
Funeral Sermon on Psalm. 16. ult. In thy presence is fullness of joy, and at thy
right hand there are pleasures for evermore. But the Lord raised him again
beyond the expectation of himself, Friends or Physician. Let him not forget
Gods Mercies, and suffer too much worldly business to crowd in upon him, and
choke the remembrance and sense of Gods goodness so singular; but let him by
his singularity in meekness, humility, self-denial, and love, zeal, and holy
walking, declare that the Lord has been singularly gracious unto him. But when
I speak of home-concernments, let me not forget to look abroad.

The Plague now increases exceedingly, and fears there are amongst us, that
within a while there will not be enough alive to bury the dead, and that the
City of London will now be quite depopulated by this Plague.

Now some Ministers, formerly put out of their places, who did abide in the
City when most of Ministers in place were fled and gone from the people, as
well as from the Disease, into the Countries, seeing the people crowd so fast
into the grave and eternity, who seemed to cry as they went, for Spiritual
Physicians, and perceiving the Churches to be open, and Pulpits to be open, and
finding Pamphlets flung about the streets, of Pulpits to be let, they judged
that the Law of God and Nature did now dispense with, yea, command their
Preaching in public places, though the Law of man (it is to be supposed in
ordinary cases) did forbid them to do it. Surely if there had been a Law that
none should practice Physic in the City, but such as were licensed by the
College of Physicians, and most of those, when there was the greatest need of
them, should in the time of the Plague have retired into the Country, and
other Physicians who had as good skill in Physic, and no License, should have
staid amongst the sick, none would have judged it to have been breach of Law,
in such an extraordinary case, to endeavor by their practice, though without a
License, to save the lives of those who by good care and Physic were capable
of a Cure; and they could hardly have freed themselves from the guilt of
Murder of many bodies, if for Nicety of Law in such a case of necessity, they
should have neglected to administer Physic. The case was the same with the
Unlicensed Ministers which stayed, when so many of the Licensed ones were gone,
and as the need of souls was greater then the need of bodies, the sickness of
the one being more universal and dangerous then the sickness of the other; and
the saving or losing of the soul, being so many degrees beyond the preservation
or death of the body: so the obligation upon Ministers was stronger, and the
motive to preach, greater; and for them to have incurred the guilt of
Soul-murther, by their neglect to administer Soul-physick, would have been more
heinous and unanswerable; that they were called by the Lord into public, I
suppose that few of any seriousness will deny, when the Lord did so eminently
own them, in giving many seals of their Ministry unto them.

Now they are preaching, and every Sermon was unto them, as if they were
preaching their last. Old Time seems now to stand at the head of the Pulpit,
with its great Sithe, saying with a hoarse voice, Work while it is called to
day, at night I will mow thee down. Grim Death seems to stand at the side of
the Pulpit, with its sharp Arrow, saying, Do thou shoot Gods Arrows, and I will
shoot mine. The Grave seems to lie open at the foot of the Pulpit, with dust in
her bosom, saying,

London thy Cry
To God,
To Men,
And now fulfill thy Trust;
Here thou must lie,
Mouth stopped,
Breath gone,
And silent in the Dust.
Ministers now had awakening calls to seriousness and fervor in their
Ministerial Work; to preach on the side and brink of the Pit, into which
Thousands were tumbling; to pray under such near views of Eternity, into which
many passengers were daily entering, might be a means to stir up the spirit more
then ordinary.

Now there is such a vast concourse of people in the Churches where these
Ministers are to be found, that they cannot many times come near the
Pulpit-doors for the prease, but are forced to climb over the Pews to them: And
such a face is now seen in the Assemblies, as seldom was seen before in London;
such eager looks, such open ears, such greedy attention, as if every word would
be eaten which dropped from the mouths of the Ministers.

If you ever saw a drowning man catch at a rope, you may guess how eagerly many
people did catch at the Word, when they were ready to be overwhelmed by this
overflowing scourge, which was passing through the City; when Death was
knocking at so many doors, and God was crying aloud by his Judgments; and
Ministers were now sent to knock, cry aloud, and lift up their voice like a
Trumpet: Then, then the people began to open the ear and the heart, which were
fast shut and barred before; How did they then hearken as for their lives, as
if every Sermon were their last; as if Death stood at the door of the Church,
and would seize upon them so soon as they came forth; as if the Arrows which
flew so thick in the City, would strike them before they could get to their
Houses; as if they were immediately to appear before the Bar of that God, who
by his Ministers was now speaking unto them. Great were the impressions which
the Word then made upon many Hearts, beyond the power of man to effect, and
what the people before ever felt, as some of them have declared. When sin is
ripped up and reproved, O the tears that slide down from the eyes! when the
judgments of God are denounced, O the tremblings which are upon the Conscience!
when the Lord Jesus Christ is made known and proffered, O the longing desires
and openings of heart unto him! when the riches of the Gospel are displayed,
and the promises of the Covenant of Grace are set forth and applied, O the
inward burnings and sweet flames which were on the affections! now the Net is
cast, and many fishes are taken; the Pool is moved by the Angel, and many
leprous spirits, and sin-sick-souls are cured; many were brought to the birth,
and I hope not a few were born again, and brought forth: a strange moving there
was upon the hearts of multitudes in the City; and I am persuaded that many
were brought over effectually unto a closure with Jesus Christ, whereof some
died by the Plague with willingness and peace; others remain steadfast in Gods
ways unto this day: but Convictions (I believe) many hundreds had, if not
thousands, which I wish that none havest fled, and with the Dog returned to
their vomit, and with the Sow, have wallowed again in the mire of their former
sins. The work was the more great, because the Instruments which were made use
of was more obscure and unlikely, whom the Lord did make choice of the rather,
that the glory by Ministers and people might be ascribed in full unto himself.

About the beginning of these Ministers preaching, especially after their first
^a^t together, the Lord begins to remit, and turn his hand, and cause some
abatement of the Disease.

From 7155 which died of the Plague in one week, there is a decrease to 5538
the next, which was at the latter end of September, the next week a farther
decrease to 4929, the next to 4327, the next to 2665, the next to 1421, the
next to 1031; then there was an increase the first week in November to 1414,
but it fell the week after to 1050, and the week after to 652, and the week
after that to 333; and so lessened more and more to the end of the year: when
we had a Bill of 97306 which died of all Diseases, which was an increase of
more then 79000, over what it was the year before; and the number of them which
died by the Plague, was reckoned to be 68596 this year; when there were but 6
which the Bill speaks of who died the year before.

Now the Citizens, who had dispersed themselves abroad into the Countries,
because of the Contagion, think of their old Houses and Trades, and begin to
return, though with fearfulness and trembling, lest some of the after-drops of
the storm should fall upon them: and Oh that many of them had not brought back
their old hearts and sins, which they carried away with them! Oh that there had
been a general repentance and reformation, and returning to the Lord that had
smitten the City! The Lord gave them Leisure and Vacation from their Trades,
for the one necessary thing, which had they improved, and generally mourned for
sin, which brought the Plague upon the City, had they humbly and earnestly
sought the Lord to turn from his fierce anger, which was kindled against
London, it might have prevented the desolating Judgment by Fire: But alas! how
many spent their time of leisure in toys and trifles, at best about feeding
and preserving their bodies, but no time in serious minding the salvation of
their souls; and if some were a little awakened with fear, whilst the Plague
raged so greatly, and they looked upon themselves to be in such danger; yet when
they apprehended the danger to be over, they dropped asleep faster then before;
still they are the same or worse then formerly: They that were drunken, are
drunken still; they that were filthy, are filthy still; and they that were
unjust and covetous, do still persevere in their sinful course; couzening, and
lying, and swearing, and cursing, and Sabbath-breaking; and pride, and envy,
and flesh-pleasing, and the like God-displeasing, and God-provoking sins, do
abound in London, as if there were no signification in Gods Judgments by the
Plague. Some return to their houses, and follow their worldly business, and
work as hard as they can to fetch up the time they have lost, without minding
and laboring to improve by the Judgment, and Gods wonderful preservation of
them; others return, and sin as hard as they can, having been taken off for a
while, from these opportunities and free liberties for sin, which they had
before, most (...) now to sit down at rest in their houses when the summer was
come, and the Plague did not return: now they bring back all their Goods they
had carried into the Country, because of the Plague; they did not imagine they
should be forced to remove them again so soon.

Thus concerning the great Plague in London.

GODS Terrible Voice in the City of London: By the late Judgment of the Fire.
I Proceed now to give a Narration of the Judgment of the Fire; in which I
shall be more brief, it being dispatched in fewer days, then the Plague was in
months.

It was the Second of September 1666, that the anger of the Lord was kindled
against London, and the Fire began: It began in a Bakers house in Pudding-lane
by Fish-street-hill: and now the Lord is making London like a fiery Oven in the
time of his anger, Psalm. 21.9. and in his wrath does devour and swallow up our
habitations. It was in the depth and dead of the night, when most doors and
senses were locked up in the City, that the Fire does break forth and appear
abroad, and like a mighty Giant refresht with wine, does awake and arm it self,
quickly gathers strength, when it had made havoc of some Houses, rusheth down
the Hill toward the Bridge, crosses Thames Street, invadeth Magnus-Church at
the Bridge-foot, and though that Church were so great, yet it was not a
sufficient Barracado against this Conqueror; but having scaled and taken this
Fort, it shoots flames with so much the greater advantage into all places
round about: and a great building of Houses upon the Bridge is quickly thrown
to the ground: Then the Conqueror being stayed in his course at the Bridge,
marches back toward the City again, and runs along with great noise and
violence through Thames Street Westward, where having such combustible matter
it its teeth, and such a fierce Wind upon its back, it prevails with little
resistance, unto the astonishment of the beholders.

My business is not to speak of the hand of man, which was made use of in the
beginning and carrying on of this Fire. The beginning of the Fire at such a
time, when there had been so much hot weather, which had dried the houses, and
made them the more fit for fuel; the beginning of it in such a place, where
there were so many Timber-houses, and the shops filled with so much combustible
matter; and the beginning of it just when the wind did blow so fiercely upon
that corner toward the rest of the City, which then was like Tinder to the
Sparks, this does smell of a Popish Design, hatched in the same place where the
Gunpowder-Plot was contrived, only that this was more successful. The World
sufficiently knows how correspondent this is to Popish Principles and
Practices; those, who could intentionally blow up King and Parliament by
Gunpowder, might (without any scruple of their kinds of Conscience) actually
burn an Heretical City (as they count it) into ashes: for besides the
Dispensations they can have from his Holiness, or rather his Wickedness the
Pope, for the most horrid Crimes of Murder, Incest, and the like; It is not
unlikely, but they count such an action as this meritorious, (in their kind of
Merit) which, in the issue, they will find to merit the flames of eternal
fire, instead of a Crown of Glory, which I wonder that in their way they can
have the least hopes of. I believe that the people will now take more heed of
them and their ways, and instead of promoting their cause, I hope that a
contrary effect is produced; and that the before Indifferency of a generation
more newly sprung up, who did not know them, is now turned into loathing and
detestation of such a Religion, as can allow of such practices. My work is not
to declare what has been pr^^ed against the Papists before the Honorable
Committee of Parliament appointed to enquire into their Insolences; and the
Proofs which have been given in, concerning the Fire, and who have been
accessory thereunto.

No, I would rather endeavor to turn peoples eyes from men to God; for whoever
were the Instruments, God was the Author of this evil, which has come upon us;
there being no evil in the City (that is, evil of punishment) which the Lord as
a righteous and the supreme Judge, does not inflict. And surely more of the
extraordinary hand of God, then of any men, did appear in the burning of the
City of London. God could have prevented men, by discovering their Plots (as he
did that of the Gun-powder-treason) before they had taken effect. God could
have directed and given a blessing unto means for the quenching of it when it
was first kindled. God, who has the Winds in his Fist, could have gathered in
the Wind, and laid it asleep; or so turned it the other way, that it should
have been a defense to the City: or God who has the Clouds at his command, and
the Bottles of Heaven in his hand, could have gathered his thick Clouds
together, and squeezed them; opened his Bottles, and poured down Rain in
abundance upon the City; so that if the wind had blown as it did, it should
have blown water upon the fire, which would quickly have put it out. But the
Heavens at that time were Brass, no showering Clouds to be seen: the Fire
begins, is quickly taken notice of, though in the midst of the night; Fire,
Fire, Fire, does resound the streets; many Citizens start out of their sleep,
look out of their windows; some dress themselves and run to the place. The Lord
Mayor of the City comes with the Officers; a confusion there is, counsel is
taken away: and London, so famous for wisdom and dexterity, can now find
neither brains nor hands to prevent its ruin. The hand of God was in it: The
Decree was come forth: London must now fall; and who could prevent it? No
wonder, when so many Pillars are removed, if the Building tumbles; the prayers,
tears, and faith which sometimes London has had, might have quenched the
violence of the Fire; might have opened Heaven for rain, and driven back the
wind: but now the Fire gets mastery, and burns dreadfully; and God with his
great Bellows blew upon it, which makes it spread quickly, and ^ with such
force and rage, overturning all so furiously, that the whole City is brought
into jeopardy of desolation. That night most of the Londoners had taken their
last sleep in their houses; they little thought it would be so when they went
into their beds; they did not in the least suspect, when the doors of their
ears were unlockt, and the casements of their eyes were opened in the morning,
to hear of such an Enemies invading the City, and that they should see him,
with such fury, enter the doors of their houses, break into every room, and
look out of their casements with such a threatening countenance; As it is said,
Lam. 4. 12. The Inhabitants would not have believed that the adversary should
have entered the gates of Jerusalem: so the Inhabitants of the City, would not
have believed that the Fire should have entered and prevailed to burn London to
the ground.

That which made the ruin the more dismal, was, that it was begun on the
Lord's Day morning: never was there the like Sabbath in London; Some Churches
were in flames that day; and God seems to come down, and to preach himself in
them, as he did in Mount Sinai, when the Mount burned with Fire: Such warm
preaching those Churches never had; such Lightning dreadful Sermons never were
before delivered in London. In other Churches Ministers were preaching their
Farewell Sermons, and people were hearing with quaking and astonishment:
Instead of a holy Rest which Christians have taken on this day, there is a
tumultuous hurrying about the streets toward the place that burned, and more
tumultuous hurrying upon the spirits of those that sat still, and had only the
notice of the ear, of the quick and strange spreading of the Fire.

Now the Train-bands are up in Arms, watching at every quarter for
Outlandish-men, because of the general fears and jealousies, and rumors that
Fireballs were thrown into Houses by several of them, to help on and provoke
the too furious flames. Now goods are hastily removed from the lower parts of
the City; and the body of the people begin to retire, and draw upwards, as the
people did from the Tabernacles of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, when the earth
did cleave asunder and swallow them up, Numb. 16. 27,31,32. or rather as Lot
drew ont from his House in Sodom, before it was consumed by Fire from Heaven,
Genesis 19. Yet some hopes were retained on the Lord's Day, that the Fire would be
extinguished, especially by them who lived in the remote parts, they could
scarcely imagine that the Fire a mile off should be able to reach their Houses.

But the evening draws on, and now the Fire is more visible and dreadful:
instead of the Black curtains of the night, which used to be spread over the
City, now the curtains are Yellow; the smoke that arose from the burning parts,
seemed like so much flame in the night, which being blown upon the other parts
by the wind, the whole City at some distance seemed to be on fire. Now hopes
begin to sink, and a general consternation seizes upon the spirits of the
people; little sleep is taken in London this night, the amazement which the eye
and ear does effect upon the spirit, does either dry up, or drive away the
vapor which used to bind up the senses: Some are at work to quench the Fire
with water, others endeavor to stop its course, by pulling down of Houses; but
all to no purpose: if it be a little allayed, or beaten down, or put to a stand
in some places, it is but a very little while; it quickly recruits, and
recovers its force; it leaps and mounts, and makes the more furious onset,
drives back its opposites, snatcheth their weapons out of their hands, seizes
upon the Water-houses and Engines, burns them, spoils them, and makes them
unfit for service. Some are upon their knees in the night, pouring out tears
before the Lord, interceding for poor London, in the day of its calamity; but
alas, I fear there are too few weeping Jeremiahs at the Throne of Grace; too
few Moses's to stand in the Gap, too few Jacobs to wrestle with the Lord, and
hang about his arm. Londons sins were too great, and Gods anger against the
City was too hot, so easily and presently to be quenched and allayed; and if by
the intercession of some, a mitigation be obtained, so that the Lord does not
stir up all his 'wrath, utterly to destroy the place, as he did Sodom and
Gomorrah; yet none can prevail to call back that wrath, and reverse that decree
which is gone forth against the City: The time of Londons fall is come; the
Fire has received its commission from God to burn down the City, and therefore
all attempts to hinder it are in vain.

On the Lord's Day night the Fire had run as far as Garlick-hithe in
Thames Street, and had crept up into Cannon-street, and levelled it with the
ground, and still is making forward by the waterside, and upward to the brow
of the hill, on which the City was built.

On Monday, Grace Church Street is all in flames, with Lumbard-street on the
left hand, and part of Fen-Church-street on the right, the Fire working (though
not so fast) against the wind that way: before it were pleasant and stately
houses, behind it ruinous and desolate heaps. The burning then was in fashion
of a Bow a dreadful Bow, it was such as mine eyes never before had seen; a Bow
which had Gods Arrow in it with a flaming point; it was a shining Bow; not like
that in the Cloud, which brings water with it, and withal signified Gods
Covenant, not to destroy the World any more with water: but it was a Bow which
had Fire in it, which signified Gods anger, and his intention to destroy London
with Fire.

Now the flames break in upon Cornhill, that large and spacious street, and
quickly cross the way by the train of Wood that lay in the streets untaken
away, which had been pulled down from the houses to prevent its spreading: and
so they lick the whole street as they go; they mount up to the top of the
highest houses; they descend down to the lowest vaults and Cellars; and march
along on both sides of the way, with such a roaring noise, as never was heard
in the City of London; no stately building so great* as to resist their fury:
the Royal Exchange it self, the glory of the Merchants, is now invaded with
much violence; and when once the Fire was intred, how quickly did it run round
the Galleries, filling them with flames, then came down stairs, compasses the
Walks, giving forth flaming volleys, and fills the Court with sheets of Fire;
by and by, down fall all the Kings upon their faces, and the greatest part of
the stone-building after them, (the Founders statue only remaining) with such a
noise, as was dreadful and astonishing.

Then, then the City did shake indeed, and the Inhabitants did tremble, and
flew away in great amazement from their Houses, lest the flames should devour
them; Rattle, rattle, rattle, was the noise which the Fire struck upon the ear
round about, as if there had been a thousand Iron Chariots beating upon the
stones; and if you opened your eye to the opening of the streets, where the
Fire was come, you might see in some places whole streets at once in flames,
that issued forth, as if they had been so many great Forges from the opposite
windows, which folding together, were united into one great flame throughout
the whole street; and then you might see the Houses tumble, tumble, tumble,
from one end of the street to the other with a great crash, leaving the
foundations open to the view of the Heavens.

Now fearfulness and terror does surprise the Citizens of London; confusion
and astonishment does fall upon them at this unheard of, unthought-of
Judgment. It would have grieved the heart of an unconcerned person, to see the
ruful looks, the pale cheeks, the tears trickling down from the eyes, (where
the greatness of sorrow and amazement could give leave for such a vent) the
smiling of the breast, the wringing of the hands; to hear the sighs and groans,
the doleful and weeping speeches of the distressed Citizens, when they were
bringing forth their wives (some from their Childbed) and their little ones
(some from their sickbed) out of their Houses, and sending them into the
Countries, or some where into the Fields with their goods. Now the hopes of
London are gone, their heart is sunk; now there is a general remove in the
City, and that in a greater hurry then before the Plague; their goods being in
greater danger by the Fire, then their persons were by the Sickness. Scarcely
are some returned, but they must remove again, and not as before, now without
any more hopes of ever returning, and living in those houses any more.

Now Carts, and Drayes, and Coaches, and Horses, as many as could have entrance
into the City were laden, and any money is given for help, 5 l.. 10 l.. 20 l..
30 l.. for a Cart, to bear forth into the Fields some choice things, which were
ready to be consumed; and some of the Countries had the Conscience to accept of
the highest price, which the Citizens did then offer in their extremity: I am
mistaken if such money do not burn worse, then the Fire out of which it was
raked. Now Casks of Wine, and Oil, and other Commodities are tumbled along, and
the owners shove as much of their goods as they can toward the Gate: every one
now becomes a Porter to himself, and scarcely a back either of Man or Woman
that has strength, but had a burden on it in the streets. It was very sad to
see such throngs of poor Citizens coming in, and going forth from the unburnt
parts, heavy laden with some pieces of their goods, but more heavy laden with
weighty grief and sorrow of heart, so that it is wonderful they did not quite
sink under these burdens.

Monday night was a dreadful night, when the wings of the night had shadowed
the light of the heavenly Bodies, there was no darkness of night in London, for
the Fire shines now round about with a fearful Blaze, which yielded such light
in the streets, as it had been the Sun at noonday. Now the Fire having wrought
backward strangely against the Wind to Billings-gate, etc. along Thames Street
Eastward, runs up the Hill to Toner-street, and having marched on from
Grace Church Street, makes further progress in Fen-Church-street, and having
spread its wing beyond Queen hithe in Thames Street Westward, mounts up from
the Waterside through Dowgate, and Old Fish street, into Watling-street; but
the great fury of the Fire was in the broader streets: in the midst of the
night it was come down Cornhill, and laid it in the dust, and runs along by the
Stocks, and there meets with another Fire, which came down Thredneedle-street,
a little further with another, which came up from Wall-brook, a little further
with another, which comes up from Bucklers-bury; and all these four joining
together, break into one great flame at the corner of Cheap Side with such a
dazzling light, and burning heat, and roaring noise by the fall of so many
houses together, that was very amazing; and though it were something stopped in
its swift course at Mercers Chapel, yet with great force in a while it
conquers the place, and burns through it, and then with great rage proceeds
forward in Cheapside.

On Tuesday was the Fire burning up the very bowels of London; Cheapside is all
in a light fire in a few hours time: many Fires meeting there, as in the
center; from Soper-lane, Bow-lane, Bread-street and Friday-street, and
Old-change, the Fire comes up almost together, and breaks furiously into the
Broad street, and most of that side of the way was together in flames, a
dreadful spectacle! and then partly by the Fire which came down by Mercers
Chapel, partly by the fall of the Houses cross the way, the other side is
quickly kindled, and does not stand long after it. Now the Fire gets into
Blackfriars, and so continues its course by the water, and makes up toward
Paul's Church, on that side, and Cheap Side Fire besets the great building on
this side, and the Church though all of stone outward, though naked of houses
about it, and though so high above all buildings in the City, yet within a
while does yield to the violent assaults of the conquering flames, and
strangely takes Fire at the top; now the Lead melts and runs down, as if it had
been snow before the Sun; and the great beams and massy stones, with a great
noise fall on the Pavement, and break through into Faith-Church underneath; now
great flakes of stone scale, and peel off strangely from the side of the Walls;
the Conquer or having got this high Fort, darts its flames round about, now
Paternoster Row, Newgate-Market, the Old Bailey, and Ludgate Hill have
submitted themselves to the devouring Fire, which with wonderful speed rusheth
down the Hill into Fleet Street.

Now Cheap Side Fire marches along Ironmonger-lane, Old Jury, Lawrence-lane,
Milk-street, Wood-street, Gutter-lane, Foster-lane; now it runs along Lothbury,
Cat-eaten-street, etc. From New-gate-Market, it assaults Christ-Church, and
conquers that great building, and burns through Martins-lane toward
Aldersgate, and all about so furiously, as if it would not leave a House
standing upon the ground.

Now horrible flakes of Fire mount up the sky, and the yellow smoke of London
ascends up toward Heaven, like the smoke of a great Furnace; a smoke so
great, as darkened the Sun at noonday, (if at any time the Sun peeped forth,
it looked red like blood) the Cloud of smoke was so great, that Travelers did
ride at noonday some miles together in the shadow thereof, though there were
no other cloud beside to be seen in the sky.

And if Monday night was dreadful, Tuesday-night was more dreadful, when far
the greatest part of the City was consumed: many thousands who on Saturday had
Houses convenient in the City, both for themselves and to entertain others, now
have not where to lay their head; and the fields are the only receptacle, which
they can find for themselves and their goods; most of the late Inhabitants of
London lie all night in the open Air, with no other canopy over them, but that
of the Heavens: The Fire is still making toward them, and threatens the
Suburbs; it was amazing to see, how it had spread it self several miles in
compass; and amongst other things that night, the sight of Guild Hall was a
fearful spectacle, which stood the whole body of it together in view, for
several hours together, after the Fire had taken it, without flames, (I suppose
because the timber was such solid Oak) in a bright shining coal, as if it had
been a Palace of Gold, or a great building of burnished Brass.

On Wednesday morning, when people expected that the Suburbs would be burnt, as
well as the City, and with speed were preparing their flight, as well as they
could, with their luggage into the Countries, and neighboring Villages. Then
the Lord has pity on poor London; his bowels begin to relent, his heart is
turned within him, and he stays his rough wind in the day of the East wind;
his fury begins to be allayed; he has a remnant of People in London, and there
shall a remnant of houses escape; the wind now is hushed; the Commission of the
Fire is withdrawing, and it burns so gently, even where it meets with no
opposition, that it was not hard to be quenched, in many places with a few
hands: now the Citizens begin to gather a little heart, and encouragement in
their endeavors to quench the Fire. A check it had at Leaden Hall; by that
great building; a stop it had in Bishops-gate-street, Fen-Church-street,
Lime-street, Mark-lane, and toward the Tower; one means under God, was the
blowing up of houses with Gunpowder. Now it is stayed in Lothbury,
Broad-street, Coleman-street; toward the Gates it burnt, but not with any
great violence; at the Temple also it is stayed, and in Holborn, where it had
got no great footing; and when once the Fire was got under, it was kept under,
and on Thursday the flames were extinguished.

But on Wednesday-night, when the people late of London, now of the fields,
hoped to get a little rest on the ground, where they had spread their beds, a
more dreadful fear fell upon them then they had before, through a rumor that
the French were coming armed against them to cut their throats, and spoil them
of what they had saved out of the Fire; they were now naked and weak, and in
ill condition to defend themselves, and the hearts, especially of the females,
do quake and tremble, and are ready to dye within them; yet many Citizens
having lost their houses, and almost all that they had, are fired with rage and
fury; and they begin to stir up themselves like Lions, or like Bears bereaved
of their whelps, and now Arm, Arm, Arm, does resound the Fields and Suburbs
with a dreadful voice. We may guess at the distress and perplexity of the
people this night, which was something aleviated when the falseness of the
Alarm was perceived.

Thus fell great London, that ancient City! that populous City! London, which
was the Queen City of the Land, and as famous as most Cities in the World; none
so famous for the Gospel and zealous profession of the reformed Religion. And
yet how is London departed like smoke, and her glory laid in the dust? how is
her destruction come, which no man thought of, and her desolation in a moment?
how do the Nations about gaze and wonder? how does the whole Land tremble at
the noise of her fall? how do her Citizens droop and hang down their heads? her
Women and Virgins weep, and sit in the dust? Oh the paleness that now sits upon
the cheeks! the astonishment and confusion that covers the face, the dismal
apprehensions that arise in the minds of most concerning the dreadful
consequences which are likely to be of this fall of London? How is the pride of
London stained, and beauty spoiled! her arm broken and strength departed? her
riches almost gone, and treasures so much consumed? The head now is sick, and
the whole body faint; the heart is wounded, and every other part is sensible of
its stroke; never was England in greater danger of being made a prey to a
foreign power, then since the firing and fall of this City, which had the
strength and treasure of the Nation in it. How is London ceased, that rich
City! that joyous City! one corner indeed is left, but more then as many houses
as were within the walls, are turned into ashes.

The Merchants now have left the Royal Exchange; the Buyers and Sellers have
now forsaken the streets: Grace Church Street, Cornhil, Cheap Side,
Newgate-Market, and the like places which used sometime to have throngs of
Traffiquers, now are become empty of Inhabitants: and instead of the stately
houses which stood there last Summer, now they lie this Winter in ruinous
heaps. The glory of London is now fled away like a Bird, the Trade of London is
shattered and broken to pieces, her delights also are vanished, and pleasant
things laid waste; now no chaunting to the sound of the Viol, and dancing to
the sweet Music of other Instruments; now no drinking Wine in Bowls, and
stretching upon the beds of lust; now no excess of Wine and Banquetings; no
Feasts in Halls and curious dishes; no amorous looks, and wanton dalliances; no
ruffling silks, and costly dresses; these things in that place are at an end.
But if houses for sin alone were sunk, and fuel for lust only were consumed, it
would not be so much; but the houses also for Gods Worship, (which formerly
were a bulwark against the Fire, partly through the Walls about them, partly
through the fervent Prayers within them) now are devoured by the flames, and
the habitations of many who truly fear God, have not escaped; and in the
places where God has been served, and his servants have lived, now nettles are
growing, owls are screeching, thieves and cutthroats are lurking: A sad face
there is now in the ruinous part of London, and terrible has the Voice of the
Lord been, which has been crying, yea roaring in the City by these dreadful
Judgments of the Plague and Fire, which he has brought upon us.

FINIS.

