A FAREWELL EXHORTATION TO THE CHURCH AND PEOPLE OF DORCHESTER IN NEW ENGLAND.

But Not unusefull to any others, that shall (...) Read (...) the (...)

Containing Christian and Serious Incitements, and persuasions to the Study and
Practice of Seven principal Duties of great Importa^^^ ^or the Glory of God,
and the Salvation of the Soul, And therefore needful to be Seriously
considered of all in these declining times.

By RICHARD MATHER Teacher to the Church above mentioned.

2 Pet: 1.15. Moreover I will Endeavor that you may be able after my decease
to have these things always in remembrance.

Phil. 2.12. Wherefore my Beloved, as you have always Obeyed, not as in my
presence only, but now much more in my absence, Work out your own Salvation
with fear and trembling.

Printed by Samuel Green at CAMBRIDG in New England 1657.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
IT is warranted, and grounded upon the light both of nature and Scripture, 2
Cor: 12.14. That Parents should lay up for their Children, and leave such an
estate behind them, that their posterity after them may comfortably be
provided for, which as it is requisite for the outward subsistence of Children
in temporal regards: So it is most necessary for spiritual Fathers (which the
word of God tells are not many, 1 Cor: 4.15. how many Instructours soever there
are) I mean for the faithful Ministers of Christ, to leave a good stock and
heritage of Gods Testimonies for his people committed to their charge, and
their children in the faith: which care as it was always needful so
especially it is in these times, wherein there is so much Apostasy and departing
away from the faith and truth. In this regard we find it to have been the
practice of the most precious servants of the Lord, that in their old age they
have left their cygneas cantiones, their swans songs (as they are called) which
they sung not long before they departed this life, as Moses did Deuteronomy: 32. the
occasion of which song is set down Deuteronomy: 31.27, 29. I know your rebellion and
your stiff neck: behold while I am yet alive with you, ye have been rebellious
against the Lord, and how much more after my death? and ver: 29. I know that
after my death ye will utterly corrupt your selves, and turn aside from the way
that I Commanded you, and evil will befall you in the latter days, because ye
will do evil in the sight of the Lord etc: Therefore ver: 26. Moses commanded
the Levites to take the book, and to put it in the side of the Arc of the
Covenant, for a witness against them upon any apostasy of theirs. And is there
not as great need that such like course should be taken by Gods faithful
servants and Ministers to leave some works as it were in the A^ke of the
Covenant, some monuments and witnesses against the backsliders in these days?
Much like to this is the example of J^shua before his death, as appears Josh.
chap: 23, and 24. wherein he warnes them against their apostasy most sweetly
and pathetically, and particularly remarkable is that Josh. 24., 25, 26.
Joshua made a Covenant with the people, and set them a statute, and Ordinance
in Sechem, and Joshua wrote those words in the book of the Law of God, and took
a great stone, and set it there under an Oak that was by the Sanctuary of the
Lord, and said unto all the people, behold this stone shall be a witness unto
us, for it has heard all the words of the Lord, which he spoke unto us, least
ye deny your God.

Thus it has pleased the Lord in mercy (...) guide the spirit of this Reverend
Minister and servant of Christ, now being strick^n in years, and sollicitous
about the state of the Lords flock committed to his charge, what may befall
them after his departure in such times as these, to leave this precious
treatise, as a jewel, little in bulk, but great in virtue and value, as a
witness that may survive after his departure, and it may serve both as a
warning and a testimony not only to the Congregation of Dorchester, but to all
the Congregations and Churches of Christ here or else where, that shall have
the perusal of it, and it may be as Joshuahs stone, and a standing witness
against such amongst us as shall deny the Lord and his truth now both preached
and professed by Gods grace amongst us. Many of the Lords living witnesses are
either killed or deceased and taken up to heaven, and those few that are
surviving have very nigh finished their Testimony, and are following the others
apace: Therefore it is very precious and desirable, if as many of them as may
be, when they can no longer testify viva voce, with a lively voice, they may
do it mortua, or with a dead voice, (or by writing) which is many times
effectual and of great use: as it was the speech of that wise King Alphonsus,
mortuos esse consulendos, ab ijs qu^rendam veritatem, optimosque eos esse
consiliarios, that is that we should ask counsel of the dead, meaning the books
of wise and good men departed) and that the truth is to be sought of them, and
that they are the best counselors: and before him Demetrius Phalereus in
Plutarch wisely admonished Ptolomeus Philadelphus, the great Patron of
learning, and the learned men of that age, ut demortuorum sapientum libros sibi
compararet, quod quae aliquando consiliarij neque libere admonere metu paenae
vellent, aut etiam sine periculo aliquo non auderent, de illis in libris eorum
abunde^et libere scriptum essa. That is, that he should get the books of
learned men departed, that of those things which sometimes his counsello^^s
neither freely would admonish him for fear of punishment, or perhaps w^^hout
some danger durst not, I say of those things it was plentifully and freely
w^^tten in their books. So we can not tell how near such times may be, wherein
neither friends nor ministers either will or dare make known unto us the
blessed w^ll of God: in such times doubtless godly books will speak freely to
us, yea in whatsoever times that saying is most true, nullus amicus est magis
liber quam liber, no friend is more free then a book is. Finally I commend unto
thy piety and practice Christian Reader, this pious treatise of this Reverend
and judicious servant of the Lord, to which (at the request of a friend, in
sincere respect of the Author, and just estimation of the work) I have
prefixed a short preface, as the paper would permit; now* I shall conclude
undoubtedly with that speech of our Savior Joh. 13. if ye know these things
happy are ye if ye do them, so I commend both thy knowledge and pr^ct thereof to
the grace of God in Christ.

A true friend I hope, of thine everlasting peace, Charles Chauncy.

TO THE CHURCH AND INHABITANTS of DORCHESTER in New England, Mercy and Peace in
CHRIST JESUS.
MY dearly Beloved^^ Christ,. It was the desire and purpose of (...) Blessed
Apostle (...) 12, 13. and he engaged (...) that it should (...) be always
putting (...) of such things as did concern the Everlasting good of (...) also
endeavor that they might have the same in (...) example is my warrant, and
should be my (...) to endeavor the like, (as far as my Tenuity and slend^r
abiliti^^ (...)) concerning your selves. For which cause as now by the space of
two and (...) and upwards, I have been putting you in remembrance of sundry
(...) duties of the Gospel, by word of mouth, so no small part of my intent in
(...) present undertaking is, that you might remember the Lord and your own
(...) not only whilst I shall live, but also after my decease. And as it was
(...) to the blessed Apostle, to be the more diligent during life, as knowing
(...) shortly die, and lay down this Tabernacle, 2 Pet: 1.14. And an other (...)
more diligent and earnest, because the time of his departure was (...) hand 2 Timothy ^.5, 6. and our blessed Savior before them, would not fail to work the
(...) him that sent him, whilst it was day, because a night was coming when
no man could work, John 9.4. In like sort I was the more desirous to perform
this service (such as it is) for the good of your souls, as knowing that it
will not be long (considering my years) before the time come when I can be
serviceable here no more. But though you can not always have my endeavors by
word of mouth, yet what is here presented to your view, may be always with you
whenever you shall pl^^se to call for it: And as it is said of Abel, that
being dead, he yet speaks, Heb: 11.4. So why may not I be speaking to you in
these poor papers for the good of your souls, when in person I shall be
removed frm you by bodily death; So you have my Apology for my present
undertaking, and a manifestation of my Scope and aim therein.

Be pleased therefore I beseech you, to give me leave to commend to your
consideration and acceptance in the Lord, a few l^ues of Christian counsel and
advise, for the good of your precious and immortal sin it; which I desire to
leave with you as the best Legacy I can be quea^h to you, (...), you may read
and practice the same when I am taken from you: And I beseech you receive it as
from one that does unfainedly love you, or at the least does wish he had a
heart that could do it, and thinks he could be right heartily glad of the
welfare and salvation of all your souls; and that when you and I must all
appear before the Lords Tribunal, we might then ^^joyce and have comfort
together in Christ Jesus for (...), as finding that our (...), whether mine in
preaching, or yours in hearing ^^^ther mine in writing, or (...) in reading,
has not been in vain. With such an heart I desire to tender to (...) and
directions ensuing* (...) I desire that so and no otherwise (...) the (...)
which (...) and directions are expessed in these Seven particulars that (...)*

FIRST of all, I beseech (...)* Be not (...) in the great work of Sorrow for
your Sins, of Contrition (...) of Soul in sight and sense thereof. For you must
needs confess (...) any amongst you but has cause enough to be sencible of
sin, and (...) affected therewith. For the Scripture is most true that tells
you tha^ (...) have sinned, Romans 3.23. and ^.12. and that there is not a just
man upon the (...) that does good and sins not, Eccl. 7.20. and that if you
say you have no (...)* you deceive your selves, and the truth is not in you, 1
John 1.8. Now if there (...) sin in you, shall there not be grief and sorrow
because of the same? Is not (...) most proper cause of sorrow? when you can
truly say you have no (...) you will have no cause of sorrow; but this you can
never say, whilst (...) are here upon earth. And sure it is, sin is a
dishonor and grief unto God himself, and to his holy Spirit, Gen: 6.5, 6.
Psalm. 95.10. Ephe. 4.30. and if it be so to him, shall it be no grief to you?
shall your sins be a burden to the Lord, Isay 1.13, 14, 24 and he be pressed
under them, as a cart is pressed that is full of sheaves, Amos 2.13. and shall
you be unsensible of any burden therein, and securely go on, as if there were no
cause of grief or mourning for this thing? Never say you love the blessed God,
if it be so with you; If your sin which is such a dishonor and injury and
grief to him, be not a grief to you also. If you be of those that must be saved
by Christ, then it was for your sins* as well as for the sins of others that
Christ was Crucified, and put to endure all those doleful and bitter
sufferings in the garden, and upon the Cross, Mat 26, and 27. F^r all his
sufferings were for the sins of those that must be saved, (...). 53.5 6* 8.
And can you believe and remember and consider these his sufferings, and look
upon him as one whom you have pierced, and ^et for all this remayn without true
Contrition and grief of heart? believe it then your hearts are very hard
indeed. What? kill Christ, and not be grieved? and look on him whom you have
pierced, and yet not mourn, nor be in bitterness for all this? Is this
possible? or may it not rather be concluded from Zech. 12.10. that those that
do not bitterly mourn for their sins, as the cause of Christ's sufferings, that
such hard hearted creatures are none of those that must be saved by Christ, nor
have part and portion in the saving benefits of his passion? He that was a man
after Gods own heart, you may find him complaining that his iniquities were
gone over his head, and were as an heavy burden, too heavy for him, Psalm. 38.4.
and that theref^^^ he would declare his iniquity and be sorry for his sin,
verse (...) though a man of much grace and holiness, yet because of (...) that
was still dwelling in him. cries out, oh wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death? (...) 17, 20, 2^* 24. (...) both he and
David, and other Saints have (...), the sins and iniquities of other men, Psalm
(...) 3.18, 19. 2 Cor. 2.4. and 12.21. Ezekiel 9.4. 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. And if so, then
judge in your selves, what hearts those men have, who are so unlike these men of
God, that they have no heart to grieve and mourn for their own sins, and much
less for the iniquities of others. And if Heaven be a pl^ce of wiping away men's
tears from their eyes, Rev* 7.17. and 21.4. are they ever like to come there
who have tears in-now for other causes, but ^one for their sins? But what
should I speak of coming to heaven? the truth is, without Compunction of heart
and sorrow of soul for a man's sins, be (...) like to attain to any truth of
saving grace upon earth. For can a child be born, where there never was any
travailing pains? can there (...) crop of corn at harvest, where the ground
was never plowed, nor broken up? Is not the way to Canaan through the
wilderness? doubtless through the wilderness you must go, if ever you will come
to Canaan And what was that wilderness? a terrible place surely, yea a place
wherein were fiery flying Serpents, and Scorpions, and drought, Deuteronomy. 8.15. a
land of deserts, and of pits, and of the shadow of death, Jer 2.6. and yet
through this wilderness must Israel go, before they could enter into the good
land. In like sort, a soul must go through a wilderness-like condition, that
is, he must be afflicted with sight and sense of spiritual misery and sin,
before he can attain to any state o^ saving rest and grace in Christ Jesus For
the Scripture tell^ us that they to whom Christ Jesus is sent, are poor,
broken-^e^rted, captives, pris^ner^, blind, and bruised creature^,, Luk 4.18.
(...) ^1.1. yea that they mourn in Sion, do sit in ashes, in mourning and in a
spirit of heav^^^* (...) and in a lost estate, and to those is the Lord jesus
sent to seek and save them, and to preach the Gospel to them, Luke 19 10. Isai.
61.1. Luke 4.18. But for others, that do not feel themselves sick of sin, but
are secure and hard hearted, as if they were righteous and whole and well, to
those the Lord Jesus himself tells us that he is no physician for the healing
of them, Mat. 9.12, 13. and if Christ who is the only physician to cure souls,
be not sent unto (...), do not heal them nor call them, how is it possible that
they should ever (...) healed? how is it possible that they should be converted
and called? The (...) is, the ruin of many professors (...), that they are
too (...) their first coming on to profession; as the stony ground (...) with
joy, but wanting depth of earth, and the stony heart not being ^^^oughly broken
and (...), therefore they continued not, but in time of (...) temptation fell
(...), Mat: 13.5, 6, 20, 21. and so that proverb is (...). The house will never
stand, that is built (...) without digging deep that it may be founded on the
Rock, (...) that is, that profession of Christianity, will not endure, that is
not begun in serious and deep humiliation. And though there be men that count
all sorrow for sin to be Legal, and not suitable, to the spirit of grace in the
Gospel, yet it is better for you to believe the word of God, which makes
mourning for sin, yea bitter mourning, as for an only Son, or the loss of one^
first born, to be the effect and work of the spirit of grace poured forth upon
Gods people, Zech: 12.10. and therefore not a mere legal business, as some
would make it. They may repent that ever they did so much repent, and look upon
their sorrow for sin, as Christ upon his enemies, Lord forgive me for I knew
not what I did. But when Christ shall appear to comfort mourners, and to
inflict that which long since he denounced, even woe to the (...) laugh, for
they shall wail and weep, Luke 6.25. then these men will be of another (...),
and wish they had had experience of more true mourning and sorrow for sin^. And
therefore my Beloved* if you mean to reap in joy, see that you sow in t^ares,
Psalm. 126.5, 6. I mean, if ever you expect to have grace or glory, the
salvation of God in this or in another world, see to it that the fallow ground
of your hearts be thoroughly plowed up, that you may not sow among thorns,
(...)* 4.3, 4. See to it that you be truly sensible of sin, and broken
hearted, and as it were sick with sorrow for it, that so Christ and his
Righteousness, may be highly esteemed by you, that you may believe in him, and
in d^e time be comforted by him: In a word see to it, that you be not destitute
of that godly sorrow that work^th Repentance to salvation, not to be repented
of, 2 Cor: 7.10. If now you mourn in an holy and spiritual manner, the Lord
Jesus has pronounced that you are blessed, and shall be comforted, Mat. 5.4.
But otherwise, expect not but that sorrow and mourning will seize upon you, if
not now, then at such a time when you shall not be able to put them off, nor
find any comfort therein. And as we say of winter, that, winter is seldom or
never lost, so may we say of sorrow for sin it will not be always left, but
will certainly come, either at one time or another either now in this life, or
herefie^ when it will be worse to be born. As Mos^^ said to those Tribes, Numb.
32.23. even so may I say to you, you have (...), and be sure your sin will find
you out. It may be sweet (...) present, but assure your selves it will be
bitterness in the (...) end, (...) 2.26. and at the last will bite like a
Serpent, and sting (...) Adder, Pro: 23.32 yea be bitter as wormwood, and sharp
as a two (...) word, Pro: 5.3, 4. But oh how much better (...), to feel the
(...) sorrow here, where mercy and forgiveness may (...) hard-hearted and
secure, and then to feel sorrow remediless in Hell!

2. Labor to be men of (...) Judgment and Understanding in the things of
Religion* and make account th^^ all Error is sin, as being frequently
forbidden by the Lord, Jam. 1.16. Mat 16.6, 11, 12. and 24.4. 1 John 4.1. In so
much as as that some errors do no less then subvert the soul, Acts 15.24.
excluding out of Heaven, as other horrid works of the flesh, Gal. 5.19, 20,
21. and (...) to them that hold thm, 2 Pet: 2.1. and 3.16. and others which are
not so fundamental, but are as hay and stubble upon the foundation, yet even
these do so hazard a man's salvation, that though he may be saved holding the
foundation, yet his work shall be burnt, and he shall suffer loss (...), 1 Cor:
3.15. Wherefore as you love your own souls, take heed of erroneous doctrines
and opinions; but contend earnestly for the Faith, that was once deliver^d to
the Saints, Jude 3. Believe not every Spirit, but try the spirits whether they
be of God, for many false prophets are gone out into the world 1 (...). 4.1.
Yea your zeal for the Truth, and against the contrary should be such, that if
any come to you and bring not the doctrine of truth, you should not receive him
into your house, nor bid him God speed 2 John 10. But if he were an Angel from
heaven, hold him accursed. Gal. 8, 9. Therefore believe not them that think a
man may be saved in any Religion, and that it were good to have all Religions
free, and that opinions have no great danger in them. These are but the devises
of Satan, that so pernicious errors might more easily be entertained, as not
being greatly suspected: but believe the word of God which tells you otherwi^^
in the places cited, and in Mat. ^.15. Acts 20.29. where false Teachers are
compared to grievous and ravening wolves, And if you can believe that sheep may
do well enough though ravening wolves be let in amongst them, then you may
believe that false doctrine and they that teach it are no ways dangerous to
the souls of men; But if the one be contrary to experience and common sense,
and therefore may not be believed, then neither may the other. Wherefore my
beloved, take heed you be not plucked away with any error of the wicked, and
fall from your own stedfast^^ss, 2 Pet: 3.17. But be diligent in the search and
study of the holy Scriptures, (...) want whereof, is the cause of error, Mat:
22.29. Acquaint your selves (...) Catechism, and be well grounded therein; for
commonly they that (...) to (...) defective in the knowledge of Catechistical
points. Make conscience (...) obey the Truth which you do already know; for
such have a promise to (...) the truth, John 7.17. And live not in, nor foster
any sinful lust in your bea^^^ or lives, for this makes captives to false
doctrine, and them that teach it, 2 Timothy: 3.^. And ^e sure (...) down the pride
of your hearts, and be low and little in your own eyes; (...) babes shall have
the truths of Christ revealed to them, whereas with (...) self-conceited ones it
shall be otherwise, Mat: 11.25. 1 Cor: 3.18. If yo^ shall be wise in your own
conceit, which God forbid, never think your sel^^^ Christians indeed in such a
case, for ^here is more hope of a fool then of such, (...) 6.12. I think he
said well and wisely, who said that to be a true christian without humility,
was as hard as to be a man without a soul: and sure I am, (...) said very well,
and very wisely, who tells us that God resists the proud (...) gives grace
to the h^mble 1 Pet 5.6. James 4.6.

3. Content not your selves to live without the faithful Ministry, and other
holy appointments and Ordinances of Jesus Christ. But make account there is
somewhat in it, and much too* when Pastors and Teachers ac^^rding to Gods
heart shall f^ed his people with knowledge and understanding are promised as
special blessings to the people of God, Jer: 3.15. Isai. 30.20. and are gifts
reckoned amongst the principal fruits and benefits of the Ascension of Jesus
Christ, Ephesians. 4.8 11, 12. On the other side* our Savior tells us that when the
blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch, Mat: 15.14. and therefore
he bewailes and pitties the con^^i^on of such people who were as ^heep that had
no shepherd, and bids us make it one of our prayers, that the Lo^d of (...)
harvest, would thrust forth laborers (...) Harvest, Mat: 9.36, 38. Some may
think, (and so much I grant is publ^shed (...) pr^nt) that when our Savior
speaks of a ministry, and of baptism to (...), and to have his presence
therewith, till the end of the world, (...): 28.9, 20. that by the word
englished, The end of the world, He (...) no more but the end of that age that
then was, when the Apostles were upon the earth, But by the like reason they
may call the harvest when the Elect shall be gathered by the Angels into the
glory of Heaven, and when the wicked shall be cast as tares into Hell fire,
they may with as good reason call this Harvest the end of that age when the
Apostles lived, for th^s also is called the end of the world, Mat. 13.30, 39,
40. and if it were absurd to call this Ha^vest the end of that age, it is no
better to translate and expound the word so in the 28 of Matthew for the phrase
is the same in both places; to omit the mention of other places also, where the
phrase is used, as it is rightly englished for the end of this world, and not
for the end of the Apostles age. The Apostle tells us, that the Lords Supper
must be observed till the Lord come, 1 Cor: 11.26. and that the delivering up
of the Kingdom as administered by external Ordinances shall not be till the end,
1 Cor: 15.24. but till that time, this way of administering Christ's Kingdom
shall continue. God forbid that you should be of their mind who think the use
of Ordinances to be too low a dispe^sation for them that have attained those
excellent and high seize of grace, and of Christ in the Spirit which they
speak of, For was there ever time, or will there ever be a time of more
excellent spiritual seize then in the primitive Church at Jerusalem when
it is expressly said, that great gra^e was upon them all, Acts 4.32, 33. and yet
at this time of so great grace, they did not live without ordinances or above
them, as having attained too high seize to attend upon God in the use of
such low dispensations; no* but they continued in the Apostles Doctrine, and
fellowship, and breaking of bread, and prayers, Acts 2.42. If through
profaneness, or worldliness, or high flown imaginations of excellent
seize, you shall once think an able ministry, and Christ's Ordinances to
be of no great necessity, believe not that your hearts are in a right frame in
such a case; for how should they, when they are so contrary to the heart of him
who was a man after Gods own heart, I mean David, who often bewailes it and
laments it as a great misery, when he was deprived of Sanctuary-enjoyments, as
you may see in Psa 42. and 43. and 63. and 84. so that he was so far from
counting it an excellency to live without these things, or to please himself in
such a condition that he bewailes such a thing as one of the greatest miseryes.
It is not like but ere long I shall be taken from you: and then (if not sooner)
see that you do your utmost endeavor to obtain a faithful and an able
Minister, to be set over you in the Lord: and acknowledge him and your other
Elders your Overseers and Rulers as the Scripture calls them, Acts 20.28. 1 Timothy 5.17. And therefore be content to Obey them, an^ Submit your selves to
them in the Lord. 1 (...) 5.12, 13. Heb* 13.7* 17. And though it be now a time
when many think, that no great abilityes are requisite in a minister, or
preacher of the word but that ordinary brethren may suffice for such
employment, yet you shall do better to be of his mind, who counts a man fit for
such work, to be one of a thousand, Job 33.23. which imports that such men are
not very common, but fare men. And otherwise what need was there for Paul to
cry out oh who is sufficient for such things* 2 Cor: 2.16. Sure there was
little reason for such an exclamation, if ability to read English be
sufficient, but one would think that speech implies, that such abilityes and
(...) are requisite for this work, as are not very easy to be found. Sure it
(...) Rule requires that such men should be able to deliver, the whole Counsel
of God, Acts. 20.27. and to be able not only to deliver some truths, and by
Sound doctrine to Exhort, but also to Convince gainsayers, 1 Ti^. 1.9. and if
the ordinary so^^ of people can do this, I am much mistaken. They that would
not much care if learning and Schools of Learning amongst Christians were
suppressed, are but too like that wretched Julian the Apostate, who forb^d all
the children of Christians to be trained up in such Schools; (...)
and his reason was quia proprijs pennis ferimur, we are beaten or stricke^
says he as it were with our own weapons. For he was vexed to see the learning
and eloquence of some Christians, as Basil, Gregory and others; and how they
by learning were able to withstand the Argutia, or cunning subtilties of the
Gentile^; and therefore to hinder christian Religion, and in favor to
Gentilism, be devised this devise, Theodor, l 3. C 8. Sozom. l 5. C 17. Socrat.
l 3. C 10, and C 14. Carrion, Chron. p. 278. Symson History, book 1. Cont. 4.
p. 60. And therefore judge in your selves whether it be not sad and lamentable
that professed Christians should be so like to this wretched Apostate and enemy
of Christ. Amongst the sins of the house of Jerobo^m, which were causes to cut
it off, and to destroy it from off the face of the earth, this is reckoned for
one, that he made of the lowest of the people Priests, so that whose ever would
might be consecrated to such employment, 1 King. 13.33, 34. And therefore I
exhort you pr^ze the Ministry, and an able ministry as an Ordinance of Jesus
Christ; and do not think it can be well with you if either you have none or
none of any competent abilityes; but remember what the Apostle tells you R^m:
10.13, 14, 15. that as calling upon God is the way and means of salvation and
without faith there can be no callin^ upon God, so not any, faith without
hearing, nor hearing without a Prea^^er, not any preach except then ^e sent, If
therefore you desire salvation, you must see that you call upon the name of God
that y^u may be saved; and if you desire to call upon God, you must see that
you be believers; and if you would be believers, you m^s^ see the necessity
(...) hearing sent preachers, as the way and mean, to believing, even as
believing and ^^lling upon God is the way and means to Salvation. And when God
shall be so gracious unto you as to bestow such a man upon you, see that you
dearly love him and reverence him in the Lord, holding such in reputation,
Phil. 2.29. and counting their very feet to be beautiful, Rom* 10.15. or
otherwise the Lord will require it of you as a disrespect offered and done to
him, who has said, He that hears and re^^iveth you, hears and receives
me, and he that despises you, despises me, Luke 10.16. John 13.20.

4. Think it not enough to serve the Lord your selves alone in your own
persons, but be sure to have special care that your Children and families may
serve him also, and therefore remember to Instruct them and teach them the word
and will of God, and to pray for them and with them, for Gods blessing to be
upon their souls. For the former of these, there is express Commandment and
charge, Ephesians. 6.4. Psalm. 78.5, 6. Pro. 22.6. Deuteronomy: 6.6, 7. In which last
Scripture, every householder (...) Commanded of God to have the words of God in
his heart, and that he teach them diligently to his children, talking of them
when he sits in his house, and when he walks by the way, when he lies
down and when he rises up. And therefore, if your children and servants be not
instructed and taught in the word of God, you will not be able to give any good
answer for it before the Lord, having lived in the neglect of so express and
plain, so serious and solemn a Commandment. The truth is you have but little
love either to God, or to your children, or to your selves, if you make not
conscience of this duty. For love to God would both provoke to keep his
Commandments, of which the teaching of your children is one, and would stir
up the soul that has it to desire and endeavor that God might be honored and
served as much and by as many persons and people as possibly it could attain
unto. And therefore how can you say that you love God, when you do not your
best endeavor that others, at least your own children and households may do him
service? Would you have God to have no service but by your selves, or whilst
your selves are alive? You know your selves must not live always; therefore it
would be some Testimony of your love to his Majesty, if you be careful to
train up a posterity for the Lord, and so to teach them in his ways, that your
seed may serve him when your selves shall be dead and gone. As for your
children, you know they are born in sin, and so children of wrath by nature*
and without Regeneration and holiness must never see the Kingdom of God; and
can you love them, and not endeavor to help them out of this woeful and
wretched condition? I think he loves his child, or his friend but little, that
sees him ly fast asleep within the flood-markes and reach of the tide, and so
every hour in danger to be swept away and drowned in the waters and waves of
the Sea, and for all this can endure yet to let him alone, and never endeavor
to awake him and rouse him up, that he may escape that apparent and imminent
danger. Judge then in your selves, what love there can be in you to your poor
children when you take no care, or make no conscience to save their souls from
the deluge of destruction, and from their sins of heart and life, whereby they
are in daily danger to be swept away with that deluge, and to be overwhelmed
with destruction. Please not your selves as if you loved them sufficiently in
that you are careful to provide them meat and clothes, and other necessaryes
for the body. For Turks and Indians can do so; and should not you be better and
do better then they? Will you do no more for the souls of your children then
Pagans and Infidels would do for the souls of theirs? Very bears and other
^^uit beasts, yea and the Sea Monsters, are not so unnatural, but that they
have some care of their young ones, Lam: 4.3. Only this care of theirs reaches
no further but to the flesh or body, as indeed they have no immortal Souls to
care or be cared for. But I beseech you, let your care and love to your
children reach further, even to do your utmost endeavor to help forward the
salvation of their precious and immortal souls; else never say you do truly
love them. Nay in such case you cannot say you do truly love your selves. For
the neglect of this duty will be your own disadvantage, and will further your
own discomfort, both in this and in another world. If children be duly
instructed when they are young, there is hope they will walk according thereto
when they shall be grown, Pro: 22.6. and will not this be a comfort and joy of
heart to any godly Parent? the holy Ghost tells us that the wise Son makes a
glad Father, Pro. 10.1. and 23. ver. 24, 25. and ver. 15, 16. But on the other
side, who knows not, that the Father of a fool has no joy, Pro: 17.21, 25.
and that a child left to himself brings his Mother to shame, Pro: 29.15.
Unless therefore you love your own sorrow and shame, you must not leave your
children to themseves, neglecting to instrust them in the word and ways of
God, but as you love your selves and your own comfort, you must be careful of
this duty; for this means is conducible to such an end, and the neglect
hereof, does ^end to the contrary. Consider seriously of this one thing, viz
when poor children shall be plagued and damned in Hell for their sin, and the
want of ^^ace, and when the Parents also shall be in the same conditi^n as for
their other sins, so for this amongst the rest, that they have neglected this
duty to their children, and dyed without Repentance for it, what a miserable
and (...) day will that be? what a hearing will it be to poor tormented souls
to hear their children cry out against them thus, or to the like purpose, viz
All this that we here suffer is through you: You should have taught us the
things of God, and did not, you should have restrained us from Sin and
corrected us, and you did not: (...) were the means of our Original
Corruption and guiltiness, and yet you never showed any competent care that we
might be delivered from it, from you we did receive it, by your neglect we have
continued in it, and now we are ^amned for it: Woe unto us that we had such
Carnal and careless parents, and woe unto you that had no m^re Compassion and
p^^ty to prevent the everlasting misery of your own Children. All this is no
more then may well be imagined and supposed to be the woeful condition of many
poor children and their Parents, in another world. And if all this seem a light
thing in the eyes of any Parent or householder, I may say, the Lord be merciful
to such a man, for his heart is very hard. Joshua was otherwise minded, for he
is resolute that he and his house will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15. and David
gives grave and godly Instructions to his Son Solomon 1. Chron: 28.9. that he
should know and serve the Lord, and so Pro. 4.3, 4, 5. And of Abraham, God
himself gives Testimony, that he kn^w that he would Command his children and
his household, to keep the way of the Lord, and to do Judgment and Justice,
Genesis 18.19. and why are these examples recorded, but for imitation? Yea our
Savior tells us, that those that are the children of Abraham, will do the
works of Abraham, John 8.39 Therefore as ever you desire to be known unto your
selves or others to be the children of Abraham by a true and lively faith, so
see that you be careful to tread in his steps and to do his works, as in
other things wherein he is propounded as a pattern, so in this particular of
instructing and well ordering of your children and families. But alas, all your
instructing will avail nothing, unless God do give the blessing; and therefore
you must also be diligent and faithful in the practice of prayer for and with
your families. Husbands and Wives must live in peace, that their prayers be not
hindered, 1 Pet: 3.7. Cornelius prayed in his house, Acts 10.30. David by
prayer is said to bless his house, 1 Chronicles. 16.43 Abraham prays earnestly for
Ishmael, oh that Ishmael might live in thy sight, Gen: 17.^8. and who can think
but he prayed for Isaac also, and for the rest of his children? There is a
dreadful Imprecatio^ for the wrath of God to be poured out upon the (...) that
call not on Gods Name, J^r 10.25. oh see that you be not of that number, for
the wrath of God is terrible and intolerable. Pray without (...) and remember
that every creature is (...) God and Prayer, 1 (...) 4.4, 5. So ^^at your (...)
and your marriage of which he there especially spea^ (...) by like reason, your
buying and s^lling, your plowing and ^^wing, ^our sowing and mowing and
reaping, your feeding cattle and keep^^^ sheep, yo^^ planting orchards and
gardens, your b^k^ng and brewing, your building houses (...) outhouses, your
fencing in ground or other (...) what ever, you can not have any holy or
sanctified use thereof, if the word of God in your families, and prayer there
be neglected. Therefore teach your children the word of God, firstly the
principles of Catechism, and afterward highe^^ points, and pray that they, and
your endeavors with them and for them may be blessed. Tell them, so many of
them as have been Baptized, and tell it them as soon as they shall be able to
learn, what a solemn Covenant there is between the God of heaven and them,
whereby the Lord takes them to be his own. Ezekiel. 16.8. yea to be his Children,
Sons and daughters unto him, Ezekiel. 16.20, 21. ^sai 43.8. and engages himself
to be a God to them, Gen: 17.7. and this even from their Infancy, or mothers
womb, Psalm. 22.10. Isai. 46.3. Tell them also that in their Baptism, this
Covenant between the Lord and them was solemnly confirmed and sealed; for it
was so with the Circumcised, Gen: 17.11 Rom* 4.11. and it is no less with the
Baptized. Yea and tell them that they were Baptized into the name of the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, Mat: 28.19. and therefore do now bear the name of
God upon them, and so are not their own but his, as being called by his name,
Deuteronomy: 28.9, 10. Isai. 43.7. and 63. last; And if they be the Lords, and be
called by his name, and have him to be their God by Covenant, they may be well
assured that all the rich blessings of that Covenant shall be their Inheritance
for ever, if it be not through their own default, because the Lord is the
Faithful God that keeps Covenant and Mercy with them that love him and keep
his Commandments, even to a thousand geneeations, Deuteronomy: 7.9. Psalm. 105.8. So
that if they do not break Covenant with him, He will never break with them. But
on the contrary, you must not fail to tell them that if they for their parts
shall walk contrary to their Covenant, in the ways of sin and unbelief, and
shall continue impenitently therein, this will be a great aggravation of their
sin in the sight of God, and will bring upon them the sorer and more dreadful
judgments, as breach of Covenant has ever done, Deu: 29 25, and 31.16, 17.
Judges 2.20. Jer: 11.10, 11. Ezekiel. 16.8, 32, 38, 59. and their Baptism, which
if they kept their Covenant, might be unto them a pledge and seal of salvation,
will now be altogether fruitless and unprofitable, as if it were no Baptism,
Rom: 2.25, 28. and the condition of the children of Turks or Indians or other
Pagans, which were never Baptized, but are strangers from God and from his
Covenant, will be no worse, nor more uncomfortable then theirs; or rather
theirs will be far worse, their sins being against more mercy and being
violations of the Covenant, which was confirmed and sealed in their Baptism.
Tell them seriously of these things, and press upon them the remembrance,
consideration, and conscience of their Baptism and Covenant, and the great
engagement that lies upon them thereby. Take account of them how they profit
by hearing Sermon. Suffer them not to profane the Sabbath or Lords day, by
spending it in idleness, or mispending any part of that holy time in play, but
remember that in the fourth Commandment, the householder is charged to keep
that day holy, and to see that Son and daughter, man and maid may do the like.
Yea the Mother and mistress of the house is not exempted from this duty; for
Solomon was instructed by his Mother, Pro. 31.1. etc: and Timothy by his Mother
and Grandmother; for he knew the holy Scriptures of a child, 2 Timothy: 3.15. and
how should that be but by his Mother and Grandmother being believers, 2 Timothy:
1.5. for his Father was a Greek, Acts 16.1. And every Virtuous woman will open
her mouth with Wisdom, (viz in her house amongst her children and servants,
for in the Church she must be silent, 1 Cor: 14.34, 35.) and the Law of Grace
is in her tongue, Pro: 31.26.

Mothers, you are more with your children whilst they are little ones, then
their Fathers are, therefore he still teaching them as soon as ever they are
capable of learning. You are at much pains with the bodies of your children,
and suffer not a little while you bear them in your wombs and when you bring
them into the world, and will you not be at some pains for the saving of their
souls? You are naturally of tender and dear affection to your children, and
God mislikes it not that it be so; but will you show no affection to them in
respect of their souls, which is the principal matter? will it not move you to
think that the children of your own bowels should everlastingly perish, and be
in unconceivable misery world without end? I beseech you have pity upon them,
and do your best to teach them, and pray for them, weep for them, and wrestle
with God for them, who knows but the prayers and tears of a faithful Mother
may be the salvation of the child's soul?

5. Content not your selves with the name of Christians or of Church Members,
nor with mere profession or an external form of Religion, but see that you be
Religious in sincerity and truth, mainly following after and showing forth the
power of godlyness, and avoiding whatsoever is contrary thereunto or may hinder
therein. For God requires truth in the inward parts, Psalm 51*6. and cou^ts
nothing true religion or godliness which is but external or outward but that
only which is inward in the heart and spirit, and inner man, R^^ 2. two last.
The Pharisees were just and righteous before men, and made a (...) show
outwardly, but their hearts w^^hin being full of Hypocrisy and iniquity,
therefore the Lord abhord them, and all their seemingly glorious performances,
Luke 16.15. Mat: 23.27, 28. Think with your selve^ that God knows the heart,
Ac^s 1.24. and 15.8. Psa. 44.21. Rev. 2.23. So that though you may deceive men
and your own selves, yet him you can not deceive Think with your selves that
though Hypocrisy may ly hid and unknown for a time, yet it shall not always
do so, but in time shall be revealed and brought to light, Luke 12.1, 2. 1 Cor:
4.5. Think with your selves, that all professors are not found but there are
many yea very many that are otherwise; for many are called, so as to be amongst
the guests of God it the marriage fe^^t, and yet of them that are thus called,
there are few that are chosen, and that have indeed the wedding garment, Mat:
22.10, 11, 12, 14. And lastly think this with your selves that of all
punishments, the punishment of hypocrites is amongst the greatest for when the
dreadful wrath of God is expressed against that man, Mat. 24. it is said, he
shall have his portion with Hypocrites, verse 5^. which intimates, that the
portion of Hypocrites shall be most dreadful and terrible. To be Baptized, to
be a member of the visible Church of Christ, to be admitted to the Lords Table
and to all other privileges of the Church, To be outwardly blameless and no
ways scandalously vicious for Adulery, Fornication, Lasciviousness,
Drunkenness, Profaneness, Swearing, Scoffing at godlyness, or such like, To be
frequent in prayer, in reading the Scriptures and good books, in hearing
Sermons, and repeating them afterward, in Sabbath-services and other duties of
Gods worship, All this may be and the heart not right in the sight of God; for
all this is but the form of godlyness, which possibly may be, where the power
of godlyness is wanting, 2 Timothy: 3.5. The pith and power of Religion and
godlyness is another thing, and consists chiefly in that which is inward in
the heart and soul; as, In a true sight and sense of a man's own sin and
vileness, even of that which is inward in the heart, 1 King. 8.38. Rom: 7.14,
21, 23, 24. with an unfeined self-loathing, or abhorring of a man's self because
of the same, and in all true humility and low thoughtedness of a man's self: In
true self-denial, when the will of a man is so subdued to the will of God, as
that he can be content that Gods will should take place before his own, whether
that will of God be manifested in the Scriptures or in Providence, and whether
it should be submitted and yielded unto by doing, or by suffering: In Faith
unfeigned, and the life of faith, when a man adhereth and cleaves to God in
Christ, and to the precious promises of his grace, even then when sense and
carnal reason do speak contrary, and when in the eye of flesh and blood there
is little or no appearance of any such thing as the promise holds forth: In
the practice of Mortification, when a man is continually beating down his
corruption, and striving in the strength of Christ from day to day that his
flesh with the affections and (...) thereof may b^ Crucified and killed,
maintaining a combat and war against sin, and unfeinedly desiring that no
iniquity might have dominion over him, but that the old man and all the body of
sin might be destroyed: In the spirituality of duty, when a man endeavors to
do all that he does, whether of the first or second Table, whether in his
general or particular calling, 1. In obedience to God that has so commanded,
2. With the heart and soul and not alone with the outward man, 3. In sense of a
man's own infirmity and not in his own strength, but ^n the strength of Christ,
4. With an heart desirous to please and glorify God therein, 5. Never taking
contentment in any thing he does, further then the Spirit of Christ does thus
carry him forth in all,

6. Feeling need of the pardoning grace of God in the blood and Intercession of
Christ, for the best of his performances, 7. Looking up thereunto for the same
and for all his acceptance: In heavenly mindedness, when a man's affections and
conversation are so in Heaven that he takes no con^^^tment in the best of all
the comforts that are under the Sun, but counts them all vanity and vexation of
spirit, having many thoughts and holy actings of spirit toward God and Christ,
longing for death, and loving the appearing of the Lord Jesus, and this not out
of pangs of impatience as not willing to do or suffer the will of God, but from
unfeigned hatred of his own sin and corruption, and from earnest desire to be
freed from it, and to obtain the enjoyment of more full communion with God and
Jesus Christ then in this life can be attained unto, These and such like are
the things wherein true Religion and the power of godliness consists: but in
mere bodily exercise and external shows and performances, in them it
consists not. Oh then strive earnestly after the one, and content not your
selves with the other. In these days and in this country, profession is
somewhat common, Authority through the goodness of God countenancing Religion,
and ministering Justice against all known ungodlines and unrighteousness of men.
You have therefore so much more need to take heed and beware, least your
Religion reach no further but to the profession and the external form thereof*
this for the causes mentioned being so common, and the eye of man being able to
reach no further. It is true the condition of many amongst you (and so in other
parts of this Country) is such as necessarily puts you on to have much
employment about the things of this life, and to labor with care and pains
taking in the works of husbandry, and other worldly business for the
maintenance of your selves and your families, the Lord hav^ng laid this burden
on man, that (...) and experience shows that it is an easy thing in the
midst of worldly business to loose the life and power of Religion, that
nothing thereof should be left but only the external form, as it were the
carcass or shell, (...), and having consumed the very soul and (...) 1 Kings
20.40. was busy here and there, he whom he should have kept was missing and
gone: So while many men are busy here and there about worldly employments, the
power and life of Religion, which they should have carefully kept, is utterly
lost and quite gone. The deceitfulness of riches, and cares of this life, do as
thorns choke the seed of the word in many professors, that they become
unfruitful, Mark 4.19. As Demas forsook Paul through love of this present
world, 2 Timothy: 4.10. and Ezekiels hearers could not hear the word with profit,
because their heart went after their coveteousness, Ezekiel. 33.31. Oh therefore
take heed, I do beseech you, least it be so with any of you, least earthly
cares and encumbrances should dull your spirits, and take off their edge in the
things of greatest importance, and lest by these things all the vigor of
Religion should be wasted and worn out, and nothing be left but a dry and
sapless formallity, a spiritless and powerless profession. You would be more
happy if you could make a virtue of necessity, I mean if you could turn all the
acts of your particular callings, all the employments that God has laid upon
you about these earthly things, if you could turn them all into so many acts of
Religion and Obedience toward God. Which is not a thing impossible, for the
Apostle expressly requires it of Servants, that what ever they did ( viz: in
the labors of their callings) they should do it as unto Christ, as to the Lord
and not unto men, Ephesians. 6.5, 6 7. Col. 3.22, 23. And if servants may do their
works and duties of their places with such a spirit, why may not masters do
theirs with the like spirit, and Parents theirs, and children theirs, and
husband and wives theirs, and every man and every woman perform their earthly
employments in such fear of God, in such singleness of heart, in such respect
to the Commandment, that all these may be so many several acts of Obedience
toward God, so many parts and expressions of the power and practice of
godliness? If Adam had not sinned, his dressing and keeping the garden Gen:
2.15. would have been so: and doubtless with our blessed Savior it was so; for
he was subject to Joseph and Mary as a child to his parents, Luke 2.51. and it
is like he wrought with Joseph at the work of a Carpenter, and therefore he was
not only called the Carpenters son, but the Carpenter Mark 6.3. and his
Religious and pious spirit would doubtless do all these external and earthly
business with respect to God and in obedience to him. And the truth is, it is
not only the object about which actions are conversant, but the heart wherewith
they are done, and the grounds of doing them, with the ends that are aimed at
therein, that makes them acts of Religion truly pleasing to God; So that if
these be not right and spiritual, then preaching and praying, hearing and
repeating Sermons, and such like will be no better then acts of profaneness and
ungodlyness, and in the issue be charged upon the doers as so many But on the
contrary, civil employments if they be performed with spiritual minds, upon
such spiritual grounds, and to such spiritual ends as they might and ought,
then these employments even these will be accounted and approved of, as acts of
religion and godlyness, or obedience toward God, and as such will be pleasing
in his sight. Wherefore, to make an end of this, let it be your care, and the
Lord help you that you may do it effectually, that earthly or worldly
employments may not destroy nor diminish the life and power of godlyness and
religion, but that the life and power of religion may breath and be put forth
in all your earthly and civil employments.

6* Above all other things be careful in all your desires and endeavors to
make out after the enjoyment of God himself, and of Communion with his blessed
Majesty, as your summum bonum, your chi^f good. For you are utterly undone if
your hearts come not up to this, even to desire and choose the blessed God
himself for your portion and for all your happiness, but shall sit down as
contented or satisfied with any thing else that falls short of God. They that
are far from God shall perish, he destroys all them that go a whoring from
him, Psalm. 73.27. And amongst all the miseries of an unregenerate state, this
is reckoned as the sorest and worst, that such men are without God in the
world, Ephe. 2.12. Think with your selves how at the last day the dreadful
doom of the reprobate will chiefly be this, that they shall eternally be
separated from the favorable presence of God, Man 25.41. 2 These. 1.9. which
does evidently demonstrate that to enjoy communion with the blessed God, is of
all things the most desirable for any of the sonns of men. Imagine all the good
in the whole world to be gathered into one storehouse, and there to be laid up
in one heap, you know he that were far from that storehouse and had no part
there must needs be miserable; and even so is such a soul as is without the
enjoyment of God. If the Sun should depart out of the world there would be
nothing left but dreadful darkness upon all the Creation, all light being now
placed in the Sun: and if the fountain be dried up or stopped, all the streams
must needs fail. In like sort take away the enjoyment of God from any soul, and
all that is left must needs be nothing worth, but even a lump of vanity and
evil. For the best of creatures without God are but vanity, yea and vexation
of spirit. You may believe him that by large experience had found it so, and
gives us his report and testimony of what he had found, Eccles. 1.2. and 12.8.
And the time will come when his words will be found of others to be a truth, if
now it seem not so. When sickness comes when old age comes, when the
temptations of the Devil do assault you, when the pangs of death are upon you,
oh then what will all these things avail you in that day? they will surely be
then as Jobs friends, dry and empty pits, miserable comforters and physicians
of no value Job 6.15. etc: and 13.4. ^ 16.2. Yea then it will be found that all
things else besides God are but (...) things, that cannot profit nor deliver
for they are vain, 1 Samuel: 12.21. The Prodigal when absent from his fathers face
and family, may seek to fill his bell^ with the husks that the swine did eat,
but he will find that it will not be, tha^ those husks will not satisfy, but
that for all them he will begin to be in want, and be ready to perish through
hunger, and all because he is absent from his fathers house, where there is
bread enough and to spare, Luk^ 15. I tell you true my beloved, if a man could
enjoy the world at will, the greatest confluence of creature comforts that ever
man enjoyed, yet if he have not the fruition of the favor of God, all these
things would stand him one day in little or no stead, but in the fullness of all
his sufficiency, he shall be in streights, Job 20.22. and the creatures will
yield him no more content and satisfaction then a bed which is shorter then
that a man can stretch himself on it, and a covering which is narrower then
that he can wrap himself ^n it, Isai. 28.20. Oh then as you love your souls,
take heed of resting in any creature, and of looking no further then to them.
Do not spend your money for that which is not bread, and your labor for that
which satisfies not, Isai. 55.2. do not hew out unto your selves the
Cisternes, the broken Cisternes of one creature or another, that can hold no
water, but make out in the desires and longings of your souls after God
himself, who is the fountain of l^ving waters, (...) 2.13. Do not wander in the
outgoings of your hearts after this or that inferior good, and neglect the
Lord who is the principal, for that would be to be like them that wandered and
wen^ from mountain to h^ll f^rgetting (...) place, Jer* 50.6. Remember David
who at one time in his prosperity thoug^t he should never be moved, the Lord
had made his mounta^n (...) but when God did once hide his face he was
troubled, P^al. 3^.6.7. and the great mountain of all his outward prosperity
could not preven^ that trouble. You will do more w^sely if you follow him when
he said, (...) God, Psalm. 63.8. or him that said* (...) to draw (...) to God,
Lord whom have (...) heaven but thee? and the^e is none upon earth that I
desire besides thee, Psalm 73.25, last or him that could say, the Lord (...) my
portion says my soul, therefore wi^^ ^ hope in him, Lan. 3.24. For if you do
not go a (...) in your affiance or affection after other things, but (...) near
to God and choose him alone for your portion, you will never repent of such a
choice, but w^ll see cause to rejoice in it, and with thankfulness to
acknowledge, that (...) lines ar^ fall^n to you in p^ea^ant pla^es, and that in
God you have a good^y (...), Psalm. 16.5, 6. This is the good part, the best
part, that can be chosen, and they that have grace to make their choice of it,
it shall never be taken from them, Luke 10.42 But in God as in the fountain of
life, in whose light they shall see light, and who makes them drink of the
River of his pleasures, in him, and in his favor they shall be abundantly
satisfied, Psalm. 36.7, 8.9. and 17.15. and their souls shall one day be ^^lied
as with marrow and fatness, and their mouths shall praise the Lord with joyful
lips, Psalm. 63.5. It is no great matter if the comfort of creatures shall fail
them, if they shall be compassed about with miseries and distresses on every
side, yea if they walk in the valley of the shadow of death, yet having God
with them and his favor toward them, they need not to fear for any of these
things but may comfort themselves and rejoice in God in the worst condition
that can befall them, and at such times be even filled with joy and with the
Holy Ghost, Hab: 3.17, 18. 1 Samuel: 30.6. Psalm. 23.4. Acts 13.52. Lo friends
what it is to have the enjoyment of God. Wherefore if you be wise draw near to
God, and make him your portion. You see it will be good, yea best for you so to
do; and the Lord help you that you may do it unfeinedly and effectually,
without delay and without declining. Do you not consider what a great and
heinous Idolatry it is, when men choose unto themselves other God: besides the
Lord Jehovah, the only true and living God? It is you know the first
Commandment of the ten, Thou shall have no other Gods but Me? and to love the
Lord above all, even with all the heart and with all the soul, and with all the
mind and with all the strength, this is the first and great Commandment Mat:
22.37. Beware therefore that no love of any creature what ever it be, much less
the love of any Sin, beware I say that no love to any of these be predominant
in your souls above the love of God: you will be v^le Idolaters if it be so
with you. Beware that there be no Idols in your hearts, for this may be as bad
Idolatry as that which is more apparent and open. See to it that in judgment
and affection you do truly account it your chiefest happiness to enjoy the
Lord, and that you make him your chiefest good and your last end. If sin be (as
it is) an aversion or turning away of the soul from God to something else
besides him and above him, then in the work of grace there is a conversion and
turning of the soul toward God again, as to the best and chiefest good of all.
If it be not thus with you, you will not be able to clear it up to your own
consciences that any saving work of grace is wrought in your souls: for how
should you, when yet there is something else, which your souls do prefer
before God? The very reason why you hear and pray, why you do any duty of one
kind or another, yea why you do desire to live and breath on earth, the very
reason of all these things, if your hearts be right is chiefly this, that you
may se^k the Lord h^^ self, as the first cause and ^ast end, ^ha^ yo^ may
honor him and do for him, and be happy in the inj^yment of (...). They in
Ze^^. 7. fasted and mourned many a time in this and in that month, even those
seventy years; and yet says God, (...) ye at all fast unto me, even unto me,
verse 5. It seems their fasting was neither with hearts that desired nor aimed
to honor God, nor to enjoy communion with God, and therefore all their fasting
is rejected, because God was not sought therein. If you do not seek the Lord in
your doings and performances, nor make him the end of your desires and
endeavors, but that there be something else that your hearts do more esteem
then him, and can rest contented withal, though without him, then I must needs
say your state in grace is very questionable, or rather unquestionably unsound.
For if any man love the world, (sure if he love the same better then God) the
love of the Father is not in him, 1 John 2.15. It is (and must needs be so
accounted, even) a vile dishonor and notorious contempt against the
alsufficient and blessed God, when any creature whether a man's self, or ought
else is more respected and esteemed then he. Therefore though many say, who
will show us any good, yet let your hearts say, Lord lift up the light of thy
countenance upon us, and this shall be to us more gladness of heart, then in the
time when their corn and their wine increased, Psalm. 4.6, 7. CHRISTIAN, thou
that read these lines, Lift up thy heart unto God, and pray that he would
give thee such an heart that thou might in sincerity say, Oh that above all
things I might have the enjoyment of God! oh that above all things I migh be to
the honor of God.

7. But how should men that are sinners have any access to God, or enjoy
Communion with him. It is true, of themselves they can not, yet the^e is hope
in Israel concerning this thing, because JESUS CHRIST the Eternal Son of God
has taken on him the nature of man, and in that nature has fulfilled all
Righteousness, and been Obedient to the death, even the death of the Cross: and
so giving his life a ransom for many has made Reconciliation for the sins of
the people, that now by the merit of his death and Obedience, that d^stance
that sin had made between the soul and God, might be taken away, and sinners
have access to God by him, who otherwise could have no Communion with him. You
know what is written, that Christ has suffered, the Just for the unjust, that
he might bring us to God, 1 Pet: 3.18. and so by him we have access unto the
Father Ephesians 2.18. This therefore is the seventh and last though not the least
part of my advice unto you in the Lord, That with all seriousness and
uprightness you choose this Lord Jesus, and him alone as the only and
Alsufficient way and means for your enjoyment of God the chief good. For this
Lord Jesus is the only Advocate and Mediator between God and the souls of
men. And as there is but one God so there is but one Mediator between God and
men, the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy: 2.5. He is the way, the truth and the life,
there is no coming to the Father but by him, John 14.6. To enjoy God it is
true is our life, for in his favor is ^ife, yea his loving kindness is better
then life it self, Psalm. 30.5. and 63.3. But it is as true, that this life can
not now be had but through Christ, so that he that has the Son has life, and
he that has not the Son has not life, 1 John 5.12 If you desire Communion
with God and shall sue unto him that you may enjoy it, (and you are most
wretched and accursed if you do it not) yet in such case the Lord will speak to
you in language like to that of the Lord of Egypt unto Jacobs sonns, never see
my face except your brother be with you, never look to see the face of God to
your comfort in this or in another world, except Jesus Christ be with you, and
that you present your selves before God in his Satisfaction and Mediation. You
may not think, oh let such thoughts be far from you, that you can have access
to God or be accepted of him, for any thing that you have wrought or can work.
You know but little of your selves if you do not know, that the best of your
performances have need of pardon through the blood of Christ, and therefore
they are not able to purchase any pardon or favor for you in the sight of God;
no, no, it is Christ alone that must do this for you* you and your works must
be washed in his precious blood, and so cleansed from the uncleaness that is in
you and them, or else both you and they will be rejected of God as most
abominable in his sight. It is Christ alone that is the true High Priest that
bears the iniquity of the holy things of Gods people, that through his
Holiness they may be accepted before the Lord* Exodus: 28.38. which otherwise
they could not be. It is he that is that true Golden Altar that Sanctifies all
gifts, that are offered upon him. It is he that offers Incense with the prayers
of all Saints, and perfumes them with his Merits and Intercession, that so they
may ascend with acceptance before God out of his hand, Rev: 8.3, 4. Wherefore
of necessity you must disclaim all thought of any worth in your selves, or in
the best of your doings, and look for all acceptance of your persons and
performances through Jesus Christ and through him alone, as that blessed Martyr
John Lambert cried out at his death, none but Christ, none but Christ. When
Christ was in the world he was always careful to honor the Father, and now
the Father would have all men to honor him, even as they honor the Father;
and we are plainly told, that he that honors not the Son, he honors not
the Father which sent him, John. 5.23. And of the honor that we should do unto
the Son, this is the Sum, that we acknowledge all our interest in God, and so
in all good to be only through him and accordingly through him alone to look
for it, and to behave our selves as those that so do. If you shall through
grace do thus, this will be greatly for the honor of Jesus Christ, wherein you
have a notable and pregnant example of blessed Paul, as having gone before you
in this way of giving honor to the Lord Jesus. For sometimes you have him say
that he esteemed not to know any thing (...) Jesus Christ and (...) Crucified,
1 Cor: 2.2. Sometime you hear him say, God forbid th^^ I should glory in any
thing (...) in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, Gal* 6.14. and sometime he
tells you that the things that ^ere (...) unto him, those ^e accounted l^ss for
Christ, (...) doubtless (...) counted all things but loss for the excellency of
the knowledge of Christ Jesus his Lord, for whom he suffered the loss of all
things, and (...) count them but (...) that he might (...) Christ, and might be
found in him, not having his own Righteousness which was of the Law, but th^^
which is by the faith of Christ, even the Righteousness which is of God through
faith, that he might kn^w him, and so forth as is more largely expressed in
that 3. of Phil. verse 7, 8, 9, 10. A worthy pattern, and worthy to be
followed; Yea and that which is followed by all them that are believers in
truth, for unto all such this Lord Jesus is very precious, as 1 Pet: 2.7. yea
he is exalted and extolled, and is very high; Isai. 52.13. they count him white
and ruddy, the chiefest amongst ten thousand, so that he is very excellent in
their eyes from top to toe, his head, his eyes, his cheeks, his lips, his
legs and all have surpassing excellency in them in their esteem, and what ever
he be to others, to them he is altogether lovely, C^nt: 5.10, 11. etc:
Wherefore if you do not dearly love and highly prize the Lord Jesus Christ,
never count your selves to be true believers o^ true Christians, for in truth
you are then far from it. Therefore be ^^se merchants, and sell all that you
have to purchase this pearl: let the choicest of creature comforts, the best of
your own righteousness, and the sweetest of sins, even the right eye and all,
below and little base and bitter, in your esteem, in comparison of Jesus
Christ. Accept him gladly as your only Lord and Saviou^. Take his yoke upon
you, for it is easy and his burden light, and be not of them that say (in heart
at least) we will not have this man to reign over us, Luke 19.14. but count it
(for so you well may) not only your duty but your happiness to be under his
blessed and gracious government; you will find this to be a thousand times
better, then to be left to your selves, to fulfill or follow your own wills.
Consider how sweetly and lovingly he invites poor souls to come to him,
professing that he will ^n no wise reject them that so do, but promising that
he will entertain them and give them rest, John 6.37. Mat: 11.28 29. Yea and
how he lays the blame of men's eternal death and perdition upon themselves,
because they w^ll not come unto him that they may have life, J^hn 5.40. but he
would have gathered them, as an henn does chickens under her wings, and they
would not Mat: 23.37. Be afraid therefore least a promise of eternal life and
rest being left you in Christ Jesus, any of you should seem to come short of
it, Heb: 4.1. That God should send his Christ into the world to save sinners,
and sinners should neglect to come to this Christ or to accept of him, as if
they had no need of him, or could do well enough without him, this will
doubtless be the damnation, the great and deep^damnation of a world of men at
the last day, J^hn 3.19. Kindness and grace despised must needs provoke and
procure the heavier wrath. Men had better to have been Turks or other Infidels,
and never have heard of the name of Jesus of Nazereth, the Son of God the
Savior of the world, then living under the Gospel where they have heard of
these things, yet to live and die in their unbelief without union and communion
with Christ, and in a continued neglect of him; yea it had been good for such
men if they had never been born Oh take heed and be afraid that it be not so
with you or any of you; and again I say take heed and be afraid of such a thing.

But when you are once come to Christ, as I hope many of you are, then let all
your life be a life of faith, in the frequent actings and exercises thereof
upon this Christ, that from him in whom all fullness dwells, you may receive
continual supplies of grace, according to all your occasions and needs, while
you are in the wilderness of this world, you can not do better then to be
always leaning upon your beloved. In your selves you are feeble and weak, yea
you have need of much and continual supplies of grace, and Christ has
sufficient and abundant fullness for you. Make all your addresses unto God (and
you are not right if those addresses be not frequent and many, but let them all
be made) in this Christ's Mediation and Name; so you shall find acceptance with
the Father, as this Christ has promised John 16.23. but otherwise you may not
look for any such matter.

And being redeemed to God by his blood, and reconciled by his death, you must
now make account that you a^e not your own, but his; and therefore you must no
more live to your selves, but to him that dyed for you and rose again, and
heerunto the love of Christ should constrain you, 1 Cor: 6.20. 2 Cor: 5.14, 15.
He has deerly loved you, how can you be so unthankful as not to love him
again? And if you love him, you must keep his Commandments, for himself gives
this as a bad^ and token of such as love him, J^hn 14.21, 23. Your love its
true is l^ttle worth, and can not be profitable to him at all: But this must
needs be ackowledged that he is well worthy of your love, were it never so
good. And you shall be no loosers by loving him; for he loves (...) him, (...)
8.17. and the Father loves them also. J^hn 1^.21. and 16 27. and both Father
and Son will come to him that truly loves Christ; and will man (...)
themselves to such a one, and make their abode with him, J^hn 14.21, 23. Yet
^hey that l^ve him (...) keep his C^mmandements, shall continue in his love,
(...) Commandments and (...) in his love. J^hn 15.1^ His love moved him to
(...), and your love to him should be such as to suffer any affliction, yea t^
lay down your lives for his sake, if he shall call you unto it. If you love any
creature how dear or near so ever it may be, yea if you love your own lives
better then him, he will never own you for his, nor account you his disc^ples,
Mat: 10.37. Luke 14.26. and how much less if you love any sin so dearly that
you can not leave it for Christ's sake, but still retain it and live in it?
Therefore see that you love him, and love him above all. Let your thoughts be
much taken up in holy musings and meditations of him. Long for his presence in
the commings in and gracious workings and fillings of his spirit. Let it be
your grief, if at any time his face be hid from you* and count it a wearisome
time till he show himself again: with the loyal spouse of Christ it is so Cant:
3. and 5. and that heart is no better then the heart of an harlot, that has
not many thoughts of her husband when absent from her, but can bear his absence
though it be never so long, without grief, with few and seldom thoughts of
him, and small desires of his coming. He is now absent from you all in regard
of his bodily presence; but he has promised his spiritual presence, which is
as good if not much better, Man 28.20. John 16.7. And besides his supporting,
assisting, and sanctifying presence by that Spirit, there are (especially to
some souls and at some times) such spiritual consolations afforded in sense
of their enjoyment of Christ, they are said to be filled with comfort, and to
be exceeding joyful in all their tribulation, 2 Cor. 7.4. to be filled with
peace and joy in believing, Rom: 15.13. to know the love of Christ which
passes knowledge, and to be filled with all fullness of God, Ephe. 3.19. Yea
that Christ brings them into the banqu^ting house and his banner over them is
love, that he stays them as with flagons and comforts them with apples, they
being sick of love, that his left hand is under their head, and his right hand
does embrace them, Cant: 2.4, 5, 6. that in regard of the sweetness of his love
he is unto them as a bundle of myrrh and does ly all night between their
breasts, Cant 1.1^. and many such things which that book of the SONG does
express. Therefore if you love him, these consolations of his Spirit must not
be small with you, Job 15.11. but you must highly prize them, earnestly desire
them, and pray for them, and be diligent in the use of the word and Ordinances
wherein they are wont to be dispensed and count it as the Apostle counts it,
Romans 14.17. a great part of the Kingdom of God to enjoy these joys of the
Holy Ghost.

But I must tell you the truth, it is but a small pittance of the comforts of
Christ in comparison, that in this world you can enjoy. No, no, Jesus Christ is
not here, he has left this world and is gone unto the Father, and here we can
see him no more. His choicest sai^ts can not see him in fullness, till the time
come that they be removed hence, and then they shall see him, yea and be like
unto him, for they shall see him as he is, 1 John 3.2. and then shall all
weakness and imperfection be done away, and perfection come in stead thereof, 1
Cor: 13.10. Yea then shall be fulfilled the promise that he has promised, that
having prepared a place in heaven for his redeemed, he will come again and take
them to himself, that where he is there they may be also. John 14.2, 3. and
then shall appear the full performance of that prayer of his, when he prayed
unto the Father, that those whom he had given him might be with him where he is
to behold his glory which is given unto him by the Father* John 17.2^ When this
time shall come, then, my dearly beloved* you may be happy in the full fruition
of Christ; but before that time it can not be. While you are at home in the
body, you are absent from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.6. Therefore take not up your rest
on this side Jordan: Count not your selves to have attained what is to be
attained, for you have yet no more but the first fruits, Rom 8.23 the full
harvest is yet to come. Oh long for the harvest, long for your departure, and
for the appearing of Christ. You know who said, it was his desire to depart and
to be with Christ, which was far better, Phil. 1.23. You know it is the
description of all the godly, that they love the appearing of Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 4.8. Y^w know it is their prayer, when he said he would surely come
quickly, Amen say they, even so come Lord Jesus, R^v 22.20. My hearts desire
is, my dearly beloved, that you may be like minded that you may sincerely love
the Lord Jesus, truly desiring the fullest enjoyment of him and of the Father
through him, and heartily hating what ever is co^^rary thereto; and that you
may be preserved unto his heavenly Kingdom, having your hearts directed unto
the love of God and to the patient waiting for Christ, and that you may be
found of him in peace without spot and blame^ess, yea unblamable in holiness
before God the Father at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his
saints.

For these ends I have written to you as here you see, and I think I have done
it out of an (...) desire^ of the good of your soule^. Weaknesses I doubt not
there are herein, as als^ in every thing that comes from me. If what is here
presented to you had been (...) well have be^eemed it you, yet such as it is I
commend it to your serious consideration and Gods blessing, and so leave it
with you. Yet this I must desire that you would not give these things the
reading only, and so dis^u^s them with a ba^e approvall or disapprovall, but
that what is according to God, you would seriously endeavor the practice
thereof. As our Savior said, if you know these things happy are you if you do
the^ (...). 13.17. Even so say I to you. The directions are not many in number,
but only seven, and so not hard to be remembered for the substance of them: and
yet as I conceive, they are all of great importance, and not any of them that
can be safely neglected. If you be destitute of godly sorrow and humiliation
for sin, and true humility of mind, If you be not sound in the faith, but
corrupt in your judgment* (...) great things of Religion. If you lightly esteem
the Ministry and Ordinances of Jesus Christ, If you neglect the religious
ordering of your familyes and good of posterity, If you content your selves
with the form of godliness without the power thereof, If you choose not God
himself as your last end and chief good, and Jesus Christ as the way and means
for the enjoyment of God, If in all or any of these you shall be careless and
culpable, and shall so (...) without care or conscience of amendment, I tell
you true it will be no less then the endangering of your precious souls to be
utterly lost in everlasting woe; and so much the more because you have had this
warning also* besides all that you have had formerly by one means or by
another. But if the Lord shall help you to endeavor Obedience according to the
will of God, as God in Christ shall be glorified thereby, So it will be greatly
to your own comfort, and to mine also in the day of Jesus Christ; In whom I
rest,

Your Loving (though unworthy) Teacher, whilst the chief Shepherd shall
continue my Commission and work amongst you, RICHARD MATHER.
^^^chester this 10 of the second month 1658.
Faults escaped, thus amended.
Page* 1. line* 17. for this Tabernacle, read his Tabernacle. p. 5. l. 13. for
the sorrow, r. this sorrow. p. 5. l. 29. put out as. p. 6. l. 27. for shall
^eed, r. which shall feed. p. 8. l. 18. in margent for (...) r. (...). p. 8. l.
2^, for Gen^^^sme, r. gentilisme. p. 9. l. 13. for 226. r. 22.6. p. 12. l. 9.
for say 43. r. Isa. 43. p. 13. l. 25. for your, r the p. 17. l. 23. for
hasband, r. husbands. p. 17. l. 33. ^or business, r. businesses. p. 22. l. last
for ^a^e^ r. hear.

FINIS.

