PRECEPTS FOR CHRISTIAN PRACTICE: Or, the Rule of the New CREATURE: Containing
Duties to be daily observed by every Believer.

Gal. 6.16. ^

^

THE heads of the Ten DUTIES
The first Duty.
BE always sensible of thy Original corruption, and consider how it inclines
thee continually to all evil and indisposeth thee to any good, groan under it,
and bewail it; Also take special notice of your actual sins or daily
infirmities, in thought, word, and deed, and endeavor to make your peace with
God before you go to bed.

The second Duty.
Get your union with Christ, and your interest in him, cleared and confirmed to
you ^aily more and more, that you are a branch in his Vine, and a member in his
Body.

The third Duty.
Labor to draw and derive from Christ (...) the powerful attractive force of
Faith, spiritual abilities sufficient for the day.

The fourth Duty.
Perform all Duties, both in Family and Closet, especially these three, of
prayer, meditation and reading, and do them with sincere attention, with heat
of affection, and with diligence and delight.

The fifth Duty.
Fortify your selves every morning against your special Lusts, to which (...)
Nature you ^re most prone, or shall be most tempted; ^ee it Pride, Passion,
Coveteousness, or the ^^ke.

The sixth Duty.
Get your hearts strongly fixed on God by trusting in him, and submitting to
him, against all Fears, Cares, Doubts, Trials and Afflictions of every Day;
For sufficient to the day is the evil thereof.

The seventh Duty.
Get and keep continually a savory relish of your Christian privileges,
wherewith you are invested as you are new Creatures in Christ.

The eighth Duty.
Sanctify the Lord in your hearts daily, make him your fear, your love and
delight.

The ninth Duty.
Get a public spirit, first, to mind the things of Jesus Christ as naturally
as if they were your own; secondly, to look on the things of others, and to
prefer Jerusalems welfare before your chiefest joy, and the Gospels Liberty
before your own, and to mourn for the sins of the times as the Godly in
Jerusalem did.

The tenth Duty.
Get your hearts daily weaned from the World, and from those Creatures and
Comforts in it which are dearest and sweetest to you, as Wife, Children,
Friends, Goods, Liberty, House, and Life, etc.

PRECEPTS FOR CHRISTIAN PRACTICE, Or the Rule of the New CREATVRE, To be daily
observed by every Believer, in the practice of these ten following DUTIES.
The first Duty.
Be always sensible of thy original corruption, and consider how it inclines
thee continually to all evil, and indisposeth thee to any good; groan under it
and bewail it as Paul did, Romans 7.27. O wretched man that I am who shall
deliver me from the body of this death! Also take special notice of of your
actual sin, or daily infirmities in thought, word, and deed; endeavor to make
your peace with God before you go to bed.

Which must be done these four ways.

1. BY repenting and confessing your sins to God; working your hearts to grief
and sorrow for them by some such melting considerations as these. 1. Of the
goodness of God to you. 2 Of the unreasonableness and every way
unprofitableness of sin; and 3. Of the great damage, prejudice, and hurt that
comes to the Soul by sin.

2. By believing and casting your self wholly on Christ's Righteousness for
remission of sin, and for reconciliation with God, Romans 3.22, 23, 24* 25 22.
Even the righteousness of God, which is by Faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and
upon all them that believe: for there is no (...). 23. For all have sinned and
come (...) of the glory of God. 24. Being just^fied free^y (...) his grace
through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ. 25. Whom God has set forth to
be a prop^^^ation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for
the remission of sins that are past through the fo^bearance of God.

3. By cleaving to Gods promise of pardon and peace, as Isai. 43.25. I even I
am he that bl^tteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not
remember thy sins. Romans 5.1. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace
with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.

4. By waiting till the Lord shall speak unto you, Psalm. 85 8. I will hear what
the Lord will speak, for he will speak peace unto his People, and to his
Saints: but let them not turn again to folly.

The second Duty.
Get your union with Christ and your interest in him cleared and confirmed to
you daily more and more, that you are a branch in his vine, and a member in his
body.

This is done three ways.

FIrst, by daily renewal of your faith in Christ, especially of that act of
faith whereby the soul knitteth or tyeth it self unto Christ; casts and rou^es
it self on Christ for salvation. Cause your hearts in a solemn manner every day
to act this part, or to put forth this primitive act of faith in the view of
the whole Soul: The daily exercise hereof will increase and strengthen the
divine habit of faith in your Soul; and make your Soul sensible of the very act
of it: By frequent believing you shall feel at your very heart that you do
believe, so shall you have in your self a witness, that you are in Christ, 1
(...). 5, 10. He that beb^eveth in the Son of God has the witness in himself,
etc.

Secondly, by examining your heart upon what grounds you took Christ to be
yours: The grounds are these five. 1. A sight and sense of your sins, as of the
guilt, power, and punishment of them, and of your misery by them, Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that labor and be heavy leaden, and I will give you rest.

2. Your want of Christ seen, and felt at your very heart, to Justify,
Sanctify, Redeem, and save you, else you are utterly lost, and undone
everlastingly, Luke 19.10. For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that
which was lost.

3. Gods free and general offer of Christ to any that will take him by Faith,
Joh. 3.16. For God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. There
are manifold promises to that purpose, and the grounds of all Gods offers and
donations of Christ to the poor soul are free Grace, rich Mercy, undeserved
Love, Ephesians. 2.4, 5, 6, 7. But God who is rich in Mercy, for his great Love
wherewith he loved us; 5. Even when we were dead in sins has quick^ned us
together with Christ (by grace ye are saved.) 6. And has raised us up
together, and made us sit together in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus; 7. That
in the ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace in his
kindness toward us. Titus 3, 4, 5, 6. But after that the kindness and love of
God our Savior toward man appeared; 5. Not by works of righteousness which we
(...) do^e, ^ut according to his mercy he saved us by the w^shing of
regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. 6. Which he shed on us abundantly
through Jesus Christ our Savior.

4. Christ's sweet and gracious invitation of such to come to him as are weary
of sin, and that have neither worth in themselves nor money to buy, Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest. Isai. 55.1. Hoe every one that thirsts come to the waters, and he that
has no money, come ye, buy and eat, yea come, buy wine and milk without money
and without price.

5. As sinful vile wretches as you are, have been soug^t of Christ and found in
Christ, 1 Cor. 6.10, 11. Nor the (...), nor covetous, nor drunkard, nor
revilers, nor extortioners shall inherit the kingdom of God. 11. Such were some
of you: but ye are w^shed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in
the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. 1 Timothy 1.13 Paul was
a Blasphemer, Persecutor, and yet obtained Mercy. Therefore why may not you?
Thus the more clearly you discern on what grounds you take Christ, the clearer
will your title to Christ be evidenced to your own soul.

3 ly. By surveying and observing in what manner you take Christ daily, which
is.

1. Whether you do wholly renounce all opinion and conceit of your own
righteousness and desert, Mark 8.34. Whosoever will come after me, le^ him deny
himself, and take up his Cross and follow me. Phil. 3.7, 8, 9. But what things
were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ. 8. Yea doubtless, and I
count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus
my Lord for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but
dung that I may win Christ. 9. And be found in him not having my own
righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith. Thus you come to Christ
empty of your self, yea very vile and nothing in your own eyes, unworthy to
receive him.

2. Whether you lay hold on Christ with an empty hand of faith, joining nothing
at all with Christ in the matter of salvation, as the holy Martyr at the stake
cried out, None but Christ, none but Christ.

3. Whether you find the Father drawing your hearts after Christ, Ioh. 6.44.
No man can come unto me except the Father which has sent me draw him, and I
^ill raise him up at the last day: Which is in hungring and panting desires
that will never be satisfied without him; So that both the stream of your
judgment, and affections run after him, as 1 Cor. 2. ver. 2. For I determined
to to know nothing among you but Jesus Christ and him crucified* Gal. 6.14. But
God forbid I should glory save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom
the World is Crucified unto me, and I unto the World.

4. Whether you take Christ as well for a Lord to rule you, as a Jesus to save
you, Col. 2.6. As ye tberefore have received Christ jesus the Lord, so walk ye
in him: As one that is all in all to you, your wisdom, your righteousness,
your sanctification and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. Your spiritual food, Ioh.
6.48. I am that bread of life ver. 55. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my
blood is drink indeed.

Your raiment, Romans 13.14. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not
provision for the Flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof.

Your strength, Phil 4.13. I can do all things through Christ which
strengthens me.

Your life, Gal* 2.20. I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I l^ve, yet not
I, but Christ lives in me; and the life which I now live in the Flesh, I live
by the Faith of the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me. Col
3.3. For ye are dead and your life is hid with Christ in God.

5. Whether you seek and wait for Christ (out of the sense of your spiritual
want and penury in every ordinance, public and private, Word, Sacraments*
Prayer, Meditation and Conference, not as they are your own works of
Sanctification, but as they are Gods Ordinances appointed on purpose, for the
manifestation and communication of Christ to the Soul. Frequent perusal hereof
will clear to you your manner of taking Christ, and that will evidence to you
your right and title which you have in Christ Jesus.

The third Duty.
Labor to draw and derive from Christ by the powerful attractive force of
Faith, spiritual ability sufficient for the day.

FIrst, to perform all your duties, Phil. 4.13. I can do all things through
Christ which strengthens me.

Secondly, to exercise all your graces, 2 Cor. 3.5. Not that we are sufficient
of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves but our sufficiency (...) of
God.

Thirdly, to resist and overcome all your corruptions and temptations, Romans
8.37. In all these things we are more then conquerers through him that loved us.

Fourthly, to undergo all your trials and afflictions, Io^. 1.16. And of his
fullness have we all received, and grace for grace.

Make your provision of strength and grace from Christ, every morning fetch
from him so much as you shall have occasion to use all the day long, yea and
upon all occasions that fall out in the day, go to Christ still for the wisdom
that must direct you, for the holiness that must Character you for the shoulder
that must bear your Crosses, for the strength that must resist your
temptations, and for ability to perform all Duties as Duties.

To this end act your faith daily in the promises of grace and strength, as
Ioh. 1 16. Of his fullness have we all received, and grace for grace, Isai. 44
3. I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground:
I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring,
Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put
within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will
give you an heart of flesh. 27. And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause
you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do them, Zech.
10.12. And I will strengthen them in the Lord, and they shall walk up and down
in his name, says the Lord. These and the l^ke promises are security given you
by God, that you shall receive grace in the use of the ordinances, which are as
the conduit pipes or instruments of conveying the same from Christ to you.

This is the way and means to do all in the strength of Christ, and to take
forth a great deal of Christ into your souls, that not you but Christ may live
in you, Gal. 2.20. I am crucified with Christ: Nevertheless I (...), yet not I
^ut Christ lives in me; and the life which I now live in the Flesh, I live by
the faith of the Son of God* who loved me, and gave himself for me.

The fourth Duty.
Perform daily duties both in Family and Closet, especially these three, of
Prayer Meditation and Reading; and ^o them with sincere intention, with heat of
affection, and with diligence and delight. Jer 48.10 Cursed be he that does
the work of the Lord deceitfully, or negligently, Mat. 1.14. But cursed be the
deceiver which has in his flock a male, and voweth and sacrifices unto the
Lord a corrupt thing: for I am a great King says the Lord of Hosts, and my
name is dreadful among the Heathen, 1 Chronicles. 21.24. And King David said to
Or^a^, (...), but I will verily buy it for the full price: for I will not take
that which is thine for the Lord, nor offer burnt offerings without cost.

To this end,

FIrst, watch to these duties, keep the heart in a good frame for them,
undefiled with sin, untainted by the world, Ephesians. 6.18 Praying alw^yes with
all prayer and suppl^cation i^ the spirit, and watching thereunto with all
perseverance and supplication for all Saints.

Secondly, take the fittest time for the performance of them all, when you are
least dull and sl^ggish* begin the day constantly with thoughts of God. Psa^.
57.7* 8 9 My heart is fixed, O God my heart is fixed, I will sing and give
praise: awake up my glory, awake Psaltery and harp, I my self will awake
early, I will praise thee O Lord.

Thirdly be very real, serious, and substantial with God in them, endeavor to
feel all duties at your heart, inliving, enlarging, inflaming your affections,
Deuteronomy. 4.29 Thou shall (...) the Lord thy God if thou s^ek him with all thy
heart and with all ^hy soul, Deuteronomy. 6.5. T^ou sha^t love the Lord thy God with
all thine he^r^, (...) with all thy soul, and with all thy might, Psalm 119.32.
I will run the way of thy Command^en^s when thou shall enlarge my heart. These
be the duties of most importance and consequent commodity and comfort to the
Soul, because they properly aim at, and reach to the souls good, and celest^al
happiness, yea even to the training up of a soul for Heaven.

The fifth Duty.
Fortifi^ your s^l^es every morning against your (...), to which by nature you
are most (...) shall b^ most tempted; be it Pride, Passi^n, Coveteousness, or
the like.

This is done,

First by holy Arguments and reasonings within y^u^ selves, drawn from the sad
effects thereof as D^sp^op^et, Discomfort, D^sgrace or the l^ke; this will
discover the unreasonableness of you^ sins and make your souls ashamed of them.
For (...), shall I b^ proud? then I shall be sure to fall, for pride goes
before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall, (...). 16.18. and God
will account me for his enemy for God resi^teth the proud, Jam. 4.6. Shall I be
angry? If I let passion in, I cannot keep Satan out, Ephesians. 4.26, 27. Be
angry, but sin not, let not the Sun go d^wn upon your wr^^h 27. Neither give
place unto the Devil. Again, I shall grieve the holy Spirit of God, Ver. 30
31. And grieve not the holy Spirit of God whereby ye are sealed to the day of
Redemption. 31. Let all bitterness, and wrath, and (...), and cla^our, and evil
speaking be pu^ away from you, with all malice. Shall I be covetous? I cannot
but be very si^ful, since the love of money is the root of all evil. 1 (...). 6
10

Secondly, By pondering in your mind upon the precepts in Gods book against
your sins, Prove. 6, 23* 24. For the Commandment is a lamp, and the Law is
light: and reproof of ^nstruction are the way of life: To keep thee from the
evil woman, from the flattery of the (...) of a strange woman. And on the
judgments threatened or infl^cted for them; as on p^oud H^rod, Act. 12 23.
voluptuous D^ves, Luke 16.23, churl^sh (...), ^ Sam. 25.^8

Thirdly, By applying the promises of mortification close to your hearts, as a
plaist^r to the sore, for subduing your iniquities, Mic. 7.19 He will turn
again, he will have compassion upon us: he will subdue our iniquities, and thou will cast all their sins into the depth of the Sea, Romans 6.14. For sin shall
not have dominion over you, for ye are not under the L^w, but under Grace,

Fourthly, By drawing virtue from Christ's death into the soul, which has in it
a force of killing sin, Romans 6.4.5.6. Therefore we are buried with him by
baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the
glory of the Father: even so we also should walk in newness of life. 5. For if
we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in
the likeness of his resurrection. 6. Knowing this, that our old man is
crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we
should not serve sin. Phil. 3.10. That I may know him, and the power of his
resurrection, and the fellowship of his suffering, being made conformable unto
his death.

The sixth Duty.
Get your hearts strongly fixed on God by trusting in him, and submitting to
him, against all Fears, Cares Doubts, Trials, and Afflictions of every day, for
sufficient to the day is the evil thereof, Psalm. 112, 7. He shall not be afraid
of evil tidings, his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord. 2 Samuel 15.26 But if
he thus say* I have no delight in thee, behold here I am, let him do to me as
seems good unto him. 1 Samuel 3.18. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him
good. Mat. 6.34. Take therefore no thought for the morrow: for the morrow shall
take thought for the things of it self: sufficient unto the day is the evil
thereof.

To this End,

FIrst, be prudent to foresee your personal trials and troubles, whatsoever
they are like to be, Prove. 22.3. A prudent man fore-sees the evil, and hides
himself, but the simple pass on and are punished.

2. Go hide, and lay up your self in God, run unto his name, for God is a rock
of habitation, to which a poor soul may continually resort, yea God will give
commandment to save all such as thus do come unto him, Psalm. 71.3. Thou have
given Commandment to save me, thou art my rock and my fortress, 1 Pet. 4.19.
Wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit the keeping
of their souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator.

3. Especially commit that very thing to God whatsoever you desire to keep, or
fear to sore, put it into his hands, 2 (...). 1.12. I know whom I have
believed, and I am persuaded he is able to keep that which I have committed
unto him against that day: be it Life, Liberty, Name, (...), Maintenance, etc.
What you would have resolved, if it be a doubt, Psalm. 37 5. Comm^^^^y way unto
the Lord, trust also in (...), and he shall b^ing it to pass. Or suppl^ed if
it be a want, Psa. 37.4. D^light thy self also in ^he Lord, and he shall give
thee the desire of thy hea^^. Or removed, if it be a cross, Prove. 16.7 When a
man's ways (...) the Lord; he makes (...) his enemies (...) be at peace with
him. And together with the thing cast all your Care, Fear, Sorrow, and Troubles
of M^nde about it* wholly on the Lord, Man. 6.31. Therefore take no thought,
saying, what shall we eat? or what shall we drink? or wherewith shall we be
clothed* ver. 33. But seek ye first the Kingdom of G^d, and his righteousnes^,
and all these things shall be added unto y^u. 1 Pet. 5.7. Casting all your care
upon him, for he cares for you. Psalm. 55.22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord,
and he (...) sustain thee, he shall never suffer the righteous to be moved.

Fourthly, Renew your Faith in those promises every day* which most concern
your present estate; and in promises first of supplies, if you be in want,
Psalm. 34.8. O taste and see that the L^^d is good, blessed as the man that
trusts in him. Psalm 37.3. Trust in the Lord, and do good, so (...) the L^nd,
and verily thou sha^^ be fed. And 84.11. For the Lord God is a Sun and a
Shield, the Lord will give grace and glory; no good thing will he wi^hhold
from them that walk uprightly. Mat. 6.30. Wherefore if God so cloth the grass
of the (...), which is to day, and to morrow is cast into the ^^ven, shall he
not much more cl^^h you, ye of little Faith 2. Of protection, if you be in
danger, Psalm 34.7. The Angel of the Lo^d encampeth r^und about them that fear
him, and delivers them. 3. Of Direction, if in doubt, Jam. 1 5. If any of you
(...) wisdom, let him a^k of God, that give^h to all men liberally, and (...)
not: and it shall be given him. 4 Of Deliverance if in trouble, Job 5.19. He
shall d^^iv^r thee in six troub^es, yea in seven, th^re shall (...) touch thee.
5 Of a good end, and sanctified use of all. Deuteronomy. 8.16. Who fed thee in the
Wilderness with Manna, which thy Fath^rs knew not, that he might humble thee,
and that he might (...) thee, to do thee good at thy l^tter end, Jam. 5.11.
B^hold, we account them happy which endure: ye have heard of the patience of
Job, and have seen the end of the Lord, that the Lord is very p^tiful, and of
tender mercy. Romans 8.28. And we know that all things work together for good to
them that love God: to them who are called according to his purpose. Heb.
12.10. For they verily for a few days chastened us after their own pleasure;
but he for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness.

F^fthly, Labor to see Gods hand, Psalm. 39.9. I was dumb, I opened not my
mouth, (...) thou did it. To believe his love. Heb. 12 6. For whom the Lord
loves he chasteneth, and scourges every Son whom he receives, Rev, 3.19. As
many as I love, I rebuke and chasten, be zealous therefore and repent. And with
all meekness, and patience resign up your selves wholly to his will in every
affliction. Mat. 26.39 O my Father if it be possibl^, let th^s cup pass from
me: nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will.

The seventh Duty.
Get, and keep a savory relish continually of your Christian privileges,
wherewith you are invested as you are new Creatures in Christ.

AS, first, Of your dignity, that you are the Sons of God* 1 John 3.1, 2.
Behold! what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be
called the Sons of God. Beloved, now are we the Sons of God, and it does yet
appear what we shall be; but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be
like him, for we shall see him as he is. 2. Christ's Brethren, Heb. 2.11. He is
not ashamed to call them Brethren: but says, Jo^. 20.17. Go unto my B^e^hren,
and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father, and to my God and
your God. 3. Heavens Heirs, Jam. 2.5. Hearken my beloved Brethren, has not God
chosen the poor of this World rich in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom which
he has promised to them that love him? 4. Partakers of a High, and Heavenly
calling, Heb. ^.1.

2. Of your l^berty, that you are the Lords freemen. 1 Co^. 7.22. For he that
is called of the Lord b^ing a S^rvan^, is the Lords freeman. Delivered out of
the hands of all your enemies. 2 Kin 17.39. But the Lord your God shall ye fear
and he shall d^^iver you out of the hands of your enemies

Thirdly, of your victory, that you are through Christ more then Conquerors
over all the World of Creatures, 1 Jo^. 5.4. For whatsoever is born of God,
overcommeth the World, and this is the Victory overcommeth the World, even our
Faith. Romans 8.15. For ye have not received the Spirit of bondage again (...);
but ye have received the Spirit of Adopt^on, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.
ver, 16. The Spirit it self bearing witness with our Spirits tha^ we are the
Children of God, ver. 17 And if children, then heirs of God, joint heirs with
Christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified
together. Fourthly, of your Safety, that you have almighty God. 1. For your
place of refuge, Psalm. 48.2. God is (...) in her Palaces in Zion) o^ a refuge.
2. For a hedge o^ Providence, Job 1.10 Have thou not made a hedge about him,
and about (...) house, and about (...) that he h^th? 3. For a guard of Angels,
Psalm 91.11. For he shall g^ve his Angels ch^rge over thee, (...) by waye^. 4.
An enclosure of Mercy, Psalm. 32.10 Many sorrows shall be to the wicked, (...)
he that trusts in the Lord, mercy s^all c^mpass him; for the prom^ses of God
are a writ of Protection for your defense. Heb. 13.5 6. Let your convers^tion
be without covetousness, and be content with such things as ye have; for he
has said, I will never have thee, nor forsake thee. ver. 6. So that we may
boldly say, the Lord is my help, and I will not fear what man shall do unto me.

Fif^hly, Of your Riches, and durable substance in heaven, Heb. 10.34. For ye
had compassion of me in my bonds, and took joyfully the ^oiling of your good^,
knowing in your selves that you have in heaven a better and ^nduring substance:
also an incorruptible inheritance, 1 Pet. 1.4. To an inheritance incorruptible
and undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in heaven for you, etc. A kingdom
of glory, and a crown of life; for you are heirs of God, and co-heires with
Christ.

Sixthly, Of your Joy and Pleasure, precious, for k^nde, and plent^ful for
measure, Psalm. 16.11. Thou will show me the path of Life, in thy presence is
fullness of joy, at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. Peace
unconceivable* Phil. 4.7. And the place of God which passes all understanding,
shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus. Joy unspeakeable 1 Pet.
1.8. Whom having not seen, ye love, in whom, though now y^ see him not, yet
believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of gl^^y. The (...) joy.

Get your hearts affect^d with all these as being yours. Chew and suck them by
serious Meditation work* and warm them on your hearts by close application,
rubbing them into your affections. Oppose these your spiritual privileges to
all your temporal pressures, setting the one against the other; as your
heavenly friends to your earthly foes, your high dignity in Christ, to your low
estate and meanness in outward condition, your wealth above to your want below,
your future joys and rest to your present troubles and sorrows. This will make
you not only patient under the afflictions of this life, Romans 12.12. Rejoicing
in hope, patient in tribulation, continuing in prayer; but also joyful in
them, as Romans 5 3. And not only so, but glory in tribulations also; knowing
that tribulation works patience; and triumphant over them, as 1 Cor. 15.55. O
death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? Thus did the Apostles
Romans 8.18. For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time, are not
worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us. 2 Cor.
4.17. For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Verse 18. While we look not at the
things which are seen, but at the things which are not s^en; for the things
which are seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen are eternal. So
Chap. 6. verse 8 9, 10. ^y honor, and dishonor, by evil report, and good
report, as decievers and yet true. ver. 9. As unknown and yet well known; as
dying and behold we live; as chastened, and not killed. ver. 10 as sorrowful,
yet alway^ rejoicing; as poor yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet
possessing all things.

These will provoke to duties, 1 Pet. 2.9. You are a chosen generation, a royal
Priesthood, a holy Nation, a peculiar People, that you should show forth the
praises of him who has called you out of darkness into his marveilous Light,
ver. 11. I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly Lusts,
which war against the Soul. ver. 12. Having your conversation honest among the
Gentiles; that whereas they spoke against you, as evil doers; they may by your
good Works which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of their
visitation. And preserve you. 1. From fainting* 2 Cor. 4.16, 17. For which
cause we faint no^, but though our ou^ward man perish; yet the in^ard man is
renewed day by day. And 2. From trouble of heart, Joh. 14.1. Let not your heart
be troubled, ye^ believe in God, believe also in me. ver. 2. in my Fathers
house are many Mansions; if it were not so, I would have told y^u; I go to
prepare a place for you.

The eighth Duty.
Sanctify the Lord in your hearts daily, 1 Pe^. 1 15. But as (...) which ha^h
called you is holy (...) holy in all manner of conversation. Make him your
fear, Isai. 8.13. Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself; and let him be your
fear, and let him be your dread. Your love and delight, as Psalm. 37 4. Delight
thy se^f also in the Lord, and h^ shall give thee the desires of thine heart.

To this End,

FIrst, have often high and honorable thoughts of God, serious med^tations of
his glorious Atributes* as h^s Wisdom, Power, Truth, Mercy, justice, etc. and
work them upon your hearts, that they may Echo to them with pure, and melting
aff^^ctions. This will increase and nourish up the divine nature in you, 2
(...) 1.4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and p^^c^ous promises,
that by these you might be partakers of the divine Nature.

Secondly, Labor to be affected with all the works of God, as first to behold,
and admire the wisdom of God in the Creatures, Psalm. 136.5. To him that by
wisdom made the Heavens; for his mercy endures for ever. 2. To see* and taste
Gods goodness in every mercy, Psalm. 34 8. O ^aste and see that the Lord is
good; (...) is the man that trusts in him. 3. To take notice of* and to
tremble at the anger, and displeasure of God in all his Judgments. Psa. 119
120. My flesh trembles for fear ^f thee, and I am ^ffraid of thy Judgments.
Hab. 3 16. When I heard, my ^e^y trembled my lips quivered at thy voice,
rottenness entered into my b^nes, and I trembled in my self but I might rest in
the d^y of troubl^. 4 That you may answer the dispensations of Gods providence
with suitable dispositions; let your hearts carry a counterpane in affection to
a^l Gods actions, Is^y. 26.8. Yea, in the way of thy judgments have we waited
for thee, the desire of our soul is to thy Name, and to the rem^mb^ance of thee.

Thirdly* Wrestle with God by praying, and believing for an heart of flesh,
which will receive impressions from the very thought of God in the mind, E^ek.
36, 26. (...) heart also will I give you* and a (...) will I put wit^in you;
and I will (...) away the stony Heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an
heart of Flesh.

Fourthly, Apply promises of particular affections: as first of love, Deuteronomy.
30.6. And the Lord thy God will ^ircircumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy
seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul,
that thou may Live.

2. Of Fear. Jer. 32.40. And I will make an everlasting Covenant with them,
that I will not turn away from them to do them go^d; but I will put my fear in
their Hear^s, that they shall no^ depart from me. 3. Of Delight, Isai. 58
13.14. ver. 13, I thou will ^urn away thy feet from the Sabbath, from doing thy
pleasure on my holy day. etc. ver. 14. Then shall thou delight thy self in the
Lord, and I will cause thee to ride upon the high (...) of the Earth, and fe^d
thee with the Heritage of Jacob thy Father; for the mouth of the Lord has
spoken it. There is heat, and life in these promises, sufficient to quicken and
warm thy dead and frozen affections.

The ninth Duty.
Get a public Spirit, first, to mind the things of Jesus Christ, as naturally
as if they were your own, Phil. ^3.20. For I have no man like minded, who will
naturally care for your estate. ver. 21. For all seek their own, not the things
which are Jesus Christ's. Secondly, to look on the things of others, and prefer*
first, Jerusalems welfare before your chiefest joy, Psalm. 137.5, 6. If I forget
thee O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning. ver. 6, If I do not
remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I prefer not
Jerusalem above my chiefest joy. And secondly, the Gospels liberty before your
own, as Paul did: And thirdly, to mourn for the sins of the times, as the Godly
in Jerusalem did, Ezekiel. 9.4. And the Lord said unto him, go through the midst
of the City, through the midst of Jerusalem; and set a mark upon the foreheads
of the men that sigh and that cry for all the abomiations that be done in the
midst thereof.

Especially lay to heart,

FIrst, The Churches misery, when Gods Ordinances go down, and Superstition
goes up, when Gods cause and side are put to the worst, when any thing falls
out, that gives a blow to Religion, or proves an impediment to the Gospel. If
the Arc be taken* call your comforts I^habods, 1 Samuel 4.21.

2. The afflictions of Joseph, Amos 6.6 That drink wine in bowls, and anoint
themselves with the chief ointment; but they are not grieved for the affliction
of Joseph: the sufferings of Gods servants, whether Ministers or People. O
sympathize with them, Heb. 13.3. Remember them that are in binds, as bound with
them; and them which suffer adversity, as being your selves also in the body.
Neh. 1.4. And it came to pass, when I heard these words, that I sat down and
wept, and mourned certain days; and fasted and prayed before the God of
Heaven: Labor to feel their trouble and sorrow at your very heart; and pray
earnestly for them, as the Church did for Peter, Act. 12.5. Peter therefore was
kept in prison, but Prayer was made without ceasing of the Church to God for
him.

Thirdly, The signs of the times, which hypocrites cannot discern (though
they be well versed in the face of the Sky) to wit, the sad symptoms, and
presages of approaching Judgments: as first, The commonness of sin; for all
sorts transgress in all kinds of open sinfulness with a high hand against the
light of Nature, and the means of grace, Ezekiel. 12.3. Son of Man, prepare thee
stuff for removing, and remove by day in their sight; and thou shall remove
from thy place unto another place in their sigh^; it may be they will consider
though they be a rebellious house.

2. Contempt of Gods Ordinances, misusing of his Ministers, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. But
they mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his
Prophets; until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was
no remedy.

3. Departure of Gods glory from his house, Ezekiel. 9.3. And the glory of the God
of Israel was gone up from the Cherub whereupon he was, etc.

4. Incorrigibleness after former, and under present judgments, Lev. 26. from
ver. 14, 15, 16. But if ye will not hearken unto me, and will not do all these
Commandments, and if ye shall despise my Statutes, or if your soul abhor my
judgments; so that ye will not do all my Commandments; but that ye break my
Covenants: I also will do this unto you* I will even appoint over you Terror,
Consumption, and the burning Ague; that shall consume the eyes, and cause
sorrow of heart: and you shall sow your seed in vain, for your enemies shall
eat it: and so on to the end of the Chapter.

5. The death of many righteous men, and the carrying away of others to hiding
places, Isai. 57* 1. The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart, and
merciful men are taken away; none considering that the righteous is taken away
from the (...) to come.

6. The Vials of Gods wrath powered on the Churches beyond the Seas, Jer. 7.12.
But go ye now unto my place which in Shiloh, where I set my Name at the first,
and see what I have done unto it* for the wickedness of my people Israel.

7. The inundation of spiritual judgments, as a spirit of Error,
Superstition, Apostasy, etc. which do commonly end in temporal plagues, Isai.
6.10, 11. Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and
shut their eyes: lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their heart, and convert and be healed. ver. 11. Then said I,
Lord how long? and he answered, until the Cities be wasted without inhabitant,
and the houses without man, and the Land be utterly desolate.

Now the Holy Ghost is a public Spirit breathing and acting in all the members
of the mystical body of Christ: pray for it, Luke 11.13. If ye then, being
evil, know how to give good gifts unto your Children; how much more shall your
heavenly Father give the Holy Ghost unto them that as^ him? believe for it,
Gal. 3.14. That the blessing of Abraham may come on the Gentiles, through Jesus
Christ; that we might receive the promise of the Spirit; through faith. Ezekiel
36.37. I will yet for this be (...) of by the house of Israel, to do it for
them* will increase them with men like a flock.

The tenth Duty.
Get your heart daily weaned from the World, and from those creatures and
comforts in it, which are dearest and sweetest to you. As Wife, Children,
Friends, Goods, Liberty, House, Life. This Christ requires of those that follow
him, Luke 14 26, 27. If any man come to me, and hate not his Father and Mother,
and Wife and Children, and Brethren and Sisters; yea and his own life also, he
cannot be my Disciple. 27. And whosoever does not bear his Cross and come after
me, cannot be my Disciple. Mark 10.29, 30. Verily, I say unto you, there is no
man has left House, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or
Children, or Lands for my sake, and the Gospels; but he shall receive an
hundred fold now in this time, Houses, and Brethren, and Sisters, and Mothers,
and Children, and Lands with persecutions, and in the World to come eternal
Life. This will prepare you either to suffer, or to die when God calls you to it.

To this end consider seriously;

FIrst, that these things cannot satisfy your heart, when you have enjoyed
them to the full, Eccles. 4 ^. There is one alone, and there is not a second
for he has neither Child nor Brother; yet is there no end of all his labor,
neither is his eye satisfied with riches; neither says he for whom do I
labor, and berieve my Soul of good? this is also vanity, yea, it is a sore
travail. and chap. 5.10. He that loves silver, shall not be satisfied with
silver; nor he that loves abundance with increase: this is also vanity: you
soon grow weary of them, or glutted with them, so that you desire some new
delights, or more of the old, or some over again.

Secondly, nor can they sanctify you, but will expose you often to many lusts,
temptations, distractions, yea to a spirit of the World, and they will hinder
you from following of Christ, 1 Timothy 6 9, 10. But they that will be rich, fall
into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which
drown men in destruction and perdition. 10. For the love of ^^ney is the root
of all evil; which whilst some coveted after, they have erred from the Faith,
and pierced themselves through with many sorrows. Mat. 19.21, 22 Jesus said unto
the young man, if thou will be perfect, go and sell that thou have, and give to
the poor, and thou shall have treasure in Heaven; and come and follow me. 22.
But when the young man heard that saying, he went a way sorrowful, for he had
great possessions.

Thirdly, nor can they save you from Gods wrath, from death and judgment,
Prove. 11.4. Riches profit not in the day of wrath; but righteousness delivers
from death.

Fourthly, the wicked whose portion is only in this World, have often the
greatest share of them. Job. 21.7. to the 14. Wherefore do the wicked live,
become old yea are mighty in power? 8. Their seed is established in their sight
with them, and their offspring before their eyes. 9 Their houses are safe from
fear, neither is the rod of God upon them. 10, Their Bull gendreth and fails
not; their Cow calveth, and casts not her ca^f. 11, They send forth their
little ones like a flock, and their children dance. 12. They take the timbrel
and harp, and rejoice at the sound of the organ. 13. They spend their days in
wealth, and in a moment go down to the grave.

Fifthly, they serve only in this life, while we are on this side of the grave,
they shall not be the least ingredients into our celestial happiness. When we
come to be happy in Heaven, we shall stand in no reed of food, raiment physic,
marriage, etc. Mat* 22.30. For in the resurrection they neither (...), nor are
given in marriage; but are as the Angels of God in Heaven. We shall hunger no
more, neither thirst any (...), Rev. 7.16. They shall hunger (...), neither
thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light on them, nor any heat. We shall
live by the a sufficient spirit of God, which never needs refreshing; we shall
be clothed with long white Robes of immortality, Rev. 7.9. After this I beheld,
and lo, a great multitude, which no man could number of all Nations, and
Kindreds, and People, and Tongues stood before the Throne, and before the
Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands; In a word, when we
come to Heaven the place of Gods Habitation, we shall enjoy the face, and
beatifical presence of the most glorious Jehovah, blessed for ever, as an
object, wherein all the powers of our souls will be satisfied with ineffable
delight; and God will be unto us everlastingly all in all, 1 Cor, 15.28. And
when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son him self also be
subject unto him that put all things under him, that God may be all in all.

FINIS.

