An Humble PROPOSAL, for the Enlargement of UNIVERSITY LEARNING in NEW ENGLAND,
By the TRUSTEES hereafter named, to whom the Management of this Affair is
committed.
THE Good People of this Nation, as they are, and have been Honorable for
their professed Love, to the hated ways and truths of Christ in those
perilous and evil times, which some years since we saw, so are they also no
less worthy of acknowledgment, for their indeared affection to his Faithful
Servants, who were then exposed to cruel sufferings by that evil Generation, of
whom, as now it is, so, we hope it will be ever true concerning them, which the
Prophet speaks in another case: Thou art cast out like a Branch that is
abominable, like the raiment of them that are slain, thrust through with a
Sword, and as a Carcass trodden under foot.

The special subjects of that wrath and rage which then appeared, in those
wicked and unreasonable men, were the good old Non-Conformists, to which Tribe,
the People of New England, both by joining to bear witness against all
Traditions of men in the Worship of God, and by pertaking with them in the
afflictions of the Gospel are most nearly related; of them, it may be said,
they feared not the wrath of man, when it was like the roaring of a Lion, but
they endured as seeing him who is invisible, esteeming the reproach of Christ
greater riches then the revenues of England: Hence it was, that they so
willingly suffered the spoiling of their goods, the leaving of their dearest
friends, the loss of their native Country, to the peril of their lives, both by
Land and Sea, and though the Lord has led them to a Wilderness, where they
have been as a People separated from their brethren and exposed to dwell alone
in solitary places, yet they can and do declare to the praise of his love and
goodness, that he has not been a barren Wilderness to them, nor a Land of
Darkness; but has testified his signal owning of them, by providing for them
in those ends of the earth, where he has set them down in quiet habitations,
with rest round about, under the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel of
Christ, accompanied with a Godly Orthodox and Learned Ministry, the propagation
whereof (as the outward and visible means of such a blessing) is their present
and great endeavor.

And because, as sometimes David said upon the like occasion, They will not
serve the Lord with that which cost them nothing; they have according to their
ability, if not above, and beyond it, (considering their late great losses, and
other yearly burdens in reference to public affairs) laid some foundation for a
Seminary of Learning, the ordinary means whereby the Lord is pleased to make
way for the free passage of his everlasting Gospel, which they look at and
rejoice in, as the standing portion and entailed inheritance of them and theirs
for ever.

We cannot but be very sensible in their behalf, how much the Lord has smiled
upon their small beginnings, by succeeding the studious endeavors of those,
who have been trained up in their Cambridg, of whom some are eminently useful
among themselves at this present, and of the (...) many, who have been called
forth into other parts both of America and Europe, have given large, and full
proof of their faithfulness and fitness (...) of the (...) of the (...) of God,
which we take as a token for good, superadded to all other obligations under
Gods kind dealings with his People of New England.

We must now crave leave, as in their names, humbly to recommend and propose
that foundation for University Learning (which has been laid by them) to be
both every way enlarged, as also to be built upon, by the goodness and favor
of their ever honored, their deerly beloved Brethren, and worthy Christian
Friends in England, who work the work of the Lord as they also do: And
according to our present instructions, we shall only address our selves to such
Persons of Worth and Reputation among the People of God, who are (in spiritual
respects) near of kin to the special objects of their deserved bounty. And we
do beseech and entreat them humbly, unto whom we shall repair upon this
occasion, that they will do the Kinsmans part in raising up, if we may so say,
the name of Christ on his inheritance.

And for their necessary information touching this Work in hand, wherein the
erecting and supporting of illustrious Schools and Colleges, adequately
answerable to the increase of their Youth and Children in New England, is
particularly intended; We must, and do declare, That all those sums of money,
or other Donatives which have been given for the furtherance of Preaching to
the Indians, are applied and appropriated to that Service only: So that this
business of advancing University Learning by illustrious Schools and Colleges,
has not had, or ever shall, or can have the allowance of one farthing from
that liberal Contribution.

One thing more must be offered to special consideration, namely, That all the
provision which they have toward this great Undertaking, is not sufficient,
according to a very low and moderate Computation, for the twentieth part of
those who are born in that Country, and capable of such Improvement: So greatly
has the Lord been pleased to bless his People in those parts with increase of
Children.

In pursuance of what we have proposed, we judge it expedient to give some
account of that Authority by which we act in this Case, for which end we shall
recite and extract some particulars, the Original whereof is in our custody,
and at all times ready to be produced upon any just occasion.

We the Governor, and General Court of the Massachusetts in New England out of
the knowledge and confident assurance we have of the Wisdom, Faithfulness and
Sincerity of your selves, hereafter named, together with your natural care and
readiness to promote so worthy a design; have requested, constituted and
appointed, and by these presents do request, constitute and authorize you
Nathaniel Bacon Esquire Herbert Pelham, Richard Saltonstal and Henry Ashurst
Esquires; Mr. William Hook Master of the Savoy, Mr. John Knowlles of Bristol.
Mr. Thomas Allen of Norwich, Ministers of the Gospel, you and every of you as
Trustees, for the raising and managing of a Revenue in England, toward the
education of the youth and children of New England in University Learning;
Giving and hereby granting to you, or any three or more of you, with such gifts
as you shall receave, to purchase Lands, Rents, Reversions, or Annuities to and
for the use aforesaid; and in case of death or removal of any of you the said
Trustees, power is hereby given to the rest to elect and constitute one or more
in his or their stead; as also to choose and appoint such Officers under you,
as you or any three or more of you shall think necessary: And further to do and
act in the Premises as in your wisdom and discretion you shall judge meet: And
in testimony hereof, We have hereunto affixed the Seal of our Collony this
eleventh day of May, One thousand six hundred fifty and nine.


