SEVERAL LAWS AND ORDERS Made at the General Court, Held at Boston in
New England, October 14. 1668.

PRinted and Published by their Order.

Edward Rawson Secr.

Cambridge Printed in the Year, 1668.

Several Laws and Orders, Made at the General Court held at Boston in NEW
ENGLAND. October 14. 1668.
Maritime Affairs.
WHereas through the blessing of God upon this Jurisdiction, the Navagation and
Maritime affairs thereof, is grown to be a considerable interest, the well
management whereof, is of great concernment to the public weal; for the
better ordering the same for the future, and that there may be known Laws and
Rules for all sorts of persons employed therein, according to their several
stations and capacities, and that there may be one Rule for the guidance of all
Courts in these proceedings, in distributive justice; This Court does Order,
and be It Ordered by the Authority thereof,

SECT. 1.
That whereas there is many times differences between owners of Ships, K^tches,
Barques and other vessels, in setting forth their several parts, whereby damage
does accrue to the particular concernment of owners, and if not prevented, may
be a great obstruction of Trade, where there are several owners concerned, as
owners in Ship, Ketch, Barque or other Vessel whatsoever, used for Traffic,
Commerce, Fishing, Log, Board, Wood or Stone, carriage upon salt or fresh
Water, all such owners of lesser part, shall be concluded for the setting forth
of his part, by the major part of the whole concerned, such owners so
concluded, having notice given them of the meeting for such conclusion, if they
be nigh hand; and in case of any owner refusing, or by reason of neglect or
absence, or not able to provide for the setting forth his part, the Master of
such Ship or Vessel may take up upon the bottom, for the setting forth of the
said part; the which being defrayed, the remainder of the income of such part
to be paid by the Master to the said owner.

Sect. 2.
And in case of Fraightment, where any owner shall refuse to assent to the
letting out of Ship or Vessel, where he is interessed, such dissenter shall
manifest it by some public act of protest, before the signing of charter
party, except the master or the rest of the owners or both, conceal from him or
them their actings, then his or their protest after charter party, signed by
themselves or agents, shall be taken for legal dissent, yet not to hinder the
proceed of the Ship or Vessel, but that those so sending her forth, shall be
liable to respond his part upon ensurance according to the custom of
Merchants, which ensurance is to be defalked out of that part of hire, due for
such owners which dissented.

Sect. 3.
Whereas Masters of Ships or other Vessels, have their owners live part in one
Country and part in another, whereby they have in themselves not only
opportunity; and some have made use thereof in their own persons, to represent
the major part of the owners in the place where he comes; It is therefore
Ordered that such Master shall not be taken to have vote in the ordering of
such vessel further then his own interest, except he make it appear to the rest
of the owners, where he is, that he is authorized under the hands of such
owners absent, and then he is to have votes according to the proportion of
parts he so stands for, and the majority of parts are to carry it as before;
nevertheless it is to be understood, that any owner has power to make sale of
his part, either to the rest of the owners, or others, as may be most to his
own advantage, and if any Master shall presume to act contrary hereunto, what
damage shall be sustained by the rest of the owners, the Master shall be liable
to make good, it being duly proved against him.

Sect. 4.
All Masters taking charge, as Masters of ship or other vessel, and not being
sufficient to discharge his place, or that through negligence, or otherwise,
shall imbezel the owners or imployers stock, or time, or that shall suffer his
men to neglect their due attendance on board, both by day and night, especially
when or whilst Merchants Goods are on board, and that Himself or Mate be not
on board every night, to see good orders kept, upon defect therein, such Master
shall be liable to pay the damage that shall accrue by such neglect, it being
duly proved against him.

Sect. 5.
For the Masters better securing their men to them, and to prevent all Coven,
they shall make clear agreements with their Mariners, and Officers, for their
wages, and those agreements enter into a Book, and take the several men's hands
thereto, a copy whereof the Master as a portlige bill shall leave with their
owners if required of them, before their setting sail upon the voyage, and all
such agreements, the Master shall make good to the seamen, and such ship or
vessel as they sail in, shall be liable for to make good the same.

Sect. 6.
All Masters of greater or lesser vessels, shall make due and meet provisions
of victuals and drink for their seamen, or passengers, according to the
laudable custom of our English Nation, as the custom and capacity of the
places they sail from will admit, upon penalty of paying damages sustained for
neglect thereof.

Sect. 7.
That no Master shall ship any seaman or mariner that is shipped before by
another Master or Imployer upon a voyage, nor shall any seaman ship himself to
any other man, until he be discharged from him that shipped him first, upon
penalty of him that entertains him to pay one months pay, that such seamean
agrees for, as also of such seaman sh^pping himself to pay one months pay that
he agrees for* the half thereof to be paid to the use of the poor of the Town
or place where the offense is committed, the other half to the complainer or
informer.

Sect. 8.
No Master of ship or vessel shall sail into any Haven or Port, except
necessitated thereunto by wind or weather, or for want of provision, or for
security from Pirates, but such port as by charter party, or his bill of
Lading, he is bound unto, until he has delivered his goods according to his
engagement; and in case any Master shall take in goods for more ports and
places then one, he shall declare himself so to do, to those that freight upon
him, and in case he shall voluntarily go to any other Port or Harbor, then he
is obliged to as above* if damage to the Merchants goods happen thereby, such
Master shall make good the same, it being duly proved against him.

Sect. 9.
Any Master hired out or employed by his owners upon any voyage, receiving
advice from his imployers, that the alteration of the voyage when they are
abroad, may be much for their security and advantage, by going to some other
port, the Master seeing meet to close with that advice, the mariners shall not
hinder his proceed* unless where any of the seamen shall have made a particular
contract with the Master to the contrary* provided that they be not carried to
stay out above one year, nor be carried to any place where they may be liable
to be pressed into a service they are not willing unto

Sect. 10.
Masters shall see that their Officers and Mariners be duly paid their wages
according to agreement made with them, upon the finishing of their voyage,
without delay or trouble, upon penalty of paying damages for neglect, and all
costs that the seamen shall be at for recovering the same.

Sect. 11.
Whereas many times Masters take in Merchants goods on board their ships or
vessels upon freight, when yet they are not meetly fitted with suitable
tackling and seamen for the security of such ships or vessels and goods: It is
Ordered, that in case any Master of ship or vessel after he has laden upon his
ship or vessel any Merchants goods to be transported, shall for want of
sufficient ground tackle (if to be had) or because of want of sufficient men
being on board, come a shore to the damage of such Merchants or fraighters in
their goods, the ship shall be liable to make good such damages; and in case
the defect appear to be in the Master and men both, or either, the owners shall
recover such damage from them.

Sect. 12.
Where any Ship Master has mored his ship or vessel, none other shall come so
near to him first mored as to do him damage or receive damage by him, upon the
penalty of him so coming to make good all the damage, and to be farther
punished if wilfulness or perverseness in the action be proved against him.

Sect. 13.
In case any Master of ship or vessel under sail shall run on board any other
ship or vessel at an Anchor, and damnifie him, the party offending shall pay
the damage, and such ship or vessel as he sails in shall be liable to arrest
for the making good the damage, the damage to be judged by indifferent men,
appointed by the Judges thereof, unless the parties agree among themselves.

Sect. 14.
In case of loss of goods by reason of throwing some over board to ease the
vessel to save the rest, the goods thrown over board, shall not be done without
the Master and major part of the companies consent, or at least of the officers
with the Master, which goods shall be brought into an Avarage, and the whole
loss to be born by ship, and goods, and wages in proportion that are saved; the
like course shall be for cutting of Masts, and loss thereof, or boats, cables
or anchors, as also of riggin and sails, for the safety of the whole, the
Merchants goods are to bear a part of the loss.

Sect. 15.
In case a ship or vessel, at setting forth proves deficient, and gives over
the voyage, the charges the Merchant has sustained in shipping and landing his
goods, shall be born by the Master and owners of such vessel, that presumes to
take goods into an insufficient bottom.

Sect. 16.
Any ship or vessel at sea receiving damage by the Masters or mariners
negligence, yet brings the Merchants goods home, and delivers them
according to bills of lading, he shall receive his freight, but if the Goods be
damnified the Master or mariners shall make good the damage.

Sect. 17.
If any ship or vessel in storm shall break loose and fall upon another, and do
her damage for want of ground tackle, the ship breaking loose shall make good
the damage; but if it appear the Master, or mariners, or both, are negligent
of freshing their hoase, or clearing their Cables, they shall pay the damage
for such neglect.

Sect. 18.
All mariners being shipped upon a voyage, and in pay, they shall duly attend
the service of the Masters ship or vessel for the voyage, and not absent
themselves day or night without leave from the Master, upon forfeit for every
offense five shillings.

Sect. 19.
No officers or mariners shall be disorderly or unruly, to occasion
disturbance in the ship or other vessel he is shipped upon, to hinder or
damnifie the voyage, to be proved by the Master or other mariners, or both,
upon penalty of paying the damage if able, and in case of inability to pay, to
suffer corporal punishment as the nature of the offense may appear to the
Judges; and in case Master or mariners shall conceal the offenses of such,
and refuse to give in evidences therein, they shall be amerced or imprisoned,
as the judges shall see meet.

Sect. 20.
If any shall undertake the charge of Pilot, boat-swain, gunner, or any other
office, in ship or other vessel, and not be able to discharge the duty of the
place, such shall lose their wages in part or in whole, and be further punished
for their presumption, as the Judges shall see meet.

Sect. 21.
All mariners shall keep true watch at sea or in harbor, as the Master shall
appoint, upon pain of forfeit of twelve pence for every default, to be defalked
out of their wages.

Sect. 22.
Any mariner that has entered upon a voyage, and shall depart and leave the
voyage, shall forfeit all his wages, one half to the poor, the other half to
the Master and owners, and be further punished by imprisonment or otherwise as
the case may be circumstanced, to be judged by the Magistrate or Magistrates
they are complained to, except such seaman shall show just cause for his so
leaving the voyage, and shall procure an order therefore from Authority.

Sect. 23.
If any mariner shall have received any considerable part of his wages, and
shall run away from the ship or vessel he belongs to, and decline the service
of the Master in the prosecution of the voyage, he shall be pursued as a
disobedient runaway servant, and proceeded with as such a one.

Sect. 24.
If any mariner shall entertain any person or persons on board the ship or
vessel he sails in, without the masters leave, or Masters or mariners shall
do it at unseasonable times, he or they shall forfeit twenty shillings, one
half to the poor, the other half to the owners.

Sect. 25.
No seaman, or seamen, or officer shall commit any outrage upon the Master of
any ship or vessel, but those so offending shall be severely punished, by fine
or other corporal punishment, as the fact shall appear to be circumstanced to
the Judges that shall hear it, and as they shall judge meet; if any officers or
mariners, shall combine against the Master, whereby the voyage shall be
diverted or hindered, or that damage thereby shall accrue to the ship and goods,
they shall be punished with loss of wages, as otherwise as mutiniers, as the
case may require.

Sect. 26.
In case any ship or vessel be in distress at sea, by tempest or other
accident, the mariners shall do their utmost endeavor to assit the Master in
saving ship and goods, and not desert him without apparent hazard appear, that
by their staying they may lose their lives.

Sect. 27.
And in case of suffering shipwreck, the mariners are without dispute upon
their getting on shore, to do their utmost endeavors to save the ship or
vessel, tackle and apparel, as also the Merchants goods as much as may; out of
which they shall have a meet compensation for their hazard and pains; and any
upon conviction of negligence herein shall be punished.

Bastards.
WHereas there is a Law provided by this Court for punishing of Fornicators,
but nothing as yet for the easing of Towns, where Bastards are born, in regard
of the poverty of the Parent or Parents of such Children sometimes appearing,
nor any rule held forth touching the reputed Father of a Bastard for legal
conviction.

It is therefore Ordered, and by this Court Declared, that where any man is
legally convicted to be the Father of a Bastard child, he shall be at the care
and charge to maintain and bring up the same, by such assistance of the Mother
as nature requires, and as the Court from time to time (according to
circumstances) shall see meet to Order: and in case the Father of a Bastard, by
confession or other manifest proof* upon trial of the case, do not appear to
the Courts satisfaction, then the Man charged by the Woman to be the Father,
she holding constant in it, (especially being put upon the real discovery of
the truth of it in the time of her Travail shall be the reputed Father, and
accordingly be liable to the charge of maintenance as aforesaid (though not to
other punishment) notwithstanding his denial, unless the circumstances of the
case and pleas be such, on the behalf of the man charged, as that the Court
that have the cognizance thereon shall see reason to acquit him, and otherwise
dispose of the Child and education thereof. Provided always, in case there be
no person accused in the time of her travail, it shall not be available to
abate the conviction of a reputed Father, any Law, Custom or usage to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Tolling of Cattle.
FOr the prevention of felonious practices growing upon us, by stealing of
Horse-kinde, and other Neat Cattle, and selling them as their own

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that there shall be a
Toll-Book kept in every Town by the Clerk of the Writs, wherein all Horse kind
and other Cattle, as aforesaid, bought of any person, shall be entered, with
their age, color and marks, at the peril of the buyer, with the name of the
seller, and such seller shall have two Vouchers, to testify the said seller to
be the proper owner of such Horse kind, or other Cattle so sold; or in case of
Horse kind or Cattle so sold, shall be challenged by any other person, the
Vouchers in case of the escape of the seller, shall be liable to all damages
that shall arise thereupon; and the Clerk of the Writs shall have three pence
of the buyer, for entering every such Horse kind, or Neat Cattle, and if any
Horse kind, or other Cattle as aforesaid, so bought by any person be not
Tolled, nor Sellers, nor Vouchers found, upon challenge of any such Cattle, the
said buyer shall be liable to all damages, as the Felon himself should be were
he present, and any person or persons having lost any Horse kind, or other
such Cattle, shall have free liberty to search any Toll-Book in any Town in any
such case.

Signing of Warrants.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that the Secretary for
the time being, shall from time to time, sign all warrants for the execution of
persons sentenced to death, either in the General Court or Court of Assistants:
and that the Secretary or Clerk of every Court, shall sign Warrants for
executions in all other judgments of Courts civil or criminal; any custom or
usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

Idle Persons.
WHereas in the Law tit. House of Correction, Idle persons are particularly
named as such, as the Law intends should be committed to that House for
Correction and reformation: This Court taking notice, upon good information and
sad complaints, that there are some persons in this Jurisdiction, that have
families to provide for, who greatly neglect their callings, or mispend what
they earn, whereby their families are in much want, and are thereby exposed to
suffer, and to need relief from others.

This Court for remedy of these great and unsufferable evils, do declare, that
by idle persons (mentioned in the recited Law) such neglectors of their
families, are comprehended amongst the rest, and that in a special manner.

Sabbath breakers.
FOr the better prevention of the breach of the Sabbath. It is enacted by this
Court and the Authority hereof, that no servile work shall be done on that day,
namely, such as are not works of Piety, of Charity, or of Necessity, and when
other works are done on that day, the persons so doing, upon complaint, or
presentment, being legally convicted thereof, before any Magistrate, or County
Court, shall pay for the first offense Ten shillings fine, and for every
offense after to be doubled; and in case the offense herein be circumstanced
with profaneness, or high handed presumption, the penalty is to be augmented at
the discretion of the Judges.

As an Adition to the Law, for preventing profaning the Sabbath day, by doing
servile work; this Court does Order, that whatsoever (...) this Jurisdiction,
shall travel upon the Lords day, either on horseback or on foot, or by boats,
from, or out of their own Town, to (...) unlawful assembly or meeting, not
allowed by Law; are hereby declared to be prophaners of the Sabbath, and shall
be provided against as the persons that profane the Lords day, by doing
servile work.

Single Persons.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority hereof, that the following Order
shall be directed and sent by the Clerks of the several shire Courts, to the
Constables of the Towns within their shire, who are enjoined faithfully to
execute the same, and if upon the return made, it does appear that the Select
Men are negligent in executing the Laws therein mentioned; the Court shall
proceed against them by Admonition, or fine, as the merit of the case may
require, and shall also dispose of single persons, or stubborn children or
servants, to the House of Correction, according to the intent of the Law, any
Law, Custom or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

To the Constable of A.
WHereas the Law published by the honored General Court, lib. 1. page 76. sect.
3. do require all Towns, from time to time, to dispose of all single Persons
and Inmates within their Towns to service, or otherwise, and in page 16. tit.
Children and Youth, It is required of the Select men, that they see that all
Children and Youth, under family Government, be taught to read perfectly the
English Tongue, have knowledge in the Capital Laws, and be taught some Orthodox
Catechism, and that they be brought up to some honest employment, profitable to
themselves and the Common Wealth; and in case of neglect on the part of the
Family Governors, after admonition given them, the said Select Men are
required, with the help of two Magistrates, or next Court of that shire, to
take such Children or Apprentices from them, and place them forth with such as
will look more straightly to them.

The neglect whereof, as by sad experience from Court to Court abundantly
appears, does occasion much sin and profaneness to increase among us, to the
dishonor of God, and the ensnaring of many Children and Servants, by the
dissolute lives and practices of such as do live from under Family Government,
and is a great discouragement to those Family Governors, who conscientiously
endeavor to bring up their Youth in all Christian nurture, as the Laws of God
and this Common wealth does require:

THese are therefore in his Majesty's Name to require you to acquaint the
Select men of your Town, that the Court does expect and will require, that the
said Laws be accordingly attended, the prevalency of the former neglect
notwithstanding: and you are also required to take a list of the names of those
young persons within the bounds of your Town, and all adjacent Farms though out
of all Town bounds, who do live from under Family Government, viz. do not serve
their Parents or Masters, as Children, Apprentices, hired Servants, or Journey
men ought to do, and usually did in our Native Country, being subject to their
commands and discipline, and the same you are to return to the next Court to be
held at (...) on the (...) day of (...) and hereof you are to make a true
return under your hand and not to fail.

Choice of Church Officers.
WHereas the Christian Magistrate is bound by the Word of God to preserve the
Peace, Order or Liberty of the Churches of Christ, and by all due means to
promote Religion, in Doctrine and Discipline, according to the Word of God: and
whereas by our Law, tit. Ecclesiastical, Sect. 4. It is Ordered and Declared
that every Church has free liberty of Calling, Election and Ordination of all
her Officers, from time to time, provided they be able, pious, and orthodox:
For the better explanation of the said Law, and as an addition thereunto, this
Court does Order and Declare, and be it hereby Ordered and Enacted, that by the
Church, is to be meant, such as are in full Communion only; and that the
^eaching Officer or Officers of such Church or Churches, we do intend shall be
the Minister or Ministers to all the people in that Town where such Church or
Churches are planted; and that no Inhabitant in any Town shall challenge a
right unto, or act in the Calling or Election of such Officer or Minister,
until he be in in full communion, upon the penalty of being accounted a
disturber of peace and order, and to be punished by the Court of that Shire,
either by Admonition* Security for the good Behavior, Fine, or Imprisonment,
according to the quality and degree of the offense.

Preserving of Peace.
FOr the better preserving of Peace, and every man's Liberty and Safety in this
Jurisdiction, and to the end that all fighting quarrelling and disturbance may
be avoided. It is by this Court Ordered, and by the Authority thereof enacted,
that no person shall beat, hurt or strike any other person, upon penalty of
paying to the party stricken, by fine to the County where the offense is
committed, or both, such sum or sums as the County Court, Magistrate,
Commissioner or Associate, that take cognizance thereof shall determine: and
because in this case several circumstances may alter the degree of the offense,
as who do smite, who is smitten, with what instrument, the danger of the wound,
more or less, time, place and provocation, and other the like, it is left to
the discretion of the Judges aforesaid, upon hearing and consideration, to
impose such penalty or penalties, as in their discretion shall seem just, equal
and proportionable to the merit of the offense.

Age for Plantiffs and Defendants.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority hereof, that the age for
Plantiffs and Defendants in civil cases, before any Magistrate, Commissioner or
Court of Judicature, shall be twenty one years of age, and for all persons
under that age, their Parents, Masters, and Guardians as they shall see meet
shall plead and defend their right and interest, as the matter may require; and
in all criminal cases, every person younger as well as elder, shall be liable
to answer in their own persons, for such misdemeanors as they shall be accused
of, and may also inform and present any misdemeanour to any Magistrate,
Grand-jury-man or Court, any Law, Custom or Usage to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Judgment for title of House or Land.
IT is Declared and Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, That where
a Judgment is given in any Court for any person of House or Land, upon the
trial of the Title thereof; if the person against whom the Judgment is given,
does either forcibly keep possession thereof still after execution served, or
enter upon it again, and so retain possession by force, he shall be counted a
high offender against the Law, and breaker of the public peace; therefore
speedily to redress such a criminal offense, every Magistrate is empowered, and
by his place has power to give warrant and command to the Marshal, Officers
and other men (whom he thinks meet to be employed in the business) The Marshal
also requiring aid, greater or lesser, as need requires, and suppress the
force, and give possession to the owner, and to imprison such as do appear to
be delinquents, and their aiders and abettors, to be forth coming at the next
Court that did give the Judgment in the case, there to make their Answer: and
whom the Court does find guilty, to set such fine or other punishment upon
them as the merit of their several cases does require.

FINIS.
SEVERAL Laws and Orders Made at the General Court of ELECTION Held at Boston,
May 19th 1669.
And Printed and Published by their Order, June 4. 1669. EDW DRAWSON Secret'.
Order to Rate all Goods and Provisions imported into this Jurisdiction.
THis Court taking notice of sundry Complaints, of much Inequality in the
present way of Raising Moneys to defray Public Charges; Do therefore Order,
and by the Authority of this Court be it Ordered and Enacted:

I.
That all Goods, Wares, Merchandises and Provisions of all sorts (excepting
Fish, Sheeps wool, Cotton-wooll, Salt, and such other things as by former Laws
are exempted, or otherwise provided for) which from any foreign part, or other
Jurisdiction, shall be imported into any of our Harbors, Ports, Shores, or
elsewhere within this Jurisdiction, shall be Rated in a just proportion with
Estates rateable in the Country, viz. for every Twenty shillings value shall be
paid One penny in money.

II.
All Goods, Wares and Merchandises as aforesaid, shall be here valued as
follows; that is, Every hundred pounds at the Port or place from whence it
came, to be accounted here at One hundred and twenty pounds: which penny per
twenty shillings shall be paid by the Agent, Factor, Owner, or other person, by
whom they are brought, or to whom they are sent or consigned; and so according
to the same proportion for all greater or lesser quantities whatsoever.

III.
To which end, all goods and provisions as aforesaid imported, shall by the
Master, Purser, Boatswain, or Skipper of each Ship, or other vessel in which
they are brought, before breaking bulk, or landing any of the said goods, be
certified unto the Country Treasurer, or Collector by him empowered in the
several Port Towns, or other places where they are brought, on penalty of
forfeiture of twenty shillings per Tun, according to the burden of the Ship or
vessel wherein they are brought from time to time.

IV.
And all and every such Collector shall carefully and truly enter all such
goods, with their several Marks, Casks, Packs, Fardels, Trusses, Chests,
Trunks, Cases, and all other things how ever called or distinguished, with the
Names of the persons to whom such goods or other things are sent and consigned,
or are owners thereof, so far as may by any lawful means be discovered.

V.
And all persons to whom such goods or other things aforesaid are consigned or
sent, or are the owners thereof, shall from time to time, before such goods are
landed, signify the true and just value thereof, by showing the true and
perfect Invoyce thereof, unto the aforesaid Collectors for each Port; who are
hereby required to Enter the gross Sum thereof in a book for that purpose, what
the said goods or other things amount unto, and shall forthwith demand and
receive the several Rates or Assessments before mentioned, or certify the
Treasurer, or such other Collector or Receiver as is concerned therein.

VI.
And in case of denial or delay of payment, the Collector authorized as
aforesaid shall levy the same by distress upon the said goods, at the rate or
price set in the Invoyce, out of which he shall have two shillings per pound
for his time and labor therein: And for the more full effecting hereof, the
said Collector is empowered to require aid (if need be) as any Constable may in
the like service, and no man may refuse to assist, upon the same penalty the
Law in that case express.

VII.
If any Invoyce or bill of parcels shall be falsified, concealed, or not
produced, of any goods or other things imported as aforesaid, it shall be
lawful for the Treasurer or Collector, with the Select men of each Town therein
concerned, to Rate all such goods, or the Owner or other Agent for the same, by
will and doom according to their best discretion; provided it be not less then
four pounds per Tun, as the same stands entered in the bill of Lading in the
Boatswain or other Officers book.

VIII.
It is further Ordered, in reference to all sorts of Cattle that are brought
into this Jurisdiction, to be sold, killed, or transported, that the venders
shall give a just and true account of all such Cattle so brought, to some one
of the aforesaid Officers empowered to act herein, both in respect of number
and kind, and the same shall be entered in a book; and the owners of all such
Cattle, or the person with whom they are trusted, before they are set to sale,
killed, or put on board any vessel for transport, shall pay for every Head as
is expressed in the Law tit. Charges Public; upon penalty of forfeiture of any
such beast, or the true value thereof, in whose hand soever found: the one half
to the public Treasury, the other half to the Informer.

IX.
For all other sorts of goods, Hides, Skins, Beaver, Peltry, Butter, Cheese, or
other Merchandise or Provisions brought into this Jurisdiction by land, the
Owner, Factor, Agent, or other person entrusted, shall before any sale made, or
before any putting on board any vessel for transport, or other disposal of the
said goods, make a just and true Entry thereof, as is before provided
concerning goods imported by Sea, and to be rated one penny in every twenty
shillings, the same to be paid in money to the said officer, under the penalty
of forfeiture as aforesaid; the one third part to the Country Treasurer, one
third part to the Informer, and one third part to the Collector.

X.
The Country Treasurer for the time being is hereby empowered and required duly
to execute, or cause to be duly and fully executed this present Order in each
particular part thereof; who is also empowered and authorized to depute and
empower all such officers under him, as he shall judge necessary for the
accomplishment thereof, who upon Warrant to them directed under his Hand and
Seal shall attend the same: And the said officer or officers shall be
accountable to the said Treasurer, when he shall call them thereunto.

XI.
It is also Ordered, That such goods or other things as upon importation shall
by this Order be paid for, shall not again for that year be Rated, whilst they
remain in the hands of them that so paid for them.

XII.
In case the Treasurer, or any Officer under him, shall find any great
difficult or doubtful case in the execution of this Order, they shall repair to
the Governor and Council, or so many of them as can conveniently assemble,
provided the number be not less then five, who are hereby empowered to give
such order and directions for removing obstructions, as the major part of them
shall judge expedient for the effectual prosecution of this Order.

And the Order respecting Customs, made October 1668. is hereby Repealed.

And it is Ordered further, That this present Law be in force forthwith, upon
the ending of this present Sessions, and forthwith published in Boston and
Charls-town.

It is ordered by this Court, that this shall be the Seal of the Treasurers
Office.

Order to prevent exportation of Money out of this Jurisdiction.
FOr the better execution of the Law page 62. sect. 2. for the restraining the
Exportation of Money; It is ordered by this Court, and the Authority hereof,
That the persons hereafter named, viz. For Boston, Captain James Oliver, and
Mr. Thomas Brattle, or either of them. Commissioners to search for Money, etc.
For Charls-town, Captain John Allen For Salem, Mr. Edward Ba^ter. For
Piscataqua, Mr. Elias Stileman. For Marble-head, Mr. Samuel Ward. For Dedham,
Ensign Fisher. For Braintry, Moses Pain. For Marlborow, William Kerley. For
Springfield, Laurence Bliss.
Be all and every of them appointed, empowered, and required to search for, and
seize all Moneys of the Coin of this Jurisdiction, that shall be found or
discovered in any Ship, or any other vessel has weighed Anchor to depart from
that Port where she ladeth, or all such Money that shall be found in any
persons Pocket, Cloak-bag, Portmantel, or any other thing belonging (...),
after such person has taken Horseback, to proceed and (...) his or their
Journey out of this Jurisdiction, from the first Town or station whence such
persons begin their travel: And all Money that such Searcher shall find
(except so much as is allowed by Law) he shall safely keep it until the next
Court of the Shire, and then present the same unto the said Court; and if it be
judged by the Court to be forfeited according to Law, then the said Court are
required to order the delivery of one third part to the officer that seized the
same, and the other two third parts to return to the public Treasury of the
Country. And it is further ordered, that the Searchers before-named are hereby
empowered to break open any Chrest, Trunk, Box, Cabin, Cask, Truss, or any
other suspected place or thing, where they or any of them conceive Money may be
concealed, and seize the same: And also they or either of them are empowered to
require such assistance from any Constables or others, as to them may seem
expedient, who are to aid them upon the penalty of forty shillings Fine for
every neglect.

Order further to Regulate Coopers-staves.
WHereas the Law tit. Pipe-staves, p. 64. provides only for Pipe-staves for
tite Cask, and that Hogshead-staves and Barrel-staves both of white and red
Oak, as well as for Pipe-staves, are frequently transported, and traffiqued in
payments, both to the Country Treasury, and otherwise; It is Ordered by this
Court, and the Authority thereof, that all Hogshead-staves shall be in length
three foot two inches, or upwards, not exceeding three foot four inches; and
all Barrel-staves shall be in length thirty one inches, all well and even hewed
or dressed sufficiently for use, as for Pipe-staves is expressed, whether of
white or red Oak. And all Headings for Pipe-staves of any sort to be in length
twenty eight inches; and for Hogsheads and Barrels, suitable to the Cask to be
made thereof; and that it be inserted in the Oath appointed for Viewers of
Pipe-staves, page 88. Any thing in the aforesaid Law to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Order to determine Book debts, etc.
ON Complaint, and consideration of sundry Inconveniences both to Creditors and
Debtors, through want of seasonable examination and ballancing of
Book-accompts; It is Ordered, and by this Court Enacted, That all such
book-debts as are now standing out, or that hereafter shall be made, and that
shall not within three years after publication hereof, or within three years
after such debt as hereafter shall be made, be accounted for or balanced with
the original Debtor, or his Attorney, Agent, Assign, or other lawful Successor
or Substitute, and on account or balance thereof, assured by Specialty given
for it, or witnessed by subscribing the Debtor or other Accomptants Name to the
Creditors book, or the Subscription of the Witnesses to such Account, Shall not
be pleadable in any Court; unless such book-debt shall within the time
before-limited, be prosecuted or proved in such Court as has proper cognizance
thereof, by Evidence competent and approved by the said Court: And the Evidence
there recorded, and the Record thereof, shall secure the Creditor, his
Executors, administrators and assigns, unless the Debtor or his assigns shall
disprove the same, within one year after such proof made, or recovery of the
said debt, if such Debtor, his or her agent, attorney, assign, substitute,
executor, administrator, or other lawful successor, be or shall be within this
Jurisdiction, or elsewhere, and have due notice from the Creditor thereof.

Order determining the choice of Military Officers.
THis Court considering the direction of our Patent, relating to the stating of
all Military officers in this Jurisdiction; Do hereby order and declare, That
all Commission Officers that at present are in power, are confirmed according
to their respective Commissions; but for the time to come, where new are to be
chosen, it is only in the power of the General Court (or in case of
emergency, for the Council of the Commonwealth) to nominate, choose, appoint,
and empower all Commission Military Officers, (excepting the Major General and
Admiral at Sea, the choice of whom are otherwise provided for by Law) And for
all inferior officers in Companies, they are to be chosen and appointed by the
Commission officers of that Company; and where no Commission officer is, by the
Major of the Regiment.

Law to prevent breaking of Prisons.
ON Complaint of the Keeper of the Prison, That some Malefactors and other
Prisoners have made Escape, by means of some evil-disposed persons that supply
them with Instruments to effect the same; It is therefore ordered by this
Court, and the Authority thereof, That if any person whatsoever shall any
ways, either directly or indirectly, convey any instrument or other thing
whatsoever, to any prisoner, by which such prisoner, or any other prisoner,
either shall, may, or might break prison, or work him or her self unlawfully
out of the same; if it were for debt, such person so transgressing shall pay
the full debt, and incur the penalty of Forfeiture of as much to the Country,
or undergo such corporal punishment as the Court on whose proceedings such
imprisonment followed, or the Court of Assistants, shall impose, order or
appoint: And if any prisoner committed for offense or offenses, Criminal or
Capital, shall by such wicked compliance of any person, break prison, or make
escape out of prison, or be found in preparation thereunto, The person or
persons which directly or indirectly conveyed such instruments, tools, or other
things, whereby such prisoner shall or might work his or her escape from
prison; such person shall be liable to the same corporal punishment which the
prisoner was liable unto, and also incur such further penalty by Fine,
imprisonment, or corporal punishment, as the County Court, Court of Assistants,
or General Court shall appoint: So that where the prisoners are not actually
escaped, in such cases any Court to moderate as they shall see meet. And if the
escape of any prisoner appear to be through the fault or neglect of the Jailer,
he shall then be liable to such penalties as the prisoner was, according as the
Court which has cognizance thereof shall determine.

FINIS.

