NEW-ENGLANDS MEMORIAL: OR, A brief Relation of the most Memorable and
Remarkable Passages of the Providence of God, manifested to the PLANTERS OF
New England in America;

With special Reference to the first Colony thereof, Called

NEW PLYMOUTH.

As also a Nomination of diverse of the most Eminent Instruments deceased, both
of Church and Commonwealth, improved in the first beginning and after-progress
of sundry of the respective Jurisdictions in those Parts; in reference unto
sundry Exemplary Passages of their LIVES, and the time of their DEATH.

Published for the Use and Benefit of present and future Generations, By
NATHANIEL MORTON, Secretary to the Court for the Jurisdiction of New Plymouth.

Deuteronomy.32.10. He found him in a desert Land, in the waste howling wilderness he
led him about; he instructed him, he kept him as the Apple of his Eye. Jerem.
2.2,3. I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine Espousals,
when thou wentest after me in the wilderness, in a Land that was not sown etc.
Deuteronomy. 8. 2,16. And thou shall remember all the way which the Lord thy God led
the this FORTY YEARS in the Wilderness etc. CAMBRIDGE: Printed by S.G. and M.
J. for John Usher of Boston. 1669.

To the Reader.
IT is much to be desired there might be extant A Complete History of the
United Colonies of New England, that God may have the praise of his goodness to
his People here, and that the present and future Generations may have the
benefit thereof. This being not attainable for the present, nor suddenly to be
expected, it is very expedient, that (while sundry of the Eldest Planters are
yet living) Records and Memorials of Remarkable Providence be preserved and
published, that the true Originals of these Plantations may not be lost; that
New England, in all time to come, may remember the day of her smallest things;
and that there may be a furniture of Materials for a true and full History in
aftertimes.

For these and suchlike Reasons we are willing to Recommend unto the Reader
this present Narrative as a Useful Piece. The Author is an approved godly man,
and one of the first Planters at Plymouth; The Work it self is Compiled with
Modesty of Spirit, Simplicity of Style, and Truth of Matter, containing the
Annals of New England for the space of 47 years, with special reference to
Plymouth Colony, which was the first, and where the Author has had his
constant abode: And yet (so far as his Intelligence did reach) relating many
Remarkable Passages in the several Colonies; and also making an honorable
mention of diverse of the most Eminent Servants of God that have been amongst us
in several parts of the Country, after they had finished their course. We hope
that the Labor of this good man will find a general Acceptance amongst the
People of God, and also be a means to provoke some or other in the rest of the
Colonies (who have had the knowledge of things from the beginning) to
Contribute their Observations and Memorials also; by which means, what is
wanting in this Narrative, may be supplied by some others: and so in the issue,
from diverse Memorials there may be matter for a just History of New England in
the Lords good time. In the mean time, this may stand for a Monument, and be
deservedly acknowledged as an Eben Ezer, that Hitherto the Lord has helped us.

John Higginson. Thomas Thacher,
March 26. 1669.
To the Right Worshipful, THOMAS PRINCE Esquire Governor of the Jurisdiction of
New Plymouth; With the Worshipful, the MAGISTRATES, His Assistants in the said
Government:
N. M. wishes Peace and Prosperity in this Life, and Eternal Happiness in
that which is to come.
Right Worshipful,
THe consideration of the weight of Duty that lies upon us, to Commemorize to
future Generations the memorable passages of Gods Providence to us and our
Predecessors in the beginning of this Plantation, has wrought in me a
restlesness of spirit, and earnest desire, that something might be achieved in
that behalf, more (or at least otherwise) then as yet has been done. Many
discouragements I have met with, both from within and without my self: but
reflecting upon the Ends I have proposed to my self in setting out in this Work
(...) has afforded me some support, viz. The glory of God, and the good of
present and future Generations. Being also induced hereunto, by the
consideration that your selves (especially some of you) are fully acquainted
with many of the particulars, both concerning Persons and Things, inserted in
the following Narrative, and can on your own knowledge assert them for Truth.
Were it so that any other had traveled in this kind, in such a way as might
have conduced to a brief and satisfactory intelligence in particulars relating
to the premises, I would have spared this labor, and have satisfied my self in
perusal of their Works, rather then to have set pen to paper about the same;
but having neither seen nor heard of any, especially respecting this our
Plantation of New Plymouth, which God has honored to be the first in this
Land, I have made bold to present your Worships with, and to publish to the
world something of the very first Beginnings of the great Actings of God in
New England, begun at NewPlimouth: wherein, the greatest part of my
intelligence has been borrowed from my much honored Uncle, Mr. William
Bradford, and such Manuscripts as he left in his Study, from the year 1620,
unto 1646; whom had God continued in this world some longer time, and given him
rest from his other more important Affairs, we might probably have had these
things from an abler Pen, and better digested, then now you may expect. Certain
Diurnals of the honored Mr. Edward Winslow, have also afforded me good light
and help: and what from them both, and otherwise I have obtained, that I judged
suitable for the following Discourse, I have with care and faithfulness
related; and have therein more follicitously followed the truth of things (many
of which I can also assert on my own knowledge) then I have studied quaintness
in expressions.

I should gladly have spoken more particularly of the Neighboring United
Colonies, whose ends and aims in their Transplanting of themselves and
Families, were the same with ours, viz. The glory of God, the propagation of
the Gospel, and enlargement of His Majesty's Dominions; but for want of
intelligence, and that I may not prevent a better Pen, I shall only make
mention of some of their Worthies that we have been most acquainted with.

I shall not insist upon the Clime nor Soil of the Country, its Commodities or
Discommodities; nor at large on the Natives, or their Customs and Manners: all
which have been already declared by Captain Smith, Mr. Higginson, Mr. Williams,
Mr. Wood, and others. What it is, and what my aims at Gods glory, and my good
affections to the place and people of whom I treat, may make it, I present your
Worships with; Humbly craving your favorable aspect, and good acceptance of my
poor Endeavors; and that my self and it may find protection and shelter under
the wings of your pious Pattonage, to defend us against such critical and
censorious eyes and tongues, as may either carp at my expressions, or
misconstrue my intentions. The ample experience I have had of your undeserved
Favor and Respect to me, in my many years Service of the Public, and my
observation in that time, that you have desired something of this nature might
be done, has encouraged me hereunto: your good acceptance whereof, shall ever
oblige me to answerable returning of gratitude, and administer to me further
cause of thankfulness, That God has given me an Habitation under your just and
prudent Administrations; and wish for a Succession of such as may be skillful
to lead our Israel in this their peregrination; and when God shall take you
hence, to receive the Crown of your labors and travels. So prays,

Your Worships humble Servant, Nathaniel Morton.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER:
Grace and Peace be multiplied; With Profit by this following Narration.
Gentle Reader,
I Have for some length of time looked upon it as a duty incumbent, especially
on the immediate Successors of those that have had so large Experience of those
many memorable and signal Demonstrations of Gods goodness, viz. The first
Beginners of this Plantation in New England, to commit to writing his gracious
dispensations on that behalf; having so many inducements thereunto, not only
otherwise, but so plentifully in the Sacred Scriptures: That so, what we have
seen, and what our fathers have Psalm. 78.3 ^
told us, we may not hide from our children, showing to the generations to come
the praises of the Lord; that especially the seed of Abraham his servant, and
the children Psalm.101.8 ^^
of Jacob his chosen, may remember his mavelous works in the beginning and
progress of the planting of New England, his wonders, and the judgments of his
Psalm.80.8,9.
mouth: How that God brought a vine into this Wilderness; that he cast out the
Heathen and planted it; that he made room for it, and caused it to take deep
root, and it filled the Land; so that it has sent forth its boughs to the Sea,
and its branches to the River. And not only so, but also that He has guided
his people by Exodus.15.13.
his strength to his holy Habitation, and planted them in the Mountain of his
Inheritance, in respect of precious Gospel-Enjoyments. So that we may not only
look back to Psalm.66.6.
former Experiences of Gods goodness to our Predecessors, (though many years
before) and so have our faith strengthened in the Mercies of God for our times;
that so the Church being one Numerical Body, might not only even for the Hosea
12 4.
time he spoke with us in our Forefathers, by many gracious manifestations of
his glorious Attributes, Wisdom, Goodness, and Truth, improved for their good:
but also rejoice in present Enjoyments of both outward and spiritual mercies,
as fruits of their Prayers, Tears, Travels and Labors. That as especially God
may have the glory of all, unto whom it is most due; so also some rays of
glory may reach the Names of those blessed Saints that were the main
Instruments of the beginning of this happy Enterprise.

So then, gentle Reader, thou may take notice, that the main Ends of
publishing this small History, is, That God may have his due praise, His
Servants the Instruments have their Names embalmed, and the present and future
Ages may have the fruit and benefit of Gods great work, in the Relation of the
first Planting of New England. Which Ends, if attained, will be great cause of
rejoicing to the Publisher thereof, if God gives him life, and opportunity to
take notice thereof.

The Method I have observed, is (as I could) in some measure answerable to the
ends forenamed, in inserting some Acknowledgements of Gods Goodness,
Faithfulness, and Truth upon special occasions, with allusion to the
Scriptures; and also taking notice of some special Instruments, and such main
and special Particulars as were perspicuously remarkable, in way of
Commendation in them, so far as my intelligence would reach; and especially
in a faithful Commemorizing, and declaration of Gods wonderful works for, by,
and to his people, in preparing a place for them, by driving out the Heathen
before them; bringing them through a a Sea of Troubles; preserving and
protecting them from, and in those dangers that attended them in their low
estate, when they were strangers in the Land; and making this bowling
Wilderness a Chamber of rest, safety, and pleasantness, whiles the storms of
his Displeasure have not only tossed, but endangered the overwhelming of great
States and Kingdoms, and has now made it to us a fruitful Land, sowed it with
the seed of man and beast; but especially in giving us so long a peace,
together with the Gospel of peace, and so great a freedom in our Civil and
Religious Enjoyments; and also in giving us hopes that we may be Instruments in
his hands, not only of enlarging of our Princes Dominions, but to enlarge the
Kingdom of the Lord Jesus, in the Conversion of the poor blind Natives.

And now, Courteous Reader, that I may not hold thee too long in the Porch, I
only crave of thee to read this following Discourse with a single eye, and
with the same ends as I had in penning it. Let not the smallness of our
Beginnings, nor weakness of Instruments, make the thing seem little, or the
work despicable; but on the contrary, let the greater praise he rendered unto
God, who has effected great things by small means. Let not the harshness of my
style, prejudice thy taste or appetite to the dish I present thee with: Accept
it as freely as I give it thee. Carp not at what thou do not approve, but use
it as a Remembrance of the Lords goodness, to engage to true Thankfulness and
Obedience; so may it be a help to thee in thy journey through the wilderness of
this world, to that Eternal Rest which is only to be found in the Heavenly
Canaan: which is the earnest desire of

Thy Christian Friend, Nathaniel Morton.

NEW-ENGLAND'S MEMORIAL: OR, A brief Relation of the most Remarkable Passages
of the Providence of God manifested to the Planters of New England in AMERICA.
And first, of the beginning of the first Plantation in N.E. CALLED
NEW PLYMOUTH.
IT is the usual manner of the Dispensation of the Majesty of Heaven, to work
wonderfully by weak means for the effectuating of great things, to the intent
that he may have the more Glory to himself: Many instances hereof might be
produced, both out of the Sacred Scriptures, and common Experience; and amongst
many others of this kind, the late Happy and Memorable Enterprise of the
Planting of that part of America called New England, deserves to be
Commemorized to future Posterity.

IN the Year 1602. diverse godly Christians of our English Nation in the North
of England, being studious of Reformation, and therefore not only witnessing
against Humane Inventions, and Additions in the Worship of God, but minding
most the positive and practical part of Divine Institutions, they entered into
Covenant, To walk with God, and one with another, in the enjoyment of the
Ordinances of God, according to the Primitive Pattern in the Word of God. But
finding by experience they could not peaceably enjoy their own liberty in their
Native Country, without offense to others that were differently minded; they
took up thoughts of removing themselves and their Families into the
Netherlands, which accordingly they endeavored to accomplish, but met with
great hinderance: yet after some time, the good hand of God removing
obstructions, they obtained their desires; arriving in Holland, they settled
themselves in the City of Leyden, in the year 1610, and there they continued
diverse years in a comfortable condition, enjoying much sweet society and
spiritual comfort in the ways of God, living peaceably among themselves, and
being courteously entertained, and lovingly respected by the Dutch, amongst
whom they were strangers, having for their Pastor Mr. John Robinson, a man of a
learned, polished, and modest spirit, pious and studious of the Truth, largely
accomplished with suitable Gifts and Qualifications to be a Shepherd over this
Flock of Christ; having also a fellowhelper with him in the Eldership, Mr.
William Brewster, a man of approved Piety, Gravity, and Integrity, very
eminently furnished with gifts suitable to such an Office.

But notwithstanding their amiable and comfortable carrying on, (as has been
said) although the Church of Christ on Earth in holy Writ, is sometimes called
Heaven; yet there is always in their most perfect state here in this lower
world, very much wanting as to absolute and perfect happiness, which is only
reserved for the time and place of the full enjoyment of Celestial Glory: for,
although this Church was at peace, and in rest at this time, yet they took up
thoughts of removing themselves into America with common consent; the
Proposition of removing thither being set on foot, and prosecuted by the Elders
upon just and weighty grounds: for, although they did quietly and sweetly enjoy
their Church-liberties under the States, yet they foresaw that Holland would be
no place for their Church and Posterity to continue in comfortably, at least in
that measure that they hoped to find abroad; and that for these Reasons
following, which I shall recite as received from themselves.

First, Because themselves were of a different Language from the Dutch, where
they lived, and were settled in their way, insomuch that in ten years time,
whiles their Church sojourned amongst them, they could not bring them to reform
the neglect of Observation of the Lord's Day as a Sabbath, or any other thing
amiss amongst them.

Secondly, Because their Countrymen, who came over to join with them, by reason
of the hardness of the Country, soon spent their Estates, and were then forced
either to return back to England, or to live very meanly.

Thirdly, That many of their Children, through the extreme necessity that was
upon them, although of the best dispositions, and graciously inclined, and
willing to bear part of their Parents burdens, were oftentimes so oppressed
with their heavy labors, that although their Spirits were free and willing,
yet their Bodies bowed under the weight of the same, and became decrepid in
their early youth, and the vigor of Nature consumed in the very bud. And that
which was very lamentable, and of all sorrows most heavy to be born, was, that
many by these occasions, and the great licentiousness of Youth in that Country,
and the manifold temptations of the place, were drawn away by evil examples
into extravagant and dangerous courses, getting the reins on their necks, and
departing from their Parents: Some became S^^diers, others took upon them far
Voyages by (...) other-some worse courses tending to dissoluteness, and (...)
destruction of their Souls, to the great grief of their Parents, (...) the
dishonor of God; and that the place being a place of great licentiousness and
liberty to Children, they could not educate them, nor could they give them due
correction without reproof or reproach from their Neighbors.

Fourthly, The their Posterity would in few generations become Dutch, and so
lose their interest in the English Nation; they being desirous rather to
enlarge His Majesty's Dominions, and to live under their Natural PRINCE.

This bath been graciously answered fiace, by moving the hearts of many of his
Servants to be very instrumental in this work, with some good success, and
hopes of a further blessing in that aspect.
Fifthly and lastly, and which was not the least, a great hope and inward Zeal
they had of laying some good Foundation, or at least to make some way
thereunto, for the propagating and advancement of the Gospel of the Kingdom of
Christ in those remote parts of the World, yea although they should be but as
stepping-stones unto others for the performance of so great a Work.

These and such like were the true Reasons of their removal, and not as some of
their Adversaries did upon the rumor thereof, cast out slanders against them;
as if the State was weary of them, and had rather driven them out, (as Heathen
Histories have seigned of Moses and the Israelites, when they went out of
Egypt) then that it was their own free choice and motion.

I will therefore mention a particular or two, to evince the contrary.

And first, Although some of them were low in their Estates, yet the Dutch
observing that they were diligent, faithful and careful of their engagements,
had great respect to them, and strove for their custom.

Again, secondly, the Magistrates of the City of Leyaen where they lived, about
the time of their coming away, in the public place of Justice gave this
commendable Testimony of them, in reproof of the Walloons who were of the
French Church in the City; These English (said they) have lived now amongst us
Ten years, and yet we never had any Suit or Accusation against them, or any of
them; but your Strifes and Quarrels are continual.

The Reasons of their Removal abovenamed being debated first in private, and
thought weighty, were afterward propounded in public; and after solemn days
of Humiliation observed both in public and in private, it was agreed, That
part of the Church should go before their Brethren into America, to prepare for
the rest: and if in case the major part of the Church did choose to go over with
the first, then the Pastor to go along with them; but if the major part stayed,
that he was then to stay with them.

They having employed sundry Agents to treat with several Merchants in England,
who adventured some considerable Sums in a way of valuation to such as went
personally on in the Voyage; the Articles of Agreement about the premises being
fully concluded with the said Merchants, and sundry Difficulties and
Obstructions removed, having also obtained Letters Patents for the Northern
parts of Virginia, of King James of Famous Memory; All things were got ready
and provided, a small Ship was bought and fitted out in Holland, of about sixty
^un, called The Speedwell, as to serve to transport some of them over, so also
to stay in the Country, and attend upon Fishing, and such other affairs as
might be for the good and benefit of the Colony when they came thither. Another
Ship was hired at London, of Burden about Ninescore, called The May-flower,
and all other things got in a readiness: so being prepared to depart, they had
a solemn day of Humiliation, the Pastor teaching a part of the day very
profitably and The Text of Scripture was Ezra 8.21.
sutably to the present occasion, the rest of the time was spent in pouring out
of Prayers unto the Lord with great fervency, mixed with abundance of tears;
and the time being come that they must depart, they were accompanied with most
of their Brethren out of the City, unto a Town called Del^s Haven, where the
Ship lay ready to receive them: so they left that goodly and pleasant City,
which had been their resting place above eleven years; but they knew that they
were Pilgrims and Strangers here below, and looked not much on these things,
Hebr. 11.16.
but lifted up their eyes to Heaven, their dearest Country, where God has
prepared for them a City, and therein quieted their spirits.

When they came to the place, they found the Ship and all things ready; and
such of their Friends as could not come with them, followed after them, and
sundry came from Amsterdam to see them shipped, and to take their leaves of them.
One night was spent with little sleep with the most, but with friendly
entertainment, and Christian discourse, and other real expressions of true
Christian love. The next day the wind being fair they went on Board, and their
friends with them, where truely-doleful was the fight of that sad and mournful
parting, to hear what sighs and sobs and prayers did found amongst them; what
tears did gush from every eye, and pithy speeches pierced each others heart,
that sundry of the Dutch strangers that stood on the Key as spectators, could
not refrain from tears: yet comfortable and sweet it was, to see such lively
and true expressions of dear and unseigned love. But the Tide (which stays for
no man) calling them away, that were thus loath to depart, their Reverend Pastor
falling down on his knees, and they all with him, with watery cheeks commended
them with most ^ervent Prayers unto the Lord and his blessing; and then with
mutual embraces, and many tears, they took their leaves one of another, which
proved to be the last leave to many of them. Thus hoysing Sail with a
prosperous gale of wind, they came in short time to Southampton, This was about
the second of July 1620.
where they found the bigger Ship come from London, being ready with all the
rest of their Company, meeting each other with a joyful welcome and mutual
congratulation.

At their parting, their Pastor Mr. John Robinson wrote a Letter to the whole
Company, which I thought meet here to insert, being so fruitful in it self,
and suitable to their occasions.

Loving Christian Friends,
I Do heartily, and in the Lord saint you, as being these with whom I am
present in my best affections, and most earnest longings after you, though I be
constrained for a while to be bodily absent from you: I say, Constrained; God
knowing how willingly, and much rather then otherwise, I would have born my
part with you in this first brunt, were I not by strong necessity held back for
the present. Make account of me in the mean time as a man divided in my self,
with great pain, (and as Natural bonds set aside) having my better part with
you: And although I doubt not but in your godly wisdoms you both foreset and
resolve upon that which concerns your present state and condition, both
severally and jointly; yet have I thought it but my duty to add some further
spur of provocation unto them who run already, if not because you need it, yet
because I owe it in love and duty. And first, as we are daily to renew our
Repentance with our God, especially for our sins known, and generally for our
unknown trespasses: so does the Lord call, us in a singular manner, upon
occasions of such difficulty and danger as lies upon you, to a both narrow
search, and careful reformation of your ways in his sight, left he calling to
remembrance our sins forgotten by us, or unrepented of, take advantage against
us, and in judgment leave us to be swallowed up in one danger or other:
whereas on the contrary, sin being taken away by earnest Repentance, and the
pardon thereof from the Lord sealed up to a man's Conscience by his Spirit,
great shall be his security and peace in all dangers, sweet his comforts in all
distresses, with happy deliverance from all evil, whether in life or death. Now
next after this heavenly peace with God and our own Consciences, we are
carefully to provide for peace with all men, what in us lies, especially with
our Associates; and for that, watchfulness must be had that we neither at all
in our selves do give, no nor easily take offense being given by others. Woe be
to the world for offenses, for although it be necessary, considering the malice
of Satan and man's corruption, that offenses come, yet woe unto the man, or
woman either, by whom the offense comes, faith Christ, Match. 18.7. and if
offenses in the unseasonable use of things in themselves indifferent, be more
to be feared then death it self, as the Apostle teaches, I Cor. 9. 15. how
much more in things simply evil, in which neither honor of God nor love of man
is thought worthy to be regarded? Neither yet is it sufficient that we keep our
selves by the grace of God from giving of offense, except withal we be armed
against the taking of them when they are given by others: for how imperfect and
lame is the work of Grace in that person, who wants Charity to cover a
multitude of offenses? as the Scripture speaks. Neither are you to be exhorted
to this grace, only upon the common grounds of Christianity, which are, that
persons ready to take offense, either want Charity to cover offenses, or
Wisdom duly to weigh humane frailties; or lastly, are gross though close
Hypocrites, as Christ our Lord teaches, Mat.7.1,2,3. as indeed, in my own
experience few or none have been found which sooner give offense, then such as
easily take it; neither have they ever proved sound and profitable Members in
Societies, who have nourished this touchy humor. But besides these, there are
diverse Motives provoking you above others to great care and conscience this
way; as first, there are many of you strangers as to the persons, so to the
infirmities one of another, and so stand in need of more watchfulness this way,
left when such things fall out in men and women as (...) expected not, you be
inordinately affected with them, which does require at your hands much Wisdom
and Charity for the cover^^g and preventing of incident offenses that way. And
lastly, your intended course of Civil Community, will minister continual
occasion of offense, and will be as fuel for that fire, except you diligently
quench it with brotherly forbearance: and if taking of offense causlesly or
easily at men's doings, be so carefully to be avoided; how much more heed is to
be taken that we take not offense at God himself? which yet we certainly do, so
often as we do murmr at his Providence in our crosses, or bear impatiently such
afflictions as wherewith he is pleased to visit us. Store up therefore Patience
against the evil day; without which, we take offense at the Lord himself in his
holy and just works. A fourth thing there is carefully to be provided for; viz.
That with your common Employments, you join common Affections truly been upon
the general Good, avoiding as a deadly Plague of your both Common and Special
Comforts, all retiredness of mind for proper advantage; and all singularly
affected every manner of way, let every man repress in himself, and the whole
Body in each person, as so many Rebels against the Common Good, all private
respects of men's selves, not sorting with the general Convenience. And as men
are careful not to have a new House shaken with any violence, before it be well
settled, and the parts firmly knit: so be you, I beseech you Brethren, much
more careful that the House of God (which you are, and are to be) be not shaken
with unnecessary Novelties, or other Oppositions at the first settling thereof.

Lastly, Whereas you are to become a Body Politic, using amongst your selves
Civil Government, and are not furnished with persons of special Eminency above
the rest, to be chosen by you into Office of Government; Let your wisdom and
godliness appear not only in choosing such persons as do entirely love, and
will promote the Common Good; but also in yielding unto them all due Honor and
Obedience in their lawful Administrations, not beholding in them the
ordinariness of their persons, but Gods Ordinance for your good: not being like
the foolish multitude, who more honor the gay Coat, then either the virtuous
mind of the man, or the glorious Ordinance of the Lord: But you know better
things, and that the Image of the Lords Power and Authority which the
Magistrate bears is honorable, in how mean persons soever; and this duty you
may the more willingly, and ought the more conscionably to perform, because you
are (at least for the present) to have them for your ordinary Governors, which
your selves shall make choice of for that Work.

Sundry other things of Importance I could put you in mind of, and of those
beforementioned in more words; but I will not so far wrong your godly minds,
as to think you heedless of these things, there being also diverse amongst you
so well able both to admonish themselves and others of what concerns them.
These few things therefore, and the same in few words, I do earnestly commend
unto your Care and Conscience, joining therewith my daily and incessant Prayers
unto the Lord, That He who has made the Heavens, and Upon the receipt of this
letter, the company was called together, and it was publicly read amongst
them, which had good acceptance with all, and after fruit (...)
the Earth, and Sea, and all Rivers of Waters, and whose Providence is over all
his Works, especially over all his dear Children for good, would so guide and
guard you in your ways, as inwardly by his Spirit, so outwardly by the hand of
his power, as that both you, and we also for and with you, may have
after-matter of praising his Name all the days of your and our lives. Fare you
well in Him in whom you trust and in whom I rest,

An unfeigned well-willer of your happy success in this hopeful Voyage, JOHN
ROBINSON.


Of the Troubles that befell the first Planters upon the Coast of England, and
in then Voyage in coming over into New England, and their arrival at Cape Cod,
alias Cape James.
ALl things being got ready, and every business dispatched, they ordered and
distributed their Company for either Ship, (as they conceived for the best) and
chose a Governor, and two or three Assistants for each Ship, to order the
people by the way, and to see to the disposing of the Provision, and such like
affairs; all which was not only with the liking of the Masters of the Ships,
but according to their desires: which being done, they set Sail from
Southampton the fifth of August, 1620. But alas, the best Enterprises meet
oftentimes with many discouragements; for they had not failed ^arre, before Mr.
Reynolds, the Master of the lesser Ship, complained that he found his Ship so
leak, as he durst not put further to Sea: on which they were forced to put in
at Dartmouth, Mr. Jones the Master of the biggest Ship likewise putting in
there with him; and the said lesser Ship was searched, and mended, and judged
sufficient for the Voyage by the Workmen that mended her: On which, both the
said Ships put to Sea the second time, but they had not sailed above an hundred
Leagues, ere the said Reynolds again complained of his Ship being so leak, as
that he feared he should founder in the Sea, if he held on; and then both Ships
bore up again, and went in at Plymouth: but being there searched again, no
great matter appeared, but it was judged to be the general weakness of the
Ship. But the true ^eason of the re^arding and delaying of matters was not as
yet discerned: the one of them respecting the Ship (as afterward was found)
was, that she was over Masted, which when she came to her trim in that respect,
she did well, and made diverse pro^itable and successful Voyages. But secondly,
and more especially, by the deceit of the Master and his Company, who were
hired to stay a whole year in the Country; but now fancying dislike, and
fearing want of Victuals, they plotted this stratagem to free themselves, as
afterward was known, and by some of them confessed; for they apprehended that
the greater Ship being of force, and in whom most of the Provisions were
bestowed, that she would retain enough for her self, whatsoever became of them
and the Passengers: But so strong was self-love and deceit in this man, as he
forgot all duty and former kindness, and dealt thus falsely with them. These
things thus falling out, it was resolved by the whole to dismiss the lesser
Ship, and part of the Company with her, and that the other part of the Company
should proceed in the bigger Ship: which when they had ordered matters in
reference thereunto, they made another ^ad parting the one Ship, ( viz.) the
lesser going back for London, and the other ( viz.) The May-flower, Mr. Jones
being Master, proceeding on in the intended Voyage.

These troubles being blown over, and now all being compact together in one
Ship, they put to Sea again with a prosperous wind: but after they had enjoyed
fair winds for a season, they met with many contrary winds and fierce storms,
with which their Ship was shrewdly shaken, and her upper works made very leaky,
and one of the main Beams of the Mid-ships was bowed and cracked, which put
them to some fear that she would not be able to perform the Voyage; on which
the principal of the Seamen and Passengers had serious consultation what to do,
whether to return or hold on: but the Ship proving strong under water, by a
Screw the said Beam was brought into his place again; which being done, and
well secured by the Carpenter, they resolved to hold their Voyage, and so after
many boisterous storms in which they could bear no fail, but were forced to lie
at Hull many days together; after long beating at Sea, they fell in with the
land called ^
Cape Cod the which being made, and certainly known to be it, they were not a
little joyful. After some little deliberation had amongst themselves with the
Master of the Ship, they tacked about to stand to the Southward, to find some
place about Hudsons River, (according to their first intention^) for their
Habitations: But they had not failed that Course above half a day, but they
fell amongst perilous Sholes and Breakers, and they were so far entangled
therewith, as they conceived themselves in great danger; and the wind shrinking
upon them withal, they resolved to bear up again for the Cape aforesaid: the
next day, by Gods Providence, they got into the Cape harbor. Thus they arrived
at Cape Cod, alias Cape James, in November 1620. and being brought safe to
land, they fell upon their knees and blessed the God of Heaven, who had brought
them over the vast and furious Ocean, and delivered them from many perils and
miseries.

Nevertheless, it is to be observed, that their putting into this place was
partly by reason of a storm, by which they were forced in, but more especially
by the fraudulency and contrivance of the aforesaid Mr. Jones, the Master of
the Ship: for, Of this Plot be twist the D^tch and Mr. I (...) I have had late
and certain Intelligence.
their Intentions, as is before-noted, and his Engagement, was to Hudsons
River; but some of the Dutch having notice of their inten^ions, and having
thoughts about the same time of erecting a Plantation there likewise, they
fraudulently hired the said Jones by delays while they were in England, and
now under pretense of the danger of the Sholes, and c. to disappoint them in
their going thi^her: But God out-shoots Satan oftentimes in h^s own Bow, for
had they gone to Hudsons River as before expressed, it had proved very
dangerous to them: for although it is a place far more commodious, and the
Soil more fertile, yet then abounding with a multitude of pernicious Salvages,
whereby they would have been in great peril of their lives, and so the work of
transplanting the Gospel into these parts, much endangered to have been hindered
and retarded: but God so disposed, that the place where they afterward settled
was much depopulated by a great Mortality amongst the Natives, which fell out
about two years before their arrival, whereby he made way for the carrying on
of his good purpose in promulgating of his Gospel as aforesaid.

But before we pass on, let the Reader with me make a pause, and seriously
consider this poor peoples present condition, the more to be raised up to
admiration of Gods goodness toward them in their preservation: for being now
passed the vast Ocean, and a sea of Troubles before in their Preparation, they
had now no Friends to welcome them, no Inns to entertain or refresh them, no
Houses, or much less Towns to repair unto to seek for succor: the Barbarians
that Paul the Apostle fell amongst in his Shipwreck at the Isle M^lita, showed
him no small Acts 29.
kindness; but these Salvage Barbarians when they met with them (as after will
appear) were readier to fill their sides full of Arrows, then otherwise: and
for the season, it was Winter, and they that know the Winters of the Country,
know them to be sharp and violent, subject to cruel and fierce Storms,
dangerous to travel to known places, much more to search unknown Coasts.
Besides, what could they see but a hideous and desolate Wilderness, full of
wild Beasts and wild Men? and what multitudes of them there were, they then
knew not: neither could they as it were go up to the Top of Pisgah, to view
from this Wilderness a more goodly Country to feed their hopes; for which way
soever they turned their eyes (save upward to Heaven) they could have little
solace or content in respect of any outward object, for Summer being ended, all
things stand in appearance with a weather-beaten face, and the whole Country
full of Woods and Thickets, represented a wild and salvage hew; if they looked
behind them, there was the mighty Ocean which they had passed, and was now as
a main Bar and Gulf to separate them from all the Civil Parts of the World.
The Master of the Ship and his Company pressing with speed to look out a place
for their Settlement at some near distance, for the season was such as he would
not stir from thence, until a safe Harbor was discovered by them with their
Boat: yea, it was sometimes threatened, that if they would not get a place in
time, that they and their goods should be turned on shore, and that the Ship
would leave them; the Master expressing himself, that Provisions spent apace,
and that he would keep sufficient for himself and his Company for their return.
It is true indeed, that the love and affections of their Brethren they left
behind them in Holland, was cordial and entire toward them, but they had
little power to help them or themselves: what could now sustain them but the
Spirit of God and his grace? Ought not, and may not the Children of these
Fathers Psalm. 107. 1,2, 4:5,8.
rightly say, Our Fathers were English men, which came over this great Ocean,
and were ready to perish in this Wilderness; but they cried unto the Lord, and
he heard their voice, and looked on their adversity: Let them therefore praise
the Lord, because he is good, and his mercy endures for ever; yea, let them
who have been the redeemed of the Lord show how he has delivered them from the
hand of the oppressor, when they wandered in the desert Wilderness out of the
way, and found no City to dwell in; both hungry and thirsty, their soul was
overwhelmed in them: Let them therefore confess before the Lord his loving
kindness, and his wonderful works before the children of men?

Of the first Planters their Combination by entering into a Body Politic
together; With their proceedings in discovery of a place for their Settlement
and Habitation.
BEing thus fraudulently dealt with (as you have heard) and brought so far to
the Northward, the season being sharp, and no hopes of obtaining their intended
Port; and thereby their Patent being made void and useless as to another place:
Being at Cape Cod upon the Eleventh of November 1620. it was thought meet for
their more orderly carrying on of their Affairs, and accordingly by mutual
consent they entered into a solemn Combination as a Body Politic, To submit to
such Goverrnment and Governors, Laws and Ordinances, as should by a general
Consent from time to time be made choice of, and assented unto. The Contents
whereof follows.

I N the Name of God, Amen. We whose Names This was the first Foundations of
the Government of NewPlimouth.
are underwritten, the Loyal Subjects of our dread Sovereign Lord King James,
by the grace of God of Great Britain, France and Ireland, King, Defendor of the
Faith, and c. Having undertaken for the glory of God, and advancement of the
Christian Faith, and the Honor of our King and Country, a Voyage to plant the
first Colony in the Northern parts of Virginia; Do by these Presents solemnly
and mutually, in the presence of God and one another, Covenant and Combine our
selves together into a Civil Body Politic, for our better ordering and
preservation, and furtherance of the ends aforesaid: and by virtue hereof do
enact, constitute and frame such just and equal Laws, Ordinances, Acts,
Constitutions and Officers, from time to time, as shall be thought most meet
and convenient for the general good of the Colony; unto which we promise all
due submission and obedience. In witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed
our Names at Cape Cod, the eleventh of November, in the Reign of our Sovereign
Lord King James, of England, France and Ireland the eighteenth, and of Scotland
the fifty fourth, Anno Dom, 1620.

John Carver. William Bradford. Edward Winflow. William Brewster. Isaac
Allerton. Mil^s Standish. John Alden. Samuel Fuller. Christopher Martin.
William Mullins. William White. Richard Warren. John Howland. Steven Hopkins.
Edward Tilly. John Tilly. Francis Cook. Thomas Rogers. Thomas Tinker. John
Ri^gdale. Edward Fuller. John Turner. Francis Eaton. James Chilton. John
Craxton. John Billington. Joses Fletcher.. John Goodman. Digery Priest. Thomas
Williams. Gilbert Winslow. Edmond Margeson. Peter Brown. Richard Bitteridge.
George Soul. Richard Clark. Richard Gardener. John Allerton. Thomas English.
Edward Doten. Edward Liester.
Mr. John Carver the first Governor of the Jurisdiction of New Plymouth
After this, they chose Mr. John Carver, a man godly and well-approved amongst
them, to be their Governor for that year.

Necessity now calling them to look out a place for Habitation, as well as the
Master and Mariners importunity urging them thereunto; while their Carpenter
was trimming up of their Boat, sixteen of their men tendered themselves to go by
land and discover those nearest places; which was accepted: and they being well
armed, were sent forth on the sixteenth of November 1620. and having marched
about a mile by the Seaside, they espied five Indians, who ran away from them,
and they followed them all that day sundry miles, but could not come to speech
with them: so night coming on, they betook themselves to their Rendezvous, and
set out their Sentinels, and rested in quiet that night; and the next morning
they followed the Indians tracts, but could not find them nor their dwellings,
but at length lighted on a good quantity of clear ground near to a Pond of
fresh water, where formerly the Indians had planted Indian Corn, at which place
they saw sundry of their graves; and proceeding further, they found new Stubble
where Indian Corn had been planted the same year; also they found where lately
an house had been, where some Planks and a great Kettle was remaining, and
heaps of sand newly paddled with their hands, which they dug up, and found
in them diverse fair Indian Baskets filled with Corn, some whereof was in Ears
fair and good of diverse colors, which seemed to them a very goodly sight,
having seen none before: Of which Rarities they took some to carry to their
friends on Shipboard, like as the Israelites Spies brought from Eshcol some of
the good fruits of the Land: but finding little that might make for their
encouragement as to situation, they returned, being gladly received by the rest
of their Company.

After this, their Shallop being ready, they set out the second time for a more
full Discovery of this place, especially a place that seemed to be an opening
as they went into, the said Harbor some two or three Leagues off, which the
Master judged to be a River; about thirty of them went out on this second
Discovery, the Master of the Ship going with them: but upon the more exact
discovery thereof, they found it to be no Harbor for Ships, but only for
Boats. There they also found two of their Houses covered with Mats, and sundry
of their Implements in them; but the people ran away, and could not be seen:
Also there they found more of their Corn and Beams of various colors; the Corn
and Beams they brought away, About 6 months after they gave them full
satisfaction to their content.
purposing to give them full satisfaction when they should meet with any of
them. And here is to be noted, a special and a great mercy to this people, that
here they got them seed to plant them Corn the next year, or otherwise they
might have starved, for they had none, nor any likelihood to get any, until A
special Providence of God to be noted.
the season had been past (as the sequel did manifest) neither is it likely
that they had had this, if the first Discovery had not been made, for the
ground was now all covered with Snow, and hard frozen; but the Lord is never
wanting unto those that are his in their greatest needs. Let his holy Name have
all the praise.

Having thus discovered this place, it was controverted amongst them what to
do, touching their abode and settling there. Some thought it best for many
Reasons to abide there:

1. Because of the Convenience of the Harbor for Boats, though not for Ships.

2. There was good Corn-ground ready to their hands, as was seen by experience
in the goodly Corn it yielded, which would again agree with the ground, and be
natural seed for the same.

3. Cape Cod was like to be a place for good Fishing, for they saw daily great
Whales of the best kind for Oil.

4. The place was likely to be healthful, secure, and defensible.

5. and lastly, The especial Reason was, that now the heart of Winter and
unseasonable weather was come upon them, so as they could not go upon Coasting
and Discovery, without danger of losing both men and Boat, upon which would
follow the overthrow of all, especially considering what variable winds and
sudden storms do there arise; also cold and wet lodging had so tainted their
people, as scarce any of them were free from vehement Coughs, as if they should
continue long, it would endanger the lives of many, and breed diseases and
infection amongst them. Again, that as yet they had some Provisions, but they
would quickly be spent, and then they should have nothing to comfort them in
their labor and toil that they were like to undergo. At the first it was also
conceived, whiles they had competent Victuals that the Ship would stay, but
when that grew low, they would be gone, and let them shift for themselves.

Others again urged to go to Agawam, alias Angawam, a place about twenty
Leagues off to the Northward, which they had heard to be an excellent Harbor
for Ships, better ground, and better fishing.

Secondly, for any thing they knew there might be hard by About this time Mrs.
Susanna White was delivered of a Son who was named Peregrine; he was the first
of the English that was born in N.E. and still surviveth, and is the Lieutenant
of the Military Company of Mathfield.
us a far better Seat, and it would be a great hinderance to feat where they
should remove again.

But to omit many Reasons and Replies concerning this matter, it was in the end
concluded to make some discovery within the Bay, but in no case so far as
Angawam. Besides, Robert Coppin their Pilot made relation of a great Navigable
River, and good Harbor in the other Head-land of the Bay, almost right over
against Cape Cod, being in a right line not much above eight Leagues distant,
in which he had once been; and beyond that place they that were to go on
discovery were enjoined not to go.

The Month of November being spent on these Affairs, and having much ^oul
weather; on the sixth of December they concluded to send out their Shallop
again on a third Discovery. The Names of those that went on this Discovery,
were Mr. John Carver, Mr. William Bradford, Mr. Edward Winslow, Captain Miles
Standish, Mr. John Howland, Mr. Richard Warren, Mr. Steven Hopkins, Mr. Edward
Tilly, Mr. John Tilly, Mr. Clark, Mr. Coppin, John Atherton, Thomas English,
Edward Doten, with the Master Gunner of the Ship, and three other of the common
Seamen; these set sail on Wednesday the sixth of December 1620, intending to
Circulate the deep Bay of Cape Cod, the weather being very cold, so as the Spra
of the Sea lighting on their Coats, they were as if they had been glazed;
notwithstanding, that night they got down into the bottom of the Bay, and as
they drew near the shore they saw some ten or twelve Indians, and landed about
a League off them, (but with some difficulty, by reason of the Sholes in that
place) where they carried that night. In the morning they divided their Company
to coast along, some on shore, and some in the Boat, where they saw the Indians
had been the day before cutting up of a Fish like a Grampus; and so they ranged
up and down all that day, but found no people, nor any place they liked as fit
for their settlement: and that night they on shore met with their Boat at a
certain Creek, where they made This is (...) to be a place called Namskeket.
them a Barricado of boughs and logs for their lodging that night, and being
weary betook themselves to their rest. The next morning about five of the clock
(seeking guidance and protection from God by prayer) and refreshing themselves
in way of preparation to persist on in their intended Expedition, some of them
carried their Arms down to the Boat, having laid them up in their Coats from
the moisture of the weather; but others said they would not carry theirs until
they went themselves: But presently all on a sudden, about the dawning of the
day, they heard a great and strange cry, and one of their Company being on
board, came hastily in, and cried, Indians, Indians, and withal their Arrows
came flying amongst them; on which, all their men ran with speed to recover
their Arms (as by Gods good Providence they did.) In the mean time, some of
those that were ready discharged two Muskets at them, and two more stood ready
at the entrance of their Rendezvous, but were commanded not to shoot, until
they could take full aim at them; and the other two charged again with all
speed, for there were only four that had Arms there, and defended the
Barricado which was first assaulted. The cry of the Indians was dreadful,
especially when they saw their men run out of their Rendezvous toward the
Shallop to recover their Arms; the Indians wheeling about upon them: but some
running out with Coats of Mail, and Cuttle-axes in their hands, they soon
recovered their Arms, and discharged amongst them, and soon stayed their
violence. Notwithstanding, there was a lusty man, and no less valiant, stood
behind a Tree within half a Musket shot, and let fly his Arrows amongst them:
he was seen to shoot three Arrows, which were all avoided, and stood three shot
of a Musket, until one taking full aim at him, made ^
the Bark or Splinters of the Tree fly about his ears; after which he gave an
extraordinary shriek, and away they went all of them: and so leaving some to
keep the Shallop, they followed them about a quarter of a mile, that they might
conceive that they were not afraid of them, or any way discouraged.

Thus it pleased God to vanquish their Enemies, and to give them deliverance,
and by his special Providence so to dispose, that not any one of them was
either hurt or hit, though their Arrows came close by them; and sundry of their
Coats which hung up in the Barricado were shot through and through: for which
salvation and deliverance they rendered solemn Thanksgiving unto the Lord.

From hence they departed, and coasted all along, but discerned no place likely
for Harbor, and therefore hasted to the place their Pilot (as aforesaid) told
them of, who assured them that there was a good Harbor, and they might fetch
it before night: of which they were glad, for it began to be ^oul weather.

After some hours failing it began to Snow and Rain, and about the middle of
the Afternoon the wind increased, and the Sea became very rough, and they brake
their Rudder, and it was as much as two men could do to steer the Boat with a
couple of Oars; but the Pilot bid them be of good cheer, for he saw the
Harbor: but the storm increasing, and night drawing on, they bare what sail
they could to get in while they could see: but herewith they brake their Ma^t
in three pieces, and their Sail fell overboard in a very grown Sea, so as they
had like to have been cast away; yet by Gods mercy they recovered themselves,
and having the flood with them, struck into the Harbor. But when it came to,
the Pilot was deceived in the place, and said, Lord be merciful to us, my eyes
never saw this place before: This was bet^^^^the place called the G^^ners Nose
and Sagaquab, by the mouth of Plymouth harbor.
and he and the Masters Mate would have run the Boat ashore in a Cove full of
Breakers before the wind, but a lusty Seaman which steered bade them that
rowed, If they were men, about with her, else they were all cast away; the
which they did with all speed: so he bade them be of good cheer, and row hard,
for there was a fair Sound before them, and he doubted not but they should
find one place or other where they might ride in safety. And although it was
very dark, and rained sore, yet in the end they got under the le^ of a small
Island, and remained This was afterward called Clarks Island, because Mr.
Clark the Masters Mate first stepped on shore there o^
. there all night in safety. But they knew not this to be an Island until the
next morning, but were divided in their minds, some would keep the Boat,
doubting they might be amongst the Indians, others were so wet and cold they
could not endure, but got on shore, and with much difficulty got fire, and so
the whole were refreshed, and rested in safety that night. The next day
rendering thanks to God for his great deliverance of them, and his continued
merciful good Providence toward them, and finding this to be an Island, it
being the last day of the week, they resolved to keep the Sabbath there.

On the second day of the week following they founded the Harbor, and found it
fit for Shipping, and marched into the Land, and found diverse Corn fields, and
little running Brooks, a place (as they supposed) fit for Situation, at least
it was the best that they could find, and the season and their present
necessity made them glad to accept of it. So they returned again to their Ship
with this News to the rest of their people, which did much comfort their hearts.

On the fifteenth of December they weighed Anchor, to go to the place they had
discovered, and arrived the sixteenth day in the Harbor they had formerly
discovered, and afterward took better view of the place, and resolved where to
pitch their Dwellings; and on the Five and twentieth day of December began to
erect the first House for common use, to receive them and their goods: and
after they had provided a place for their goods and common store (which was
long in unlading for want of Boats, and by reason of foulness of the winter
weather, and sickness of diverse) they began to build some small Cottages for
Habitation, as time would admit; and also consulted of Laws and Orders both for
their Civil and Military Government, as the necessity of their present
condition did require. But that which was sad and lamentable, that in two or
three Months time half of their Company died, especially in January and
February, being the depth of Winter, wanting houses and other comforts, being
infected with the Scurvy, and other Diseases, which this long Voyage and their
incommodate condition had brought upon them, so as there died sometimes two,
sometimes three on a day in the aforesaid time, that of One hundred and odd
persons, scarce Fifty remained. Amongst others in the time forenamed, died Mr.
William Mullins, a man pious and well-deserving, endowed also with a
considerable outward Estate; and had it been the will of God that he had
survived, might have proved an useful Instrument in his place, with several
others who deceased in this great and common affliction, whom I might take
notice of to the like effect. Of those that did survive in this time of
distress and calamity that was upon them, there was sometimes but six or seven
sound persons, who (to their great commendation be it spoken) spared no pains
night nor day to be helpful to the rest, not shunning to do very mean services
to help the weak and impotent. In which Sickness the Seamen shared also deeply,
and many died, to about the one half of them before they wentaway. Thus being
but few, and very weak, this was an opportunity for the Salvages to have made a
prey of them, who were wont to be the most cruel and treacherous people in all
these parts, even like Lions, but to them they were as Lambs, God striking a
dread in their hearts, so as they received no harm from them. The Lord also so
disposed, as aforesaid, much to waste them by a great Mortality, together with
which were their own Civil Dissentions, and Bloody Wars, so as the twentieth
person was scarce left alive when these people arrived, there remaining sad
spectacles of that Mortality in the place where they seated, by many bones and
skulls of the dead lying above-ground; whereby it appeared, that the living of
them were not able to bury their dead. Some of the ancient Indians that are
surviving at the writing hereof, do affirm, That about some two or three years
before the first English here arrived, they saw a Blazing Star or Comet, which
was a forerunner of This (...) to be the same that was seen about that time in
Europe.
this sad Mortality, for soon after it came upon them in extremity. Thus God
made way for his people, by removing the Heathen, and planting them in the
Land; yet we hope in mercy to some of the posterity of these poor blind
Salvages, by being means (at least stepping-stones) for others to come and
Preach the Gospel amongst them: of which afterward in its more proper place.
But to return.

The Indians after their arrival would show themselves afar off, but when
they endeavored to come near them, they would run away. But about the
sixteenth of March, 1621. a certain Indian called Samoset came boldly amongst
them, and spoke to them in broken English, which yet they could well
understand, at which they marvelled: but at length they understood that he
belonged to the Eastern parts of the Country; and had acquaintance with sundry
of the English Fishermen, and could name sundry of them, from whom he learned
his language. He became very profitable to them, in acquainting them with many
things concerning the state of the Country in the Eastern parts, as also of the
people here; of their Names Number, and Strength, of their Situation, and
Distance from this place, and who was Chief amongst them: He told them also of
another Indian called Squanto, alias Tisquantam, one of this place, who had
been in England, and could speak better English then himself: And after
courteous entertainment of him, he was dismissed. Afterward he came again,
with some other Natives, and told them of the coming of the great Sachem named
Massasoiet, who (about four or five days after) came with the chief of his
Friends and other Attendants, with the aforesaid Squanto, with whom (after
friendly entertainment and some gifts given him) they made a League of Peace
with him, which continued with him and his Successors to the time of the
writing hereof. The terms and Conditions of the said League is as follows:

Of the (...) more in the year 1639.
I. T Hat neither he, nor any of his, should injure or do hurt to any of their
people.

II. That if any of his did any hurt to any of theirs, he should send the
Offender that they might punish him.

III. That if any thing were taken away from any of theirs, he should cause it
to be restored; and they should do the like to his.

IV. That if any did unjustly War against him, they would all him; and if any
did War against them, he should aid them.

V. That he should send to his Neighbour-Confederates, to certify them of
this, that they might not wrong them, but might be likewise comprised in these
Conditions of Peace.

VI. That when his Men came to them upon any occasion, they should leave their
Arms (which were then Bows and Arrows) behind them.

VII. Lastly, That so doing, their Sovereign Lord King James would esteem him
as His Friend and Ally.

All which he l^ked well, and withal at the same time acknowledged himself
content to become the Subject of our Sovereign Lord the King aforesaid, His
Heirs and Successors; and gave unto them all the Lands adjacent, to them and
their Heirs for ever.

After these things he returned to his place called Sowams, about forty miles
distant from Plymouth, but Squanto continued with them, and was their
Interpreter, and proved a special Instrument sent of God for their good beyond
expectation; he directed them in Planting their Corn, where to take their Fish,
and to procure their Commodity; and also was their Pilot to bring them to
unknown places for their profit, and never left them until his death: He was a
Native of this place where Plymouth is, and scarce any left besides himself. He
was carried away (with diverse others) by one named Hunt, a Master of a Ship,
who thought to sell them for Slaves in Spain, but he got away for England, and
was entertained by a Merchant in This Merchants name was Mr. Slaney.
London, and employed to Newfound-land and other parts; and at last brought
hither into these parts by one Mr. Dermer, a Gentleman employed by Sir
Ferdinando Gorges and others, for Discovery, and other Designs in these parts:
of whom I shall say something, because it is mentioned in a Book set forth Anno
1622. by the President and Council for New England, That he made the Peace
between the Salvages of these parts and the English, of which this Plantation
(as it is intimated) had the benefit: and what a Peace it was, may appear by
what befell him and his men.

This Mr. Dermer was here the same year that these people came, as appears by a
Relation written by him, bearing date June 30. Anno 1620. and they arrived in
the Country in the Month of November following, so that there was but four
Months difference: In which Relation to his honored Friend, he has these
passages of this very place where New Plymouth is; I will first begin (faith
he) with that place from whence Squanto, or Tisquantam was taken away, which in
Captain Smiths Map is called This name of Plymouth was so called not only for
the reason here named, but also because Plymouth in O.E. was the last town they
left in their Native Country; and for that they received many kindnesses from
some Christians (...)
Plymouth, and I would that Plymouth had the like Commodities. I would that the
first Plantation might here be seated, if there come to the number of Fifty
persons, or upwards; otherwise at Charlton, because there the Salvages are less
to be feared. The Pocanakets, which live to the West of Plymouth, bear an
inveterate malignity to the English, and are of more strength then all the
Salvages from thence to Panobskut: Their desire of Revenge was occasioned by an
Englishman, who having many of them on Board, made great slaughter of them
with their Murderers and small Shot, when (as they say) they Note
offered no injury on their parts. Whether they were English or no, it may be
doubted; yet they believe they were, for the French have so possessed them: for
which cause Squanto cannot deny but they would have killed me when I was at
Namassaket, had he not entreated hard for me. The Soil of the Borders of this
great Bay, may be compared to most of the Plantations which I have seen in
Virginia. The land is of diverse sorts; for Patukset is an heavy but strong
Soil, Nauset and Satukket are for the most part a blackish and deep Mould, much
like that where grows the best Tobacco in Virginia. In the bottom of the Bay
is great store of Cod, (...) Mullet, etc. And above all, he commends Pacannaket
for the richest Soil, and much open ground, likely and fit for English Grain.
Massachusetts is about nine leagues from Plymouth, and situate in the mids:
between both is many Islands and Peninsuls, very fertile for the most part.
With sundry such Relations, which I forbear to transcribe, being now better
known then they were to him.

This Gentleman was taken Prisoner by the Indians at Mannamoset, (a place not
far from Plymouth, now well known) he gave them what they demanded for his
liberty; but when they had got what they desired, they kept him still, and
endeavored to kill some of his men, but he was freed by seizing on some of
them, and kept them bound till they gave him a Canooes load of Corn: Of which
see Purch, hb. 9. fol. 1778. But this was Anno 1619.

After the writing of the former Relation, he came to the (...)
Isle Capewak, which lies South from this place in the way to Virginia, and
the aforesaid Squanto with him; where he going on shore amongst the Indians to
trade, as he used to do, was assaulted and betrayed by them, and all his men
slain, but one that kept the Boat: but himself got on Board very sore wounded,
and they had cut off his Head upon the Cuddy of the Boat, had not his Man
rescued him with a Sword, and so they got away, and made shift to get into
Virginia, where he died, whether of his wounds, or the Diseases of the Country,
or both, is uncertain. By all which it may appear how far this people were
from Peace, and with what danger this Plantation was begun, save as the
powerful hand of the Lord did protect them.

These things were partly the Reasons why the Indians kept aloof, as aforesaid,
and that it was so long ere they could come to speech with any of them: Another
Reason (as afterward themselves made known) was, how that about three years
before these first Planters arrived, a certain French Ship was cast away at
Cape Cod, but the men got on shore, and saved their lives, and much of their
Victuals and other goods; but afterward the Indians heard of it, and gathered
together from these parts, and never left watching and dogging them, until
they got advantage, and killed them all but three or four, which they kept and
sent from one Sachem to another to make sport with them, and used them worse
then Slaves; and they conceived this Ship was now come to revenge it. Two of
the said French so used were redeemed by the aforesaid Mr. Dermer, the other
died amongst the Indians: and as the Indians have reported, one of them lived
amongst them until he was able to discourse with them, and told them, That God
was angry with them for their wickedness, and would destroy them, and give
their Country to another people, that should not live like beasts as they did,
but should be clothed, and c. But they derided him, and said, That they were so
many that God could not kill them. His answer was, That though they were never
so many, God had many ways to destroy them that they knew not. Shortly after
his death came ^
the Plague, a Disease they never heard of before, and mightily swept them
away, and left them as dung upon the earth (as you have heard.) Not long after
came the English to New Plymouth, and then several of the Indians began to
mind the French-mans words, thinking him to be more then an ordinary man. And
as the first part of his speech had proved true, they began to be apprehensive
of the latter, viz. The loss of their Country. This Relation the first Planters
at Plymouth, after they came to be acquainted with them, several of them heard
from diverse of their ancient and gravest Indians, and have often seen the place
where the French were surprised and taken; which place bears the Name of
Frenchmans Point with many to this day. This Relation for the verity thereof,
being also very observeable, was thought meet to be here inserted: And let me
add General instands of the Mortality of the Indians occasional: taken notice
of.
a word hereunto; That it is very observable likewise, That God has very
evidently made way for the English, by sweeping away the Natives by some great
Mortalities; as first, by the Plague here in Plymouth Jurisdiction; secondly,
by the Small Pox in the Jurisdiction of the Massachusetts, a very considerable
people a little before the English came into the Country; as also at
Conecticot, very full of Indians a little before the English went into those
parts; and then the Pequots by the Sword of the English (as will appear in its
place) and the Country now mostly possessed by the English. I might also
mention several places in the Jurisdiction of New Plymouth, peopled with
considerable companies of proper able men, since the first Planters thereof
came over, even in our sight, before they were in a capacity to improve any of
their land, that have by the same hand of Providence been cut off, and so their
Land even cleared for them, and now so replenished with their Posterity, Exodus
(...) 28, 7 (...) 30.
that places are too straight for them. BY little and little (faith God of old
to his people) will I drive them out from before thee, till thou be increased,
and inherit the Land.

But before I pass on, let the Reader take notice of a very remarkable
particular, which was made known to the said Planters at Plymouth some short
space after their arrival, That the Indians, before they came to the English to
make Friendship Behold how Satan labored to hinder the Gospel from coming into
N.E.
with them, they got all the Powaws in the Country, who for three days
together in a horrid and devilish manner did Curse and Execrate them with
their Conjurations: which Assembly and Service they held in a dark and dismal
Swamp. But to return.

The Spring being now come, it pleased God that the Mortality which had taken
away so many of the first Planters at Plymouth, ceased, and the Sick and Lame
recovered apace, which was as it were a new life put into them; they having
born this Affliction with much patience, being upheld by the Lord. And thus we
are come unto the Twenty fifth of March, 16^^.

1621.
THis Year several of the Indian Sachems (besides Massasoiet before-named) came
unto the Government of NewPlimouth, and acknowledged themselves to be the Loyal
Subjects of our Sovereign Lord King James, and subscribed unto a Writing to
that purpose with their own hands; the tenor of which said Writing follows,
with their Names annexed thereunto. It being conceived by some that are
judicious, that it may be of use in succeeding times, I thought meet here to
insert it.

September 13. Anno Dom. 1621.
KNOW all men by these Presents, That we whose Names are under written do
acknowledge our selves to be the Loyal Subjects of King James, King of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, and c. In Witness whereof,
and as a Testimonial of the same, we have Subscribed our Names or Marks, as
follows.

Ohquamehud. Cawnacome. Obbatinnua. Nattawahunt. Caunbatant. Chikkatabak.
Quadaquina. Hattamoiden. Apannow.

Now follows several Passages of the Providence of God to, and the further
progress of the first Planters at Plymouth, appertaining to the Year 1621.

THey now began to hasten the Ship away, which carried so long by reason of the
necessity and danger that lay on them, because so many died both of themselves,
and the Ships Company likewise; by which they became so few, as the Master
durst not put out to Sea, until those that lived recovered of their Sickness,
and the Winter over.

The Spring of this year they Planted their first Corn in New England, being
instructed in the manner thereof by the forenamed Squanto: they likewise sowed
some English Grain with little success, by reason partly of the badness of the
Seed, and lateness of the season, or some other defect not then discerned.

In the Month of April in this year, their Governor Mr. John Carver fell sick,
and within a few days after died, whose death was much lamented, and caused
great heaviness amongst them; and there was indeed great cause. He was buried
in the best manner they could, with as much Solemnity as they were in a
capacity to perform, with the Discharge of some Volleys of shot of all that
bare Arms. This worthy Gentleman was one of singular Piety, and rare for
Humility, as appeared by his great condescendency, when as this poor miserable
people were in great sickness and weakness, he shunned not to do very mean
services for them, yea the meanest of them: He bare a share likewise of their
labor in his own person, accordingly as their extreme necessity required; who
being one also of a considerable Estate, spent the main part of it in this
Enterprise, and from first to last approved himself not only as their Agent in
the first transacting of things, but also all along to the period of his life,
to be a pious, faithful, and very beneficial Instrument, and now is reaping the
fruit of his labor with the Lord.

His Wife who was also a gracious woman, lived not six weeks after him: she
being overcome with excessive grief for the loss of so gracious an Husband,
likewise died.

In some short distance of time after this, Mr. William Bradford was chosen
Governor of Plymouth in his stead, being not as yet well recovered of his
weakness, having bin at the point of death, and Mr. (...) Allerton likewise was
chosen to be his Assistant.

The second of July in this year they sent Mr. Edward Winslow and Mr. Steven
Hopkins, unto the great Sachem Massasciet aforesaid, with a gratuitie to
congratulate with him, and to view his Country, and likewise to take notice of
what strength of men he had, and c. having Squanto for their guide: who found
his place to be about forty Miles from New Plymouth, his People few in
comparison of what they had been, by reason of the mortality amongst the
Indians forementioned. These brought word upon their return of the
Narrhagansets, a People that lived on the otherside of that great Bay, which
are a People strong and many in number, living compact together, and had not at
all been touched with the wasting Plague before-specified. They also brought a
full intelligence in reference unto the particulars they were sent about, and
so returned in safety.

Thus their peace being well established with the Natives about them, which was
much furthered by an Indian named Hobamak, who came to live amongst the
English; he being a proper lusty young man, and one that was in account amongst
the Indians in those parts for his valor, continued faithful and constant to
the English until his death. He with the said Squanto being sent amongst the
Indians about business for the English, were surprised by an Indian Sachem
named Corbitant, who was no friend to the English; he met with them at
Namassaket, and began to quarrel with them, and offered to stab Hobamak, who
being a strong man, soon cleared himself of him; and with speed came and gave
intelligence to the Governor of Plymouth, saying, he feared that Squanto was
slain, for they were both threatened, and for no other cause, but that they were
friends to the English, and serviceable to them. On which it was thought meet
to vindicate their Messengers, and not to suffer them to be thus wronged, and
it was concluded to send some men to Namassaket well armed, and to fall upon
them: whereupon fourteen men being well prepared were sent, under the conduct
of Captain Miles Standish, who when they came thither beset the house, and the
said Captain entered into the same to look for the said Corbitant, but he was
fled, and so they missed of him; but understood that Squanto was alive; so they
withheld, and did no hurt, save three of the Natives pressing out of the house
when it was beset, were sorely wounded; which they brought home to their Town
with them, and were dressed by their Surgeon, and cured.

After this they had many Congratulations from diverse Sachems, and much firmer
peace, yea those of the Isle of Capewak sent to make friendship with them, and
this Corbitant himself used the mediation of Massasoiet to make his peace, but
was shie to come near them a long time after.

After this, on the eighteenth of September they sent out their Boat to the
Massachusetts with ten men, and Squanto for their Interpreter, to discover and
view that Bay, and to trade with the Natives; and found kind entertainment
with them, who expressed themselves to be much afraid of the Tarateens, a
people in the Eastern part of New England, which used to come in Harvest time
and take away their corn, and many times kill some of their people; who after
they had accomplished their business, returned in safety, and made report of
the place, wishing they had been there seated. But the Lord who assigns to all
men the bounds of their habitations, had appointed it for another end and use.

And thus they found the Lord to be with them in all their ways, and to bless
their outgoings and in-comings: for which let his holy Name have the praise
for ever.

Being now well recovered in respect of health (as has been said) they began
to fit up their buildings against winter, and received in their first harvest,
and had great plenty of fowl and fish, to their great refreshing.

About the ninth of November came in a small ship to them This ship was called
the Fortune, in which came no Provisions which was one cause of a great famine
that bef^ll the Plantation of NewPlimouth soon after. unexpected, in which came
Mr. Robert Cushman, who was both a godly man and an active and faithful agent,
and useful instrument in the common interest of this first design; and there
came with him in that ship, thirty five persons, to remain and live in the
Plantation: which did not a little rejoice the first planters. And these when
they came on shore, and found all well, and saw plenty of provisions beyond
their expectation, were also satisfied and no less glad: for coming in at Cape
Cod before they came to Plymouth, and seeing nothing there but a barren place;
they then began to think what should become of them, if the People were dead or
cut off by the Indians; and began to consult upon some passages, which some of
the Seamen had cast out, to take the Sails from the Yard, left the ship should
get away and leave them: but the Master hearing thereof, gave them good words,
and told them, If any thing but well should have befallen the People at
Plymouth, he hoped he had provisions enough to carry them to Virginia, and
whiles he had any, they should have their part; which gave them good
satisfaction.

This ship stayed at Plymouth not above fourteen days, and returned; and soon
after her departure, the People called the Narrhagansets aforesaid, sent a
messenger unto the Plantation, with a bundle of Arrows, tied together with a
Snakes skin, which their Interpreter Squanto told them was a threatening and a
challenge; upon which the Governor of Plymouth sent them a rough answer, (
viz.) That if they loved war rather then peace, they might begin when they
would, they had done them no wrong, neither did they fear them, or should they
find them unprovided: and by another Messenger sent the Snakes skin back again
with Bullets in it, but they would not receive it, but sent it back again. It
is probable the reason of this their Message to the English, was their own
ambition, who since the death of so many Indians, thought to dominear and lord
it over the rest, and conceived the English would be a bar in their way, and
law that Massasoiet took shelter already under their wings; but this made the
English more carefully to look to themselves, so as they agreed to close their
Dwellings with a good strong Pale, and made ^^ankers in convenient places, with
Gates to shut, which were every night locked, and a Watch kept, and when need
required there was also Warding in the day time; and the Company was by the
Governor and Captains advice, divided into four Squadrons, and every one had
their quarter appointed them, unto which they were to repair: and if there
should be any cry of Fire, a Company was appointed for a Guard with Muskets,
whiles others quenched the Fire; the same to prevent Indian Treachery. And
herewith I shall end the Passages of this Year.

1622.
AT the Spring of this Year (the English having certified the Indians of the
Massachusetts that they would come again unto them) they accordingly prepared to
go thither; but upon some rumors which they heard from Hobamak their friend
forenamed, who feared that the Massachusetts were joined with the
Narrhagansets, and might betray them if they were not careful; and intimated
also his jealousies of Squanto, by what he gathered from some private
whisperings between him and other Indians, that he was not really cordial to
the English in what he pretended, made them cautelous. Notwithstanding, they
sent out their Boat with ten of their principal men about the beginning of
April, and both Squanto and Hobamak with them, in regard of the jealousy
between them: but they had not been gone long, ere that an Indian belonging to
Squanto's family came running, seeming to be in great fear, and told them that
many of the Narrhagansets, with Corbitant, (and he thought Massasoiet) was
coming against them: At which they betook them to their Arms, and supposing
that the Boat was not as yet out of call, they caused a Piece of Ordnance to be
discharged, to call them in again: But this proved otherwise, for no Indians
came. After this they went to the Massachusetts, and had good Trade, and
returned in safety, God be praised.

But by the former passages and things of like nature, they began to see that
Squanto sought his own ends, and played his own game, by putting the Indians in
fear, and drawing gifts from them to enrich himself; making them believe he
could stir up war against them when he would, and make peace for them when he
would; yea he made them believe, that the English kept the Plague buried in the
ground; and ^ould send it amongst This ^.
whom they would, which did much terrify the Indians; and made them more depend
on him, and seek more to him then to their great Sachem Massasoiet; which
procured him envy, and had like to have cost him his life: for after the
discovery of these practices, the said Massasoiet sought it both privately and
openly; which caused him to stick close to the English, and never after durst
go from them until his death. They also made good use of the emulation that
grew between Hobamak and him, which made them both carry more squarely; and the
Governor seemed to countenance the one, and their Captain the other; by which
they had the better intelligence, and it made them both the more diligent.

About the latter end of May they espied a vessel at sea, which at the first
they thought ^o be a Frenchman, but it proved one that belonged to Mr. Thomas
Weston a Merchant; which came from a ship which he and another had sent out on
fishing to a place called Damarels Cove, in the Eastern parts of N. E. this
boat brought seven men, and some letters, but no provisions to them, of which
they were in continual expectation from England, which expectations were
frustrated in that behalf; for they never had any supply to any purpose after
this time, but what the Lord helped them to raise by their industry amongst
themselves: for all that came afterward was too short for the passengers that
came with it.

After this the same year, the abovenamed Mr. Thomas Weston, who had formerly
been one of the Merchant-adventurers to the Plantation of New Plymouth (but had
now broken The one named the Sparrow, the other the Charity.
off and deserted the general concerns thereof) sent over two ships on his own
particular interest; in the one of them came sixty lusty men, who were to be
put on shore at Plymouth, for the ship was to go with other passengers to
Virginia; these were courteously entertained (with the seven men forenamed
belonging to the said Weston, at Plymouth aforesaid) until the ship returned
from Virginia, which was the most part of that Summer; many of them being sick,
and all of them destitute of habitation, and unacquainted with this new
beginning: at the ships return from Virginia, by the direction of the said Mr.
Weston their Master, or such as he had set over them, they removed into the
Massachusetts Bay, he having got a Pattent for some part there, yet they left
all their sick folk at Plymouth, until they were settled and fitted for housing
to receive them: These were an unruly company, and had no good government over
them, and by disorder fell into many wants, as afterward will appear.

But before I pass on, I may not omit the mentioning of a courteous Letter that
came in the vessel abovenamed, in which the abovesaid seven men came, being
directed to the Governor of Plymouth, with respect unto the whole Plantation,
from a Captain of a ship at the Eastward, who came thither on a fishing voyage;
the which for the ingenuity of the man, and his courtesy therein expressed,
may not unfitly be here inserted, being inscribed as follows.

To all his good Friends at Plymouth.
F Riends, Countrymen and Neighbors, I salute you, and wish you all health
and happiness in the Lord: I make bold with these few lines to trouble you,
because, unless I were inhumane, I can do no less. Bad news does spread it self
too far, yet I will so far inform, that my self with many good friends in the
^outh Colony of Virginia have received such a blow, that four hundred persons
large will not make good our losses. Therefore I do entreat you, although not
knowing you, that the oldrule which I learned when I went to school, may be
sufficient, that is, happy is he who other men's harms does make to beware; and
now again and again, wishing all those that willingly would serve the Lord, all
health and happiness in this World, and everlasting peace in the World to come:

I rest, yours JOHN HUDSTON.


In the same Vessel the Governor returned a thankful Answer, Although this was
not much amongst them all, yet it was a very seasonable blessing and supply,
they being now in a low condition for want of food.
as was meet, and sent a Boat of their own with them, which was piloted by
them; in which Mr. Edward Winslow was sent to procure what Provisions he could
of the Ship, who was kindly received by the aforesaid Gentleman, who not only
spared what he could, but wrote to others to do the like: by which means the
Plantation had a good quantity of Provisions.

This Summer they built a Fort with good Timber, both strong and comely, which
was of good defense, made with a flat Roof, and Battlements; on which Fort
their Ordnance were mounted, and where they kept constant Watch, especially in
time of danger: It served them also for a Meeting House, and was fitted
accordingly for that use. It was a great Work for them to do in their weakness,
and times of want; but the danger of the time required it, there being
continual rumors of the Indians, and fears of their rising against them,
especially the Narrhagansets; and also the hearing of that great and sad
Massacre in Virginia abovenamed.

It may not here be omitted, that notwithstanding all their great pains and
industry, and the great hopes they had of a large Crop, the Lord seemed to
threaten them with more and sorer Famine by a great Drought, which continued
from the third week in May, until the middle of July, without any Rain, and
with great heat of Weather for the most part, insomuch as their Corn began to
wither away, although it was planted with Fish, according to their usual manner
in those times; yet at length it began to languish sore, and some of the dryer
grounds was parched like withered Hay, part whereof was never recovered. Upon
which they set apart a so^^mn Day of Humiliation, to seek the Lord by humble
and servent Prayer in this great distress: and he was pleased to give them a
gracious and speedy answer, both to their own and the Indians admiration that
lived amongst them; for all the morning, and greatest part of the day, it was
clear weather, and very hot, and not a Cloud nor any sign of Rain to be seen,
yet toward evening it began to overcast, and shortly after to Rain, with such
sweet and gentle showers, as gave them cause of rejoicing and blessing God: it
came without either Wind or Thunder, or any violence, and by degrees in that
abundance, as that the Earth was thoroughly wet, and soaked therewith, which did
so apparently revive and quicken the decayed Corn and other Fruits, as was
wonderful, and made the Indians astonished to behold. A little before the Lord
sent this Rain of Liberalities upon his people, one of them having occasion to
go to the house of the aforementioned Hobamak the Indian, he the said (...) person
that made this Relation is still surviving and a principal man in the
Jurisdiction of Newr Plymouth.
Hobamak said unto him, I am much troubled for the English, for I am afraid
they will lose all their Corn by the Drought, and so they will be all starved;
as for the Indians, they can shift better then the English, for they can get
Fish to help themselves. But afterward the same man having occasion to go
again to his house, He said to him, Now I see that the English-mans God is a
good God, for he has heard you, and sent you Rain, and that without Storms,
and Tempests, and Thunder, which usually we have with our Rain, which breaks
down our Corn, but your stands whole and good still; surely your God is a good
God: or with words to the like effect.

And after this gracious return of Prayers in this so seasonable a blessing of
the Rain, the Lord sent them such seasonable showers, with interchange of warm
weather, as (through his blessing) caused in its time a fruitful and liberal
Harvest, to their great Comfort and Rejoicing: for which Mercy, in time
convenient, they also solemnized a Day of Thanksgiving unto the Lord.

Now the welcome Harvest approached, in the which all had some refreshment, but
it arose but to a little in comparison of a whole ye^^^ supply; partly by
reason they were not ye^ well acquai^^^ with the manner of the Husbandry of the
Indi (...) no other) and also their many other Employments; but chiefly their
weakness for want of food, so as to appearance Famine was like to ensue, if not
some way prevented: Markets there was none to go unto, but only the Indians;
but they had no Trading-stuff. But behold now another Another good providence
of God tending to their relief.
Providence of God; A Ship came into the Harbor, one Captain Jones being chief
in her, set out by some Merchants to discover all the Harbors between Cape Cod
and Virginia, and to Trade along the Coast. This Ship had store of English
Beads, (which were then good trade) and some Knives, but would sell none but at
dear rates, and also a good quantity together; yet they were glad of the
occasion, and fain to buy at any rate: they were fain to give after the rate of
Cent. per Cent. if not more, and yet pay away Coat-Beaver at three shillings
per pound. By this means they were fitted again to trade for Beaver and other
things, and so procured what Corn they could.

But here let me take liberty to make a little digression: There was in the
Ship sent by Mr. Weston forenamed (in which his Men came) a Gentleman named
Mr. John Porey, he had been Secretary in Virginia, and was now going home
Passenger in this Ship. After his departure he wrote a Letter to the Governor
of Plymouth, in the Postscript whereof he has these expressions following:

To your self and Mr. Brewster I must humbly acknowledge my self many ways
indebted, whose Books I would have you think very well bestowed, who esteems
them such Jewels. My haste would not suffer me to remember, much less to beg
Mr. Ainsworths elaborate Work on the five Books of Moses; both his and Mr.
Robinsons do highly commend the Authors, as being most conversant in the
Scriptures of all others: and what good who knows it may please God to work by
them through my hands, though most unworthy, who find such high content in
them. God have you all in his keeping.

Your unfeigned and firm Friend, JOHN POREY.
August 28. 1622.

These things I here insert, partly for the honors sake of the Authors memory,
which this Gentleman does so ingenuously acknowledge, and also the credit and
good that he procured unto the Plantation of Plymouth after his return, and
that amongst those of no mean Rank. But to return.

Mr. Westons people forenamed, who were now seated in the Bay of the
Massachusetts, at a place called by the Indians Wesagusquaset, Now by the
English called Weymouth.
and by disorder (as it seemed) had made havoc of their Provision, they began
now to conceive that want would come upon them; and hearing that their
Neighbors at Plymouth had bought Trading-stuff, as aforesaid, and intended to
Trade for Corn, they wrote to the Governor, and desired that they might join
with them, and they would employ their small Ship in this service; and also
requested to lend or sell them so much of their Trading-stuff as their part
might come to: which was agreed unto on equal terms; so they went out in the
Expedition, with an intention to go about Cape Cod to the Southwards, but
meeting with cross Winds, and other Crosses, went in at Mannamoik, where the
aforesaid Squanto, being their Guide and Interpreter, fell sick, and Squanto's
Death.
within a few days died: A little before his death, he desired the Governor
of Plymouth (who then was there) to pray for him, that he might go to the
English-mans God in Heaven; and bequeathed diverse of his things to sundry of
his English Friends, as Remembrances of his love: of whom they had a great loss.

Here they got a considerable quantity of Corn, and so returned. After these
things John Sanaers, who was left chief over Mr. Westons men at Wesagusquaset,
in the Month of February sent a Messenger, showing the great wants they were
fallen into, and would have borrowed Corn of the Indians, but they would lend
him none; and desired advice whether he might take it from them by force to
(...) his men, until return from the Eastward, whither he was now going: But
the Governor and the rest dissuaded him by all means from it, for it might so
exasperate the Indians, as might endanger their safety, and all of them might
smart for it: for they had already heard how they had wronged the Indians, by
stealing their Corn, and c. so as the Natives were much incensed against them:
yea, so base were some of their own Company, as they went and told the Indians,
that their governor was purposed to come and take their Corn by force, which
with other things made them enter into a Conspiracy against the English. And
herewith I end the Relation of the most Remarkable Passages of Gods Providence
toward the first Planters, which fell out in this Year.

1623.
MR. Westons people forenamed, notwithstanding all helps they could procure
for supply of Provisions, fell into great Extremity, which was occasioned by
their (...) expense while they had it, or could get it; and after they came
into want, many sold away their Clothes and Bed-coverings; others were so base
as they became servants to the Indians, and would cut them Wood, and fetch them
Water for a Cap full of Corn; others fell to stealing both night and day from
the Indians, of which they grievously complained. In the end they came to that
misery, that some starved and died with hunger; and one in gathering of
Shellfish was so weak, as he stuck fast in the mud, and was found dead in the
place; and most of them left their Dwellings, and were scattered up and down in
the Woods by the Waterside, where they could find Ground-nuts and Clams, here
six, and there ten, by which their carriages they became contemned and scorned
of the Indians, insomuch as they began greatly to insult over them in a most
insolent manner, so as if they had set on such Victuals as they had gotten to
dress it, when it was ready the Indians would come and eat it up: and when
Night came, when as possibly some of them had a sorry Blanket, or such like, to
lap themselves in, the Indians would take it, and let the other lie all night
in the cold, so as their condition was very lamentable; and in the end they
were fain to hang one of their Company, whom they could not reclaim from
stealing, to give the Indians content.

Whiles things went on in this manner with them, the Governor and People of
Plymouth had notice that the Sachem Massasoiet their Friend was sick, and near
unto death, and they sent to visit him, and sent him some comfortable things,
which gave him content, and was a means of his recovery: Upon which occasion he
discovered the Conspiracy of these Indians, how they were resolved to cut off
Mr. Westons Company, for the continual Injuries they had done them, and would
now take opportunity of their weakness, and do it; and for that end had
conspired with other Indians their Neighbors there abouts: and thinking the
People here would revenge their death, they therefore thought to do the like by
them, therefore to prevent it, and that speedily, by taking some of the chief
of them before it was too late, for he assured them of the truth thereof.

This did much trouble them, and they took it into serious consideration, and
found upon Examination, and other Evidences to give light thereinto, That the
matter was really so as the said Sachem had told them. In the mean time came an
This man's name was Phinehas Pratt, who has penned the particular of his
perilous Journey, and some other things relating to this Tragedy.
Englishman from the Massachusetts, from the said Company in misery, as has
been above-related, with a small pack at his back; and although he knew not a
foot of the way, yet he got safe hither, but lost his way, which was well for
him, for he was pursued by two Indians, who by Gods Providence missed of him by
that means; and he related how all things stood with them there, and that he
durst stay no longer, for he apprehended by what he observed they would be all
slain ere long. This made them make the more haste, and they dispatched a Boat
away with some men under the conduct of Captain Standish, who found them in a
miserable condition; out of which he rescued them, and helped them to some
relief, cut off some of the chief Conspirators against them, and according to
his Order offered to bring them all to Plymouth, to be there until Mr. Weston
came, or some other way should be presented for their help: they thanked him
and the rest, but they rather desired that he would help them with some Corn,
and they would go with their small Ship to the Eastward, to look out for a way
for themselves, either to have relief by meeting with Mr. Weston, or if not to
work with the Fishermen for their supply, and their passage for England: so
they shipped what they had of any worth, and he helped them with as much Corn
as he could, and saw them out of the Bay under sail, and so came home, not
taking the worth of a penny of any of them.

This was the end of these that sometimes boasted of their strength, being all
able, lusty men; and what they would do and bring to pass, in comparison of the
people at Plymouth who had many Women and Children, and weak ones; and said at
their first arrival, when they saw the wants at Plymouth, That they Here see
the affect of Pride and (...) would take another course, and not fall into such
a condition as this simple people were come to: but a man's way is not in his
own power, God can make the weak to stand: Let him that thinks he stands
(in such respect as well as other) take heed left he fall.

Shortly after Mr. Weston came over with some of the Fishermen, where he heard
of the Ruin of his Plantation, and got a Boat, and with a man or two came to
see how things were; but by the way (for want of skill) in a Storm he cast away
his Boat in the bottom of the Bay, between Merrimack and Pas^ataqua, and
hardly escaped with life; and afterward fell into the hands of the Indians,
who pillaged him of all that he had saved from the Sea, and stripped him of all
his Clothes to his Shirt. At last he got to Pas^ataqua, and borrowed a Suit of
Clothes, and got means and came to Plymouth. A strange alteration there was in
him, to such as had seen and known him in his former flourishing condition; so
uncertain are all things of this uncertain world.

But to return to the state and condition of the Planters at Plymouth, all this
while no supply heard of, so they began to think how they might raise as much
corn as they (...) as they might not languish in misery as formerly they had
done, and at the present they did, and it was thought the best way, and
accordingly given way unto, that every one should plant Corn for his own
particular, and in that regard provide for themselves, and in other respects
continue the general course and way as before: and so they ranged all their
youth under some family, and set upon such a course, which had good success,
for it made all hands very industrious, so as much Corn was planted.

This course being settled, by that time all their Corn was planted, all their
victuals was spent, and they were only to rest on Gods providence; many times
at night, not knowing where to have any thing to sustain nature the next day,
and so (as one well observed) had need to pray that God would give them their
daily bread, above all people in the world; yet they bare those wants with
great patience and ala^rity of spirit, and that for so long a time as the most
part of two years.

Which brings to mind what Peter Martyr writes in magnifying (...) first
Decade, p. 203.
of the Spaniards; They (said he) led a miserable life for five days together,
with parched grain of Maize only, and that not to sati^ty; and then concludes,
that such pains, such labors, he thought none living, which is not a Spaniard,
could have endured.

But alas, those men when they had Maize (that is Indian Corn) they thought it
as good as a feast; and wanted not only for five days together, but sometimes
for two or three months together, and neither had bread, nor any kind of corn.

Indeed in another place in his second Decade page 94. He mentions how others
of them were worse put to it, where they were ^aint to eat Dogs, Toads and dead
Men, and so almost all of them (...). From these extremities the Lord in his
goodness preserved both their lives and healths, let his Holy Name have the
praise; yet let me here make use of his conclusion, which in some sort may be
applied to this people; That with their miseries they opened a way to those new
lands: and after storms with what case other men came to inhabit in them, in
respect of the calamities these men suffered; so as they seemed to go to a
bride feast where all things are provided for them.

They having one boat left, and she none of the best, with a net which they
bought, improved them for the taking of Basse, which proved a good help to
them, and when those failed they were fain all hands to go dig shellfish out
of the sands for their living; in the winter season ground-nuts and fowl was
the principal of their refreshing, until God sent more settled and suitable
supplies, by his blessing upon their industry.

At length they received some letters from the adventurers, which gave them
intelligence of a ship set out, to come hither unto Plymouth, named the
Parragon; This ship was bought by Mr. John Pierce, and set out on his own
charge, upon hopes of great matters; the passengers and goods, the Company sent
in her he took in for freight, for which they agreed with him to be delivered
here: this was he in whose name their first Patent was taken, for this place
where Plymouth is, by reason of acquaintance and some alliance that some of
their friends had with him, but his name was only used in trust; but when he
saw they were here hopefully seated, and by the success God gave them, had
obtained the favor of the Council of New England, he goes and sues to the said
Council for another Patent of much larger extent in their names, which was
easily obtained, but he meant to keep it to himself, and to allow them what he
pleased to hold of him as tenants, and sue to his Courts as ^hief Lord: but the
Lord marvelously crossed him in his proceedings; for when his ship abovenamed
se^ out from the Thames, she sprang a leak by that time she got to the Downs,
and also by reason of a chop that accidentally be^el one of her Cables, it
brake in a stress of wind while she there rode, and was in danger to have bin
driven on the sands, and thereupon was constrained to return back to London,
and there arrived in fourteen days after, and was haled up into the Dock, and
an hundred pound more bestowed on her to mend her leaks and bruifes, which she
received in the aforesaid storm; and when she was again fitted for the voyage,
he pestered his ship, and takes in more passengers, and those some of them not
very good, to help to bear his losses, and sets out the second time; and when
he was half way or thereabouts to New England was forced back again by an
extreme tempest, wherein the goodness and mercy of God appeared in their
preservation, being one hundred and nine souls. This ship suffered the greatest
extremity at sea, at her second setting forth, as is seldom the like heard of;
It was about the middle of February that the storm began, and it continued for
the most part of fourteen days, but for two or three days and nights together
in most violent extremity: at the beginning of the storm, their boat being
above-decks, was thrown overboard; they spent their Mainmast, their
Roundhouse This Relation was make by Mr. William Pierce the Master of the said
ship, and some of the passengers of good credit.
was beaten off with the storm, and all the upper works of their ship: he that
stood to give direction, for the guiding of her before the sea, was made fast,
to prevent his washing overboard, and the seas did so over-rake them, as that
many times those upon the deck, knew not whether they were within-board or
without; and by her extreme leaking, being a very rotten ship, and the storm
increasing, she was once very near foundering in the sea, so as they thought
she would never rise again: Notwithstanding the Lord was pleased of his great
mercy to preserve them; and after great weather-beating and extraordinary
danger, they arrived safe at Portsmouth in Hampshire, to the wonderment of all
that beheld in what condition they were, and heard what they had endured.

Upon the return of the said Mr. John Pierce for England; (he being personally
in this his ship in the so sad storm) the other Merchant Adventurers, got him
to assign over the grandPatent to the Company, which he had taken in his own
Name, and made quite void their former Patent.

About the latter end of June, came in a ship at Plymouth with This was the
ship called the Paragon aforesaid.
Captain Francis West, who had a Commission to be Admiral of New England, to
restrain Interlopers, and such fishing ships as came to fish and trade without
license from the Council of New England, for which they should pay a great sum
of money; but he could do no good of them, for they were too strong for him,
and he found the fishermen to be refractory, and their owners upon complaint
made to the Parliament, procured an order, that fishing should be free. He told
the Governor of Plymouth that they spoke with a ship at sea, and were on board
her, that was coming to the said Plantation of Plymouth, in which were sundry
passengers, and they marvelled she was not arrived, fearing some miscarriage;
for they lost her in a storm that fell shortly after they had been on board:
which relation filled them full of fears, yet mixed with hope. The Master of
this ship had two Hogsheads of Pease to sell, but seeing their wants, held them
at Nine pounds sterling an Hogshead, and under Eight he would not take, and yet
would have Beaver at an under-rate; but they told him they had lived so long
without, and would do still, rather then give so unreasonably: so the said Ship
went from Plymouth to Virginia.

About fourteen days after come in the Ship called The Ann, whereof Mr.
William Pierce was Master: two of the principal Passengers that came in this
Ship were Mr. Timothy Hatherly and Mr. George Morton; the former, viz. Mr.
Timothy Hatherly, soon after his arrivel met with some cross Providence by the
burning of his House, whereby he was much impoverished, and much discouraged,
and returned the Winter following for England: and afterward the Lord was
pleased to renew his Estate, and he came again into New England, and proved a
very profitable and beneficial Instrument both in Church and Commonwealth,
being one of the first beginners, and a good Instrument to uphold the Church
and Town of Situate; and also served God and the Jurisdiction of Plymouth in
the place of Magistracy, and retained his Integrity in the Profession of the
ways of Christ unto old Age; still surviving at the penning hereof.

The latter of the two forenamed, viz. Mr. George Morton, was a pious gracious
Servant of God, and very faithful in whatsoever public Employment he was
betrusted withal, and an unseigned well-willer, and according to his Sphere
and Condition, a suitable Promoter of the Common Good and Growth of the
Plantation of New Plymouth, laboring to still the Discontents that sometimes
would arise amongst some spirits, by occasion of the Difficulties of these new
beginnings: but it pleased God to put a period to his days soon after his
arrival in New England, not surviving a full year after his coming ashore. With
much comfort and peace he fell asleep in the Lord in the Month of June, Anno
1624.

About ten days after the arrival of the Ship called The Ann abovenamed,
there came in another small Ship of about forty four Tun, named the James, Mr.
Bridges being Master thereof; which said Ship, the Ann had lost at Sea by
reason of foul Weather: she was a fine new Vessel, built to stay in the
Country. One of the principal Passengers that came in her was Mr. John Jenny,
who was a godly, though otherwise a plain man, yet singular for publickness of
spirit, setting himself to seek and promote the Common Good of the Plantation
of NewPlimouth; who spent not only his part of this Ship (being part Owner
thereof) in the general Concernment of the Plantation, but also afterward was
always a Leading-man in promoting the general Interest of this Colony: He
lived many years in New England, and fell asleep in the Lord Anno 1644. In the
two Ships last named, came over many other persons besides those before
recited, who proved of good use in their places.

These Passengers, seeing the low and poor condition of those that were here
before them, were much daunted and dismayed, and according to their diverse
humors, were diversely affected. Some wished themselves in England again;
others fell on weeping, fancying their own misery in what they saw in others;
other-some pitying the distress they saw their Friends had been long in, and
still were under. In a word, all were full of sadness; only some of their old
Friends rejoiced to see them, and that it was no worse with them, for they
could not expect it should be better, and now hoped they should enjoy better
days together. And truly it was no marvel they should be thus affected, for
they were in a very low condition, both in respect of Food and Clothing at that
time.

To consider seriously how sadly the Scripture speaks of the Famine in Jacobs
time, when he said to his Sons, Go, buy us food, that we may live and not die;
and that the Famine was great and heavy in the Land, and yet they had great
Herds, and store of Cattle of sundry kinds, which besides their flesh, must
needs produce other useful benefits for food, and yet it was accounted a fore
affliction: But the misery of the Planters at Plymouth at the first beginning,
must needs be very great therefore, who not only wanted the staff of Bread,
but all the benefits of Cattle, and had no Egypt to go to, but God fed them out
of the Sea for the most part: so wonderful is his powerful Providence over his
in all Ages: for his Mercy endures for ever.

About the middle of September arrived Captain Robert Gorges in the Bay of the
Massachusetts, with sundry Passengers and Families, intended there to begin a
Plantation, and pitched upon that place which Mr. Weston forenamed had
forsaken. He had a Commission from the Council of New England to be General
Governor of the Country: and they appointed for his Council and Assistants,
Captain Francis West the aforesaid Admiral, Christopher L^v^t Esquire and the
Governor of Plymouth for the time being: Also they gave him Authority to
Choose such other as he should find fit. Also they gave by their Commission
fall Power to him and his Assistants, or any there of (...) (whereof himself
was always to be one) To do and execute what to them should seem good, in all
Cases, Capital, Criminal, and Civil; with diverse other Instructions: Of which,
and his Commission, it pleased him to suffer the Governor of Plymouth to take
a Copy.

He meeting with the aforesaid Mr. Weston at Plymouth, called him before him
and some other of the Assistants, with the Governor of Plymouth aforesaid, and
charged him with the ill carriage of his Men at the Massachusetts, by which
means the peace of the Country was disturbed, and himself and the people which
he had brought over to plant in that Bay, thereby much prejudiced. To which the
said Weston easily answered, That what was done in that behalf, was done in his
absence, and might have befallen any man. He left them sufficiently provided,
and conceived they would have been well governed; and for any error committed,
he had sufficiently smarted.

The said Mr. Tho: Weston was a man of parts, and a Merchant of good account in
London Sometime after these Passages he went for England, and died in the City
of Bristol; he proved but a staff of Reed to the Plantation of Plymouth.
Another particular was, An abuse done to his father Sir Ferdinando Gorges, and
to the State. The thing was this: He used him and others of the Council of
New England, to procure him a License for the Transporting of many great Pieces
of Ordnance for New England, pretending great Fortification here in the
Country; for which when he had obtained, he sold them beyond Sea for his
private profit: At which the State was much offended, and his Father suffered a
shrewd check, and he had Order to apprehend him.

The said Weston excused it as well as he could, but could not wholly deny it:
but after much speech about it, by the Mediation of the Governor of Plymouth,
and some other Friends, the said Captain Gorges was inclined to gentleness,
(though he apprehended the abuse of his Father deeply) which when the said
Weston perceived, he grew the more presumptuous, and gave such cutting and
provoking speeches, as made the said Captain rise up in great indignation and
distemper, vowing, That he would either curb him, or send him home for England:
At which the said Weston was daunted, and came privately to the Governor of
Plymouth, to know whether they would suffer him to send him for England? It was
answered him. They could not hinder it: and much blamed him, that after they
had pacified things, he should thus break out by his own folly and rashness,
and bring trouble upon himself and others. He confessed it was his passion, and
prayed the Governor aforesaid to entreat for him, and procure a pacification
for him, if he could: the which at last he did obtain with much difficulty. So
he was called again, and the said Captain Gorges was content to take his own
Bond to be ready to to make further answer, when either he or the Lords of the
Council should send for him; and at last he took only his own Word, and so
there was a friendly parting on all hands.

Soon after this, the said Captain Gorges took his leave, and went to the
Massachusetts by land, being very thankful for his kind Entertainment. His Ship
stayed at Plymouth, and fitted for to go to Virginia, having some Passengers to
deliver there: and with her returned sundry of those from Plymouth, which came
over on their particular account; some out of discontent and dislike of the
Country, and others by reason of Fire that burnt their Houses and all their
Provisions, so as they were necessitated thereunto. This Fire was by some of
the Seamen, This was on the fifth of November 1624.
that were Roystering in an House where it first began, making a great Fire,
the weather being cold, which brake out of the Chimney into the Thatch, and
burnt three Houses, and consumed all their Goods and Provisions. The House in
which it began, was right against their Storehouse at Plymouth, which they had
much ado to save, in which was the Common Store of the Provisions of the
Plantation, which had it been lost, the same had been overthrown: but through
Gods mercy it was saved, by the diligence of the people, and care of the
Governor and those about him. Some would have had the Goods thrown out, but if
they had, there would have been much lost by the rude Company belonging to the
two forenamed Ships, which were almost all on shore at this time; but a trusty
Company were placed within, as well as such as were meanwhile employed in
quenching the Fire without, that if necessity required they might have them all
out with speed: for they suspected some malicious dealing, if not plain
Treachery; and whether it was only suspected or no, God knows: but this is
certain, that when the Tumult was greatest, there was a voice heard (but from
whence it came is uncertain) that bade them look well about them, for all were
not friends that were then about them; and soon after, when the vehemence of
the A very remarkable Preservation.
Fire was over, smoke was seen to arise within a Shed that was joined to the
end of the aforesaid Storehouse, which was wattled up with boughs, in the
withered leaves whereof the fire being kindled, which some running to quench,
found a long Firebrand of about an Ell long, lying under the wall on the
inside, which could not come thither by casualty, but must be laid there by
some hand, in the judgment of all that saw it. But God kept them from this
danger, whatever might be intended.

But to return again to speak something of the aforesaid Captain Gorges, after
he had been at the Eastward and expedited some occasions there, he and some
that depended upon him returned for England, having scarcely saluted the
Country in his Government, finding the state of things not to answer his
quality and condition; his people dispersed themselves, some went for England,
others for Virginia, some few remained, and were helped with supplies from
Plymouth: amongst the rest, the said Captain brought over a Minister with him,
one Mr. Morrel, who returned for England about a year after him, he took ship
at Plymouth, and had a certain power and authority of superintendency over
other Churches granted him, and instructions for that end; but he never showed
it, or made any use of it, but only spoke of it to some of Plymouth at his
going away. This was in effect the end of the second Plantation, in the
aforenamed place called Wesagusquaset.

There were also some scattering beginnings made in other places, as at
Pascataqua, by Mr. David Thompson, and at Monhegin, and some other places, by
sundry others.

1624.
THe time of new Election of Officers being come for this year at Plymouth, the
number of their people being increased, and their troubles and occasions
therewith; the Governor desired them to change the persons, as well as renew
the Election, and also to add more Assistants to the Governor for help and
counsel, and the better carrying on of public affairs, showing that it was
necessary it should so be; for if it were any honor or benefit, it was fit
that others should be made partakers of it; if it was a burden (as doubtless it
was) it was but equal that others should help to bear it, and that this was the
end of yearly Elections.

The conclusion was, that whereas there was before but one Assistant, they now
chose five, giving the Governor a double voice; and afterward they increased
them to seven, which course has continued in that Colony until this day.

In the month of March, in this year Mr. Edward Winslow arrived at Plymouth in
New England, having bin employed as agent for that Plantation, on sundry
occasions, with the Merchant Adventurers in England, who brought a considerable
supply with him, the ship being bound on a fishing voyage; and with him came
Mr. John Lyford a Minister, which was sent over by some of the Adventurers.

There came over likewise in this ship three Heifers and a Bull, The first Neat
Cattle that came to N. E.
which was the first Neat Cattle that came into New England.

The aforesaid John Lyford, when he came first on shore, saluted them of the
Plantation of Plymouth with that reverence and humility, as is seldom to be
seen; and indeed made them ashamed, he so bowed and cringed unto them, and
would have kissed their hands if they would have suffered him: yea he wept and
shed many tears, blessing God that had brought him to see their faces; and
admiring the things they had done in their wants, as if he had been made all of
love, and the humblest person in the World: but in the end proved more like
those Psalm 10.10.
mentioned by the Psalmist, that crouched and bowed, that heaps of the poor may
fall by them: or like unto dissembling Ishma^, Jer. 41.6.
who when he had slain Gedaliah, went out weeping, and met those that were
coming to offer Incense in the house of the Lord, saying, Come to Gedaliah,
when he meant to slay them. They gave him the best entertainment they could, in
all simplicity, and as their Governor had used in all weighty affairs, to
consult with their Elder Mr. Brewster, together with his Assistants; so now he
called Mr. Lyford also on such like occasions: after some short time, he
desired to join himself a member to their Church, and was accordingly received;
he made a large confession of his Faith, and an acknowledgement of his former
disorderly walking, and his being entangled with many Corruptions, which had
bin a burden to his Conscience, and blessed God for this opportunity of freedom
and liberty, with many more such like expressions; in some short time he fell
into acquaintance with Mr. John Oldham, who was a copartner with him in his
after courses; not long after, both Oldham and he grew very perverse, and
showed a spirit of great malignancy, drawing as many into a faction as they
could: were they never so vile or profane, they did nourish and abet them in
all their doings, so they would but cleave to them, and speak against the
Church: so as there was nothing but private meetings and whisperings amongst
them, they feeding themselves and others, with what they should bring to pass
in England by the faction of their That is, some at the Adventurers, who proved
in the issue (...) to the Plantation.
friends there; which brought others as well as themselves into a fools
Paradise, yet they could not carry so closely, but both much of their doings
and sayings were discovered, although outwardly they set a fair face of things.

At length, when the Ship he came in was ready to return for England, and it
was observed that Lyford was long in writing, and sent many Letters, and could
not forbear to communicate to his Intimates such things as made them laugh in
their sleeves, and thought he had done their errand sufficiently: The Governor
and some of his friends knowing how things stood in reference to some known
adversaries in England, and what hurt these things might do, took a boat and
went out with the ship, a league or two to sea, and called for all Lyfords and
Oldhams Letters, Mr. William Pierce being Master of the ship, and knew well
their evil dealings, (both in England and here) afforded them all the
assistance he could; he found about twenty of Lyford^; Letters, many of them
large, and full of slanders and false accusations, tending not only to their
prejudice, but ruin and utter subversion; most of them they let pass, only
took copies of them, but some of the most material, they sent true copies of
them and kept the originals, left he should deny them, and that they might
produce his own hand against him; amongst these Letters they found the copies
of two Letters, which were sent in a Letter of his to Mr. John Pemberton a
Minister, and a great opposite to the Plantation; these two Letters of which he
took the copies, were the one of them written by a Gentleman in England to Mr.
Brewster here, the other by Mr. Winslow to Mr. Robinson in Holland; at his
coming away, as the ship lay at Gravesend, they lying sealed in the great
Cabin, whiles Mr. Winslow was busy about the affairs of the ship, this fly
Merchant opens them, takes copies of them, and seals them up again, and not
only seals the copies of them thus, To his Friend and their Adversary, but
adds thereto in the Margent many scurrilous and flouting Annotations. In the
evening the Governor returned, and they were somewhat blank at it; but after
some weeks when they heard nothing, they then were as brisk as ever, thinking
nothing had been known, but all was gone current, and that the Governor went
out but to dispatch his own Letters.

The reason why the Governor and the rest concealed these things, was to let
things ripen, that they might the better discover their intents, and see who
were their adherents; because among the rest, they found a Letter of one of
their confederates, in which was written, that Mr. Oldham, and Mr. Lyford
intended a reformation in Church and Commonwealth, and as soon as the ship was
gone they intended to join together and have the Sacrament; few of Oldhams
Letters were found in the aforesaid search, being so bad a Scribe as his hand
was scarce legible, yet he was as deep in the mischief as the other; and
thinking they were now strong enough, they began to pick quarrels at every
thing. Oldham being called to watch (according to order) refuses to come, fell
out with the Captain, called him Rascal, and beggarly Rascal, and resisted
him, and drew his knife at him, though he offered him no wrong, nor gave him
any ill terms, but with all fairness required him to do his duty; the Governor
hearing the tumult, sent to quiet it; but he ranted with great fury, and called
them all Traitors: but being committed to Prison, after a while he came to
himself, and with some slight punishment was let go upon his behavior for
further Censure; but to cut things short, at length it grew to this issue, that
Lyford with his accomplices, without either speaking one word either to the
Governor, Church or Elder, withdrew themselves, and set up a public meeting
apart on the Lord's Day, with sundry such insolent carriages too long here to
relate, beginning more publicly to act that which they had been long plotting.

It was now thought high time to prevent further mischief, to call them to
account; so the Governor called a Court, and summoned the whole company
togher, and they charged Lyford and Oldham with such things as they were guilty
of respecting the premises; but they were stiff, and stood resolutely upon the
denial of most things, and required proof: they first alleged what was writ,
compared with their practices here; that it was evident they joined in plotting
against them, and disturbed their peace in their Civil and Church State, which
was most injurious, for both they and all the world knew they came hither to
enjoy the liberty of their Consciences, in the free use of Gods Ordinances, and
for that end had ventured their lives, and passed through so much hardship
hitherto, and they and their friends had born the charge of these beginnings,
which was not small, and that he ( viz.) Lyford, for his part was sent over on
this charge, and both he and his great family was maintained on the same; and
for him to plot against them, and seek their ruin, was most unjust and
persideous.

But Lyford denied, and made strange of sundry things laid to his charge. Then
his Letters were produced, at which he was struck mute. Oldham began to be
furious, and to rage, because they had intercepted their Letters, provoked the
people to Mutiny in such words as these; My Masters, where are your hearts? now
show your courage: you have often complained to me so and so; now is the time,
if you will do any thing, I will stand by you, and c. thinking that every one
knowing his humor that had fooled and flattered him, or otherwise, or that in
their Discontent uttered any thing unto him, would now side with him in open
Rebellion: But he was deceived, for not a man opened his mouth, all were silent.

Then the Governor took pains in Convicting Lyford of his Hypocrisy and
Treachery, in abusing his friends, in taking Copies of their Letters in an
underhand way, and sending them abroad to their disgrace, and c. and produced
them, and his own Letters under his own Hand, which he could not deny, and
caused them to be read before all the people; at which all his Consedrates were
blank, and had not a word to say. But after awhile he began to say, That sundry
had made some Complaints unto him, and informed him of diverse things: which
being there present, and the particulars named to them, they denied.

Then they dealt with him about his Dissembling in the Church, and that he
professed to concur with them in all things, and what a large Confession he had
made at his admittance; and that he held not himself a Minister, till he had a
new Calling, and c. and yet now he contested against them, and drew a Company
apart, and sequestered himself, and would go about to administer the Sacraments
by his former Calling, without ever acquainting them with it. In conclusion he
was fully convicted, and burst out into tears, and confessed be feared he was a
Reprobate, his sins were so great that he doubted that God would not pardon
them, he was unfavoury salt and c. and that he had so wronged them, as he could
never make them amends; confessing all he had written against them was false
and naught, both for matter and manner: And all this he did with as much
fullness as words and tears could express.

After their Trial and Conviction, the Court sentenced them to be expelled the
Plantation; John Oldham presently to depart, though his Wife and Family h^d
d^^berty to stay all Winter or longer, until he could make provision to remove
them comfortably. Lyford had liberty to stay six Months; it was with some eye
to his release, if he carried himself well in the mean time, and that his
Repentance proved sound. Lyford acknowledged his Censure was far less then he
deserved, and afterward he confessed his sin publicly in the Church with
tears, more largely then before. I shall here relate it as I find it penned by
some who took it from his own mouth as himself uttered it.

Acknowledging, That he had done very evil, and slanderously abused them; and
thinking most of the people would take part with him, he thought to have
carried all by violence and strong hand against them; and that God might justly
lay innocent blood to his charge, for he knew not what hurt might have come by
these his Writings, and blessed God that they were stayed; and that he spared
not to take knowledge from any of any evil that was spoken, but shut his eyes
and ears against all the good; and that if God should make him a Vagabond in
the earth, as was Cain, it was but just: and he confessed three things to be
the causes of this his doings, Pride, Vainglory, and Self-love: amplifying
these Heads with many other expressions in the particulars of them, so as they
began to conceive good thoughts of him upon his Repentance, and admitted him to
teach amongst them as before; yea sundry tenderhearted persons amongst them
were so taken with his signs of Sorrow and Repentance, as they professed they
would fall upon their knees to have his Censure remitted and released. But that
which made them all stand amazed in the end (and may do all others that shall
come to hear the same, for a rarer president can scarcely be named) was, that
after two Months time all his former Consessions, Convictions, and public
Acknowledgements, both in the presence of God and his Church, and the whole
Company, with so many Tears, and sad censures of himself, he should go again to
justify what he had done; for secretly he wrote a second Letter to the
Adventurers in The Copy of this letter is extent but too large to be here
inserted. England, in which he justified all his former Writings, save in some
things which tended to their damage.

1625.
AT the time of their Election Court, John Oldham came again amongst them; and
though it was apart of his Censure for his former Mutiny, Not to return without
leave first obtained, yet he presumed without leave at all to come, being set
on and hardened by the ill counsel of others; and not only so, but suffered
his unruly passion to run beyond the bounds and limits of all Reason and
Modesty, insomuch that some strangers that were with him were ashamed of his
outrage, and rebuked him: but all Reproofs were but as Oil to the fire, and
made the flam^ of his choler the greater. He called them all to naught in his
fury, an hundred Rebels and Traitors: but in conclusion, they Committed him
until he was tamer, and then appointed a Guard of Musketeers, which he was to
pass through, and every one was ordered to give him a blow on his Hinder-parts
with the Butt-end of his Musket, and then he was conveyed to the Waterside,
where a Boat was ready to carry him away, with this Farewell, Go and mend your
Manners.

After the removal of his Family, he fell into some straights, and about a year
after intended a Voyage to Virginia: and so it pleased God, that himself and
sundry passengers being in the Barque, they were in great danger, so as they
despaired of life, and fell to Prayer, and to Examination of their Hearts and
Consciences, and confessed such sins as most b^rthened them and the said John
Oldham did make a free and large Confession of the wrongs he had done to the
Church and People at Plymouth in many particulars; that as he had sought their
Ruin, so God had now met with him, and might destroy him; yea, he feared that
they all fared the worse for his sake: He prayed God to forgive him, and made
Vows, That if the Lord spared his life, he would become otherwise. This was
reported by some of good Credit not long since living in the Massachusetts Bay,
that were themselves partners in the same danger, which was on the Sholes of
Cape Cod.

It pleased God to spare their lives, but they lost their voyage; He was a man
of parts, but high-spirited, and extremely passionate, which marred all in
point of right improvement of them.
and in time afterward the said Mr. John Oldham carried himself fairly toward
them, and acknowledged the hand of God to be with them, and seemed to have an
honorable respect of them, and so far made his peace with them, as he had
liberty to go and come at his pleasure, and in sometime after went on trading
in a small vessel amongst the Indians, and being weakly manned, upon some
quarrel betwixt them, they ^lew him with an hatchet: this his death being one
ground of the Pequot war, of which afterward in its proper place.

The time being expired that Mr. John Lyford his Censure was to take place, he
was so far from answering their hopes by amendment, as he had doubled his evil,
as beforementioned. But first behold the hand of God concerning him, wherein
that Psalm.7.15
of the Psalmist is verified, he has made a pit and dug it, and is fallen
into the pit that he made: he thought to bring shame and disgrace upon them,
but instead of that, opens his own to all the world; for his wife who was a
prudent sober woman, taking notice of his false and deceitful carriage about
the premises, in grief of mind expressed her fears, that God would bring upon
himself and his family, some sad judgment for these and other his wicked
practices, and related that he had a Bastard by another woman, before marriage
with her, which he denied to her with an oath, but it afterward appeared to be
so: and another miscarriage of the like nature, more odiously circumstanced,
was also discovered, for which he was forced to leave Ireland; and so came
New England to be troubled with him. Being banished hence, he went first to
Nantasket, then to Salem, and after to Virginia, where he shortly after died.

I have been too tedious in my relating the plots of these wicked
Machavillians: But to conclude, the Reader may take notice, that God observed
and brought to naught their wicked devices, was a defense to the innocent, and
caught them in the snares they privily laid for them, punishing one sin by
another, until he had accomplished the freedom of his Israel, by the overthrow
of his and their enemies; for which his mercy, let his holy Name be praised for
evermore.

This storm thus blown over, yet sundry sad effects followed, for the company
of the Merchant Adventurers brake in pieces hereupon, and the greatest part
wholly deserted the Colony, but yet God took care of it; for although sundry of
them fell off and adventured no more toward the support thereof, but rather
proved manifest adversaries thereunto then otherwise: and the rest, partly
because they were grown (some of them) low in their estates, and there being
small hopes of returns to their expectations; although courteous in words and
well wishes, yet afforded little or no help after this, so that the Plantation
was fain to stand on their own legs, being indeed marvellously supported by the
Lord, for it pleased him so to bless their endeavors, as that they raised
great crops of Indian Corn (about this time) so as they had enough, and to
spare, and began to have thoughts of improving part of it in a way of trading
with the Indians, and having only two shallops, and no bigger vessels, they
laid a deck on the one of them in the midships, to preserve the corn dry from
weather, and so sent her laden with corn to a place called Kenebek, about fifty
leagues off to the Eastwards: and notwithstanding they were strangers to the
way, and place of trade, and to the people, and having no seamen to go with
them, and at that season, being the latter end of the year and drawing on to
winter; yet it pleased God to preserve them, and so to bless their endeavors,
as that they returned in safety, and with good success, it being the first
enterprise they achieved in this kind (at least) so far, and it proved an
inlet to a further trade, which was greatly beneficial to them afterward.

And here I may not omit the observable dispensation of Gods providence,
respecting his dealing with the Adventurers forementioned, in reference unto
two ships they sent unto these parts about that time, on a fishing voyage only
upon their own account, having left the Plantation to shift for themselves; one
of these ships was a small one ( viz.) the James forenamed, ^
which was well laden with good Cor fish, and in her a great quantity likewise
of Beaver and other furs, which was sent by the Plantation to the Adventurers,
and returned for England: the other ship was also laden with good dry fish, and
she also returned with her; being thus well fraighted, they went together
lovingly and joyfully away, the greater ship towing the lesser at her stern all
the way over-bound, and had such fair weather, as they never cast her off, till
they were shot deep into the English Chanel, almost within sight of Plymouth,
and yet there she was unhappily taken by a Turks-man of war, and carried into
Sally, where the Master and Men were made Slaves, and many of the Beaver-skins
were sold for four pence a piece. Thus were all their hopes dashed in this
respect, and the joyful News they went to carry home, turned into heavy
Tidings. Some thought this a Hand of God for some unkindness showed to the
Plantation, by exaction upon them in reference to a parcel of goods they a
little before had sent over to them on extreme Rates: But Gods Judgments are
unsearchable, neither ought we to be too bold therewith. But however, it shows
us the uncertainty of all humane things, and what little cause there is in
joying in them, or trusting to them.

In the bigger of these Ships Captain Miles Standish went over as Agent in the
behalf of the Plantation, in reference unto some particulars yet depending
betwixt them and the Adventurers; as also to the Honorable Council of
New England: and notwithstanding some Difficulty he met with in his occasions,
by reason of the Pestilence which was then so hot in the City of London, yet he
accomplished his business so, as he left things in a fair way for future
Composition be^wixt the said Merchant-Adventurers and the Plantation: and he
spoke also with some of the Honorable Council aforementioned, who promised all
helpfulness to the Plantation that lay in them. About this time it pleased the
Lord likewise to give them peace, health, and good success on their endeavors,
his holy Name be praised.

1626.
ABout the beginning of April, they heard of Captain Standish his arrival, and
sent a boat to fetch him home; welcome he was, but the news he brought was sad
in many regards, not only in regard of the forementioned losses which their
friends had suffered, and some of them dead of the Plague, but also that Mr.
John Robinson their Pastor was dead, which Mr. John Robinson death.
struck them with much sorrow and sadness, as they had great cause: his and
their adversaries, had been long and continually plotting, how they might
hinder his coming into New England, but now the Lord had appointed him to go a
greater journey, at less charge, to a better place.

But before I pass things concerning this Worthy Servant of Christ Mr. John
Robinson, I shall here insert the honorable testimony that Mr. William
Bradford senior has left behind him, concerning him, being greatly acquainted
with his worth and excellency.

Says he, such was the mutual love and reciprocal respect that this worthy man
had to his flock, and his flock to him, that it might be said of them, as it
was once of that famous Emperor Marcus Aurelius and the people of Rome, That
it was hard to judge whether he delighted more in having such a People, or they
in having such a Pastor. But to return.

Captain Standish likewise brought the sad news of the death of Mr. Robert
C^shman, their ancient friend, whom the Lord The death of Mr. Robert took
C^shman
took away also this year (about the same time) who was as their right hand
with their friends the Adventurers, and for diverse years had done and agitated
all their business with them to their great advantage, of whom occasionally
there has been honorable mention formerly made in this Book.

About this time they received diverse Letters from their friends at L^ya^n in
Holland, full of sad lamentation for their heavy loss by the death of their
Pastor Mr. Robinson abovenamed; and although their wills were good to come over
to their brethren in New England, yet they saw no probability of means how it
might be effected, but concluded (as it were) that all their hopes was cut off,
and many being aged, began to drop away by death. All which things before
related, being well weighed and laid together, it could not but strike them
with great perplexity, and to look humanely on the state of things as they
presented themselves at this time, it is a marvel it did not wholly discourage
and sink them, but they gathered up their spirits, and the Lord so helped them
(whose work they had in hand) as now when they were very low, they began to
rise again; and being stripped (in a manner) of all humane helps and hopes, he
brought things about otherwise in his divine Providence, so as they were not
only upheld and sustained, but their proceedings both honored and imitated by
others, as by the sequel will appear.

1627.
THis Year they sent Mr. Isaac Allerton for England, and gave him order to make
a Composition with the Adventurers, in reference unto some particulars betwixt
the Plantation and them, which Captain Standish had begun, as is before hinted,
and at the ordinary season of the year (for the expectation of ships) he
returned with some success in the business he was employed in.

Likewise this Year they began to make some distribution of Lands, having had
hitherto but to every person one Acre allowed him as to propriety, besides
their Home-steads, or Garden-plots; the reason was that they might keep
together, both for more safety and defense, and the better Improvement of the
general Employments: which condition of theirs brings to mind that which may
be read in Pl^^y of the Romans first beginnings They, (...). ^^ Chap 2.
in Romulus time, how every man contented himself with two Acres of Land, and
had no more assigned them: and Chap. 3. It was thought a great Reward to
receive at the hands of the People of Rome a Pin^e of Corn; and long after, the
greatest Present given to a Captain that had got a Victory over their Enemies,
was as much ground as he could Till in one day; and he was not accounted a
good, but a dangerous man, that would not content himself with seven Acres of
Land; as also how they did pound their Corn in Mortars, as these people were
forced to do many years before they could get a Mill.

Notwithstanding as abovesaid, so small a portion of Land served them at the
first, yet afterward for diverse Reasons moving thereunto, they were
necessitated to lay out some larger Proportions to each person; yet resolving
to keep such a mean in distribution of Lands, as should not hinder their growth
by others coming to them, and therefore accordingly allotted to every one in
each Family Twenty Acres to be laid out, five Acres in breadth by the
Waterside, and four Acres in length.

I may not omit the inserting of a particular that sell out this year, in
reference unto a Ship with many Passengers in her, and some considerable goods,
which was bound for Virginia, who had lost themselves at Sea, either by the
insufficiency of the Master, or his illness (for he was sick, and lame of the
Scurvy, so as he could but lie in the Cabbin-door and give direction, and (it
should seem) was badly assisted either with Mate or Mariners) or else the fear
of, and the unruliness of the Passengers was such, as they made them steer a
Course between the Southwest and Northwest, that they might fall with some
Land, whatever it was they cared not, for they had been six weeks at Sea and
had no Beer, nor Water, nor Wood left, but had burnt up all their empty Cask,
only one of the Company had a Hogshead of Wine or two, which was also almost
spent, so as they feared they should be starved at Sea, or consumed with
Diseases, which made them run this desperate Course. But it pleased God, that
although they came so near the Sholes of C^p^c^d, or else ran stumbling over
them in the night they knew not how, they came before a small Harbor that
lies about the middle of Mannamoi^ct Bay, to the Southward of Cape Cod, and
with a small gale of wind, and about a high water, touched upon a Bar of Sand
that lies before it, but had no hurt, the Sea being smooth so they laid out an
Anchor; but toward Evening the wind sprang up at Sea, and was so rough as
brake their Cable, and beat them over the Bar into the Harbor, where they
saved their Lives and Goods: for although with much beating they had sprung a
butt-end of a Plank, yet they soon got over, and ran upon a dry Flatt within
the Harbor close to a Beach, and at a low water got out their Goods, and were
not a little glad that they had saved their Lives. But when they had refreshed
themselves, not knowing where they were, nor what to do, were much troubled,
but soon after saw some Indians come toward them in Canooes, which made them
stand upon their guard, but when they heard some of them speak English, they
were not a little revived; especially when they heard them ask whether they
were not the Governor of Plimouths Men, or Friends, and that they would bring
them to the English houses, or carry their Letters: and when they had feasted
these Indians, and given them many gifts, they sent two men and a Letter with
them to the Governor of Plymouth, by which he had intelligence of their
condition, and took order for their supply they hoping by mending of their Ship
to recover her to go to Sea again, and accordingly did mend her; but afterward
having but bad Moring, was put on shore again, and suffered so much shipwreck
as she never got off more, but all the Company were forced to repair to
Plymouth, where they continued the best part of a year, being courteously
entertained, and so were dispersed: The greatest part of them went to Virginia,
and some remained in the Country. The chief amongst them were Mr. Fells, Mr.
Sibsey, and the Masters Name was Johnston a Scotsman.

This Year the Plantation of Plymouth received Messages The Dutch (...) trading
in these Southern parts diverse years before the English came, but they began no
plantation until after the English came, and were here seated.
. from the Dutch Plantation, sent unto them from the Governor there, written
both in Dutch and French: The sum of the Letters forementioned were, To
Congratulate the English here, taking notice of much that might engage them to
a friendly Correspondency and good Neighborhood, as, The propinquity of their
Native Country, Their long continued Friendship, and c. and desired to fall
into a way of some Commerce and Trade with them.

To which the Governor and Council of Plymouth returned answerable courteous
acceptance of their loving Propositions, respecting their good Neighborhood in
general, and particularly for Commerce: And accordingly the Dutch not long
after sent their Secretary Mr. Isaac de Rosier with Letters and goods, who laid
the foundation of a Trade that continued between them many years after, to
their mutual benefit. They also brought the English acquainted with the trading
of Wampampeag, until then little known to us, nor esteemed by us, but was
after of good valuation, and profitable. Although for the space of 20 years it
was of great esteem amongst the Natives in diverse parts of the Country, so as
it made the Indians in these parts Rich, Proud and Powerful, yet until they
had store of it, they could not attain English Ammunition, but were fain to
improve their own Artillery of Bows and Arrows: But when as they learned to
make store of Wampam, they furnished themselves with Guns, Powder and Shot,
which no Laws can restrain, by reason of the baseness of sundry unworthy
persons, both English, Dutch and French, which may turn to the ruin of many:
for hitherto the Indians of these parts had no Pieces, nor other Arms but their
Bows and Arrows and Clubs, nor of many years after; neither dur^t they fearce
handle a Gun, though out of kelter, it was a terror to them: but those Indians
to the Eastern parts which had Commerce (...) the French, got Pieces of them,
and they in the end made a common Trade of it; and in time our English
Fishermen, led with the like Covetousness, followed their example for their own
gain: but upon Complaint against them, it pleased the Kings Majesty to prohibit
the same by a strict Proclamation, Commanding that no sort of Arms or
Ammunition should by any of His Subjects be Traded with them.

1628.
THis Year died Mr. Richard Warren, who has been mentioned before in this
Book, and was an useful Instrument and during his life bare a deep share in the
Difficulties and Troubles of the first Settlement of the Plantation of
NewPlimouth.

This Gentleman's name is here occasional; used, and although he came over in
year 1625. yet (...) passages in reference to Morton fell out about this year,
and therefore referred to this place
.Whereas about three years before this time there came over one Captain
Wollaston, a man of considerable parts, and with him three or four more of some
Eminency, who brought with them a great many Servants, with Provisions, and
other Requisites for to begin a Plantation, and pitched themselves in a place
within the Massachusetts Bay, which they called afterward by their Captains
Name, Mount Wollaston; which place is since called by the Name of Braintry. And
amongst others that came with him, there was one Mr. Thomas Morton, who it
should seem had some small Adventure of his own or other men's amongst them, but
had little respect, and was slighted by the meanest Servants they kept. They
having continued some time in New England, and not finding things to answer
their Expectation, nor Profit to arise as they looked for, the said Captain
Wollaston takes a great part of the Servants, and transports them to Virginia,
and disposed of them there, and writes back to one Mr. Rasdale, one of his
chief partners, (and accounted their Merchant) to bring another part of them to
Virginia likewise, intending to put them off there, as he had done the rest;
and he with the consent of the said Rasdale, appointed one whose Name was
Filcher to be his Lieutenant, and to govern the remainder of the Plantation,
until he or Rasdale should take further order there about.

But the aforesaid Morton (having more craft then honesty) having been a
Petty-fogger at Furnivals Inn; he in the others absence watches an opportunity
(Commons being but hard among them) and got some strong drink, and other
junkets, and made them a feast, and after they were merry, he began to tell
them he would give them good Counsel: you see (faith he) that many of your
fellows are carried to Virginia, and if you stay still until Rasdales return,
you will also be carried away and sold for slaves with the rest; therefore I
would advise you to thrust out this Lieutenant Filcher, and I having a part in
the Plantation, will receive you as my partners and consociates, so may you be
free from service, and we will Converse, Plant, Trade and live together as
equals (or to the like effect) This counsel was easily See the sad Effects of
the want of good Government
. followed, so they took opportunity, and thrust Lieutenant Filcher out of
doors, and would not suffer him to come any more amongst them, but forced him
to seek bread to eat, and other necessaries amongst his neighbors, till he
could get passage for England.

After this they fell to great licentiousness of life, in all profaneness, and
the said Morton became Lord of misrule, and maintained (as it were) a school of
Atheism, and after they had got some goods into their hands, and got much by
trading with the Indians, they spent it as vainly, in quaffing and drinking
both Wine and strong Liquors, in great excess (as some have reported) Ten
pounds worth in a Morning, setting up a May Pole, drinking and dancing about
it, and frisking about it, like so many Fairies or Furies rather, yea and worse
practices, as if they had anew revived and celebrated the feast of the Romans
Goddess Flora, or the beastly practices of the mad Bacchanalians. The said
Morton likewise to show his Poetry, composed sundry Rythmes and Verses, some
tending to laciviousness, and others to the detraction and scandal of some
persons names, which he affixed to his Idle or Idol May Pole: they changed also
the name of their place, and instead of calling it Mount Wollaston, they called
it the Merry Mount, as if this jollity would have lasted always. But this
continued not long, for shortly after, that Worthy Gentleman Mr. John Endicot,
who brought over a Patent under the Broad Seal of England for the Government of
the Massachusetts, visiting these parts, caused that May Pole to be cut down,
and rebuked them for their profaneness, and admonished them to look to it that
they walked better; so the name was again changed, and called Mount Dagon.

Now to maintain this riotous Prodigality and profuse expense, the said Morton
thinking himself lawless, and hearing what gain the Fishermen made of trading
of Pieces, Powder and Shot; he as head of this confortship, began the practice
of the same in these parts: and first he taught the Indians how to use them, to
charge and discharge them, and what proportion of powder to give the Piece,
according to the size or bigness of the same, and what shot to use for Fowl,
and what for Deer: and having thus instructed them, he employed some of them to
Hunt and Fowl for him; so as they became somewhat more active in that
employment then any of the English, by reason of their swiftness of foot, and
nimbleness of body, being also quick-sighted, and by continual exercise, well
knowing the haunt of all sorts of game; so as when they saw the execution that
a Piece would do, and the benefit that might come by the same, they became very
eager after them, and would not stick to give any price they could attain to
for them; accounting their Bows and Arrows but bables in comparison of them.

And here we may take occasion to bewail the mischief which came by this wicked
man, and others like unto him; in that notwithstanding all laws, for the
restraint of selling Ammunition to the Natives, that so far base covetousness
prevailed, and does still prevail, as that the Salvages become amply furnished
with Guns, Powder, Shot, Rapiers, Pistols, and also well-skilled in repairing
of defective Arms: yea some have not spared to tell them how Gunpowder is
made, and all the materials in it, and that they are to be had in their own
Land; and would (no doubt, in case they could attain to the making of
Sait-Peter) reach them to make Powder: and what mischief may fall out unto the
English in these parts thereby, let this pestilent fellow Morton (aforenamed)
bear a great part of the blame and guilt of it to future Generations. But lest
I should hold the Reader too long in the relation of the particulars of his
vile actings; when as the English that then lived up and down about the
Massachusetts, and in other places, perceiving the sad consequences of his
trading, so as the Indians became furnished with the English Arms and
Ammunition, and expert in the improving of them, and fearing they should at one
time or another get a blow thereby; and also taking notice, that if he were let
alone in his way, they should keep no servants for him, because he would
entertain any how vile soever: Sundry of the chief of the straggling Plantations
met together, and agreed by mutual consent to send to Plymouth, who were then
of more strength to join with them, to suppress this mischief: who considering
the particulars proposed to them to join together to take some course with him,
and finding them weighty, agreed together to take some speedy course, to
preven^ (if it might be) the evil that was accrewing toward them; and resolved
first to admonish him of his wickedness respecting the premises, laying before
him the injury he did to their common safety, and that his acting concerning
the same, was against the Kings Proclamation: but he insolently persisted on in
his way, and said, the King was dead, and his displeasure with him, and
threatened them that if they came to molest him, they should look to themselves;
so that they saw there was no way but to take him by force: so they resolved to
proceed in such a way, and obtained of the Governor of Plymouth, to send
Captain Standish and some other aid with him, to take the said Morton by force,
the which accordingly was done; but they found him to stand stiffly on his
defense, having made fast his doors, armed his Consorts, set Powder and Shot
ready upon the Table; scoffed and scorned at them, and he and his Accomplices
being filled with strong drink, were desperate in their way: but he himself
coming out of doors to make a shot at Captain Standish, he stepping to him, put
by his Piece and took him, and so little hurt was done; and so he was brought
Prisoner to Plymouth, and continued in durance until an opportunity of sending
him for England, which was done at their common charge, and Letters also with
him, to the honorable Council for New England, and returned again into the
Country in some short time, with less punishment then his demerits deserved (as
was apprehended.)

The Year following he was again apprehended, and sent for England, where he
lay a considerable time in Exeter Goal: for besides his miscarriage here in
New England, he was suspected to have murdered a man that had ventured moneys
with him, when he came first into New England; and a warrant was sent over from
the Lord Chief Justice to apprehend him, by virtue whereof, he was by the
Governor of the Massachusetts sent into England, and for other of his
misdemeanors amongst them in that Government, they demolished his House, that
it might no longer be a roost for such unclean Birds: Notwithstanding he got
free in England again, and wrote an Infamous and Scurrilous Book against many
godly and chief men of the Country, full of lies and slanders, and full fraught
with profane calumnies against their Names and Persons, and the ways of God.
But to the intent I may not trouble the Reader any more with mentioning of him
in this History: In fine, sundry years after he came again into the Country,
and was imprisoned at Boston for the aforesaid Book and other things, but
denied sundry things therein, affirming his Book was adulterated. And soon
after being grown old in wickedness, at last ended his life at Pascataqua. But
I fear I have held the Reader too long about so unworthy a person, but hope it
may be useful to take notice how wickedness was beginning, and would have
further proceeded, had it not been prevented timely.

1629.
THis Year sundry Ships came out of England, and arrived at Neumkeak, where Mr.
John Endicot had chief Command; Now called Salem and by Infection that grew
amongst the Passengers at Sea, it spread also among them on shore, of which
many died, some of the Scurvy, and other of infectious Fevers. Mr. Endicot
understanding that there was one at Plymouth that had still in such Diseases,
sent thither for him; at whose Request he was sent unto them: And afterward,
acquaintance and Christian love and Correspondency came on betwixt the said
Governor, and the said Mr. Endicot; which was furthered by Congratulatory
Letters that passed betwixt each other: one whereof, because it shows the
beginning of their Christian fellowship, I shall here insert.

The Copy of a Letter from Mr. Endicot to Mr. Bradford, as follows.
Right Worshipful Sir,
I T is a thing not usual, that Servants to one Master, and A Letter from Mr.
Endicot ^ Mr. Bradford of the same Household, should be strangers; I assure you
I desire it not: nay, to speak more plainly, I cannot be so to you. Gods People
are all marked with one and the same mark, and have for the main one and the
same heart, guided by one and the same Spirit of Truth; and where this is,
there can be no discord, nay here must needs be a sweet harmony: and the same
request (with you) I make unto the Lord, that we as Christian Brethren be
united by an heavenly and un^eigned love, bending all our hearts and forces in
furthering a Work beyond our strength, with reverence and fear, fastening our
eyes always on him that is only able to direct and prosper all our ways. I
acknowledge my self much bound to you for your kind love and care in sending
Mr. Fuller amongst us, and rejoice much that I am by him satisfied touching
your judgment of the Outward Form of Gods Worship: It is (as far as I can
gather) no other then is warranted by the Evidence of Truth, and the same which
I have prof^ssed and maintained ever since the Lord in mercy revealed himself
unto me, being far from the common Report that has been spread of you
touching that particular: but Gods children must not look for less here below;
and it is a great mercy of God that he strengthens them to go through it. I
shall not need at this time to enlarge unto you, for (God willing) I purpose to
see your face shortly: in the mean time I humbly take my leave of you,
committing you to the Lords blessing and protection, and rest

Your assured loving Friend, JOHN ENDICOT.
Neumkeak, May 11. 1629

In the three Ships that came over this year to Salem in the Month of June,
besides many godly Christians, there came over three Ministers; two of them,
Mr. Skeleton and Mr. Higginson, were Non-conformists, who having suffered much
in their Native Land upon that account, they came over with a professed
intention of practicing Church-Reformation: the third Minister Mr. Bright was a
Conformist, who not agreeing in judgment with the other two, he removed to
Charlstown, where also not agreeing with those godly Christians there that were
for Reformation, after one years stay in the Country he returned for England.
But Mr. Higginson and Mr. Skeleton, in pursuance of the ends of their coming
over into this Wilderness, acquainted the Governor Mr. Endicot, and the rest
of the godly People whom they found Inhabitants of the place, and the chief of
the Passengers that came over with them, with their professed intentions, and
consulted with them about settling a Reformed Congregation; from whom they found
a general and hearty Concurrence, so that after some Conference together about
this matter, they pitched upon the 6th of August for their entering into a
solemn Covenant with God, and one another, and also for the Ordaining of their
Ministers; of which they gave notice to the Church of Plymouth (that being the
only Church that was in the Country before them) the people made choice of Mr.
Skilton for their Pastor, and Mr. Higginson for their Teacher. And accordingly
it was desired of Mr. Higginson to draw up a Confession of Faith and Covenant
in Scripture Language; which being done, was agreed upon. And because they
foresaw that this Wilderness might be looked upon as a place of Liberty, and
therefore might in time be troubled with erroneous spirits, therefore they did
put in one Article into the Confession of Faith on purpose about the Duty and
Power of the Magistrate in Matters of Religion. Thirty Copies of the foresaid
Confession of Faith and Covenant being written out for the use of thirty
persons who were to begin the Work. When the sixth of August came, it was kept
as a day of Fasting and Prayer, in which after the Sermons and Prayers of the
two Ministers, in the end of the day, the foresaid Confession of Faith and
Covenant being solemnly read, the forenamed persons did solemnly profess their
Consent thereunto: and then proceeded to the Ordaining of Mr. Skeleton Pastor,
and Mr. Higginson Teacher of the Church there. Mr. Bradford the Governor of
Plymouth, and some others with him, coming by Sea, were hindered by cross winds
that they could not be there at the beginning of the day, but they came into
the Assembly afterward, and gave them the right hand of fellowship, wishing all
prosperity, and a blessed success unto such good beginnings. After which, at
several times many others joined to the Church in the same way. The Confession
of Faith and Covenant forementioned, was acknowledged only is a Direction
pointing unto that Faith and Covenant contained in the holy Scripture, and
therefore no man was confined unto that form of words, but only to the
Substance, End and Scope of the matter contained therein: And for the
Circumstantial manner of joining to the Church, it was ordered according to the
wisdom and faithfulness of the Elders, together with the liberty and ability
of any person. Hence it was, that some were admitted by expressing their
Consent to that written Conf^ssion of Faith and Covenant; others did answer to
questions about the Principles of Religion that were publicly propounded to
them, some did present their Confession in writing; which was read for them;
and some that were able and willing, did make their Confession in their own
words and way: A due respect was also had unto the Conversations of men, viz.
that they were without Scandal. But some of the Passengers that came over at
the same time, observing that the Ministers did not at all use the Book of
Common Prayer, and that they did administer Baptism and the Lords Supper
Without the Ceremonies, and that they professed also to use Discipline in the
Congregation against scandalous persons, by a personal application of the Word
of God as the case might require, and that some that were scandalous were
denied admission into the Church, they began to raise some trouble: of these
Mr. Samuel Brown and his Brother were the chief, the one being a Lawyer, the
other a Merchant, both of them amongst the number of the first Patentees, men
of Estates, and men of Parts and port in the place. These two Brothers gathered
a Company together in a place distinct from the public Assembly, and there
sundry times the Book of Common Prayer was read unto such as resorted thither.
The Governor Mr. Endicot taking notice of the disturbance that began to grow
amongst the people by this means, he convented the two Brothers before him.
They accused the Ministers as departing from the Orders of the Church of
England, that they mere Separatists, and would be Anabaptists. etc. but for
themselves, they would hold to the Orders of the Church of England. The
Ministers answered for themselves, They were neither Separatists nor
Anabaptists, they did not separate from the Church of England, nor from the
Ordinances of God there, but only from the Corruptions and Disorders there;
and that they came away from the Common Prayer and Ceremonies, and had suffered
much for their Nonconformity in their Native Land, and therefore being in a
place where they might have their liberty, they neither could nor would use
them, because they judged the imposition of these things to be sinful
Corruptions in the Worship of God. The Governor and Council, and the
generality of the people, did well approve of the Ministers Answer: and
therefore finding those two Brothers to be of high Spirits, and their speeches
and practices tending to Mutiny and Faction, the Governor told them, That
New England was no place for such as they; and therefore he sent them both back
for England at the return of the Ships the same year: and though they breathed
out Threatenings both against the Governor and Ministers there, yet the Lord so
disposed of all, that there was no further inconvenience followed upon it.

The two Ministers there being seriously studious of Reformation, they
considered of the state of their Children, together with their Parents;
concerning which, Letters did pass between Mr. Higginson, and Mr. Brewster the
reverend Elder of the Church of Plymouth, and they did agree in their
judgments, viz. concerning the Church Membership of the Children with their
parents, and that Baptism was a seal of their Membership, only when they were
Adult, they being not scandalous, they were to be examined by the
Church Officers, and upon their approbation of their fitness, and upon the
Childrens public and personal owning of the Covenant, they were to be received
unto the Lords Supper. Accordingly Mr. Higginson's eldest Son, being about
fifteen years of age, was owned to have been received a member together with
his Parents, and being privately examined by the Pastor Mr. Skeleton, about his
knowledge in the principles of Religion, he did present him before the Church
when the Lords Supper was to be Administered, and the Child then publicly and
personally owning the Covenant of the God of his Father, he was admitted unto
the Lords Supper: it being then professedly owned, according to I Cor.7. 14.
that the Children of the Church are holy unto the Lord as well as their
Parents, accordingly the Parents owning and retaining the Baptism, which they
themselves received in their Infancy, in their Native Land, as they had any
Children born, Baptism was administered unto them, viz. to the Children of such
as were members of that particular Church.

Mr. Higginson lived but one year after the settling of the Church there,
departed this life about the same time the next year, in the Month of August,
1630. Mr. Skeleton lived until the year 1634. when he also quietly slept in the
Lord, and were both buried at Salem. As it is an honor to be in Christ before
others, as in Rom.16. so also to be first in the Lords work, and to be faithful
in it, as these two holy men were; who made such a beginning in
Church-reformation, as was afterward followed by many others.

In the year 1634. Mr. Reger Williams removed from Plymouth to Salem: he had
lived about three years at Plymouth, where he was well accepted as an assistant
in the Ministry to Mr. Ralph Smith, then Pastor of the Church there, but by
degrees venting of diverse of his own singular opinions, and seeking to impose
them upon others, he not finding such a concurrence as he expected, he desired
his dismission to the Church of Salem, which though some were unwilling to, yet
through the prudent counsel of Mr. Bre^ster (the ruling Elder there) fearing
that his continuance amongst them might cause divisions, and there being then
many able men in the Bay, they would better deal with him then themselves
could, and foreseeing (what he professed he feared concerning Mr. Williams,
which afterward came to pass) that he would run the same course of rigid
Separation and Anabaptistry, which Mr. John Smith the Sebaptist at Amsterdam
had done; the Church of Plymouth consented to his dismission, and such as did
adhere to him were also dismissed, and removed with him, or not long after him
to Salem. He came to Salem in the time of Mr. Skeltons weakness, who lived not
long after Mr. Williams was come, whereupon after some time, the Church there
called him to office; but he having in one years time, filled that place with
principles of rigid separation, and tending to Anabaptistry, the prudent
Magistrates of the Massachusetts Jurisdiction, sent to the Church of Salem,
desiring them to forbear calling him to office, which they not hearkening to,
was a cause of much disturbance; for Mr. Williams had begun, and then being in
office, he proceeded more vigorously to vent many dangerous opinions, as
amongst many others these were some; That it is not lawful for an unregenerate
man to pray, nor to take an Oath, and in special, not the Oath of Fidelity to
the Civil Government; nor was it lawful for a godly man to have communion
either in Family Prayer, or in an Oath with such as they judged unregenerate:
and therefore he himself refused the Oath of Fidelity, and taught others so to
do: also, That it was not lawful so much as to hear the godly Ministers of
England, when any occasionally went thither, and therefore he admonished any
Church Members that had done so, as for heinous sin: also he spoke dangerous
words against the Patent, which was the foundation of the Government of the
Massachusetts Colony: also he affirmed, That the Magistrates had nothing to do
in matters of the first Table, but only the second; and that there should be a
general and unlimited Toleration of all Religions, and for any man to be
punished for any matters of his Conscience, was persecution. And further he
procured the Church of Salems consent unto letters of Admonition, which was
written and sent by him in their name, to the Churches at Boston, Charlstown,
New-town (now Cambridge) etc. accusing the Magistrates that were members of the
respective Churches, of sundry heinous offenses which he laid unto their
charge, and though diverse did acknowledge their error and gave satisfaction,
yet Mr. Williams himself, notwithstanding all the pains that was taken with him
by Mr. Cotton, Mr. Hooker, and many others, to bring him to a sight of his
errors and miscarriages, and notwithstanding all the Courts gentle proceedings
with him, he not only persisted, but grew more violent in his way, insomuch as
he staying at home in his own house, sent a Letter, which was delivered and
read in the public Church assembly, the scope of which was to give them
notice, That if the Church of Salem would not separate not only from the
Churches of Old-England, but the Churches of New England too, he would separate
from them: the more prudent and sober part of the Church being amazed at his
way, could not yield unto-him: whereupon he never came to the Church Assembly
more, prosessing separation from them as Antichristian, and not only so, but he
withdrew all private religious Communion from any that would hold Communion
with the Church there, insomuch as he would not pray nor give thanks at meals
with his own wife nor any of his family, because they went to the Church
Assemblies: diverse of the weaker sort of the Church Members, that had been
thoroughly leavened with his Opinions, of which number were diverse women that
were zealous in their way, did by degrees fall off to him, insomuch as he kept
a meeting in his own house, unto which a numerous company did resort, both on
the Sabbath day and at other times, in way of separation from, and opposition
to the Church Assembly there; which the prudent Magistrates understanding, and
seeing things grow more and more toward a general division and disturbance,
after all other means used in vain, they passed a sentence of Banishment
against him out of the Massachusetts Colony, as against a disturber of the
peace, both of the Church and Commonwealth.

After which Mr. Williams sat down in a place called Providence, out of the
Massachusetts Jurisdiction, and was followed by many of the members of the
Church of Salem, who did zealously adhere to him, and who cried out of the
Persecution that was against him: some others also resorted to him from other
parts. They had not been long there together, but from rigid separation they
fell to Anabaptistry, renouncing the Baptism which they had received in their
Infancy, and taking up another Baptism, and so began a Church in that way; but
Mr. Williams stopped not there long, for after some time he told the people
that had followed him, and joined with him in a new Baptism, that he was out of
the way himself, and had misled them, for he did not finds that there was any
upon earth that could administer Baptism, and therefore their last Baptism was
a nullity, as well as their first; and therefore they must lay down all, and
wait for the coming of new Apostles: and so they dissolved themselves, and
turned Seekers, keeping that one Principle, That every one should have liberty
to Worship God according to the Light of their own Consciences; but otherwise
not owning any Churches or Ordinances of God any where upon Earth.

Thus much was thought meet to be inserted here concerning the great and
lamentable Apostasy of Mr. Williams, that it may be a Warning to all others to
take heed of a gradual declining from, and forsaking the Churches of Christ,
and Ordinances of God in them, left they be left of God to run such a course as
he has done; Wherefore let him that thinks he stands, take heed left he fall,
I Cor. 10. 12. As also to be a Motive to the Saints, to remember him unto God
in their servent Prayers for his return, he having been sometimes an able
Dispenser of the Word of God, and (in several respects) of an exemplary
Conversation.

And yet that there may be a standing Evidence of the Care that was had in
those times to prevent the growth of Errors, and of the exercise of the
Communion of Churches for that end, it is thought meet further to insert this
passage: That before the putting forth of the Civil Power of the Magistrate for
the removing of Mr. Williams from Salem, and besides other means also used,
there was a public Admonition sent in writing from the Church of Boston to the
Church of Salem, for the reducing of Mr. Williams, and the erring part of the
Church. The Title of the Writing was,

Errors in Doctrine maintained by some of the Brethren of the Church of Salem,
tending to the disturbance of Religion and Peace in Family, Church and
Commonwealth; viz.
1. THat it is not lawful to call upon an unregenerate man to pray for himself.

2. It is not lawful for a regenerate man to pray with his carnal Family.

3. It is not lawful for Magistrates to take an Oath of Fidelity from
unregenerate men.

4. It is not lawful for Magistrates to take an Oath of Fidelity from the body
of their Subjects, though regenerate, and Members of Churches.

5. It is not lawful for Magistrates to punish the breaches of the first Table,
unless thereby the Civil Peace of the Commonwealth be disturbed.

Whence also it follows, and is confessed,

That a Church wholly declining into Arianism, Papism, Familism, or other
Heresies, being admonished, and convinced thereof by other Churches, and not
reforming, may not be reformed by the Civil Magistrate in a way of Civil
Justice, unless it break the Civil Peace.

These Errors were solidly confuted, and the contrary Truths asserted by the
Word of God, in that Writing which was Subscribed by

John Cotton Teacher of the Church of Boston. Thomas Oliver Thomas Leveret
Elders of the same Church. Mr. Wilson the Pastor of the Church being at that
time absent upon a Voyage to England.

1630.
THis Year it pleased God of his rich grace to Transport over into the Bay of
the Massachusetts diverse honorable Personages, and many worthy Christians,
whereby the Lord began in a manifest manner and way to make known the great
thoughts which he had of Planting the Gospel in this remote and barbarous
Wilderness, and honoring his own Way of Instituted Worship, causing such and
so many to adhere thereunto, and fall upon the practice thereof: Among the
rest, a chief one amongst them was that famous Pattern of Piety and Justice Mr.
John Winthrop, the first Governor of that Jurisdiction, accompanied with
diverse other precious Sons of Sion, which might be compared to the most fine
gold. Amongst whom also I might name that Reverend and Worthy man, Mr. John
Wilson, eminent for Love and Zeal; he likewise came over this year, and bare a
great share of the difficulties of these new beginnings with great cheerfulness
and alacrity of spirit: They came over with a Fleet of ten Ships, three of them
arriving first at Salem, in which several of the chiefest of them came, who
repaired sundry of them in some short time into the Bay of the Massachusetts;
the other seven Ships arrived at Charlstown, where it pleased the Lord to
exercise them with much sickness, and being destitute of housing and shelter,
and lying up and down in Booths, some of them languished and died: yea, it
pleased God to take away amongst the rest, that blessed Servant of Christ Mr.
Isaac Johnson, with his Lady, soon after their arrival, with sundry other
precious Saints. This sickness being heavy upon them, caused the principal of
them to propose to the rest to set a day apart to seek the Lord for the
a^^waging of his displeasure therein, as also for direction and guidance in the
solemn enterprise of entering into Church Fellowship; which solemn day of
Humiliation was observed by all, not only of themselves, but also by their
Brethren at Plymouth in their behalf: and the Lord was entreated not only to
a^^wage the sickness, but also encouraged their hearts to a beginning, and in
some short time after to a further progress in the great Work of Erecting a way
of Worshipping of Christ in Church Fellowship, according to Primitive
Institution. Those choice and eminent Servants of Christ did not despise their
poor Leaders and Fellow Soldiers that they found in the same Work of the Lord
with them at Plymouth, but treated them as Brethren, much pitying their great
straits and hardships they had endured in the first beginning of Planting this
Wilderness, promising all helpfulness even out of their own Estates according
to their power; and their said Brethren at Plymouth were persuaded they spoke
as they thought in their hearts: for, such was the simplicity of those times,
as that diverse faces were not carried under a hood; Pride, Covetousness,
Profaneness, and sinful Self, were ashamed to be seen, except in obscure places
and persons. Oh poor New England, consider what thou wast, and what thou now
art! Repent, and do thy first works, faith the Lord; so may ^^^ 43. 18, 19.
thy peace yet be as a river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea. So
be it. But to return.

The first that began in the work of the Lord abovementioned, were their
honored Governor Mr. John Winthrop, Mr. Johnson forenamed, that much
honored Gentleman Mr. Thomas Dudley, and Mr. John Wilson aforesaid: These four
were the first that began that honorable Church of Boston, unto whom there
joined many others. The same year also Mr. George Philips (who was a worthy
Servant of Christ, and Dispenser of his Word) began a Church Fellowship at
Watertown; as did also Mr. Maverick and Mr. Wareham at Dorchester the same year.

Thus out of small beginnings greater things have been produced by his hand
that made all things of nothing: and as one small Candle may light a thousand;
so the Light here kindled has shone unto many, yea in some sort to our whole
Nation. Let the glorious Name of Jehovah have all the praise in all Ages

1631.
THis Year the Reverend and useful Instrument Mr. John Eliot came over, and
not long after Mr. W^ld, who began a Church-Society at Roxbury; as likewise
good old Mr. Maverick and Mr. Warehans began one at Dorchester.

1632.
THis year one Sir Christopher Gardener (being as himself said) descended of
the house of Gardener Bishop of Winchester, who was so great a Persecutor of
Gods Saints in Queen Mary's days, arrived in New England; he being a great
traveller received his first honor of Knighthood at Jerusalem, being made
Knight at the Sepulcher there: he came into these parts in pretense of
forsaking the World, and to live a private life in a godly course, not
unwilling to put himself upon any mean employment, and take any pains for his
living, and sometimes offered himself to join to the Church in sundry places:
he brought over with him a servant or two, and a comely young woman whom he
called his Cousin; but it was suspected (that after the Italian manner) she was
his Concubine: he living at the Massachusetts, for some miscarriages for which
he should have answered, fled away from Authority and got amongst the Indians
in the Jurisdiction of New Plymouth; the Government of the Massachusetts sent
after him but could not get him, and promised some reward to those that should
find him; the Indians came to the Governor of Plymouth and told where he was,
and asked if they might kill him, but the said Governor told them no, they
should not kill him by no means, but if they could take him alive and bring him
to Plymouth, they should be paid for their pains; they said he had a Gun and a
Rapier, and he would kill them if they went about it, and the Massachusetts
Indians said they might kill him, but the Governor aforesaid told them no,
they should not kill him, but watch their opportunity and take him, and so they
did; for when they light on him by a River side, he got into a Cannoo to get
from them, and when they came near him, whiles he presented his piece at them
to keep them off, the stream carried the Cannoo against a Rock, and threw both
him and his Piece and the Rapier into the water, yet he got out, and having a
little dagger by his side, they durst not close with him; but getting long
poles, they soon beat his dagger out of his hand: so he was glad to yield, and
they brought him to the Governor at Plymouth, but his hands and arms were
swelled and very fore with the blows they had given him, so he used him kindly,
and sent him to a lodging where his arms were bathed and anointed, and he was
quickly well again, and blamed the Indians for beating him so much they said
they did but a little whip him with sticks. In his lodging those that made his
bed, found a little Note-book that by accident had slipped out of his pocket or
some private place, in which was a memorial what day he was reconciled to the
Pope and Church of Rome, and in what University he took his Scapula, and such
and such a Degree; it being brought to the Governor, he kept it, and sent it
to the Governor of the Massachusetts with word of his taking, who sent for him;
but afterward he went for England and showed his malice against New England,
but God prevented him; of which I thought meet to insert a Letter from Mr.
Winthrop Governor of the Massachusetts to Mr. Bradford the Governor of
Plymouth (in reference to this matter) as also the Copy of an Order relating to
the same as follows. And first of the Letter.

SIR,
Upon a Petition exhibited by Sir Christopher Gardener, Sir Ferdinando Gorges,
Captain Ma^on, etc. against you and us, the cause was heard before the Lords of
the Privy Council, and afterward reported to the King; the success whereof
makes it evident to all, that the Lord has care of his people here; the
passages are admirable and too long to write: I heartily wish for an
opportunity to impart them unto you, being many sheets of Paper; but the
conclusion was, against all men's expectation, an order for our encouragement,
and much blame and disgrace upon the adversaries, which calls for much
thankfulness from us, all which we purpose (God willing) to express in a day of
thanksgiving to our merciful God, I doubt not but you will consider if it be
not fit for you to join in it; who as he has humbled us by his late
correction, so he has lifted us up by an abundant rejoicing in our deliverance
out of so desperate a danger; so as that which our enemies built their hopes
upon toruine us by, he has mercifully disposed to our great advantage, as I
shall further acquaint you when occasion shall serve.


The Copy of the Order follows.

At the Court at Whitehall, January 19. 1632.
Sigillum Crescent.

Lord Privy Seal. Earl of Dorset. Lord Vicount Falkland. Lord Bishop of London.
Lord Cottinton. Mr. Trevers. Mr. Vice-Chamberlain. Mr. Secretary Cook. Mr.
Secretary Windebank.
Whereas his Majesty has lately been informed of great distraction and much
disorder in the Plantations in the parts of America called New England, which
if they be true, and suffered to run on, would tend to the dishonor of this
Kingdom, and utter ruin of that Plantation: for prevention whereof, and for
the orderly settling of Government, according to the intention of those Patents
which have been granted by his Majesty, and from his late Royal Father King
James; It has pleased his Majesty that the Lords and others of his most
honorable Privy Council should take the same into consideration: Their
Lordships in the first place thought fit to make a Committee of this Board, to
take examination of the matters informed: which Committee having called diverse
of the principal Adventurers in that Plantation, and heard those that are
complainants against them; most of the things informed being denied, and
resting to be proved by parties that must be called from that place; which
required a long expense of time, and at present their Lordships finding they
were upon dispatch of Men, Victuals and Merchandise for that place, all which
would be at a stand if the Adventurers should have discouragement, or take
suspicion that the State here had no good opinion of that Plantation; their
Lordships not laying the fault, or fancies (if any be) of some particular men
upon the General Government, or principal Adventurers, which in due time is
further to be enquired into; have thought fit in the mean time to declare, that
the appearances were so fair, and hopes so great, that the Country would prove
both beneficial to this Kingdom, and profitable to the particulars, as that
the Adventurers had cause to go on cheerfully with their undertakings, and rest
assured, if things were carried as was pretended when the Patents were granted,
and accordingly as by the Patents it is appointed, His Majesty would not only
maintain the Liberties and privileges heretofore granted, but supply any thing
further that might tend to the good Government, prosperity and comfort of His
people there of that place, and c.

William Tromball.

1633.
THis Year Mr. Edward Winslow was Chosen Governor of the Jurisdiction of
New Plymouth: And Mr. William Bradford, Captain Miles Standish, Mr. John
Howland, Mr. John Alden, Mr. John Dove, Mr. Stephen Hopkins,and Mr. William
Gilson,
were Chosen to be his Assistants in Government.

The Plantation of Plymouth having had some former converse with the Dutch, as
has been hinted, they seeing them seated in a barren quarter, told them of a
River called by them the Fresh River, which they often commended unto them for
Which is the same calledConecticot River.
a good place, both for Plantation and Trade, and wished them to make use of
it; but their hands being full otherwise, they let it pass: but afterward
there coming a company of Indians into these parts, that were driven out of
their Country by the potency of the Pequots, they solicited them to go thither.
These Indians not seeing them very forward to entertain the motion, which they
moved with great ardency, they solicited them of the Government of the
Massachusetts in like sort; but they being then not fit to entertain the motion,
in respect that they were newly come into the Country, did not much regard it.
Notwithstanding, some of the chief made a motion to join with some here in a
way of Trade at the same River; on which a meeting was appointed to treat
concerning the same matter, and some of Plymouth appointed to give them
meeting, which they did, but they cast in the way many fears of danger and
loss, and the like, on which they of the Massachusetts declined the thing, and
did not proceed therein. Whereupon, those of Plymouth went on alone, and
prepared a Frame of an House, and stowed it into a Barque, ready to rear at
their landing, and went up the said River, and reared their House, and ^enced
it about with a Pallisado, which was done with great difficulty, not only of
the Dutch, but also of the Indians.

Notwithstanding, the place they possessed themselves of, was such as the Dutch
had nothing to do with, and likewise was lawfully purchased of the Indians
which they carried with them. And this was Plimouths entrance there, who
deserved to have held it, and not by friends to have been thrust out, as in a
sort they afterward were.

This year it pleased God to visit Plymouth with an infectious Fever, of which
many fell very sick, and upwards of twenty died, men, women and children, and
sundry of them were of their ancient Friends; amongst the rest, Mr. Samuel
Fuller then died, after he had much helped others, and was a comfort to them:
he was their Surgeon and Physician, and did much good in his place, being
not only useful in his faculty, but otherwise as he was a godly man, and
served Christ in the Office of a Deacon in the Church for many years, and
forward to do good in his place, and was much missed after God removed him out
of this world.

This sickness caused much sadness amongst them, and according to their duty
they besought the Lord by Fasting and Prayer, and he was entreated of them, and
toward Winter the sickness ceased. This sickness being a kind of a pestilent
Fever, swept away also many of the Indians from many places near adjoining to
Plymouth.

It is to be observed, That the Spring before this sickness, there was a
numerous company of Flies, which were like for Strange and unwonted Flies a
pre^age of a sickness that followed.
higness unto Wasps or Bumble Bees, they came out of little holes in the
ground, and did eat up the green things, and made such a constant yelling noise
as made all the Woods ring of them, and ready to deaf the hearers; they were
not any of them heard or seen by the English in the Country before this time:
but the Indians told them that sickness would follow, and so it did very hot in
the Months of June, July and August of that Summer.

This year there arrived in New England those three worthy Mr. Cotton, Mr.
Hooker, and Mr. Samuel Stones arrival in N.E.
Instruments, Mr. John Cotton, Mr. Thomas Hooker, and Mr. Samuel Stone, who
were Gospel-Preachers of excellent worth and use in their places, until God
took them out of the world unto himself.

This year likewise Mr. William Collier arrived with his Fa Mr. Colliers
arrival in N.E.
mily in New England, who as he had been a good Benefactor to the Colony of
New Plymouth before he came over, having been an Adventurer unto it at its
first beginning; so also he approved himself a very useful Instrument in that
Jurisdiction after he arrived, being frequently Chosen, and for diverse years
serving God and the Country in the place of Magistracy; and lived a godly and
holy life until old Age, which to him is a Crown of Glory, being found in the
way of Righteousness.

1634.
THis Year Mr. Thomas Prince was Chosen Governor of the Jurisdiction of
New Plymouth: His Assistants in Government were Mr. William Bradford, Mr.
Edward Winslow, Captain Miles Standish, Mr. William Collier, Mr. John Alden,
Mr. John Howland, and Mr. Stephen Hopkins.


A-great sickness amongst the (...).
In the Spring of this Year there fell a very great sickness of the Small Pox
amongst the Indians, so as they died most miserably of it; for a sorer Disease
cannot come amongst them, and they dread it more then the Plague it self, for
usually those of them which have this Disease, have them in abundance, and for
want of Bedding and Linen, and other Necessaries, they fall into a lamentable
condition; for as they lie on their hard Mats, the Pox breaking and running one
into another, their skin cleaving by reason thereof to the Mats they lie on,
when they turn them, much of their skin will flay off at once, and they will be
all on a gore blood, most sad and grievous to behold; and then being very sore,
what with cold and other distempers, they die like rotten sheep.

This Year one Captain Stone, who had sometimes lived at Christophers in the
West-India's, came into these parts; of whom I have nothing to speak in way of
commendation, but rather the contrary. After he had been to and fro in the
Country, he returned toward Virginia with one Captain Norton, and so it was,
that as they returned they went in at Conecticot River, where the Indians
killed the said Stone as he lay in his Cabin, and threw a Covering over him:
they likewise killed all the rest of his Company but the said Captain Norton,
he defending himself a long time in the Cook-room of the Barque, until by
accident the Gunpowder took fire, which for readiness he had set in an open
thing before him, which did so burn and scald him, and blind his eyes, as he
could make no longer resistance, but was slain also by them, and they made a
prey of his goods.

It is to be observed, That the said Stone being at the Dutch Plantation in the
forepart of this year, a certain Barque of Plymouth being there likewise on
Trading, he kept company with the Dutch Governor, and made him drunk, and got
leave of him in his drunkeuness to take the said Barque, without any occasion
or cause given him; and so taking his time when the Merchant and some of the
chief of the men were on shore, with some of his own men, made the rest of them
weigh Anchor, and set ^ail to carry her away to Virginia: but some of the Dutch
Seamen, who had been at Plymouth and received kindness, seeing this horrible
abuse, got a Vessel or two and pursued them, and brought them back. After this
he came into the Massachusetts Bay, where they commenced Suit against him; but
by the mediation of some it was taken up, and afterward in the company of some
Gentlemen he came to Plymouth, and was kindly entertained: but Revenge boiling
in his breast, (as some conceived) he watched a season to have stabbed the
Governor, and put his hand to his Dagger for that end, but by Gods Providence
ordering the vigilance of some that were about him, he was prevented: but God
met with him for these and other wickednesses, as has been before related.

1635
THis year Mr. William Bradford was chosen Governor of the Jurisdiction of
New Plymouth. And Mr. Edward Winslow, Mr. Thomas Prince, Mr. William Collier,
Captain Standish, Mr. John Alden, Mr. John Howland, and Mr. Stephen Hopkins,
Were Chosen to be his Assistants in Government.

This Year Mr. Edward Winslow took a Voyage for England, on public occasions,
and it came to pass that he had occasion to answer some Complaints made against
the Country, at the Council Board; more chiefly concerning the Massachusetts
Jurisdiction, which he did to good effect, and further prosecuted such things
as might tend to the good of the whole: in particular he preferred a Petition
to the Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners for the Plantations in America,
in reference unto some injuries done by the French and Dutch unto the Country;
which Petition found good acceptance, and was in a way to a satisfactory
Answer: but sundry Adversaries interposed, whose ends were the subversion and
overthrow of the Churches, at least to disturb their peace, and hinder their
growth; but by Gods providence it so fell out in the end, that although those
Adversaries crossed the Petition for taking any further effect in the end
principally intended in it; yet by this as a means, the whole plot was
discovered, and those Adversaries came to nothing: the particulars whereof, are
too long here to be inserted.

This Year, on Saturday, the fifteenth day of August, was such a mighty storm
of Wind and Rain, as none now living in these parts, either English or Indian
had seen the like, being like unto those Hirracanes or Tussins that writers
mention to be sometimes in the Indies. It began in the morning a little before
day, and grew not by degrees, but came with great violence in The great storm
or Hirracane
the beginning, to the great amazement of many; It blew down sundry houses, and
uncovered diverse others: diverse Vessels were lost at Sea in it, and many more
in extreme danger. It caused the Sea to swell in some places to the southward
of Plymouth, as that it arose to twenty foot right up and down, and made many
of the Indians to climb into Trees for their safety: It threw down all the Corn
to the ground, which never rose more; the which through the mercy of God, it
being near harvest time, was not lost, though much the worse: and had the wind
continued without shifting, in likelihood it would have drowned some part of
the Country. It blew down many hundred thousands of Trees, turning up the
stronger by the roots, and breaking the high Pine Trees and such like in the
midst, and the tall young Oaks, and Walnut Trees of good bigness, were wound as
a With by it; very strange and fearful to behold. It began in the Southeast,
and veered sundry ways, but the greatest force of it at Plymouth, was from the
former quarter, it continued not in extremity above five or six hours, ere the
violence of it began to abate; the marks of it will remain this many years, in
those parts where it was forest: the Moon suffered a great Eclipse two nights
after it.

1636.
THis Year Mr. Edward Winslow was chosen Governor of the Jurisdiction of
Plymouth: And Mr. William Bradford, Mr. Thomas Prince, Mr. William Collier, Mr.
John Alden, Mr. Timothy Hatherly, Mr. John Brown, Mr. Stephen Hopkins,
were chosen to be his Assistants in Government.

This Year the Towns on the River of Connecticot began to be planted, and in
transporting of Goods thither, from the Massachusetts Bay, two shallops were
cast away (laden with Goods to go thither) in an Easterly storm, at the mouth
of Plymouth Harbor; the Boats men were all lost, not so much as Mr. William
Cooper cast away.
any of their bodies found for burial, they being five in number in both the
Boats: the Principal of them was one Mr. William Cooper, an ancient Seaman of
known skill, having formerly been Master of a ship, and had gone great Voyages
to the East Indies and to other parts, but the night being dark and stormy,
they ran upon the skirt of a flat that lies near the mouth of the harbor, and
so were over-raked; the goods came on shore along the Harbor, and the
Governor caused a careful course to be taken for the preservation of them in
the behalf of the right owners, who afterward received so many of them as were
saved.

The Relation of the Pequot W^rs.
Now follows the Tragedy of the War that fell betwixt the English and the
Pequots, which I will relate according to my best intelligence; in order
whereunto I thought good to mention some particulars first, that by discerning
the whole matter, in the several parts and circumstances, the more of the mercy
and goodness of God may be taken notice of, to his praise, for destroying so
Proud and Blasphemous an Enemy.

In the Year 1634. the Pequots, a stout and warlike People, who had made War
with sundry of their Neighbors, and being pussed up with many Victories, grew
now at variance with the Narrhagansets, a great People bordering upon them;
these Narrhagansets held correspondence and terms of friendship with the
English of the Massachusetts: now the Pequots being conscious of the guilt of
Captain Stones death, whom they knew to be an English man, as also those that
were with him; and being fallen out with the Dutch, left they should have over
many Enemies at once, sought to make friendship with the English of the
Massachusetts, and for that end, sent both messengers and gifts unto them, as
appears by some Letters sent from the Governor of the Massachusetts to the
Governor of Plymouth, as follows.

Dear and Worthy Sir,
T O let you know something of our affairs; you may understand that the Pequots
have sent some of theirs to us, to desire our friendship, and offered much
Wampam and Beaver, and c. The first messengers were dismissed without answer;
with the next we had diverse days conference, and taking the advice of some of
our Ministers, and seeking the Lord in it, we concluded a peace and friendship
with them, upon these conditions, that they should deliver up to us those men
who were guilty of Stones death, andC. and if we desired to plant in
Connecticot, they should give up their right to us, and we would send to trade
with them as our friends, which was the chief thing we aimed at: they being now
in War with the Dutch and the rest of their Neighbors; To this they readily
agreed, and that we should mediate a peace between them and the Narrhagansets,
for which end they ^ere content we should give the Narrhagansets part of the
Present they would bestow on us; for they stood so much on their honor, as
they would not be seen to give any thing of themselves: as for Captain Stone,
they told us there were but two left of those who had any hand in his death,
and that they killed him in a just quarrel, for (said they) he surprised two of
our men and bound them, to make them by force to show him the way up the River;
and he with two other coming on shore, nine Indians watched them, and when they
were asleep in the night, they killed them, to deliver their own men; and some
of them going afterwar^s to the Barque, it was suddenly blown up: We are now
preparing to send a Barque unto them. And in another Letter ^e says, Our
Barque is lately returned from the Pequots, and our men put off but little
Commodities, and found them a very false people, so as we mean to have no more
to do with them.

Yours ever assured, John Winthrop.
Boston March 12. 1634.

Not long after these things, Mr. John Oldham (of whom much is spoken before)
being now an inhabitant of the Massachusetts, went with a small vessel and
slenderly manned on trading on those south parts, and upon a quarrel between
him Mr. Oldham death.
and the Indians, was cut off by them in such manner as has been fore-noted,
at an Island called by the Indians Mannisses, but by the English Block-Island;
this with the former about the death of Stone, and the baffling of the Requots
with the English of the Massachusetts, moved them to set out some to take
revenge, and require satisfaction for those wrongs; but it took little effect,
some of the murderers of Mr. Oldham ^led to the Pequots, and although the
English went to the Pequots, and had some parley with them, yet they did but
delude them; and the English returned without doing any thing to purpose, being
fru^trate of their opportunity by their deceit: After the English of the
Massachusetts were returned, the Pequots took their time and opportunity to cut
off some of the English at connecticot, as they passed up and down upon their
occasions; and tortured some of them in putting them to death, in a most horrid
and barbarous manner: and most Blasphemously in this their cruelty, bad them
call upon their God, or mocked and derided them The Pequots horrible Blasphemy.
when they so did; and not long after assaulted them at their houses and
habitations, as will appear more fully in the ensuing Relation.

1637.
IN the forepart of this Year, the Pequots fell openly upon the English at
Connecticot, in the lower parts of the River, and flew sundry of them as they
were at work in the fields, both men and women, to the great terror of the
rest; and went away in great pride and triumph with many high threats: they
also assaulted Saybrock Fort, at the mouth of the River of Connecticot,
although it was strong and well defended: it struck them with much fear and
astonishment, to see their bold attempts in the face of danger, which made them
in all places to stand upon their guard, and to prepare for resistance, and
earnestly to solicit their friends and consederates in the Massachusetts Bay,
to send them speedy aid, for they looked for more forceable assaults: Mr. Vane
being then Governor of that Jurisdiction, writ from their General Court to the
Governor and Court of New Plymouth, to join with them in this War, to which
they were cordially willing: In the mean time, before things could be prepared
for to set out, the Pequots (as they had done the winter before) sought to make
peace with the Narrhagansets, and used many pernicious Arguments to move them
thereunto, as That the English were strangers, and began to overspread their
Country; and Would deprive them thereof in time, if they were suffered to grow
and increase; and if the Narrhagansets did assist the English to subdue them,
that did but make way for their own overthrow; for if they were rooted out, the
English Would soon take occasion to subjugate them; and if they Would hearken
to them, they should not need to fear the strength of the English: for they
Would not come to open Battle with them, but fir^ their Houses, kill their
Cattle, and lie in ambush for them as they went abroad upon their occasions;
and all this they might easily do with little danger to themselves: the which
course being held, they well saw the English would not long subsist, but they
Would either be starved with hunger, or forced to forsake the Country: with
many like things; insomuch that the Narrhagansets were once wavering, and were
half minded to have made peace with them, and joined against the English; but
again when they considered how much wrong they had received from the Pequots,
and what an opportunity they now had by helping the English, to right
themselves, revenge was so sweet to them, as it prevailed above all the rest;
so as they resolved to join with with the English against them, and so did. The
Court of Plymouth agreed to send fifty men at their own charge, and with as
much speed as possibly they could get them in a readiness, under sufficient
Leaders, and provided a Barque to carry their provisions, and to tend upon them
on all occasions, and when they were ready to march with a supply from the Bay,
they had word sent them to stay, for the Enemy was as good as vanquished and
there would be no need.

I shall not take upon me exactly to describe their Proceedings in this War,
because possibly it has been done by themselves that were Actors therein, and
best knew the Circumstances of things: I shall therefore set them down in the
main and general, according to my best Intelligence.

From Conecticot, who were most sensible of the hurt sustained and the present
danger, they set out a party of men, and another party met them from the
Massachusetts Bay at the Narrhagansets, who were to join with them. The
Narrhagansets were very earnest to be gone, before the English were well rested
and refreshed, especially some of them which came last: It should seem their
desire was to come upon the Enemy suddenly and unexpectedly. There being a
Barque of Plymouth newly put in there, which was come from Conecticot, they did
encourage them to lay hold of the opportunity of the Indians forwardness, and
to show as great forwardness as they, for it would encourage them, and
Expedition might turn to their great advantage: So they went on, and so ordered
their march, as the Indians brought them to the Fort of their Enemy (in which
most of their chief men were) before day: They approached the same with great
silence, and surrounded it both with English and Indians, that they might not
break out, and so assaulted them with great Courage, shooting amongst them, and
entered the Fort with great speed; and those that first entered found sharp
resistance from the Enemy, who both shot and grapled with them: Others ran into
their houses, and brought out fire and set them on fire, which soon took in
their Mats, and their houses standing close together, with the wind all was
soon on a flame, and thereby more were burnt to death then were otherwise
slain. It burnt their Bow-strings, and made them unserviceable. Those that
escaped the Fire were slain with the Sword; some hewed to pieces, others run
through with their Rapiers so as they were quickly dispatched, and very few
escaped: The Number they thus destroyed, was conceived to be above Four
hundred. At this time is was a fearful sight to see them thus frying in the
Fire, and the streams of Blood quenching the same; and horrible was the slink
and scent thereof: but the Victory seemed a sweet Sacrifice, and they gave the
praise thereof to God, who had wrought so wonderfully for them, thus to enclose
their Enemies in their They Prai^ God for giving them to the victory
hands, and give them so speedy Victory over so proud, insulting, and
blasphemous an Enemy. The Narrhagansets all this while stood round about a loos
off from all danger and left the whole Execution to the English, except it were
the stopping any that brake away, insulting over their Enemies in their ruins
and misery, when they saw them dancing in the Fire; calling by a word in their
own Language, signifying O brave Pequots! which they used familiarly amongst
themselves in their own praises, in Songs of Triumph after their Victories.

After this Service was thus happily accomplished, the English marched to the
waterside, where they met with some of their Vessels, by whom they were
refreshed, and supplied with Victuals and other Necessaries: But in their
march, the rest of the Pequots drew into a Body, and followed them, thinking to
have some advantage against them by reason of a Neck of Land; but when they saw
the English prepare for them, they kept aloof, so as they neither did hurt, nor
would receive any. And after the English their refreshing, and repairing
together for further Counsel and Directions, they resolved to pursue their
Victory, and follow the War against the rest: but the Narrhagansets most of
them forsook them, and such of them as they had with them for Guides or
otherwise, they found very cold or backward in the business, either out of
envy, or that they thought the English would make more profit of the Victory
then they were willing they should, or else deprive them of that advantage that
they desired, in making the Pequots become Tributaries unto them, or the like.

For the rest of this Tragedy, I shall only relate the same as it is in a
Letter from Mr. Winthrop to Mr. Bradford, as follows:

Worthy Sir,
I Received your loving Letter, but straightness of time forbids me: for my
desire is to acquaint you with the Lords great mercy toward us, in our
prevailing against his and our Enemies, that you may rejoice and praise his
Name with us. About fourscore of our men having coasted along toward the Dutch
Plantation, sometimes by water, but most by land, met here and there with some
Pequots, whom they slow or took Prifoners. Two Sachems they took and beheaded;
and not bearing of (...) the chief Sachem, they gave a Prisoner his life to go
and find him out: He went, and brought them word where he was; but (...)
suspecting him to be a Spy, after be was gone, fled away with some twenty more
to the Mohawks, so our men missed of him: yet dividing themselves, and ranging
up and down as the Providence of God guided them, for the Indians were all gone
save three or four, and they knew not whither to guide them, or else would not;
Upon the thirteenth of this Month they lighted upon a great Company, viz.
Eighty strong men, and two hundred women and children, in a small Indian Town
fast by (...) Swamp, which they all st^pped into, before our men could get to
them. Our Captains were not then come together, but there was Mr. Ludlow and
Captain Mason, with some ten of their men, and Captain Patrick with some twenty
or more of his, who shooting at the Indians, Captain Trask with fifty more came
so ^im at the noise. Then they gave order to surround the Swamp, it being about
a Mile round; but Lieute^ant Davenport and some twelve more, not bearing that
Command, fell into the Swamp amongst the Indians: The Swamp was so thick with
shrubs, (...) withal, that some stuck fast, and received (...) Lieutenant
Davenport was dangerously wounded (...) ^his Arm hole, and another shot in the
Head, so as fainting they (...) in great danger to have been taken by the
Indians, but S^rgeant Rigg (...) Sergeant Jeffery, and two or three more,
rescued them, and ^lew diverse of the Indians with their Swords. After they were
drawn out, the Indians desired Parley, and were offered by (...) our
Interpreter, That if they would come out and yield themselves, they should have
their lives that had not their (...) in the English Blood. Whereupon the Sachem
of the place came for^h, and an old man or two, and their wives and children,
and so they spak^ t^ a hours; till it was night: Then Thomas Stanton was sent
to them again, to call them forth, but they said they would fell their lives
there; and so shot at him so thick, as if he had not been presently relieved
and rescued on his crying out, they would have stain (...). Then our men cut
off a place of Swamp with their swords, and cooped up the Indians into a narrow
compass, so as they could easier kill them through the thickets: so they
continued all the night, standing about twelve foot one from another, and the
Indians coming up close to our men, shot their Arrows so thick, as they pierced
their Hat brims, and their sleeves and stockens, and other parts of their
Clothes, yet so miraculously did the Lord preserve them, as not one of them was
wounded, save those three who rashly went into the Swamp as aforesaid. When it
was near day it grew very dark, so as those of them that were left, dropped
away, though they stood but twelve or fourteen foot asunder, and were presently
discovered, and some killed in the pursuit. In the searching of the Swamp the
next morning, they found nine slain, and some they pulled up, whom the Indians
had buried in the Mire: so as they do think that of all this Company not twenty
did escape, for they after found some who died in the flight of their wounds
received. The Prisoners were divided, some to those of the River, and the rest
to us of these parts. We send the (...)children to Bermuda's by Mr. William
Pierce, and the Women and Maid-children are disposed about in the Towns. There
have been now slain and taken in all, about Seven hundred, the rest are
dispersed, and the Indians in all quarters so terrified, as all their friends
are afraid to receive them. Two of the Sachems of LongIsland came to Mr.
Staughton, and tendered themselves to be under our Protection; and two of the
Nepannet Sachems have been with me to seek our Friendship. Among the Prisoners
we have the Wife and Children of Mononotto, a woman of a very modest co^tenance
and behavior: It was by her mediation that the two English Maids were spared
from death, and were kindly used by her; so that I have taken charge of her.
One of her first requests was, That the English would not abuse her body, and
that her Children might not be taken from her. Those which were wounded we
fetched soon off by John Gallop, who came with his Boat in an happy hour to
bring them Victuals, and to carry their wounded men to the Barque, where our
chief Surgeon was, with Mr. Wilson, being about eight leagues off. Our
people are all in health, the Lord be praised: And although they had marched in
their Arms all the day, and had been in fight all the night; yet they professed
they found themselves so, as they could willingly have gone to such another
business: the Captains report we have slain thirteen Sachems, but Sasacus and
Monotto are still living; this is the substance of what I have received, though
I am forced to omit many considerable circumstances: so being in much
straightness of time, the ships being to depart within this four days, and in
them the Lord Lee and Mr,.Vane; I here break off, and with hearty Salutation,
etc. I rest

Your assured Friend, John Winthrop.
July 28.1637.

To conclude the discourse of this matter: This Sasacus the Pequot Sachem,
being fled to the Mohawks, they cut off his head, and some other of the chief
of them, whether to satisfy the English, or rather the Narrhagansets (who as I
have heard hired them to do it) or for their own advantage, I know not.

And thus this War took end; the body of this People were wholly subdued, and
their Country taken from them, and such of its Inhabitants as had escaped the
heat of our revehge, by fire and sword, being nevertheless at the dispose of
the Conquerers, were by the English appointed some to the Narrhagansets, and
some to the Monhegens under Unkas their Sachem, who had been faithful and
serviceable to them in this War: yet the Narrhagansets, were not pleased that
themselves had not the sole Government of the Captives, and have since been
continually quarrelling with the Monheags, and have sometimes been plotting
against the English also; but to conclude, the Pequots have since been taken
under the immediate Government of the English Colonies, and live in their own
Country, being Governed by such of their own, as are by the English substituted
and appointed for that purpose.

This year Mr. William Bradford was chosen Governor of the Jurisdiction of
New Plymouth. And Mr. Edward Winslow, Mr. Timothy Hatherly, Mr. Williams
Collier, Mr. Thomas Prince, Capt. Miles Standish, And Mr. John Jenny, Were
Chosen his Assistants in Government.

This Year Mr. Theophilus Eaton and Mr. John Davenport, accompanied with diverse
other Christians of special eminency, began Called by the Dutch Roeabert and by
the Indians Quinnapiuk.
the fourth of the United Colonies in New England, called New Haven, where they
erected a Church of Christ, which continue in Gospel Order until this day, in
an amiable and exemplary manner; notwithstanding they have met with diverse
losses and crosses, both of eminent and useful Instruments, as also of a great
part of their estates, as in special by the loss of Mr. Lambertone ship. Of
which said Plantation and Colony, I have little to insert, for want of more
full and certain intelligence.

About this time there arose great troubles in the Country, especially at
Boston, by the broaching of Antinomian and Familistical Opinions; the chief
sect-leader thereof, was one Mrs. Hutchinson: these carried on their abominable
Tenets, with such subtilty, under a pretense of advancing free grace, and
crying up the Covenant of Grace, and down the Covenant of Works; as they took
away (by their assertions) Grace from the Covenant; yea so close was this
mystery of Iniquity carried on, as that some of the prudentest of the Orthodox
party, could not discern it at the first; but at length, the folly of those
that were principal therein was made manifest unto all men: the evil
consequences thereof faced very sadly, so as it influenced into their Civil
State, and caused great disturbance: but by Gods blessing on the improvement of
the faithful endeavors of his Servants, the Messengers of the Churches, who
were called together as a Synod to help in the case; together with the prudence
and industry of sundry principal ones amongst them, both in Church and State at
other times: a right understanding of some few things, in difference amongst
the sincere and godly, was procured. The Ringleaders of the Faction being thus
detected were censured, not only by the Church, but by the Civil power, and
were also condemned to exile; who not knowing where they might sit down safely,
made requests unto the Government of Plymouth, that they might be at an Island,
that they had not hitherto improved, called by the Indians Aquetnet, (and by
the English inhabiting it Road-Island) which the Government of Plymouth
aforesaid, considering they were their Countrymen and fellow Subjects that
were thus distressed, and destitute of habitation, although they had their
errors in as great dislike as those from whence they came, yet pitying them in
their present straights, granted their request: so these having there seated
themselves, and finding that it was a very fruitful and pleasant place, (such
indeed, as that Colony or Jurisdiction has not any the like left within their
Patent) they soon drew many more unto them, not only to fill up that Island,
but have also seated two more Towns on the Main; therein (as is judged)
incroaching upon the just rights of the aforesaid Colony of Plymouth, and have
of late through misinformation obtained a Patent, not only for the places
forementioned, but have also extended it into the heart and bowels of the known
and possessed rights of the said Colony: endeavoring to requite their kindness,
as sometimes it is said the Hedgehog did by the friendly Coney. But it is our
great happiness, that as God takes notice from on high of the unrighteousness
and oppression of the sons of men, so he has given us a gracious Prince, who
minds the peace of His meanest Subjects, from whose Justice and Prudence we do
confidently expect relief, and on that assurance do resolve by Gods help to
contain our selves from seeking to vindicate our wrongs in such a way as their
injurious dealings might provoke unto.

This Year there was a hideous Monster born at Boston in New England, of one
Mrs. Mary Dyer, a Co-partner with the said Mrs. Hutchinson, in the aforesaid
Heresies; the said Monster (as it was related to me). It was without Head, but
Horns like a Beast, Scales or a rough skin like the fish called the
Thornback,it had Legs and Claws like a Fowl, and in other respects as a Woman
Child; the Lord declaring his detestation of their Monstrous errors (as was
then thought by some) by this prodigious Birth.

Not long before these Troubles, there arrived at Boston one Samuel Gorton, who
from thence came to Plymouth; and upon his first coming thither, gave some
hopes that he would have proved an useful Instrument, but soon after, by little
and little, discovered himself to be a proud and pestilent Seducer, and deeply
leavened with blasphemous and Familistical Opinion, and observing such Fictions
to be spread by some of his Spirit already in the Country, he takes his
opportunity to begin to sow such seed at Plymouth, whereby some were seduced,
in special one John Weeks and his Wife, who in some short time became very
Atheists, looking for no more happiness then this world affords, not only in
practice such, but also in opinion. But the said Gorton falling into some
Controversy with one Mr. Ralph Smith, was summoned to the Court held at
Plymouth the fourth of December 1638. to Answer the said Mr. Smiths Complaint;
and there he carried so mutinously and feditiously, as that he was for the
same, and for his turbulent carriages toward both Magistrates and Ministers in
the presence of the Court, Sentenced to find Sureties for his good Behavior,
during the time he should stay in the Jurisdiction, which was limited to
fourteen days, and also Amerced to pay a considerable Fine. In some short time
after he departed to Road-Island, and in like manner or worse demeaned himself
there, so as they were forced to Sentence him to suffer Corporal Punishment by
Whipping, and they Banished him likewise off the Island. And from thence he
with diverse of his Accomplices went to Providence, and there he and they
carried so in outrage and riotously, as they were in danger to have caused
Bloodshed, so as the Inhabitants some of them, viz. Mr. Roger Williams and
others, were constrained to solicit the Government of the Massachusetts for
aid, and help them against their Insolences: And for that end, some of them
desired to come under their Jurisdictiou, and were accepted. Moreover, several
of the poor Neighboring Natives were so injuriously wronged by them the said
Gorton and his Company, they seeking to bereave them of their just Rights of
Lands by surreptitious ways; in special, Pomham and Sokanoko, two petty
Sachems The Answer of Mr E Winslow to Gortons pansphlet, entitled,Simplicities
defense against the seven headed Policy will give the Reader a full and
particular intelligence concerning all the transactions of those matters and
likewise of their damnable Errors.
living not far off from Providence, who were bereaved of their just Rights
in Lands, by improving the Tyranny of Miautonimok, the then chief Sachem of the
Narrhagansets, for the procuring thereof, which necessitated the said
underSachems to make their Appeal to the Court of the Massachusetts for help in
their oppressed condition, subjecting themselves and their Lands unto their
Jurisdiction likewise: which caused the said Government to Require their
Appearance at Boston, to Answer the Complaints of those oppressed English and
Indians, But notwithstanding they several times sent to them with all
gentleness and courteous expressions, they neither appeared, nor sent
satisfying Reasons for their absence; but in stead thereof, many insolent,
proud, railing, opprobrious Returns: so that the said Government saw there was
no remedy, but to send force to constrain them to come; which they accordingly
performed, and Committed the said Gorton and several of them to Ward: and
during the time of their Imprisonment, they carried still very proudly and
audaciously toward all in place of Authority, sparing not to reproach, abuse
and traduce the most Honorable and Reverend both in Church and State; and
which is yet worse, spared not blasphemously to fly upon the Lord Jesus
himself, his Word and Ordinances, in such a manner as scarce in any Age any
Heretics or Apostates have done the like: Not only abandoning and rejecting
all Civil Power and Authority, (except molded according to their own Fancies)
but belching out errors in their Familistical Allegories (if I may so call
them) as (to speak with holy reverence) they rendered the Lord Christ no other
then an Imagination; shunning not blasphemously to say, That Christ Horrible
Fanilism and Blaspbony, as if they were spoken by, and differ little from the
caused dectrine of their grand Leader Henry Nicols.
was but a shadow and resemblance of what is done in every Christian; That
Christ was Incarnate in Adam, and was that Image of God wherein Adam was
created; and, That his being born afterward of the Virgin Mary, and suffering,
was but a manifestation of his suffering in Adam; That Man's losing Gods Image,
was the Death of Christ; That Christ is the Covenant properly; and, That Faith
and Christ are all one: They call the holy Word, and Sermons of Salvation,
Tales; the LordsSupper, An Abomination, and A Spell; Baptism, Vanity and
Abomination; the Ministers of the Word, Necromancers: and by other opprobrious
terms villi^ie and traduce them. Much more might be spoken and mentioned of
this stuff, which they have not been ashamed to divulge; but a little is
enough: save but to give the Reader to see the Lords goodness toward his poor
people in New England, that has delivered us, and saved us of his grace from
their pernicious destructive ways, and has so detected their solly, as it is
made manifest to all men. In fine, the said Gorton and his fellow Prisoners
were several of them Sentenced to remain in durance in several Towns of the
Jurisdiction of the Massachusetts for six Months, and afterward Banished.

He was a subtle Deceiver, courteous in his carriage to all at some times (for
his own ends) but soon moved with passion, and so lost that which he gained
upon the simple. To shut up what I have to say concerning him, which is sad; He
is since become a for did man in his life, as he has been declared to be in
his cursed Principles and Opinions, and has not shunned to say and affirm,
That all the felicity we are like to have, we must expect in this life, and no
more: and therefore advised one with whom he had some speech, to make much of
her self, for she must expect no more but what she could enjoy in this life; or
words to the same effect. Thus evil men and deceivers grow worse and worse,
deceiving and being deceived, 2 Timothy 3.13.

1638.
THis Year Mr. Thomas Prince was Chosen Governor of the Jurisdiction of
New-Plymouth: Mr. William Bradford, Mr. Edward Winslow, Captain Miles Standish,
Mr. John Alden, Mr. John Jenny, Mr. John Atwood, Mr. John Brown, were Chosen
Assistants in Government.

This year three men were Executed for Robbing and Murdering an Indian near
Providence, which besides the Evidence that came against them, they did in
substance Confess against themselves, and were Condemned by Legal Trial. Some
have thought it great severity, to Hang three English for one Indian; but the
more Considerate will easily satisfy themselves for the Legality of it: and
indeed, should we suffer their Murderers to go unpunished, we might justly
fear that God would suffer them to take a more sharp Revenge. By such Arguments
was the Government of Plymouth moved by the Government of the Massachusetts to
do Justice in the case. And here may be noted, That the Massachusetts refused
this Trial, as being committed in the Jurisdiction of Plymouth; and they of
RoadIsland having Apprehended them, delivered them to the aforesaid
Jurisdiction of Plymouth on the same grounds.

This Year, about the second of June, there was a great and fearful Earthquake:
It was heard before it came with a rumbling Noise, or low murmr, like unto
remote Thunder. It came from the Northwards, and passed Southwards: as the
Noise approached near, the Earth began to quake; and it came at length with
that violence, as caused Platters, Dishes, and such like things which stood
upon Shelves, to clatter and fall down; yea, people were afraid of their
Houses: and it was so, that some being without doors could not stand, but were
sain to catch hold of Posts and Pales to prevent them from falling. About half
an hour after, or less, came another Noise and shaking, but not so ^o^d nor
strong as the former. It was not only on the Land, but at Sea also; for some
ships that were on the Seacoast were shaken by it: so powerful is the mighty
hand of the Lord, as to cause both the Earth and N^h^m I. 3^4, 5. 6.
Sea to shake, and the Mountains to tremble before him: His way is in the
whirlwind, and the storm and the Clouds are the dust of his feet; the Rocks are
thrown down before him: Who can stand before his indignation? and who can abide
in the fierceness of his anger?

1639.
THis Year Mr. William Bradford was Chosen Governor of Plymouth: Mr. Thomas
Prince, Captain Miles Standish, Mr. John Alden, Mr. John Brown, Mr. William
Collier, Mr. Timothy Hatberly, Mr. John Jenny, were Chosen Assistants.

This Year HARVARD COLLEGE was Erected at Cambridge in New England, which was
so called in Remembrance of a worthy Gentleman, who liberally Contributed
toward the Charge of the Erecting of it.

This Year the great Sachem Woosamequen, sometimes called Massasoiet, and
Mooanam his Son, came into the Court held at Plymouth in New England, on the
Five and twentieth day of September, in their own proper persons, and desired
that the ancient League and Confederacy formerly made with the Government of
Plymouth aforesaid, (wherein he acknowledged himself Subject to the King of
England and his Successors) may stand, and remain inviolable: And the said
Woosamequen and Mooanam his Son, for themselves and their Successors, did He
that here is called Mooanam is the same that afterward was called Wam^^^^a; it
being usual for the Indians to change their Names.
faithfully promise to keep and observe the Covenants and Conditions therein
expressed and contained, which on their parts are likewise to be kept and
observed. And the said Woosamequen, and Mooanam his Son, did then also promise
to the whole Court aforesaid, That he nor they shall nor will needlessly or
unjustly raise any quarrels, or do any wrong to other Natives, to provoke them
to War against him; and, That he nor they shall not Give, Sell or Convey any of
his or their Lands, Territories or Possessions whatsoever, to any person or
persons whomsoever, without the privity and consent of the Government of
Plymouth aforesaid, other then to such as the said Government shall send or
appoint. All which Conditions the said Woosamequen, and Mooanam his Son, for
themselves and their Successors, did then faithfully promise to observe and
keep. And the whole Court, in the Name of the whole Government, for each Town
respectively, did then likewise Ratify and Confirm the aforesaid ancient
League and Confederacy; and did also further promise to the said Woosamequen,
and Mooanam his Son, and their Successors, That they shall and will from time
to time defend the said Woosamequen, and Of this see page 24.
Mooanam his Son, and their Successors, when need and occasion shall require,
against all such as shall unjustly rise up against them to wrong or oppress
them unjustly.

1640.
MR. William Bradford was Elected Governor of the Jurisdiction of Plymouth:
Mr. Thomas Prince, Mr. William Collier, Mr. John Brown, Captain Miles Standish,
Mr. Timothy Hatherly, and Mr. Edmond Freeman, Were Elected Assistants.

1641.
THis Year Mr. William Bradford was Elected Governor of the Jurisdiction of
New Plymouth: Mr. Edward Winslow, Mr. Thomas Prince, Mr. William Collier,
Captain Miles Standish, Mr. Timothy Hatherly, Mr. John Brown, and Mr. Edmond
Freeman, were Chosen Assistants to him in Government.

1642.
THis Year Mr. William Bradford was Elected Governor of the Jurisdiction of
New Plymouth: Mr. Edward Winslow, Mr. Thomas Prince, Mr. William Collier, Mr.
Timothy Hatherly, Mr. John Brown, Mr. William Thomas, and Mr. Edmond Freeman,
were Elected Assistants to him in Government.

In reference unto the three years last specified, although I have no special
Providence to take notice of, particularly to assign to each of them, save the
continuance of Gods mercy and goodness in the Annual Election of godly and able
Magistrates in the Jurisdiction of Plymouth, as is before-noted; yet
notwithstanding we are to take notice of the continued Peace and Plenty, with
which not only these three years (restrictively considered) but also for many
years together both before and after them, New England was so marvellously
gratiated. But that which is more, that about these times the Lord was pleased
of his great goodness richly to accomplish and adorn the Colony of Plymouth (as
well as other Colonies in New England) with a considerable number of godly and
able Gospel-Preachers, who then being dispersed and disposed of to the several
Churches and Congregations thereof, gave Light in a glorious and resplendent
manner, as burning and shining Lights: Which mercy and transcendent favor, had
not Sin and Satan's envy interposed, might have rendered them greatly happy and
prosperous; it being observed, That where Gospel Dispensation flourishes,
there Prosperity in other respects may usually be expected.

In reference un^o the ho^our of God, and due respects unto such worthy
Instruments, I thought meet to nominate some of the speciallest of them; viz.
Mr. Charles Chauncy, Mr. William Hook, Mr. N^^holas Street, Mr. John Laythrop,
Mr. John Mayo, Mr. John Reyner, Mr. Ralph Partridge, Mr. Samuel Newman, Mr.
William Leveri^h, Mr. Richard Blinman, Mr. Edward Bulkly, Mr. John Miller, Mr.
Marmaduke Matthews.


With Some others that might be named. These Some of them stayed not long ere
they removed, some into NeighbourColonies, some into Old-England, and others to
their Eternal Rest, whereby the said Jurisdiction was wanting in a great
measure for some time of such a Blessing: Howbeit, the Lord has since
graciously raised up a supply to diverse of the said Congregations, and more may
be expected according to his Promises.

1643.
THis Year Mr. William Bradford was elected Governor of the Jurisdiction of
New Plymouth: And Mr. Edward Winslow Mr. Thomas Prince, Mr. William Collier,
Mr. Timothy Hatherly, Mr. John Brown, Mr. Edmond Freeman, And Mr. William
Thomas, were chosen his Assistants in Government.

This Year about the eighteenth day of April died Mr. William Brewster, the
Ruling Elder of the Church of Christ at Plymouth; concerning whom, I could say
much of mine own knowledge; but I shall content my self, only to insert the
honorable Testimony that Mr. William Bradford deceased, has left written with
his own hand, concerning him.

Says he, My dear Friend Mr. William Brewster was a man that had done and
suffered much for the Lord Jesus, and the Gospels sake, and has born his part
in weal and woe, with this poor persecuted Church, above thirty six years, in
England, Holland, and in this Wilderness; and done the Lord and them faithful
service in his place and calling: and notwithstanding the many troubles and
sorrows he passed through, the Lord upheld him to a great age; he was four
score and four years of age when he died; he had this The death of Mr. William
Brewster.
blessing added by the Lord to all the rest, to dye in his bed in peace amongst
the midst of his friends, who mourned and wept over him, and ministered what
help and comfort they could unto him; and he again recompensed them whiles he
could: his sickness was not long, and until the last day thereof, he did not
wholly keep his bed, his speech continued until somewhat more then half a day
before his death, and then failed him, and about nine or ten of the clock that
evening he died without any pangs at all; a few hours before, he drew his
breath short, and some few minutes before his last, he drew his breath long, as
a man fallen into a found sleep, without any pangs or gasping, and so sweetly
departed this life unto a better.

I would now demand of any, What he was the worse for former sufferings? what,
do I say worse? no, he was the better, and they now added to his honor: 2 Thessalonians. ^. 5,6,7.
It is a manifest token (faith the Apostle) of the righteous Judgment of God,
that we may be counted worthy of the Kingdom of God, for which we also suffer;
seeing it is a righteous thing with God, to recompen^e tribulation to them that
trouble you, and to you who are troubled, rest with us when the Lord Jesus
shall be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels; and if you be reproached
(faith the Apostle I Per. 4. 14.
Peter) for the Name of Christ, happy are ye, for the Spirit of God and of
Glory shall rest upon you: what though he wanted the riches and pleasures of
the World in this life, and Pompous monuments of his Funeral? yet the memorial
of the Just Prove. 1217.
shall be blessed, when the name of the wicked shall not (with their Marble
Monuments.) He was well educated in learning, as at inseriour Schools, so also
at the University; and from thence went to the Court, and there served Mr.
Davison a godly Gentleman, and Secretary of State to Queen Elizabeth, and
attended him on his Embassage into Holland, and was employed by him in matters
of greatest trust; as in keeping of the Keys of the Cautionary Towns delivered
up to him for her Majesty, and things of the like nature; his Master would
always in private confer with him as a friend or equal: he afterward lived in
good esteem in his own Country, and did much good, until the troubles of those
times enforced his remove into Holland, and so into New England, and was in
both places of singular use and benefit to the Church and People of Plymouth
whereof he was; being eminently qualified for such work as the Lord had
appointed him unto, of which should I speak particularly as I might, I should
prove tedious: I shall content my self therefore only to have made honorable
mention in general of so worthy a man.

And here I might take occasion to mention with admiration, the mavelous
providence of God, that notwithstanding the many changes and hardships that
this people, viz. the first Planters at New Plymouth went through, and the many
Enemies they had, and difficulties they met withal, that so many of them should
live until very old age: It was not only this Reverend man's condition, but many
more of them did the like; some dying before and about this time, and some
living, who attained to sixty years of age, and to sixty five, diverse to
seventy, and some to more then eighty as he did: It must needs be more then
ordinary, and above natural reason that so it should be; for it is found in
experience, that changing of Air, Famine, and unwholesome Food, much drinking of
Water, Sorrows and Troubles and c. all of them are enemies to health, causes of
much diseases, consumers of natural vigor, and the bodies of men, and shortners
of life; and yet of all these things they had a large and long part, and
suffered deeply in the same: they went from England to Holland, where they
found both worse Air and Diet, then that they came from; from thence, enduring
a long imprisonment in the ships at Sea into New England; and how it has been
with them here has already been shown, and what crosses, troubles, fears,
wants and sorrows they have been liable unto, is easily to be discerned, so as
in some sort they may say with the Apostle, they were in Journeys often, in
perils of I Cor. II. 26. 27.
Waters, in perils of Robbers, in perils of their own Nation, in perils amongst
the Heathen, in perils in the Wilderness, in perils in the Sea, in perils
amongst false Brethren, in weariness, in painfulness, in watching often, in
hunger, thirst, in fasting often, in cold and nakedness: What was it then that
upheld them? It was Gods visitation that preserved their spirits; he that
upheld the Job 10. 12. 2 Cor. 4. 9. 2 Cor. 96.
Apostle, upheld them: They were persecuted but not forsaken, cast down but
perished not, as unknown and yet known, as dying and be-hold we live, as
chastened and yet not killed.

God (it seems) would have all men behold such works of his Providence, as
these are toward his people, that they in like cases might be encouraged to
depend upon him in their trials, and also bless his Name when they see his
goodness toward others; Man lives not by bread only: It is not dainty Deuteronomy. 8.
3.
fare, peace, rest and hearts ease, in enjoying contentments and good things of
this World only, that preserves health and prolongs life: God (in such
examples) would have the World take notice, that he can do it without them; and
if the World will shut their eyes and take no notice thereof, yet he would have
his people to see and consider it: Daniel could be in better liking with ^ulse,
then with the Kings dainties; Jacob, though he went from one Nation to another
People, and passed through Famine, Fears and many afflictions, yet he lived
until old age, and died sweetly and rested in the Lord, as many others of Gods
servants have done, and still do through Gods goodness, notwithstanding all the
malice of their enemies; When the branch Job 15. 32. Psalm. 55. 23.
of the wicked shall be cut off before his day, and the bloody and deceitful
man shall not live out half his days.

By reason of the plotting of the Narrhagansets ever since the Pequot War, the
Indians were drawn into a general conspiracy against the English in all parts,
as was in part discovered the year before, and now made more plain and evident,
by many discoveries and free consessions of sundry Indians, upon several
occasions, from diverse places, concurring in one; with such other concurring
circumstances, as gave the English sufficiently to understand the truth
thereof, and to think of means how to prevent the same. In which respect,
together with diverse other and more weighty reasons, the four Colonies ( viz.)
the Massachusetts, Plymouth, Conecticot and New Haven, entered into a more near
Union and Confederation the nineteenth day of May 1643. and the Articles of the
said confederation were signed by the Commissioners of the said Jurisdictions
respectively, by which were Authorized thereunto, viz. John Winthrop Governor
of the Massachusetts. Thomas Dudley. Edward Winslow. William Collier. Edward
Hopkins. Thomas Gri^son. Theophilus Eaton. George Fenwick.


The said Articles at large, with sundry other particulars appertaining
thereunto, together with the particulars concerning the plotting,
contrivements, menacings and insolences of the Narrhagansets against the
English, together with the provision See Acts of the Commissioner for (...)
united colonies of N.E. (...) 1644. and (...).
and preparation made by the English for an expedition against them, with the
yieldings and compliance of the said Narrhagansets to the English, and the
Composition and Articles of agreement made with them, and c. these are all to
be seen as they are at large extant in the Records of the Commissioners for the
United Colonies of New England, whereunto I refer the Reader.

1644.
THis Year Mr. Edward Winslow was Elected Governor of the Jurisdiction of
New Plymouth: Mr. William Bradford, Mr. Thomas Prince, Mr. William Collier, Mr.
Timothy H^therly, Mr. John Brown, Mr. William Thomas, Mr. Edmond Freeman, were
Elected his Assistants in Government.

This Year Mr. John Atwood died, he was a godly man, singularly endowed with
the grace of Patience, and having a large estate became a useful benefactor to
the Colonic of NewPlimouth; he departed this life, expressing great Faith in
Christ, and a cheerful expectation of the restoration of his body at the
general Resurrection in Glory.

This Year many of the Town of Plymouth, by reason of some straights that were
upon them, took up thoughts of removing to some other place for their better
accommodation, and for that end made a more exact and particular discovery of a
place called by the Indians, Namset; which place being purchased by them of the
Indians, diverse of the considerablest of the Church and Town removed thither,
and erected a Town, which is now called by the name of Eastham.

1645.
THis year Mr. William Bradford was Elected Governor of the Jurisdiction of
New Plymouth. And Mr. Edward Winslow, Mr. Thomas Prince, Mr. William Collier,
Capt. Miles Standish, Mr. Timothy Hatherly, Mr. John Brown, and Mr. Edmond
Freeman, Were Elected his Assistants in Government.

The Commissioners of the United Colonies of New England were called together
this Year, before their ordinary time of meeting, partly in regard of some
differences between This meeting was held the 28 of July, 1145.
the French and the Government of the Massachasets, about their aiding of
Mo^seir Latore against Mo^seir de (...), and partly about the Indians, who had
broken their former agreements about the peace concluded the year before; as
concerning such conclusions and determinations which passed in this meeting, in
reference to the premises, I shall refer the Reader unto the Acts of the said
Commissioners for that Year, as they are recorded at large.

1646.
THis Year Mr. William Bradford was Chosen Governor of the Jurisdiction of
New Plymouth: Mr. Edward Winslow, Mr. Thomas Prince, Mr. William Collier,
Captain Miles Standish, Mr. Timothy Hatherly, And Mr. Edmond Freeman, were
Elected his Assistants in Government.

About the middle of May this Year, there came three Men of War into Plymouth
Harbor, under the command of Captain Thomas Cromwell, who had taken several
Prizes from the Spaniards, by Commission from the Earl of Warwick: they were
full of moneys, silks, and other rich goods, some of which they left behind
them. They were a company of lusty stout men, but very unruly and hard to
govern; notwithstanding the care and vigilance, both of such as were in
Authority of Plymouth, and also of their own Commanders, who could hardly
restrain them, especially from inordinate drinking and quarrelling: It proved
fatal to one of them, who being quarrelling with one of their own company, and
being commanded by their Captain to forbear, he giving very provoking Language,
and also attempting to draw upon his Captain; he took his Rapier from him, and
struck him on the head, with the Hilt, of which wound, three or four days
after he died: the Captain was tried by a Council of War, and acquitted by the
largeness of his Commission.

This Year Mr. Edward Winslow went for England, upon occasion that some
discontented persons, under the Government of the Massachusetts, sought to
trouble their peace, and disturb, if not innovate their Government, by laying
many scandals upon them, and intended to prosecute against them in England, by
petitioning and Complaining to the Parliament. Also Samuel Gorton and his
company, made complaint against them; so as they made choice of Mr. Winslow to
be their Agent to make their defense, and gave him Commission and Instructions
for that end; in which he so carried himself, as did well answer their ends,
and cleared them from any blame and dishonor, to the shame of their
Adversaries. After this he fell upon other employments in English, which
detained him there, so as he returned not again to New England any more, whose
absence has been much to the weakening of the Government of New Plymouth, who
had large experience of his help and usefulness amongst them in Government, and
C. of whom I have more to insert in honor of so worthy a Gentleman in its more
proper place.

1647.
MR. William Bradford was Elected Governor of the Jurisdiction of
New Plymouth: Mr. Edward Winsow, Mr. Thomas Prince, Mr. William Collier, Mr.
Timothy Hatherly, Captain Miles Standish, Mr. John Brown, And Mr. William
Thomas, were Elected his Assistants in Government.

This Year the whole Land, but more especially the Church and Town of Hartford
on Conecticot, sustained a great and more then ordinary Loss, by the Death of
that most eminent Servant of Jesus Christ Mr. Thomas Hooker, who in the The
Death of Mr. Hooker.
Month of July in this year changed this Life for a better: Concerning whose
Piety, Learning, and singular dexterity in Preaching the Gospel with answerable
success, the many Souls wrought upon by his Ministry in both Old-England and
New, do give forth a large Testimony; and withal, as an addition to the
former, those Learned and Profitable Works penned by him for the Refutation of
Error, and guiding and confirming of the Saints in the Ways of Christ: In
which respects, with others, his Name will live, and is Embalmed; and does
remain, and will be as a precious Ointment in the Churches, and amongst the
Saints, in present and future Ages.

This special Servant of Christ, as he served his Master with great Zeal, Love,
Wisdom, and Sincerity; so he ended his Life with much Comfort and Serenity: so
as it is rare that was said of him, That the peace which he had in believing
thirty years before his death, was firm and not touched by the Adversary until
the period of his life: And with much joy and peace in believing he fell asleep
in the Lord, and was honorably buried at Hartford on Conecticot.

In whose Memorial, I shall here insert the Funeral Elegies of two eminent
Divines, written upon his Death.

On my Reverend and dear Brother, Mr. Thomas Hooker, Late Pastor of the Church
at Hartford on Conecticot.
T O see three things was holy Austins wish,
Rome in her Flower, Christ Jesus in the Flesh,
And Paul s'th Pulpit: (...) men might see,
Two first, and more, in Hookers Ministry.
Zion in Beauty, is a fairer ^g^t,
Then Rome in Flower, with all her glory dight;
Yet Zions Beauty did most clearly shine
In Hookers Rule, and Doctrine: both Divine.
Christ in the Spirit, is more then Christ in Flesh,
Our Souls to quicken, and our States to bless?
Yet Christ in Spirit brake forth mightily,
In faithful Hookers searching Ministry.
Paul in the Pulpit, Hooker could not reach,
Yet did He Christ in Spirit so lively preach,
That living Hearers thought He did inherit
A double Portion of Paul's lively spirit.
Prudent in Rule, in Argument quick, full:
Fervent in Prayer, in Preaching powerful:
That well did learned Ames record bear,
The like to Him he never wont to hear.
'Twas of Geneva's Worthies said, with wonder,
(Those Worthies Three:) Farell was went to Thunder;
Virer like Rain, on tender grass to shower;
But Calvin, lively Oracles to pour.
All these in Hookers spirit did remain:
A Son of Thunder, and a Shower of Rain,
A pourer forth of Lively Oracles,
In saving Souls, the sum of Miracles.
Now blessed Hooker, thou art set on high,
Above the thankless world, and cloudy skic:
Do thou of all thy labor reap the Crown,
Whilst we here reap the seed which thou have sown.
J.C.

A Lamentation for the Death of that Precious and Worthy Minister of Jesus
Christ, Mr. Thomas Hooker, who died July 7. 1647. as the Sun was Setting: the
same hour of the day died blessed Calvin, that glorious Light.
Come sighs, come sorrows, let us lament this Rod,
Which has bereaved us of this Man of God:
A Man of God, which came from God to men,
And now from them is gone to God again.
Bid Joy depart, bid Merriment be gone;
Bid Friends stand by, sit sorrowful alone.
But ah! what sorrow can be to suffice,
Though Heaven and Earth were filled with our cries.
The Clouds were turned into drops of tears,
The Mourning for to last an Age of Years?
'Twere all too little to lament his death,
Whose life so precious was for Heaven and Earth.
Job wished his day might quite forgotten me,
Which brought him forth this worlds light first to see:
O let not the day numbered be in th Year,
That took this Light out of our Hemisphere.
A fatal day, a day of sad presage
To us survivers of this present Age:
The hour of thy decease when Sun went down,
When light turned dark, when heavens began to frown.
It Is ominous to us who saw his light,
That Grace provoked should turn our day to night;
And Gospels light which shin^th from on high,
Should clouded be, and darkened in our sky.
O happy days, when such Lights shine on Earth!
O bitter days, when they are hid beneath!
This is our grief, He which late shined on high
Is hid in grave, and now beneath does lie.
Let Hartford sigh, and say, I Have lost a Treasure;
Let all New England mourn at Gods Displeasure,
In taking from us one more gracious,
Then is the Gold of Ophir precious.
Sweet was the savor which his grace did give,
It seasoned all the place where he did live:
His Name did as an Ointment give it is smell,
And all bare witness that it savored well.
Wisdom, Love, Meekness, Friendly Courtesy,
Each Moral Virtue, with rare Piety,
Pure Zeal, yet mixed with mildest Clemency,
Did all conspire in this one Breast to lie.
Deep was his Knowledge, Judgment was acute;
His Doctrine solid, which none could confute.
To Mind he gave light of intelligence,
And searched the corners of the Conscience:
To Sinners stout, which no Law could bring under,
To them he was a Son of dreadful Thunder,
When all strong Oaks of Bashan used to quake,
And fear did Lebanus his Cedars shake;
The stoutest Hearts he filled full of fears,
He clave the Rocks, they melted into tears.
Yet to sad Souls, with sense of Sin cast down,
He was a Son of Consolation.
Sweet peace he gave to such as were c^ntrite;
Their darkness sad he turned to joyous light.
Of Preaching he had learned the rightest Art,
To every one dividing his own part.
Each Ear that he^^d him said, He spoke to me:
So piereing was his holy Ministry.
His Life did shine, Times Changes stained it not,
Envy it self could not there find a spot.
Had he survived to finish Works begun,
'I had been a Blessing to all Christendom:
Then should the world have known what God had showed him,
And what themselves for all his Works had owed him.
But this unthankful Age is now cut short
Of that rich Treasure, 'c^^se they c^r'd not for it
O that his love may turn us, yet to prize
The blessings yet enjoyed: herein be wise;
Left that which he not long ago foretold,
Be now in us fulfilled, as 'twas of old,
That wantonness of Churches, would bereave
Them of their Ministers, without their leave.
God plaguing this his messengers contempt,
With this soul-stroying Plague and Punishment:
But whatsoever wrath does us abide,
Whatever plague for sin does us betide,
Yet thou, O blessed Saint, art now at rest,
In The bosom of thy Christ which is the best:
Bathing in rivers of divine pleasure,
Which is at Gods right hand, most sweet and pure;
Tasting the fruit of all thy labors spent,
To honor God which was thy whole intent.
From God thou cam^st forth, who sent thee hither
And now has called thee back to live together;
Him did thou serve, while life and breath did last,
With him now blessed, while life and breath is past.
Sense of our loss would call thee back again,
But out of love, we bid thee there remain,
Till we yet left behind our course fulfill,
To meet thee on the top of Zion hill;
When thou and we shall both rejoice together,
So fast united as no death shall sever;
Both to sing praises to our heavenly King,
Who has us saved from deaths poisonous sting,
And will restore our bodies from the grave,
Which them to dust of death consumed have;
Making them shine, like brightness of the Sun
With Glory, never to end when once begun.
Let Heaven, and Earth, Angels, and Men him praise,
Sounding his Glory past all length of days.
P. B.

1648.
THis Year Mr. William Bradford was elected Governor of the Jurisdiction of
New Plymouth: And Mr. Thomas Prince, Mr. William Collier, Captain Miles
Standish, Mr. Timothy Hatherly, Mr. John Brown, Mr. William Thomas, were chosen
his Assistants in Government.

1649.
THIS Year Mr. William Bradford was Elected Governor of the Jurisdiction of
New Plymouth: Mr. Thomas Prince, Mr. William Collier, Captain Miles Standish
Mr. Timothy Hatherly, Mr. John Brown, And Mr. William Thomas, were Chosen his
Assistants in Government.

This Year Mr. John Winthrop Governor of the Jurisdiction of the Massachusetts
deceased, the twenty sixth day of March, about ten of the clock. He was
singular for Piety, Wisdom, The death of Mr. Winthrop.
and of a public spirit: he brought over a great estate into the Country, and
partly by his liberality, and partly by the unfaithfulness of his Baily, spent
the most part of it, so as when he died, he was but low in that respect: and
yet notwithstanding, very much honored and beloved of the most, and continued
in the place of Governor for the most part until his death, which was much
lamented by many. He was a man of unbyassed Justice, patient in respect of
personal wrongs and injuries, a great lover of the Saints, especially able
Ministers of the Gospel, very sober in desiring, and temperate in improving
earthly contentments; very humble, courteous, and studious of general good. His
body was with great solemnity and honor, buried at Boston in New England, the
third of April, 1649.

This year some parts of the Country was much troubled with numerable hosts of
Caterpillars, which destroyed the fruits of the earth in diverse places; and did
eat off the leaves of the trees, so as they looked as bare as if it had been
winter: An innumerable company of catterpillers in some parts of the Country.
and in some places did eat the leaves from off the Pease straw, and did not
eat the Pease. It pleased God to give them a check, and a rebuke, so as they
hurt but in some places, and of his goodness in short time removed them.

This Year August 25. that faithful and eminent servant of Christ Mr. Thomas
Shepard died, who was a soul-searching Minister of the Gospel, and Pastor of
the Church of Christ at Cambridge. By his death not only that Church and
people, but also all New England sustained a very great loss: he not only
preached the Gospel profitably and very successively, but also has left
behind him diverse worthy works of special use, in reference unto the clearing
up the state of the soul to Godward; the benefit thereof, those can best
experience, who are most conversant in the improving of them, and have Gods
blessing on them therein to their souls good. His body was honorably buried at
Cambridge in New England.

Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, for their works follow them, Rev 3.
13.

This Year there passed an Act of Parliament in England, for the promoting and
propagating the Gospel of Jesus Christ amongst the Indians in New England; in
reference unto the furtherance and advancement of so good a work, a Corporation
of sixteen Select men were appointed, consisting of a President, Treasurer, and
Assistants, called by the name of the President and Society for the propagation
of the Gospel in New England, to receive such sums of money, as from time to
time was, or should be collected and raised by the liberal contributions of
such as whose hearts God was pleased to stir up to so glorious a work; and it
was by the same Parliament Enacted, that the Commissioners for the United
Colonies of New England, for the time being, by themselves or such as they
shall appoint, shall have Power and Authority to receive and dispose of the
said moneys brought in and paid to the said Treasurer for the time being, or
any other Moneys, Goods or Commodities acquired and delivered by the care of
the said Corporation at any time: whose receipt or receipts of such Person or
Persons so Authorized by them, shall be a sufficient discharge to the said
Corporation and Treasurer. The particulars of such Orders and Instructions,
with which the said Act is invested, the Reader may be more amply satisfied in,
by the perusat thereof, as it is extant bearing date, July 27. 1649.

Moreover, let the Reader take notice of the special favor of Almighty God, in
moving the heart of the Kings Majesty, since his Restitution to his Crown and
Regal Dignity, particularly of his Royal Favor to countenance this work, and
to secure what has been, and what may be given toward this work, by a legal
settlement, which before was wanting; so as the said glorious design has been
vigorously carried on, both in Old England and in New, by such active and
faithful Instruments as God has raised up and improved therein, with some
considerable success. The work coming on to such perfection, as that the Holy
Bible is Translated and Printed in the Indian Language, whereby the glad
tidings of the Gospel is, and may be communicated to them with the greater
facility: some souls also of them being gained (as may be hoped) to believe on
the Lord Jesus for life everlasting; and daily hopes of further and greater
success in that behalf, for which unspeakable riches of his grace, let his Holy
Name have all the praise throughout all ages.

The Principal Instruments improved in Preaching the Gospel of Christ unto the
Indians, are Mr. John Eliot Senior. Mr. John Eliot Junior. Mr. Thomas Mayhew.
Mr. Pierson. Mr. Brown. Mr. James. Mr. Cotton.


Besides diverse of their own Nation, whose Names and number I know not.

1650.
THis Year Mr. William Bradford was Elected Governor of the Jurisdiction of
New Plymouth: Mr. Edward Winslow, Mr. Thomas Prince, Mr. William Collier,
Captain Miles Standish, Mr. Timothy Hath^rly, Mr. John Brown, and Mr. William
Thomas, Chosen Assistants to him in Government.

This Year there was more then ordinary mortality in the Country, especially
about Boston, and mostly amongst their Children: since which time, several
diseases have been in the New diseases the fruits of new si^s.
Country more frequently then formerly; as namely, gripings in the bowels, with
violent Vomiting and Purging, which has taken away many: as also a disease in
the Mouth or Throat, which has proved mortal to some in a very short time; as
also great distempers of Colds, and c. which ought to be awakening
dispensations, together with others, to cause us to consider and examine,
whether we have not provoked the Lord with some general and unwonted sins;
inasmuch as he is pleased to exercise the Country o^t-times with unwonted
afflictions and punishments.

1651.
THis Year Mr. William Bradford was Elected Governor of the Jurisdiction of
New Plymouth: Mr. Thomas Prince, Mr. William Collier, Captain Miles Standish,
Mr. Timothy Hatherly, Mr. John Brown, Mr. John Aldens, Captain Thomas Willet,
were Chosen his Assistants in Government.

This Year Mr. William Thomas expired his natural life, in much peace and
comfort: he served in the place of Magistracy in the Jurisdiction of Plymouth
diverse Years; he was a well Mr. William Thomas his death.
approved and a well grounded Christian; well read in the Holy Scriptures, and
other approved Authors, and a good lover and approver of Godly Ministers and
good Christians, and one that had a sincere desire to promote the common good
both of Church and State. He died of a Consumption, and was honorably buried
at Marshfield, in the Jurisdiction of NewPlimouth.

1652.
THis year Mr. William Bradford was Elected Governor of the Jurisdiction of
New Plymouth. And Mr. Thomas Prince, Capt. Miles Standish, Mr. Timothy
Hatherly, Mr. John Brown, Mr. John Alden, Captain Thomas Willet, and Lieut.
Thomas Southworth Were Chosen his Assistants in Government.

This Year that blessed Servant of God, Mr. John Cotton died; he was sometimes
Preacher of Gods Word at Boston in Of (...) Life, Mr. Norton has Penned a Book
whereunto I refer the Reader for more fail relation of the same.
Lincolnshire, and from thence came over into New England, in the Year 1633,
and was chosen Teacher of the first Church of Christ at Boston: for which
Function and Office, he was greatly enriched with gifts and (...), being an
able expounder, and faithful applier of the Word of God; furnished also with
wisdom and prudence to go before the Church, in the ordering of the affairs
thereof; endowed also with meekness of spirit, whereby he was sitted to compose
such differences as did at any time arise amongst them: he was very patient
also in respect unto personal wrongs or injuries done unto himself, yea,
toward his sharpest Antagonists. An influence of good, not only flowed from
him unto the Church over whom he was set, but also into all the Churches in
New England (as necessity required.) A Come^ (...) at the time of Mr. (...)
sickness, and w^^t out soon after his death.
About the time of his sickness, there appeared in the Heavens, over
New England, a Comet, giving a dim light; and so waxed dimmer and dimmer, until
it became quite extinct and went out, which time of its being extinct, was soon
after the time of the period of his life: it being a very signal testimony,
that God had then removed a bright Star, a burning and shining light out of the
heaven of his Church here, unto Celestial glory above. He was buried at Boston
in New England, with great Honor and Lamentation, in the Year above written.

Upon whose never enough deplored death, were made these Verses following.

A Funeral Elegy upon the death of the truly Reverend Mr. John Cotton, late
Teacher of the Church of Christ at Boston in New England.
A Nd after Winthrop's, Hooker's, Shepard's Hearse,
Does Cotton's death call for a mourning Verse?
Thy Will be done: yet Lord who dealest thus,
Make this great death expedient for us.
Luther pulled down the Pope, Calvin the Prelate slew:
Of Calvin's Lapse, chief cure to Cotton's due.
Cotton whose Learning, Temper, Godliness,
The German Phoenix lively did express.
Melancthon's all, may Luthers word but pass;
Melancthons all, in our great Cotton was.
Then him in flesh, scarce dwelt a better one:
So great's our loss, when such a Spirits gone.
Whilst He was here, Life was more Life to me;
Now He is not, Death hence less Death shall be.
That Comets, great Men's deaths do often forego,
This present Comet does too sadly show.
This Prophet dead, yet must in's Doctrine speak
This Comet says, else must New England break.
What ere it be, the Heavens avert it far,
That Meteors should succeed our greatest Star.
In Bostons Orb, Winthrop and Cotton were;
These Lights extinct, dark is our Hemisphere.
In Boston once how much shined of our glory,
We now lament, Posterity will story.
Let Boston live, who had, and saw their worth:
And did them Honor, both in life and death,
To him New England trust in this distress,
Who will not leave his exiles comfortless.
J. N.

Upon the TOMB of the most Reverend Mr. John Cotton, late Teacher of the Church
of Boston in New England.
H Ere lies magnanimo^ Humility,
Majesty, Meekness; Christian Apathy
On soft Affections: Liberty in thrall;
A Noble Spirit, Servant unto all.
Learnings great Masterpiece; who yet would sit
As a Disciple at his Scholars feet;
A simple Serpent, or Serponti^e Dove,
Made up of Wisdom, Innocence, and Love.
Neatness Embroidered with it self alone;
And Civils Canonized in a Gown:
Embracing old and young, and low and high;
Ethics imbodyed in Divinity:
Ambitious to be lowest, and to raise
His Brethrens Honor on his own Decays.
Thus does the Sun retire into his bed,
That being gone, the Stars may show their head.
Could wound at Argument without Division;
Cut to the quick, and yet make no Incision;
Ready to Sacrifice Domestic Notions
To Churches Peace, and Ministers Devotions.
Himself indeed (and singular in that)
Whom all admired, he admired not.
Lived like an Angel of a Mortal Birth,
Conversed in Heaven while he was on Earth:
Though not (as Moses) radiant with Light,
Whose Glory dazell'd the beholders sight;
Yet so divinety beautified, youl'd count
He had been born and bred upon the Mount.
A living breathing Bible: Tables where
Both Covenants at large engraven were;
Gospel and Law in's Heart had each its Colume
His Head an Index to the Sacred Volume.
His very Name a Title Page; and next,
His Life a Commentary on the Text.
O what a Monument of glorious worth,
When in a New Edition he comes forth
Without Errata's, may we think (...) be.
In Leaves and Covers of Eternitis!
A man of Might at heavenly Eloquence,
To fix the Ear, and charm the Conscience.
As if Apollos were revived in him,
Or he had learned of a Seraphim.
Spoke many Tongues in one: one Voice and Sense
Wrought Joy and Sorrow, Fear and Confidence.
Rocks rent before him, Blind received their sight;
Souls levelled to the dunghill, stood upright.
Infernal Furies burst with rage to see
Their Prisoners captived into Liberty.
A Star that in our Eastern England rose,
Thence hurried by the Blast of stupid foes,
Whose soggy Darkness, and benumbed Senses,
Brook'd not his dazzling servent Influences.
Thus did he move on Earth from East to West;
There he went down, and up to Heaven for Rest.
Nor from himself, whilst living does he vary,
His Death has made him an Ubiquitary:
Where is his Sepulcher is hard to tell,
Who in a thousand Sepulchers does dwell;
(Their Hearts, I mean, whom be has left behind,)
In them his Sacred Relique's now Ensbrin'd.
But let his Mourning Flock be comforted,
Though Moses be, yet Joshua is not dead:
I mean Renomned NORTON; worthy be
Successor to our MOSES is to be,
O happy Israel in AMERICA,
In such a MOSES such a JOSHUA.
B. W.

1653.
MR. William Bradford was Elected Governor of the Jurisdiction of
New Plymouth: Mr. Thomas Prin, Captain Miles Standish, Mr. Timothy Hatherly,
Mr. John Brown, Mr. John Alden, Captain Thomas Willet, and Lieut. Thomas
Southworth, were Chosen his Assistants in Government.

Mr. Thomas Dudley, who was a principal Founder and Pillar of the Colony of the
Massachusetts in New England, and sundry times Governor and Deputy Governor of
that Jurisdiction, died at his house in Roxbury, July 31. in the seventy
seventh Year of his age: he was a person of quick understanding, and solid
Judgment in the fear of the Lord; he was a lover of (1) Justice. (2) Order.
(3) the People. (4) Christian Religion; the supreme virtues of a good
Magistrate. 1. His love to Justice appeared at all times, and in special upon
the judgment seat, without respect of persons in Judgment: and in his own
particular transactions, with all men he was exact and exemplary. 2. His zeal
to Order appeared in contriving good Laws, and faithfully executing them upon
criminal offenders, Heretics, and Underminers of true Religion. He had a
piercing Judgment to discover the Wolf, though cloached with a sheep-skin. 3.
His love to the People was evident in serving them in a public capacity many
Years, at his own cost, and that as a nursing Father to the Churches of Christ.
4. He loved the true Christian Religion, and the pure Worship of God, and
cherished as in his bosom, all godly Ministers and Christians: he was exact in
the practice of Piety, in his person and family all his life; in a word, he
lived desired, and died lamented by all good men.

The Verses following were found in his Pocket after his death, which may
further illustrate his Character, and give a taste of his poetical fancy:
wherein (it is said) he did excel.

DIm Eyes. dea^ Ears, cold stomach show
My dissolution is in view.
Eleven times seven near lived have I,
And now God calls, I willing die:
My Shuttle's shot, my race is run,
My Sun is set, my Deed is done;
My Span is measured, Tale is told,
My Flower is faded and grown old,
My Dream is vanished, Shadow^s fled,
My Soul with Christ, my Body dead.
Farewell dear Wife, Children, and Friends,
Hate Here^it, make blessed ends;
Bear Poverty, live with good men,
So shall we meet with joy again.
Let men of God in Courts and Churches watch^
Over such as do a Toleration hatch;
Left that ill Egg bring forth a Cockatrice,
To poison all with Heresi^ and Vice.
If men be left and otherwise combine,
My Epitaph's, I died no Libertine.
This Year Mr. John Laythrop did put off his Earthly Tabe^^acle: He was
sometimes Preacher of Gods Word in Egerton in Kent, from whence he went to
London, and was chosen pastor of a Church of Christ there; he was greatly
troubled and imprisoned for witnessing against the errors of the times: during
the time of his imprisonment, his wife fell sick, of which sickness ^^e died.
He procured liberty of the Bishop to visit his wife, before her death, and
commended her to God by Prayer, who soon after gave up the ghost: at his return
to prison, his poor Children being many, repaired to the Bishop to L^mbeth, and
made known unto him their miserable condition, by reason of their good Father
his being continued in close durance; who commiserated their condition so far,
as to grant him his liberty, who soon after came over into New England, and
settled for some time at the Town of Situate,and was chosen pastor of their
Church, and faithfully dispended the Word of God amongst them: and afterward
the said Church dividing, a part whereof removing to B^rnstable, he removed
with them, and there remained until his death. He was a man of an humble and
broken heart and spirit, lively in dispensation of the Word of God; studious of
peace, furnished with godly contentment; willing to spend and to be spent for
the Cause and Church of Christ. He fell asleep in the Lord, Nov.8.1653.

1654.
THis Year Mr. William Bradford was Elected Governor of the Jurisdiction of
New Plymouth: Mr. Thomas Prince, Captain Miles Standish, Mr. William Collier,
Mr. Timothy Hatherly, Mr. John Brown, Mr. John Alden, and Capt. Thomas Willet,
were Chosen Assistants to him in Government.

1655.
THis Year Mr. William Bradford was Elected Governor of the Jurisdiction of
New Plymouth: Mr. Thomas Prince, Captain Miles Standish Mr. William Collier,
Mr. Timothy Hatherly, Mr. John Brown, Mr. John Alden, and Captain Thomas
Willet, were Chosen Assistants to him in Government.

The death of Mrs. Winslow.
This year that Worthy and Honorable Gentleman Mr. Edward Winslow deceased; of
whom I have had occasion to make honorable mention formerly in this Discourse.
He was the Son of Edward Winslow Esquire of the Town of Dranghtwith in the County
of Worcester: He traveling into the LowCountreys, in his Journeys fell into
acquaintance with the Church of Leyden in Holland, unto whom he joined, and
with whom he continued until they parted to come into New England, he coming
with that part that came first over, and became a very worthy and useful
Instrument amongst them, both in the place of Government and otherwise, until
his last Voyage for England, being sent on special Employment for the
Government of the Massachusetts, as is forementioned in this Book; and
afterward was employed as one of the grand Commissioners in that unhappy
Design against Domingo in Hispaniola, who taking grief for the ill success of
that Enterprise; on which, together with some other Infirmities that were upon
him, he fell sick at Sea betwixt Domingo and Jamaica, and died the eighth day
of May, which was about the Sixty first year of his life, and his Body was
honorably committed to the Sea, with the usual Solemnity of the Discharge of
Forty two Piece of Ordnance.

One of the Company who was employed in taking notice of the Particulars of
that Tragedy, gave such Testimony of the said Mr. Winslow, as follows in this
poem:

The English of May, west from'Spaniola shore,
God took from us our Grand Commissioner,
Winslow by Name, a man in Chiefest Truft,
Whose Life was sweet, and conversation just;
Whose parts and wisdom most men did excel:
An h^nour to his Place, as all can tell
1656
THis Year Mr. William Bradford was Chosen Governor of the Jurisdiction of
New Plymouth: Mr. Thomas Prince, Mr. William Collier, Mr. Timothy Hatherly,
Captain Miles Standish, Mr. John Alden, Capt. Thomas Willet, and Capt. James
Cudworth, were chosen to be his Assistants in Government.

This Year Captain Miles Standish expired his mortal life: He was a Gentleman,
born in Lancashire, and was HeirApparent The death of capt. Standish,
unto a great Estate of Lands and Livings, surreptitiously detained from his;
his great Grandfather being a Second or Younger Brother from the House of
Standish. In his younger time he went over into the Low Countries, and was a
Soldier there, and came acquainted with the Church of Leyden, and came over
into New England with such of them as at the first set out for the Planting of
the Planation of New Plymouth, and bare a deep share of their first
Difficulties, and was always very faithful to their Interest: He growing
ancient, became sick of the Stone or Strangullion; whereof, his suffering of
much dolorous pain, he fell asleep in the Lord, and was honorably buried at
Duxbury.

1657.
THis year Mr. Thomas Prince was Chosen Governor of the Jurisdiction of
New Plymouth. This Election was on the fifth of June 1657. and M William
Bradford died the 9th of May in this year before this Election.
Mr. William Collier, Mr. Timothy Hatherly, Mr. John Alden, Captain Thomas
Willet, Capt. James Cudworth, Capt. Josias Winslow, and Lieut. Tho: Southworth,
Were Chosen his Assistants in Government.

This Year it pleased God to put a period to the life of his precious Servant
Mr. William Bradford, who was the second Governor of the Jurisdiction of
Plymouth, and continued in the same place for the most part of his time, with
little intermission. Concerning whom, the following Poems made, the one by
himself, and the other by such as were well acquainted with his Worth and
Excellency, will give a large Testimony thereof.

Certain Verses left by the Honored William Bradford Esquire Governor of the
Jurisdiction of Plymouth, penned by his own hand, declaring the gracious
dispensation of Gods Providence toward him in the time of his Life, and his
preparation and sittedness for Death.
F Rom my years young in days of Youth,
God did make known to me his Truth,
And called me from my Native place
For to enjoy the Means of Grace.
In Wilderness he did me guide,
And in strange Lands for me provide.
In Fears and Wants, through Weal and Woe,
As Pilgrim past I to and fro:
Often left of them whom I did trust:
How vain it is to rest on Dust!
A man of Sorrows I have been,
And many Changes I have seen.
Wars, Wants, Peace, Plenty have I known;
And some advanced, others thrown down.
The humble, poor, cheerful and glad;
Rich, discontent, sower and sad:
When Fears with Sorrows have been mixed,
Consolations came betwixt.
Faint not, poor Soul, in God still trust,
Fear not the things thou suffer must;
For, whom he loves he does chastise,
And then all Tears wipes from their eyes.
Farewell, dear Children, whom I love,
Your better Father is above:
When I am gone, he can supply;
To him I leave you when I dye.
Fear him in Truth, walk in his Ways,
And he will bless you all your days.
My days are spent, Old Age is come,
My Strength it fails, my Glass near run:
Now I will wait when work is done,
Until my happy Change shall come,
When from my labors I shall rest
With Christ above for to be blessed.
By the honored, Major Josias Winslow, on the the said Mr. William Bradford,
as follows:
WILLIAM BRADFORD. Anagr.

I made Law for Bridl'.
For Law I made Bridl'.
S Ee how God honored has this Worthy's Name,
To make it spell his Virtue and proclaim
His rare Endowments, used for God and Us:
Now such as honor God, he will honor thus.
Both Just, and Gentle; Merciful, and Just;
And yet a Man, and yet composed of Dust?
Yes, God within these slender walls can find
A Noble, Virtuous, Studious, Active Mind.
God was the Guider of his Childhood, Youth;
God did preserve him ever in the Truth,
And gave him grace to own Him when but young,
Whom afterward he made a Champion strong
For to defend his People, and his Cause,
By Wisdom, Justice, Prudence, and by Laws;
And most of all by his own good Example,
A Pattern fit to imisate most ample.
If we should trace him from the first, we find
He flies his Country, leaves his Friends behind,
To follow God, and to profess his Ways,
And here encounters Hardships many days.
He is content (with Moses) if God please,
(Renouncing Honor, Profit, Pleasure, Ease)
To suffer Tossings and Unsettlements,
And (if their Rage does rise) to Banishments
He weighs it not, so he may still preserve
His Conscience clear, and with Gods People serve
Him freely, 'cording to his mind and will;
If not in one place, he will go forward still.
If God have Work for him in the Ends of the Earth,
Safe, Danger, Hunger, Colds, nor any Dearth,
A howling Wilderness, nor Salvage men,
Discourage him, he will follow God again.
And how God has made him an Instrument
To us of quiet Peace and Settlement,
I need not speak; the eldest, youngest know
God honored him with greater Work then so.
To sum up all, in this still he went hence,
This man was wholly God's; His Recompense
Remains beyond expression, and he is
Gone to possess it in Eternal Bliss.
He Is happy, happy thrice; unhappy we
That still remain more Changes here to see:
Let Us not lament that God has taken him
From Troubles hence, in Seas of Joys to swim.
Let Us not lament his gracious Life is ended,
And he to Life of Glory is attended;
Nor let us grieve that now Gods Work is done,
In making him a happy blessed one.
But let us bewail that we have so neglected
Duty to God; or men have disrespected,
With earnest Lamentations let us lament,
And whiles we may let us seriously Repent,
That we have not improved as we might,
For God, and for our selves, this worthy wight;
And now that God has Moses taken away,
Let Us pray that he would give us Joshua
To go before the Camp, and to subdue
God's and his People's foes; whatever Crew
Oppose our Journeys to that Land of Rest,
Which till obtained, we are never truly blessed.
And for our better progress in this course,
Let now our great Necessity enforce
Each man to study Peace, and to improve
His greatest strength to reunite in Love
The Hearts and the Affections of us all,
Lest by our fault Gods Work to the ground should fall
W hy mourns the People thus for me, Since I
I n Heavens dwell shall to Eternity?
L ^t not so many Tears fall from my Friends;
L ive holy, happy, God will recompense
I nto your bosoms all your love again,
A nd your affections whiles I did remain
M ongst you, but now you must refrain.
B Eat up your hearts, dear hearts, when thoughts of me
R un in your minds, with this, The time will be,
A nd every hour brings it on apace,
D ear friends, when we for ever shall embrace.
F arewell but for a season then, farewell;
O ur next Embraces shall the rest excel.
R est happy, Children, Friends, and Tender Wife,
D eath but begins the godly's happy Life.
A few Verses more added by one that was well acquainted with the Worth of the
said Mr. William Bradford.
T He Ninth of May, about Nine of the Clock,
A precious one God out of Plymouth took:
Governor Bradford then expired his breath,
Was called away by force of cruel Death.
A man approved in Town, in Church, in Court,
Who so behaved himself in godly sort
For the full space of Thirty seven years,
As he was means of turning many fears
Away from thee, poor Plymouth, where he spent
The better part of time that God him lent.
Well skilled he was in Regulating Laws,
So as by Law he could defend the Cause
Of poor distressed Plaintiff, when he brought
His Case before him, and for help besought.
Above all other men, he loved those
Who Gospel Truths most faithfully unclose,
Who were with Grace and Learning fully fraught,
Such as laboriously the Gospel taught:
Willing also to own in his due place
The meanest Saint, expressing gifts of grace.
Sweet Brewster he is gone some time before,
Wise Winslow whose death we lament so sore,
And faithful Standish freed from horrid pain,
To be with Christ, in truth the greatest gain:
Now blessed holy Bradford, a Successor
Of blessed holy Bradford the Confessor,
Is gone to place of Rest, with many more
Of precious ones, whom I might name great store,
And Commendation of each one have given;
But what needs that? their Names are writ in Heaven.
And now, dear Lord, let us our time improve,
To be with thee in Prayer much above.
Oh save thy People, help in time of need;
When all means fails, be thou in room and stead
Of other helps, who fail when needed most;
When greatest need, they then give up the ghost.
And let thy Servant^ their time still employ,
That in the end they may attain such joy
As may a fruit of true Believing be^,
That we with Christ may reign Eternallse.
This Worthy Gentleman was interred with the greatest solemnities that the
Jurisdiction to which he belonged was in a capacity to perform: many deep
sighs, as well as loud volleys of shot, declaring that the People were no less
sensible of their own loss, who were surviving, then mindful of the worth and
honor of him that was deceased; you might now easily discern a heavy heart in
the mournful countenance of every sober minded and considerate man: for as you
have heard in the three or four Years last past, God was pleased greatly to
weaken this poor tottering Colony of Plymouth, by taking away several of the
most useful Props thereof, both in Church and Civil State; some others who had
been of singular use, now stooping under the infirmities of old age, could not
be so serviceable as in times past; and others removed so far from the center
of the Government, that they could not without great difficulties attend their
public concerns, nor could possibly so constantly as our necessities required,
which did greatly aggravate our troubles: we were become weak, when we had need
of greatest strength; had lost many of our Chiestains, when we stood in need of
the best conduct and guidance: for besides the troubles and changes that then
attended our Native Country, and might call for great circumspection in our
walking in relation unto them; we had also at this very time, some amongst us
that growing weary of the long peace and concord that we had enjoyed, and
hoping to fish better in troubled waters, when their bait might be taken in,
and the hook not easily discerned, would willingly have been ringing the
Changes in this Jurisdiction also, pretending a great zeal for liberty of
Conscience, but endeavoring to introduce such a liberty of Will, as would have
proved prejudicial, if not destructive to Civil and Church societies: and at
the same time there arrived in the said Colony many of that pernicious sect
called Quakers whose Opinion are a composition of many errors, and whose
practices tend greatly to the disturbance both of Church and State; many
unstable people amongst us were leavened with their errors, and proved very
troublesome to this as well as other Colonies in New England. But the Lord many
times delights to appear in the Mount of his Peoples miseries, distresses and
troubles, that his power and wisdom may appear when they are weakest, and that
they may know that their salvation is from him. At such a time, and when the
condition of this Colony was such as has been declared, God was pleased to
mind it, even in its low estate, and when he had taken to himself not only our
Moses, but many of the Elders and Worthies of our Israel, he has not hither to
les^us without a Joshua to lead us in the remaining part of our pilgrimage.
When the usual time for the renewing of our (...) of such as should govern us
came, Mr. Thomas Prince was by unanimous vote chosen Governor; and although
men's spirits were so distempered as I have related, and it might have been
expected that they would have been much divided in their choice; yet God (who
disposes the lot that is cast into the lap) so disposed that all their votes
centered there: a good demonstration that he was chosen of God for us, and by
his blessing made an Instrument of much peace and settlement in this place, and
to this people, in these times of trouble and confusion. The Lord also
directing the Freemen of this Jurisdiction at the same time in their Election
to the choice of a discreet and able Council, to be assistant unto our said
honored Governor in this so weighty Work, diverse of them being desrended of
several of the honored Magistrates deceased; not only bearing their Names, but
having a large measure of their Spirit bellowed on them, besitting them for
such Work; so as through the goodness of God, those storms that seemed to the
eaten the subversion of our All, and did at first prevail, to the disturbing
and shaking of many Towns and Churches, and to the great discouragement of the
Ministers in diverse places, do seem to be pretty well blown over; such
uncomfortable jarrs (as have been sometimes thought uncureabie) seem to be
thoroughly reconciled and healed, our Towns for the most part supplied with
godly and able Ministers, and we sit under our Vines and Figtrees in peace,
enjoying both Civil and Religious Liberties: For which goodness of the Lord,
let his holy Name be praised; and may he grant us for to improve our present
opportunities, as he may have some suitable returns, and we may have cause to
hope in his grace for the continuance of such favors.

This Year that much honored and worthy Gentleman, Mr. Theophilus Eaton,
Governor of New-Heaven, deceased; who was very Eminent both on a Religious and
Civil account: His death proved a great blow to that Jurisdiction, and was
seconded (not long after) with the loss of another precious man amongst them,
viz. Mr. Francis Newman.

In this year 1657, in the month of November, Mr. Garret set sail on a Voyage
for England from Boston; in whose Ship, amongst many considerable Passengers,
there went Mr. Thomas Mayhew junior, of Martins-Vineyard, who was a very
precious man: he was well skilled, and had attained to a great proficiency in
the Indian Language, and had a great propensity upon his Spirit to promote Gods
glory in their Conversion, whose Labors God blessed for the doing of much good
amongst them; in which respect he was very much missed amongst them, and
bewailed by them: as also in reference unto the Preaching of Gods Word amongst
the English there. The loss of Mr. Garrets Ship.
The loss of him was very great. Many other sad losses befell sundry others in
the Country by the loss of that Ship, both in their Estates and dear Relations,
to the great grief and sadning of the hearts of many.

1658.
THis year Mr. Thomas Prince was Elected Governor of the Jurisdiction of
New Plymouth. Mr. William Collier, Mr. John Alden, Captain Thomas Willet, Capt.
Josias Winslow, Lieut. Tho: Southworth, Mr. William Bradford, and Mr. Thomas
Hinkley, Were Elected his Assistants in Government.

This Year there was a very great Earthquake in New England.

Also Mr. Ralph Partridge died in a good old Age, having for the space of
forty years dispensed the Word of God with very little impediment by sickness:
His pious and blameless life became very advantageous to his Doctrine; he was
much honored and loved by all that conversed with him. He was of a sound and
solid judgment in the main Truths of Jesus Christ, and very able in
Disputation to defend them; he was very singular in this, That notwithstanding
the pausity and poverty of his Flock, he continued in his Work amongst them to
the end of his life. He went to his grave in peace, as a shock of Corn fully
ripe, and wa^ ^^^^urably buried at Duxbury.

In whose R^^^orance, one who was a true Admirer of his worth, presente^ (...)
at his Funeral.

N Ot Rage, (...) Age; not Age, but Gods Decree,
Did call me hence, my Savior Christ to see,
And to embrace, and from his hand receive
My Crown of ^lorry: Oh who would not leave
A flattering ^^rld, nay Friends, or what is most dear,
The Saints (...) that is enjoyed here,
At once to have God, Christ, Saints, Angels all,
To make complete, and sum our Joys total?
Now I behold Gods Glory face to face,
Now I sit down with Christ, who have run my Race;
Now I sing praise to God, and to the Lamb;
Now I Companion to the Angels am;
Now I behold with greatest joy my Sons
And Daughters all; I mean Converted ones,
Which I was isntrumental in my place
To bring to God, but all of his Free Grace.
How am I Changed! that of late was weak,
Above the force of Satan now to break?
How am I Changed! Son of sorrow late,
But now triumphing in my heavenly state.
How was I vexed with pains, with griefs molested!
How in a moment am I now Invested
With Royal Robes, with Crowns, with Diadems,
With Gods Eternal Loves? Such precious Gems
He has in store for them his Saints that are;
For such indeed he counts his Jewels rare.
Oh Brethren, Sisters, Neighbors, Country, Friends,
I Am now above you: Hark to them God sends,
As yet surviving in their worthy Charge,
Whose work it is Gods Vineyard to enlarge.
God and my Conscience, your experience knows,
Whiles I was with you, I was one of those
That labored faithfully Gods Vineyard in,
Sowing his Seed, and plucking up of Sin.
Now is the Harvest to my self indeed;
The Lord grant a supply of one to feed
Your Souls with heavenly food, and one to lead
^^wayes of God, until his Courts you tread.
Next to Gods love, my Flock, love one another;
And next to Christ, preserve love to thy Brother.
Let ever precious be in your esteem
Gods holy Word; and such as slight it, deem
Of Serpents brood: whatever they pretend,
By no means to such Blasphemies attend.
Decline all wanderings, left from all you stray;
If stepped aside, return in this your day:
Keep close to God, so he that is Most High
Shall you preserve as Apple of his Eye.
And give you peace, on Earth Tranquillity,
Mansions in Heaven to Eternity;
Where we that Death does for a time now sever,
Shall meet, embrace, and shall not part for ever.
Run is his Race,
And his work done;
Left Earthly place,
Partridge is gone,
He Is with the Father and the Son.
Pure joys and constant do attend
All that so live, such is their end.
Return he shall with Christ again,
To Judge both just and sinful men.
Raised is this Bird of Paradise:
Joy Heaven entered breaks the ice.
Death under foot he trodden has;
Grace is to Glory straitest Path,
Ever enjoyes Love free from wrath.
This year, on the last day of July, it pleased God that by Thunder and
Lightning one John Philips of Marshfield, in the Jurisdiction of New Plymouth,
was suddenly slain,

Also in the monet^ of August it pleased God to take away by death Mr. William
Paddy, who was a precious Servant of Christ, endued with a meek and quiet
Spirit, of a courteous behavior to all men, and was very careful to nourish an
intimate Communion with God: He was instrumental in his place for common good
both in the Church, (being sometimes by Office a Deacon of the Church of Christ
at Plymouth) and in other respects very officious as occasion did require. He
having a great Temporal Estate, was occasioned thereby to have abundance of
business upon him: but when he was to put off this his earthly Tabernacle, he
laid aside all his earthly Encumbrances and Occasions, even as one would have
taken off a garment, and laid it down; and without any trouble of Spirit (on
that behalf) prepared himself for his Journey to the Everlasting Mansions,
prepared for him by his Lord and Master in the highest Heavens, whereof he was
well assured; as to the like effect he spoke some words to Mr. Norton, near
unto the period of his life: and so falling asleep in the Lord, he was buried
at Boston with honor and great lamentation, in the year and month
abovementioned.

One who was well acquainted with his Worth and gracious Endowments, presented
this following as a Testimonial of his good respects of him.

Weep not dear Wife, Childeren, nor dear Friends,
I live a life of Joys that never ends.
Love God, and fear him to end of your days:
Live unto him, but die to sin always.
In heavenly place of Bliss my Soul does rest
Among the Saints and Angels I am blessed;
Much better here, then in the world at best.
Praising my God is now my great employ,
Above such troubles as did me annoy.
Did but my friends know what I here possess,
Doubtless it would cause them to mourn the less:
Your Souls with mine ere long shall meet in bliss.
1659.
THis Year Mr. Thomas Prince was Chosen Governor of the Jurisdiction of
New Plymouth: Mr. William Collier, Mr. John Alden, Captain Thomas Willet, Major
Jofias Winslow, Lieut. Thomas Southworth, Mr. William Bradford, and Mr. Thomas
Hinkley, were Chosen Assistants to him in Government.

Having noted before, That in the Year 1657. there arrived in the Colony of
New Plymouth many of that pernicious Sect called Quakers, the Reader may take
notice, That by this time, and for some years after, New England (in diverse
parts of it) abounded with them, and they sowed their corrupt and damnable
Doctrines, both by word and writings, almost in every Town of each
Jurisdiction; some whereof were, That all men ought to attend to the Light
within them to be the Rule of their Lives and Actions; and, That the holy
Scriptures were not for the inlightning of man, nor a settled and permanent Rule
of life. They denied the Manhood of the Lord Jesus Christ, and affirmed, That
as Man he is not in Heaven. They denied the Resurrection from the dead. They
affirmed, That an absolute Perfection in Holiness or Grace is attainable in
this life. They placed their Justification upon their Patience and Suffering
for their Opinions, and on their righteous life, and retired demurity, and
affected singularity both in word and gesture.

As to Civil account, they allowed not nor practiced any civil respect to man,
though superiors, either in Magistratical consideration, or as Masters, or
Parents, or the Ancient, neither by word nor gesture. They deny also the use of
Oaths for the deciding of Civil Controversies; with other abominable Opinions,
Dreams, and Conceits, which some of them have expressed, tending to gross
Blasphemy and Atheism.

This efficacy of Delusion became very prevalent with many, so as the number of
them increased, to the great endangering of the subversion of the whole, both
of Church and Commonwealth, notwithstanding the endeavors of those in
Authority to suppress the same, had not the Lord declared against them, by
blasting their Enterprises and Contrivements, so as they have of late withered
away in a great measure; sundry of their Teachers and Leaders which have caused
them to err, are departed the Country, and we trust the Lord will make the
folly of the remainder manifest to all men more and more. Error is not
long-lived: the day will declare it. Let our deliverance from so emine^t a
danger, be received amongst the principal of the Lords gracious Providence,
and merciful loving kindnesses toward New England; for the which let present
and future generations celebrate his Praises.

This year that Learned and godly Servant of God, Mr. Henry Dunster, fell
asleep in the Lord. He was sometimes President of Harvard College at Cambridge
in New England, in which he approved himself to the satisfaction of such as
were in those Affairs concerned. Afterward he came into the Jurisdiction of
New Plymouth, and lived awhile in the Town of Situate, and was useful in
helping to oppose the abominable Opinions of the Quakers forementioned, and in
the defending of the Truth against them. He deceasing in the said Town of
Soituate, his Body was embalmed, and removed unto Cambridge aforesaid, and
there honorably buried.

1660.
THis Year Mr. Thomas Prince was Chosen Governor of the Jurisdiction of
New Plymouth: Mr. William Collier, Mr. John Alden, Captain Thomas Willet, Major
Josias Winslow, Capt. Tho: Southworth, Capt. William Bradford, and Mr. Thomas
Hinkley, were Chosen Assistants to him in Government.

This year James Pierce, a young man that belonged to Boston coming on Fishing,
and upon occasion putting into Plymouth Harbor, it pleased God that a storm of
Thunder and Lightning arose, and by a blow thereof he was slain of a sudden,
being much scorched and burnt thereby, although his Clothes were made fast and
close about him: so strange was this great work to the wonderment of all that
beheld it.

1661.
THis Year Mr. Thomas Prince was Chosen Governor of the Jurisdiction of
NewPlimouth: Mr. William Collier, Mr. John Alden, Captain Thomas Willet, Major
Josias Winslow, Capt. Thomas Southworth, Capt. William Bradford, and Mr. Thomas
Hinkley, Chosen Assistants to him in Government.

1662.
MR. Thomas Prince was Chosen Governor of the Jurisdiction of New Plymouth:
Mr. William Collier, Mr. John Alden, Captain Thomas Willet, Major Josias
Winslow, Capt. Thomas Southworth, Capt. William Bradford, and Mr. Thomas
Hinkley, were Chosen his Assistants in Government.

This Year upon occasion of some suspicion of some plot intended by the Indians
against the English; Philip the Sachem of Pocanaket, otherwise called Metacom,
made his appearance at the Court held at Plymouth, August 6. did earnestly
desire the continuance of that amity and friendship that has formerly been
between the Governor of Plymouth and his deceased Father and Brother: and to
that end the said Philip does for himself and his successors desire, that they
might for ever remain subject to the King of England, his heirs and successors;
and does faithfully promise and engage, that he and his, will truly and
exactly observe and keep inviolable, such conditions as formerly have been by
his Predecessors made; and particularly, that he will not at any time,
needlessly or unjustly, provoke or raise War with any of the Natives; nor at any
time give, sell, or any way dispose of any Lands (to him or them appertaining)
to any strangers, or to any without our privity or appointment; but will in all
things endeavor to carry peaceably, and inossensively toward the English.

And the said Court did then also express their willingness to continue with
him and his, the abovesaid friendship, and do on their part promise, that they
will afford them such friendly assistance by Advice and otherwise, as they
justly may: And we will require our English at all times to carry friendly
toward them. In witness whereof the said Philip the Sachem has set to his
Hand, as also his Uncle, and Witnessed unto by sundry other of his chief men.

Witness, John Sausamen.

The mark (...) of Francis the Sachem of Nauset.

The mark (...) of Philip alias Metacom.

This year, on the 26 of January, at the shutting in of the Evening, there was
a very great Earthquake in New England, and the same night another, although
something less then the former.

And again, on the 28 of the same month there was another about Nine of the
clock in the morning.

Forasmuch as I have had special occasion several times in this History to
mention diverse Earthquakes that have been in New England, they being great and
terrible works of God, and are usually ominous to some; strokes and visitations
of his hand unto places and peoples where they are; and sometimes the Lord in
the very acting of his power in them, has declared his severity to the
children of men, to their great overthrow and confusion:

I thought it necessary, before I pass on, a little to point at some few
particulars, to work and induce us to a profitable remembrance of them; it
being very considerable that is said by a useful Author, in taking notice of
the Wisdom of God, in preparing the Earth to be a fit Habitation for man to
dwell in, adds withal, That as if man were not always worthy to tread upon
so solid a foundation, we see it oft-times quake and shake, and rock and rend
it self, as if it showed that he which made it threatened by this trembling the
Impiety of the world, and the ruin of those that dwell on the Earth.

In order unto that which I have nominated in this behalf, and more principally
intend, let us take notice, That Writers have rendered the cause of Earthquakes
to be, That when it happens that Air and windy Spirits and Exhalations are
shut up in the Caverns of the Earth, or have such passage as is too narrow for
them, they then striving to break their prisons, shake the Earth, and make it
tremble. They speak likewise of the several kinds of them: as

First, When the whole force of the Wind drives to one place, there being no
contrary motion to let or hinder it; many Hills and Buildings have been rushed
down by this kind of Earthquake, especially when the Wind causing it was
strong: for if it be a feeble Wind, it only looseneth or unfasteneth
Foundations; if less feeble, then without further harm the Earth only shakes,
like one sick of an Ague.

Secondly, The second kind is a swelling of the Earth; the which, when the
Wind is broken out of its prison, the Earth returns to its place again.

Thirdly, A third kind is, A gaping, rending, or cleaving of the Earth one
part from another, so that sometimes whole Towns, Cities, Rocks, Hills, Rivers,
and some parts of the Sea has been swallowed up, and never seen more.

Fourthly, A fourth kind is, Shaking that causes sinking, Thus was the
Atlantic Ocean caused to be a Sea, as Plato affirms, who lived 366 years
before Christ was born.
and is far different from the former; for now the Earth splitteth not, but
sinketh: this being in such places where though the surface of the ground be
solid, yet it has but a salt foundation, which being moistened by water driven
through it by the force of the shaking Exhalation, is turned into water also.

Fifthly, A fifth kind of Earthquake is contrary to the former; for as before
the ground sinks down, so now it is cast up, like as in the second kind
already mentioned: only this is the difference, that now it returns not to
its place again, but remains a great Mountain. And note, that if such a Rising
be in the Sea, it not only causes overflowings, but produces likewise many
Islands, such as were never seen before.

These particulars are treated of at large by approved Authors, and here only
hinted, to the intent that we may take notice of the special Providence of God
to New England in this behalf, that we have not as yet felt the misery of the
worst of the kinds of Earthquakes forenamed, nor swallowed up in them, but
those we have been sensible of have been rather gentle Warnings unto us, to
snake us out of our earthlymindedness, spiritual security, and other sins, left
the Lord do come against us with Judgments of this kind in the ^orest and
worst sort of them, or otherwise by removing the present blessing of godly
Government from us.

Notwithstanding that which has been said, the Efficient Cause is
Supernatural, as either principally God, or instrumentally the Angels, although
naturally the Wind shut up within the Pores and Bowels of the Earth, as is
before-noted.

If the Effects of them usually are such, as by them is sometimes Exodus 19. 18.
Psalm. 29 6. and 104. 32 Matthew 28.2. Psalm. 18.15. Zech. 14.4. Rev. 12, 14. Mat
27 51. Acts 16. 25.
a discovery of the Channels of Water; and Foundations of the World, the
Removing of Mountains from one place to another, the Cleaving of Rocks, and
opening of Graves and of Gates, yea the throwing down of many famous Buildings
and Cities, and some swallowed up, and many thousands of people destroyed
thereby; the turning of plain Land into Mountains; the throwing down of
Mountains, and raising up of Islands in the Sea, the breaking out of Rivers
where there were none before; the discovery of burning Mountains where there
were none seen before; Famine and (...): (of which particulars diverse instances
might be produced out of the Sacred Scriptures, and several other Authors;)
Ought we not then to fear and tremble before so great a God, who (as one faith)
by his Handmaid Nature does so terribly shake the Earth, as no Land can be
sure, no place so strong that can defend us? Nay, the more strong, the more
dangerous, for the higher, the greater the fall. Let us therefore say with the
Wife-man, Eccles.3 14.
I know that whatsoever God does, shall stand for ever; nothing can be put to
it, nor any thing taken from it: and God does it that men should fear before
him.

This Year Mr. John Brown ended this life; in his younger Years traveling into
the low Countries, he came acquainted with, and took good liking to the
Reverend Pastor of the Church of Christ at Leyden as also to sundry of the
Brethren of that Church; which ancient amity induced him (upon h^s coming over
to New England) to seat himself in the Jurisdiction of New Plymouth, in which
he was chosen a Magistrate: in which place he served God and the Country
several Years; he was well accomplished with abilities, to both civil and
religious co^cernments, and attained through Gods grace unto a comfortable
persuasion of the love and savor of God to him; he falling sick of a Fever,
with much serenity and spiritual comfort, fell asleep in the Lord, and was
honorably buried at Wannamoiset near Rehoboth, in the spring of the Year
abovesaid.

1663.
THis Year Mr. Thomas Prince was Chosen Governor of the Jurisdiction of
New Plymouth: Mr. William Collier, Mr. John Alden, Capt. Thomas Willet, Major
Josias Winslow, Capt. Thomas Southworth, Capt. William Bradford Mr. Thomas
Hinckley, were chosen to be his Assistants in Government.

This year Mr. Samuel Newman; Teacher of the Church of Christ at Reboboth,
changed this life for a better. He was sometimes Preacher of Gods Word at
Weymouth in the Jurisdiction of the Massachusetts, and from thence removed to
Rehoboth, where he continued in the Work of the Ministry until the end of his
days. He was a lively dispenser of the Word of God, and of a pious life, very
hospitable, and at the close of his life very full of joy and comfort; and with
cheerfulness of spirit resigned himself up to the Lord, and his Spirit into
arms of his blessed Redeemer, desiring that the holy Angels might do their
office in transporting his Soul into everlasting bliss and happiness. He fell
asleep in the Lord on the the fifth of July 1663.

This year also it pleased God to put a speedy period to the life of Mr. John
Norton, who was a burning and a shining Light; and although the Church of
Boston in a more special manner felt the smart of this sudden blow, yet it
reflected upon the whole Land. He was singularly endowed with the Tongue of the
Learned, enabled to speak a word in due season, not only to the wearied Soul,
but also a word of Counsel to a people in necessity thereof, being not only a
wise Steward of the things of Jesus Christ, but also a wise Statesman; so that
the whole Land sustained a great loss of him. At his first coming over into
New England, he arrived at Plymouth, where he abode the best part of one
Winter, and Preached the Gospel of the Kingdom unto them; and ever after to
his dying day retained a good affection unto them: From thence he went to
Boston, and from thence to ^pswich in New England, where he was chosen the
Teacher of their Church; and after the death of worthy Mr. Cotton he was
solicited, and at length obtained to return to Boston, and there served in
that Office until his death. He was chosen by the Jurisdiction of the
Massachusetts, together with the much honored Mr. Simon Bradstreet, to go over
into England as Agents in the behalf of that Jurisdiction, unto His Majesty and
the Privy Council, upon Business of greatest Trust and Concernment; and soon
after his Return, it pleased God suddenly and unexpectedly to take him away by
death on the fifthday of April, 1663. His Body was honorably buried at Boston.
On whose much lamented death take this following Elegy.

An Elegy on the Death of that Eminent Minister of the Gospel, Mr. John
Norton, the Reverend Teacher of the Church of Christ at Boston, who exchanged
this life for a better April 5. 1663.
A Sk not the reason why Tears are our meat,
And none but Mourners seen in every street?
Our Crown ( alas) is fallen from our head;
We find it off: Woe to us, NORTON's dead.
Our breach is like the Sea, no healing's known:
To comfort Sions daughter is there none?
Oh teach your daughters Wailing every one,
Their Neighbors deepest Lamentation!
Oh that mine eyes a Fountain were of Tears!
I Would day and night in Mourning spend my years.
My Father! Father! Isreal's Chariots thou
And Horsemen were! Sons of the Prophets now
Weep, since your Master from your head is taken:
This Father of the Muses has forsaken
His Study here, not liking our dark Room,
Does ^huse those Mansions in his Fathers Home.
The Schoolmen's Doctors, whomsoe're they call
Subtle, Seraphick, or Angelical:
Dull Souls! their Tapers burnt exceeding dim,
They might to School again to learn of him.
Lombard must out of date: we now profess
Norton the Master of the Sentences.
Scotus, a Dunce to him: Should we compare
Aquinas here, none to be named are.
Of a m^^^ heavenly strain his Notions were,
More pure, sublime, Scholastical and clear:
More like the Apostles Paul and John I wist,
Was this our Orthodox Evangelist.
And though an Exile from his Native Land,
As John in Patmos was; yet here the hand
Of Christ leads forth more clearly to espy
The New-Jerusalem in her bravery.
Who more Acute in Judgment was then he?
More famous too for Heavenly Policy?
He was a wise and faithful Counselor,
One of a thousand, an Interpreter.
Mighty in Word and Prayer, who could have
What're almost from Heaven he did crave
On him, with things without (which I Will not name)
The care of all the Churches daily came.
He cared thus naturally: Oh hear that Rod
Which us bereaved of such a Man of God!
Zealous for Order; very Critical
For what was truly Congregationall.
A Pillar of our Church and State was he;
But now No more, no more his face we see!
Who thought more fit of all his Tribe to stand
Before our King, for favor for our Land
Lately? but now translated is to Rest
This Agent of New-Englands Interest.
When last he Preached, he us the Pattern gave
Of all that Worship Christ in's Church would have:
God then him up into the Mount did call,
To have the Vision Beatificall.
As Thomas to the Twelve said [Come, let us go
And die with him] I Would almost said so too:
I Will yet awhile in Tears sow, that I may
With him in joyful Reapings live for ay.
A Tomb now holds his Souls beloved Shrine,
Of The Holy Ghost a Temple most divine.
And well New-Englands Heart may rent at this;
Wonder not, Reader, I so greatly miss
Fit words, his Worth, our loss and grief to same,
When as no Epitaph can declare the same.
T. S.

Not long after, viz. in the month of July, followed the death of that Eminent
Servant of God, Mr. Samuel Stone, who was another Star of the first Magnitude
in the Firmament of New England. He was a learned, solid, and judicious Divine,
equally able for the Confirmation of the Truth, and Consutation of Errors. His
Ministry was with much Conviction and Demonstration, and when he set himself to
Application, very Powerful. He was Teacher to the Church of Hartford fourteen
years together with Mr. Hooker, and sixteen years after him, Thirty years in
all: He died on the 20 th of July, and was honorably buried at Hartford.

A Threnodia upon our Churches second dark Eclipse, happening July 20. 1663. by
Deaths Interposition between us and that Great Light and Divine Plant, Mr.
Samuel Stone, late of Hartford in New England.
L Ast Spring this Summer may be Autumn styled,
Sad withering Fall our Beauties which despoyl'd:
Two choicest Plants, our Norton and our Stone,
Your Justs threw down; removed, away are gone.
One Year brought Stone and Norton to their Mother
In one Year April July them did smother.
Dame Cambridge Mother to this darling Son;
Emmanuel, Northampt' that heard this one.
Essex, our Bay, Hartford, in Sable clad,
Come bear your parts in this Threnodia sad.
In l^sing One, Church many lost: O then
Many for One come be sad singing men.
May Nature, Grace and Art be found in one
So high, as to be found in few or none?
In him these Three with full-fraught hand contested
With which by each he should be most invested.
The Largess of the Three it was so great
On him, the Stone was held a Light complete:
A Stone more then the Eben-ezer famed;
Stone splendent Diamond, right Orient named;
A Cordial Stone, that often cheared hearts
With pleasant Wit, with Gospel rich imparts;
Whet-Stone, that Edg^fi'd the obtusest Mind;
Lodestone, that drew the Iron Heart unkind;
A Ponderous Stone, that would the Bottom sound
Of Scripture-depths, and bring out Arcan's found;
A Stone for Kingly David' s use so fit,
As would not fail Goliah' s Front to hit;
A Stone an Antidote, that brake the course
Of Gangrene Error by Convincing force;
A Stone Acute, fit to divide and square;
A Squared Stone, became Christ's Building rare;
A Peter's Living lively Stone, ( so Reared)
As live, was Hartfords life; dead, death is feared.
In Hartford old, Stone first drew Infart-breath;
In New eff^s'd his last: O there beneath
His Corpse are laid, near to his darling Brother,
Of whom dead often he sighed, Not such another. Mr. Hooker.

Heaven is the more desirable ( said he)
For Hooker, Shepard, and Hayne^ Company.
E. B.

1664.
THis Year Mr. Thomas Prince was Chosen Governor of the Jurisdiction of
New Plymouth: Mr. William Collier, Mr. John Alden, Captain Thomas Willet, Major
J sias Winslow, Capt. Tho^ Southworth, Capt. William Bradford,and Mr. Thomas
Hinkley, were Chosen Assistants to him in Government.

This year a Blazing-Star or Comet appeared in New England, in the Ninth,
Tenth, Eleventh, and the beginning of the Twelfth Month: Concerning which, it
has been observed, That such was its motion, that in all likelihood it was
visible to all the Inhabitants of the Earth; and that also in its motion the
Blaze of it did turn to all the quarters of the World; and that by its turning
according to the several Aspects it had to the Sun, it was no fiery Meteor
caused by Exhalation, but that it was sent immediately by God to awake the
secure World.

I willingly close with that which Mr. Samuel Danforth has Religiously
observed, as to the Theol^gical Application of this strange and notable
Appearance in the Heavens, That indeed by the Testimony of the Sacred
Scriptures, and the common Histories of former Ages, Comets do usually precede,
and portend great Calamit^^^, and notable Changes.

To add a few more Instances to those the said Author has well observed.

When the Emperor Jovian attained to the Empire, (succeeding the Apostata
Julian, under whom the Church suffered much Persecution) and that under him
both Church and Commonwealth were like to have had a flourishing time, had he
not been taken away by sudden death; Then also appeared Socrates, lib. 4. Cap.
22.
a Comet, showing that further trouble was yet to be expected to the Church.

Again, other Authors make mention of a strange Comet that was seen in the year
of Christ 410, being like a Twoedged Sword, which portended many Mischiefs and
Calamities that happened both in the East and West, and such great slaughters
of men were about those days, as no Age ever afforded the like: All Europe was
in a manner undone; no small part of Asia was affrighted; and Africa also was
not void of those Evils, as War, Famine, Drought and Pestilence: all of them
strove as it were to trouble the whole World.

Also in the Years 1400, 1401, 1402, 1403, Comets appeared, and great
Calamities followed; sundry unheard of Diseases were felt, Rivers dried up, and
Plagues were increased; TamerLain, King of the Scythians and Parthians, with an
innumerable Read Carrion, lib. 5. page 854.
Host invaded Asia, calling himself The Wrath of God, and Desolation of the
Earth.

Also in the Year 1529 appeared four Comets; and in the Years 1530, 1532, and
1533, were seen in each year one.

Lanquet faith, That there were three within the space of two years, upon which
these and the like Calamities followed, viz. A great Swea^ing Sickness in
England, which took away great multitudes of people; The Turk in the quarrel of
John Vuavoyda, who laid Claim to the Crown of Hungaria, entered the said
Kingdom with Two hundred and fifty thousand fighting Soldiers, committing
against the Inhabitants thereof most harsh and unspeakable Murders, Rapes,
Villainies and Cruelties.

Great Famine and Dearth in Venice, and the Countries thereabouts, which swept
away many; The Sweating Sickness in B^^bant, and in a great part of Germany.

Great Wars likewise about the Dukedom of Millain, between the Emperor
Charles the Fifth, and Francis the French King.

About that time also all Lusitania or Portugal was struck with an Earthquake,
insomuch that at Ulisippo, or Lisbon, above a Thousand Houses were thrown down,
and Sixty more so shaken that they were ready to fall: with many other Evils
that besell those parts about that time.

And to observe what has fallen out since this last Comet appeared, will not
be unuseful, either in Europe, or in America.

In Europe, the great Contest between our own Nation and the Since the writing
her of there have been sad engagements betwixt the two Nations, and much Blood
spilt.
Dutch, which has threatened bloody War; and what will be in the conclusion, is
known only to God: Besides other Contests between the Dutch and some other of
their Neighbors; as also the Pestilence very hot both in England and Holland.

In America, the late and sad blow that our Countrymen at the Isle Christophers
received from the French. And as to our selves in New England, although through
the mercy of our good God there is no breaking in, nor going out into
Captivity, nor complaining in our streets; yet we have been threatened with
Invasion by Foreign Force, and sometimes in expectation thereof; as also we
are not to slight the hand of God in his late fore Strokes in taking away so
many by Thunder and Lightning, to the great amazement and terror of many: as
also Gods continued strokes in Drought, Blasting, and Mildew, with which much
of the Fruits of the Earth have been destroyed. All which considered, ought to
induce us to search and try our ways, and to enter into a strict and serious
examination of our hearts and lives, and having found out what those sins are
that are most provoking to the Majesty of Heaven, we may reform them, whether
in Church, in State, in Family, or in Persons; that so he may not stir up all
his P^^ 1. 78 38.
wrath, but yet may delight over us to do us good, from the beginning of the
year to the end thereof.

This year it pleased God to smite the Fruits of the Earth, viz. the Wheat in
special, with Blasting and Mildew, whereby much of it was utterly spoiled, and
became profitable for nothing, and much of it worth little, being light and
empty. This was looked at by the judicious and conscientious of the Land, as a
speaking Providence against the Unthankfulness of many for so great a mercy,
and their Murmuring expressed in their words, by slighting and undervaluing
terms of it: as also against Voluptuousness, and abuse of the good Creatures of
God by Licentiousness in Drinking, and Fashions in Apparel; for the obtaining
whereof, a great part of this principal Grain was oftentimes unnecessarily
expended. This so sad a Dispensation, with other particulars, occasioned the
observation of some days in a way of Humiliation before the Lord, somewhat
more frequently then ordinary. Let it also be observed, That yet in judgment
he remembered mercy, by affording a plentiful Harvest of other sorts of Grain,
so as the Country suffered not in respect of the want of Bread this year, but
had plenty thereof.

This year also His Majesty's Commissioners, viz. Colonel Richard Nicolls, Sir
Robert Carre Knight, George Cartwright Esquire and Samuel Maverick Esquire Arrived at
Boston in New England in the month of July: The tenor of whose Commission was
in special, To reduce the Dutch at the Manhato's to His Majesty's Obedience;
which in some short time was accomplished, and the Place and Jurisdiction
thereof surrendered up unto His Majesty's said Commissioners, who styled it by
the Name of New York, and placed a Government over it of His Majesty's
Subjects, the aforesaid honorable Colonel Richard Ni^olls being Governor in
chief there. And whereas they were likewise Commissionated To hear and
determine such Differences as might be amongst the Colonies, in respect unto
the Bounds of their Jurisdictions; Some such Differences were by them heard,
and in special betwixt Plymouth and Road-Island, and such Settlement therein
concluded as they were capacitated unto. As also sundry Propositions were by
them made to several of the respective Jurisdictions, which together with the
Agitations concerning them, and the Answers unto them, are elsewhere extant.
They likewise presented the honored Governor of the Jurisdiction of Plymouth
(as to that Colony) with a gracious Letter from His Majesty: The Contents
whereof are as follows.

To Our Trusty and Well beloved, Our Governor and Council of New Plymouth,
greet.
CHARLES REX.

TRusty and well-beloved, We greet you well. We need not enlarge upon Our Care
of, and Affection to that Our Plantation of New Plymouth, when We give you such
a Testimony and Manifestation of it, in the sending of those Gentlemen, persons
well known unto Us, and deserving from us, Our trusty and well-beloved Colonel
Richard Nicolls, Sir Robert Carre Knight, George Cartwright Esquire and Samuel
Maverick Esquire our Commissioners to visit you, and other our Plantations in those
parts of New England, and to give us a full and particular Information and
account of your present state and condition, and how the same may be advanced
and improved by any further Acts of Grace and Favor from us toward you; and
that both you and all the world may know and take notice, That we take you into
our immediate protection, and will no more suffer you to be oppressed or
injured by any foreign Power, or ill Neighbors, then we would suffer our other
Subjects that live upon the same Continent with us, to be so injured and
oppressed. And as our Care and Protection will (we doubt not) be sufficient
with Gods blessing to defend you from foreign force; so our Care and
Circumspection is no less, that you may live in peace amongst your selves, and
with those our other Subjects who have planted themselves in your neighbor
Colonies, with that Justice, Affection, and brotherly Love, which becomes
Subjects born under the same Prince, and in the same Country, and of the same
Faith and Hope in the Mercies of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. And to the
end there may be no Contentions and Differences between you, in respect of the
bounds and Jurisdiction of your several Colonies; the hearing and determining
whereof we have referred to our Commissioners, as the Right appears by clear
Evidence and Testimony before them, or that they can settle it by your mutual
Consent and Agreement; otherwise, in cases of difficulty, they shall present
the same to us, who will determine according to our own Wisdom and Justice.
The Address you formerly made to us, gave us so good satisfaction of your Duty,
Loyalty and Affection to us, that we have not the least doubt that you will
receive those Commissioners in such manner as becomes you, and as may manifest
your respect and affection toward us, from whom they are sent. They will let
you know the resolution we have to preserve all your Liberties and Privileges,
both Ecclesiastical and Civil, without the least violation; which we presume
will dispose you to manifest by all ways in your power, Loyalty and Affection
to us, that all the world may know that you do look upon your selves as being
as much our Subjects, and living under the same obedience under us, as if you
continued in your natural Country. And so We bid you f^rewell.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, April 23. 1664. in the Sixteenth Year of Our
Reign. By His Majesty's special Command, HENRY BENET.


After the said His Majesty's Commissioners had visited several of the
Jurisdictions of New England, and were courteously entertained in every of
them, the said honorable Colonel Richard Nicolls is settled at New York for the
present, being Governor there, as is before-noted: George Cartwright Esquire went
for England in the latter end of the year with Mr. Benjamin Gillam, and was
taken by the Dutch, and afterward The said Sir Robert Carre si^ce that went
for England, in the year 67. He arrived at Bristol, and died there June 1. the
next day after be came abore. About that time it was thought by such as were
judicious, That through the Instigation of the said Maverick, (whose spirit was
full of Malignity against the Country) our both Civil and Religions Liberties
were much endangered; and the rather for that probably there would have been a
Concurrence of diverse Ill-affected in the Land, bad not the Lord prevented.
with some difficulty arrived in England: Sir Robert Carre is at the present at
Delaware, and Mr. Samuel Maverick at Boston.

1665.
THis year Mr. Thomas Prince was Elected Governor of the Jurisdiction of
New Plymouth. Mr. William Collier, Mr. John Alden, Major J^sias Winslow, Capt.
Thomas Southworth, Capt. William Bradford, Mr. Thomas Hinkley, and Mr. James
Brown, were Chosen Assistants to him in Government.

In the Spring of this Year, that honorable Gentleman Mr. John Endicot,
Governor of the Jurisdiction of the Massachusetts, changed this life for a
better. He was a very virtuous Gentleman, and was greatly honored and loved of
the most, as he well deserved. He arrived at Salem in the year 1628, and had
the chief Command of those that at the first there seated, and bare a deep
share of the Difficulties of those first beginnings, which were great, by
reason especially of the great Sickness and Mortality that was then amongst
them, as has been before-noted: There he continued, until the Jurisdiction of
the Massachusetts saw reason to desire his removal to Boston, for the more
convenient Administration of Justice, as Governor of the said Jurisdiction, to
which he was frequently Elected for many years together with little
intermission; and in which honorable Service he served God and the Country,
until old Age, and the Infirmities thereof, coming upon him, he fell asleep in
the Lord, and was with great honor and solemnity Interred at Boston.

This year it pleased God to cause a sad dispensation of his hand to pass
before us, in reference to the sudden death of Captain Davenport, who in the
Mone^h of July was slain as he lay on his Bed with a blow of Thunder and
Lightning. He was a man of some Eminency, being betrusted with the Command of
the Castle in the Massachusetts; at which said Castle he was slain as aforesaid:
The more ought this so sad stroke of God to be considered, and laid to heart,
and improved for our humiliation, and the amendment of our lives before the
great and terrible God, who so aloud spoke unto us in this so sad and awing a
Providence.

This year it pleased the Lord again to strike the Wheat of this Country in a
more general way then the last year, with Blasting and Mildew, whereby the
greatest part of it was spoiled, and the Plowmans hopes (in that respect) very
much frustrated. Howbeit, the Lord still mixed with this affliction very much
mercy, in sparing the other Grain, whereby the Country was in some good measure
supplied.

1666.
THis Year Mr. Thomas Prince was Chosen Governor of the Jurisdiction of
New Plymouth: Mr. John Alden, Major Josias Winslow, Capt. Thomas Southworth,
Capt. William Bradford Mr. Thomas Hi^ckley, Mr. James Brown, and Lieut. John
Freeman, were chosen to be his Assistants in Government.

This year it pleased God to go on in a manifestation of his displeasure
against New England, in a very remarkable manner, by striking dead in a moment
by a blow of Thunder, three persons in the Town of Marshfield in the
Jurisdiction of NewPlimouth, in the month of June, viz. one named William
Shirtliff, and a Woman and a Youth; which sad Dispensation of Gods hand, being
considered with some Circumstances, gave cause to the beholders to be much
astonished: the said Shirtliff having his Wife by the hand, and sitting by her
to cheer her, in respect that the said storm was so fierce, he was slain, and
she preserved, though in some measure scorched with the Lightning; yea, he had
one of his Children in his arms, and himself slain, and the Child preserved.
We have likewise received intelligence of four more that about that time were
slain by Thunder and Lightning about Pascataqua, and diverse more hurt. At the
time of this storm of Thunder and Lightning, in the which those of Marshfield
died, there arose likewise a very great Whirlwind, that where it came it tore
up Trees by the Roots, though through mercy it did little other ^urt.

It was a great while, and many years spent since the English came into these
parts, before any very considerable hurt was done by Thunder and Lightning to
either man, or beast appertaining to them, although sometimes very fierce
storms of that kind, as frequently as in these times: but now how does the
Lord go on gradually in this, as in other Judgments here in New England? first
by striking Cattle, and then one person at a time, and this year diverse, to the
number of seven, besides some Cattle also.

Thus God thundereth marvellously with his voice, he works Job 37. 5. and 38.
35. and 40. 8.
great things which we know not: He can send the Lightnings that they may walk,
and say, Lo here we are. Has any an arm like God? or can any thunder with a
voice like him? By this his terrible Voice he breaks the Cedars, and divides
the flames of Psalm. 29 5^7.
fire; which he commissionates to do his pleasure, sometimes not only striking
Cedars, but great Oaks in a wonderful manner, sometimes Beasts, sometimes Men
and Women. If Gods Judgments have thus been abroad in the Earth, how ought the
Isalah 26. 9.
Inhabitants (of New England) to learn righteousness? How easily can the Lord
stain the pride of our glory with a stroke of his hand? Let not the
familiarness or frequency of such Providence, cause them to be neglected by
us, to improve them as God would have us, to fear before him, and to turn from
such Eccles.8 13
iniquities especially as are most displeasing unto him, and to hold our lives
in our hands, and to be in a readiness for his pleasure, lest knowing not our
time, as the fishes that are taken Eccles.9. 12.
in an evil net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare, so we shall be
snared in an evil time, when it falls suddenly upon us.

This year the Lord threatened the Country with that infectious and contagious
Disease of the Small Pox, which began at Boston, whereof some few died: but
through his great mercy it is stayed, and none of late have died thereof.

This year the Lord likewise threatened, and in some measure executed his
displeasure upon the Country by Drought; but through his mercy has of late
sent plenty of Rain, for the recovering of the fruits of the earth. Although it
is to be observed, That soon after a day of Humiliation was observed by some
Congregations, for the blessing of Rain in the Drought abovementioned, that
sad stroke by the Thunder and Lightning at Marshfield fell out: so that we may
say with the Psalmist unto the Lord, By terrible things in Righteousness thou
have answered us, O God of our Salvation.

Also this year there has been some ground of fear of Invasion by Foreign
Enemies; but hitherto the Lord has kept us.

This year much of the Wheat is destroyed with Blasting and Mildew, as also
some other Grain by Worms, and the Drought aforementioned; but the Lord has
sent much Rain for the recovery of the remainder, through his great mercy.

This year, about the middle of July, Mr. Thomas Prince Governor of the
Jurisdiction of Plymouth, Captain Thomas Southworth, Mr. John Eliot senior, Mr.
John Eliot junior, Mr. Samuel Arnold, Mr. John Holmes, Mr. William Brinsmead,
and Mr. Thomas Cushman, gave meeting to Mr. Richard Bourn of Sandwich, in
reference to the taking notice of what proficiency A special Manifestation of
Gods goodness toward some poor Salvages in the Jurisdiction of NewPlimouth.
the Indians under the Instruction of the said Mr. Bourn have attained unto, in
the knowledge of God in Christ, and their interest in him by Faith; and to make
such Professions or Confessions as they should openly make thereof, to the
glory of God, and the satisfaction of the Saints, in order unto their joining
into Church Fellowship.

And the Lord was pleased to come in unto some of them, so as they gave good
satisfaction unto the said honored and judicious persons forenamed, then
assembled in reference to the premises: So that it was concluded by them, That
what had passed from the Indians in that behalf, should be drawn up in writing,
and Copies thereof exhibited to the Churches of the Jurisdiction of Plymouth,
such of them as are neighboring near unto them; and if nothing should be then
objected, that then in due and convenient time they should be permitted and
encouraged to enter into Church Fellowship as aforesaid.

Now although I doubt not but the Passages of these things will be in due time
published by a better Pen, yet I have made bold here to insert so much as I
have been informed of them, in regard that they are the first fruits of the
Jurisdiction of New-Plimonth, that have come on to so good perfection in this
kind.

This year, in the month of December, it pleased God to take unto himself by
death that worthy Servant of Christ Mr. William Thompson, who was a lively
dispenser of the Word of God, and very affectionate in the delivery thereof. It
pleased God to bless his Labors to the Conversion of many Souls. He was
sometimes, together with Mr. Knowles, sent unto Virginia by the Elders of the
Churches of the Massachusetts, being requested by a Message sent by some of
Virginia for some help in Preaching Gods Word amongst them: The fruit and
benefit of whose Labors therein, still remains upon the Souls of some
eminent in this Land. He was Elected and Ordained to be Pastor of the Church of
Christ at Braintry in New England; in which Office he served Christ many years,
until old Age coming upon him, and the prevailing of his Melancholy
distemper, did in a manner wholly disable him from that Service; and Satan
taking advantage thereby, he was under sad desertions and trouble of Spirit: At
which time the Reverend Elders, and others of the aforesaid Jurisdiction of the
Massachusetts, were very officious for his Recovery, and in sense of his sad
condition offered up many Prayers to God for him, and in Gods good time they
received a gracious answer; so as in his weakness and sickness it pleased God
to come in unto his Soul, and to remove the Cloud of darkness that was upon his
Spirit, so that with much peace and comfort he fell asleep in the Lord, and his
Body was honorably buried at Braintry. Mark the upright man, and behold the
just; for the end of that man is peace.

1667.
MR. Thomas Prince was Chosen Governor of the Jurisdiction of New Plymouth:
Mr. John Alden, Major Josias Winslow; Capt. Thomas Soutbworth,, Capt. William
Bradford, Mr. Thomas Hinkley, Mr. John Freeman, Mr. Nathaniel Bacon, Chosen
Assistants to him in Government.

This year on the last day of November, being the last day of the next week,
there was heard several loud Noises or Reports, as if it had been Guns
discharged in the Air, first one distinctly, and in a short time as it had been
a Volley of Shot discharged: It was especially heard and observed at Nantasket,
and related by sundry of them of good Credit.

In the Spring following, in the beginning of March, there appeared a Sign in
the Heavens in the form of a Spear, something thicker in the midst then at
either end, of a whitish bright color; it was seen several nights together in
the West, about an hour within the night: it stood stooping, and the one end
pointing to the setting of the Sun, and so settled downward by little and
little, until it quite vanished, and descended beneath our Horizon. God awaken
us, that we be not heedless spectators of his wonderful Works.

This year, on the seventh of August, it pleased the Lord to call home to
himself the Reverend, Ancient, and godly Pastor of the Church of Boston, Mr.
John Wilson: He was a truly Reverend and holy Man of God; he came to
New England in the year 1630. He was instrumental in the first beginnings of
the Church of Boston, having been the Pastor of it three years before Mr.
Cotton, Twenty years with him, Ten years with Mr. Norton, and Four years after
him; Thirty seven in all. And in all the Changes of Times that passed over him,
he was full of Faith and Prayer, and eminent for Sincerity and Humility, (being
ever low in his own eyes;) and for the grace of Love, he had largeness of heart
as the sand of the Sea, to do good to all. He was very charitable, where there
was any signs and hopes of good; and yet withal very zealous against known and
manifest evils. He was Orthodox in his Judgment, and very holy in his
Conversation: Very few that ever went out of the world, so generally beloved
and reverenced as this good man. He was a good man indeed, and full of the holy
Ghost; He lived to a good old age, and was full of days, and full of honor,
being in the Seventy ninth year of his Age, when the Lord took him to himself.
He was Interred with much Honor and Lamentation.

In the time of his languishing sickness he was visited by the Elders round
about, especially on the Sixteenth of May, the day after the Court of Election,
when there being a general meeting of all the Elders of the Churches at his
house, they requested Mr. Wilson (because they knew not whether ever they
should have the like opportunity to hear him speak again, and having been from
the first a Pillar amongst them, and of much Experience in his observation of
the state of things) That he would solemnly declare to them, what he conceived
to be those sins amongst us, which provoked the displeasure of God against the
Country. He then told them, That he had diverse times, and long feared these
sins following, as chief among others, which God was greatly provoked with; viz.

1. Separation. 2. Anabaptism. 3. Corahism.
This latter he did explain thus; viz. when people rise up, as Corah, against
their Ministers or Elders, as if they took too much upon them, when indeed they
do but Rule for Christ, and according to Christ; yet (faith he) it is nothing
for a Brother to stand up, and oppose without Scripture or Reason, the Doctrine
and word of the Elder, saying, [I am not satisfied] and c. And hence, if he do
not like the Administration, (be it Baptism, or the like) he will then turn his
back upon God and his Ordinances, and go away, etc. And (says he) for our
neglect of baptizing the Children of the Church, those that some call
Grandchildren. I think God is provoked by it.

4. Another sin I take to be, The making light of, and not subjecting to the
Authority of Synods, without which the Churches cannot long subsist. And so for
the Magistrates being Gallio- like, either not caring for these things, or else
not using their Power and Authority for the maintenance of the Truth, and
Gospel, and Ordinances of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and for the
bearing thorough witness against the contrary: Should the Lord leave THEM
hereunto, how miserable a people should we be!

At night the Assembly being dismissed with Prayer, Mr. Wilson did (being
desired by them so to do) in a solemn manner bless the Elders, making a short
Prayer, saying, I am not like long to be with you; the Lord pardon us, and heal
us, and make us more Heavenly, and take us off from the world, and make us
burning and shining Lights, by our heavenly Doctrine and Example. And I beseech
the Lord with all my heart to bless you, and to bless his Churches, and to
bless all his People, and to bless all your Families, and to bless your Wives,
and to bless all your Children, and your Childrens Children; and make us all
more and more meet for our Inheritance, and bring us all to it in his good
time, etc.These words, with some few other, he spoke with great affection, and
with tears: and all the Ministers wept with him, and they took their leave of
him, even as Children of their Father, who having blessed them was about to die.

Upon the Death of that Reverend, Aged, Ever-honoured, and gracious Servant of
Christ, Mr. John Wilson, Pastor of a Church in Boston: Interred August 8. 1667.
AH! now there is none who does not know
That this day in our Israel
Is fallen a great and good man too,
A Prince I might have said as well!
A man of Princely Power with God,
For Faith and Love of Princely spirit;
Our Isreal's Chariots, Horsemen good,
By Faith and Prayer, though not by Merit.
Renowned for Practick Piety
In Englands both, from Youth to Age;
In Cambridge, Inns-Court, Sudbury,
And each place of his Pilgrimage.
As humble as a little Child,
When yet in real worth high-grown:
Himself a Nothing still he styled,
When God so much had for him done.
In Love a Nonesuch: as the Sand
With largest heart God did him fill;
A bounteous Mind, an (...) Hand,
Affection sweet, all sweetning still.
Love was his Life; be died in Love;
Love does embalrs his Memory;
Love is his Bliss and Joy, above
With God now who is Love for as.
A comprehending Charity
To all, where ought appeared of good;
And yet in Zeal was none more high
Against th'appareat Serpents Brood.
To Truth he ever constant was,
In Judgment wondrons Orthodox;
In Truth's Cause never fearing face,
As if he were another Knox.
The Prelates and their Impositions
Did never him Conformist make;
But to avoid those Superstitions,
Great Worldly Hopes did he forsake.
When in New England Errors wind
From sundry other Quarters blew;
No one could him Conforming find,
Naught from the Line of Truth him drew.
Firm stood he against the Familist,
And Antinomian spirit strong,
He never loved the Separ'tist,
Nor yet the Anabaptists throng.
Neither the Tolerator's strain,
Nor Quakers Spirit could be brook;
Nor bowed to the Morellian Train,
Nor Childrens Right did overlook.
Nor did he slight Our Liberties
In Civil and in Church-concerns,
But precious were they in his eyes
Who stood among their fixed friends.
Grave Saint in England twice did give
This farewell word to him, While you
Shall in that place (New England) live
No hurt shall happen thereunto.
Strange word, and strangely verified!
He this day goes to's Grave in peace.
What Changes sad shall us beside
Now he is goze, we cannot guess!
What Evil are we hastening to!
Lord spare thy People, but awaken;
When such away do from us go,
That yet we may not be forsaken!
He a first Cornerstone was laid
In poor New-England's Boston's Wall:
Death pulls this out; the breach is wide:
Oh let it not now tumble all!
He Is now at Rest, and reigns in Bliss;
In Conflicts we are left behind,
In Fears and Straits; How shall we miss
His Faith, Frayer, Zeal, and peaceful Mind.
Lord pour a double portion
Of his sweet, gracious, pious Spirit
On poor Survivers! let each one
Somewhat thereof at least inherit!
Gaius our lost, ah now is gone!
Can we e're look for such another?
But yet there is a Mansion
Where we may all turn-in together.
No moving Inn, but Resting Place,
Where his blessed Soul is gathered,
Where good men going are apace
Into the Bosom of their Head.
Ay thither let us haste away,
Sure Heaven will the sweeter be
(If there we ever come to stay)
For him, and other such as he!
J. M.

Upon the Death of that most Reverend Man of God, Mr. John Wilson, Pastor of
the first Church in Boston, in New England; whose decease was Aug. 7. 1667.
JOHN Wilson

Anagr.

John WILSON.

Oh change it not! no sweeter Name or Thing
Throughout the World within our ears shall ring.
W Ho so of Abr'am, Moses, Samuel reads,
Or of Elijah, or Elisha' s deeds,
Would surely say their Spirit and Power was his,
And think there were a Metempsychosis.
Yea, like John Baptist in the Wilderness,
So was our John in Patmos here, no less.
John the Divine, resembling therefore rather,
And of New-Englands Prephets was the Father,
John the Divine, whose Life a Revelation
Of Faith, and Love, and Christ to admiration.
John the Divine, whom Jesus loved most dear,
Sweetened with leaning on his Bosom here:
This is that John, whose Death who does not moan,
Has sure no heart of flesh, but one of stone.
He had the Countries Faith, and Love, and Zeal,
Even Grace enough for Church and Common weal;
Whereby was propt up all the Fabric still,
That else had tumbled down our Sion Hill.
Of merely Men deserving glory more,
You Will find nor Martyr, nor a Confessor
Inspired he was with the Prophetic Spirit
Of all the Prophets, which he did inherit.
'Twixt an Apostle and Evangelist,
His Order stands in the Heavenly List.
If Paul himself among us dead had been,
More tears or sorrow could not have been seen.
They wept not more for this, that they should see
His face no more, then now we Mourners be.
For Heavenly Poems, most Angelical,
Composing Volumes with delight: were all
But gathered up in one, we should espy
Enough to fill an University.
And were another Psalm-book made by thee
[Mictam of John] their Title it should be.
As aged John the Apostle used to bless
The People, which they judged their happiness:
So we did count it worth our Pilgrimage
Unto him, for his Blessing in his Age:
Yet then, no Babe more longing for the Breast,
Then he to take within the Church his rest,
To have the sincere Milk of God's good Word;
Which to his Soul all comfort did afford:
Not Heat, nor Cold, nor Rain, nor Snow must bar;
But every where becomes an Auditor.
Who ever labored in the Ministry
More given, then he, to Hospitality?
To Strangers, Widows, Father less and all;
To Friends and Foes he was most liberal.
Of all his Prayers, Sermons, Travels, Pains,
He is ascended Heaven to reap the gains.
Oh for a double portion of thy Spirit!
No richer Treasure would we all inherit.
Mastus apposuit, T. S.

1668.
THis Year it pleased God to visit New England with the manifestation of his
displeasure, by the death of three Eminent Instruments: The first whereof was
that worthy Servant of Christ Mr. Samuel Shepard, Pastor of the Church of
Christ at Rowley in New England, who deceased in the Spring of this year, in
the midst of his days, and in the beginning of his Work in the Ministry. The
second, that worthy Man of God Mr. Henry Flint, Teacher of the Church of Christ
at Braintry in New England, who ended his mortal life the 27 of April in this
year; a man of known Piety, Gravity, and Integrity, and well accomplished with
other Qualifications fit for the Work of the Ministry. The third and last, but
not the least, that Supereminent Minister of the Gospel (rightly so called) Mr.
Jonathan Mitchel, Pastor of the Church of Christ at Cambridge in New England,
who laid down his Earthly Tabernacle on the Ninth of July in this year: Of
whose rare Endowments, and the great Loss the whole Land sustained by his
death, take this following brief Account.

Mr. Jonathan Mitchell was born at Halifax in Yorkshire in England, of pious
and wealthy Parents, who coming over to New England, brought him over young;
his Education in Learning was perfected at Hanvard College in Cambridge, where
he attained to such a degree in knowledge, that he was soon called to be a
Fellow of the College, and within few years after his luster did so shine,
that the Church at Hartford upon Conecticot River made application to him in
order to supply the place of that Eminent Servant of Christ Mr. Thomas Flooker,
a little before deceased; but the Church at Cambridge (by the Advice of their
Pastor Mr. Thomas Shepard, then living) not willing to part with so great a
Treasure, became Competitor with Hartford, and gave him a Call to them. This
loving Strife between the two Churches of Hartford and Cambridge about him, was
in a short time decided by the awful hand of God, in the death of that Eminent
and Glorious Star, Mr. Thomas Shepard, Pastor at Cambridge; which place being
wholly destitute, and Hartford being supplied with a Teacher, namely, that
Worthy of the Lord, Mr. Samuel Stone, the Balance was cast for Cambridge, and
in the year 1650 he was Called and Ordained their Pastor. It was an eminent
favor of God to that Church, to have their great Breach thus made up, with a
man so much of the Spirit and Principles of their former Pastor, and so
excellently qualified with respect to the College: for, Reason and Prudence
requires, that the Minister of that place be more then ordinarily endowed with
Learning, Gravity, Wisdom, Orthodoxness, Ability, sweet and excellent Gifts in
Preaching, that so the Scholars which are devoted and set apart in order to be
Preachers of the Gospel, might be seasoned with the Spirit of such an Elijah:
In which regard, this holy Man of God was eminently furnished, and his Labors
wonderfully blessed; for very many of the Scholars bred up in his time (as is
observed) do favor of his Spirit, for grace and manner of Preaching, which was
most attractive. He lived Pastor of the Church about Eighteen years, and was
most intense and faithful in declaring much of the Counsel of God. He went
through a great part of the Body of Divinity; made a very excellent Exposition
of the Book of Genesis, and part of Exodus; and delivered many fruitful and
prositable Sermons on the four first Chapters of John; and in his Moncthly
Lectures, which were abundantly frequented, he Preached of Man's Misery by Sin,
and Recovery by Christ Jesus; and died in the third part of it, viz. concerning
Man's Obedience^^ Christ: besides many other excellent Truths by him taught upon
diverse occasions. In all his Labors God was wonderfully present with him. He
was a person that held very near Communion with God; Eminent in Wisdom, Piety,
Humility, Love, Self-denial, and of a compassionate and tender heart;
surpassing in Publick-spiritedness; a mighty man in Prayer, and Eminent at
standing in the Gap; he was zealous for Order, and faithful in asserting the
Truth against all Oppugners of it. In a word, he was a man whom God had richly
furnished, and eminently fitted for his Work; lived desired, and died lamented
by all good Christians that knew him. It pleased God upon the Ninth of July,
1668. in a hot and burning season, (but much more hot in the Heat of Gods Anger
to New England) to take him to Rest and Glory, about the 43 year of his Age. His
Race was but short, but the Work he did was very much. The Elegies following
may give the Reader a further account of what esteem he was.

Upon the Death of that truly Godly, Reverend, and Faithful Servant of Christ,
Mr. Jonathan Mitchell, Pastor of the Church at Cambridge, who deceased July 9.
1668.
W Hat shall we say? Of sad Effects what fear?
Four Splendent Stars extinguished in one year:
Two Old, one Young, and this of Middle Age;
A brightest Light, most eyes who did engage.
The Lord in's Temple is, Earth silence keep;
Dispute not over-bold this Judgment deep.
A Mourning great, each Eye distilling Streams;
Sad Sighs and Sobs in most men's months their Theams:
And who can blame it! for this we well may,
If Love, if Fear, if Temple-shakes bear sway.
The Wife has lost her Head; four hopeful Stems
A Father; Cambridge too their Crowning Gems;
Neighbors, a useful Light; Elders, a Brother,
Whose Head and Mouth made him to most a Father.
Sad Cambridge, when thou lost thy Thomas dear,
God pitied thee, and gave a right Compeer;
This Jonathan thy Mitchell, one in whom
Was Much-of-EL, a Michael judged by some.
Right strong in School, in Desk of brightest shine;
Artist, good Linguist, high Orthodox Divine;
Of Judgment deep, of Memory how large!
Invention quick, grave, pleasant; who can charge
Thee in thy Theory or Practick with dark fail?
Humble, Sincere, whose Love-cords did avail.
Much good by him you Cambridge have received:
He gone, by you his Relicts see relieved.
A Royal Quaere'twas, when Jonathan dead,
And Royal Act, Jonathan's Stems to feed.
E.B.

To the Memory of the Learned and Reverend, Mr. Jonathan Mitchell, late
Minister of Cambridge in N. E. Inhumed July 10. 1668.
Quicquid agimus, quicquid Patimur venit ex Alto.
T He Countries Tears, be ye my Spring; my Hill
A general Grave; let Groans inspire my Quill
With an Heart-rending Sense, drawn from the Cries
Of Orphan Churches, and the Destinies
Of a Bereaved House: Let Children weep
They scarce know why; and let the Mother steep
Her lifeless Hopes in Brine; The Private Friend
Overwhelmed with grief falter his Comforts end.
By a warm Sympathy let Feverish Heat
Roam through my Verse unseen; and a Cold Sweat
Limning Despair, attend me; Sighs diffuse
Convulsions through my language, such as use
To type a Gasping Fancy; Lastly shroud
Religions Splendour in a Mourning Cloud,
Replete with Vengeance for succeeding Times
Fertile in Woes, more fertile in their Crimes,
These are my Muses; These inspire the Sails
Of Fancy with their Sighs in stead of Gales.
Reader, read Reverend Mitchel's Life, and then
Confess the World a Gordian Knot again.
Read his Tear-delug'd Grave, and then decree
Our present Woe, and future Misery.
Stars falling speak a Storm: when Samuel dies,
Saul may expect Philistia's Cruelties.
So when Jehovah's brighter Glory fled
The Temple, Israel was Captive led.
Geneva's Triple Light made one Divine;
But here that vast Triumvirate combine
By a blessed Metempsycosis, to take
One Person for their larger Zodiake.
In Sacred Censures, Farrels dreadful Scroul
Of Words, broke from the Pulpit to the Soul.
[Indulgent Parents when they spare, they spoil;
Old Wounds need Vinegar as well as Oil:
Distastful Cates with Miseries do suit;
The Paschal Lamb was eat with bitter fruit.]
In Balmy Comforts, Virers Genius came
From the wrinkled Alps to woo the Western Dame,
And Courting, Cambridge, quickly took from thence
Her last Degrees of Rhetoric and Sense.
Calvin's Laconicks through his Doctrine spread,
And Children's Children with their Manna fed.
His Exposition Genesis begun,
And fatal Exodus Eclipsed his Sun.
Some say that Souls often sad Presages give;
Death-breathing Sermons taught us last to live.
One sowes another reaps, may truly be
Our Grave-Instruction, and his Elegy.
His System of Religion half unheard,
Full double in his Preaching Life appeared.
Happy that place where Rulers Deeds appear
In The Front of the Battle, and their Words in the Rear.
He Is gone, to whom his Country owes a love
Worthy the prudent Serpent, and the Dove.
Religion's Panoply, the Sinners Terror,
Death summoned hence sure by a Writ of Error.
The Quaker trembling at his Thunder, fled,
And with Caligula resumed his Bed.
He by the Motions of a Nobler Spirit
Cleared Men, and made their Notions Swine inherit.
The Munster Goblin by his holy flood
Exorcis'd, like a thin Phantasma stood.
Brown' s Babel shattered by his Lightning, fell;
And with Confused Horror packed to hell.
The Scripture with a Commentary bound
(Like a lost Calice) in his Heart was found.
When he was Sick, the Air a Fever took,
And thirsty Phoebus quaft the Silver Brook:
When Dead, the Spheres in Thunder, Clouds and Rain
Groaned his Elegium, Mourned and Wept our Pain.
Let not the Brazen Schismatic aspire;
Lot' s leaving Sodom, left them to the Fire.
It Is true, the Bee's now dead, but yet his Sting
Death's to their Dronish Doctrines yet may bring.
Epitaphium
H Ere lies within this Comprehensive Span,
The Churches, Courts, and Countries Jonathan.
He that speaks Mitchell, gives the Schools the Lie;
Friendship in Him gained an Ubiquity.
Vivet post Funera Virtus.
P.D.

An Epitaph upon the deplored Death of that Supereminent Minister of the
Gospel, Mr. Jonathan Mitchel.
H Ere lies the Darling of his time,
Mitchell, Expired in his prime;
Who four years short of Forty seven
Was found full Ripe, and plucked for Heaven.
Was full of prudent Zeal, and love,
Faith, Patience, Wisdom from above:
New-England's Stay, next Ages Story;
The Churches Gemme; the College Glory.
Angels may speak him; Ah! not I,
(Whose Worth's above Hyperbole)
But for our Loss, were in my power,
I Would weep an Everlasting Shower.
J.S.

A fourth Minister that died this year, was Mr. John Eliot Junior, born at
Roxbury in New England, Eldest Son of the Reverend Mr. John Eliot, Teacher of
the Church there. He was Educated (at Cambridge) in the Latin School, and in
the College, until he became Master of Arts, and a few years after was called
to be Pastor of a Church within the Bounds of Cambridge, upon the South side of
Charles River. He was a person excellently endowed, and accomplished with Gifts
of Nature, Learning, and Grace; of comely Proportion, ruddy Complexion,
cheerful Countenance; of quick Apprehension, solid Judgment, excellent
Prudence; Learned both in Tongues and Arts for one of his time, and studiously
intense in acquiring more knowledge. His Abilities and Acceptance in the
Ministry did excel; His Piety, Faith, Love, Humility, Self denial, and Zeal,
did eminently shine upon all occasions. He had (under the conduct of his
Father) by his diligence, industry, and zeal (for the good of Souls) attained
to such skill in the Indian Language, that he Preached to the Indians sundry
years; Traveling many miles in a day once a Fortnight to dispense the Gospel
to them. The Indians have often said, that his Preaching to them was precious
and desirable; and consequently their loss, and the obstruction in that Work,
much to be lamented. In a word, there was so much of God in him, that all the
wise and godly who knew him, loved and honored him in the Lord, and bewailed
his death; which sell upon the 13 day of October 1668. and of his Age about 35
years.

I Shall close up this small History with a word of Advice to the Rising
generation, That as now their godly Predecissors have had large Experience of
the goodness and faithfulness of God, for the space of near Forty six years
(some of them) and have passed under various Dispensations, sometimes under
great Afflictions, other-while the Sun shining upon their Tabernacles in ways
of peace and prosperity, and yet notwithstanding, through the grace of Christ,
the most of them have held their integrity in his Ways: That so, such as
succeed them would follow their Examples, so far as they have followed
Christ; that it might not be said of them, as it is to be feared it may be, by
what yet appears amongst many of them, That indeed God did once plant a Noble
vine in New England, but it is degenerated into the plant of a strange vine.
Jerem.2 21.
It were well that it might be said, that the Rising-generation did serve Josh.
24. 31.
the Lord all the days of such as in this our Israel are as Joshua's amongst
us, and the Elders that over lived him, which have known all the works of the
Lord which he has done for their Fathers. But if yet notwithstanding
afterward such shall forget, and not regard those his great Works here
presented before them (besides many more that I hope by some others may come to
their view) be they assured, Psalm. 28.5.
He will destroy them, and not build them up. Oh therefore, let the truly
godly in this Land be incited by the example of Moles, as the mouth of the
Church, to pray earnestly and incessantly unto the Lord, That his work may yet
Psalm. 90.16. (...) 44.304.
appear to his servants, and his glory unto their children; and, that he would
pour out his Spirit upon his Church and people in New England, and his blessing
upon their offspring, that they may spring up as among the grass, and as the
willows by the watercourse; That so great occasion there may be thereby of
taking notice thereof in succeeding generations, to the praise and glory of
GOD. So be it.

FINIS.
A Brief Chronological Table, Of the principal PASSAGES contained in New
Englands Memorial.
In the Year of Christ 1610.
Sundry godly Christians of the English Nation remove out of the North of
England into the Netherlands, and gathered a Church at Leyden, where they
continued until the year 1620. Page 1,2

1620.
For several Reasons the English conclude on a removal from thence into
America, Page.2,3,4

Letters Patent were obtained from King James of Famous Memory for the
Northern parts of Virginia, P.5

July 2. sundry of the English set Sail from Holland for Southhampton. At their
departure Mr. John Robinson Pastor of the English Church at Leyden writes them
a parting Letter, P.6, and c.

August 5. they fet Sail from Southampton for America: Many discouragements
happened on the Voyage, P.10,11

November 11. they Arrived at Cape Cod, P.12

And there they entered into a Body-Politick, P.14

And Chose Mr. John Carver their Governor for the present year, P.16

Discovery is made for a fit place for Habitation, ibid.

In the Discovery the English are assaulted by the Barbarous Natives, P.19

A place discovered, and there they settled, which was called New Plymouth,
P.21,22

In January and February was a Mortality amongst the English, which swept away
about half the Company, P. 22

Several Articles of Peace were drawn up betwixt the English and the great
Indian Sachem Massasoiet, willingly submiting himself and his People to become
the Loyal Subjects of the Kings of England, P.24

A certain Indian named Squanto, who had formerly been in England, became the
Indian Interpreter for the English, and proved an Instrument of much good to
the first Planters, P.25

1621.
Several Indian Sachems willingly submitted themselves to the Government of
New Plymouth, and voluntarily acknowledged themselves and their People to be
the Loyal Subjects of the Kings of England, P.29

Indian Grain planted, and English Grain sowed by the English this year, but
with little success. In April Mr. John Carver Governor of Plymouth died, his
Wife not succeeding him above six weeks, P.30,31

Mr. William Bradford was Chosen Governor in his stead. Mr. Edward Winslow and
Mr. Stephen Hopkins give the great Sachem Massasoiet a Visit, P.31

The English view the Massachusetts Bay, being courteously entertained by the
Indians the Natives thereof, P.32

In November one Mr. Robert Cushman arrived at New Plymouth, who brought over
35 Passengers, P.33

The Narrhaganset Indians send the English a Challenge, which the English
answer with another, but they would not accept of it, ibid.

1622.
The English hold Correspondency with the Indians of the Massachusetts Bay by
trading with them, P.34

By reason of daily rumors of the Indians Insurrection, the English build them
a strong Fort, in which were several great Pieces of Ordnance mounted, P. 37

A great Drought happened this summer, from May 3. until the middle of July there
was no Rain, so that the Corn began to wither away, but the Lord remarkably
answered the Prayers of his people even to admiration, P. 37, 38

A remarkable Providence of God, tending to the relief of the first Planters
being in great extremity, P. 39

Here arrived three Ships from one Mr. Thomas Weston Merchant, with 67 lusty
men, who seated themselves in in a part of the Massachusetts Bay, now called
Weymouth, P. 35, 36

Westons unruly Company fall into great wants, P. 40

1623.
The Indians, by reason of Westons disorderly Company, stealing away their
Corn, and c. carry it very insultingly over them, and enter into a Conspiracy
to cut off the English; which Conspiracy being occasionally discovered by the
Sachem Massasoi^t, was prevented by the English, P. 41, and c.

Westons Plantation wholly ruinated, P. 43

Mr. John Pierce in his Voyage to New England, was by reason of leaks and great
storms twice driven back to England, in whose ship was 109 persons, P. 45,46

In June one Capt. Francis West, who had Commission to be Admiral of N.E.
arrived at Plymouth, but by reason of discouragements he quickly left the
Country, P. 47

Two ships, the Ann^ and James, arrive in Plymouth, P. 47,48

Capt. Robert Gorges arrives in Plymouth, begins a second Plantation of the
Massachusetts Bay; which quickly brake in pieces. Capt. Robert Gorges had
Commission from the Council of N.E. to be the General Governor of the Country;
he brought over with him a Minister, on Mr. Morrel, that had a Superintendent
Authority over other Churches granted him: but they both being discouraged,
quickly returned home to England, P. 49 to 52

A Fire which did considerable damage at Plymouth. Several of the Inhabitants
through discontent and casualties, remove into Virginia, P. 5^

1624.
The Number of Magistrates increased to 5 at Plymouth, p.53

The first Neat Cattle brought into the Country, ibid.

Lyford and Oldham, for their treacherous under mining the Government of
Plymouth, and setting up a Schismatical Church, are both Banished that
Jurisdiction, p.53, and c.

1625.
Remarkable Judgments of God upon those two Machavilians Lyford and Oldham,
p.59, and c.

Many of the Merchant-Adventurers prove open Adversartes to the Plantation of
Plymouth, p.61

A remarkable Providence of God on the Merchant-Adventurers, p.62

Successful Trading with the Indians of Kenebek, p.61

Capt. Miles Standish goes over to England as an Agent in the behalf of the
Plantation of New Plymouth, p.62

1626.
In April Capt. Standish arrives in Plymouth, brings sad tidings of Mr. John
Robinsons, and Mr. Robert Cusbmans death, p.63

They receive diverse Letters from their friends in Holland, p.64

1627.
Mr. Issac Alterton goes over for England Agent for the Plantation with the
Merchant-Adventurers, p.64

The first distribution of Land amongst the Inhabitants of Plymouth, p.65

A ship with many Passengers in her, bound for Virginia, was cast away at the
middle of Mannamoiet Bay, but they saved their lives and their goods, and were
courteously entertained at Plymouth, p.65, and c.

The Dutch Plantation desire Commerce with Plymouth, which they grant them, and
so they held mutual and prositable correspondency together. The Dutch acquaint
the English with the trading of Wampam-peag, p.67

1628.
Morton for his Atheistical and licentious Practices, is apprehended by Capt.
Standish, and sent home to England, p.68, and c.

Mr. John Endicot arrives, bringing with him a Patent under the Broad-Seal of
England, for the Government of the Massachusetts, p.70

1629.
Three ships arrive at Salem, bringing a great number of Passengers from
England: Infectious diseases amongst them, p.73

Mr. Higginson, Mr. Skeleton, Mr. Bright, Ministers, arrive, p.74

Upon Aug.5. was the first Church in the Massachusetts Colony gathered, viz. at
Salem, p.75

The Book of Common Prayer pleaded for, and practiced in Massachusetts Colony by
two of the Patentees, p.76

But was quickly prohibited by the Authority there, p.77

1630.
Mr. Higginson Teacher of Salem Church died, p.78

A Fleet of ten ships arrived in the Massachusetts Colony, in which came over
many worthy Instruments, Mr. John Winthrop, and Mr. Thomas Dudly Magistrates;
Mr. Isaac Johnson Esquire and Mr. John Wilson, Mr. George Philips, Mr. Maverick and
Mr. Wareham, Ministers, arrived. Mr. Isaac Johnson Magistrate of the
Massachusetts, and his Lady, soon after their arrival, died, p.83

Churches gathered this year at Boston, by Mr. John Wilson, Watertown, by Mr.
Philips Dorchester, by Mr. Maverick and Mr. Wareham, p.84

1631.
A Church gathered at Roxbury by Mr. John Eliot and Mr. Weld, p.85

1632.
Sir Christopher Gardener (^^rong Papist) arrived in N.E. who for some
mis^ar^^^ges left the Country, and returned home to England, and there proved
an open Adversary to the Country, p.85,86

The Lords of the Kings most honorable Privy Council favor the Plantations of
N.E. by their encouraging Order, p.87,88

1633.
The number of (...) at Plymouth increased to seven, p.89

An infectious Fever amongst the Inhabitants of Plymouth, whereof many died,
p.90

Great swarms of strange Flies up and down the Country, which was a presage of
the following mortality, p.91

Mr. John Cotton, Mr. Hooker, and Mr. Stone, Ministers, arrive in N.E. ibid.

Mr. William Collier, a liberal Benefactor to the Colony of NewPlimouth,
arrives in N.E. ibid.

1634.
Mr. Skeleton Pastor to the Church at Salem died, p.78

A great mortality amongst the Indians by the Small Pox, p.92

Capt. Stone turns Pirat at the Dutch Plantation, and there seizes on a
Plymouth Barque that was there trading, p.93

The cruel Massacre of Capt. Stone and Capt. Norton at Connecticot River by the
Pequot Indians, p.92,93

Mr. Roger Williams lamentable Apostasy, p.78, and c.

He is Banished by the Massachusetts Colony, ibid.

1635.
Mr. Edward Winslow sent over to England as a public Agent for the Country,
p.94

An Hirracane which did great damage both by sea and land, p.95

1636.
Conecticot Colony planted this year by many worthy Instruments. Two shallops
laden with goods were cast away in the mouth of Plymouth Harbor, the goods
were saved, ten men drowned, p.96

Mr. John Oldham murdered in his Barque by the Indians of Block Island, p.98

1637.
The Pequot Wars; in which War the English slew and took Prisoners-about 700
Indians, and slew 13 Sachems, to the great terror of all the Natives, p.99

New Haven Colony began this year, p.106

Antinomian and Familistical Errors are broached in the Country, especially at
Boston, ibid.

A Synod is called, which condemned these Errors out of the Word of God, p

Mrs. Hutchinson and Errors are banished by the Magistrates of the
Massachusetts Colony, ibid.

A hideous Monster born at Boston of one Mrs. Mary Dyer, p. 108

1638.
Three Englishmen were put to death at Plymouth for robbing and murdering an
Indian near Providence, p.111.

June 2. a great and fearful Earthquake in the Country, ibid.

Gorton, a pestilent Seducer, and blasphemous Atheist, is banished Plymouth
Colony, Whipped and banished from Road-Island, banished the Massachusetts Colony,
p. 108, etc.

1639.
Harvard College founded at Cambridge by Mr. John Harvard of worthy memory, p.
112

Articles of Peace renewed with Massasoiet Sachem, and his Son Mooanam, by the
Government of Plymouth, p.112, etc.

1642.
Thirteen able godly Ministers at this time in Plymouth Jurisdiction, shined as
bright Stars in the Churches Firmament, p.116

1643.
Mr. William Brewster, Ruling-Elder in the Church of Plymouth died in the 84
year of his Age, p.117

May 19. was the first Combination of the four United Colonies of N.E. p.120

1644.
Mr. John Atwood, an eminent Benefactor to the Colony of Plymouth, died, p.121.

The Town of Eastham erected by diverse considerable persons of Plymouth, ibid.

1646.
Three men of War arrived in Plymouth Harbor under the command of Capt. Tho:
Cromwell, richly laden. A mutiny amongst the Seamen, whereby one man is killed,
123 Mr. Edw Winslow goes over into England Agent for the Massachusetts Colony,
to answer the complaints of sundry discontented persons, but returned no more
to N. E. p. 124

1647.
Mr. Thomas Hooker, Pastor of the Church at Hartford, rested from his labors,
p.125

1649.
March 26. Mr. John Winthrop Governor of the Massachusetts deceased, p.130

An innumerable company of Caterpillars in some parts of the Country destroyed
the Fruits of the Earth, p.131

August 25. Mr. Thomas Shepard Pastor of Cambridge Church died, ibid.

An Act of Parliament passed in England for promoting and propagating the
Gospel amongst the Indians in N. E. In reference to which, an Indian
Corporation was there established. Able Instruments encouraged to preach the
Gospel to the Indians in N. E. the Bible was translated into the Indian
Language by Mr. John Eliot, and (in 1664.) was printed at Cambridge, p.131

1650.
A great mortality amongst Children this year, p.133

1651.
Mr. Will: Thomas Magistrate of Plymouth Colony died, p.134

1652.
Mr. John Cotton Teacher of Boston Church died. A Comet was seen at the time of
his sickness hanging over N. E. which went out soon after his death, p.135, and
c.

1653.
July 31. Mr. Thomas Dudly Governor of the Massachusetts died, about the 77
year of his Age, p.139

1655.
Plymouth hears sad news of the death of Mr. Edward Winslow, who had sometimes
been their Governor, p.142

1656.
Capt. Miles Standish Magistrate of Plymouth died, p.143

1657.
May 3. Mr. William Bradford Governor of Plymouth died, p.144

The Quakers (that cursed Sect) arrive at Plymouth, p.151

Mr. Theoph: Eaton Governor of Newhaven Colony died, p.152

Mr. Garret cast away in his Voyage from Boston to England, which was a great
loss to the Country, p.152

1658.
A great Earthquake was heard in N.E. p.153

Mr. Ralph Partridge Minister at Duxbury deceased, ibid.

John Philips of Marshfield slain by Thunder and Lightning, p.155

Mr. William Paddy Deacon of Plymouth Church died, ibid.

1659.
The damnable Opinions of the Quakers are vented up and down the Country, p.157

Mr. Henry Dunster, first President of Harvard College, deceased, p.158

1660.
James Pierce slain by Lightning at Plymouth, p.159

1662.
In January several Earthquakes were heard in N.E. p.161

Philip Sachem of Pokanaket renews the Articles of Peace made betwixt the
Government of Plymouth, and his Father and Brother, p.160

Mr. John Brown Magistrate of Plymouth Colony ended this life, p.163,164

1663.
Mr. Samuel Newman Teacher of Rehobath died, p.164

Mr. John Norton Teacher of Boston died suddenly, p.165

Mr. Samuel Stone Teacher of Hartford deceased, p.168

1664.
A great and dreadful Comet appeared in New England for the space of three
months, which was accompanied with many sad Effects, p.170

Great mildew and blasting in the Country, p.172

The Kings Commissioners arrived at Boston in N.E. p.173

Manado's surrendered up to His Majesty, and called New York, p.173

Colonel Cartwright on his Voyage to England was taken by the Dutch. Sir Robert
Carre died the next day after his arrival in Bristol, p.176

1665.
Mr. John Endicot Governor of the Massachusetts, died, p.176

Capt. Davenport killed with Lightning as he lay on his Bed at the Castle, p.177

Wheat exceedingly blasted and mildewed, ibid.

1666.
Three killed in a moment by a blow of Thunder at Marshfield, and four at
Pis^ataqua, and diverse hurt. A great Whirlwind at the same time, p.178

The Small Pox at Boston, p.179

The mi^dew and blasting of the Corn still continued, ibid.

A remarkable manifestation of Gods goodness to some poor Salvages in the
Jurisdiction of Plymouth, p.180

The death of Mr. William Thompson Minister at Braintry, p.181

1667.
Several Vollies of shot heard discharged in the Air at Nanta^ket. In March
there appeared a Sign in the Heavens in the form of a Spear, pointing directly
to the West, p.182

Mr. John Wilson, who had been Pastor of Boston Church 37 years, rested from
his labors in the 79 year of his Age, p.183

1668.
Mr. Samuel Shepard Pastor of Rowley Church died, p.190

April 27. Mr. Henry Flint, Teacher at Braintry, died, ibid.

July 9. Mr. Jonathan Mitchel, Pastor of the Church at Cambridge, deceased,
p.190, and c.

October 13. Mr. John Eliot junior, Pastor of a Church within the Bounds of
Cambridge, departed this life, p196,197

The Conclusion of the History, with Advice to the Rising generation, p.197,198

FINIS.

