A TESTIMONY FROM THE SCRIPTURE AGAINST IDOLATRY and SUPERSTITION, In Two
Sermons; Upon the Example of that Great Reformer Hezekiah, 2 Kings 18.4.

The first, Witnessing in general against all the Idols and Inventions of men
in the Worship of God.

The second, more particularly against the Ceremonies, and some other
Corruptions of the Church of England.

Preached, the one September 27. the other September. 30. 1660

By Mr. SAMUEL MATHER, Teacher to a Church of Christ in Dublin in Ireland.

1 Samuel 5.3, 4. And when they of Ashdod arose early on the morrow, behold,
Dagon was fallen upon his face to the earth before the Ark of the Lord: and
they took Dagon and set him up in his place again.

And when they rose early on the morrow morning, behold, Dagon was fallen upon
his face to the ground before the Ark of the Lord, and the head of Dagon, and
both the palms of his hands were cut off upon the threshold, only the stump of
Dagon was left unto him.

TO THE READER.
SUndry Judicious and Learned (in both Englands) upon the perusal of the
following Sermons, have professed that the Author has therein done like
himself, and (according to the wisdom given unto him (...) God) comprehended
in a little room, the Substance of what is to be said, in Defense of that
Cause, which in this ^ast Age has been so abundantly confirmed, both by Words
and Sufferings of many of the Lords faithful Servants. I have known some in
that City where these Sermons were Preached, who although by reason of their
adherence to Hierarchical Principles, they esteemed the Author as one of their
greatest Opposites, yet would say of him, That for a Scriptural, Logical,
Methodical Preacher, they never knew his equal.

It has been the Fate (may we use that word) attending the Posthumous Works of
many Learned men, that they have come forth with a Caetera desiderantur, as is
to be seen in sundry of our great Rainold his Praelections de libr. Apocr. (not
to mention others) And so it is here: Nevertheless, this Copy is perfect so far
as it goes, having been, not only perused by the Author himself, but a great
part of it written with his own hand, (who saw cause to enlarge the Second
Sermon especially, after it was Preached) from whom I received it some years
ago, we being then both of us in the same Land; but we were constrained to
part, before he could cause all his Meditations and Collections on this Subject
to be Transcribed. That defect notwithstanding, it has been conceived, that if
what is here presented, should be in this way brought into public light, it
would conduce very much toward the establishment of many in the present Truth,
both in the Land where these Sermons were Preached, and amongst us also, who
are Exiles for the same Cause, should any number of Copies (as after Printed,
it is hoped there may) happen to be dispersed amongst us they are therefore
Transmitted for the Press.

The most specious Reason, which our Opposites seem to have for the impleaded
Ceremonies, is the pretended Indifferency of them. Were that so, yet
considering that the Imposition of them is attended with Scandal to many
Protestants, who embrace these Superstitions with relucting Consciences, yea
with Scandal to Papists, who are thereby hardened in their Idolatries; since as
one well says, The Ceremonies are Monuments of Popery, the Trophies of
Antichrist, and the Relics of Romes Whorish Bravery, they therefore ought to
be called Nehushtan. I wish that some who are much taken with that
Socinianizing, and at last Papizing, and most corrupt Interpreter Hugo Grotius,
(who is extremely followed by the amongst Praelatical men admired Dr. Hammond,
who in his Notes on the New Testament, has showed all possible favor to
Antichrist; which things I am the rather willing to mention, not to detract any
thing from the worth or deserved praise of those Authors, in respect of their
great Learning, but that young Students may be Cautioned against sucking in
poison from their Writings; I say, I wish such) would remember Grotius his Note
on the Text which is in the following Discourses largely and elaborately
discussed, Egregium (inquit) documentum Regibus, ut quamvis been instituta sed
non necessaria, ubi (...), male usurpantur, e conspectu tollant, ne ponant
ostendiculum caecis. But besides that Argument (which yet is not easily
answered) the ensuing Discourses demonstrate, That to allow Popish, or any
Non-instituted Ceremonies, a Religious state and use in the Worship of God, is
absolutely sinful, as being a direct violation of the Second Commandment.

I confess there are other large and elaborate Tractates on the Subjects here
treated on, which as yet remain unanswered, such as Mr. Parker of the Cross,
Dr. Ames his Fresh Suit against Ceremonies, Mr. Gelaspy's Dispute against
English Popish Ceremonies. Indeed some have glanced at less material Passages
in the Books mentioned, but never any (that I could hear of) did strike at
their whole Frame, or undertake ((...)) to answer them, or any one of them.
Nevertheless, the Publication of the Sermons herewith emitted, has not been
thought unnecessary, because they are in a Method suited to vulgar Capacities,
and contain in few Pages the strength and substance of what others have
voluminously expressed. Nor can those other Tractates be easily obtained, or
digested by the ordinary sort of Readers, as these may. And who knows, but
the Lord may bless what is here made public, for the Enlightening and
Establishing of the Rising Generation, that they also having their Minds well
informed, and girt about with Truth, may be able to suffer, rather then comply
with Prelatick Superstitions, (or with Erastianism) for nonconformity whereto,
our blessed Fathers suffered many things, and not in vain? I will likewise
confess, that the remembrance of the awful Saying of that Ancient, had some
impression upon my spirit, inducing to this Publication, Non solum ille
proditor veritatis est qui palam mendacium pro veritate loquitur, sed etiam
ille qui non libere pronuntiat veritatem.

Now the same Spirit that breathed mightily in the Preacher, when (viva voce)
delivering what is here Published, go along with his Truth, that the Lords Name
may be glorified, and his People edified thereby. Which is the Prayer of him,
who has still an earnest desire to be found not only amongst Witnesses, but
(if the will of God be so concerning him) amongst Sufferers, on that account of
Testifying against the Superstitions and Corruptions of the Times.

M. I.

ERRATA.
Page 18. line 10. read Archslamins, Primislamins. page 24. l. 19 r. Peter. p.
33. l. 11. r. have not. p. 37. l. 23. r. Feathers. p. 52. l. 20. r. bold.

That ista desiderantur, p. 31. l. 24. should have been printed in the Margin,
having respect to the Objections, etc. there mentioned, which are not in this
Edition.

A TESTIMONY From Scripture against Idolatry, and Superstition. The First
Sermon witnessing in General against all the Idols, and Inventions of men in
the Worship of God.
2 Kings 18.4, 5, 6, 7. Ver. 4. He removed the high places, and brake the
Images, and cut down the Groves, and brake in pieces the brazen Serpent that
Moses had made; for unto those days the Children of Israel did burn Incense to
it: And he called it Nahushtan.

Ver. 5. He trusted in the Lord God of Israel, so that after him was none like
him amongst all the Kings of Judah, nor any that were before him.

Ver. 6. For the clave to the Lord, and departed not from following him, but
kept his Commandments, which the Lord commanded Moses.

Ver. 7. And the Lord was with him, and he prospered whithersoever he went
forth.


THis Chapter Contains the Beginning of the History of Hezekiah, that great
Reforming Prince. The parts of the Chapter are these three; (1) There be some
General circumstances of his Reign, the time when, and how long, his Parentage
etc. ver. 1, 2. (2) His eminent piety in matters of Religion, ver. 3. to 7. (3)
His great prosperity in the Political, or Civil affairs of his Kingdom, ver.
7. to the end.

His Piety is set forth two ways, (1) By a general Testimony of him, ver. 3.
He did that that was right in the sight of the Lord, according to all that his
Father David did: (2) By a more particular enumerati^n and induction of
particulars in the words read unto you, in these five things; (1) his
destroying Idolatry, ver. 4. (2) his Trusting in God, ver. 5. (3) his
pre-eminence in piety above all the Kings of Judah. Ibid. (4) his faithful
cleaving to God in his Word. ver. 6. (5) The prospering presence of God with
him in all his affairs. ver. 7. From which five particulars, we may accordingly
observe five points of Doctrine.

1. From the destruction of Idolatry, ver. 4. Observe. That it is a thing very
right and pleasing in the sight of God, when the sin of Idolatry and all the
monuments of it, all the remembrances, and remainders of it are quite
destroyed, and rooted up from amongst his people. For thus Hezekiah did, and it
is said in the third verse, he did that which was right in the sight of the
Lord.

2. Whereas it is noted of him, that he trusted in the Lord God of Israel, ver.
5. Observe from hence. That nothing will carry a man through in the work of
Reformation, but trusting, and relying upon God by Faith. For so did this good
King: A man may begin, reform a little, and do something in the work of God
as Jehu did, for his own ends, but he never went through with it, because he
trusted not in the Lord God of Israel, but in his own carnal policy; therefore
he left the calves at Dan and Bethel, removing some Idols, but leaving others:
but to go through with the work, requires a Spirit plainly Heroical, a Spirit
of Faith, and firm relyance, and dependence upon God. There be so many, and to
the eye of carnal reason, such insuperable difficulties and impediments in the
work of Reformation, That a man shall never be able to surmount and get above
them without an Almighty assistance from the Lord: H^zekiah could not but see
what reproach and danger he did incurr, and expose himself unto by it; The
clamours of the people for their old Religion, the Religion of their Fathers,
the Scandal it would give to many: Rabshakeh tells him he had destroyed the
worship of God, and calls him in effect an Heretic, and a Schismatic. ver.
22. If you say we trust in the Lord our God, is not that he whose High places,
and whose Altars Hezekiah has taken away? and he upbraids him also with
trusting upon that bruised reed, even upon Egypt. ver. 21. Here were sad
reproaches, and discouragements from men, but his hope was in the Lord, he
trusted in the Lord God of Israel.

3. From his pre-eminence in Piety above all his Predecessors and Successors;
Observe. That a reforming Spirit in Magistrates as it is very excel^ent, so it
is very rare. ver ^. After him there was none like him amongst all the Kings of
Judah, nor any that were before him. By which expressions we are to understand,
that there were but very few, for there was one or two, for he is paralleled
with David, ver. 3. And the same expression is afterward used concerning
Josiah, 2 Kin. 2^.25. So that these three, David, Hezekiah, Josiah, were the
three great Reformers, and therefore when it is said, there was none like
Hezekiah, the expression is a little Hyperbolical, and but a little, for there
was but two more amongst all the Kings of Judah: The meaning therefore is not
prorsus nemo, but fere nemo, as Piscator well expounds it. For it is the Hebrew
phrase of Speech to use a Negative, when it intends a Superlative. There is a
parallel expression in Prove. 2. 19. None that go to her return again, that is,
very, very few, not one of a thousand, but some there are; as Mary Magdalene
out of whom Christ did cast seven unclean Devils, but where will you find such
another? So when Paul says of Timothy, I find no man like minded to seek the
Churches good, Phil. 2. 20. There was Titus, and one, or two more, who had the
same Spirit, but alas how few! how few!

It is true, there were some other reforming Kings in Judah; but none like
these who were the first three, for the rest had great blemishes. Asa was a
reforming King, but there is one black mark upon him, for he persecuted the
Prophet Hanani, for reproving him; and he oppressed some of the people at the
same time, whereby his Sun did set under such a Cloud that some have questioned
whether he was a godly man; 2 Chronicles. 1^.10. Iehosaphat did Reform Religion,
but he entered into a sinful League with that great Idolater Ahab, and though
the Prophet Iehu reproved him for it, 2 Chronicles. 19.2. and though we do not find
that he was so exceeding vile as to persecute the Prophet for it, yet he fell
into the same sin again with Ahaziah, for which God destroyed his Navy, and
broke his Fleet of Ships that should have gone to Tarshish, 2 Chronicles. 20. ult.
King Vzziah likewise was true to Gods worship in the beginning of his Reign,
but afterward, his prosperity puffed him up, and he invaded the Priests Office
to his own destruction, 2 Chr. 26 4, 16. And if you look into our own Histories
of England, how few shall you find! It was prophesied of them, that they
should give both (...) both their force of Arms, and their Power of Laws to the
Beast, to serve the Popes Interest* Rev. 17.13. And accordingly they have fully
accomplished it till the time of Henry the eigth, who began the Reformation.

4. Here is Hezekiah his cleaving to the Lord, and to his Word, ver. 6 For he
clave to the Lord, and departed not from after him, but kept his Commandments,
which the Lord commanded Moses. Hence the fourth Doctrine is this. That the
Rule of Reformation in Religion, is the will and Word of God: He that will
reform aright, must reduce, and bring all things back to that Rule: when John
was to measure the Temple, and to reform the Church, there was a Reed given
unto him like a Rod, Rev. 11.1. and Rev. 2^.15. The new Jerusalem is measured
with a golden Reed. It is spoken with allusion to Ezekiels Vision, Chap. 40.
ver. 3. which measuring Reed, can be no other but the Word of God. Hence we
call the Scriptures Canonical, because they are the Rule of all Religion. It is
not the wills and lusts of men, but what the Lord has Commanded us by Moses,
and the Prophets, and by Christ and his Apostles.

5. The last particular is, The prospering presence of God with this reforming
Magistrate, ver. 7. And the Lord was with him, and he prospered whithersoever
he went forth. Hence observe, 5. That a through Reformation of Religion
according to the Word of God, to the rooting up of all Idolatry, is the way to
obtain the prospering presence of God with us in whatsoever we take in hand.
Let Hezekiah turn himself which way he will, the Lord went with him. It is
promised, Psalm. 1.3. He that delights in the Law of the Lord, whatsoever he
does shall prosper, and the same thing is noted concerning other reforming
Kings, as King Vzziah, 2 Chronicles. 26.5. As long as he sought the Lord, God made
him to prosper, and he did great things. Men are apt to think it will cause
trouble, disturb all things, and bring Heaven and Earth together, but it is
indeed the way to prosper.

Thus you see the principal Truths, and points of Doctrine, that are contained
in the words. I shall resume and prosecute a little more fully the first of
them, viz.

Observe. That it is a thing very pleasing in the sight of God, when the sin of
Idolatry, and all the monuments, all the remembrances and remainders of it are
quite destroyed, and rooted out from amongst his people. For Hezekiah here made
through work of it, he removed the High places, and brake the Images, and cut
down the Groves, and brake in pieces the brazen Serpent, he spared nothing that
had the Devils stamp upon it; If he had spared any thing, it would have been
the brazen Serpent, for the honor of the first Founder, for it was Moses that
made it, and that by Gods appointment; but yet being now abused to Idolatry he
brake it in pieces, and calls it N^hushtan, which is a name of Contempt; as
indeed when men are speaking of Idolatry, there ought to be a sting of holy
indignation in the very expressing of it. In Number. 21.9. It is called (...)
nehash nehosne^, but here only (...) Nehushtan. There it was denominated both
from the Form and matter, but here from the matter only. There it was called a
Serpent of brass, but now he calls it a mere piece of brass, the stamp of
Institution being taken off, and the thing having been horribly abused to
Idolatry, or as some have not unfitly rendered it, that base piece of brass.
For the prosecution of this Doctrine, four things are necessary to be spoken
to; (1) what is meant by Idolatry? (2) what by the monuments of it? (3) How it
may appear that the Lord will have them to be rooted up. (4) The reasons of
this Severity of God against this Sin?

1. What is meant by Idolatry?

Answ. Idolatry in general, is the worshipping of Images or Idols. Now there be
two sorts of Images, and therefore two sorts of Idolatry. First, against the
Object of worship, in the first Commandment. Secondly, against the means of
worship in the Second. The Idolatry forbidden in the first Commandment is, when
the worship is terminated upon a false Object, and not upon the True God that
made Heaven and Earth. But the Idolatry forbidden in the second Commandment is,
when the worship is directed to the True God, but by false ways and means,
which he had never appointed, and which never came into his heart: we commonly
call it for distinction sake, Superstition, which is as much as to say, Cultus
supra statutum, a worship beside, and beyond the Rule. The Scripture calls it
Idolatry, or the worshipping of Idols, and Superstition, and will worship, Col.
2. ult. Acts 7 41. and Acts 17.16, 22.

The Idolatry against which the Prophets are so frequently, and almost
continually thundering forth the wrath of God throughout the Old Testament, and
which is so much condemned also in the New, and which the People were chiefly
guilty of. It is for the most part this latter. For when they made the Calf,
Exodus- 32. They said, These he thy Gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of
the Land of Egypt. ver 4. and they proclaimed a Holy day, not to the Calf, but
to Jehovah, ver. 5. Of whom the Calf was but an Image, in which they looked at
Jehovah, as near unto them and as going with them, and before them. ver. 1
Their intention therefore was to worship the True God, but in a way of their
own. And in l^ke manner Micah's mother, she dedicated the Silver to ^ehovah to
make a graven Image, Judges 17.3. and Micah concludes, ve^. last, that now
Jehovah would do him good. Yea, Jeroboam himself, when he set up his Calves at
Dan and Bethel, he proclaims, behold thy Gods O Israel, which brought thee up
out of the Land of Egypt, 1 King. 12.28, which is a description of the True
God, so that it was not Ieroboam^ intention to introduce another Object of
worship, but only another manner of worship, but yet seeing he worshipped God
in a false way, The Scripture charge him for worshipping the Devil, 2 Chronicles.
11.15. He ordained Priests for the Devils, which he had made. Yea, I find that
our Divines Calvin Instit. ii. 1. Ca. 1. Sect 9. Ra^nolds de Idol. Roman.
Eccles, lib. 2. Ca. 3. Cartwright 2 Reply page 185, 186, 187. do observe
against the Papists, that the very Heathens, and Pagans were not so sottish, as
to terminate their worship upon a dead piece of Wood, and Stone; though perhaps
some of the blindest of them might look no further, yet the more knowing ones
amongst them did look upon their Idols as the Images and representations of
some higher Deity, from whence they called them simulachra Deorum, the
representations of the Gods. For they knew that God was a Spirit, as in that
Verse of Cato. Si Deus est animus, ^it pura mente colendus: and that Heaven is
his dwelling place: Hence they said, Acts 14.11. The Gods are come down unto us
in the likeness of men. And when reproved for their Idolatry, Austin in Psalm
118 (...)
Austine says, the common people themselves were wont to Answer, se non
visibile illud colere, sed numen, quodillic invisibiliter habitabit, that they
did not worship the visible Image, but that which dwelt invisibly in it. But
yet they were Idolaters in the sight of God, and are charged with this guilt
every where throughout the Scripture. For they did herein grossly break the
second commandment. For the further opening whereof, because it will give light
unto all that follows to be spoken; the second Commandment with the
Scriptures apperteining thereto, (being that spiritual Armory out of which
whosoever will fight against Superstition must fetch their Weapons;) you may
observe briefly these four things concerning it.

1. That it is not meant of Images for Civil use, but for worship; thou shall
not bow down to them, nor serve them. For the Civil use of Images is lawful for
the representation and remembrance of a person absent, for honor and Civil
worship to any worthy person, as also for ornament, but the scope of the
Command is against Images in State and use religious.

2. Neither yet is it meant of all Images for religious use, but only Images of
their own devising, for God does not forbid his own Institutions, but only our
inventions, and therefore one says both wittily and wisely, Non Imago, non
simulachrum prohibetur, sed non facies tibi. The Emphasis lies here, Thou shall
not make to thy self; For there were Images by Gods Appointment in the Church
of the Jews, for the making whereof the Lord sitted Bezaleel and Aholiah with
his Spirit, and with skill in all manner of workmanship, Exodus 31.3, 4, 5. and
it is the Churches complaint against the Enemy. Psalm. ^4.6. But now they brake
down the Carved work thereof, at once with Axes and Hammers; now it is a duty
to worship God by the graven Images, which he himself has appointed, which
under the Law was the Tabernacle, and Temple, with the rest of the worship
thereto belonging, the Ark, Altar, Cherubims, Sacrifices, Feasts, Passover,
etc. And in these Gospel times Baptism, and the Lords Supper are external Forms
or Images, but they are of Gods appointing; but such as God has not appointed
are forbidden in this Commandment. For it is not enough, to worship the True
God, but we must worship him in the right way, and seek him in the right order,
as 1 Chronicles. 15.13. For the neglect whereof, he made that Breach upon Vzziah. It
is not enough to eschew false Objects of worship, but we must also take heed of
false means of worship. Hence the people are blamed for Sacrificing in the High
places, though to the Lord their God Only. 2 Chronicles. 33.17.

3. Although none but the grossest kind of Idolatry, viz graven Images are
expressly mentioned, yet, under this one Instance is comprehended all other
sins of the same kind, all other Inventions of men are included and
comprehended under this. For it is a general rule observed by all Judicious
Expositors upon the Ten Commandments, that they must be opened by Synecdoches
and Metonymies; Synecdoches to comprehend all sins of the like kind, and all
the Degrees thereof; and Metonymies to comprehend all the Causes and means, and
occasions thereof. And Christ himself teaches us so to Interpret them. As in
the sixth Commandment, Thou shall not kill, this forbids all rash anger, even
passionate words, and thoughts. Mat. 5.21, 22. and in the Seventh Commandment,
though Adultery only is named, yet by the like Synecdoche all other kinds, and
Degrees of uncleanness are included, and intended under that, even filthy
thoughts. Mat. 5.28. Therefore, so are all Humane Inventions under graven
Images. For there is the same reason of Carved, painted, molten Images, yea,
the most refined spiritual Devises and Inventions of men. For we are often
charged neither to add nor diminish from Gods appointments whatsoever thing I
Command you, observe and do it, thou shall neither add thereto nor diminish
from it. Deuteronomy. 12. last. And in many other places. The Lord gave it strictly in
Change to Moses, Exodus 25. last. Look to it that thou make them after their
Pattern which was showed thee in the Mount. And accordingly it is observed, and
no less then eighteen Times repeated in the 39. and 40 Chapters of Exodus, that
every thing was done as the Lord Commanded Moses. Henc^ the Neg^tio^ Argument
is so frequent in the Scriptures, which I Commanded not, and which never came
into my heart* and who required these things at your Hands.

4. Hence that distinction of Bellar. de effect. Sacr Lib. 2. C 33
Bellarmine, which some of our Formalists have borrowed from him, between
Corruptive and perfective additions to the worship of God is a most Corrupt and
blind distinction. For all Additions are Corruptive, being so directly contrary
to this Command. If thou lift up thy tool upon the Altar, thou have polluted
it, Exodus 20.25* To polish, is to pollute. What ever solemn worship men perform
to God either it arises from the very nature of God in the first Commandment:
or else there is a stamp of institution upon it, and then it is an Ordinance of
God, required in the Affirmative part of the second Commandment; or else it is
an Humane Invention, and so forb^dden in the Negative part thereof.

Quest. 2. What is meant by the Monuments of Idolatry?

A. Such things as being indifferent in their own Nature, have been abused, and
polluted with Idolatry. This is evident from the Instance of the Brazen Serpent
in the Text, of which you may observe a threefold state. 1. Religious. 2.
Indifferent. 3. Sinful.

1. Religious, and necessary. For the first Original of it was not Humane, but
Divine. It was once a Type of Christ, and spiritual Healing through him, as
Christ himself expounds it, Joh. 3.14, 15. and therefore it was then a
spiritual and a blessed Ordinance of God. But this necessary, and commanded use
of the Serpent, was (as Mr. Cartwright observes) Mr. Cart. rest of 2d. reply page
262
but for the time, wherein it was a means to heal those that were bitten. This
use therefore Ceased, and the Stamp of Institution was taken off, when the
fiery Serpents Ceased, when they came out of the Wilderness.

2. After this, it was retained, and set up as it seems upon the Walls of the
Temple, as a Monument of that miraculous mercy and healing, which they had
formerly received by it in the Wilderness. and this use of it was not
Instituted, but only indifferent, and it seems to be of the same nature with
the laying up of Goliahs Sword at No^ behind the Ephod: Dr. Fulke against
Saunders of Images, page 64. Ames Fresh Suit, part 2. page 322.327. Calv. in
Josh. 22. Pa^ker of the Cross, part 1. page 52.53.
1 Samuel 21.9. and with the Altar of Witness, Josh. 22. Of which our Divines
observe, that though it was not every way commendable, yet it was in some sort
excusable, as being not intended, nor set up for worship, but for another end;
only as a public Record and Testimony, for which it was usual to erect heaps
of Stones in those ancient Times, and therefore though it was Religious in a
Sense Common, or mixtly as all things are, which are done to an holy end; yet
it was not religious in Sense special, or in State, as those things are which
have order, obligation and a kind of Immobility in Gods Service; The like may
be said concerning the brazen Serpent. And in this use it had continued amongst
them, as some have computed, no less then seven hundred years, so ^p. Bilson
against the Jesuits, which Example (says he) Bilson ^f obed. part 4 pa^ 339,
340
he would have you advisedly to mark; From hence we conclude, that the painted
and carved Images of Christ himself may not be adored, and if they be, they may
be removed, though they were delivered even by the Apostles, as yours were not.
For when the people went a step further to burn incense to this brazen Serpent,
then Hezekiah throws it away as a defiled monument, it was no longer
indifferent, but sinful, and this was the third state of it.

Now this explication cuts off those Objections, If all the monuments of
Idolatry must be destroyed, then so must Baptism, and the Lords Supper, say
some; because they have been abused by the Papists. Answ. It follows not, for
the brazen Serpent was not an Ordinance at this time, when Hezekiah brake it in
pieces, it was only an indifferent thing abused. But the Sacraments are
standing Ordinances, and the Ordinances of Christ cannot be looked upon as
monuments of Idolatry, for they are not indifferent things abused, but duties
Commanded and appointed by the Lord Jesus. Therefore the abuse of them must be
reformed and rectified, but the right use retained and continued. As when the
Vessels of the Temple had been polluted and abused in Babylon, where they
became Belshazzars quaffing bowls, they were not therefore laid aside by the
people of God in their return out of Babylon, but restored and brought back to
their former right use in the Temple: So when it is Objected, that then public
meeting places for worship must be pulled down, and the use of Cups and Vessels
in the Sacrament laid aside, because the Papists have abused them. I Answer
still as before, that these things are not monuments of Idolatry, for though
they be not Ordinances, yet they are necessary appurtenances to them. For when
God appoints any Ordinance, the Institution thereof implies and carries with it
an Implicit Warrant (...) the use of all such things as are necessary to the
celebration of it. As when Christ appoints us to drink wine in the Lords Supp^^
he does thereby warrant the use of Cups and Vessels to hold the wine; ^he very
nature of the thing implies it. So the Lord commands public ^^semblies, and
therefore public meeting places, we hold them Ames fresh (...) part 2 page 379
commanded in general, though not for their particular places and Forms, says
Dr. Ames in answer to this Objection. But it is easy to distinguish between
such necessary things, and things indifferent; whereof there is no necessity
neither from Gods Institution, nor from the nature of the things themselves. To
clear it, by by two plain Instances. Those love feasts in the Church of Corinth
were indifferent things, hence when abused, they were abolished out of the
Church. But the Sun is of necessary use, and therefore we need not go about to
pluck it out of the Firmament, but may freely make use of it, though it has
been abused and worshipped by Idolaters.

Q. 3. But how may it be proved, that the monuments of Idolatry must be
destroyed and rooted up?

Answ. The proofs for it are fitly referred to these four heads. 1. Commands to
warrant it. 2. Promises to encourage to it. 3. Reproofs for the neglect of it.
4. Commended Examples.

1. Commands. Thus shall ye deal with them, thou shall destroy their Altars,
break down their Images, and cut d^wn their Groves, and burn their graven
Images with fire, Deuteronomy. 7 5. and again ver. 25. the graven Images of their
gods, shall ye burn with fire, thou shall not desire the silver or gold that is
on them, nor take it unto thee, lest thou be ensnared therein; For it is an
abomination to the Lord thy God. So likewise, Isai. 30.21. ye shall defile also
the covering of thy graven Images of silver, the very coverings, those costly
garments which Idolaters were wont to put upon their Idols, and the ornament of
their molten Images of gold, thou shall cast them away as a menstruous Cloth,
thou shall say unto it, get thee hence.

2. There be gracious promises also annexed to these Commands, for further
encouragement, Numb. 33.52, 53. ye shall destroy all their pictures, and
destroy all their Images, and quite pluck down all their High places, so as to
leave no memorial, no remembrance at all of the Canaanitish Superstition; now
mark what follows in the next words, and ye shall dispossess the Inhabitants of
the Land, and dwell therein. It is observed by some Interpreters, jun^ Anal
exolic (...) merorum
that the words are indeed, and in the true sense of them a Connex Axiom, so
Junius, Cui mandato subjic itur sua promissio. Yea, there is a promise of
taking away their sins, when the Lord shall take away their Idols. Isai. 27.9.
By thi^ therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob he purged, and this is all the
fruit, to take away his sin: when he makes all the Stones of the Altar as
chalk Stones that are beaten in sn^der, the groves and Images shall not stand
up.

3. The^e ^e many threatenings and Reproofs for this sin, both in the old
Testament, and the New. Yea, the Lord himself threatens to take the work into
(...) own hand, and to do it himself, if none else would, Zep. 1 4. I will cut
off the Remnant of Baal from this pl^ce, and the very names of Ch^marims, those
bla^k Priests. It is observed, as the blemish of sundry reforming Kings, that
the High places were not removed And those proud Idolaters, Isai 65.4. are
reproved not only for eating Swines flesh, but because the broth of such
abominable things was in their Vessels. And Christ from Heaven reproves those
two Churches of Pergamus and Thyatira for eating meat sacrificed to Idols, Rev.
2.14 20.

4. The Commended examples are very many. Jacob, Genesis 35.4. destroys not only
the Idols of his Family, but their Earings also. Moses, Exodus 32.20. took the
Calf which they had made and burnt it in the fire, and ground it to powder, and
strawed it upon the water. The Prophe Elijah would not so much as offer
Sacrifice to the God of Heaven upon Baals Altar, many without question thought
he was more precise then wise, to keep the people in suspense so long; Could he
not offer upon the Altar that was ready at hand? no. It was a polluted thing,
and therefore he would not use it, but repayrs the Altar of the Lord that was
broken down, 1 Kin. 18.3^. Jehu likewise though a bad man yet thus far, he
wrought with God, he destroyed the Images, and the house of Baal, and for the
more Contempt turned it into an House of Office. 2 Kin. 10.27. and slew the
Priests in all their pontifical Robes, ver. 22. that there might not be so much
as a Surplice, nor a rag of Baal left, Josiah likewise, destroyed every thing
of Baal, 2 Kin. 23. the Vessels, the Groves, the Images, the High places, the
Priests, the Altars* the chariots of the Sun, he burns them with fire, stamps
them to powder, throws the dust of them down the River, that there might be no
remembrance, not memorial of Baal left. And this Example of Hezekiah in the
Text is as pregnant as any, and therefore usually alleged by all our Divines
against the Papists; This brazen Serpent though once an Ordinance, but now an
idol* he spares it not, but breaks it in pieces, and Calls it that base piece
of brass.

So that the Case is clear beyond dispute, if we will stand to the Verdict of
the Scripture, that all the monuments of Idolatry ought to be destroyed, and
lest any should think it is a new notion, lately found out by some precise
Puritans, and hot Spurs in Religion, it was one of Queen Elizabeth's injunctions
above an hundred years ago ^
, They shall (...) way, utterly extinct and d^stroy all Sh^ines, covering of
Shrines, all Tables, Candle sticks, Trindals and rolls of Wax, pictures,
paintings, and all other monuments of feigned miracles, pilgrimages, Idolatry
and Superstition, so that there remain no memory of the same in Walls, glass
windows, or less where, within their Churches or Houses. But could they see To
far in the very dawning of the day, and cannot we see it now? not but that it
may be lawful to employ such things to private, ^
common uses, where it can be done without danger of Superstition, as is also
granted by those that write against them, as Crosses of Wood for firing for
poor people, Su^plices to make Sh^^ts or dish clouts of, the Stones of the
Altar for grave Stones or the like, ^
but they must be utterly destroyed out of Gods worship, and so they are when
put to such uses as these. The Reasons of the point are these.

Reas. 1. Because the smallest relics of Idolatry preserved and Continued
amongst a People, are dangerous baits and Snares to allure, and entice, and
bring them back again unto Idolatry. Take heed to thy self that thou be not
snared by following them, saying, how did these nations serve their Gods? Deuteronomy.
12.30, It is Calvin's observation in his Letter to the Protector of England Calv
Epist and ^espon^ ^dit genes ^617 page ^^ and 136
quid enim illae Ceremonia aliud fuerunt, quam totidem lenocinia, that the
Ceremonies are whorish enticements to spiritual filthiness, and he writes to
Cranmer that they had so defectively reformed and removed Superstition, ut
residui maneant innum^ri surculi qui assidue pullulent. For the relics of
Idolatry, etiam sopitae solent recalescere; and therefore as Zanchy speaks,
pietas in deum, et charitas in prox mum postulan^, ut tollantur, both piety
toward God, and love toward men requires the extirpation of them. When
Constantine had only shut up the Temples of the Heathenish Idols, Julian the
Apostate did easily unlock and open them again. But Theodosius did utterly
demolish and raze them down to the ground, and after this Popery indeed came
up, but the old pagan Idolatry in that way, and profession of Paganism rose up
again no more. Upon this account, Mr. Fox approves Fox Acts and Mon ^ol. ^.
page ^^1, 5^3.
and Commends that great and worthy act of Cromwell, by whom the Monasteries and
abbeys were utterly overthrown, and plucked up by the roots in the time of Henry
the eigth. For seeing the Nobility were scarce able to retein the Lands and
Possessions of the Abbeys, which were distributed to them by King Henry, from
the devotion of Queen Mary, seeking to build again the Walls of Jericho. If the
buildings had not been Pulled down, but only converted to another use, and if
the Lands had been otherwise disposed of, then they were, it had been easy for
Queen Mary, or any Popish prince to have restored them again, whereby we might
have had such swarms of Friars and Monks possessed in their nests again, before
this day in England, in so great a number that ten Cromwels afterward Uneath,
should have been suffered to have unhoused them. It is no sufficient help
against Idolatry to preach against it, (...) the 2d. (...) ^bject. 6
when such things are retained, as I shall show, when I come to answer
Objections.

Reas. 2. Prom the Lords exceeding hatred and detestation of this sin of
Idolat^y. There is no sin which the Lord in Scripture does express a greater
detestation and abhorrence of, hence he will have the least remainders of it to
be rooted up.

Q. But what may be the Reason of this severe and fierce displeasure of God
against this sin?

This had need be spoken to, for men are apt to make light of these sins, to
think that Ministers are more zealous then wise, to preach against them, and
that the Lord himself will not be so severe to punish them, nay, which is some
what strange, they hope to please God by them, and are apt to allege their
Idolatry as an excuse, and to hold it up as a Shield of defense, when reproved
for other sins. But therefore the Scripture lays load upon it. Hos 8.11.
Ephraim has made many Altars to sin: they thought to worship God, but the Text
says, it was to sin against him. and Chap. 9 15. all their wickednes^ is in
Gilgal, that is their greatest wickedness, for there were many other sins
amongst them, sed hic nomen (...) accipitur pr^ summo vel praecipuo says
Calvin, as if the Prophet should say, all their Whoredoms, Robberies, and
Oppressions, and other Crying sins, which did abound amongst them, were not so
bad as their Idolatries and Superstitions there committed. No sin like this.
The greatness of it will appear, if you Consider, 1. The nature of it, 2. The
Causes from whence it comes, 3. The effects that flow from it.

1. In the nature of this sin, there be four things that make it very odious in
the sight of God.

1. Because it is a sin of high Rebellion against the will of God. The worship
required in the First Commandment is called Natural worship, because it arises
from the very nature of God, and the Creature. Hence to withdraw that inward
Homage and worship of Faith, Hope, and Love, and the actings thereof, in
Conf^ssing his name, hearing his Word, praying, and returning the praise of all
to him, or to bestow and employ these chief affections and actings of the Soul
upon other Objects, it strikes directly and immediately at the very nature of
God, and denies his natural dominion, and that Relation that we have to Him as
his Creatures. But the second Commandment which Contains the Instituted worship
of God, flows from the will of God, and therefore for men to resist this, is
to set up their own wills, above, and against Gods, as it is excellently set
forth by the Prophet Jeremy, The Lord says by his Prophets, oh, do not this
abominable thing which I hate, but the People say, we will not hearken unto
th^e, but we will certainly do whatsoever goes out of our own mouth, to burn
Incens^ unto the Queen of Heaven. Jer 4.4, 16, 17 They say in brief, our own
will sh^l^ stand. Hence it is, that the second Commandment has met with so
much opposition from the Sons of men, because the^e is so much of the will of
God in it, and men cannot bear the will of God, but they are resolved to have
their own wills, which must needs provoke the Lord exceedingly. Men account it
happiness to have their wills, and misery to be crossed of their wills, and were
they subdued to the will of God, it would be so indeed. But for a poor sinful
Creature to set up his own fooli^h, froward will, against the holy, blessed
will of God, How, Can the Lord bear this?

2. It is a sin of much reproach to the wisdom of God, for men to worship God
in their own ways. It is as charging God with folly, as if the Infinite
blessed God were not wise enough to find out the best and fittest way for his
own worship and glory: Hence the Lord, whose judgments are suitable to the
sins of men, such as delight in this sin, he wounds their heads, and smites
their understandings, that their foolish Hearts are darkened, and professing
themselves wise, they become fools. Romans 1.22. Because they will be wiser then
God, he makes them more foolish then men.

3. It is a sin of Whoredom against that spiritual Chastity that the Lord
requires of his people: There is nothing more frequent in the Scripture then to
express Idolatry under the name of Whoredom and Adultery, for it is a breach
of the Marriage-Covenant, and a yielding that honor to another, to a Creature,
to an Idol, which is due to none, but God. Lev. 17.7. They shall no more offer
their Sacrifices unto Devils, after whom they have gone a whoring; Gideons
Ephod, Judges 8.27. they went a whoring after it. With their Idols have they
Committed Adultery, Ezekiel. 23.37. and throughout that Chapter. The two
Idolatrous Cities, Samaria and Jerusalem are compared to two adulterous Women,
Aholah, and Aholihah. They have Committed Adultery with Stocks and Stones. Jer.
3.9. that is, because they made them media Cultus. Hence Rome is called the
Mother of Harlots, Rev 17.5. And pure Worshippers, who follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes, are called Virgins, Rev. 14.4. Hence the Lord
professes in the Sanction of the second Commandment, I am a jealous God; now
the Object of jealousy is Conjugal Chastity, and as jealousy is the rage of a
man, so the jealousy of God is the highest wrath of God.

4. All the worship and honor men do, or think they do to God by these
Inventions of their own, it does red^und indeed and in truth, to the honor of
the Devil. For although Superstition is a sin directly against the means of
worship, yet it is ultimately against the Object of worship. Strange worship
sets up a strange God, Amer medull. li. 2. Cap. ^3. These 1^, 15, 42
for it necessarily supposes and feigneth to it self, ^uch an Object of
worship as is delighted, and well pleased with that kind of worship which the
Lord abhorrs, but Satan is well pleased with. We do advance and set up him as
God, to whose will we do subject our selves, as the rule of our religious
worship. Therefore the Lord so Interprets false worship, that a new God is
devised for the Object of it. The things which the Gentiles Sacrifice, they
Sacrifice to Devils, and not to God. 1 Cor. 10.20. and the Jewish Idolatry was
no better, they shall no more offer their Sacrifices unto Devils, after whom
they have gone a whoring, Lev. 17.7. Jeroboam ordained Priests for the Devils
which he had made. 2. Chron. 11.15 and so the Papists in like manner, it is
said, they repented not of wo^shipping Devils, Rev. 9. 2^. Hence Rome is called
an habitation of Devils, and foul Spirits. Rev. 18.2. and their Factours, and
Emmisaries are called the Spirits of Devils, Rev. 16 4. they think, they
worship Saint Peter and the Virgin Mary, yea, God himself, and Jesus Christ,
but it is indeed, and in Gods account, the Devil whom they worship. Hence, that
Objection vanishes, what? Can we honor God too much? no, I confess you cannot,
His name is above and beyond all praise. But you may mistake, and honor the
Devil, when you think you honor God. Hence, Superstition is called in Greek
(...) q. d. fearing the Devil. For it does not elevate and raise up the mind
toward God, but presses it down from him, and debaseth it as low as Hell.
Thus you see from the nature of this sin, how evil it is in the eyes of God.

2 Look at the Causes of it, from whence it comes. and here we must not give
heed to what men pretend, nor yet to what they think. For men do not know their
own hearts, nor the springs and principles of their own actions, but the Lord
he knows, and the Scripture discovers, and searches the deepest corners and
Secrets of the Heart. Therefore let us see what the Scripture says to it. We
must be very circumspect herein to speak nothing, but what the Scripture says.
For to speak without the Scripture is Censoriousness, but to speak plainly
according to it, is Faithfulness. Isai. 58.1. Cry aloud and spare not, saih the
Lord, but lift up thy voice like Trumpet, show my People their Transgressions,
and the House of Jacob their sins. It was Ierusalems Calamity and ruin, that
her Prophets did see vain and foolish things for her, and did not discover her
iniquity, to turn away her Captivity: Lam. 2.14. Now the Scripture takes notice
of many distempers and Corruptions in the hearts of men, whereby they are
inclined to this sin of Idolatry and Superstition, and in some respects more
propense and prone to it, then to open profaneness. I shall Instance in six
particulars, whereby you will see that it must needs be evil and bitter fruit,
that has such bitter Roots and Causes.

1. Forgetfulness of God, Hos. 8.14. Israel has forgotten his Maker, and
builds Temples, and when they made the molten Calf, though they did proclaim
an holy day to Jehovah, yet it is said, they forgot God their Savior, Psalm.
^06.19, 20, 21. This will seem very strange to carnal reason, for men are apt
to think, they do it out of very good devotion, because they do, or would
remember, and put themselves in mind of their duty toward God, as when men bow
to a Crucifix, or to the name of Jesus, or the like, surely they remember
Christ one would think, but let them pretend what they will, the Text is clear,
they forget God their Savior, it is because they forget the Lord Jesus, they
do not remember him with any true and right affection. Hence we see it in daily
experience, that the same persons who are most profane, are usually most
Superstitious, they that forget God most in moral duties, are most devout in
ways of Superstition, so that profaneness is one Cause of Superstition.

2. It comes from pride, Col. 2.18. Let no man beguile you by voluntary
humility, being vainly puffed up in his fleshly mind. And this accompanied with
deep hypocrisy, for neither they themselves who are circumeised keep the Law,
but desire to have you Circumcised, that they may glory in your flesh. Gal.
6.13. that they may boast amongst the Jews, how many followers and Proselytes
they have gained, it was their ambition and desire of applause that acted them.
Profaneness is a discredit amongst men, and therefore though many are, and will
be profane, yet there be few that would seem so; now the best and likeliest
way to hide this nakedness, is to cover it with the fig leaves of Superstition.
Iezabel, therefore, when she intended murder, proclaims a Fast. The Pharisees
devour Widows Houses, but for a pretense they made long prayers. So that here
was pride mixed with Hypocrisy, but God loves Truth in the inward parts, and he
delights to abase the Sons of Pride*

3. Fleshly wisdom, or carnal Policy, is another ground and principle of
Superstition. Almost all the sin and misery that has filled the World, has
broke in at this door, harkening to reason against Institution. Hence,
Idolaters and Superstitious persons, have never wanted pretense of Reason for
it: they think first, to please God by it. 2. To secure themselves. 3. To
Circumvent and overreach others. 1 To please God. Having run into great
arreares by gross neglects in moral obedience, they think to make it up with
Ceremonials, either of Gods appointing, or of their own devising. Wherewith
shall I come before God? will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or
with ten thousands of Rivers of Oil? shall I give my first born for my
Transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my Soul. Mic. 6.6, 7, 8. So
the Pharisee, I fast twice a week; but who requires this at his hands? and in
Isai. 1. Their hands are full of blood, but yet full of Oblations and
Sacrifices, and Mat. 23.23. (...) unto you Scri^e^ and Pharisees, Hypocrites,
for you pay Tith of Mint, Annis, and Cummin, and have omitted the weigh^^er
matters of the Law, judgment, mercy, and faith. Such is the natural Popery of
men's hearts, that they have a secret thought by such things to supererogate
with God, or at least to compensate and make amends for their neglects in
greater things, and so to purchase Gods favor, and go to Heaven in an easy
way, and at a cheap Rate. For it is an easy thing to walk in their own ways,
and to follow their own devises. What an easy thing is it to nod and bow to an
Altar? but it is hard to mortify a lust. It was an easy thing to the Pharisees
to Tyth Mint and Cummin, and to wash their Cups and Platters, but it is a great
and difficult work to cleanse and wash the heart from filthiness. So that
Superstition though it seems to be overbusy, yet it is indeed but a lazy thing,
and suits that distemper of spiritual Sloth; A man's Conscience would torment
and tear him in pieces, Hell from beneath would rise up for him, if he should
have no Religion at all: but the power and life of godliness is difficult,
Hence men rest in shadows, and sit down with Superstitious empty Forms and
shows of Devotion, by which Conscience being charmed, they think God is
pacified, and all is clear above head. 2. They hope to secure themselves by it,
as to this World. This made Jeroboam to set up the Idolatry at Dan and Bethel,
and Jehu to continue it, for he said in his heart, if this people go up to
Jerusalem to do Sacrifice in the House of the Lord at Jerusalem, the Kingdom
will return to the House of David. 1 Kin. 12.26, 27, And upon the like account
Ahaz made sundry changes to the prejudice of Gods worship, because of the King
of Assyria, that is for fear of him, and that he might please him. And he
Sacrificed to the Gods of Damascus, which smote him, saying in his foolish,
carnal wisdom, because the Gods of the Kings of Syria help them, therefore will
I Sacrifice to them, that they may help me, but they were the ruin of Him, and
of all Israel. 2 Chronicles. 28.23. Isai. 5^ 5, 6.
For it is usual with God to Curse and blast the carnal policies of men, when
they hatch such cockatrice eggs, and weav the Spiders web, he that eats of
their eggs dies, and that which is Crushed breaks out into a Viper, their
webs shall not become garments, neither shall they cover themselves with their
works, being works of Iniquity.

3. The third design of Superstition is to Circumvent and go beyond others.
hence some have Dr. Jack^son orig (...) unbelief. ^ Sect. 4. Cap 23
observed, that to outstrip our Adversaries in their own policies, or to use
means abused by others to a better end, is a resolution so plausible to worldly
wisdom, which of all other Fruits of the Flesh, is for the most part the
hardliest and last renounced; that even Christians have mightily overreached
and entangled themselves by too much seeking to Circumvent, or go beyond
others. Ames fresh Suit ^art 2 page ^3 5000.
Hence in the declining times of the Christian Churches, perceiving that the
Pagans were very tenacious of their old Customs and Superstitions, they thought
it was good policy to borrow sundry things from them to win them, and to bring
them over to the Christian Religion. Hence as Peter Lombard observes, because
the Heathens had their Flamins, Antiflamins, princiflamins, etc. In Lombard
Sentent lib 4 di^tinct 24. m^
imitation of this, the Christians made Bishops, Arch Bishops, Primates, and
the like. But what was the issue and effect of this Carnal policy? Instead of
making Pagans turn Christians by it, they did transform Christian Churches into
Antichristian, It was this fleshly wisdom that was the means to conjure up
those two venomous Beasts, the Church, and Pope of Rome, Rev. 13.

4. It proceeds from a Spirit of folly and delusion. For a man's own wisdom is
folly, such things indeed have a show of wisdom, Col. 2. last. But that is all,
for professing themselves to be wise, they become fools. Romans 1.22. They have
not known nor understood, for he has shut their eyes that they cannot see, and
their hearts that they cannot understand, and none considers in his heart,
neither is there knowledge nor understanding to say, I have burnt part of it in
the fire, yea, also I have baked bread upon the Coals thereof, I have
roasted-flesh and eaten it, and shall I make the residue thereof an
abomination? shall I fall down to the Stock of a Tree? He feeds on ashes, a
deceived heart has turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his Soul, nor say,
Is there not a lie in my right hand? Isai. 44.18, 19, 20. So that all the Zeal
and affection men have in a Superstitious way is but blind Devotion, and zeal
without knowledge. Thou blind Pharisee, every man is brutish in his knowledge,
every Founder is confounded by the graven Image, For his molten Image is
falsehood, and there is no breath in them, they are vanity, and the work of
errors, in the time of their visitation they shall perish. Ier. 10.14, 15. and
you have the same words again repeated, Ier. 51.17, 18. Hence darkness and a
sad eclspse, and decay of light and knowledge in the Church, was the Immediate
forerunner of Antichrist, with all his Idolatryes and Superstitions. For the
third part of the Sun, Moon, and Stars were smitten and darkened under the
fourth Trumpet, and then Anti Christ appears with open face in the fifth, Rev.
8.12. with 9.1.

5. A Fearful Cowardly Spirit is another cause, they Constrain you to be
Circumcised, only lest they should suffer Persecution for the Cross of Christ,
Gal. 6.12. It was by this means as some have observed, that the Pope got up,
and kept all his Idolatryes, because the Ministry that should have stood in the
gap were for the most, though indeed not all, for God was pleased even then to
raise up some faithful Witnesses, but the Generality of the Clergy, during the
reign of Antichrist, were as one says of them, a Generation of spiritual
Cowards, so that the Pope did what he listed, in laying loads and yokes upon
the Conscience, and they like Issachar were content to Couch under every
burden, yea, which is worse, forward and active to serve the Popes lusts, and
to impose burden^ and lay snares for the Consciences of men, as the Prophet
Hosea complains of the Superstitious Clergy in his time, Hos. 9.8. The Prophet
is as the Snare of a Fowler in all his ways. I remember a Story in the Book of
Martyrs of one that had been a Protestant, but when persecution arose, he fell
back to Popery, and when one of his Friends told him of his former profession,
oh (says he,) that was the right way, but I cannot burn, I cannot burn. But
his House happening to be on fire, and going in to fetch out some of his Goods,
he was burnt in his own House. He that could not burn at a Stake for the Truth,
was burnt to death in his own House; but it had been better to burn in the
Cause of God, then in the way of his judgments. Now if this be one Cause of
Idolatry and Superstition, It must needs be a very great sin. When men shall
fear men more then God, and those that can but kill the body, more then him
that is able to destroy both Soul and body in Hell. Who art thou, that thou
should be afraid of a man that shall dye, and of the Son of man that shall
be made as grass, and forgettest the Lord thy Maker, that has stretched forth
the Heavens, and laid the Foundations of the Earth, and best feared continually
every day because of the fury of the Oppressor, as if he were ready to destroy?
and where is the fury of the Oppressor, Isai. 51.12, 13.

6. Lastly, It proceeds from secret enmity and hatred of the blessed God. For
as it is assign of love to God, to love his Ordinances, so on the contrary, for
men to cast the second Commandment behind their backs, it is a sign they hate
Him. Hence the Lord there threatens I will visit the sin of them that Hate me,
and show mercy to thousands of them that love me. So in Hos. 9.7. He threatens
to visit them for the multitude of their iniquity and the great hatred. It is
true, in times of Ignorance and darkness good men may be carried away in many
things with the stream of the times for want of better light But to be zealous
for the grossest Superstitions in times of light, is an ill sign that the heart
is full of poison, full of Hatred, and Enmity against the Lord, and against his
blessed ways. And it is the worse, because that Superstitious persons pretend
much love and devotion, as though they thought nothing too dear, nor too much
for God, when there is the poison of Asps underneath. No wonder therefore, if
the Lord abhorrs them. For there is nothing more odious both to God and men,
then hatred masked over with pretenses of love. And thus you see from the
Causes of this sin, how great a sin it is.

3. Consider also the Cursed effects and Fruits of it, the bitter Fruits that
grow upon this root of bitterness, These will yet further discover the evil of
it. Men are apt to think their own Inventions are of much use in the worship of
God, though they call them sometimes Indifferent things, yet they think them
very good and necessary. But the Lord has said the graven Image is profitable,
or good for nothing. Isai. 44.10. no good comes of it, but much hurt and
mischief every way. It is a sin that has many woeful effects.

1. It deceives and deludes, it is a very deceiving and infatuateing sin. It is
the Lords direction to Joshua to keep close to the Rule, and to the Law of
Moses, that thou may prosper, or as it may be rendered, that thou may deal
understandingly wherever thou shall go: Josh. 1.7, 8. but on the contrary,
when men worship God according to their own Inventions, see that dreadful
threatening, Isai. 29.13, 14. because their fear, that is, their worship toward
me is taught by the precepts of men, therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a
mavelous work amongst this people, even a mavelous work and a wonder, for
the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their
prudent men shall be hid; they shall be befooled and infatuated even to
admiration, they are altogether brutish and foolish; the stock is a doctrine
of vanities. Jer. 10 8. And the molten Image a teacher of lies, Heb. 2.18. for
their Idols have spoken vanity, and their Diviners have seen a lie, Zech. 10.2.
The Scripture is very frequent and copious in this Argument, because men are
very apt to value their own Inventions and Additions to the worship of God at a
high rate, and to admire and applaud themselves therein; as if they had
contributed not a little to the Majesty, and to the Splendor of it, by their
Great wisdom and prudential power, as they call it; when it is indeed
prudential folly, their glory is their shame, they are mad upon their Idols,
Jer. 50.38. Superstitio est res insana, as he said, Superstition is a mad
thing, folly is the Cause of it, and folly the Effect.

2. It is a very defiling sin, thou have defiled thy self in thine Idols which
thou have made, Ezekiel. 22.4. It is a sin of spiritual filthiness and
uncleanness, I have seen thine Adulteries, and thy neighings, and the lewdness
of thy whoredoms, the meaning is, thine Idolatryes, as appears by the next
words, thine abominations on the Hills, and in the fields, will thou not be
made clean, when shall it once be? Jer. 13. ult. Superstitious persons are apt
to think themselves more devout, and more holy then others, as the Papists call
their several ways of Superstition, religious orders. But the Lord accounts
them more vile, more filthy, they say to others, stand by thy self, come not
near to me, for I am holier then thou. Isai. 65 4, 5. for that Text is clearly
meant concerning Superstitious people, that Sacrifice in Gardens, remain among
the Graves, etc. who did look with disdain upon others, and trusted in
themselves that they were righteous, when indeed it was but Superstition, and
therefore the Lord says of them, these are a Smoke in my nose, and a fire that
burns all the day.

3. It makes all their worship vain, as it makes their Spirits vain, by
deluding and defiling them, so it spoils and frustrates their religious
worship. In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the Commandments of
men, Mat. 15 9. they Sacrifice flesh, the sacrifices of mine offerings, and eat
it, but the Lord accepts them not: Hos. 8.13. because they did it contrary to
the Institution. For the Lords appointment and promise was, that in mine holy
Mountain, in the Mountain of the heig^t of Israel, there shall all the house of
Israel serve, or worship me, there will I accept them, and there will I require
your offerings, and the first Fruits of your oblations, with all your holy
things, Ezekiel. 20 40. Deuteronomy. 12.5, 6. now this is a sad Effect; when a man offers
many Sacrifices, says many pater nosters, performs many religious duties,
hears, and prays much, that all should be in vain, and all his prayers and
labor lost. And though there be a whole Sea of worship* and Ordinances, that
all should be but like the blood of a dead man; as Rev. 8.8. and 16.3. There is
no acceptance but in Christ. But Christ has said concerning Idolatrous
worship, I will not pour out their Oblations, that is, ( See Answorth in Psalm.
16.4.
I will not be a Mediator to their Services. Psalm. 16.4.

4. It will in time justle out Gods true worship, His Institutions will be laid
aside, that there may be elbow room for their own Inventions, Full well ye
rejest the Commandments of God, that you may keep your own Traditions, Mark.
7.8, 9. I might give many Examples and Instances of this. Those Superstitious
persons in Isai. 6 5.3, 4. who did Sacrifice in Gardens, remain among the
Graves, and lodge in the Monuments, which the Lord never required at their
hands, yet they made no Conscience of eating Swines flesh, which the Lord had
forb^dden to that people in those Times, Jeroboam made Priests of his own,
after the manner of the Nations of other Lands, but therefore he ca^sts out the
Priests of the Lord the Sons of Aaron, and the Levites, to mak^ way for his
own, 2 Chronicles. 13.9. Ahaz gives order that the Priests should offer their
Sacrifices upon his own Altar, but then what should they do with the braz^n
Altar, the Altar of the Lord; That, says he, shall be for me to enquire by, Si
quando placebit (as Iunius well observes) if at any time such a good fit shall
come upon him, or as others render it, I will inquire and Consider what use to
put it to, so Piscator upon the place, but thus Gods Altar was laid aside, and
turned out of Office, 2 Kin. 16.15. we have seen sad examples of this in former
times, a Surplice, and a few Superstitious Ceremonies have justled out the
preaching of the Gospel, and stopped the mouth of many a godly Minister.

5. It provokes the Lord to jealousy against his people, and pulls down, and
hastens the desolating judgments, and wrath of God upon them. This was hinted
in general before, as a Reason why the relics of Idolatry must be destroyed,
but I mention it here again, to show the greatness of this sin, Exodus 20.5.
Thou shall not bow down to them, nor serve them, For I the Lord thy God am a
jealous God, visiting the sins of the Fathers upon the Children, to the third
and fourth Generation of them that hate me. Thou have defiled thy self with
thine Idols, and have caused thy days to draw near, and art come even to thy
years, Ezekiel. 22.4. that is, the days and years of wrath and vengeance, as the
like expression is explained, Cap. 7.7. the Time is come, the day of Trouble is
near, and Cap. 12.23. the days are at hand, and the Effect of every Vision,
that is, the accomplishment of every Threatening. There is no sin that makes men
sooner ripe for Ruin. The Jews were carried away Captive into Babylon. Sion
was plowed as a Field, and Jerusalem became an heap of Stones for this sin. The
Apostle bids the Coloffians take heed they do not miss of Heaven by it, Col.
2.18. let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary Humility.

Yea though they be good men that are guilty of it, as sometimes they have
been, especially in former darker times, yet this will not protect them, nor
stave off the judgments of God. Gideon was a good man and a great Reformer,
and therefore called Ierubbaal, but yet for all that, he did but make a
Superstitious garment, a kind of a Surplice, a small matter one would think;
but it became a Snare to Gideon, and his House, Judge. 8.27. Solomon was a good
man, and it was he that built the Temple of the God of Heaven, but yet he fell
to the public countenancing of Idolatry, and for this, God rent away the Ten
Tribes, the greatest part of his Kingdom from him, and had it not been for his
Father David's sake, he had lost them all, Yea, so provoking to the Lord is this
sin, especially, if aggravated by Persecution, as for the most part it is, that
sometimes the Lord will not pardon it, and turn away his wrath, though men do
repent; as in Manass^hs Case. Though as to personal forgiveness, the Lord will
pardon every repenting Sinner, yet not always as to National Forgiveness, so
as to avert and turn away his righteous judgments. For Manasseh did repent and
reform, Josiah comes and makes a thorough Reformation, but yet ruin and
desolation comes for the old Idolatryes and Superstitions of Manasseh, and for
the Innocent blood he shed, which the Text says, the Lord would not pardon, 2
King. 24.4. and 2 King. 23.25, 26.

6. There is yet a further Effect of this Sin, which is worse then all the
rest, if worse can be. It is this, It does so harden the hearts of men, that it
is a very rare and difficult thing to get true repentance for it: you may see
this in those great Idolaters the Papists, as they are described in the Book of
the Revelation, when under the execution of Gods righteous judgments, under
the sixth Trumpet, The Lord looses the four Angels about the River Euphrates,
that is, the Turks, who were at first four Nations, to plague the Anti
Christian World for their Idolatry, and to destroy, and to kill up the third
part of men, but what was the Effect of this, did they repent? no; no such
matter, the rest of the men which were not killed by these plagues, yet they
repented not of their worshipping of Devils, and Idols of wood and stone, Rev.
9.20. well let us go a little further, when the Seventh Trumpet sounds and
pours down all the seven Vials of the last plague, and the wrath of God upon
the Antichristian party, surely, that will convince them, they will repent
then, when the third woe is come upon them, which has seven Vials of wrath in
the womb of it: no, for all this, they repent not, but they are described to be
like men in Hell, Rev. 16.10, 11. the fifth Angel pours out his Vial upon the
throne of the Beast, which is generally understood concerning the City of Rome
it self, and his Kingdom was full of darkness, and they gnawed their tongues
for pain; but they blasphemed the God of Heaven, because of their pains, and
their sores, and they repented not of their needs: They roar under their
plagues, but repent not of their Sins. So likewise under the Seventh Vial,
which is poured forth into the Air, which is conceived by Interpreters to be
meant of the whole expansum of the Antichristian Interest, and party that are
acted by the Prince of Power in the Air, whoever, and wheresoever they be, over
all the world every where, M^de in (...).
omnium ubicunque terrarum Christi Domini nostra h^stium: what Effect will that
have? see ver. 21. where they are found again blaspheming God, because of their
plagues, but not repenting. Oh, what a dreadful sin in this! that makes men so
incapable of repentance. The Reasons of this strange Impenitency, are

1. Because it is usual with God when men love their sins, and hate to be
reformed, he gives them up judicially to their Sins, that their Sins may be
their Plagues. Hence it is threatened as a punishment of Idolatry, Deuteronomy 4. 25,
28. Because they have corrupted themselves with graven Images, therefore they
should serve Gods of wood and Stone, which neither hear, nor see, nor eat, nor
smell: when they had made the molten Calf, then God turned, and gave them up to
worship the Host of Heaven, Acts 7.42. He gave them up for that sin, to more
sin: Ephraim is joined to Idols let him alone, Hos. 4.17. Because Ephraim has
made many Altars to sin, Altars shall be unto him to sin, Hos 8.11. They will
have their sins to live in them, therefore says the Lord, they shall have them
to be plagued by them.

2. And as this sin is the punishment of itself, so it is often punished with
other sins also, sometimes he gives them up to bodily uncleanness for their
spiritual Whoredoms, Hos. 4.13. they Sacrifice upon the tops of the mountains,
and burn Incense upon the Hills, under Oaks and Pop^ars, and Elms, because the
shadow thereof is good, therefore your Daughters shall commit Whoredom, and
your Spouses shall commit Adultery, Hos. 4.13. The Apostle Paul fitly joins
Lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, revellings, banquettings, and abominable
Idolatryes together, 1 Pet. 4.3. Superstition and profaneness usually go
together, they look to other Gods, and love flagons of wine, Hos. 3.1. and
where there is such profaneness it is seldom without Persecution also, for
the evil Servant, Mat. 24.49. is said to smite his fellow Servants, and to eat,
and drink with the drunken, pictos agnos adorante, vivos devorant, as he says
of the Papists. And when sinners are bound in so many black ^etters and Chains
of darkness, how hard a thing is it to break them off, by true repentance?

3. When men are given up to Idolatry, or to any other sin, by such a judcial
act of God, it so deludes the mind, and darkens the understanding, that it is
impossible to fasten a Conviction upon them, they will never believe, nor be
persuaded that this is the sin for which God Smites, and if no Conviction, no
repentance. The Jews thought, Ier. 44.18. Since we left off to burn Incense to
the Queen of Heaven, and to pour out drink offerings to her, we have wanted all
things, and have been consumed by the Sword, and by the Famine, whereas the
Prophet tells them, because you have burnt Incense, therefore this evil is
happened unto you, but they would not believe him: And just so the Papists, oh,
say they, It was never good world since the old Religion was put down, and
since we left the holy Catholic Church of Rome. And I have heard of some
Lutheran Ministers after the late Wars and desolations of Germany, who have
concluded and thought that the Reason of Gods wrath against them was the
pulling down of Images. And there be some in like manner at this day, that
ascribe all the Wars and Troubles, and evils of the late times that have
passed over these Nations, to the pulling down of Bishops, and Ceremonies;
whereas it was indeed the old Sins of the Bishops and that party, their
adulterating and corrupting the worship of God with Popish Innovations, Their
violence and Persecutions of Gods faithful Witnessse and Servants; that was the
chief procuring cause of all the plagues and judgments that have come upon the
Land.

4. A man's Repentance is never true till it be proportionable to the nature of
his Sins. It is not enough for men to leave these Sins, but they must also
loath themselves in their own sight for all their abominations, because that I
am broken with their whorish hearts, which go a whoring after their Idols, as
the Lord there speaks, Ezekiel. 6.9.
but how hard is it to get such a self-loathing, self-abhorring frame of
Spirit, not only to see that it is a Sin, but to see the exceeding vileness of
it, and to loath it as God loathes it, to hate it as God hates it. I have
Insisted the longer upon the Reasons of the point, that you may see the heinous
nature of this Sin, that it is no light thing to break the second Commandment.
These are the Reasons of the point, I conclude with a few words of Use.

Use I. This Doctrine Condemns and cashieres at once all the Ceremonies, and
whatever other Inventions of men have been introduced into the worship of God
by the Spirit of Antichrist, and retained, and continued by some reforming
Magistrates, who have made but incomplete and imperfect Reformations. As who
knows not, that almost all the Ordinances of Christ have been polluted and
corrupted by them. The Gospel might not be preached without a Surplice, See the
second Sermon
nor Baptism administered without the sign of the Cross, So likewise kneeling
at the Sacrament, bowing to the Altar, and to the name Jesus, Popish holy
days, holiness of places, Organs and Cathedral Music, The Books of Common
prayer, Prelacy or Church Government by Bishops. These things are no better
then this brazen Serpent was. And therefore if this was a Nehushtan, so are all
these. They are nothing else but relics of Popery and remnants of Baal, and
therefore when the Kingdom of Christ is come, they shall perish from off the
Earth, and from under these Heavens.

Use II. Direction to Rulers and Magistrates, and to you all in your prayers
for them, Let Magistrates imitate this Example of Hezekiab. It should awaken
them to their Duty. Be wise now therefore, O ye Rulers, be instructed O ye
judges of the Earth, and know, that it is your duty to promote the purity of
Gods worship, and to protect his people and Messengers, It is a thing
impossible to keep in with both sides, both with Persecutors and Sufferers, but
therefore it will be your wisdom, and the best and safest way to be on Gods
side, and let Baal plead for himself. But because I see but few of them here, I
shall direct my speech only to the people of God here present, you may see from
hence, what Prayers to make, and what Requests to put up for those whom God by
his Providence has set in Authority over you, pray that God would give them
reforming Spirits; and for the King, that God would make Him another Hezekiah
to remove the High places, and to cut off the remnants of Baal, that he may
trust in the Lord, and keep close to his Word; and that the Lord would be with
him, and prosper him whithersoever he goes, as he will certainly do in this
way of Integrity to Religion, and to the work of Reformation.

Use III. I Conclude with that word of Exhortation wherewith the Apostle John
concludes his first Epistle, Little Children keep your selves from Idols, Amen.
1 John 5. ult. And it is Paul's Exhortation also, 1 Cor. 10.14. wherefore my
dearly Beloved, flee from Idolatry. Remember what you heard in the Reasons of
the point concerning the greatness of this Sin, and how jealous, and severe the
Lord is against these violations of the Second Commandment, and Consider also
these four words.

1. It has been the great design of Satan in all times, and Ages, to destroy
and to corrupt the worship of God. And if he cannot persuade men to be down
right Athiests, he labors then to drive them into the other extreme of
Superstition, if he cannot prevail with them to cast of all the worship of God
altogether, then he tempts them to worship him in a wrong way, to worship the
true God Superstitiously. What was the great sin amongst the Jews? was it not
this? so likewise amongst the old Heathens and Pagans, and amongst the Papists
at this day. And what is the great design and work of Christ at this day? but
to bring forth his worship into purity, that the new Jerusalem may come down
from Heaven; This therefore Satan is most industrious to countermine and fight
against, Therefore be sober, be vigilant against this Sin, because your
Adversary the Devil is so watchful to ensnare you.

2. It will be varnisht over with fair colors, and plausible pretenses. The
whore of Babylon gives the wine of the filthiness of her Fornication in a
golden cup, Rev. 17.4. The Devil in his actings against the Church in the Times
of the new Testament, He did appear at first almost like himself in the shape
of a great red Dragon, in the Roman Pagan Em^e^^u^s. But when Michael and his
Angels overcame, and overthrew ^im in this appearance Rev. 12. Then he puts on
a new Vizard, and appears in another shape, Chap. 13. but still pursues the
same design though under new pretenses, and by other Instruments, viz. by the
Church and Pope of Rome. For he has made it his buisiness, ever since the time
of Constantine to revive the old Heathenish Idolarry under other names, that
whereas before they worshipped the Devil under the names of Jupiter and Apollo,
now they commit the same Idolatry, and worship the same Devil still, but under
the names of Popish Saints; now it is not Jupiter and Apollo any more, but
Saint Peter, and the Virgin Mary, and the Vicar of Christ, and the holy
Catholic Church of Rome. Thus does that Harlot paint her face: So the
Prelatick Superstitions at this day are painted over with those glozing
pretenses of Antiquity, Fathers, Councils, Order, Decency, Edification, the
peace of the Church, and such like.

3. If once you begin in a way of Superstition, you will never know where to
stop or stay, nor where to make an end, but you will multiply your Idols, and
increase your Altars, and grow worse and worse. For evil men and Seducers shall
wax worse and worse. It is the nature of all sin, but of this in a especial
manner, as it is in bodily uncleanness, 2 Ti^ 3.13*
when men are given up to that lust, they are insatiable, and work all
uncleanness with greediness, so it is in this sin of spiritual Whoredom, it is
an endless sin. If you do but wear a Surplice for peace sake, why not as well
admit the sign of the Cross in Baptism, or bow to an Altar, and in a little
time you will find that the same Reason is as strong for bowing to an Image, to
a Crucifix, and why not as well say Mass too, for the peace of the Church, and
then at last swallow down every thing, Submit to the Pope, worship the Beast,
and so be damned and go to Hell, and all for the peace of the Church. Oh! there
is no end here, when a man is once going down the Hill in a way of Carnal
Compliance and Superstition, he will never cease; but like a man that is
tumbling down a steep Hill, cannot stop, till he come to the bottom, to the
very bottom of the pit of Popery. All the abominations of Antichrist came in
by degrees, the four first trumpets were so many steps or degrees of the rise
of Antichrist, and then in the fifth, he appears upon his Throne with open
face, as the Angel of the bottomless pit, and as an Abaddon, as a destroyer and
Son of perdition, with all his Frogs and locusts about him, with all that
Antichristian Popish Clergy, acting under him and for him, Rev. Chap. 8. Chap.
9. It is observed in the Histories of the Idolatrous Kings of Israel, that
those in succeeding Times were worse then their wicked Predecessors: Jeroboam
he that made Israel to sin, He did but set up the two Calves at Dan and Bethel,
but Omri went beyond him, for it is said, He did worse then all that went
before him, 1 King 16.25. we read of the Statutes of Omri, Mica. 6.16. so that
Omri did enact, and establish Iniquity and Idolatry by a Law; But his Son Aha^
was worse then He, for as if it had been a light thing for Him to walk in the
Sins of Jeroboam, he did set up all the worship of Baal, 1 King. 16 30, 31, 32,
33. Hence the faithful Servants of the Lord have been exceeding wary and
watchful against the least appearances and beginnings of Idolatry. One of the
Ancients ( Basil as I remember) when the Heathen Idolaters had put Incense into
his Hand, and offered to spare his life, if he would but throw it in, or let it
fall into the Censer, he chose rather to burn* his Hand and loose his life,
then to Commit that seeming little sin; which brings me to a fourth
Consideration.

4. Remember this for ever, that it is better to suffer then to sin. A man had
better suffer, better dye, then sin. And therefore if Superstition be a Sin, be
wise for your selves, and choose the greatest affliction, rather then the least
Sin. Thou that say in thy heart, life is sweet, and thou art loath to suffer,
loath to dye; I tell thee, It were better for thee to be cast into prison, into
the deepest-darkest-Dungeon. It were better for thee to be burnt at a Stake, or
to be hanged upon a Tree, then to sin against thy Conscience. Hooper that
blessed Martyr (...) vol. (...) 3.
when one assaulted him with this Temptation, death is bitter, life is sweet,
He replied, but death eternal is more bitttr, and life Eternal is more sweet.

5. Suppose the worst that can be supposed, Suppose that sad time of staying
the witnesses be not yet accomplished, as indeed it is a great Controversy, one
of the greatest in this Book, whether it be, or no; it is the judgment of very
great Interpreters, that it is past, but Suppose there be some further
accomplishment of it yet behind, as it may be hopefully conceived that it shall
not be so great a slaughter as the first, and that the rage of the
Antichristian party shall not be able to prevail and proceed so far as then
it did, for the Kingdom of Antichrist is decaying, and the Kingdom of Christ
is rising; So it is certain, that the time will not be long, for it shall be
but three days and an half, Rev. 11.11. Let the Prelates and Prelatick
Persecutours, take notice of it, suppose you should prevail for a time, and
suppose Prelacy should get up again, yet it will not be able to stand, but
after three days and an half, that is to say, after a little short time, it
will fall and perish. The Lord will then cast you forth again, and that for
ever, so as to make a full end of you! And therefore let the people of God bear
up, and be encouraged in the lord, for the Lord will speedily arise, and have
mercy upon Sion; the King^om of Christ is coming, and the wheels of his
Chariots hasten, he will speedily appear to your joy, but they shall be ashamed.

Quest. But what shall we do to prevent that In-undation of Idolatry and
Superstition that seems to be flowing in upon us?

Answ. If any thing will do it, those Ancient weapons of the Church, pra^es et
la^hrima, prayers and tears will do it, or at least you shall thereby deliver
your own Souls.

1. Be much in prayer, ye that are the Lords Remembrancers, keep not silence,
give him no rest, Isai 62.6, 7.
till he arise and make Jerusalem a praise in the Earth. Pray against these
things, and that God would put his bridle in the ^aws of Persecutours, and his
Hook in their nostrils, that the Lord would look upon all the Host of them
thorough the Cloud, and knock off their Chariot wheels, that they may drive
heavily in all their designs against the Lord Jesus, and that Prelacy, which is
the Image of that Beast the Papacy, may never be restored again in these
Nations, but that God would keep it down for ever in that grave in which it
has been buried for these twenty years together; and if sueh things begin to
reappear, pray them down again into the bottomless pit from whence they came,
and be earnest with God for those in Authority, that he would give them
reforming Spirits, and for your Mlnisters, that Christ would hold the Stars in
his right hand, and give them both wisdom and Courage, that the Truth may have
no disadvantage by us in any thing, as also for your selves and your
posterityes after you, that the Truth of the Gospel, and the purity of Gods
worship may continue with you; It concerns you at such Time as this, to be much
in prayer, and when the Lord shall build up Sion, he will regard the Prayers of
the destitute, Psalm. 102.16, 17.

2. Be much also in mourning and humiliation, that Gods bottle may be filled
with tears. Is there not cause of mourning for the sins of the Times? the
deluge of profaneness, as if Hell were broke loose, the abominations in the
midst of Jerusalem, which they that mourn for, Ezekiel. 9.4. Rev. 7.3. and 9.4.
, shall be Sealed with the mark of God upon their Fore heads, that they may be
preserved at least with spiritual Preservations in Times of common Calamity,
when public sins are visited with public judgments; and have thou not also
Sins of thine own to mourn for?

Is there none of you that may say with Paul, I was a Persecutour a blasphemer,
I was an Idolater, and a desperate Superstitious wretch, Crossing and Cringing,
and bowing down to the stock of a Tree? but now you have obtained mercy; or if
kept from those gross abominations, yet have you not been careless and bold
with lesser evils? Have you been solicitous to know the mind of Christ in these
points? Cant. ^.7.
tell me where thou feedest? have you made inquiries for the way to Sion? they
shall ask the way to Sion, going and weeping as they go, Jer. 50 5. Is there no
guilt upon thee, as to barrenness of Spirit, and unprofitableness under pure
Ordinances which you have long enjoyed in this City? you have had the Gospel
preached, and the Ordinances of Christ dispensed amongst you in power and
purity, without the mixtures of men's Inventions; but now the Lord threateneth
to remove the Candlestick, to deprive you of former mercies, and so to enter
into judgment with you for your unfruitfulness under them. Oh! Consider of it.

You have had pure worship, holy Ordinances, but Carnal Common hearts it may
(...) or if there be a change of state, as I know through grace (...) of you,
yet they that are planted in the house of the Lord, should grow in grace, and
he very fruitful, and flourishing, Psalm. 92.13, 14. but has your growth been
proportionable to the dispensations of light and life that you have had, if
not, go home, and mourn before the Lord for this Sin, who knows, but he may yet
repent and return, and continue his wonted gracious presence with you*

The End of the first Sermon.
THE SECOND SERMON Witnessing more particularly against the Ceremonies of the
Church of ENGLAND.
The Text, 2 King. 18 4. And he removed the High places, and broke the Images,
and cut down the Groves, and brake in pieces the brazen Serpent, that Moses had
made, for unto those days, the Children of Israel did burn Incense to it, and
he called it Nehushtan.


THe Doctrine as you may Remember, was this,

That it is a thing very right, and pleasing in the sight of God, when the sin
of Idolatry and all the monuments of it, all the remembrances and remainders of
it, are quite destroyed and rooted out from amongst his people.

This Truth has been opened and largely proved unto you from many Scriptures:
and partly also applied; but not to repeat the Truths formerly delivered, there
was one Use which then we did but mention, but shall now proceed (in the help
of Christ) to finish it. It was this,

This Doctrine Condemns and Cashiers at once all the Ceremonies, and other
Corruptions, and Inventions of men which were introduced and brought into the
worship of God by the Pope, in the time of Antichristian bondage and darkness,
but they have been continu^d by some reforming Magistrates, who have made but
inc^mpleat and imperfect Reformations. They are commonly known, and recommended
by this name, the Ceremonies of the Church of England, the Doctrine whereof in
the nine and thirty Article^, is ge^erally owned by good men as sound and good,
but the worship has too much of the old leaven of popish Corruptions unpurged
out. I shall first g^ve you some general g^ounds and Arguments against them.
Secon^ly, speak to the chief of them more particularly. Ista desi^e^antur.
Th^^dly, Answer Objecti^ns, and then close up this Discourse with a (...) o^
Use and Application.

SECT. I. General Argument against the Ceremonies.
FIrst for general Arguments* waving many other things, my Text leads me to
insist chiefly upon this, that they ^re Idols against the Second Commandment:
They are not directly and immediately against the First, for they are used as
means whereby to honor and worship God, the Father, Son, and Spirit, but there
may be a false worship offered up to the true God, and that the Ceremonies are
such, that they are Idols against the Second Commandment, these Reasons do
evince.

1. Because they are means of worship which the Lord never appointed, and which
never came into his heart. There is no stamp of God upon them, no stamp of
Institution, But God will say of them at the great day, who required these
things at your Hands. They are means of worship of an High Nature, for they
have a great part of the nature of Sacraments in them, For the Patrons of them
say, they are neither dead nor dumb, but mystical and significant, and
appointed on purpose to stir up the dull mind of man to the remembrance of his
duty toward God, by some special and notable signification, whereby He may be
edified, they are the words of the preface to the Common prayer Book. So that
as the Sacraments have two parts, an outward sign, and the inward grace
signified thereby, So have the Ceremonies. The Surplice signifies the whiteness
of purity and Innocence that should be in Ministers: The Sign of the Cross
signifies that they must not be ashamed of the Cross of Christ, and so all the
rest have some pretended spiritual signification annexed to them, yea they are
not only pretended to be significative, but affective also, to edify, to stir
up a dull and dead heart, etc. which brings to mind that strange Answer in the
Catechism of the Common prayer, to that Question? How many Sacraments there be,
They Answer, two only, as gene^^lly necessary to Salvation, viz. Baptism and
the Lords Supper; Implying, that there be other Sacraments also, though not so
necessary, which must either relate to the seven popish Sacraments, or else to
these English Popish Ceremonies, but they are such Sacraments as Christ is not
the Author of, Sacraments of man's making, for the greatest Patrons and
promoters of them, do not pretend a divine Institution for them, but only the
Authority of the Church, but if the Second Commandment was given to the Church,
as I hope they will not deny, thou shall not make any graven Image, o^ form of
worship to thy self, they are a manife^^ breach of that Commandment.

2. Because there is greater weight laid upon them then upon greater things,
therefore they are Idols. As when the Pharisees did prefer Mint and Cummin
before the great things of the Law: And the Traditions of the Elders, which is
in the language of these Times, the Ceremonies and Canons of the Church, before
the Commandments of God, Math. 23.23 and Math. 15. did they not Idolize their
own Traditions? And that the Ceremonies are Idols upon this account, is
manifest; because the neglect of them is more severely punished then many great
Sins against the Law of God, which as it has been long since Abrid^^^ment
e^^cept. 2^ arg. 3. (...) 39
objected to them; So the Truth of it is so apparent, that some of their own
Writers have the confidence to deny it. Dr. Burges instead of denying it,
confesses Burges of kneel^ing. (...) p 62 (...) Apud (...) Pop Cere^monies
(...) part 3 (...) 48
and bewails the violent urging and pressing of Conformity. And at a
Metrapolitical Visitation in Lancashire in the time of the Bishops, when
Complaint was made to Cousins the Visitor against a godly Minister, that he had
never worn a Surplice in all his life; the Visitor swore, it had been better
for Him to have got seven Bastards, and so proceeded accordingly to silence
him, which yet was an orderly and Canonical way of proceeding: and very just
and moderate, for it is enacted in the Canons of 1603. Canon
that whosoever shall but declare his difference in judgment from the Prelates
in these things, shall be excommunicated ipso facto; but I need not Insist
here, for these Nations have had plentiful and woeful experience of it, and it
is known to all the world, that these wretched Ceremonies have been the
principal Engines and Instruments of Persecution in the Hand of Satan to stop
the mouths of Gods faithful Messengers, and to oppress the Witnesses, and
obstruct the work of Christ.

3. They are Idols, because monuments of former Idolatry. As the brazen Serpent
here, might not Hezekiah have prohibited the burning Incense to it, but
retained the thing it self, and have pleaded, though it was an Idol, yet it is
none now; as our Formalists use to plead for these old popish Ceremonies? no,
for God will cut off the Remnants of Baal from this place, the very relics of
Popery, Zeph. 1.4. Although some of these things have formerly been of use in
the worship of God by his own Appointment, as the brazen Serpent was, and
lights, oil, musical Instruments, holy garments for the Priests under the
Levitical Law, yet now the stamp of Institution being taken off, and having
been the Idols of the Papists, they are Nehushtans, base things.

4. It is a Symbolizing with Idolaters, amongst whom these abominations are
continued unto this day. But this is frequently and severely for^idden in the
Scripture: after the doings of the Land of Egypt, wherein ye dwelt, shall ye
not do, and after the doings of the Land of Canaan whither I bring you, shall
ye not do, neither shall ye walk in their Ordinances, Lev. 18.3. Take heed to
thy self, that thou be not snared by following them, saying, how did these
Nations serve their Gods? even so will I do likewise Thou shall not do so unto
the Lord thy God; where observe that he speaks of the manner of worship,
presupposing the true Object, for every abomination to the Lord which he hates
have they done unto their Gods, Deuteronomy. 12.30, 31. Abijah therefore justly
reproves the ten Tribes for it, you have made you Priests after the manner of
the Nations of other Lands, 2 Chronicles. 23. 9. And therefore the Lord was very
angry with Israel and removed them out of his sight, because they went after
the Heathen that were round about them, concerning whom the Lord had charged
them, that they should not do like them, 2 King. 17.15. And shall we then do
like the Papists? there is the same Reason as to this matter of Popish
Idolatries, as there is of Heathenish. The Lord will have his people to have no
Communication with Rome at all, whatsoever our Popish Prelates may pretend for
Union, and Reconciliation with her. The Lord has said, If any man worship the
Beast and his Image, and receive his mark in his Forehead, or in his Hand,
that man shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, Rev. 14 9, 10.

The Argument does not depend upon this Hypothesis, neither does the Question
turn upon this Hinge, whether Popery be the worst or grossest kind of Idolatry,
but whether it be Idolatry at all; For we must not communicate, nor Symbolize
with any kind of Idolaters whatsoever. Neither is it fit to ex^use and
extenuate the Idolatry of the Papists, as the Bishops usually do in their
pleadings for the Ceremonies. For though it may seem in some respects not so
bad as the Heathenish, yet in other respects it is worse, and I find that our
Divines generally do so judge of it; as Parker, and ^
Ames have showed at la^ge, and amongst our Divines in this point (says Ames)
we may reckon De Iackson ^
himself, who has a Chapter of the Identity, or Equivalency of Superstition in
Rome, Heathen, and Rome Christians. And evident it is that the Scripture speaks
of the Popish Idolatry as the very Qui^tessence of all Paganism Hence Rome is
styled Sodom, Egypt, Bab^lon, as being indeed the very Sea that receives into
her Channel all the filthiness of all the Pagans that were before. Hence the
Scripture calls the Papists Gentiles, Rev. 11.4. the outward-Court, the
visible Church is given to the Gentiles, that is to those Heathenish Idolaters
the Papists, who did t^ead down the holy City forty and two Moneth^. Neither is
there Canaa^ite, Moabite, (...)* or any other to whom the Papists are not
eq^al. And as they are in Equipage with former Pagans, so likewise with all
modern Aliens. The Turk himself being not excepted, who is loosed from the
East, to punish them, ( Rev. 9.13, 14, 15.) and is not half so much aimed at in
the Book of Gods Counsels, which the Lamb has unsealed to John, as tbey are
aimed at. Thus the learned Part of the Cross 1 Cha^ Sect 2^ page 37
Parker, plus metuendus and cavendu^ est inimicus ^
(says Cyprian cum latenter obrepit, ea est Diaboli astutia ut sub ipso
Christiani nominis Titulo fallat incautos. Therefore what though the Papists
call themselves Christians, and what though they have some good things amongst
them? So have the Turks too, It is not denied, that the Papists have some
Truths and Ordinances amongst them, but the Argument is concerning their
Idolatryes and Superstitions, not concerning the Ordinances of Christ usurped
by them; but concerning the Idols and Superstitions invented and committed by
them in the worship of God. We must not conform our selves therero, but say to
their Idols, get ye hence. Judge in your Consciences, Is it fit for the Spouse
of Christ to wear the Trinkets and Ornaments of the great Whore? It is a
dishonor to Christ, and an hardening to the Papists in their Idolatrous and
sinful ways, so to comply with them. But this may suffice for general grounds
and Arguments against the Ceremonies, let us bring them now to a more
particular Trial.

SECT, II. A more particular Examination of Ten of the principal Ceremonies and
Idols of the Church of England.
I Shall Instance only in these Ten particulars.

1. The Surplice. 2. The Sign of the Cross in Baptism. 3. Kneeling at the Lords
Supper. 4. Bowing to the Altar. 5. Bowing at the name of Jesus. 6. Popish holy
days 7. The holiness of places. 8. The Organs, or Cathedral Music. 9. The
Books of Common Prayer. 10. Prelacy, or Church Government by Bishops. ^

Which though they are condemned as Idols, by all the former Arguments, yet I
Conceive it will be useful, and tend to the further Conviction and discovery of
them, to speak to them severally.

I. The Surplice.
THe Surplice with all the rest of that Popish Wardrope of Superstitious
garments, Hoods, Tippets, Rochets, etc. For there is the same Reason of them
all, they are all Popish Idols, and ancient ways of Superstition. For if you
look into the story of Jehu, you will find that the Priests of Baal had their
Superstitious garments in those times, 2 Kin. 10.22. and he said unto Him that
was over the ^estry, bring forth the vestments, (...) page ^
for the worshippers of Baal. And amongst the Papists, the Surplice as some
have well observed, (...) 28
has been such a master Idol, that it sanctifies as it were all their other
Idols; So that without this it is unlawful for them to Officiate. The Lord
indeed appointed holy garments for the Priests under the Law, but if the Lord
had not appointed them, it had been a sinful and a foolish thing to use them,
and therefore it is said of Gideons Ephod, which as it seems, was made in
imitation of the high Priests garments, that Israel went a whoring after it,
and it became a snare to Gideon and to his House, Judge. 8.27 An Ephod is
nothing else but a garment made partly of Linen, not unlike a Surplice, but
more rich and costly. Those garments of Aaron, are said to be for glory, and
for beauty, Exodus 28.2. (...) 28 2
Because they typified and shadowed out the beauty of Christ, our true high
Priest, in all those glorious graces of the Spirit of holiness in him. But when
the Sun arises, the shadows fly away, and therefore now that Christ the body
is come, and that Sun of Righteousness arisen upon the World, those legal
shadows are done away* and to retain them in these Times of the New Testament,
does interpretatively deny that Christ is come in the flesh, and therefore
there should be no difference between the garments of Ministers in their holy
ministrations, and the garments of other persons, or of themselves at other
times, but they should go in their habit according to the grave and Comely
manner of those among whom they live. All the hint the Scripture gives
concerning Ministers apparel, is only in that word (...) ^ Tim. 3. 2. which
implies, that they should be comely, but not the least hint of any different
Ceremonious garments to know them by, from other men. And therefore when this
Superstition began to spring amongst the french Bishops, Ca^estinus writes
thus to rhem, (...) part (...) ^507^
discernendi a plebe vel caeteris sumus doctrina non vest, Conversatione non
habitu, mentis puritate non cultu, we are to be distinguished from the common
sort by Doctrine, and not by garment, by Conversation and not habit, by the
purity of mind, and not Apparel.

I dare appeal to any sober man's Conscience, do you think tha^ (...) Jesus
Christ wore a Surplice, or that Paul or any of the twelve (...) did preach in a
Surplice? This Argument was alleged to one in (...), to which the man
confessed, He thought they did not, but He (...) Reason was, because the Church
had not then appointed them, to (...) the other replied, I will have as good an
Answer as this from a (...), to believe as the Church believes, the Church is
bound to keep to (...) Word, and if she reject it, the Church plays the Harlot.
John the (...) had a several apparel, Math. 3.4. As Elijah also had before
Him, 2 King. 11.8. but he had a special diet also, locusts and wild honey, and
therefore by this Argument Ministers must have a several diet also from other
men, as well as a distinct Apparel* Mr ^artwrights first rep^ page 73
But John was an extraordinary person, and the Lord would have him and his
Ministry differenced from others, and the extraordinariness of his Ministry set
forth by these things, that the people might be the rather moved to enquire of
his Office whom they saw vary so much from the Common Custom of other men;
neither did he wear gorgeous and costly apparel, but course and mean, and
therefore it does no way suit the case in Hand, unless the Bishops will
exchange their Surplices for raiment of Camels hair, and their Canonical
girdles for a leathern girdle, etc. And it is of like weight to allege the
Angels appearing in white, of which the Surplice, is but a ridiculous and as
Dr. Ames fitly calls it Ames* Fresh (...) part 2 Pa^ 292
an apish Imitation, for by the same Reason Ministers should wear Leather,
because the Angels are described with wings, to show their swiftness and
readiness in execution of their Office. The wearing of a white garment in old
time was nothing else but a more comely apparel, such as black is now, with
us: After times having betaken themselves to darker Colors, as more grave and
modest, and therefore that Color would be light, and Stage-like with us, which
was grave and honorable with them.

Objection, better preach in a fools Coat, then not preach the Gospel;

Answ. If this saying be weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary, it will be
found to be more pleasing then solid, more plausible then weighty. For the Rule
is clear, we must not do evil, that good may come thereof, Romans 3.8. but it is
an evil thing, and a sin to preach in a fools Coat, therefore we ought not to
do it, no not for that good end to enjoy the liberty of our Ministry. But how
may that be proved that it is a sin? why thus. To do any thing in the worship
of God that is not decent is a sin, for the Rule is express, 1 Cor. 1.4. ult.
Let all things be done decently and in order, but to wear a fools Coat is not
decent, but ridiculous; therefore it is a sin to do it in the worship of God,
and much more to wear a Surplice, which is fitly called a fools Coat indeed,
being as bad, yea, worse. For a fools Coat is only a breach of the rule of
decency, but a Surplice is both ridiculous and Superstitious too, It is both a
breach of the rule of decency and of the second Commandment, and therefore it
is worse then a fools Coat. But we are not to break the least Command for the
greatest good* And such Ministers as are silenced upon this account, it is not
they that do forsake their Ministry, as is most unchristianly and reproachfully
said by some, but they are forced from it, and are driven into Corners by plain
force and violence. For if men will not suffer us to preach but upon such hard
Conditions, that we must break Rules, and Sin against our Consciences if we
will preach, it is all one as if they should absolutely hinder, for we must not
purchase the liberty of our Ministry at such a dear price, though it be such a
precious Ordinance, and so great a mercy to enjoy it. A man had better never
preach a Sermon all his days then part with a good Conscience for it.

And it is not only a few Puritans or Fanatics as they are now termed, that
are so nice and so precise, as to dislike the wearing of a Surplice. For those
good men who have been over-borne by this Objection, yet their undistressed
judgments were against it. For they did conform to it with grief, and as
their burden, and because their judgments were distressed by the persecutions
of those times, between these two, either to conform, or not to preach. And in
the Book of Martyrs you will meet with many remarkable Testimonies of those
faithful witnesses of Christ, who loved not their lives unto the death, you
will there find a great cloud of Witnesses against these smaller things as some
account them, Mr. Rogers the Proto-martyr of all that blessed Company that
suffered in Queen Maryes time; He told them in an holy scorn, Fox. Acts and
monum. vol. 3. page 131. edit. 1641.
that he would not wear that foolish attire, unless the massing Priests were
made to wear upon their sleev^ a Cha^^^e with an Host upon it, that there might
be a manifest difference between the popish Priests and the Ministers of the
Gospel. Bucer also did refuse to wear a square cap, and gave this Reason for
it, Dido^lav. Altar Damasc. page 891.
because his head was round. Philpot Fox vol 3 page 29 col ^^
in Queen Maryes time would not come to the Convocation in a long Gown, and
Tippet, as all the popish Clergy did, for which they did threaten to turn him
out of the Convocation; Ho^per in King Edwards days, did earnestly testify
against them, upon which occasion Mr. Fox complains vol 3 page 146 147
that notwithstanding the Reformation begun, they used to wear such garments
and apparel as the Popish Bishops were wont to do, which he calls
player-like Apparel. And Ridly who was at that time a great stickler for it,
God gave him repentance for it, when He was in prison, in so much that he wrote
a letter to Hooper about it, wherein he bewails the former ignorance and rigor
of his Spirit, and confesses it was his own weakness and simplicity that
jarred with Hoopers wisdom in that matter, And in another place there is
mention made of one Blumfield a cruel Persecutor, who did threaten a good man,
one Simon Harlestone to put him to the Officers, because He did wear no
Surplice, when he said Service; and hereupon Mr. Fox who wrote the Book of
Martyrs, has these words vol ^ page 909 col 2 (...) 60.
wherefore it is pity such baits of Popery are left to the enemies to take
Christians in, God take them away, or else us from them. For God knows they
be the cause of much blindness and strife amongst men. And Mr. Thomas Becon in
his works printed at London, cum privilegio, 1562. expresses himself thus,
Becon Catech page 484 apud quench (...) page 110
wherefore in my judgment it were meet and convenient that all such disguises
of apparel were utterly taken away, for as much as it is but the vain
Invention of man, and has been greatly abused of the massing Papists. For what
has the Temple of God to do with Idols, what Concord is there between Christ
and Belial, what have the vestments of a popish Altar to do with the Table of
the Lord Christ? Moreover the Canons of 1571, forbid the gray Amice or any
other garment defiled with the like Superstition, Vide Didoclav^ page 897
but this Reason reaches the Surplice, and therefore the equity of that Canon
excludes it, though the letter do not. Finally, the Bishops are bound to the
use of a pastoral staff by King Edwards book, to which the statute of Elizabeth
refers, but in this they transgress themselves, and therefore with what
Conscience, yea, with what forehead can they smite their fellow Servants for a
lesser matter?

II. The Sign of the Cross in Baptism.
THis is another popish Idol; for it is a thing which the Lord never commanded,
and which never came into his heart. It is a manifest adding to the
Institution, and the Arguments that are usually brought against other Popish
Corruptions, against oil, cream, salt, spittle, etc. will hold as well against
the Cross. Nay more may be said against this, then against some of those. For
oil formerly was of some use in the worship of God, which the Cross never was;
and oil was never Instrumental to any cruelty of man against the Lord Jesus
Christ, as the Cross was. If a Child should love and kiss the knife that cut
his Fathers throat, or worship the Gallows on which his Father was hanged, you
would say, he were an ungracious Child, or else a mere fool, for nature and
Reason would reach him rather to detest it. But then what shall we think of the
Papists and others, who thus Idolize the Cross, upon which Christ was
crucified, why is not as much honor due to the Spear that pierced him? and to
whips, and nails, and thorns? why may they not as well worship Judas who
betrayed him? and why may we not by the same Reason take a thorn when we
baptize a Child, and give it two, or three pricks in the forehead, to show that
it must suffer for Christ? for Christ's head was crowned with thorns, we may do
this with as much Reason, and with as good devotion for Epiph. here is 49. Apud
Parker of the cross p. 1 page 103
ought I know, as Sign it with the Sign of the Cross. I have read of some who
were wont to use bread and Cheese in the Lords Supper, called Artotyritae, and
there is as much Reason for this, for ought I know, as for the Cross in
Baptism; If the Churches Authority be all that can be said for it, if there be
no other Reason for it, as indeed some pretend that this is enough; The Church
then may do things which she can give no Reason for, and we must yield blind
obedience to her dictates, and so pin our faith as the Papists would have us,
upon the Churches sleeves.

It is true, the Scripture speaks honorably of the Cross of Christ, God
forbid, Gal. 6.15.
(says Paul) that I should glory in any thing save in the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ, whereby the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the World: but
by the Cross of Christ is meant the death of Christ, for it is by the death and
Sufferings of Christ that our lusts are crucified, and not by the Cross of
wood. As when the same Apostle says, the preaching of the Cross, is the power
of God to save Souls, 1 Cor. 1.18. it is not meant of a wooden Cross, nor yet
an aerie, or watery Cross, but the preaching of Christ crucified, as he explains
himself, ver. 23, ^4. Is any man so blind as to think that the great Apostle
made it the great work, and buisiness of his preaching to cry up the Cross of
wood, which was nothing else but the instrument of man's cruelty against our
Lord Jesus Christ? And therefore as Mr. Parker shows Parker of the cross part
1. page 82
it ought to be as odious to us as is the Gallows to a child on which his
Father was hanged. And in that learned Book of his* a Book which the Bishops
durst never undertake to Answer, he has proved that this by some so much
applauded Sign of the Cross, is a sin against all the Ten Commandments, and a
breach of the very letter of the Second Commandment, being an Image in use
religious of man's devising, and taken from the Brothel house of Gods greatest
enemy, pa 104
yea, amongst all the Signs of Rome, there is not a more gross and dirty
Harlot. He shows that pa. 59
it is the greatest Devil amongst the Idols of Rome. For it is adored by the
Papists pa. 5.
as a distributer both of temporal blessings, and heavenly graces. It is
supposed by them to pa. 45.
bless, to convert sinners, to wrok miracles, to save all that are marked with
it, to sanctify and consecrate the water of Baptism, to make it effectual to
procure reverence unto Baptism, to put us in mind of our vow therein, to
fortify and strengthen us against temptations, to drive away the Devil, though
as he says well, p. 13^
this pretended use of it against the Devil is no better then a straw to run at
Tilt with. But what higher and greater things then these can be said of any
Ordinance of Christ? But instead of these glorious effects, it has done a
world of mischief, as much I do believe as ever any Idol did. For God has
accursed it to be a snare, and so it has proved accordingly. Ibid. (...) 2.
page ^ 61
It has shed much precious blood, which the Earth will not Cover, Napie^ in
Rev 16 and propos^ Dr Lay (...) against P^^^lacy pa^ 102, 10^ parker the (...)
part 1 Chap ^ Sect 6 136
And it is conceived by very learned men, that the Sign of the Cross is that
special mark of the Beast, Rev. 13.16. But all our Writers do consent, that the
Ceremonies of the Romish Church, are a part of the mark of the Beast, of which
Ceremonies, the Cross is chief. And shall such a principal badge of Popery?
such an Ensign of Antichrist, such a Trophee of Antichrist, his Conquest and
desolation of the worship, and Churches of Christ be retained and continued
amongst Protestants? shall we suffer such a mark of the Beast to be set upon
our Foreheads, and upon the Foreheads of our Friends and Children? God
forbid. They may be the Instruments of Christ to eat the Whores flesh, and to
burn her with fire, and shall they wear the Whores mark? I say again, God
forbid. The Idolatry of this Ceremony is so gross and palpable, that some, who
have made a Shift to swallow down almost all the rest, the very Organs and all,
yet they have stuck at this, they have not been well able to digest the Cross
in Baptism.

III. Kneeling at the Lords Supper.
THis is an Idol too, for it is contrary to the Institution, and to the second
Commandment: Christ and his Apostles did use a Table gesture, and therefore so
should we. For it is said, whilst they did eat, edentibus illis, Math. 26.28.
Mark. 14.22. But if whilst they did eat, then also whilst they did sit, for
these two are conjoined, Mark. 14.18. whilst they sat and did eat, and though
they did not sit upright, but with leaning, yet it was the Table gesture then
used in Feasts and Banquets; and (...) 38
if we sit according to the Custom of the Country where we live, we imitate
aright, and it were apish imitation to sit otherwise, as it is (...) to use
white wine, or red, the wine of Judea, or the wine of France.

Objection, But we may pray in the act of receiving, therefore we may kneel.

Answ. Kneeling is not the only prayer gesture, for the publican stood and
prayed, Luke 18.13. Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, Jer. 15.1. The
Prophet Elijah as it seems sat, 1 King. 18.42. neither is prayer the
principal exercise of the soul in the act of receiving, but rather meditation,
the eye not only beholding, but the mind attending upon the Sacramental
Elements and actions, making present use of them by meditation, upon the
Analogy between the Signs, and the thing signified, in which, though the ^
soul may send up short Ejaculations, and darts of prayer to Heaven, to
strengthen her own weakness, yet this need not take her off from her principal
work of meditation and application of the things represented in the Sacrament,
neither does Ejaculatory Prayer require any change of gesture.

Objection. But no gesture can be too reverend, great and reverend, dreadful
mysteries, (says one) must be received with great and dreadful humility of
Soul, and humiliation of body.

Answ. Grovelling upon the ground with their faces in the dust, is a more
forlorn, dejected posture then kneeling. And therefore by this Argument they
ought not to kneel, but rather to hide their faces in the dust. But the Apostle
condemns voluntary humility, Col. 2.18. for it is no true humility, but
hypocrisy and Superstition disguised with the name and vizard of humility. It
is gross hypocrisy for us to pretend to more holiness, reverence, and devotion
in the act of receiving then Christ himself, or then the Apostles did, when
Christ himself was there bodily present with them, (...) 37
we must follow the Example of Christ and his Apostles, except where they had
special Reasons, which do not concern us: for the Apostle alleges the
Institution against all abuses, 1 Cor. 11.23. and he propounds to us for
imitation the Example and Custom of the primitive Churches, for those Churches
were intended by Christ as patterns to succeeding Ages, 1 Cor. 11.16. and 1
Cor. 14.33. and 1 Cor. 16.1. 2 Timothy 3.14. there is sometimes in Superstitious
persons a legal bondage, and slavery of Spirit, and this they take to be
dreadful humility. But a Spirit of Adoption is more suitable to the Sacrament,
then such a legal Spirit, and obedience is the best humility. That which comes
nearest to the Rule and to the Institution, is the best and humblest way, and
most accepted of the Lord. Peter it is like, thought himself very humble, when
he said to Christ, thou shall never wash my feet, but it was a foolish and
proud humility, and Christ reprove and che^ks him sharply for it: therefore let
kneelers take heed of such deceitful, proud humility. It is the manner of all
Feasts and Banquets, even when Subjects are invited to a Princes banquet, they
do not use to kneel while they are eating, but they sit down with Him, as David
and Jonathan did at King Saul's Table. The Sacra^^^t of the Passover was an holy
Supper, and yet they did not kneel in the act of Receiving, though the Paschal
Lamb was slain in manner of a real Sacrifice, and the slaughter of Beasts, and
the shedding of blood was more dreadful then the pouring out of wine, but yet
they were not wont to kneel at the Sacraments, and Sacrifices of the old Law.

It is a dangerous Symbolizing with the papists, who kneel before their breaden
God. It gratifies and hardens them, by giving Countenance to that Error, but
grieves and offends many a precious Saint. And indeed it was the opinion of the
bodily presence that brought in this Custom of kneeling, and to deny that, and
yet to kneel, is such a piece of Idolatry and Contradiction that some of the
Papists professed that they would be torn in pieces with wild Horses, rather
then do it, if they did not believe that Christ is there bodily present.
Costerus the Jesuit confesses, that if the substance of bread remain, the
Idolatry of the Papists (...) Cap. 8 apud (...) Fresh part ^ 521
is more intolerable then the Egyptians was, in worshipping of an Ox, or a
Crocodile.

And it is a going backward in Religion, for the first Reformers in the very
dawning of the day did reject this Popish practice. (...) 5 (...) 1, 2
Mr. Knox one of the first and chief Instruments of the Reformation in
Scotland, calls the Cross in Baptism, and kneeling at the Lords Supper,
diabolical Inventions and being demanded by the Council of England, why he did
not kneel? He answered, because Christ's action was perfect, and it was surest
to follow his example, and when they said, they were sorry to find Him of a
mind contrary to the Common order, He replied, and I am sorry that the Common
order is contrary to Christ's Institution. And in King Edwards time, in those
first glimmerings and breakings forth of light, there is this Rule in the Book
of Common Prayer, Boo^ Comm^^ Praye^ anno ^ fol 15
set forth in his Time, Anno 1549. as touching, kneeling, knocking the breast,
and other gestures, they may be used, or left, as every man's devotion serves,
which was a very necessary Indulgence for tender Consciences. And shall we be
more violent in th^se Times of greater light, when we should be more tender,
more light should work more love.

IV. Bowing to the Altar, and setting the Communion Table Altar-wise. etc*
THis gross Popish Idolatry, after the Prelates had Contended and striven for
it several years, was at last enacted and established by them in their last
Canons in the year 1640. ^anon
And it was the Immediate forerunner of their deserved ruin, for by this
pestilent Innovation they did bring back the work of Reformation, not only as
the Sun in Ahaz his dial ten degrees, but almost an hundred years backward. For
this gross piece of Popish Idolatry was put down by King Edward the sixth in
the year 1550, even in the dawning of the day, in the very beginning of the
Reformation, as you may see in the Acts Mon. (...) page 7^0
Book of Martyrs. But seeing the Prelates are so madd upon it, to Conjure it up
again from the grave, and from the bottomless pit, we must therefore a little
enquire into it. Their late Contentions and Persecutions for it, have
occasioned large and learned disputes against it, but of all that has been
said, or might be said against it, I shall mind you only of these six things.

Consider. I.
THat the Communion Table is not an Altar, you will find in the ^
Book of Martyrs, six Reasons given by that reforming King Edward the sixth for
the proof of this Assertion. I shall but offer to you three Reasons briefly to
evince it.

Reas. 1. Because the Scripture calls it a Table, but not an Altar, and we
ought to speak as God and Christ has taught us of his Ordinances, 1 Cor. 10.21
Ye cannot be partakers of the Lords Table, and of the Table of Devils, Luke
22.21. the hand of him that betrayeth me, is with me on the Table. But Christ
himself is our Altar, as in that Text, Heb. 13.10. we have an Altar whereof
they have no right to eat that serve the Tabernacle. By the Altar is meant
Christ, and to eat him, is fructum passionis percipere, et ipsi tanquam Capiti
incorporari. If they will needs have it to be meant of an Altar of Stone, as
the Jesuits and Prelates pretend, they must expound the Text thus, (...) ^eb. ^3
that for reward of their obstinate cleaving to the Ceremonies of the Law, they
shall not eat stones, a small punishment for so great a sin.

Reas. 2. An Altar implies a Sacrifice, and Sacrific^ing Priests, but the Lords
Supper is not a Sacrifice, therefore the Table is not an Altar. The use of an
Altar is to offer Sacrifice upon, but when we come to the Sacrament, what do we
come for? do we come to Sacrifice Christ again, and to crucify the Son of God
afresh? no, but we come to Commemorate and Celebrate the memory of Christ's
death and Sacrifice, who offered up himself once for all, as the Scripture
often speaks, Heb. 7.27. and 9.25, 26, 28. and 10 2, 10. wherein He was both
Priest, Sacrifice, and Altar himself: a Priest in regard of both his natures,
his Humane nature was the Sacrifice that was slain and offered up to God for
us, and his Diety was the Altar that sanctified the offering, and gave that
Infinite virtue and value to his Sufferings. To talk of a Commemorative
Sacrifice in the Sacrament is mere nonsense, and a Contradiction. Quench Cole
page 204
For as the picture of a man is no man, or of fire is no fire, so the
Commemoration of a Sacrifice, is in Truth no Sacrifice The Lords Supper
therefore needs no Sacrificeing Priest: of which some of the very Jesuits have
confessed, that the New Testament does abstain from that word Priest, as more
proper for the old Law, for Sacrifices and Idols Lorin^ in Act. ^ 22 apud
Quench Cole. pa^ 293
ab hoc abstinet novum Testamentum ut magis proprio antiqu^ legis, Sacrificii
and Idolorum, concedo. Therefore Altars ought to be abolished. For as long as
the Altars remain, both the ignorant people, and the ignorant and evil
persuaded Priests will Hoop^^ third (...) upon Io^nah. pri^^^ed 1551 Quench
Cole pa^ 202
always dream of a Sacrifice, as Hooper the Martyr well observes. For Priests,
Altar and Sacrifice are relatives, and have a mutual and inseparable dependence
upon one another, ^econ works printed 1562 Co^^ paris (...) Lords Su^^per and
Mass vo^ 100.101 Apud Quench Cole pa^ 101
neither do these Altars more agree to the Christian Religion then the
Cauldron, the Fire-pan, the Basin, the Shovel, the Flesh-hook, the Gridiron,
and such like Instruments which the Priests of Aaron used in preparing,
dressing, and doing their Sacrifices, as has been long ago observed.

Reas. 3. If the Communion Table were an Altar, then it should be greater and
better then the Sacramental bread and wine, or the Lords Supper it self, and a
means to consecrate them. For the Altar sanctifies all the gifts and
Sacrifices that are offered upon it, and is greater then the gift, as our
Savior teaches us, Math. 23.18, 19. and hence it is said, that the Altar
shall be holiness of holinesses, or most holy, Exodus 29.37. and 40.10. And
indeed the Prelates place a kind of holiness in their Altars, and therefore
they rail them in, but this conceit will be con^^^d, when we come to speak of
the holiness of places. But in the mean time, seeing there is no man so blind
and desper^te, as to say, that the Table is greater then the Lords Supper, this
is enough to (...) not an Altar.

It is true, some of the Ancients have called it an Altar, but un-Scripturally,
and improperly, as they did also use other Extravagant and wanton Metaphors,
calling it solium Christi, the throne of Christ, whereas Christ is not
represented on the Table in his Majesty, as upon a Throne, but in his lowest
humility, and deepest abasement, as broken, crucified, etc; And although some
have been so tender, as to say, they will not condemn these unapt and dange^ous
Meatphors and expressions of the Ancients, yet I find that very learned,
moderate, worthy men, are not afraid to disapprove them. p^rth. ^ssembl.
^roceed^^gs (...), etc page ^9
This improper speech was dangerous, (says one) and has proven hurtful to the
Kirk, transforming indeed a Table into an Altar. These Hyperbolical
expressions and wanton Metaphors of the Ancients, Mr. D. C. ^upersti^^o est
Su^erstes ^^ge 53
(says another) have unawares to them good men, filled the Church with
Superstition. It matters not therefore, how near the Ancients and others do
Come in their expressions, but how near they come to the Truth, and holy
Scriptures, which never spoke in such a language. Another says, though some of
the Fathers called it an Altar, yet it does not follow, that we may now
lawfully do it, or that they did well in it. Quench-^^ole page ^9
For when they used this manner of speech, the Sacrifice of the Mass, and Mass
Priests, with other Idolatrous Popish Trash was not known nor heard of in the
world, neither were there any to be scandolized with those phrases, and to
wrest them to such ill ends and purposes as since they have been. But the
Fathers might better have spared, then used them, since all this hurt, but no
good at all have proceeded from them. And there be remarkable Testimonies in
some of the Fathers against Altars. For Origin who lived about two hundred
years after Christ, has these words. Origin ^^ntra ^elsum li. ^^.
Objicit nobis, quod non habemus Imagines, aut aras, aut Templa. Celsus
charge the Christian Religion with this, that we have neither Images, nor
Altars, nor Temples. In Answer to which, Origin does not deny the Charge, but
confesses the matter of Fact to be true, and defends it from the very
Fundamental grounds of Religion, and so does Arnob. ^. 6. and (...) in Book
^^lled ^uench-^^^le page ^^, 72. etc.
Arnobius and sundry others.

For the Papists indeed to call the Lords Table an Altar is not unsultable to
their own principles, who pretend to offer in their Mass a propitiatory
Sacrifice for quick and dead, but we that are Protestants cannot call it by
that name, because it is neither consistent with the Truth, nor with our
selves, as has been showed; justly therefore are the Prelates charged with a
design to destroy and undermine the Protestant Religion, and to introduce and
usher in Popery, by these their Popish Innovations. For the very name of
Altars, as being Jewish and Heathenish, was quite expunged, in the Reformation
out of Popery, so that as the learned Quench^Cole pag^ 59, 60.
have observed, it is not to be found in the Book of Common Prayer, Articles,
Injunctions, Homilies, Canons, (till 1640.) which never term the Lords Table an
Altar, neither properly, nor improperly, yea, there is ^b. pag^ 121, 122* The
Statute of Jacobi. Cap. 5.
an Act of Parliament in which Altars are expressly enumerated, and mentioned
as relics of Popery, with viz. Beads, Pictures, all which are by that Statute
appointed to be defaced and burnt. And if you look into the Story of the
Reformation, you will find that the ib. pag^ 45. (...) he (...) Fox Act^ and
(...) page 79 and 879.
first thing that was done upon the beginning of the Reformation, was the
pulling down of Altars, and setting up Communion Tables, and the first thing
again acted upon the restitution of Popery, was the setting up of Altars, and
turning Communion Tables into Altars; which the Prelates were doing with all
their might, before their late down fall. Ib. pag^ 163, 2^^ 311.
And what means all that Massing Furniture and Fooleries, wherewith their
Altars are adorned, as Tapers, Candlesticks, Ba, sons, Crucifixes, Crosses,
rich Altar-Cloths. Arras hangings, clasped brave Books, with Crosses instead of
Bosses, Crimson and Scarlet Cushions what means all this, if it does not
proclaim their love and affection to the Church of Rome, to whom they do thus
conform themselves, and so much for this first Consideration, I shall be more
brief in the rest.

Consider. II.
SVppose the Lords Table were an Altar, and whether it be an Altar or a Table,
yet it ought not to be fastened to the Wall like a dresser, or side Table, but
so to stand, as that it may be compassed round about.

For this as the learned have observed, has ever been the manner of the
Situation of Altars, both among the Jews and Heathens, for the Prophet Elijah
made a Trench round about the Altar, 1 King. 18.32, 35. I will wash mine hands
in Innocence, so will I compass thine Altar, O Lord, Psalm. 26.6. and the Lord
threatens Idolaters, I will scatter your bones round about your Altars, Ezekiel.
6.4, 5. yea, their Altars stood usually without the Temple, Quen^^ page 1^ 17.
it being both a troublesome, unseemly thing to bring Oxen and other Beasts
into the Temple, to kill and Sacrifice them there. Zecharias was slain between
the Temple and the Altar, Math 23.35. by all which it is evident, that their
Altars were not placed in the upper end, or against the East-Wall of their
Temples, but in the Courts, the Entries, or midst of their Temples, that men
might go freely round about them. And so amongst the Heathens, It was an usual
Custom, Alex Alex (...) 4. Cap^ fol 22^ 227.
ut sacrificantes, aras circumcurrerent. Alex. ab Alexandro. Virgi^ Aeneid
(...). 4.
miss^que altaria, circum. Virgil. And therefore to Imagine, that setting a
Table with one side close to the wall like a dresser, is to set it Altar-wise,
is nothing else but a foolish conceit ariseing from the profound ignorance of
our late Prelates and Papists.

And Tables also to eat and drink at, were so placed as that they might sit
round about them. Godwin wish ^^tiqu. (...) 3. (...). 2. ^^ge 106*
whence their manner of sitting was termed, Mesibah, a sitting round from,
(...) circumivit, ambivit, and their phrase of inviting their guests to sit
down, was sit round, 1 Samuel 16.11. we will not sit round, (so the Hebrew and
the margent render it, Lo Nasob, non circumsedeb^mus. Arias Montan.) till he
come. Thy children shall be like olive plants round about thy Table. Psalm.
128.3. And therefore to set the Lords Table close to the wall, as far off as
may be from the people, and to rail it in, that so none may sit and receive
near it, much less round about it, Quench: ^^ge 22.
is without all Reason, Sense, or president, being contrary to the usage of all
Nations, Ages, and our Saviors own Example, whom we ought to imitate, not only
in the substance of the Sacrament, but likewise in all decent and Convenient
Circumstances. And it is clearly most Convenient, yea, necessary, that the
Table should be so placed, as may be most for the peoples edification, and so
as they may best hear, and see the Minister in all the Sacramental actions and
Administrations, that are to be performed by him. And therefore it is but a
slight and unadvised speech, to say, it is a thing indifferent, whether the
Table stand this way, or that way, as some have said, in excuse of Altars.

Consider. III.
THe placing it also at the East end of the Church, is Superstitious. This was
the Custom of those Idolaters, Ezekiel. 8.16. they worshipped the Sun, with their
faces toward the East. And it is a Symbolizing also with the Papists. For
Hospinian observes, that most Altars at this day amongst the Papists are placed
^ospin (...) orig. ^tarium
in prima templorum part, et versus orientem spectant, in the forefront of
their Churches, and look toward the East, quod etiam ab Ethnicis sumpserunt,
which they likewise took from the Heathens. For the Temple of Jerusalem, and
its Sanctuary stood otherwise. Quench-^^le page ^^^, 235. (...) on ^^ek. 8.16.
The Ark and Mercy Seat stood in the Sanctum Sanctorum, at the west end of the
Temple, not the East, and the Jewish Synagogues both Anciently, and now were
built round, or in an oval manner: neither is there any Law, or Canon of the
Church or state of England, for the building of Churches, and Chapels, East,
and West, or placing the Chancel, or Quire, at the East end of them.

4. Whereas they call them not only Altars, but high Altars, and raise the
ground where they stand, going up by steps unto them, this is the old
Heathenish Idolatry of the Gentiles, those Idolatrous high places so often
condemned in the Scripture, Ibid. Page 163.
being nothing else but high Altars Situated in high places, in detestation
whereof the Lord gives express charge to the Jews, not to go up by steps to his
Altar, Exodus 20.28* and to destroy and pull down all high places, Numb. 33.52.
and in many other Scriptures.

5. Whereas they have Images above, or over their Altars, this also is after
the manner of the old Heathenish Idolaters, for in Iosiahs time, we read how
they brake down the Altars of Baal, and the Images that were on high above
them, or over them, 2 Chronicles. 34.4. So the Prelates have Crucifixes standing on,
or over their ^b page 30^
Altars, either in arras, glass, or metal, or in some curious Common Prayer
Book standing on their Altars, only for a dumb show, adorned with two or three
silver Crucifixes, in stead of Bosses on the Cover. And in the Church Mr.
Fuller History of the Church of (...) Cent. 17. (...) 11. page 173.
at Durham, they had a marble Altar set up there by that devout Idolater
Cousins, with Cherubims, which cost two thousand Pounds, with all the
Appurtenances thereof, namely, a Cope, with the Trinity, and God the Father, in
the figure of an old man, another with a Crucifix, and the Image of Christ,
with a red beard, and blew Cap; they lighted two hundred wax Candles about the
Altar on Candlemas day, forbade Psalms to be sung before, or after Sermon, but
made an Anthem to be sung of the three Kings of Collen, by the names of Gasper,
Balthazar, and Melchior, and they had a consecrated knife only to cut the bread
at the Communion. What vile, execrable, Hideous Idolatry was all this? was
there ever the like known, or heard of, amongst men professing the name of
Christ? but do these men call themselves Protestants? but must we have these
things set up again? and such Idolaters as these to rule the Church? O Lord,
look down from Heaven, and behold from the habitation of thine holiness, and of
thy glory, and rebuke these men! Thou rhat have chosen Jerusalem, rebuke them,
and raise up some Josiah, that may purge and cleanse the Land from this
Idolatry, and break down the Altars, with the Images that are on high above
them.

6. The bowing down to them is Idolatry against the very letter of the Second
Commandment, which says, thou shall not bow down thy self to them. It is not
meant of casual position, as if a man's face, when he kneels down to pray, be
accidentally toward an Altar, or toward the East, or the like, but it is
meant, of bowing with religious respect to them, thou shall not bow down to
them, nor serve them: if not to Images, then not to Tables; for there is the
same Reason of both, why not to the consecrated bread and wine, as well, yea
rather, then to the Altar, or Table? And why should the Table be preferred
before the Pulpit? The Truth is, This Altar worship is such gross Idolatry,
that as I never knew any but the devoted Sons of Babel who are dead drunk with
the wine of the filthiness of spiritual Fornications, plead for it, so I doubt
not, but God will shortly convince men of it, and rid the Land of it, by
astonishing plagues, and judgments, and horrible desolations upon all their
pleasant things, if no other means will serve. The glory of Jacob shall be made
thin, and the fatness of his flesh shall wax lean, and there shall be but a
gleaning left in it, as in the shaking of an Olive Tree, two or three on the
top of the uppermost bough, and when it is come to this, at that day a man
shall look to his Maker, and his eyes shall have respect to the holy one of
Israel, and He shall not look to the Altars, the work of his hands; neither,
shall he respect that which his fingers have made, either the Groves or the
Images, Isai. 17.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. And there is another Text also, that may strike
Terror into the hearts of these Idolaters, if they have any Conscience, if
they have any sense or feeling left, I mean that threatening, that dreadful and
direful Imprecation, in Isai. 2.9. the mean man boweth down, and the great man
humbles himself, therefore forgive them not. So that this Idolatrous bowing,
though it be not properly the sin against the holy Ghost, yet it is such a sin
as God seldom pardons, therefore forgive them not.

It is but a desperate shift here to talk of Relative or dependent worship,
that because the Communion Table has some Relation to Christ, therefore we may
bow down to it in honor of Christ, for it is not every thing that has some
kind of Relation to Christ, that is to be worshipped. Do but consider the long
Tail of this Serpent, the strange and wretched consequences of this Objection,
for by the same Reason we may bow down to an Image, or a Crucifix, to the
picture of Christ, as well as to the Altar, and why not to the Pulpit, as well
as to either of both? for the word of Christ is preached out of the Pulpit, and
why may we not as well adore the cups and vessels which contain the wine? and
therefore they are as much related to Christ, if not more then the Table upon
which they stand? the Papists grant, we may, and the vessels are consecrated
things, with them. Well, but the Sun, Moon, and Stars have some Relation to
Christ, as being made by Him, and somewhat may be drawn from them by way of
resemblance, But may we therefore bow to the East, and worship the Sun, and all
the Host of Heaven? yes, say the Papists, with a respective or dependent
worship, as they call it, as they are creatures of God. Well, but all inanimate
Creatures were made by Him, a stone, a stick, or a straw that I see at my feet,
they are all Crearures of God, and is it lawful then to worship them? Here I
cannot but call to mind what I have sometimes read not without admiration, and
trembling, in Vasques the Jesuit a subtle fellow, but yet the Sword was so
sharp upon his right eye, that he maintains, Vasq^^^ (...) Adoratione 2. Disp.
1. 2. number 10.397.400, 4^^ and Disp. 2. (...) number 76. pa^^ 438.
that it is lawful to worship the Ass that Christ rode upon, and to kiss the
lips of Judas that betrayed him, and that a man may do this with a true
devotion to Christ, and that it is lawful to worship all manner of Creatures,
whether alive, or dead, res omnes inanimat^s, modulum straminis, a piece of a
straw, nay, he goes further, quamvis Demon delitescat sub crucifixo, though
the Devil be in the Crucifix, yet a man may worship it. And thus you see
whither this Objection will bring you, if you follow it home, even to worship
the Devil: men had need take heed of giving way to their own wisdom and carnal
reasonings in the matters of Gods worship, lest the Sword fall upon their right
eye, lest they become vain in their Imaginations.

V. Bowing at the Name of Jesus.
A most vile piece of Syllabical Idolatry grounded upon a very gross and carnal
mistaking, and wresting of that Text, Phil. 2.9, 10. For,

1. It is but odly and untowardly translated at, for in, for the word is (...)*
and it is constantly in all other places rendered in the name, as when it is
said, baptize them in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, it would
mar both the Sense and English of the Text, and make it nonsense to say,
baptize them at the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, so to say, Our
Father which art at Heaven, Mary kept all these sayings at her heart, so in the
Creed to say, I believe at God the Father, and at Jesus Christ his Son, and at
tbe Holy Ghost: you see how absurd such a phrase would be, There is no such
phrase as at the Name, to be found in any English Author, nor in any other Text
of Scripture, beside this. (...) ^he Book (...) Quaeres (...) at the ^^me of
Jesus. (...) 2, 3.
And I have heard and read, that the Translaters of the Bible did render it in
the Name of Jesus, as the same phrase is constantly translated by them, in all
other places throughout the whole Bible. But King James committing the
Translation to the Bishops, to be published and printed, besides other bald and
wretched Alterations, they did corrupt the Translation in this place, blotting
out the word in, and rendering it at the name of Jesus, to countenance their own
Syllabical Idolatry and Superstition.

2. By the Name of Jesus is not meant the Sound of the Letters and Syllables of
the word Jesus, but the Authority, the Power, and Majesty of the person of the
Lord Jesus. To expound it of the word, letters, and Syllables, is to make it a
kind of a Magical word, which has all its efficacy included in the Sound, and
so to abuse it unto Superstition, as the Jewish Rabbis have abused the word
Jehovah with their Cabalistical fooleries and vanities. Why should we not bow
as well at the name of God all-Sufficient, El-shaddai, or at the name Jehovah,
Elohim, God the Father, Son and Spirit, or at the name Emmanuel, Messiah, Lord,
and Savior, or any other name or Attribute of God and Christ, all those other
names being no less precious and glorious then the name of Jesus: and seeing
they do not bow, when they hear Christ described, does not this plainly show,
that this honor is not done to the person of Christ, but merely to Letters and
Syllables. And it seems to make a manifest disparity and Inequality between the
three glorious persons of the Trinity, who are Coequal, Coessential, and
Coeternal. If Jews, or Infidels should come into our Assemblies, and hear men
say, I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth, without
any incurvation at all, and then to pronounce the next words and, in Jesus
Christ our Lord, with a Stentorean voice, bowing and scraping the ground, they
could not but think, and conclude, that according to our Queres (...). page 11*
principles, God the Father, and the Holy Ghost are not God, or not so much
God, as the Son, and that Christ and Jesus were two several persons, the one
being bowed too, and not the other. And some have Babington posit. of the
Second (...) page 246.
well observed, that of the two, the name Christ seems to be more peculiar and
distinguishing then the name Jesus. For the Jews never took offense at any for
calling him Jesus, but they excommunicated such as confessed him to be the
Christ, Joh. 9.22. neither did they ask him, art thou Jesus, Luke 22.67. but
art thou the very Christ? and when he did own it, they rent their Clothes. For
if you respect the litteral name, there were many others that were called
Jesus, as well as He, at the hearing of whose names, the grossest Idolatry is
oftentimes committed, by Capping, and bowing, before they know what Jesus is
intended and spoken of. For the Apochrypha mentions Jesus the Son of Syrach,
and we read in the Scripture of Jesus the Son of Nun, called in the old
Testament Joshua, but the Greek renders it Jesus, for want of some Hebrew
Letters, Act. 7.47. Heb. 4.8. and Jesus Surnamed Iustus, Col. 4.11. and
Barjesus the Sorcerer, Act. 13.6. at whose name Cousins Quaeres to (...). Qu.
2^^ page 21.
with many more at Durham did most devoutly bow, no less then twice in one day,
one after another, such was their gross Superstitious dotage. And I require a
Reason, if the word Jesus must be bowed to, why they should not bow to it, when
they see it written, printed, carved, painted, or Engraven, as well as when
they hear it? why not at the sight, as well as at the Sound of it? and why not
at home, as well as in the Church? and if bowing (...). Andrews (...). on Phil.
^^, 11.
at the name of Jesus, be a means to keep men from swearing by it, as some
would make us believe, how is it then that, the profanest Swearers are the
devoutest Bowers? and drunkards, and blasphemers, and such doleful Creatures,
who Swear, and curse, and damn themselves, and drink healths upon their knees
to the confusion of Sion, and Sions King, such is the raging, H^llish madness
of profaneness in these Times, yet such incarnate Devils are the hottest Zelots
for every false way, and the fiercest Persecutours of those they call
Fanatics, who testify against them.

But the Apostle in the Text speaks of such a name as was given to Christ at
his Resurrection, as the Fruit and reward of his death and humiliation. Which
therefore can be no other, but that Supreme Authority, Lordship, and dominion
over all things and Creatures, which was then committed to him by the Father.
For the Name Jesus was given Him in the very beginning of his Humiliation,
Math. 1.21, 25. and 2.1. and Luke 2.21. but when God did raise Him from the
dead, then did he set Him at his own right hand, far above all Principality,
and Power, and Might, and Dominion, and every Name that is named, not only in
(...) World, but also in that which is to come, Ephesians. 1.20, 21. then was all
Power given unto Him in Heaven and Earth, Math. 28.19. then did God make Him
both Lord and Christ, Act. 2.36. because then, and not till then, he did
advance Him to the full and plenary exercise of his Kingly Power and Authority,
so that, by the Name of Jesus is mean^, Christ Exalted, Christ as Lord.

3. By bowing the knee, is meant, that universal Subjection of all Creatures to
this Sovereign Lordship, Judicature, and Power of Christ, especially at the day
of judgment. For bowing the knee, is a Sign of Subjection, as when it is said,
I have left me seven Thousand that have not bowed the knee to Baal, that is,
have not submitted to that Idolatry, and toties Diabolo flectimus, quoties
peccamus. Men are said to bow to the Devil, as often as they obey him, and commit
sin. It cannot be meant literally, and carnally of bodily geniculation,
because those in Heaven and Hell have no bodily knees to bow withal. Neither is
it meant merely of voluntary heart submission, and obedience to Christ; For the
bowing here spoken of, is performed not only by the Saints and Angels, but by
those under the Earth, even by the Devils, and all the wicked and damned
Spirits, though unwillingly, and to their confusion; whence Ambrose and others
read it passively, that every knee should be bowed, for they are under the feet
of Christ, and forced to Submit, and stoop to Him, will they, nill they, as the
passive Objects of his Power and Justice. Thus Hierome, non ad genua corporis,
sed ad subjectionem mentis, and inclinationem spectat, sicut David dicit,
adhaesit pavimento anima mea. It does not belong to the knees of the body, but
to the Subjection and bowing of the mind, as when David says, my Soul cleaves
to the Earth and dust, noting his inward humiliation, not any outward gesture.
And the whole stream of Expositors goes this way. As Calvin, Cartwright, Ayry
upon the place. Alley poor (...) Library. (...) printed Lon^^^ 1571. fol. 42, ^
88, 103, 104. Babington o^ the Creed. (...) 2. page ((...) 244, 245, 246.
Whitakers A^^swer to Reighnolds Cambri^^ 1590. page. 3^^ 399 apud. (...) to
^owers* (...) 18, 29, 32.
And all our Divines against the Papists, Alley, Babington, Whitaker, and many
others, who have fully vindicated this much abused Text, and confuted this
beggarly Popish Ceremony, showing, that we ought to look at the Person and
Office of the Lord Jesus, and not to be like Children playing with Letters and
Syllables.

VI. Popish Holy Days.
THese are another Idol of the Church of England. For nothing can be holy to
the Lord, which is not made holy by the Lord. It was a part of the Pharisees
Superstition ^o fast twice a week, Luke 18.12. and it was the brand set upon
Jeroboam, 1 King. 12 33. that he ordained a Feast unto the Children of Israel,
upon the fifteenth day of the eighth Month, even the Month which he had
devised of his own Heart. And though it was like unto the Feast that was in
Judah, ver. 32. and though He pretended the glory and worship of that God that
brought them up out of the Land of Egypt, as well as the ease and accommodation
of the people, ver. 28. yet all this would not excuse Him, And what is
Christmas and Easther, and all the rest of them, but days, which the Jeroboam
of Rome has devised of his own Heart? And the people had them from the Pagans,
for Christmas is nothing else but the old Heathenish Bachanalia, it is kept at
the same time of the year, and after the same profane manner only the Pope has
Christened it with a new name.

The Apostle condems the observation of the Jewish Festivals, because they were
a shadow of good things to come, Col. 2.16. such weak and rudimentary
Instructions were fit for those darker and weaker Times of the Churches nonage,
when under the Tutorage and paedagogy of Moses, before the coming of Christ.
But after that ye have known God, or rather are known of God, how turn ye again
to the weak and beggarly Elements, whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage,
ye observe days and Months, and Times, and Years. I am afraid of you lest I
have bestowed upon you labor in vain, Gal. 4.9, 10, 11. It is a Sign the
preaching of the Gospel has had but small success in such a place, and in the
Hearts of such a people, and if the Apostle said it concerning Jewish days,
surely it is much more true concerning Popish days, for there was more Reason
to retain those which were appointed at first by God himself, then to observe
those which were invented by the Pope, and which have done so much mischief to
the Churches of Christ. For as Dr. Ames observes, they were from their first
rise not only equalled unto, but also extolled above the Lords day. Easther
brought in a Superstitious Lent to attend upon it, made Baptism wait for Her
Moon, and conformed our Lords Supper unto the Jewish Passover in unleavened
bread. It was the first apple of Contention amongst Christians, the Latin and
Greek Churches striving and contending fiercely about the time of it, de lana
caprina, and Victor Bishop of Rome desperately excommunicating those that were
not of his op^nion in the thing, so that it was the first weapon wherewith the
Bishop of Rome played his prizes against other Churches, and after slew so many
persons with, by Augustine the Monk. Holy days devised by men in honor of
Christ, invited and drew on Holy days to Saints. Though indeed it is but a
vain pretense to say, they do it in honor of Christ, for it is not good
Intentions that will excuse bad actions. Jeroboam pretended very good
Intentions, The Israelites pretended an holy day to Jehovah, Exodus, 32.5. though
they kept it in a rude manner but what says the Lord to them, even after all
the prayers of Moses for them, ver. 34. in the day when I visit, I will visit
their sin upon them.

These days are rather celebrated in dishonor, and as it were in despite of
Christ, as if Christ were a God that delighted in Profaneness and Wickedness:
for he is dishonored by letting the reins loose to all manner of Profaneness,
as much in the Twelve days, and in some respects more, then in all the Twelve
Months of the year beside. And it is a dishonor to his Sabbath, for men to
set their Posts by his Posts, and their Altars by his Altars, as Jeroboam
devised a Feast of his own heart, like unto the Feast that was in Judah.
Suppose the Church might sanctify a day where the Lord has not done it, yet
it is needless and superfluous, yea presumptuous to do it, where the Lord has
made other provision, for it is to charge God with folly. But Christ the Lord
of Time, and the Lord of the Sabbath, has sanctified and instituted the first
day of the week, whereon he arose from the dead, for the Commemoration of the
great work of our Redemption by him. And what can the man do that comes after
the King? and in those things which have been already done? Eccles. 2.12. It is
a bold and deep reflection upon the wisdom of Christ, to add thus to his
Appointments, as if the Lord Jesus Christ himself were not wise enough, to
appoint days and times sufficient to keep his own Nativity, Death,
Resurrection, Ascension, and all the great things he has done for us, in
everlasting remembrance in the hearts of his Saints, but the Devil and the Pope
must help it out. Neither is the yearly time certainly known, but much disputed
amongst Chronologers and Divines, so that Holy Day keepers cannot say that they
do commemorate opus diti in die suo, the Lord having hid it, as he did the body
of Moses, to prevent Idolatry.

And it is a great infringement of our Christian Liberty, when God has given
us six days wherein to serve him in our Callings, Six days shall thou labor.
As it is Profaneness to call that common which God has sanctified and made
holy; so it is Tyrannical Superstition and Presumption to make that holy which
God has made common. Occasional days of Humiliation and Thanksgiving, when
God by his Providence calls thereunto, there is Scripture-ground and warrant
for: for, Jehoshaphat proclaimed a Fast, 2 Chronicles. 20.3. and so did the King of
Nineveh, Jonah 3.7. see also Joel 1.14. and 2.15. From whence some have not
unaptly said, That the Magistrate and the Church has as it were a Warrant
dormant for such days. Neither indeed could all the particular Causes, and
Occasions, and Times thereof be particularly determined in the Scripture,
because they are infinite, and Christ allows also private Fasts, Matthew. 6.17,
18. but here there is only an occasional designation of a time, upon a present
emergency of Providence calling thereunto. But in those Anniversary Popish
Festivals time is dedicated and sanctified to an holy use in a stated way,
which is more then the Scripture impowers men to do. So for Week-day-Lectures,
they are most impertinently objected, for these are not hours sanctified or
consecrated to Gods service, but only the most convenient times when most may
resort to the hearing of Sermons. So that time is only designed occasionally,
not dedicate or sanctified. Time is made to serve Gods people, and not Gods
people made to serve the time, or to serve God because it is an holy time.

And whereas some have seemed to condemn the superstitious part of Christmas,
but plead hard for the Hospitable part, as they call it: The Answer is, That
the Feasting and Sporting is an Appendix to the Worship, or rather to the
Superstition, and therefore stands or falls together with it. The Apostle
therefore calls them Idolaters, even for their Feasting and Sporting, 1 Cor.
10.7. Neither be ye Idolaters, as were some of them: as it is written, The
people sat down to eat, and drink, and rose up to play. And if you read the
story of that Idolatry of the Calf, Exodus 52. you will find that it was
Celebrated much after the same manner that Christmas is, or rather somewhat
better; for they rose up early on the morrow, and offered burnt-offerings, and
brought peace offerings: So that it seems they went to Church, and said their
Prayers most devoutly in the morning, and then they sat down to eat and drink,
and rose up to play, ver. 6. and there was shouting, and singing, and dancing
amongst them, ver. 18, 19. Sober mirth, and the moderate use of the good
Creatures of God, is lawful at any time of the year, and there never was any
Minister that Preached or spoke against that; but to have better Cheer upon a
Popish Holy Day, then at another time, merely upon this account, because
forsooth it is an Holy Day, this is superstitious: and the Revelling, and
Rioting, and Luxury which is usual at those times, is every way an hinderance
to Hospitality, and not a furtherance to it, that which might and ought to be
bestowed in a way of Liberality to the Poor, being misspent and lavished away
in vain Prodigality and Luxury.

The days of Purim, Esth. 9. were seven hundred years since objected by
Papists unto the Waldenses, and since by all Papists that have written against
Protestants about Ceremonies, as Gregonius de Valentia, Bellarmine, Suarez; and
we need not seek for new Answers about it, for that which our Divines have
answered to the Papists, is sufficient in two words. 1. That it cannot be
evinced, that these days of Purim were Religious Feasts. Junius says,
Praeceptum fuit Politicum, they were only days of Civil rejoicing, they are
called only the days of Purim, not the holy days of Purim. They are not
called Chaggim, no peculiar Sacrifice was appointed, nor any holy Convocation
of the people enjoined. The Ordinance required but Feasting and Joy, and
sending of portions to one another: the Rest mentioned Esth. 9. was only from
their Enemies; so much work as might stand with a Feasting-day was not
forbidden. 2. Upon supposition of a Religious Feast instituted by Mordecai, he
did it, says Dr. Whitaker, God inspiring him, and peradventure by order from
some Prophet. As Zech. 8. they changed their Fasts into Feasts by the mouth of
the Lord, by the Ministry of the Prophet. And though we do not read expressly,
that either God or any Prophet did require this Feast of Purim, yet forasmuch
as it stands approved in Scripture, there is no doubt but it was done by
warrant from God.

The Feast of Dedication, Joh. 10.22, 23. has also been objected from the time
of the Waldenses, but it is not certainly known what Feast of Dedication this
was, and whether merely of humane Institution. Some take it for that which
Solomon appointed, others ascribe it to Ezra, others to the Maccabees; neither
is there any evidence that (...) approved it. The Text only says, that he
walked then in ^^^mons Porch, which he might do without observing or approving
(...) if it was nothing but a Tradition of the Elders, we may be sure th^^
Christ who testified against other Inventions of men, did never observe this.

It was Luthers desire no less then Seven-score years ago, in his Book de Bon^^
Operibus, set forth Anno 1520, that there were no other Festival days amongst
Christians, but only the Lord's Day: And right excellent was that Speech of
King James to a National Assembly in Scotland, Anno 1590. He praised God that
he was King in the sincerest Church in the world; sincerer then the Church of
England, for their Service was an ill-said Mass in English; sincerer then
Geneva it self, for they observed Pasche and Yoole, that is, Easter and
Christmas, and what warrant (said he) have they for that?

VII. Holiness of Places, or Consecrating of Churches*
TO discover the vanity of this Superstition, consider, that inherent Holiness
which is in Persons, is a thing which Places are no way capable of: but the
only holiness that is or can be pretended for them, is a Relative Holiness,
upon the account of some thing without them, in respect and relation whereto,
they are denominated and reputed holy. Hence one that writes for it has
described it thus, A state of Relation of Peculiarity to Godwards. Now in the
time of the Old Testament, we find two sorts of holy Places upon this account
of Relation to the holy God.

1. Where God was pleased to afford the visible and extraordinary Appearances
and Manifestations of his Glory to the very eyes of his Servants, such Places
were Holy during the time of those Manifestations. As when the Lord appeared to
Moses in the burning Bush, Exodus 3.5. The place whereon thou stand is holy
ground. So to Joshua, Chap. 5.15. Hence Mount Sinai might not be touched, Exodus
19. And upon this account the Mount where Christ was transfigured is called the
Holy Mount, 2 Pet. 1.18. but this Holiness continued only while that
extraordinary Presence continued, there is no more Holiness in Mount Sinai, or
in Mount Tabor now, then there is in any other place, therefore the Apostle so
calls it from what it was, not that it is so still; neither is any other place
in these times privileged with such an extraordinary visible Presence and
Appearance of God: and therefore this neither is nor can be pretended for our
Meeting-places. But

2. There was a stated Holiness in the time of the Law in some Places. And thus
some have observed, that we find but three Places that were holy in this
respect, The Land of Canaan, called the holy Land, Zech. 2.12. the City of
Jerusalem, called the holy City, Mat. 5.4. and 27.53. and the Temple,
frequently therefore called the holy Temple, Jonah 2.4. And these places were
perpetually holy, as long as the Old Testament dispensation continued. But if
we enquire into the nature, and into the grounds and reasons of this Holiness,
we shall find that it is wholly ceased in these Gospel Times, and that no
place is holy now upon any such account. For

1. These Places were holy, because in them were the standing Signs and Symbols
of Gods Presence, which is therefore called his Symbolical Presence, to
distinguish it from his Extraordinary Presence beforementioned, and from his
Spiritual Presence, which is not tied to any place. Hence he is said to choose
Jerusalem, and Mount Sion, and the Temple, to dwell there, and to put his Name
there, Psalm. 76.2. and 87* 2. and to dwell between the Cherubims, Psalm. 80.1.
The Temple it self was a Sign of his Presence, and the Altar, the Ark, the
Mercy-seat, Cherubims, Sacrifices, and almost all the Ordinances of those times
were affixed by Gods appointment unto those places, to be observed and
celebrated there, viz. in the Temple, and in Jerusalem: but there is no place
that is now privileged with this Symbolical Presence. There are no such
standing Signs and tokens of his Presence annexed unto any place. God has
given his Ordinances to his Church, but he has not tied them to any place, He
dwells not in Temples made with hands, Acts 17.24.

2. These places under the Law were holy, by reason of their Typical respect to
Christ, and the good things that were to come by him. Canaan the holy Land was
a Type of the Church on Earth, and of the Kingdom of Heaven, the heavenly
Canaan: They sought another Country, a better Country, that is, an heavenly,
Heb. 11.14, 16. Thine eyes shall see the land that is very far off, Isa. 33.17.
Jerusalem also was a Type of the Church, and of Jerusalem above, Gal. 4.26.
Rev. 21.2. and so the Temple, Psalm. 15.1. and it was a Type also of Christ's
Body, Joh. 2.21. Col. 2.9. Hence some have well observed, That the more nearly
and lively that any of these Places did typifie Christ, so the difference and
degree of holiness did arise; as the Temple was more holy, because it typified
the Body of Christ, in whom the Godhead dwelt bodily, Coloss. 2.9. as God did
dwell Symbolically in the Temple. But Christ the Substance being come, and all
the Types and Shadows therefore done away, there are not, there cannot be
typical Places, or typical Holiness in Places in these times.

3. Those Places of old were holy by virtue of Gods Institution, who did
appoint and sanctify them to be parts of his Worship, and Ordinances of a very
high nature; for the Lord appointed them to be the ways and means of Communion
between himself and his people: There will I meet thee, and I will commune with
thee from above the Mercy-seat, from between the two Cherubims, which are upon
the Ark of the Testimony, Exodus 25.22. Numb. 7.89. And they did sanctify both
the Worshippers, and the Worship performed in them, the Altar sanctified the
gift, the Temple sanctified the gold, Matthew. 23.18, 19. in so much that the
Places were principal, and the Duties less princ^pal, as Divines observe. The
Temple and the Altar being Types of Christ, were of an higher worth and
excellency then the Services and Sacrifices offered in them, and did bring
acceptance to them, and therefore they were to pray toward the Temple, to
offer upon the Altar, etc. Deuteronomy 12.5, 6. 1 Kings 8.29. There will I accept
them, Ezekiel 20.40. And it was a profaning of the Temple to use it for Civil
Employments, being consecrated and appropriated by God to holy uses: and
therefore Christ would not suffer them to buy or sell, or to carry vessels
through it, Mark 11.15, 16.

But there is no word of Institution in the New Testament to sanctify any one
Place more then another, but on the contrary it lays all places level in
regard of Holiness. When the woman of Samaria pleaded, Our fathers worshipped
in this Mountain, but ye say that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to
worship; Jesus said unto her, Woman, believe me, The hour comes, and now is,
when ye shall neither in this Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem worship the
Father, but the true worshippers shall worship him in spirit and in truth, Joh.
4.21, 23. He turns her eyes and thoughts away from the difference of Places, to
look at the spirituality of the worship: for as God is no respecter of persons,
so he is no respecter of places; but wheresoever, for that indefinite [ where]
is equivalent to an universal, Wheresoever two or three are gathered together
in my Name, there am I in the midst of them, Matthew. 18.20. I will that men pray
every where, (...), in every place, 1 Timothy 2.8. The Church of Troas met in an
upper Chamber to break Bread, and for Preaching and other Ordinances, Acts
20.8. therefore all places are alike.

Our public Meeting-places for Worship in these Gospel Times, do not succeed
in the stead of the Jewish Tabernacle or Temple, because they are not
privileged with that extraordinary visible Presence of God in them, which was
in the Temple at some times, neither have they that Symbolical Presence, and
residence of God in them, which was in the Temple at all times, neither have
they that typical respect to Christ, neither has God sanctified them, and set
them apart to himself as his own peculiar: but they are of the same nature with
the Jewish Synagogues, which were the places of the public Moral Worship of
God in those times, and were without question every whit as holy as our
Churches, but yet we find that the Synagogues were not appropriated to holy
uses only, Matt. 10 ^7. Matt 13.^.
though the Temple was, but they kept Courts, and had Civil Assemblies in them
about Civil matters, Mat. 23.34. Some of them shall you scourge in your
Synagogues, which suppose it were not meant of the executing and inflicting of
the punishment upon them, but only as some would have it, of passing the
Sentence, yet this will not help them, for still it was a Civil and Secular use
of the place, where they met for the public Worship of God.

I may therefore here apply that of Isai. 27.9. By this therefore shall the
iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit, to take away his sin:
when he makes all the stones of the Altar as chalk-stones, that are beaten
asunder, the Groves and Images shall not stand up. God will never purge away
the iniquity of Ireland, nor take away the sins of England, till the stones of
the Altar be as Chalk-stones, till people be convinced that there is no more
holiness in a Church, I mean the Meeting Place of Wood and Stones, then in a
dwelling house, nor in an Altar more then in Chalk-stones. There have been some
Episcopal men, Episcopal at least in some other things, who yet have been much
above this gross superstitious Conceit of the difference of Places. Dr. Usher
in his Body of Divinity, speaking against the private Administration of the
Sacraments, he has these words; In times of Persecution the godly did often
meet in Barns, and such obscure places, which were indeed public, because of
the Church of God there, the House or Place availing nothing to make it public
or private, even as wheresoever the Prince is, there is the Court, although it
were in a poor Cottage.

It is true, there is a Spiritual Presence of God in our public
Meeting-places, when his people are there assembled to Worship him in the
Beauties of Holiness, but he does not afford his Presence with respect to the
place, but to the persons; he is not present with them for the places sake, but
present in the place at that time for their sakes. And therefore this Spiritual
Presence of God does not make any place properly holy, for then all places
should be holy, wheresoever holy persons meet to enjoy the Spiritual Presence
of God in holy duties: as the Primitive Churches met in private Chambers, Acts
1.13. and 20.8. and by the same reason all the dwelling-houses where there are
Family Duties, and daily worshipping of God in the Family, and in secret, are
holy places also. Nay, the Fields, the Streets, and sometimes Prisons, and
Dungeons, and Gibbets, and all places where the Saints come, and enjoy
Communion with God in their Spirits, are holy places. And so by their own
Argument they lay all places level, the Lord having many precious Saints that
walk with him, who are dispersed and scattered up and down almost in every
corner of the Land.

Churches I confess are holy things, but the word Church is very improperly,
and Catachrestically used concerning the Material Church of Wood and Stones, by
a Metonymie; but the Scripture knows no other Church but the Church of Saints.
That place, 1 Cor. 11.22. is much abused, and misinterpreted, Have you not
houses of your own to eat and drink in? or despise you the Church of God? It is
not meant of those improper Metonymical Churches, neither does the opposition
enforce any such thing: for there be many other things which may be opposed to
their own houses, besides the public Meeting Place. There are in Logic not
only Contraria, quorum unum uni, but also Disparata quorum unum multis pariter
opponitur: The Apostles Argument is this, that it is a contempt of the Church
or Saints of God, to carry themselves so disorderly in their presence.

And yet it does not follow, that the public Meeting-places must be pulled
down, for the Consecrating of them is an abuse of things necessary, and not of
things indifferent. The Scripture mentions it as a good work to build them, He
loves our Nation, and has built us a Synagogue, Luke 7.5. and as an act of
great profaneness to pull them down, Psalm. 74.8. They have burnt up all the
Synagogues of God in the Land, which yet had no more holiness in them then our
Meeting-places. And the thing it self speaks, for if there ought to be public
Assemblies for the Worship of God, if this be a duty, it is necessary that
there be places to meet in. It is true, the Lord commanded the Jews to demolish
the Heathen Temples of the Canaanites, Deuteronomy. 12.2, 3. but these were built for
Idols, and therefore might justly be accounted mere Monuments of Idolatry; but
our Meeting-places were built for Christian Churches and Assemblies to Worship
God in, amongst whom the Essentials of a Church Estate and Worship were
preserved, even under the Apostasy of Antichrist, for the Woman was fed and
nourished all the 1260 days, Rev. 12.6, 14. therefore some Fundamental
Ordinances were preserved, though both the Worship and the Places have been
much defiled with Superstition: but yet as we do not therefore reject the
Worship of God, because of those Abuses, so neither need we reject the Places,
but should reform and retain both the one and the other, the Worship and
Ordinances being necessary by virtue of Gods Institution, and the Places
needful for the performance of the Worship. And the Superstitious abuse of them
has been taken off by public Authority. For the Great Parliament has thus
declared: As no Place is capable of any Holiness, under pretense of whatsoever
Dedication or Consecration, so neither is it subject to such Pollution by any
Superstition formerly used, and now laid aside, as may render it unlawful or
inconvenient for Christians to meet together therein for the public Worship of
God; and therefore we hold it requisite, that the places of public Assembling
for Worship amongst us, should be continued, and employed to that use. Neither
indeed can they be destroyed without great and manifest hinderance and
prejudice to the public Worship of God, unless new ones be first built. And if
they that plead for it will first erect new Meeting-places, that are every way
better, and stronger, and more comely, and more capacious to contain large and
numerous Assemblies, and more conveniently situated for the accommodation of
all the people, I say, when this is done, they shall have my free consent to do
what they please with the old ones. But if they will needs demolish them before
new and better be built in their stead, the least that can be said to them in
such a case, is that their Milk b^yles over: if they have any true Zeal against
Superstition, they had need take heed lest they run out of one extreme into
another, and lest they be acted by the spirit of the Mystery of Iniquity, and
by the Subtilty and cunning Craft of Satan into gross Profaneness, upon
pretense of avoiding Superstition.

VIII. Organs and Cathedral Music.
IT is true, they had Musical Instruments in the Worship of God under the Law;
but

1. There was then a clear word of Institution for them. The Trumpets of Silver
and Cornets of Horn, were instituted by the hand of Moses, Numb. 10. in the ten
first Verses, and Levit. 23.23, 24. and in David's time there were added Cymbals
of Brass, and Harps and Psalteries of fine Wood, 1 Chronicles. 16.4, 5. and that by
Authority and direction from God, for so was the Commandment of the Lord by his
Prophets, 2 Chronicles. 29.25. and therefore they are called the Instruments of
Music of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 7.6. and we read also of Timbrels, Organs, and
Ten-stringed Instruments, Psalm. 149.3. and 150.4.

But there is not one word of Ins^itution for them under the Gospel, but on the
contrary they are cashiered and excluded out of Gospel Worship, by that general
Rule which the Apostle lays down concerning all the parts of Gods Worship, 1
Cor. 14.26. Let all things be done unto edifying; and ver. 15. I will sing with
the Spirit, and I will sing with understanding also; but the Chanters and
Ch^risters are Barbarians to all the people, for they play and sing no body
knows what, so that the understanding cannot edify by it. If I know not the
meaning of the voice, he that speaks shall be a Barbarian unto me, 1 Cor.
14.11. It is therefore a strange Comparison which some have used, who have said
they know no Argument to prove the Organs simply unlawful, but what would prove
a Cup of Wine unlawful. For we must remember, that the Question is concerning
the use of them in the Worship of God: and therefore the Answer is, That there
is a vast disparity of Reason between a Cup of Wine and Organs, for the one is
instituted, the other not. Christ has appointed and commanded us to use Bread
and Wine in his Worship in the Sacrament of the Supper, but he has not
appointed Cathedral Music.

2. I do not find in the Scripture, that these Musical Instruments were a part
of their Synagogue-worship* which was Moral, but rather of their
Temple-worship, which was Ceremonial. In their Synagogues they had the public
Moral Worship of God, Reading and Expounding the Law, etc. Acts 13.15. Some
think they had Trumpets also in their Synagogues to call the people together,
but this was a Moral use of them, for which we use the ringing of a Bell. But
the Scripture is clear, that the Musical Instruments were appointed to be used
continually before the Ark, 1 Chronicles. 16.4, 5, 6. And the Singers and Trumpeters
stood at the East end of the Altar at the dedication of the Temple, 2 Chronicles.
5.12. And in Hezekiahs time, when the burnt-offering began, the song of the
Lord began also, with the trumpets, and with the Instruments ordained by David
King of Israel, 2 Chronicles. 29.27 28. But seeing Christ is come, and has caused
the Sacrifice and the Oblation to cease, and the City and the Sanctuary being
both destroyed, as Dan. 9.26, 27. all the Worship that was affixed thereto is
ceased with it.

3. There was a typical signification in them. The Silver Trumpet signified the
sounding of the Silver Trumpet of the Gospel through all the world, the
Preaching of the pure Word of God by his Messengers, who are said to lift up
their voice as a trumpet, Isa. 58.1. Set the trumpet to thy mouth, Hos. 8.1.
The tongue of the just is as choice silver, Prove. 10.20. and both these, and
all the rest of their Musical Instruments, were expressions and signs of joy,
Psalm. 98.6. and 89 15. Blessed is ^he people that know the joyful sound. They
were therefore fit resemblances to shadow out that heavenly Music, and inward
Melody of the joys and graces of Gods Spirit in the hearts of his people. The
Apostle therefore exhorts us to sing, but in stead of Musical Instruments, he
requires the melody of the heart, Ephesians. 5.19. and grace in the heart, Coloss.
3.16.

But 4. Suppose the signification of the Jewish Music could not be found out,
(as indeed it is an hard thing to find out the meaning of all their
Ceremonies) we are delivered not only from their Types and Ceremonies, but
also from all their Yokes and Burdens. These things were a part of the
burdensome Paedagogie, which the Church was under in the time of its Nonage
and Childhood, but now the time of Gospel-freedome is come, Gal. 4.1. And
therefore Aquinas, though a Popish Schoolman, yet he rejects and pleads against
these Instruments of Music, as being then used amongst the Jews quia populus
erat magi^ durus and carnalis, for which reason also they were so much
encouraged with promises of temporal things. And this Superstition was not
brought into the Church of Rome it self in his time, who lived about 400 years
ago, and he says the reason was ne videatur Judaiz^rt, lest they should seem
to Judaize. And he does also well observe, that Musical Instruments do more
stir up the mind to delight, then frame it to a right disposition, they raise
natural, rather then true Spiritual joy: which they that commend them as an
help partly natural and partly artificial, to the exhilarating of the spirits
for the praise of God, may do well to consider. They are such an help as God
has not appointed, and what God does not appoint, he is not wont to bless. But
why should we not have Trumpets in the Worship of God as well as Organs? for
the Jews had Trumpets also. And why must we have them only in Cathedral
Churches? If Organs be too dear for every poor Parish, yet they might get
Citherus or Bagpipes. And why should there not be Dancing in the Worship of God
as well as Piping? For those old Idolaters in Exodus 32. did not only shout,
but also danced and played before their Idol. Erasmus, though in many things a
Papist, yet he saw the evil of this, that whole flocks of Boys should be
maintained at a great charge, wasting also their own precious time in
perdiscendis hujusmodi gannitibus, which Dr. Ames renders thus, in learning
this gibble gabble. And all the first Reformers condemn it with one mouth,
Zuinglius, Calvin, Peter Martyr, and others, as a part of the Legal Paedagogie;
so that we might as well recall the Incense, Tapers, Circumcision, and all the
other Shadows of the Law into use again.

IX. The Book of Common Prayer.
WHich is not, neither are you to look upon it under the Notion of a Directory,
to inform and instruct men concerning the Worship of God, for doubtless it is
as lawful to write Books of Prayer and public Worship, as of Faith, or Love,
or any other duty. But you must consider it as a Praescript Form, as a set and
stinted Liturgy devised and appointed by men, to be read as a part of the
public Worship of God, and to be kept to, both for matter and words. This is
the true state of the Case, and upon this account we look upon the Book of
Common Prayer as a Grand Idol of the Church of England, for it is a breach of
the second Commandment more ways then one.

1. The Arguments of our Divines against the Books commonly called Apocrypha,
may serve against the Book of Common Prayer, for it is an Apocryphal Book,
introduced into the public Worship of God as a standing part thereof, and
imposed by force and violence. But thus to introduce another Book, besides the
Book of God, into his Church, is a dishonor, and an affront to the Scripture.
If it be a sin for men to set their posts by his posts, their thresholds by his
thresholds, as Ezekiel. 43.8. and their Altars by his Altars, 2 Kings 16.15. is it
no sin to set their Books by his Book?

2. We do not find any Precept for it in the Scripture, nor any Promise that
God will accept it, nor any hint of Example that ever any ordinary Officers
took upon them to impose stinted Liturgies upon the Church. If ever there had
been need of such an help, surely it had been most seasonable amongst the Jews,
in those weak and childish times: but we find no such thing throughout the
Scripture. It is true, God by the hand of his extraordinary Messengers did
appoint some Forms, but neither were they tied up to them, neither will this
warrant ordinary Officers to do the like. God has forbidden his people to make
to themselves Images, or Forms, or ways of Worship, but he has not restrained
himself to set up what Images or Forms himself sees good.

3. It is fetched from Rome. King James said, it was nothing else but an
ill-said Mass in English. King Edward VI. in his Declaration ^o the Popish
Rebels in Devonshire, which is in the Book of Martyrs, ^^ith, It seems unto
you a new Service, but is indeed no other but the old, the self-same words in
English that were in Latin, saving a few things taken out, which were so fond
that it had been a shame to have heard them in English. If the Service of the
Church was good in Latin, it remains good in English, for nothing is
altered, but to speak with knowledge what was spoken with ignorance, and to let
you understand what is said for you. It was all taken out of the Mass Book, if
we understand the word Mass Book in a large sense, as it is commonly taken: but
to speak more narrowly, it was Collected out of three Popish Books. The first
part of public Prayers, Ex Breviario. The second part, viz. the Order of
administering Sacraments, Matrimony, Visiting the Sick, and Burials, e Rituali.
3. The Order of Consecration in the Supper, the Epistles, and Gospels, and
Collects, e Missali, as the Form of Consecration of Bishops and Priests, was
taken e Pontificali, as you may see more at large in Didoclavius, and in Mr.
Shepard. Who also shows, that as the Common Prayer was taken out of the Mass,
so the principal parts of the Mass were borrowed from the Idolatrous Pagans,
and had their Original from Numa Pompilius, that Conjurer, who lived 700 years
before Christ, to adorn and deck, as the Bishops of Rome thought, the Religion
of Christ Jesus, to the which, when thus corrupted with Paganish and Popish
mixtures, the Romans were with much ado at last Converted, who till then were
obstinate in their old Heathenish Religion. Insomuch that when Theodosius sent
to the Senate to renounce their Pagan Religion, and receive the Law of Christ,
they returned Answer that they would not, but would observe the Ancient Law
Pompilian to avoid the ruin of the Commonwealth, which they feared would come
by the Change of Religion. And to those principal parts of the Mass taken from
the Pagans, viz. Vestments, Holy Water, the Confiteor, Organs, Incense,
Offertory, etc. other deckings were also added, as diverse Letanies, and the
Kurie-eleeson, Lord have mercy upon us, to be sung nine times, invented by
Gregory a Monk at first, well studied in the Laws of Numa, and Tullus
Hostilius. Damasus, as Platina and Sabellius show, enriched it with Gloria
Patri; Sergius, with an Agnus Dei, to be sung three times. Alexander and other
Bishops added the Canon of the Mass, others the Epistles and Gospels. The
Gradual, and Collects were added by Gelasius, Anno 493. the Gloria in Excelsis,
by Symmachus, 508. At last came the Host in, about ^062. Thus Mr. Shepard
concerning the Original of the Mass and Common Prayer. Yea, such a Popish piece
is this Book of Common Prayer, that as some of the Bishops have reported, Pope
Paul IV. did offer Queen Elizabeth to confirm and ratify it by his Authority,
Vt sacra hic omnia, hoc ipso quo ^unc sunt apud nos modo procurari fas esset.
And in King Henry VIII. his time, Cardinal Quignonius, at the request of Pope
Clement VII. made the Popish Missall liker the English for a great part, then
it was to the Roman Brevia^y.

But let all true Protestants judge, whether it be fit for us to fetch our
Worship from that Mother of Harlots, the Church of Rome, and to go to the Pope
to indite our Prayers; as if the Pope could tell how to pr^y better then the
people of God, who have his Spirit dwelling in them. Some indeed have said, it
is no matter whence it comes; but when Whitgift said so concerning Deans,
Canons, Prebendaries, etc. that it is not material though they come from the
Pope, Mr. Cartwright replies, It is as if he should say, It skills not though
they come out of the bottomless Pit: for whatsoever comes from the Pope, which
is Antichrist, comes first from the Devil. The second Commandment forbids
taking up Ways and Forms of Worship from Idolaters, and it must needs be a
great encouragement and hardening to the Papists, that their Mass is the
Foundation of our Worship.

4. It undermines that great Ordinance of the Ministry, the principal duties of
which Office are Preaching and Prayer, Acts 6.4. in the one whereof they are
the mouth of God to the people, in the other they are the mouth of the people
unto God. But if we prescribe to one another set Forms of Prayer, why not by
the same reason set Forms of Homilies? and then, as Mr. Cotton observes,
neither the Apostles nor their Successors needed to have left off the Deacons
employment, to attend upon the Ministry of the Word and Prayer, for both are
prepared to their hands by the Prescriptions of others. Hence also Ministers
shall little need to edify the Church by their own gifts received of Christ to
that end, but may edify them by the gifts of others. Yea Ministers, though
destitute of Ministerial gifts, yet may be fit for the public discharge of
their duties by the help of other men's gifts, both in Prayer and Preaching. And
so indeed a Prescript Liturgy is properly a maintenance for an Idol dumb
Ministry. What difference is there between the carrying of the Ark upon a Cart,
and our Prayers upon a Book? whereas both should be carried, the one upon the
shoulders of the Levites, the other upon the gifts of the Ministers.

5. It is a grievous sin against the Spirit of Prayer. It was set up at first
in opposition to the Latin Worship of the Mass, and so indeed it was a good
step of Reformation, to get the Worship of God into a known Tongue: but now it
is set up, and pleaded for in opposition to the Spirit of Prayer, and therefore
it deserves now to be called by no better name but Nehushtan, an ill said Mass.
Some conceive the first Reformers are not to be looked upon altogether as
ordinary Ministers, as being stirred up and acted by a more then ordinary
Spirit in the Work of Reformation, and doing some things somewhat out of
ordinary course, whereof this has been not unfitly reckoned to be one, the
making Formula's of Divine Service, which might better be done in those dark
and dismal times, when there was scarce one to be found for every County, that
was able to Pray and Preach without a Book* for so it was in the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth's time.

But now God has poured out his Spirit upon all flesh, so that private
Christians are able to pray to the public edification of a whole Church: and
therefore suppose it were lawful to use such a Crutch for those that could not
pray without it, yet it is unreasonable and absurd to force a man to go with
Crutches when he is not lame. It is a vain and needless thing, to tie Bladders
under the wings of Sea-fowls to keep them from sinking, or to help them to
swim. Tertullian says, the Christians in the Primitive times were wont to pray
sine monitore, quia de pectore, without a prompter, because they prayed from
the heart; which Mr. Shepard observes is spoken in opposition to the prompted
Forms then in use amongst the Pagans. It is but an heartless way of praying, to
say a Prayer out of a Book. The Apostle says, We know not what to pray for as
we ought, but the Spirit helps our infirmities, Romans 8.26. It is the Spirits
office to intercede in us, as Christ intercedes for us. But what great need is
there of the Spirit, to read a Prayer out of a Book? Other use therefore of
the Common Prayer at this day I know not, then the quenching of the Spirit, and
putting him as it were out of office, or at least limiting and stinting the
Spirit, what and how many words he must manifest himself by, without
alteration, addition, or diminution, and the furnishing of dumb Ministers with
the Instrument of a foolish Shepherd, without which they would be dumb indeed,
and unable to say any thing. To which may be also added, the arming of
Persecutors with a bloody Weapon and Instrument of Violence, whereby to oppress
the Consciences of Gods faithful Ministers and people, which some Episcopal
men, who have been more ingenuous then the rest of their fellows, have been so
convinced of, that they have confessed it. Dr. Maynwaring Chancellor of
Chester, upon a Debate with Mr. Ley about the Service Book, he confessed at
last, and said, We shall never have Peace and true Charity in the Church,
until it be taken away.

6. It would fill a Volume to enumerate and reckon up all the Corruptions of
the matter of it. The false Doctrine, That it is certain by Gods Word, that
Children that be Baptized are undoubtedly saved. The intolerable dishonor done
to the Scripture, setting up Hagar equal with her Mistress, by appointing
Apocrypha, to the number of 104 Chapters, yea the very Tales in Tobit, to be
read in the public Worship of God, but a great part of Canonical Scripture
quite omitted, and left out of the Calendar. The Superstitious Observations of
Holy Days, the Sign of the Cross, Churching of Women, Those absurd broken
responds, and shreds of Prayer, whereby they toss their Prayers, like
Tennis-balls, between the Priest and People, Tautologies, O Lord deliver us,
eight times; We beseech thee to hear us good Lord, twenty times. Complementing
with God in their Prayers, We beseech thee give us those things which for our
unworthiness we dare not presume to ask; a most weak and legal passage, as if a
Believer that prays in Christ's Name, might not freely ask of God any thing he
needs, yea the greatest things, the Spirit, and the Glory to come. Yea, there
is Nonsense in it, as when they call the Lessons out of Isaiah, Joel, and the
Prophets, Epistles. And when that Collect, where they say, Thou have sent thy
Son to be born as on this day, is appointed to be said six days together one
after another, as if Christ were born six times over. Yea, it appoints a most
corrupt, and false Translation of the Scripture to be read, and which in some
places no reasonable sense can be made of; as when they read thus in Psalm.
58.4. Or ever your pots be made hot with thorns, so let indignation vex them,
as a thing that is raw: and in many other places.

7. Neither is the Parish Book of Common Prayer established by Law. For the Law
of Eliz. 1. restores and re-establisheth the Book used in King Edw. time, and
no other or otherwise, excepting only one or two Alterations there specified.
But the Parish Book is not the same with King Edwards, but differs greatly from
it: for there was a Prayer in that against the Bishop of Rome, with all his
detestable Enormities, which is omitted in the Parish Book. And there be twenty
six Lessons of Canonical Scripture in King Edwards Calendar, which are
profanely and sacrilegiously expunged, and blotted out of the Parish Book.

USE. Let it be a word of Exhortation to the Bishops, and to the Episcopal
Party, not to revive the Superstitions and Idolatries of former times, or at
least not to impose them. For you see what the Text says, the Lord will have
them to be rooted out: and therefore he will be angry with you, if you practice
them, but his wrath will burn like fire, if you impose them. I might here speak
many things, to show the unreasonableness of such Impositions; for I do not now
speak merely against the things themselves, but against that violent, that
bloody, that imposing Spirit, the Spirit of Persecution. I think it were easy
to offer such Considerations to you concerning it, as might not only convince
your Consciences, but also move and melt your bowels. Make it your own case. If
your Consciences were against such things, you would be loath to be imposed
upon. You may fight for them with the Sword of the Spirit, and maintain them by
the Word of God, if you can, but take heed of flying to Carnal Weapons, to
oppress those Truths of Christ, which by dint of Spiritual Reason you cannot
subdue. If any of these men be present before the Lord this day, suppose you
had been compelled in former times to turn Independents, or to let your
Children die unbaptized, or to do it without the Sign of the Cross, I suppose
you would have filled Heaven and Earth with your cries. And give me leave to
tell you, that if you will be persecuting, the people of God will cry, and
never cease crying in the ears of the Lord against you, till he has brought
upon you the Judgment written. Consider therefore how you would be dealt with,
if it were your own case, and remember how you have been dealt with. I have
been in Ireland these five years, and I do not know any Episcopal man, if of a
good life and Conversation, that has been deprived of the Liberty of his
Ministry, but they have been tolerated and suffered as well as others to Preach
the Gospel, which is all that I desire this day: and will the men of that
Persuasion be so disingenuous, as to requite evil for good? will you he worse
then the Scribes and Pharisees? who though they had not the grace to forgive
their enemies, yet they had so much good nature as to love their friends: will
you give us cause to say, that there is not so much as common Ingenuity to be
found amongst you?

If you will be content with your own Liberty, and suffer your Neighbors that
differ from you, to live peaceably and quietly with you, you may go to Gilgal,
and pass over to Beth-aven, make haste toward Rome, be as Idolatrous and
Superstitious as you please, I know no Minister, nor private Christian, that
will hinder you, or give any the least impediment or obstruction to you,
further then this, that we will fight against you with the Sword of the Spirit,
which is the Word of God; but for any external impediment, we leave that to the
Magistrate to whom it belongs, to remove the high places, and break the Images,
and cut down the Groves. But if you will not be content to sin alone, but will
needs persecute and compel us to sin and perish with you, you will engage the
Prayers of all the people of God against you as one man. When you have stopped
our mouths from Preaching, yet we shall Pray, and not only we, but all the
Souls that have been converted, or comforted and edified by our Ministry, of
whom you know there be, through the grace of Christ, many in this City and
Nation, they will all cry to the Lord against you for want of Bread, because
you deprive them of those that should break the bread of life to them. And how
dreadful this will be unto you, I think I need not tell you. For when Saints
pray, God will hear, especially if they unite their forces, and join together
in the same requests. I had rather be environed with Armies of armed men, and
compassed round about with drawn Swords, and Instruments of death, then that
the least praying Saint should bend the edge of his Prayers against me, for
there is no standing before the Prayers of the Saints. You may see throughout
the whole Scripture, and especially in the Book of the Revelation, what a
powerful influence they have into all the Revolutions of Providence: before the
opening of the Seven Seals, we read of golden Vials full of odours, which are
the Prayers of the Saints, Rev. 5.8. and before the sounding of the Seven
Trumpets, that great and dreadful dispensation of Providence, consisting of
four lesser Woes, which made way for the three great Woes; for the Pope, who
appears openly under the fifth Trumpet, and for the Turk, who breaks loose in
the sixth, and for the final destruction of all Enemies, by the seventh
Trumpet. The introduction to all these astonishing Judgments was this, Christ
appears as the Angel of the Covenant, with a golden Censer in his hand, and
with much Incense of his own merits and mediation, and offers it up with the
prayers of all Saints, upon the golden Altar which was before the Throne; and
the smoke of the Incense, with the prayers of the Saints, ascended up before
God out of the Angels hand, and after this there followed Thunderings and
Lightnings, and dreadful dispensations, Rev. 8.3, 4. Lastly, before the pouring
out of the seven Vials, which is thought by many to be the dispensation that
these Times are under, the Saints are brought in praying and praising God, Rev.
15. and the seven Angels, the Instruments of Christ in the execution of these
Plagues, are said to come out of the Temple, that is, out of Reformed Churches,
ver. 6. and one of the four living Creatures, which some of the best
Interpreters understand to be Church Officers, and Ministers of the Gospel,
gave unto the seven Angels, seven golden Vials full of the wrath of God, who
lives for ever and ever, ver. 7. It is their Faith and Prayers, and the light
of Christ in their Ministry, that sets all the wheels a-going for the ruin of
Enemies, for God puts all the Prayers and ^ears of his Saints into his bottle,
Psalm. 56.8. and pours them down again in Plagues, and in streams of fire, and
blood, and brimstone, upon a malignant wicked world. If it be so dangerous to
offend the least Saint, that Christ himself professes, it were better for that
man that a millstone were tied about his neck, and to be thrown with it into the
bottom of the sea, then to offend one of these little ones, how dreadful will
it then be to offend and grieve the Spirit of God in the hearts of all his
people, and so to rowze that Lion, the Spirit of Prayer against you. For I
testify unto you, that as the Saints will pray, so the Lord himself will fight
against you, and take you into his own revenging hand. I speak it
conditionally, in case you persecute, and I wish all the Bishops in Ireland
heard me; for in the Name, and in the love of Christ I speak it to you, and I
beseech you so to take it. I say, if once you fall to the old trade of
Persecution, the Lord Jesus will never bear it at your hands, but he will bring
upon you swift destruction. And your second Fall will be worse then the first:
for, 1 Samuel 5.3, 4.
Dagon the first time did only fall before the Ark of God. But when the men of
Ashdod had set him up in his place again the second time, then he brake himself
all to pieces by his second fall, insomuch that there was nothing but the stump
of Dagon left. Persecution is a very ripening sin, and therefore if once you
super-adde the sin of Persecution to the sin of Superstition, you will be
quickly ripe for final ruin, and for the vengeance of eternal fire. And in the
day when God shall visit you, the guilt of all the righteous blood that has
been shed upon the face of the earth, from the blood of Abel, to the blood of
Mr. Vdall was a godly Non-Conformable Minister, who was cast into Prison by the
Bishops, and at last died there, by means of their cruelty toward him.
Vdall, and unto this day, it will come down the hill upon your heads, even
upon the Persecutors of this generation. The Lord Jesus, when the day of
Vengeance is in his heart, and when the year of his Redeemed is come, which is
not far off, he will then require all that blood, and revenge it all upon your
heads, if you justify the ways of former Persecutors, by walking in the same
steps of Blood and Violence.

FINIS.

