GODS' CALL TO His People To Turn unto Him; Together with His PROMISE to Turn
unto them.

Opened and Applied in II. SERMONS At two Public Fasting-dayes appointed by
Authority.

By Mr. John Davenport B. D. and Pastor to the First Church of Christ at Boston
in New England.

Published at the desire of sundry Friends.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by S. C. and M. J. for John Usher of Boston. MDCLXIX.

GODS CALL TO HIS PEOPLE To turn unto Him; Together with His Promise to turn
unto them.
ZECH. 1.3. Therefore say unto them, Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Turn ye unto
me, says the Lord of Hosts, and I will turn unto you, says the Lord of Hosts.


THe time when this Prophecy was given forth by Zechariah at the commandment
of God, you may see in the first Verse of this Chapter; it was in the eighth
Month, in the second year of Darius. In the time of the reign of Ahasuerus and
Artaxerxes, the work of building the Temple was hindered, until the second year
of Darius King of Persia, Ezra 4.24. But Darius, in the beginning of his reign,
finding in the Records Cyrus his Decree for the building of the Temple at
Jerusalem, strictly commanded that Work should proceed, and that none should
hinder the Jews therein; and that their Enemies should assist them, and give
them all necessary expenses out of the Kings Tribute beyond the River, etc.
under a dreadful penalty, as may be seen in the sixth Chapter of Ezra. The
event was, that the Elders of the Jews builded, and prospered therein through
the prophesyings of the Prophets Haggai and Zechariah, Ezra 6.14. and the Work
was finished in the sixth year of Darius, Ver. 15.

The unbelieving Jews in Christ's time said, Forty and six years was this
Temple in building, and will thou rear it in three days? Joh. 2.20. For
Artaxerxes, surnamed Long-hand, reigned forty, or one and forty years; in the
beginning of his reign the Work ceased, by his Decree against it, till the
second year of Darius, who succeeded him, and it was finished in the sixth year
of his reign. Christ spoke of the Temple of his Body, Joh. 2.21. and therefore
their discourse of the material Temple at Jerusalem, was impertinent. Yet from
the History of those times, two things may be noted:

1. That God sometimes suffers the Enemies of true Religion to prevail, for the
hinderance of the building of Gods House for a long time.

2. That in such Times God discovers in his own people a sinful remisness to
neglect the public service of God, and to be too intent upon their own private
concernments, and to satisfy themselves with such a pretense as this, We
cannot help it, the Adversaries are many and potent, and the King of Persia is
against the Work; therefore we will leave the public work till better times,
and will mind our own houses and domestical affairs. But God was displeased
with them, and showed it by smiting them in their private advantages by the
Fruits of the Earth, for their disregard of his public Worship, as the Lord
told them by Haggai, Hagg. 1.4 -- 12. and in two months after he sent
Zechariah to encourage them to go on strenuously in the work of the Lord, that
had been so long neglected by their fault.

In the second Verse of this Chapter he told them that God had been sore
disppleased with their fathers; and in the 4, 5, and 6th Verses, he tells them
for what God was displeased with their fathers; and from thence infers the
Exhortation in my Text, as the illative particle ( Therefore) shows.

In the words we may note,

1. The Command of God to this Prophet, Say unto them.

2. The Message which he must deliver to them, consisting for the Matter of it,
of three parts: 1. A Precept, Turn unto me. 2. A Promise, And I will turn unto
you. 3. A Ratification, or Confirmation of both, yet applied to each severally,
Says the Lord of Hosts. For Exposition of the words.

Turn unto me] Renounce all Idols and men's Devices in my Worship; acknowledge
me alone to be your God, and my Word to be your only Rule, with unfeigned
Repentance for your former departures from me, and disobedience to my Word; be
my people, and observe my Commandments: for, to cry to God for Corn, etc. is
not a turning to God, but to the Creature, Hos. 7.14. but it is to seek God for
himself, when nothing will satisfy us besides God himself to be our God, Psalm.
144.15. and when we mourn, not so much for the loss, or want of these things,
as for Gods displeasure for our sins that have incensed his wrath, and so seek
Gods face, and reconciliation with him in Christ, Psalm. 4.6, 7. God does not
require this of them, as if it were in their power to do it, but to convince
them that it is their duty, whereunto he would excite them by the Ministry of
his Prophet, and would quicken and enable them by the efficacy of his Spirit
accompanying the same.

And I will turn unto you] Gods turning to us is not like our turning to God:
for, our turning to God supposes a change in us, but Gods turning to us is
without shadow of turning, Jam. 1.17. both in his Nature, Mal. 3.6. and in his
Will, Isa. 46.10. but it is to be understood in respect of his Effects; that is
to say, I will be reconciled to you, and show it by suitable effects, as Micah
7.19. He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us.

Says the Lord of Hosts] This Attribute shows his Absolute dominion over all
Creatures in Heaven and Earth, whom he can dispose of by his command, to
execute his vengeance upon those that disobey him: in this sense it is added to
the Precept. And to be Instruments of dispensing the effects of his favor to
those that turn unto him, and obey him; in this sense it is added to the
Promise: In both it is suited with their condition, who had experience of the
former, and upon their returning to him should find him ready to use his Hosts
for their good.

First, from the Message which God commands the Prophet to deliver to them, as
the Means whereby God would bring the Jews to turn unto himself, that it might
be well with them, the Ministry of his Prophets, Haggai and Zechariah, note:
Doct. I. Gods usual way which he will bless for the converting or turning of
elect sinners to himself, is by sending his Ministers with a Message from
himself to them, in their Preaching Gods Word unto them.

From these words, Say thou unto them, Thus says the Lord of Hosts. I grant,
God is able, by his Absolute Power, to convert whom he will, and by what means
he will; and that God has in extraordinary times and cases converted some to
himself without these means: thus he wrought says in Rahab, Heb. 11.31. yet
ordinarily he will do it only by these means, where they may be had. This may
be cleared from Scripture in a twofold Conversion* 1. From the state of sin to
the state of grace, Acts 26.18. 2. From evil in their practice, so David: this
holds in all the degrees of Conversion to God. 1. Hereby he is wont to convince
men effectually of sin, Joh. 16.9. and to a saving sense of it, and remorse for
it. See this in David, to whom he sent Nathan, 2 Samuel 12. and afterward Gad,
in 2 Samuel 24.10. his heart smote him; how came that to pass? see Ver. 11, 12,
13. And, though it is said of Manasseh, 2 Chronicles. 33.12, 13. that when he was in
affliction he besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before the
God of his father, and prayed unto him, and he was entreated of him; yet the
affliction of it self did not turn him to God, but the principal means of his
repentance, and turning to God, were the words of the Se^^ that spoke to him in
the name of the Lord God of Israel, as it appears in Ver. 18. So Peter's
Ministry, in Acts 2.37. Hence the Word of God is likened to fire, and to a
hammer, Jer. 23.29. in its efficacy. 2. Hereby God is wont to bring men to
Christ, and to work faith in their hearts, unto their reconciliation with God
by him, Romans 10.14, 15. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. The Ministry is committed to men, but
the Efficacy is from Gods Spirit, Isa. 57.19. Joh. 6.44, 45. Ephesians. 1.13.

Reas. 1. Because the Lord will thus honor his own Ordinance. He could have
converted the Eunuch immediately by his Spirit, yet he sent Philip to him, Acts
8.29. Yea, when himself has begun the work, yet he has sent Ministers to
them, that the work might be effected by them; as Ananias to Paul, Acts 9.11.
Peter to Cornelius, Acts 10. and he ascribes to them as his Instruments, that
which is his own work, 1 Timothy 4.16.

Reas. 2. Because the Lord will thus honor the freeness and power of his
grace, in working more effectually by weaker means. The whole Scripture is
breathed of God, and therefore infallible, and stamped with Gods own Authority
in every sentence of it, 2 Timothy 3.16. and the Preaching of man is weaker in it
self, and more liable to be slighted by proud men, Jer. 43.2. yet God puts
forth his efficacy more in the Word preached, then in the Word read, 1 Cor.
1.21. for his strength is made perfect in weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9. and therefore
the Apostle notes this as Gods end in this dispensation, 2 Cor. 4.7.

Reas. 3. Because thus the Lord will make known the efficacy of his Spirit in
and with the Word preached, that the glory of turning elect sinners to himself,
may be ascribed wholly to himself: hence the Ministry of the Word is called the
ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8. because the Spirit accompanies that
Ordinance; therefore they that disobeyed the word spoken by the former
Prophets, are said to harden themselves against the words which the Lord of
Hosts sent in his Spirit by them; therefore there came a great wrath from the
Lord of Hosts, Zech. 7.12. So Steven's hearers are said to resist the holy
Ghost, Act. 7.51. Hence the Apostle ascribes the conversion of men by the
Ministry of the Gospel, only to God, Gal. 2.8. Romans 1.16. 1 Cor 3.5, 6, 7. 2
Cor. 10.4, 5. and the Heathen man converted confessed it, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. nor
can it be (...) to any less power, if we consider the quality of the (...) that
have been converted by it: Isa. 11.4, 6. Wolves, (...) Lions: Mat. 21.31.
Publicans and Harlots: Acts 6.7. Scoffers, ver. 37. open and professed enemies,
Joh. 7.32, 46.

Use 1. for Instruction: 1. That it is no easy thing for sinners to turn unto
God. 1. You see great and long-continued afflictions, of themselves, cannot
convert men: so the Text. The building of the Temple had been hindered above
forty years, which they should have been affected with, as an effect of Gods
displeasure for some sins yet remaining among them, and they should have been
provoked thereby to turn unto God: but on the contrary, they turned their
thoughts to mind the building of their own houses. Then the Lord was further
displeased, and afflicted them with scarcity of food, by Drought and Dearth;
yet they were dedolent and stupid, till the Lord sent the Prophet Haggai, to
call them to consider their ways, and to show them for what cause this
Judgment was upon them, and to stir them up to remove the Cause, that the
Effect might cease. 2. The multitude and variety of afflictions one following
another successively, cannot of themselves turn sinners to God, Prove. 27.22.
This we may see in Pharaoh, who though under the stroke of punishment he
sometimes confessed his sin, and promised amendment, yet after ten plagues,
remained as hard-hearted as at first: And in Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28.22. and in the
people of Israel, Amos 4.6 -- 12. 3. Nor can outward Mercies of themselves work
this, Isa. 26.10. 4. Nor can awakings of Conscience by the shameful and
dreadful Effects of sin, of themselves work this. This made Adam fly to hide
himself, when he heard Gods voice walking in the garden, Genes. 3.15. Nor can
the outward Ministry of the Gospel, though accompanied with Miracles, of
themselves work this: this we see in Christ's hearers, Mat. 11.20, to 25. unless
the Spirit by his divine Efficacy turn men to God, it cannot be done. See Deuteronomy.
29.2, 3, 4.

2. See from whence this comes: 1. From the many Advantages and Helps that sin
has to keep its possession and dominion in men's hearts, as, 1. The rooted
Enmity against God in the Nature of man, Coloss. 1.21. and Custom adds
strength thereto, Jer. 13.23. and hereunto the course of the world, and the
working of Satan, Ephesians. 2.2, 3. and to these Gods desertion, Psalm. 81.11, 12*
but above all, the love of sin in the members, which works against the law of
the mind, and captivates even those that have a principle of grace in them.
Paul complained of this, in Romans 7.23. I see another law in my members, warring
against the law of my mind, etc. A Law there signifies, a strong compelling
inclination, which forces to its obedience, as it were by authority, 2 Pet.
2.14. 2. It is called the law of the members, because it inclines not by
reason, but by natural force, as the members of the body are moved and acted
by the will. 3. It is said to war against the law of the mind, to show that
there is a strong faction of lusts against grace: the members are many, so are
these lusts, which constrain to evil, and restrain from good.

2. Learn therefore to proportion your endeavors to the difficulty of the
work. It is an evident proof that they are yet unconverted, who think its an
easy thing to turn unto God, Matthew. 11.12. What then is to be done? 1. In
sense of your own inability, cry mightily unto God day and night, and leave not
praying for it till the thing be attained, Jer. 31.18. Lam. 5.24. Ephraim and
the ten Tribes finding that Afflictions could not do it, pray to God to turn
them: And the two Tribes found that their Captivity in Babylon, of it self,
could not do it, therefore they cry unto God that he would do it. 2. Complain
unto God of the Impediments of it in your selves, and pray him to remove them,
Isa. 63.17. 3. Look unto Christ for efficacy to be put forth upon you, in and
by the Ministry of the Gospel. Though the Disciples could not cast out the
Devil out of the Child, yet Christ could and did: therefore the father of him
took a right course, when he brought his son that was possessed with a Devil
unto Christ, Mark 9.17, to 30. When lusts are too strong for a man, Christ
comes as a Prince and overcomes them, Acts 5.31. Do not rest in your own
resolutions, but go to God in Christ for strength, Ephesians. 3.16, 20. where the
mighty power that works in us, is the power of Christ's Death and Resurrection:
Believe in him, and thou shall overcome. 4. Improve all the ways which God
uses for this end, that the purpose of God in them may be effected; to wit,
(1.) Attend his Word* in Precepts, Promises, Threatenings, and the impressions
of them in thy heart at any time. (2.) His Providence, in some great cross
upon the commission of a sin; some dangerous sickness, though not unto death;
some inward terrors of Conscience upon sin committed; some evil report, or
some judgment executed in our sight upon another, for like sin to yours, Dan.
5.22. Jer. 3.8.

Use 2. For Reproof of two sorts of people: 1. Of such as for worldly
Accommodation, live in places where they have not the Word powerfully preached
to them. Remember Lot. 2. Of such as live under such means, but are
unprofitable and disobedient hearers. Two things I have to say unto such.

1. No course that God ordinarily takes with men will cause you to turn unto
God, if this does not, Luke 16.31. therefore do not look at this (That you are
not the better toward God after you have lived long under the Ministry of the
Word) as a small evil; for it is great in Gods account, Heb. 6.8. If you be not
the better, you are the worser by it, 2 Cor. 2.16.

2. Marvel not if God frustrate your Expectations in the fruits of the Earth,
when you frustrate his in the fruits of the Word, Isa. 5.2. Luke 13.6, 7. for
God has threatened this punishment against those that disobey his Word, Lev.
26.14, 21, 23, 27. and a worse famine then that of Bread, even of the Word, in
Amos 8.11, 12.

Secondly, From the Message it self: Hence sundry Doctrines may be observed.

1. From Gods suspending of his promise of turning to sinners, till their
turning to him; That it is in vain for any to expect Gods turning to them, that
do not turn to him.

2. From the Connection of the Promise with the Precept; That Gods readiness to
turn to those that turn to him, should mightily prevail with sinners to turn to
him.

3. From Gods promising to turn to them that turn to him; That Gods being
reconciled to sinners, will infallibly follow their turning to him.

4. From Gods Attribute, The Lord of Hosts, added to confirm both the Precept
and Promise; That if sinners break through all impediments to turn to God, as
the Lord of Hosts, God will break through all difficulties to do them good, as
the Lord of Hosts.

From Gods suspending his promise of turning to men, till they turn unto him,
and implicitly threatening to arm all his Creatures against them for their
hurt, if they do not turn to him; This Point of Doctrine may be gathered: Doct.
II. That it is in vain for any sinful persons to expect Gods turning to them
in mercy and favor, who do not turn unto him with true repentance and
reformation; but while they continue in their sins, they must expect that God
will come forth against them, as the Lord of Hosts, commanding and ordering all
his Creatures against them for their hurt.

There are two parts of this Doctrine: 1. That it is in vain for any that
continue in their sins, to expect any mercy or favor from God. 2. That such
ought to expect, that Gods wrath incensed against them by their sins and
impenitency, may be executed against them by all and any of his Creatures, as
he is the Lord of Hosts.


In the handling of this Doctrine, I must first show what this Turning to the
Lord implies and imports. Secondly, prove the Doctrine, in both the parts of it
severally.

First, Turning to the Lord, implies, 1. That by sin continued in, men turn
from the Lord, and against the Lord: as when men turn from one another in
enmity, they turn their backs one to another, and their faces to opposite
objects; so it is in this case, continuers in sin turn from God and his Word,
to Sin, and the World, and Satan, which are opposite to God in his holy and
righteous Laws; and God turns his face and favor from them, and his wrath and
indignation against them. Hence it is that the Lord says of those that disobey
the instructions of his word, that they have turned the back to him, and not
the face, Jerem. 3^. 33. and accordingly he threatens them, that he will show
them his back, and not his face, in the day of their calamity. Thus you see
what this turning to the Lord implies.

Secondly, This turning to the Lord imports two things; Repentance for, and
from all their evil ways; and Reformation of them: A hearty turning to God,
through faith in Christ, and unfeigned love to God in Christ, with an universal
conformity to his holy and righteous Rules and ways; as they resolved in Isa.
26.13. It is true, that we cannot turn unto God of our selves, till he turn us
unto himself, as you may see in Deuteronomy. 29.2, 3, 4. yet, when God calls the
vessels of mercy to turn unto him, and adds his Promise for their
encouragement thereunto, his Spirit in and by the promise, works converting
grace in them: which works in them 1. Hearty prayer unto God to convert them,
as Isai. 63.17. Jerem. 31.18. Lam. 5.31. 2. Actual Conversion to God, in answer
to Gods calling them thereunto, Psalm. 27.8. as in Jer. 31.22. This turning to
God is right,

1. When it arises from right motives. The right motives of turning to God,
are not Temporal, only for removing of some temporal Affliction, whether felt
or feared; or for obtaining some temporal good, which we want and desire: for
such a turning is not to the Lord, but to our selves, as you may see in Hos.
7.16. with Zech. 7.5. But the right motives of turning to God are Eternal, viz.
A serious and fixed apprehension of Eternal life and death, in relation to God,
and his everlasting favor and wrath, in the incomprehensible greatness and
vastness of them: when these are not transient and vanishing, but fixed in the
heart by the Spirit, and when they are looked at, not as far off, but as
present; Then they work an effectual and present conversion to God. Therefore
Christ taught his Disciples to use this motive in preaching the Gospel, for the
conversion of sinners to God, Mark 16.16. and Christ himself used the same
motive, Joh. 3.18, 36. and the reason is, because then a man sees better and
stronger reasons for his turning to God, then the world can give for his
continuing in sin, 2 Cor. 4.18. from love to God, Psalm. 97.10. Ye that love the
Lord, hate evil.

2. When it is done in a right manner, with the whole heart, Joel 2.12. that is,
when a full resolution of turning to God, follows a full illumination and
conviction; otherwise, when men have some motives to turn, but not enough, they
are not fully convinced, and so they turn but by halves, and feignedly, Jer.
3.10. Hence a right turning to God, is described as the Effect opening men's
eyes, Acts 26.18. wherein is included the opening of their hearts, as in Acts
16.14. Lydia.

3. When it produces suitable effects: 1. That sin, which had dominion in them,
is dispossessed, and grace is made Master of the house; so as though sin gets
in and dwells in them, yet it is by intrusion and usurpation, as a Thief or
Enemy, which are expelled as soon as they are discovered, and sufficient
strength is gained. 2. That sin is hated; as the Lord commanded Israel to do
against Amalek, 1 Samuel 15.3. this appears,

1. By their thrusting out the motions and lusts of sin out of their hearts
with indignation, Isa. 30.22. and shutting the doors of the Soul, the Eyes and
Ears, against temptations to it. They say in effect, as Ephraim did, in Hos.
14.8. What have I to do any more with Idols? Thus Amnon dealt with Tamar, 1 Samuel 13.15, 17.

2. By their seeking the utter destruction and full mortification of sin: for,
hatred is implacable against the whole kind, as we see in a Wolf against all
Sheep; nothing will satisfy but the death of its object, as the Lord commanded
Israel to do against Amalek, 1 Samuel 15.3.

3. By a continual fight against sin, till it be fully subdued. Gal. 5.17. The
flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh. 1 Pet.
2.11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from
fleshly lusts, which war against the soul. Hence they will account them their
best friends that help them against sin, their worst enemy.

Two Reasons of the first part of the Doctrine; That it is in vain for sinful
persons to expect that God should turn to them in mercy and favor, who do not
turn to him with true repentance and reformation.

Reas. 1. Because continuers in sin do frustrate Gods end and expectation, both
in all that he does for men, and in all that he requires to be done by them.

For the first; The Church is Gods Husbandry, 1 Cor. 3.9. Ministers are the
dressers of his Vineyard, Luke 13.7. the Ordinances are his manuring of it: and
is not good fruit the end of Husbandry? Therefore where this follows not, what
can be expected? but, as Isa. 5.5, 6, 7. God should take away the hedge
thereof, break down the wall thereof, and lay it waste: and, as Luke 13.6, 7.
in the Parable of the Figtree, when the dresser of the Vineyard came three
years seeking fruit, and found none, Cut it down, why cumbers it the ground?
Christ comes in Ordinances, and Providence; To what end? To purify the sons
of Levi, and to purge them: but when the Means attain not this End, see what
follows, Jer. 6.30. Reprobate silver shall men call them.

So for the second, what God requires to be done by his people; He requires
Reading, Hearing, Meditating, Praying, Conference, etc. but God regards not
these performances, except the doers of them turn unto him; if they prevail not
to turn men to the Lord, they are but bodily exercises, that profit little, 1 Timothy 4.8. In Romans 2.29. Paul distinguishes outward Circumcision, and a Jew
outwardly, from that which is inward, and concludes, that the latter has
praise of God, not the former, whose praise is only of men, who see only that
which is outward; but God searches the heart, if that he turn not unto him,
the rest he regards not.

Reas. 2. Because God rejects all other grounds, whereupon men expect that
God should turn unto them his face and favor in the time of their Affliction,
if this their turning unto God be wanting; viz.

1. Sinful Childrens relation to godly Parents: Matthew. 3.9. Think not to say
within your selves, We have Abraham to our father: John 8.39, to 45. Jesus
says unto them, If ye were Abraham's children, you would do the works of
Abraham.

2. Grown persons, (1) Professing Religion, Psalm. 78.34, to 38. (2) Covenanting
with the Lord and his People, Psalm. 50.16, 17. Hos. 8.1, 2, 3. He shall come as
an Eagle against the House of the Lord, because they have transgressed my
Covenant, etc.

3. Church Priviledges, Jer. 7.4. Trust not in lying words, saying, The Temple
of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these. What is
become of the Church of the Jews, and of those seven Golden Candlesticks, and
of the Church at Rome?

4. Performance of Religious Duties: Isa. 1.11 -- 15. To what purpose is the
multitude of your Sacrifices unto me, says the Lord? etc.

5. Extraordinary Humiliations: Isa. 58.3, 4, 5, 6. Is not this the fast that I
have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness? etc.

Secondly, One Reason of the second part of the Doctrine; That while they
continue in sin, they must expect that God will come out against them as the
Lord of Hosts, etc.

(...). Because continuers in sin, continue their (...) of God. Wherefore I may
say to them, as Paul in 1 Cor. 10.22. He whom you provoke to wrath is the Lord
of Hosts: All Creatures in Heaven, Earth and Sea, are his Soldiers to fight
against them. Angels are called the heavenly Host, Luke 2.13. there are an
innumerable company of Angels, Heb. 12.22. and they all excel in strength: one
of them destroyed all the firstborn of Egypt together; and one destroyed an
hundred eighty five thousand Assyrians in one night; the Stars in their courses
fought from heaven by their influences against Sisera, Judge. 5.20. the Lord
slew many of the Amorites with great Hailstones cast down from heaven upon
them. Josh. 10.11. See what Armies the Lord employed against Egypt in the ten
Plagues, Exodus Chap. 7, 8, 9, 10. and against the Israelites, Joel 1.3, 4.
which are called Gods great Army, Joel 2.25. See also Amos 4.9. The time would
fail me, if I should proceed unto particular Instances. When God would destroy
the old World with water, he opened all the Fountains of the great Deep, and
the windows of Heaven, to make a Deluge, so that the waters arose fifteen
cubits upwards above the highest Mountains, and all flesh died that moved upon
the earth, Genes. 7.20, 21. When he would destroy Sodom in a moment, he Rained
Hell out of Heaven, as Salvian said; or as Moses says, he rained upon Sodom
and Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven, and overthrew
those Cities, and all their Inhabitants, Genesis 19.24, 25.

Use 1. For the furtherance of our humiliation before the Lord, and that we may
justify the Lords righteousness in the Calamities which we have already felt,
or may further fear, for our sins are great. Isa. 24.5. The earth also is
defiled under the Inhabitants thereof, because they have transgressed the Laws,
changed the Ordinance, and broken the everlasting Covenant. The Lord may say of
us, as Jer. 5.23, 24, 25. But this people has a revolting and rebellious
heart, they are revolted and gone, etc. and our Impenitency, as Amos 4.7. to
the end. And if he should give us up to foreign Enemies, he may justly
expostulate with us, as Jer. 2.17. Have thou not procured this unto thy self,
in that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, when he led thee by the way? and
upbraid us, as ver. 19. Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy
backslidings shall reprove thee: know therefore and see, that it is an evil
thing and a bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear
is not in thee, says the Lord God of Hosts. So that whatever the Lord has
done, or may yet further do against us, we must humble our selves, and say, The
Lord is righteous, 2 Chronicles. ^2.6. and with Daniel, Dan. 9.7. O Lord,
righteousness belongs to thee, and to us confusion of faces, as at this day,
etc.

Use 2. for Exhortation: 1. To behold the works of the Lord, and to consider
them, Psalm. 78.5. Haggai 1.7. Thus says the Lord, Consider your ways in your
hearts.

2. As Lam. 3.40. Search narrowly, as they did for leaven before the Passover,
and diligently; for self-love makes it hard to find it: Let us search and try
our ways, and turn again to the Lord. Psalm. 139.24. says David, Search me,
and try me, see if there be any way of wickedness, etc. If any way of
wickedness be found in you, it will cost thee thy life: A way of Envy, of evil
speaking, of murmuring, of earthly-mindedness, of sinning secretly, of
omissions, or slight performances of duties continued in: Take warning by what
has befallen others, to fear God. This the Lord expects, Zeph. 3.6, 7, 8. I
have cut off the Nations, their Towers are desolate, I have made their streets
waste, that none passed by; their Cities are destroyed, so that there is no
man, that there is none Inhabitant: I said, Surely thou will fear me, thou will
receive instruction, etc.

3. To prepare to meet God, Amos 4.12. by turning to him, Hos. 6.1. with true
Repentance, and speedy Reformation. Jam. 4.8, 9. Draw nigh to God, and he will
draw nigh to you: Cleanse your hands, ye sinners, and purify your hearts, ye
double-minded: be afflicted, and mourn, and weep; let your laughter be turned
to mourning, and your joy to heaviness. When you have provoked the Lord to
wrath by sin, think not to take up the matter by Confessions, or Prayers, or
Fastings; (...) remember the Doctrine, That God requires these, and turning to
him besides. This was the counsel of God to Joshua, Josh. 7.10, 11. Also we
must have good Purposes and Intentions, yet these are not sufficient, unless
they produce a real and actual turning to God. Deuteronomy. 5.29. O that there were
such an heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep my Commandments
always, that it might be well with them, and with their Children for ever.
Natural Conscience enlightened and awakened, and self-love seeking a man's own
preservation and salvation, may work such good intentions and purposes, but
they neither continue, because they arise from temporal motives, or self ends;
nor are they effectual, because the subject in whom they are is irregenerate,
and carnal, and therefore such are his purposes; and all flesh is as grass,
that withers and fades, but 1 Pet. 1.23, 24, 25. the word of the Lord
endures for ever.

Lastly, Turn from your evil ways to God, and the Rules of his Word. This I
might apply to sundry particulars; but at present I shall speak only to one
Abuse of this season of the Year, which is called CHRISTMAS: which is to be
witnessed against, whether it be done upon a Religious, or Civil, or
Mixed-Account.

1. If upon a Religious Account; None can sanctify Time to make a day holy to
the Lord, but the sanctifying Spirit, in and by some Word of God in Scripture.
The Feasts of Purim were Civil Festivals, called Good days of feasting, and
sending gifts one to another, not Holy times, separated from common uses to
holy. Now we no where find warrant in Scripture for setting apart the day of
Christ's Nativity from common use, to religious holy use: Indeed the day of his
Resurrection, the first day of the week, that is by Christ sanctified to be the
Christians Christian Sabbath: for that was the beginning of Christ's Exaltation,
but the day of his Birth, was the beginning of his Humiliation and Abasement;
so that there is not a p^^ity of reason between them.

2. If upon a Civil Account; How comes Christ's Name to be used in it, that it
is called CHRISTMAS DAY? whether Mass be taken in the Saxon sense, as
signifying a Feast; or in the Popish sense, special Masses being appointed and
used in Popery on that day, I will not now dispute: but if in the first sense,
how is this Time abused by all profane, and loose spirited persons, unto
Gluttony, Drunkenness* and mis-spending of precious time, in Gaming at Cards
and Dice, and other wickednesses? as if Christ was born, and given to us, to
set men's lusts at liberty, and their persons to serve sin, and Satan; or as if
Christians would imitate the Pagans, in their Bacchanalia, and Saturnalia,
rather then Christ in his temperance, and doing good.

3. If upon a Mixed Account; This is not the time of Christ's Nativity: for
Christ was not born in Winter, but rather in September, as I shall evince;

1. From Augustus Caesar's Taxing all the Roman Empire at the time when Christ
was born, whereupon all went to be taxed, every one to his own City; which
caused Joseph, with Mary his espoused Wife, to go unto Bethlehem, at that time
when, and place where Christ was born, Luke 2.1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Now the Winter
had been an unfit season for such affairs and travels.

2. From the time when the Angel reported the Birth of Christ to the Shepherds;
it was when they were keeping watch over their flocks by night, Luke 2.8, 9, to
15. Now Shepherds watch their sheep by night, not in the open fields, in the
Winter, but in the beginning of Autumn: in the Winter they house them.

3. From the description of Christ's Incarnation, in Joh. 1.14. The Word was
made flesh, and dwelt among us: The word (...), which signifies, He tabernacled
among us, alluding to the Feast of Tabernacles, which was on the fifteenth day
of the seventh Month, Levit. 23.24. which was a type of Christ's Incarnation,
when they were commanded to leave their filled houses, and storehouses, and to
dwell in Boothes seven days, to teach them to rejoice, not in their worldly
abundance, but in Christ Jesus. In allusion hereunto, the conversion of the
Nations to Christ, is expressed by their keeping the Feast of Tabernacles, in
Zech. 14.16. Lay down therefore all former vain pretenses, and yield to this
Truth, That the keeping of Christmas in this season, is unseasonable, and in
the manner as it is usually done, is unscripturall, irrational, and unlawful.

We proceed to the third and last part of my Text, containing Gods Promise, I
will turn unto you; together with the Ratification of it, Says the Lord of
Hosts. Whence this Doctrine may be collected: Doct. III. When people who have
been formerly under the effects of Gods displeasure, do turn unto him with
unfeigned Repentance, and Reformation of their former evil ways, God will
certainly turn unto them in mercy, and make all his Creatures serviceable for
their good, as he is the Lord of Hosts.

Two particulars must be cleared and proved, 1. That God will certainly turn to
such in mercy. 2. That as he is the Lord of Hosts, he will make all his
Creatures serviceable for their good.


I. That God will certainly turn to such in mercy; that is, he will alter the
Effects of his Providence toward them, that whereas formerly they had been
afflicting, now they shall be comforting, healing, restoring. Herein two things
are meant;

First, That he will pardon their sins, and so remove the impediments of their
good: Jer. 5.24, 25. Your iniquities have turned away things, and your sins
have withholden good things from you. See Isa. 1.16, 18. He had exhorted them
to cease to do evil, learn to do well, ver. 16, 17. And if they should object.
What good shall we get by this, if our sins and miseries be so great as you
have said? To prevent this, he adds, v. 18. Though your sins were of the
deepest dye, as Crimson and Scarlet are, yet you shall be as perfectly cleansed
from them all, as if you should see Scarlet become as white as Snow, or Crimson
as white as Wool, none of the former tincture remaining. And because this is a
thing difficult for sinners to believe, he adds, Come, let us reason together:
as if he should say, It will require strong reasoning to cause you to believe
this. Therefore the Lord uses strong Reasons to confirm it.

Reas. 1. From his Essential Properties, Exodus 34.6, 7. Obj. But he is just
also. A. True; and that is for your encouragement: for Christ has satisfied
his Justice as your Surety, and it would not be just that he should require the
payment of one and the same debt twice: And he is Faithful also; see 1 John
1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

Reas. 2. From his engagement by his Word: Therefore David said, in Psalm.
56.10. In God I will praise his Word; in the Lord I will praise his Word. Now,
you may see how strongly he is engaged by his Word, before many witnesses: in
Micah 7.20. Thou will perform the truth unto Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham,
which thou have sworn to our fathers from the days of old. Hereupon the
Apostle infers, Acts 10.43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through
his Name whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of sins. 1 John
5.9, 10, 11. If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater,
etc. Psalm. 119.4. Remember thy word unto thy servant, upon which thou have
caused me to hope.

Reas. 3. From his Fatherly Relation in Christ to Believers by the Covenant of
grace, Joh. 20.17. 2 Cor. 6.18. he is their Father, and they his sons and
daughters. Hence he pitieth them. Psalm. 103.13, 14. and spares them, Mal.
3.17. and upon their repentance renews the manifestation of his Fatherly love
to them, Jer. 31.18, 19, 20.

Reas. 4. From the Means and Instrument whereby forgiveness is purchased for
Believers, and conveyed to them, Ephesians. 1.7. Heb. 12.24. Compare 1. The
Persons; Abel, a mere man, with Christ the Mediator: there is an infinite
disparity. Acts 20.28. God purchased the Church with his own blood. 2. The
speaking of their Blood; there is no proportion in their value and virtue, Heb.
9.14. 3. The thing spoken for: Abels blood cried for vengeance against Cain,
whereunto God is slow; Christ's blood requires forgiveness of humbled and
believing sinners, wherein God delights, Micah 7.18. and ready to it, Psalm.
86.5.

Reas. 5. From the Freeness of God herein, Romans 4.24, 25. he requires no
condition, but coming to Christ, as beggars do to a free dole, without which
none can receive it; and thirsting, without which none will duly prize Christ,
or come unto him upon Gospel terms, Joh. 7.37. Rev. 21.6. and 22.17. and when
they are come unto Christ, he pours upon them the Spirit of grace, etc. Zech.
12.10. and gives repentance and forgiveness of sin, Acts 5.31. Obj. But my
sins are 1. Many, 2. Great, 3. Iterated. Ans. So were the people of Isreal's
sins; yet see Ezekiel. 36.25. and Zech. 13.1. a Fountain always cleansing those
that come to it.

II. That when people who have formerly been under Gods displeasure, do turn
unto him with true Repentance, and Reformation of their former evil ways, God
will remove the Effects of his displeasure, and do them good.

Reas. 1. For his Promise sake, 2 Chronicles. 7.14.

Reas. 2. Because, the Cause being taken away, the Effect cease. There is a
Chain of evils, whereof Sin is the first Link, and draws on all the rest;
whether Temporal punishments, as you may see at large in Deuteronomy. 28.15, to the
end: or Spiritual, Romans 1.21, 24. 1. Spiritual desertions* hence the Spirit of
the Lord departed from Saul, 1 Samuel 16. Gods withdrawing his merciful and
gracious presence from a people, brings all woes and miseries upon them, Hos.
1.12. and sin causes this, Isa. 59.1, 2. 2. Tradition, or leaving them to
themselves, Psalm. 81.11, 12. But when sin is done away by Repentance on man's
part, and forgiveness on Gods part, then will the Lord return to his people in
mercy, and do them good, Joel ^^ 18, 19.

Secondly, That then God will cause all his Creatures to serve for their good:
1. The Angels, Heb. 1.14. if they be in danger of enemies, Psalm. 34.7. This
Jacob found, Genesis 32.2. and Elisha, 2 Kings 6.17. And when others are smitten
by the Angels with War or Pestilence, or any other Calamities, they shall
save them from the hurt thereof, Ezekiel. 9.4. Psalm. 91.11. 2. The Sun, Moon, and
Stars, Psalm. 121.6. Josh. 10.12, 13. Judges 5.20. 3. All Inferior Creatures:
see Lev. 26.3, to 11. and Deuteronomy. 28.1, to 9. Joel 2.23, to 28. Haggai 2.18, 19.
Mal. 3.10, 11, 12.

Reas. 1. Because he is the Lord of Hosts, by his right of Creation and
Government. As they were all made by him, so they are all at his dispose, and
under his command, for the good of his people: The Angels do his commandments,
harkening to the voice of his word, Psalm. 103.20. So of the Host of Heaven he
says, I have made the earth, my hands have stretched out the heavens, and all
their host have I commanded, Isa. 45.12. and the Meteors, Snow, Frost, he
orders by his Word of command, Psalm. 147.15, to 19. So the blessing of the
Fruits of the Earth, is by his command, Deuteronomy. 28.8.

Reas. 2. Because there is a Covenant between God in Christ, and all those who
thus turn unto him: As when Kings and States of diverse Nations, that were
before in War, do make a League by Covenant, all their Subjects have a free
Trade and intercourse for their mutual good: so it is in this case; before man
sinned against God, all Creatures of this great Lord of Hosts served for his
good: but when he sinned against God, the Lord of Hosts and all his Creatures
were against man, had not Jesus Christ, the Mediator of the New Covenant,
interposed himself to reconcile humbled believing sinners unto God. Hence, when
any are brought into this Covenant, all his Creatures are at league with him,
as Eliphaz told Job Chap. 5.23, 24. This League secures them from hurt, and
assures of good from the beasts of the field: see Hos. 2. ^1, 22. It is an
admirable Prosopopoeia, where the affections of men are ascribed to the
Creatures; Jezreel looks to the fruits of the Earth, and complains of want of
Wheat, and Wine, and Oil; they look to the Earth, and speak to it to receive
into its bowels the Corn, as desirous to rot in it, that it might feed man; the
Trees, to receive moisture from it, that they may cherish man: the Earth looks
to the Heavens, with desire of Rain, and Influences from thence, that it may be
fruitful; the Heavens look to God, desiring his word of Command and Blessing:
and all this by virtue of the Covenant.

Use 1. For Encouragement, to those who have by their sins, and continuance in
them, unto this day been under Gods displeasure, and the dreadful Effects of
it, now to come in with true Repentance, and Reformation of your former evil
ways. Come unto Christ, that in him you may obtain the mercy that God offers;
that now you may be reconciled to him in Christ, and receive forgiveness of all
your sins past. A Proclamation of Pardon will bring Rebels in, to lay down all
their Rebellions, and to become Loyal Subjects, for the time. He^^ and hearken
to the Lords Proclamation, in Jer. 3.12, 13. where we see, 1. That God is ready
to forgive repenting sinners. Obj. 1. The greatness of my sins affright me.
Ans. Isa. 44.22. I have blotted out as a thick cloud, thy transgressions, and
as a cloud thy sins, etc. Obj. 2. But our transgressions and our sins are upon
us, and we pine away in our sins, Ezekiel 33.10, 11. Ans. Consider those two
Arguments, in Psalm. 130.3, 4. (1) Else none should be saved; but it is not his
will that all sinners should perish, for then the blood of Christ had been shed
in vain: but that cannot be, Rev. 1.5. and the offer of Christ, for the
Salvation of sinners, would be in vain: but that cannot be, Joh. 3.14, 15. (2.)
Else none would worship him; but God will have some that shall fear and worship
him, Deuteronomy. 5.29. Hos. 3.5. 2. God is not only ready to receive such, but
desirous of it; and there is joy in heaven at the Conversion of such, as Christ
assures us by three Parables, Luke 15.7, 10, etc. And to show his desire, he
sends his Ministers, and by them inviteth, calls, commands, beseeches
sinners to turn unto him. Ah! let it not be said of any of you, as the Lord
complained of others Hos. 11.2, 7. 3. Consider Examples: Christ in the days of
his flesh, welcomed Publicans and sinners, that came to him with repentance,
Luke 15. and his mercy is not less in heaven, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. 1 Timothy 1.15, 16.
only lose not your season, 2 Cor. 6.1, 2. Heb. 3.15. they that put off, may
never have such an offer again: for, to those that believed not, in the
wilderness, God swear that they should not enter into his Rest, ver 16, 18. and
when they that were invited to the Wedding feast, came not, but put off the
invitation with excuses, the Master of the feast said, None of those men that
were bidden shall taste of my Supper, Luke 14.24. Remember the sad condition
they were in, that came when the door was shut, Luke 13.25, to 29.

Use 2. for Instruction. Learn hence, that when any Calamity is upon people, or
a particular person, to look through it unto sin as the cause of it. Look not
only on the outward means, or instruments, or secondary Causes: that which is
outward and obvious to our sense, is but the Vial through which Gods wrath is
poured forth. 2 Chronicles. 12.7. David knew that the natural cause of that Famine
of three years in Israel, was Drought; but he rested not there, but went to
enquire of the Lord, what sin was the cause of it, and received his answer, 2 Samuel 21.1. This the Lord taught Joshua to do, Josh. 7.10, 11. The people of
Israel learned it by long continued Afflictions, Lam. 3.39, 40.

2. Learn hence to look at sin as the most mischievous thing in the world, that
you may hate and shun it more perfectly. When men look upon sin abstractively,
only as a thing done, they think it not so dangerous an evil as it is:
therefore look at it in the effects of it, and you will see how mischievous it
is. If you should know a man who is always doing mischief, where ever he
comes, he poisons one, stabs another, etc. and leaves every where some prints
of his villainy, how dreadful and hateful would he be unto you? Such a thing
is Sin: it caused Ahabs death, and the dogs licked up his blood; and Jezabels
also, burnt up Nadab and Abihu; caused the Earth to open, and swallow up Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram; struck Ananias and Sapphira dead at Peter's feet. In a word,
it blasts the Corn, destroys the fruits of the Trees; brings diseases on men's
bodies; brings in Foreign Enemies upon people; fills the Earth with miseries,
and Hell with everlasting torments.

3. Learn hence, that if you would have punishments removed in mercy, you must
remove sin first. In diseases, till the Cause be removed, there is no Cure
wrought; but if the Cause be done away, the symptoms presently vanish. They
take a wrong course, that set their heads, hands, feet, and friends on work to
free themselves from some Calamity, when the sin remains undone away. For, 1.
If the Calamity should be removed, sin not being pardoned, nor repented of, it
is not removed in mercy, but in wrath: as when a Physician takes away his
Medicines, and leaves the disease uncured, it is a sign that either the
Patients case is desperate, or that the Physician is willing that he should
perish: and if Affliction does a man no good, it does him much hurt; for that
which does neither good nor hurt, is in vain: but God does nothing in vain. But
if sin be taken away, either the punishment will be taken away, or the sting of
it. Obj. David found it otherwise, 2 Samuel 12. A. Two cases, at least, must be
excepted: 1. Of Scandal, when the Name of God is blasphemed, ver. 14. 2. When a
lust is not sufficiently cleansed, the lust being mortified, Psalm. 51.8, 10.

4. Speedily get sin done away; for the sentence is gone out, as soon as sin is
committed, though the execution be deferred for a time, Eccles. 8.11, 12. and
the Decree is in travail before it brings forth, Zeph. 2.2. and it may be sin
is not finished, Jam. 1.15. as Judas, though he was a Thief, was let alone till
he had betrayed his Master. See Zech. 5.2, 3, 8, 9. Sin may lie like a sleeping
debt, which is not demanded for many years, but if the debtor has not an
Acquittance, the Creditor may call for it when he will, and cast him into
prison.

Use 3. for Exhortation: To be like-minded to God, Ephesians. 5.1. You call God
Father; be merciful, as your heavenly Father is merciful, especially in
forgiving: and Christ teaches us in prayer to call God Father, and to beg of
him forgiveness, and in (...) thereunto to forgive others that have offended
us. See how Christ argues for this, in Mat. 6.14, 15. and he teaches us to urge
it as an argument in our prayer, for the settled comfort of our forgiveness,
Luke 11.4. Obj. But wherein must we follow God in this? Ans. 1. In his
forgiving at the mediation of Christ, Ephesians. 4.32. When a repenting sinner comes
to Christ, and Christ mediates for him, God for Christ's sake forgives; so
should we one that has offended us, and is sorry for it, and uses the
mediation of friends, for his reconciliation to the offended party. 2. In his
preventing mercy, which shows his readiness to forgive, Luke 15.20. When he was
a great way off, yet coming, his father had compassion on him, ran unto him,
etc. was more quick to pardon, then the son to seek it: see the effect of it in
the son. So should we, not stay till an offender has come up to the height of
our expectation, but encourage beginnings of repentance. 3. In not standing too
strictly upon a full satisfaction, answerable to our imagination of the
greatness of our wrong, which many times is above the offense, and above what
we are able to convince the offender of. See that Parable in Mat. 18.22. to the
end. 4. In his ending controversies with sinners in such a way, between himself
and them, as may keep them from public shame; whence Gods forgiving, is called
his covering sin, Psalm. 32.1. so should we: Therefore this is noted as the
effect of love, 1 Pet. 4.8. See the description of Joseph, the reputed husband
of the Virgin Mary, Mat. 1.19. his Justice made him think of putting her away,
but his Love and goodness, to do it privily: the contrary is condemned in
Christians, that will not arbitrate matters, but go to Law, 1 Cor. 6.7.

Use 4. for Comfort, to repenting sinners under Affliction: Think not that you
shall never be freed from them, but be assured, that if thy heart be humbled,
and thy sin mortified, God is as willing as able to remove it. No man is in a
hard condition, but he that has an hard heart. See 1 Pet. 5.6. Humble your
selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due
time.

FINIS.

