BOSTON IN NEW ENGLAND. August 9 th, 1667, THE GOVERNOR, DEPUTY GOVERNOR AND
SUNDRY OF THE MAGISTRATES, Being Assembled, do Judge meet to commend to their
Beloved Brethren and Neighbors The Inhabitants of this Colony this following
PROPOSAL.
WHereas through the Favor of God, and his MAJESTY our SOVEREIGN, we have
continued unto us our present enjoyments, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, in
this time of Calamity to others of his Majesty's Plantations, especially in the
Caribdee Islands, by reason of the Malignity of the Common Enemy. The
consideration of whose present distressed condition with a fellow-sympathy and
helpfulness to them his Majesty in his gracious Letters, has commended to his
Subjects of this Colony, signifying, that what is done therein, would be
accepted as an expression of our loyalty to himself. The Consideration whereof
is also further commended unto us by his Excellency the Lord Willoughby his
Majesty's Governor of those parts, declaring how seasonable some present
supply of Provisions to his Majesty's Forces against the common Enemy would now
be, and also understanding the fleet is very sickly by reason of the want of
such Provisions as are good and comfortable for their present state;
notwithstanding such supplies as have been from time to time sent hence, upon
the Adventure of Merchants and Gentlemen, on their private accounts, whereby
not only themselves have sustained great losses many ways, but also the
Public is thereby much disabled to afford further supply as were to be
desired.

From the considerations abovesaid, we do commend to the Inhabitants of this
Jurisdiction a present contribution to be made for the supply of his Majesty's
Fleet in those parts, to be sent to the Lord Willoughby, to the end it may be
accordingly distributed among them, as his Excellency in his wisdom shall see
meet; and considering that expedition will be of absolute necessity, we do
therefore Nominate and Appoint our loving Friends the Gentlemen here under
named, ( i. e.) in Boston Mr. Edward Ting, Captain William Davis, Mr. Hezekiah
Usher, Mr. John Jolliffe, Captain James Oliver, Captain Thomas Lake, Mr. Thomas
Dean, Mr. Peter Oliver, Mr. Thomas Brattle, Mr. Humphrey Davy, Mr. Anthony
Stoddard, Mr. Samuel Bach, and Mr. Richard Wharton. In Charlstown, Captain John
Allin, Liutenant Randal Nicholls, Liutenant Richard Sprague, Mr James Russel,
Mr. Laurance Hammond. And in Salem Captain George Corwin, Mr. William Brown,
Captain Walter Price. For Norfolk, Captain Robert Pike. For Portsmouth and
Dover Mr. John Cutts, Mr. Richard Cutts, Captain Richard Waldern and Mr. Nath.
Friar. In Hampshire, Captain John Pynchon. Liutenant Clarke of Northampton, and
Liutenant Smith of Hadley. They, or the major part of them to receive the free
Contributions of the respective parts of the Country, and they or any five of
them to take order immediately for the Hire of a Vessel, taking care that her
Loading be of such Provisions as be good and sound, and no other, and what they
shall do herein to render an account thereof to the Governor or Deputy
Governor, from time to time from whom they shall receive Order for their
immediate Sailing.

The Gentlemen above named, are also empowered to communicate this to the
several Towns, so as may have the best tendancy for the furtherance of the end
propounded.

This Act of the Magistrates is forthwith to be printed and sent accordingly to
the several Towns.

Boston, August 9 th, 1667. Richard Bellingham Governor.


