At a Council held at Boston, March 10, 1668.
THe Governor and Magistrates being assembled in Council, and in some measure
sensible of the many tokens of the Lords displeasure against the cutting short
the Fruits of the Earth for sundry years past, and otherwise bringing us low
more then formerly; together with the many provoking Evils that do abound among
us, to the great dishonor of God, and our Profession of his holy Name, and
that notwithstanding all means used for to reclaim the same, which being in
conjunction with sundry other things that are among us, threatening yet more
displeasure against us, if the compassions of our tender hearted and
long-suffering God do not timely prevent: Do therefore commend to all the
Inhabitants of this Colony the Twenty fifth day of this instant to be kept a
Public Day of Humiliation, and spent in Fasting and Prayer to the Lord for
pardon of whatever have been, or is provoking to his holy eyes, and that he
will be pleased to give unto us, from the greatest to the least, truly to
Repent of all our sins, and to reform the same; and that those uncomfortable
Breaches made in several Societies may be again repaired, and we may obtain his
favorable Presence with us this following year, and his blessing upon our
present Seed-time, that so it may appear that the Lords anger is turned away
from us, and that he is yet in our Zion, ruling in the midst of us, uniting the
hearts of his poor people to do all his pleasure, and nothing else. Also the
present low Estate of the Churches of Christ in Europe, and especially in our
dear Native Country, is to be humbly presented before the Lord.

By the Council, Edward Rawson Secret;


