SEVERAL Laws and Orders Made at the General Court of ELECTION Held at Boston,
May 19th 1669.
And Printed and Published by their Order, June 4. 1669. EDW RAWSON Secret'.
Order to Rate all Goods and Provisions imported into this Jurisdiction.
THis Court taking notice of sundry Complaints, of much Inequality in the
present way of Raising Moneys to defray Public Charges; Do therefore Order,
and by the Authority of this Court be it Ordered and Enacted:

I.
That all Goods, Wares, Merchandises and Provisions of all sorts (excepting
Fish, Sheeps wool, Cotton-wooll, Salt, and such other things as by former Laws
are exempted, or otherwise provided for) which from any foreign part, or other
Jurisdiction, shall be imported into any of our Harbors, Ports, Shores, or
elsewhere within this Jurisdiction, shall be Rated in a just proportion with
Estates rateable in the Country, viz. for every Twenty shillings value shall be
paid One penny in money.

II.
All Goods, Wares and Merchandises as aforesaid, shall be here valued as
follows; that is, Every hundred pounds at the Port or place from whence it
came, to be accounted here at One hundred and twenty pounds: which penny per
twenty shillings shall be paid by the Agent, Factor, Owner, or other person, by
whom they are brought, or to whom they are sent or consigned; and so according
to the same proportion for all greater or lesser quantities whatsoever.

III.
To which end, all goods and provisions as aforesaid imported, shall by the
Master, Purser, Boatswain, or Skipper of each Ship, or other vessel in which
they are brought, before breaking bulk, or landing any of the said goods, be
certified unto the Country Treasurer, or Collector by him empowered in the
several Port Towns, or other places where they are brought, on penalty of
forfeiture of twenty shillings per Tun, according to the burden of the Ship or
vessel wherein they are brought from time to time.

IV.
And all and every such Collector shall carefully and truly enter all such
goods, with their several Marks, Casks, Packs, Fardels, Trusses, Chests,
Trunks, Cases, and all other things how ever called or distinguished, with the
Names of the persons to whom such goods or other things are sent and consigned,
or are owners thereof, so far as may by any lawful means be discovered.

V.
And all persons to whom such goods or other things aforesaid are consigned or
sent, or are the owners thereof, shall from time to time, before such goods are
landed, signify the true and just value thereof, by showing the true and
perfect Invoyce thereof, unto the aforesaid Collectors for each Port; who are
hereby required to Enter the gross Sum thereof in a book for that purpose, what
the said goods or other things amount unto, and shall forthwith demand and
receive the several Rates or Assessments before mentioned, or certify the
Treasurer, or such other Collector or Receiver as is concerned therein.

VI.
And in case of denial or delay of payment, the Collector authorized as
aforesaid shall levy the same by distress upon the said goods, at the rate or
price set in the Invoyce, out of which he shall have two shillings per pound
for his time and labor therein: And for the more full effecting hereof, the
said Collector is empowered to require aid (if need be) as any Constable may in
the like service* and no man may refuse to assist, upon the same penalty the
Law in that case express.

VII.
If any Invoyce or bill of parcels shall be falsified, concealed, or not
produced, of any goods or other things imported as aforesaid, it shall be
lawful for the Treasurer or Collector, with the Select men of each Town therein
concerned, to Rate all such goods, or the Owner or other Agent for the same, by
will and doom according to their best discretion; provided it be not less then
four pounds per Tun, as the same stands entered in the bill of Lading in the
Boatswain or other Officers book.

VIII.
It is further Ordered, in reference to all sorts of Cattle that are brought
into this Jurisdiction, to be sold, killed, or transported, that the venders
shall give a just and true account of all such Cattle so brought, to some one
of the aforesaid Officers empowered to act herein, both in respect of number
and kind, and the same shall be entered in a book; and the owners of all such
Cattle, or the person with whom they are trusted, before they are set to sale,
killed, or put on board any vessel for transport, shall pay for every Head as
is expressed in the Law tit. Charges Public; upon penalty of forfeiture of any
such beast, or the true value thereof, in whose hand soever found: the one half
to the public Treasury, the other half to the Informer.

IX.
For all other sorts of goods, Hides, Skins, Beaver, Peltry, Butter, Cheese, or
other Merchandise or Provisions brought into this Jurisdiction by land, the
Owner, Factor, Agent, or other person entrusted, shall before any sale made, or
before any putting on board any vessel for transport, or other disposal of the
said goods, make a just and true Entry thereof, as is before provided
concerning goods imported by Sea, and to be rated one penny in every twenty
shillings, the same to be paid in money to the said officer, under the penalty
of forfeiture as aforesaid; the one third part to the Country Treasurer, one
third part to the Informer, and one third part to the Collector.

X.
The Country Treasurer for the time being is hereby empowered and required duly
to execute, or cause to be duly and fully executed this present Order in each
particular part thereof; who is also empowered and authorized to depute and
empower all such officers under him, as he shall judge necessary for the
accomplishment thereof, who upon Warrant to them directed under his Hand and
Seal shall attend the same: And the said officer or officers shall be
accountable to the said Treasurer, when he shall call them thereunto.

XI.
It is also Ordered, That such goods or other things as upon importation shall
by this Order be paid for, shall not again for that year be Rated, whilst they
remain in the hands of them that so paid for them.

XII.
In case the Treasurer, or any Officer under him, shall find any great
difficult or doubtful case in the execution of this Order, they shall repair to
the Governor and Council, or so many of them as can conveniently assemble,
provided the number be not less then five, who are hereby empowered to give
such order and directions for removing obstructions, as the major part of them
shall judge expedient for the effectual prosecution of this Order.

And the Order respecting Customs, made October 1668. is hereby Repealed.

And it is Ordered further, That this present Law be in force forthwith, upon
the ending of this present Sessions, and forthwith published in Boston and
Charls-town.

It is ordered by this Court, that this shall be the Seal of the Treasurers
Office.

Order to prevent exportation of Money out of this Jurisdiction.
FOr the better execution of the Law page 62. sect. 2. for the restraining the
Exportation of Money; It is ordered by this Court, and the Authority hereof,
That the persons hereafter named, viz. For Boston, Captain James Oliver, and
Mr. Thomas Brattle, or either of them. Commissioners to search for Money, etc.
For Charls-town, Captain John Allen For Salem, Mr. Edward Batter. For
Piscataqua, Mr. Elias Stileman. For Marble-head, Mr. Samuel Ward. For Dedham,
Ensign Fisher. For Braintry, Moses Pain. For Marlborow, William Kerley. For
Springfield, Laurence Bliss.
Be all and every of them appointed, empowered, and required to search for, and
seize all Moneys of the Coin of this Jurisdiction, that shall be found or
discovered in any Ship, or any other vessel has weighed Anchor to depart from
that Port where she ladeth, or all such Money that shall be found in any
persons Pocket, Cloak-bag, Portmantel, or any other thing belonging to them,
after such person has taken Horseback, to proceed and travel in his or their
Journey out of this Jurisdiction, from the first Town or station whence such
persons begin their travel: And all Money that such Searcher shall find
(except so much as is allowed by Law) he shall safely keep it until the next
Court of the Shire, and then present the same unto the said Court; and if it be
judged by the Court to be forfeited according to Law, then the said Court are
required to order the delivery of one third part to the officer that seized the
same, and the other two third parts to return to the public Treasury of the
Country. And it is further ordered, that the Searchers before-named are hereby
empowered to break open any Chrest, Trunk, Box, Cabin, Cask, Truss, or any
other suspected place or thing, where they or any of them conceive Money may be
concealed, and seize the same: And also they or either of them are empowered to
require such assistance from any Constables or others, as to them may seem
expedient, who are to aid them upon the penalty of forty shillings Fine for
every neglect.

Order further to Regulate Coopers-staves.
WHereas the Law tit. Pipe-staves, p. 64. provides only for Pipe-staves for
tite Cask, and that Hogshead-staves and Barrel-staves both of white and red
Oak, as well as for Pipe-staves, are frequently transported, and traffiqued in
payments, both to the Country Treasury, and otherwise; It is Ordered by this
Court, and the Authority thereof, that all Hogshead-staves shall be in length
three foot two inches, or upwards, not exceeding three foot four inches; and
all Barrel-staves shall be in length thirty one inches, all well and even hewed
or dressed sufficiently for use, as for Pipe-staves is expressed, whether of
white or red Oak. And all Headings for Pipe-staves of any sort to be in length
twenty eight inches; and for Hogsheads and Barrels, suitable to the Cask to be
made thereof; and that it be inserted in the Oath appointed for Viewers of
Pipe-staves, page 88. Any thing in the aforesaid Law to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Order to determine Book debts, etc.
ON Complaint, and consideration of sundry Inconveniences both to Creditors and
Debtors, through want of seasonable examination and ballancing of
Book-accompts; It is Ordered, and by this Court Enacted, That all such
book-debts as are now standing out, or that hereafter shall be made, and that
shall not within three years after publication hereof, or within three years
after such debt as hereafter shall be made, be accounted for or balanced with
the original Debtor, or his Attorney, Agent, Assign, or other lawful Successor
or Substitute, and on account or balance thereof, assured by Specialty given
for it, or witnessed by subscribing the Debtor or other Accomptants Name to the
Creditors book, or the Subscription of the Witnesses to such Account, Shall not
be pleadable in any Court; unless such book-debt shall within the time
before-limited, be prosecuted or proved in such Court as has proper cognizance
thereof, by Evidence competent and approved by the said Court: And the Evidence
there recorded, and the Record thereof, shall secure the Creditor, his
Executors, administrators and assigns, unless the Debtor or his assigns shall
disprove the same, within one year after such proof made, or recovery of the
said debt, if such Debtor, his or her agent, attorney, assign, substitute,
executor, administrator, or other lawful successor, be or shall be within this
Jurisdiction, or elsewhere, and have due notice from the Creditor thereof.

Order determining the choice of Military Officers.
THis Court considering the direction of our Patent, relating to the stating of
all Military officers in this Jurisdiction; Do hereby order and declare, That
all Commission Officers that at present are in power, are confirmed according
to their respective Commissions; but for the time to come, where new are to be
chosen, it is only in the power of the General Court (or in case of
emergency, for the Council of the Commonwealth) to nominate, choose, appoint,
and empower all Commission Military Officers, (excepting the Major General and
Admiral at Sea, the choice of whom are otherwise provided for by Law) And for
all inferior officers in Companies, they are to be chosen and appointed by the
Commission officers of that Company; and where no Commission officer is, by the
Major of the Regiment.

Law to prevent breaking of Prisons.
ON Complaint of the Keeper of the Prison, That some Malefactors and other
Prisoners have made Escape, by means of some evil-disposed persons that supply
them with Instruments to effect the same; It is therefore ordered by this
Court, and the Authority thereof, That if any person whatsoever shall any
ways, either directly or indirectly, convey any instrument or other thing
whatsoever, to any prisoner, by which such prisoner, or any other prisoner,
either shall, may, or might break prison, or work him or her self unlawfully
out of the same; if it were for debt, such person to transgressing shall pay
the full debt, and incur the penalty of Forfeiture of as much to the Country,
or undergo such corporal punishment as the Court on whose proceedings such
imprisonment followed, or the Court of Assistants, shall impose, order or
appoint: And if any prisoner committed for offense or offenses, Criminal or
Capital, shall by such wicked compliance of any person, break prison, or make
escape out of prison, or be found in preparation thereunto, The person or
persons which directly or indirectly conveyed such instruments, tools, or other
things, whereby such prisoner shall or might work his or her escape from
prison; such person shall be liable to the same corporal punishment which the
prisoner was liable unto, and also incur such further penalty by Fine,
imprisonment, or corporal punishment, as the County Court, Court of Assistants,
or General Court shall appoint: So that where the prisoners are not actually
escaped, in such cases any Court to moderate as they shall see meet. And if the
escape of any prisoner appear to be through the fault or neglect of the Jailer,
he shall then be liable to such penalties as the prisoner was, according as the
Court which has cognizance thereof shall determine.

FINIS.

