ANIMADVERSIONS UPON THE ANTISYNODALIA AMERICANA, A TREATISE Printed in Old
England; In the Name of the DISSENTING BRETHREN In the SYNOD held at Boston in
New England 1662.

Tending to Clear the ELDERS and CHURCHES of New England from those Evils and
Declinings charged upon many of them in the two Prefaces before the said Book.

Together with AN ANSWER UNTO The Reasons alleged for the Opinion of the
Dissenters. And a REPLY to such Answers as are given to the Arguments of the
SYNOD.

By JOHN ALLIN, Pastor of the Church of Christ at Dedham in N. England.

Romans 3. 1,2. What advantage then has the Jew? or what profit is there of
Circumcision? Much every way: chiefly, because that unto them were committed
the Oracles of God. Gal. 3. 27,28. For as many of you as have been baptized
into Christ, have put on Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is
neither bond nor Free, there is neither Male nor Female, for ye are all one in
Christ Jesus. Heb. 12. 15,16. Looking diligently, lest any man fail of the
grace of God, lest any root of bitterness springing up, trouble you, and
thereby many be defiled. Lest there be any fornicator, or profane person as
Esau,(...) for a morsel of meat sold his Birthright. Cambridge. Printed by S.
G. and M. J. for Hezekiah Usher of Boston. 1664.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
SUch is the Infirmity and Corruption of Man, the Malice and Subtil^y of Satan
the Enemy of Truth, Purity, and Peace, and the holy and just Dispensation of
God Permitting and Ordering all things to his most glorious Ends; that frequent
Experience shows how hard it is for a People desirous to walk in all the
ways of God, to steer a right course between the Gulf of Profaning the
Ordinances by an over-loose Dispensation thereof, on the one hand; and the
Rocks of Rigid Separation, Anabaptism, and the like, on the other hand.

And hence it may seem the less strange, that (notwithstanding the Eminent
Lights we have had, holding forth The Covenant Interest of the Church-seed, and
The Duty of Churches to improve the Ordinances for their good) yet the Practice
hereof has not obtained in many of our Churches.

That this Case is now become matter of public Dispute between the late Synod,
and some Dissenting Brethren; though it be cause of Humiliation, yet we desire
herein to submit to the only wise God, hoping and waiting upon Him to see the
Improvement thereof for good, and for the further clearing up unto us what is
His good, perfect, and acceptable Will in this case.

When these Antisynodalia of our Brethren came to our hands, and Another Essay
of the same nature was here Published, some godly and wise Christians advised
the Elders to let them pass in silence; conceiving that they would not so take
with the people, as to hinder the Practice of the Doctrine of the Synod: and
that a Reply would occasion further Disputes and Contests. But, upon serious
consideration of the matter by diverse Elders met to that End, the Reasons on
the other side did preponderate. Such as these:

1. We being persuaded of the Doctrine of the Synod, and not finding any Weight
in those Tractates to change our Judgments, it seemed to us, that by silence
we should be sinfully wanting to the Truth of God, (a present Truth that many
godly ones are enquiring into) and to the Just Interest of the Church-seed.

2. This Truth being asserted in so Solemn an Ordinance, viz. The Assembly of
the Elders, and other Messengers of so many Churches, after solemn seeking the
Face of God, and much search into the Scriptures, with large Disputes about the
same; Our silence in this case would not only render that Ordinance useless
and vain at present, but also discourage the Churches in aftertimes to make
use thereof for their necessary Establishment in Truth and Peace.

3. We see evidently, that the Principles of our Dissenting Brethren give great
Advantages to the Antipoedobaptists, which if we be silent, will tend much to
their Encouragement and Increase, to the Hazard of our Churches.

4. These Treatises coming into the Peoples hands, if no Answer should be
returned, will much strengthen the hands of such as are Dissenters, and
discourage the hearts of others from the Practice of the Doctrine of the Synod,
for the good of Posterity.

5. Those unjust Aspersions cast upon many of the Elders and Churches of
New England in the two Prefaces to the Antisynodalia, do tend much to weaken
the Authority of their Ministry and Dispensations, and would lay them under
much Scandal in Old-England and New, should not a just Apology and Answer be
made thereunto.

For these and the like Reasons, it was thought necessary to return a just
Answer to these Books, published in Opposition to the Doctrine of the Synod.
But that my Brethren should have any eye upon myself to undertake this part of
the Work; viz. To Examine, and make Reply to these Antisynodalia, was very
far from my thoughts. Yet when I could by no Persuasions and Entreaties
prevail wish them, to Call out some other more able for this Work (whereof we
had choice) I considered, that the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the
Prophets, and that the Lord is not wont to deny Assistance to such as we
calls forth to any Service; yea, that He delights to show His strength in
weakness: In huge hereof, I have by his Grace and Help run through these
Antisynodalia, in my plain and homely manner (loving always to speak to vulgar
Capacities) wishing heartily it had been done by some better hand, that might
have performed it more thoroughly. This only I have to say for my self, That I
have not willingly declined any seeming strength of Reason, nor sought by
Shifts and Evasions to darken any seeming Light of Truth held forth in these
Antisynodalia; but have Heartily (according to my measure) Searched the
Scripture whether those things were so. As I have believed, so have I spoken:
As I find in the Law and Testimony, so have I written. What weaknesses and
defects may be discovered by a more judicious Eye, I hope (through Grace) I
shall be willing to see and reform upon intimation thereof; only let no Truth
herein held forth, be the less esteemed for the Infirmity of the Instrument.

I shall commit this Case of the Church-seed unto that God, who of his rich
Grace has undertaken to be their God; Beseeching Him to make his Ways plain
before the face of his People, and to improve these Disputes to common
Edification, according to the good pleasure of his will.

From my Study in Dedham in N. E. 6 day, 11 mon. 1663. Thine in the Lord, JOHN
ALLIN.

ANIMADVERSIONS UPON THE ANTISYNODALIA AMERICANA.
CHAP. I.
Being Animadversions upon the two Prefaces: The first, To the Reader; the
second, To the Honored General Court.
IT is no good sign, that the Publisher of these Antisynodalia does so foully
stumble at the Threshold, in his first stepping forth into this Business. For
where as he pretends, As a Lover of the Truth, to Publish this Treatise
without any Commission from the Dissenting Brethren, which he desires them not
to be offended with: and affirms it as a truth. That the persons engaged in
this Dissent, had much rather this Treatise were suppressed, and as an untimely
birth to have been bur^ed in everlasting darkness. The contrary hereunto is
evidently evinced by the whole Preface following; which speaks no more in the
person of the Publisher, but of the Dissenters: and wherein they endeavor to
Answer four Objections against the Publishing thereof. And in Answer to the
first Objection, taken from the Ill consequences that might follow, they
declare a Resolution to have it Published, whatever should follow; concluding
in the words of Esther, If I perish, I perish. Besides, it is well known here,
how earnest and resolute one of the chief of them was to have it Published.

Concerning the Objections here mentioned: The three first, from The sad
Consequences that may follow; The trouble of the Peace of the Churches hereby;
and from The Novelty of their Opinion; I know not of any that made these
Objections: Surely that language was not heard in the Synod, but their own
Reason might object such things. The fourth Objection is, A pretended
Concurrence of all other Congregational Churches they know of, to countenance
their Cause, but without any sufficient Proof thereof. But seeing it is now
Published, though unseasonably, (as is confessed) I shall not trouble myself
and the Reader about the Answers to the Objections, but apply myself to wipe
off those uncharitable and unjust Aspersions that in this Preface are cast upon
many of the Elders and Churches of New England. Wherein (that I may not wrong
any of our beloved Brethren, the Dissenters) I must say this on their behalf,
That some of them do profess that they had no hand in this first Preface, nor
in the Publishing thereof, nor any knowledge thereof: And I have reason to
think so of others of them, who I hope have other thoughts of their Brethren,
then this Preface holds forth. So that so far as I conceive, it is the act
of one of them only, or chiefly.

I take notice of Seven Imputations cast upon us, which I shall speak unto.

1. The Author of this Preface complains of The course Entertainment of their
Tenent, both in the Synod, and in the General Court, Where they expected more
Patrons then did appear.

Ans. That none may hence judge otherwise then the truth is; In respect of the
Synod, it cannot be denied that the matter in question was placidly, fully, and
oft-over Debated, all their Arguments weighed, all Writings presented were
read, considered, and some publicly answered: So that all the course
Entertainment was, that their Tenent was not embraced by the Synod. And as for
the Honored General Court, if they were so far satisfied with the Answers of
the Synod to that Question about The Subject of Baptism propounded by them,
that they did not think fit in their Wisdom to countenance and encourage a
Party rifing up in Opposition thereto, as tending to Divisions and Disturbances
amongst us; they may thank themselves for such course Entertainment, if they
will so account of it.

But to aggravate this course Entertainment, he adds, Though it be no other
Doctrine then of all the Congregational Churches in Holland, England, Ireland,
and New England, and also in New Haven, and Plymouth jurisdictions; yea, and
also that it has been the judgment and general Practice of the Churches in
the Bay, some few inconsiderable excepted, for thirty years.

Ans. Here is a great Pretense of general Concurrence with their Tenent, but
without Proof, and beyond the truth. And to make the Number seem the greater,
besides New England, he adds, And also New Haven, Plymouth, etc. as if these
were not New England Churches. As for those Foreign Churches, it does not
appear whether as yet (many of them at least) have declared their Judgment in
this case. Yea, I have heard from one of good note, that knows many of those
Churches, who upon the question answered, That this case has not as yet been
considered in many of those Churches. And if their Practice have not yet suited
to the Doctrine of the Synod, we know by our own experience how many hindrances
there may be of that, though their Judgment be for it. But concerning the
Judgment of New England Elders and Churches, let the Preface to the Synod be
read, by which it will appear, That the most Eminent Elders in the most
considerable Churches, and the Messengers of the Churches of New England, were
generally for this Doctrine in the Synod held at Cambridge in the year 1648. I
shall mention only that Passage of famous Hooker, whose praise is in the
Gospel in all the Churches, and who might know as much of the Principles of the
Congregational Churches as another: It is not the question (says he) Whether
wicked Members, while they are sinfully tolerated in the Church, they and their
seed may partake of Privileges; for this is beyond question: nor do I know, or
ever heard it denied by any of ours. Survey, Part 3. Chap. 2. Page 11. Whereby
it does appear, that he took it for a general Confession on all hands, That it
is the Interest in the Outward Covenant that gives right to Outward
Privileges of the Church; which is the Foundation of the Doctrine of the
Synod. Whereas the Tenent of our Dissenting Brethren is, That Members of the
Church admitted minority, and having the covenant sealed by Baptism, if being
adult, they hold not forth saving Faith and Repentance to the judgment of the
Church, even so as to come into full Communion; neither they nor their seed may
partake of Privileges, they are Felones de se, selfmurtherers, Discovenanted
of God, and are not so much as Foederally holy, so soon as they be out of their
Nonage; as will appear after: which Tenent I cannot believe will be owned by
most of the Churches named if by any of them.

This Author adds further, That yet now this Tenent is laden with Reproaches
of Antichristianism and Anabaptism.

Ans. If an Argument or two were used in the Synod, taken from such
Consequences, is this ground enough to say it is laden with such Reproaches?
(and other ground I know none.) Yet for that of Anabaptism, it will appear the
Principles of the Dissenters are so near a Kin, if not the same with theirs,
that we cannot but fear a great tendency thereunto: and what encouragement they
take from thence, we are very sensible.

Secondly, In answering the first Objection, this Prefacer takes occasion, upon
supposition of the Doctrine of the Synod to charge the Boy Churches with a sin
which he cannot see how it can stand with peace of Conscience, in leaving their
former practice in dispensing the Seals, and taking up a new manner thereof;
yea a grievous sin, in depriving so many Infants of Baptism for thirty years;
yea, of the same nature, and somewhat worse then that of the Pharisees, Luke 7.
29,30. disannulling the counsel of God against themselves, and so many hundred
poor Infants whom the Kingdom of God (as we now plead) belongs unto: and a
practical Anabaptism.

Ans. 1. It is indeed a grief of heart to many Elders and Brethren, that the
practice of the Rule, according to the Doctrine of the late Synod, cannot yet
obtain in their Churches; but they are not convinced it is a sin in them that
cannot stand with peace of Conscience, as the case stands: because all things
in the Church must be done to edification; which in this case cannot be put in
practice, especially in reference to the fifth Proposition, with peace and
edification, by reason of the strong opposition made by these, and other like
Dissenters. When this matter was under Consideration in the Synod 1648. the
Author of this Preface knows well who it was that professed. He would oppose
it with all his might: by reason whereof, and the Dissent of some few more, it
was laid aside at that time. It seems to me very hard dealing, for Brethren
so strongly to oppose others in doing their Duty, and then to charge them with
a sin that cannot stand with peace of Conscience if they do it not. The case
standing thus, let the Reader judge who are more like the Pharisees, that
rejected the counsel of God against themselves, in not being baptized of John,
whether such as would practice according to their Judgment, or such as oppose
and hinder them from so doing.

2. This Neglect is not so great for thirty years* as is Objected: for, in the
former years of these Plantations, till the Church-seed were grown up to Marry,
and have Children, there was not such need of practice according to the fifth
Proposition (which is now most stumbled at;) besides, some Churches have been
in that practice for diverse years.

3. There is no falling from our former practice, as is Objected, our
Principles are the same; this is only a progress in practicing according
thereunto, as the increase of the Churches does require. It is the way of
Christ in the Gospel, to set up the practice of his Institutions as the
necessities of the people call for them, as appears Matthew. 9. 36, etc. with
10. 1, etc. So Acts 6. 1. and 14. 23. 1 Cor. 16. 1,2.

4. When Circumcision, by reason of the travels in the Wilderness, was omitted
forty years, and the Feast of Tabernacles from the days of Joshua to the days
of Nehemiah, was neglected so many hundreds of years, we do not read of so
deep a charge laid upon the Elders and people by any of the Prophets of God.

Thirdly, We are charged with A greater sin to be trembled at, viz. That we
admitted all sorts that were personally in Covenant to the Lords Supper, which
now we deny to many, except after Covenanting they make it manifest, that they
are able to examine themselves, and, discern the Lords Body: If this be
regular, then the other is irregular, and brought guiltiness to many of the
Body and Blood of Christ, and was eating and drinking judgment to our selves.

Ans. This is a very heavy Imputation laid upon so many Elders and Churches,
and without any color of Reason: For, what matter is it whether Elders and
Churches be satisfied of the fitness of their Members for the Lords Supper,
before their admittance into the Church, by the Elders examination of them; or
at their admittance by their public Professions (which is known to be our
constant care and practice) or afterward? but because we do it not after
Covenanting in persons received in adult age, as well as in persons received in
infancy, that therefore we are so deeply guilty; this is a gross and irregular
Charge. Some have objected against our admissions, as over-strict; but who has
charged us with such a sin to be trembled at in such a manner, as to bring
guiltiness upon many of the Body and Blood of Christ? And it is strange to see
such as make so loud a Profession of stedfastness in the Faith and Order of the
Gospel, to lay so great a Scandal of a sin to be trembled at, upon so many
Elders, before conviction thereof, and their impenitency therein, and that in
the face of Old England and New, so contrary to the Principal and express Rules
of Gospel Order, Matthew. 18 15,16. 1 Timothy 5. 19.

Fourthly, In the Answer to the second Objection, viz. That by Publishing this
Treatise they shall disturb the peace, etc. The Author pleading possession of
another manner of dispensing the Ordinances, and that bought at a great rate,
The loss of Native Land, Fathers Houses, etc. he says, That the disturbers of
the peace, the troublers of Israel, are those that would rob them of their
possession, or question their right, especially having enjoyed them so long
before this pleaded-for Conversion of New England.

Ans. 1. But did we indeed come to New England to put our Posterity under the
wings of Gods gracious Covenant and Ordinances, and then to deny them and their
seed the Benefits thereof? to leave them at a loose end without the Discipline
of Christ, the Means to prevent sin, or to reduce them to Repentance unto life?
Certainly, the Profession of very many gracious and serious hearts, and their
hopes for their Children, was far otherwise. Yea, of these that now Dissent
amongst us, some I know, and many more I may suppose left Old England for the
good of their seed in this respect.

2. Are not our Children in possession of the House, Members of the Church, by
the confession of the Dissenters? The Synod pleads only that they may enjoy
the Privileges of the House; it is the Dissenters therefore that would rob
them of their possession, and disturb the peace.

3. The Synod (as appears in their Preface) does leave them to their liberty
to practice according to their Judgment: If they will not own, or Baptize such
as in the fifth Proposition are described; if they will have their Children
accounted Self-murtherers, Discovenanted of God, if the Lord have not wrought
Faith and Repentance visibly in them (...) come to adult age, there is none
that offers to disturb their possession in these things. And why then should
they disturb and oppose the Right and Possession of so many others who assert
the Rights of the Church-seed, which are in Covenant with God in possession of
the House, whose advantage (the Apostle says) and profit is much every way?
Romans 3. 1,2.

Fifthly, In Answer to the third Objection, viz. That they are Innovators; and
that the most learned Ministers were of the Synods mind. This Author of the
Preface granting this to be true of some, (which is a large some, as is
manifest in the Preface to the Synod) he must needs cast a double Aspersion
upon the Elders, affirming,

1. That as many of them are so large in Judgment, as to soulder with Parish
Churches.

Ans. If this be meant in respect of Communion with Orthodox Parish Churches,
we are no larger then our Dissenting Brethren, who concur with us in the
seventh Proposition about the first Question, which speaks to this case. But if
it be meant of enlarging the Church to the Bounds of a Parish, it is a mere
Slander: I do not believe that he can prove that any two Elders of these
Churches have so declared their judgment; much less so many as are of the
Synods mind. It lies upon the Author to make good this charge, or to recant
his rashness.

2. He affirms, That the general judgment of the learned Elders, and their
Practice, was as the Dissenters plead; but now diverse of these Elders do
retreat and recant.

To prove this, he ^lledgeth two Passages out of An Answer to Thirty two
Questions, Printed 1639. But those Passages are too weak to bear up this
Assertion; yea, do evidence the quite contrary.

The first is taken out of Page 22. of the said Book; the sum whereof is this,
That such whose Parents are not Believers and sanctified, are not foederally
holy; Foederal Holiness or Sanctity being limited to the next Parents, 1 Cor.
7. 14.

Ans. 1. This Passage does not agree with the Dissenters; for it does appear,
that the Author does account Foederal Holiness to be Sanctity: and therefore
the next parents being in Covenant with God, and so continuing, they are
Ecclesiastically holy, sanctified, and visible Believers.

2. Do not the same Elders in this Synod deliver the very same Doctrine, in the
Second Proposition, and fifth particular, viz. It is requisite to the
Membership of Children, that the next Parents, one or both, be in Covenant?
Citing the same Text, 1 Cor. 7. 14. And where then is the least show of
Recanting?

The second Proof is Page 23. of the said Book, where it is said, that We
believe that all Members of Churches ought to be Saints, and faithful in Christ
Jesus, none excepted, Ephesians. 1. 1. 1 Cor. 1. 2. Phil. 1. 1.

Ans. 1. This passage speaks of Members to be admitted in adult age, and
therefore might be as well alleged to prove a consent with the Anabaptists, as
with the Dissenters; which was far from the meaning of that Author. Besides,
though they ought to be so, yet that denies not, but being regularly admitted,
they are still Members of the Church, till they be regularly cast out, though
they do not approve themselves to be such.

2. Do not those Elders profess the same Doctrine in the Synod, Propos. 2. viz.
Members of the visible Church, according to Scripture, are Confederate visible
Believers? alleging the same Texts, Ephesians. 1. 1, etc. Where then is this
Recantation?

Sixthly, The Author of this Preface excusing the Paucity of the Dissenters, in
comparison of the many able, learned; and godly Magistrates and Ministers that
consented; He objecteth three things against the Synod consenting.

1. That diverse of the Elders having Preached and Practiced that Doctrine of
late years, were Pre-engaged: and it is strange that after Vows they should be
called to enquired.

Ans. Were not Paul, Barna^as, and others, as much engaged in the Doctrine of
that Synod Act 15? and did they come after Vows to enquire? 2. Were not the
Dissenters as much pre-engaged in their Opinion? why then did they come after
Vows to enquire?

2. It is Objected, That diverse Messengers being no Logicians to answer
Syllogisms, and discern Ambiguities, were overborn by the many Opposers.

Ans. It is incongruous and too high, to make the Body of the Synod the
Opposers, which more fitly agree to the few Dissenters. 2. Though diverse were
not such Logicians, yet Charity might allow the choice Members of our Churches
to be able to judge of Arguments drawn from the Scriptures; and so far
conscientious, as that discerning the Voice of Christ, they would not be born
down with number of Opposers. To say nothing of the Logic of the Dissenters,
that might be as little as the others.

3. It is Objected, That the corruption of man most inclines to walk in the
broadest way, though the stratter way be never so clear; especially when
persons (...) Place, Power, Learning and Piety, are so linked together.

Ans. Be it so, that there is such a corruption in man; yet when such persons
as the Synod are confessed to be) agree in one, and that in so Solemn an
Ordinance of God, where Christ has promised his Presence; Charity, (...) path
all things, might well conceive that Grace would prevail above such a
Corruption. 2. If our Brother be not aware of it, I can assure him that there
is also a Corruption in man, and in good men too, under the not on of
Strictness and Zeal, to swerve as much to the other Extreme: As when the
Disciples would have kept little children from Christ, Mark. 10. 13,14. When
out of Zeal against the Tares, men would hazard to pluck up the Wheat also,
Matthew. 13. 28,29. So when we are apt to judge others, whom God has received,
Romans 14. 3. which I wish our Brother seriously to consider. The way of the
Anabaptists is a straiter way, yet I suppose this Brother does not judge it his
corruption, to choose a way somewhat larger. So is the way of the Seekers and
others, who think their straiter ways as clear as our Brother thinks of his.

Seventhly, In Page 5. this Brother answering another Objection, That this
Discourse may seem needless, seeing all other Congregational Churches agree
with them, that they know of; alleging the Savoy Meeting, Chap. 29. Of Baptism
4. Yet, says he, there needs abundant confirmation: for no this temptation
will spread further, when more then the third part of the Stars of Heaven here
are swept down, as is Prophesied Rev. 12. etc. Furthermore, (says he) let the
world know, That the Lord has still a few Names in New England who hold fast
his Name, and are steadfast in the Faith and Order of the Gospel, and detest the
Abominations of Antichrist.

Ans. 1. This Author glories much in the Consent of other Churches. We see
here his ground, which I shall examine. The Position of that Meeting of the
Churches, it this: Not only those that do actually profess Faith in, and
Obedience unto Christ; but also the Infants of one or both believing Parents,
are to be Baptized, and those only. We can well consent with this Doctrine,
without any prejudice to the Doctrine of the Synod: For we profess and prove in
the Synod, That the Children of the Church being in Covenant with God, owned by
him as holy, as his People, his Children, and manifesting their continuance in
the Covenant, according to the fifth Proposition, these are visible Believers
in Ecclesiastical account, in Scripture account, 1 Cor. 1. 1. with 7. 14. And I
cannot believe but that Reverend and Learned Assembly would acknowledge Regular
Church Members to be visible Believers; And it does appear, that these are
Regular Church Members in their judgment, by their Second Position, Concerning
the Church, Chap. 26. where they say, All such as profess the Faith of the
Gospel, and Obedience to God by Christ according to (...) not destroying their
Profession by Errors everting the Foundation, or unholiness of Conversation,
are Members of the visible Church. Now it cannot be denied that the persons
described in the fifth Proposition of the Synod are such, for they profess
their Assent to the Doctrine of Faith, and subjection to the Rules and
Discipline of Christ; they give up themselves to God, own the Covenant, do not
destroy their Profession by Errors, nor unholiness of life; holding the
Doctrine of Faith, and not being Scandalous in life. So that for ought that
appears, that Assembly agrees rather with the Synod, then with the Dissenters.

2. In that our Brother makes such a distinction between the third part of the
Stars of New England swept down, and A few Names in New England that hold fast
the Name of God, and are steadfast in the Faith and Order of the Gospel: How
well this Comparison agrees with the Rules of Charity, Humility and Modesty, I
shall leave to the judgment of others.

3. I must enquire into the Truth and Grounds of so deep a Charge, laid upon
more then the third part of the Stars, the Lights set up in the Churches of
New England.

Is it the present Doctrine of this Synod, enlarging the subject of Baptism
beyond the Opinion of the Dissenters, that is their fall from Heaven? And the
more strict Opinion of our Brethren, the Character of those few Names remaining
that hold fast the Faith and Order of the Gospel? as indeed it seems to be
so. For, 1. This is the occasion taken up to make this Comparison. And 2. Those
other Imputations, of Forsaking former Practices, Recanting of Elders, New
Conversion of New England, in reference to this Doctrine, seem to intimate as
much. 3. And that Expression of a few Names holding fest the Faith and Order of
the Gospel, does plainly intimate, that not only more then a third part of the
Stars, but also the generality of New England are greatly departed from the
Faith and Order of the Gospel, and that, at the present, in the judgment of
this Author: which is so high a strain, that I am loath to say what might be
spoken of it.

Now if this be our Fall from Heaven, it is our comfort that we are not yet
fallen so far as many bright Stars of the first Magnitude, that have shined
gloriously in the Churches; such as Calvin, Cartwright, Perkins, Ames, and
hundreds more, whose judgment is well known to be larger in this Point then
the Synod does hold forth. And we are fallen no further then blessed Cotton,
Philips, Shepard Rovers, and others of the Bay Churches: Famous Hooker and
Stone of Connect^^, Prud^e^, of (...)-Haven, Partridge and Newman of Plymouth,
with diverse other Lights in New England, of whom I am persuaded that they are
gotten to Heaven in that Opinion, whereby we are supposed to be swept down from
Heaven. But let this Brother beware, lest himself and his few Names be not
judged by some to be swept down from Heaven also, who hold an Opinion, That
Infants of the Church are to be Baptized, which is not so strict a Tenent as
they would have.

4. But if this so great a Charge be laid upon more then the third part of the
Stars upon any other ground, let it be considered whether the Rules of Charity
and Gospel Order would not require, that he should first have Convinced his
Brethren of their Fa^, yea, indeed of their supposed Error about the Subject
of Baptism) before he should cast so great a Scandal upon them before the face
of the world; even an Heretic may have two Admonitions before rejection.
However, whether it be this or that ground, surely this course does not a
little darken that loud Profession of our Brother's holding fast to the Order
of the Gospel.

It has been our portion all along, to go through evil Reports from the
mouths of many discontented persons, and corrupt Opinionists, Familists,
Anabaptists, Quakers, and the like; but I little expected such things as these
from so near a Friend and Brother. I will not deny or excuse the Declining of
many Professors to corrupt Opinions, to the World, Loose Ways, and the like:
Neither will I justify all things in all the Elders of New England; failings
may be found in Judgment and Practice, and perhaps some may be larger in their
Judgment concerning The subject of Baptism, then the Synod does hold forth:
But God forbid we should judge them to be swept down from Heaven, that differ
from us in greater matters then these, or for such Blemishes as are incident to
good men. But whether the generality of the Stars in New England Churches be
not yet in the right hand of Christ shining in their Orbs with the light of
Heavenly Doctrine, and Christian Conversation, I appeal to the Consciences of
all the sober-minded People of God in the Country; yea, and also to the
Conscience of the Author of this Preface himself, who gives this Testimony of
the Elders in the Synod, being more then half the Elders of all the Churches of
New England, Page 5. viz. That they were able, learned and godly; and again,
Eminent in Learning and Piety. However it be, it is a very little thing to be
judged of men, whether approved or condemned.

Concerning that which is said of Mr. Parker by name, for Publishing a Book in
favor of Episcopacy; our Brother does or might know, that the Book is
distastful also to his Brethren, as well as to himself: yet the approved
Learning and Piety of the person might have called for better language.

As for that Imputation, That the Common Prayer Book finds some Advocates in
New England, who can find Stakes and Materials to edify Gods People in a
Congregational Church (as is said.) I wonder that a man of Piety and Gravity
should venture to publish such things to the world upon (As is said;) and to
what end is it, except to cast dirt upon his Brethren? Much more then is true,
is said of that and other things. The Lord help such as profess such
stedfastness in the Faith and Order of the Gospel, to walk up to the Rules of
Gospel Order and Charity, more then his Brother has done.

Thus much to the first Preface. Concerning the second, To the General Court. I
shall Animadvert only upon two or three Passages of it. And

1. Whereas Page 8. they tell the Honored Court, That they have yielded and
voted with the rest to far, that rightly considered and practiced, it would
silence all sad Complaints against the many great and prevailing corruptions of
Youth amongst us.

Ans. It is true, that one of the chief of our Dissenting Brethren did
propound, and earnestly promote the third Proposition; viz. That the
Infant Seed of the Church are Members of the same Church with their Parents,
and when they are grown up, are personally under the Watch and Government of
the Church: and this rightly practiced, would indeed tend much to the end
aforesaid; for so the Church, by an Ordinance of Christ that has his Promise
annexed, should either bring such Youth to Repentance, or purge the Church of
them. But it is as true, that this Treatise puts such a sense and meaning
upon that Proposition, as renders it useless and vain to the ends aforesaid.
For, if they be not actual, personal nor immediate Members, whereby acts of
Church Government should be put forth immediately upon their persons, but only
reach them at the second hand viz. by their parents, as was said by some in the
Meetinghouse, to which they refer, page 23. And if Excommunication, that
healing Medicine of Christ for the destruction of the flesh, and saving of the
soul, may not touch them, as is in the same Page 23. Yea, if the Foederal
Holiness of their persons, and so their Covenant Interest continue no longer
then their minority, (wherein indeed they are scarce capable of any Church
discipline) as is affirmed Page. 37.) These things being so, let any man judge
how it is possible for Church government to reform such great, many, and
prevailing corruptions of Youth.

2. Page 10. our Brethren say, It is apparent to all, what a corrupt mass of
Unbelievers shall by this change throng into the fellowship of Gods People, and
the children of strangers, uncircumcised in heart, shall be brought into Gods
Sanctuary to pollate it, contrary to Ezekiel 44. 7, 9.

Ans. 1. Whether these Parents in question be to be counted Unbelievers, or
not, will appear after. But if the Charity of our Brethren will allow them no
other term, I pray, Who let them into the fellowship of Gods People? Do not our
Brethren with us affirm, That the Covenant of Abraham belongs unto them, and
therefore they are to partake of Baptism the Seal of it? (...) (say they) there
is the whole Churches Communion in Baptism, as well as in the Lords supper, 1
Cor. 12. 13. If then they would keep them out of the fellowship of God, People,
they must join with those that shut that door against all Infants by which they
entered; for if they be Unbelievers, that are so qualified as in Proposition the
fifth, then surely they were so when they were Baptized. By this, with many
other Passages, our Brethren may see whither their Principles do carry them. So
that the difference between the Synod and our Brethren, is not about their
Admission into the fellowship of Gods People, but about The Improvement of the
Ordinances of Christ for their good, while they continue in that fellowship;
wherein the Synods Doctrine admits them not to acts of Communion with the rest
of Gods People, but as they are regularly fit; neither do the Synod continue
them in that fellowship, any longer then they walk orderly, without deserving
the Censures of the Church. Ezekiel. 44. speaks of strangers amongst the children
of Israel, such as Tob^ah, Neh 13. 4, etc. not of any Israelite, ver. 9.

3. Our Brethren in their sixth Consideration, acknowledging The great
Deliverances and Wonders that the Lord has wrought in former times for New
England; they add, But since the motion of this Change, what the Lords dealing
has been and still is, we leave to the Prudent to judge: We may glory in this
New Light, but we fear it will prove but glorying in our shame.

Ans. I had thought that Gods gracious answer to the Prayers of the Synod 1662.
in sending Rain so speedily and sweetly, night not only have taken off that
Imputation of the Drought unto the Synod, as if it was for their sakes; but
also it might have stayed our Brethren from such Applications of the
Providence of God to their own ends. I remember that when the polish Cantons
imputed the death of Zuinghus and Deco^amp^d^us to the just Judgment of God
upon then for causing their Troubles, the Historian has this Observation upon
it: It is (says he) a plots thought to attribute the disposition of every
Event to the Providence of God; but to determine to what ends those Events are
directed by his high Wisdom, is not far from Presumption. Men are so
straightly and religiously wedded to their own Opinions that they are persuaded
God loves and favors them as much as themselves. Hist. of the Council of
Treat, p. 60. But if we must needs take notice of the dealing, of God with
New England, in reference to this case; Can any prudent man say, that the
Deliverances of New England are not as great and wonderful in these last years,
and at this day, as in former years? And as for those afflicting Providence
that have lately a fallen us, have we not had as heavy Strokes many ways
formerly? And have we not Sins enough that are evident, to humble us under the
Lords hand, as deserving these and greater evils, but we must needs apply them
as Judgments of God to this (falsely so called) Change, and brand the constant
Doctrine of Gods eminent Messengers amongst, as a N^w Light that will turn to
our shame? The Lord forgive these many harsh Censures of the Brethren.

Thus have I passed through this unpleasing part of my Work: wherein, if by
clearing the innocent, any thing does reflect upon the Accusers, I hope the
equal-minded Reader will excuse me; considering, that the Name of God is named
upon the Elders and Churches of New England, and would have suffered in them,
should not such unjust Aspersions be wiped off them by a just Apology. Had our
Brethren followed the Example of the Synod, with like Love, Tenderness and
Moderation as is expressed toward them in their Preface, the world had not
been so Scandalized, as I fear it is, by these Contests, and I had spared much
of this labor. Oh! when shall we see Brethren manage such Disputes with that
Brotherly Love, Ingenuity, and Endeavors to find out the Truth, as becomes
the Cause of CHRIST, and without such harsh Reflections upon men's persons! The
want of this is a Lamentation, and shall be for a Lamentation.

CHAP. II.
Concerning our Brethrens Answer to the main Question.
COncerning The Order of this Treatise, I need not trouble the Reader; nor
concerning their two Propositions premised. Who eth that Baptism in a Seal of
the Gospel, and to be administered according to Gospel-Rules? Or, that the
surest way to end Controversies, is to find out how it was in the beginning?
Only these Rules are too general, and have a like influence into all
Controversies about Gospel Ordinances.

I shall therefore endeavor to clear up from Scripture two or three
Propositions, that have a more near and immediate respect to the Question now
in debate. It is no question between us, Whether adult persons to be joined to
the Church, and to be Baptized, should hold forth Faith and Repentance to the
judgment of Charity, and that in same particular visible Church? nor, Whether
the Infant Seed of such are to be Baptized? But, the very Hinge whereupon our
Debate turns, lies in these two things:

1. Whether the Infant Seed of all Church Members ought to be Baptized?

2. What it is that Cuts off any from his Membership in the visible Church?

Clear up these two from the Word of God, and the whole Controversy is issued.
To this end I shall premise three things, which being proved by the Word of
God, will make my way plain and easy through all these Antisynodalia.

That however the Membership of the seed of the Faithful be conveyed to them by
their Parents instrumentally, Propos. X.
yet it flows from, and is grounded upon Gods Institution, as the principal
Efficient cause thereof, who is pleased to extend the Grace of his Covenant not
only to the Parents, but also to their seed. God enters into Covenant with
them, He is their God, They are his People. This is evident Genesis 17 7. I will
establish my Covenant between Me and Thee, and thy seed after thee, to be a God
to thee, and to thy seed after thee: At eight days old they were to be
Circumcised, as a Token of the Covenant between God and them, ver. 11, 12.
Deuteronomy. 29. 11, 12. Their little ones stood before the Lord their God, to enter
into Covenant with the Lord their God, to be established a people to himself.
What can be spoken more plainly and fully to this purpose? Acts 2. 39. The
Promise is to your Children. 1 Cor. 7. 14. Your Children are holy. And indeed,
what can be supposed in the Parents Faith, Profession, or Covenanting to bring
in their seed, but it depends wholly upon Gods Free Grace ordaining his
Covenant so to be dispensed? And hence it follows. That the Infant Seed are
in their own persons actually Members of the Church, being actually in this
Covenant with God as His People, and he Their God, and having the Covenant in
their flesh, the Seal of it applied to their persons. And hence they cannot be
cut off from their interest in God, and his Covenant-Priviledges, but in such a
way as he has ordained, which in Gospeltimes is by Church Censures. Mat. 18.
1. Cor. 5.

There is a two fold Dispensation of the Covenant of God in his visible Church:
Propos. 2.
1. Outward and visible, by which the Lord bestows upon his Church, and all the
Members thereof, the outward Privileges of the Covenant, his Ordinances, and
Means of Grace, as they become capable thereof, and wherein he tenders unto
them the Saving Benefits thereof, with many Means to bring up their hearts to
the embracing thereof. This is evident, they have all the Name and Title of
Gods People, His Children, A Roy (...) Priesthood, Holy Nation, Saints, etc.
Gen, 6. 2. Exodus 19. 5,6. Deuteronomy. 32. 9. Isa. 1. 1,2. Psalm. 50. 1. 2. Mat. 15.
26. And the Ordinances and Means of Grace are theirs, Roy. 3. 1, 2. and 9. 4.
So in the New Testament, the whole Church of Corinth are called Saints, and
faithful in Christ. The Seven Churches, Rev. 1. are called Golden Candlesticks,
though there were corrupt Members in them. And the Ministry of the Word, and
other Ordinances, belong to the visible Church, Ephesians. 4. 11. 1 Cor. 12. 28.
Mat. 18. 1 Cor. 5. Whence it is evident, That Officers are set in the Church
for the edifying of the Body of Christ, and for the healing and saving the
Members of the visible Church.

2. There is a more Inward, Spiritual, and Saving Dispensation of the Covenant
to such as truly Believe, and perform the Conditions of the Covenant, whose
hearts God has circumcised according to the Promises of the Covenant, Deuteronomy.
30. 6. Ezekiel. 36. From this different Dispensation it is, that the Lord, though
he requires of all to Fear the Lord their God, to walk in his ways, to Love
him with all their hearts, etc. Deuteronomy. 10. 12,13. and keeps Covenant and Mercy
with them that love God, and walk with God in faith and obedience; but
reproves the wicked for taking his Covenant into their mouths, Psalm. 50.
rejects their Sacrifices, Isa. 1. etc. 58. calls them Uncircumcised,
Ethiopian, etc. in respect of any inward and saving Benefits of the Covenant:
yet still he owneth them as His People, Saints in Covenant with him, Psalm 50.
1. and follows them with the Means of Grace till there be no remedy. 2 Chronicles.
36. This is evident in all the story of the Church in the Old and
New Testament, as will appear more afterward.

There is a different Rule and Reason of admitting Members into the visible
Church, Propos. 30.
and the continuation of them in it, being regularly admitted. In Admiting
Members into the Church, we justly look for such positive Qualifications as the
Word of God requires, viz. A visible Profession of Faith and Repentance in
adult persons, and Foederal Holiness Infants. We well approve that Saying of
Chamier, quoted by our Brethren. No man can disallow such diligence, to prevent
the profaning of holy things, and left such as Simon Magus should lie hid. But
to cast out such as are Regularly admitted, we must have positive Impenitency
in sin, as a ground to count them as Heathens and Publicans, Mat. 18. and that
after due patience toward them; for, even an Heretic may have two Admonitions
before rejection, Tit. 3. 10. or at least some notorious scandalous sin, as
some conceive from 1 Cor. 5.

These things premised, I shall proceed to consider the next thing in order,
which is our Brethrens Answer to the main Question viz. Who are the Subjects of
Baptism? To which their Answer is this:

That visible Believers and Converts in full Communion with an instituted
Church, (being unbaptized) together with their next seed in minority, are the
proper and im^^edlate Subjects of Baptism, as to the receiving of it. For the
proof of this, they refer to the places before alleged, ^a. 28. 19. 20. Mark
16. 16. Acts 2. 38,39. Their large Discourse I pass by, though some things
might be matter of Dispute: but I would decline all impertinencies, and come to
their Reason gathered out of those Scripture; which is this:

Those are proper and immediate Subjects of Baptism, to whom Christ, in the
Gospel-institution, has appointed it. But visible Believers and Converts in
full Communion with an instituted Church, are the persons (being unbaptized) to
whom Christ, in the Gospel-institution of Baptism, has appointed it. Therefore
visible Believers, etc.

The greatest weight or stress of this Argument, lies upon that place Acts 2.
38,39. and I see our Brethren put much confidence in it, affirming, That the
minor is express Scripture, and therefore though many are unwilling it should
be true, and will cavil against it, it will be found true at the Day of
Judgment, etc.

Ans. God forbid, that in searching after the Truth we should Cavil at the
Word of God; but let us take heed of Adding to it, or Taking from it: But
whether the Minor will prove true, or not, we need not stay till the Day of
Judgment; for, the holy Scriptures, the Judge of all Controversies, will
easily decide it; and I will directly deny the Mino^; for none of those
Scriptures, or any other that I know of, will prove, That full communion with
an instituted Church is requisite to the Subject of Baptism, much less that
such are the proper Subjects thereof; as if such and only such, were to be
Baptized. This of Full Communion our Brethren thought would advantage their
Cause, and so have put it in: but it is a mere Addition to the Word of God,
which wholly fails them of any proof, yea makes evidently against them. In that
principal place, Acts 2. 38,39. it is evident, that they were Baptized before
their Full Communion: For, 1. Peter called them to be Baptized upon the ground
of the Promise, ver. 38. 2. They were Baptized, and added to the Church, before
full Communion, ver. 41,42. 3. It had been very preposterous to put them into
full Communion, before Union with the Church sealed by Baptism; for Baptism is
a Seal of Union with the Church, 1 Cor. 12. 13. which must go before Communion.
But they seem to suppose, at least, that some in full Communion may be
unbaptized, by that word ( being unbaptized:) but the truth is, that our
Brethrens confidence in this Argument will be found so greatly to fail them,
that whilst by it they seek to straiten The Subject of Baptism, beyond the
Doctrine of the Synod, they destroy and take away the whole Subject it self of
Baptism, because there will never be found any such persons, according to
Gospel-Rule, (which they call so much for, and appeal unto) that are in full
Communion with an instituted Church, being unbaptized. I will be a little bold
with our Brethren in this case, to challenge them to produce any Rule or
Example in the Gospel, of any person that either was, or by Rule might be in
full Communion with an instituted Church, being unbaptized. I hope this Answer
is plain, and no Cavil.

Yet for the further clearing up of this Answer, I shall remove what may be
further said by our Brethren.

Object. Though those in Acts 2. were not in full Communion actually before
Baptism, yet they were admitted to a state and right to full Communion by their
Baptism, which these Children in question are not.

Ans. 1. The Question is not, What state or right the Baptized are partakers
of, as a consequent fruit of Baptism received? but, what it is that constitutes
a person to be a fit Subject to be Baptized? To describe the proper subject of
Baptism, by the consequent fruits of it, and not by the precedent causes that
gives right to Baptism, is very improper and preposterous. If the Question
were, Who are the proper Subjects of Church Membership? we say, Confederating
visible Believers, and their seed; for this makes them fit for, and brings them
into such a relation. But should any answer, That the proper Subject of
Church Membership, is a person in full communion with an instituted Church; or,
One that is under the Teaching and Rule of Church Officers, which are the
fruits of Church Membership received: Who does not see the weakness of such an
Answer? and the like is this case, Baptism being the Seal of Gods Covenant with
his Church, whereby we are Baptized (...) 2. Although the Infant Seed of the
Church cannot actually enjoy full Communion in all Ordinances, as their Parents
do; yet the Covenant of God sealed to them in Baptism, sets them in estate and
right to all the Benefits of the Covenant, to be enjoyed by them as they become
fit for them, as well as their Parents: for, the Covenant of God with Parents
and seed, is one and the same. All that are in the same Covenant, are bound to
the same Duties of the Covenant, and have the same right to all the Benefits of
the Covenant, as they come up to perform the Conditions, and are fit for the
enjoyment of the Blessings. In adult Members it is so, who being under
Admonition for Scandal, or in a Frenzy, or the like case, though they partake
not of all the good of the Covenant, yet their right remains: So here, when the
seed grow up to perform the Duties of the Covenant, they also partake of the
Benefits, not by any new Covenant, or Membership, but by the right of that
Covenant God made with them, and sealed to them in Baptism, as will appear more
fully afterward.

2. I shall add further, It is true, that to admit adult persons into the
Church, and to Baptism, visible Faith is required; and so much the Texts
alleged prove: but this is not the case in Dispute between us, but About
persons already in the Church, and Baptized, whether in such, the ground of
Baptizing their seed, be Faith and Grace made visible in the same manner, or
their Interest in the Covenant? and therefore the Argument does not conclude
the Question. Put case any of those visible Believers and converts, Acts 2.
should afterward discover by their Worldliness, Looseness, or other ways, that
there is in them no sap or favor of Faith and Grace, even to the charitable
judgment of most in the Church; my Question is, Whether yet (so long as they
continue in the Church) their Infant Seed shall not be Baptized? If it be
granted, then it is not such visible Faith and Grace, but the Interest in the
Church and Covenant that gives Right to Baptism, and so to these Church Members
in question. If this be denied, let there be one Tittle of Scripture-Rule or
Example produced to the contrary. Having answered their Reason, I shall present
an Argument from the same Text, to confirm the Doctrine of the Synod. It is to
be noted, That the Promise, Acts 2. 39. is (...) which God made with Abraham,
as appears by that parallel place, Acts 3. where ^^. 19. Peter exhorts to
Repentance (...) in (...) 2. 38. and chap. 3. 25. he uses the same Reason in
other words, You are the children of the Covenant which you (...) with our
fathers; the substance whereof all grant to be this, I will be thy God, and the
God of thy seed in their generations (although the Apostle there makes use of
another branch of the Covenant concerning Christ, that seed in whom God is the
God of his People.) Now the Reason stands thus:

If the Covenant-promise to Abraham and his seed, be a ground to Repent and be
Baptized in the Gospel Dispensation, then it is the Covenant of God with his
visible Church that gives right to Baptism. But the Covenant-promise was a
ground to Repent and be Baptized, in Gospel Dispensation, Acts 2. 38,39. with
chap. 3. 19,25. Therefore it is the Covenant of God with his visible Church,
that gives right to Baptism: which is the Doctrine of the Synod.

Thus much to their Scripture-Argument. To which our Brethren add the
Testimony of Mr. Richard Mather: Well agreeing with this (say they) is the
Answer of Reverend Mr. Mather in his Catechism.

Ans. But, by their leave, it differs from their Answer in the main thing
that touches the cause in hand; for, there is nothing of full communion in
his, which they put into theirs.

2. That Reverend and Learned Author speaks only what adult persons should
be, in joining to the Church, and the seed of such so converted and joined,
which has reference to their first joining to the Church; not denying, that
being once regularly joined, they may after have their seed Baptized, though
they should not approve themselves to be true Converts.

As for the Objections and Answers here brought in, they are not the Objections
of the Synod: And what is any way pertinent to our Dispute, may sufficiently be
taken off by what is said, and therefore I shall pass them by. And I may the
rather so do, seeing our Brethren in their third Answer have yielded the Cause.
For, if the Covenant made with Abraham, and the Circumcision of his seed, was
appointed upon the same terms that Baptism was; Why should not Baptism be
continued successively to the seed remaining in the Covenant, as well as
Circumcision?

CHAP. III.
Concerning our Brethren Notes upon the first and second Proposition.
IN the first Proposition our Brethren only give an Explication (...) word
Visible Church, taking the word Church as a Gems of all particular Churches;
from which we Dissent not.

In the second Proposition, viz. That the Members of the visible Church
according to Scripture, are confederate visible Believers, and their
Infant Seed: They have made diverse Notes upon it.

1. That by visible Believers, they intend true Believers to the judgment of
charity. And herein we agree.

Second Note, That visible Believers, and their Infant Seed, are rightly
distinguished. And so far we agree also, That they are persons distinctly and
severally covenanted with by the Lord, not wrapped up in their Parents (as they
speak.)

But whereas they distinguish them from their Parents, as not being Believers,
never so called in Scripture. How can they believe that know not the right hand
from the lift? They have no Faith actual or habitual, nor can have, without a
Miracle, and we hold Miracles are ceased.

Ans. This is the great Objection of the Anabaptists against the Baptizing of
Infants; and what the scope of this Note is here, I know not, except it be to
deny them any actual and personal Membership in the Church, as in their next
Note: I shall therefore speak the more fully to it. And first it appeare^h, the
Scripture numbers them amongst Believers, if it does not also expressly call
them so Mat. 18. 6. One of these little ones that believe in me; which some
interpret of Infants. 2 Cor. 6. 14,15. where all in the Church are called
Believers, in opposition to I (...) And no Paul would not allow any of these to
marry with Infidels when grown up, by that Rule of his, and therefore he
reckons them as Believers.

2. To make a person a Member of the visible Church, the matter is not whether
he has Faith and Grace really, or not; if he has such qualifications as the
Rule of the Word accepts for Faith in the visible Church, we can go no
further. This is clear, and will be easily granted in respect of adult persons.
If a man profess he does believe with all his heart, as the Eunuch, Acts 8. and
nothing appears to the contrary: If a man appear Pricked at the heart, Gladly
receive the Word, etc. as those Acts 2. Gods Rule accepts of such as Believers
and so must the Church, though the Lord sees that some, it may be many such,
have no Faith in truth; for, Many are called, but few chosen. And however they
may afterward discover themselves, as Ananias, Simon Magus, etc. yet all will
grant these were rightly received as visible Believers. In like manner is the
case of Infants: The matter is not, whether they have true Faith, or not, in
the act or habit, so they have such qualifications as God accepts of, to
receive their persons into his Covenant, and to be Members of the Body of
Christ: This suffices, though they have no Faith or Grace really. Now that the
Lord does so accept of them into the number of the Faithful, and as Believers,
appears, 1. Because he does account them Holy, 1 Cor. 7. 14. be it Foederal
or Covenant-Holiness, this implies that God is their God; and if God gives
himself unto them, surely he accepted them as Believers: He is not the God of
Infidels, who are without God, Ephesians. 2. 12. The Covenant of God is the same
with Parents and their seed, and therefore God accepts them as such as are
answerable to the Terms and Conditions of that Covenant. 2. This appears from
the Nature of the Seal of the Covenant: Circumcision was a Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith, Romans 4. When God appointed this Seal to be set upon
Infants, surely God numbered them with Believers. So when we are said to be
Baptized into Christ, can there be any Union with Christ without Faith? As no
real Union without true Faith, so no visible Union without that which is
accepted as Faith: And when the Lord Jesus faith, Of such is the Kingdom of
God; does the Kingdom of God belong to Unbelievers? If it be said, It is their
Parents Faith that is accepted for them, not any thing in their own persons: I
answer, If so, that God will accept the Parents Faith and Profession in their
name and stead, as a Public Person covenanting for them; yet this is Gods free
and preventing Grace toward the seed and does engage their persons to the
Duties of the Covenant, to avouch God for their God, etc. and therefore they
are actually and personally in Covenant with God, as well as their Parents.

3. I add further, That as we must rest in such Signs of Faith as the Rule
requires, though it should not be there; so also we must in charity judge the
best, and walk toward such as visible Believers, till by impenitency in sin
the Church have just cause to count them as Heathens and Publicans. So Phil. 1.
7. It is meet I should think thus of you all, because you are in my heart. Love
and Church-charity should reach far, especially to Members of a Church
regularly received, because the Lord does give Faith to some; and who have
Faith in truth, who not, is hard for us to judge. And so it is in such Members
as came in in their Infancy: We know the Lord gives Faith and Grace to some
betimes, as to Samuel, Timothy, and others; yea, in all Elect Infants that die
in minority, no God gives them the Spirit of Faith, and that which is
proportionable to the act of Faith; and therefore in charity we are to look at
them as Believers, till for in penitency in sin, the Church shall ^ount them as
Heathens and Publicans.

Their third Note is, That though they be Members in general, yet Infant Seed
are only foederally holy; others that hare taken hold of the Covenant, are
sanctified in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 6. 11. These have a Parental and partial
Right, not compl^at and perfect. Thus the Lord speaks Deuteronomy, 4. 37. and 10. 15.
Acts 2. 38 39. So Dr. Ames distinction into Perfect and Imperfect, Medul. Lib.
1. Cap. 32. Sect. 13.

Ans. 1. Let it here be applied what was said of their Faith in Gods
acceptance, and the reality of it in some of them, as well as in some admitted
by Profession of Faith.

2. Concerning this distinction of Foederal Holiness, and Sanctified in Christ
Jesus: It is not sufficiently considered what is contained in Foederal
Holiness; Does it not include, that They are in Covenant with God, that God is
their God, that They are his People, An holy People to himself, A Royal
Priesthood, A Chosen Generation, etc? which the Apostle applies to Believers,
1 Pet. 2. 9. And what difference is there between Sanctified in Christ Jesus,
and Saints, and Faithful in Christ Jesus? which the Apostle attributes to the
whole Church, 1 Cor. 1. 2. whereof the holy seed was a part, 1 Cor. 7. 14.

3. To say, These have Parental and partial Right, Deuteronomy. 4. 37. and 10, 15.
Acts 2. 38. does any of these Texts prove, that Parental Right (as they call
it) or the Right by the Covenant of God with their Fathers, is a partial Right?
If God loved their fathers, and therefore chose their seed after them; was not
the seed the object of Gods choice? and as perfect Members of the Church in all
ages, as their Fathers were? It seems the Lord did as great things for them, as
for their Fathers, out of his love to them, bringing them out of Egypt with
great power, Deuteronomy. 4. 37,38. And were not their, little ones established to be
a People to God, as well as their Fathers? Deuteronomy. 29. 11,13.

4. Doctor Ames makes nothing for their Tenent, but agrees, with the Synod.
His saying (take it entire) is this: Children of the faithful are to be numbered
amongst the faithful, as Members of the Church, 1 Cor. 7. 14. for they are
partakers of the same Covenant, and also of the same Profession with their
Parents: yet Infants are not so perfect Members of the Church, that they can
exercise acts of Communion, or be admitted to partake of all Privileges,
until the increase of Faith appears; but from those things that pertain to
the beginning of Faith, and entrance into the Church, they are not to be
excluded. Medul. Lib. 1. Cap. 32. Sect. 12,13. By this it is evident, that he
does not make them I^ perfect Members, in respect of the relation of
Membership, but in respect of acts of Communion: Even as a child of the family
is not so perfect to do the work, and enjoy all the Privileges of the Family,
as a grown person is; but yet he is as perfectly a Member of the Family, as a
grown man. Besides, that eminent Doctor looked at Infants of the faithful as
capable of such thing as belong to the beginning of Earth, and to be admitted
to acts of Communion, as the increase of their Faith appears: He thought of
no other and new Membership to entitle them to all Ordinances, but that, to
come to them by their Covenant in Infancy. What can be more full, to show his
concurrence with the Synod?

Object. But Membership is a word of Relation, and therefore cannot admit of
degrees (...) (...)

To this our Brethren Answer, That it is a clear exception from the general
Rule, That such Relations, the foundation whereof is Quality to Action, (...)
admit of diversity of degrees; as Similitude is a Relation grounded on some
Quality; one thing may be more or less like another so Calefaction, etc.

Reply. The Authors of this Distinction are not so authentic, but that it may
be examined by the Rules of right Reason. And first it confounds all Logical
Arguments making Cause and Effect, yea Compared, to be Reldi^^, which is
against Reason.

2. This Distinction will not hold; For, what Relates are there, whose
foundation is not in Action or Quality? Why is this man a Father, but because
he begat a Son?. The Relation of Master and Servant, Husband and Wife, and the
like, is it not by Covenant, which is an Action? So that by this Rule, all
Relates should admit, Degrees of more or less; which is against that received
Rule of Logic (...).

But how is this Exception applied to this case?

In both which respects (say our Brethren) the Membership of the Infants Faith,
and act of Confederation being grounded on the Parents Faith, is rightly
distinguished from the Membership of such as are adult, which is grounded on
their own Faith and Confederation.

Reply. What dependence has this upon the former Distinction? where this
Relation is said to be founded upon such diversity of Action, as makes two
sorts of distinct Members, as is pretended, and not only two degrees of
Membership?

2. There is no such diversity of the Foundation of Membership, a should thus
distinguish these Members; the Foundation is one and the same, viz. The
Free Grace of God in his Covenant, extended both to Parent and Child, Genesis 17.
7,9. I will be thy God, and the God of my seed. The way of entering into this
Covenant on man's part, is only a differing means or manner of Covenanting
with God. As a Sciens put into the Stock by hand, and the Branches that grow
out of it are all equally parts of the Tree, though the Branches were not so
put in by hand as the Sciens was. A Father that purchases Lands to himself and
his Child, the Child has as perfect and good a Right as the Father has,
though he did not make the Bargain and Covenant as his Father did.

The fourth Note of our Brethren is upon those words, Whose next Parents are in
Covenant: which they say is ambiguous; and therefore they distinguish between
Parental Covenant, (as they call it) and Personal with presupposed Faith and
Repentance: the former they count insufficient to capacitate the next seed to
Baptism.

Before I come to Answer their Reasons interwoven in this Discourse: Seeing our
Brethren have so often recourse to their Distinctions of Members into actual, not
actual; personal, not personal; by Parental Covenant, and personal; immediate,
and mediate; perfect, and imperfect: and lay so much weight upon them; as, That
the Parental Covenant cannot capacitate their seed to Baptism; That their
Membership by Parental Covenant lasts no longer then minority, page 37. and,
The personal Covenant of such, makes them Members; is the Form of their
Membership, and the like: I shall therefore here, once for all, recall these
things to the Law and Testimony, and try what Light is in them.

And first, in my best Observation, I can find no such distinction of Parental
and Personal Covenant, that should make two sorts or kinds of Members, neither
in the Name or Thing: but all along in the Scripture, the Covenant is one and
the same that God makes with his People, and is called by the name of Gods
Covenant, Genesis 17. where this Covenant was most solemnly made, and to which the
oft-renewed Covenants in the Old Testament, and the Covenant or Promise in the
New Testament, has reference, as Romans 9. Acts 2. 38,39. with Chap. 3. 25. Gal.
3. In that place, I say, the Lord calls in My Covenant, seven times, and that
in respect of Abraham's seed, as well as of himself, ver. 7,9,10. Deuteronomy.
29,10,11,12. The little ones stood to enter into Covenant with the Lord their
God. Ezekiel. 16. 8. Centred into Covenant with thee, and thou becamest mine. This
is the common language of the Scripture. In the New Testament, besides other
places, note that 1 Cor. 12. 12,13. where the Apostle proves that the Church is
one Body, consisting of many Members (some weak, and of less honor, etc. By
Baptism, The Seal of the covenant, we are all Baptized into one Body; and so as
that there might be no Schism in the Body: But how shall the Body be one, if
some be Baptized into this Body as actual and personal Members, some not actual
not personal; some into a parental covenant, some personal? What a Schism might
this make? some saying, I am not actually of the Body, though Baptized with the
same Baptism, (and there is but one Baptism;) others may say, I am of the Body
personally, You are no actual Members of it? It seems the Apostle knew not
these Distinctions: So Gal. 3. 27,28. All are Baptized into Christ, and are all
one in Christ.

2. I find, that the Scripture does clearly own the Church-seed grown up to
adult age, to be in Covenant with God, and so Members of the Church by virtue
of Gods Covenant made with them in their Infancy, and that before any personal
Covenant, as they call it. See Deuteronomy. 5. 2,3. The Lord our God made a covenant
with us in Horeb. The Lord made not this covenant with our fathers, but with
us; even us, who are all of us here alive this day. Now who were these, but
that generation numbered by Moses and Eleazar, when all that were numbered at the
first, of twenty years old and upward, were dead? See Numb. 26. 63,64. with
Deuteronomy. 1. 3. So that multitudes of these now alive, were in their infancy and
minority when God made that Covenant with them in Horeb; and yet it is expressly
said, God made that Covenant with them, even with their own persons: that was a
Personal, not a Parental Covenant, as our Brethren phrase it. And this is set
out with a double Emphasis: 1. Negatively, Not with our fathers; Why so, was it
not made with their fathers now dead? Yes surely, but not only with them; or,
not with us as wrapped up with, or in our fathers. 2. With us, Affirmatively;
and again, Even with us; and a third time, With us that are now alive, in
distinction from their father to at were dead: and all this before that second
Covenant, Deuteronomy. 29. for this is said of them before the Repetition of that
Covenant at Horeb, to provoke them to the obedience thereof. Where then is this
Parental Covenant distinguished from Personal, so as to make two sorts or
degrees of Members?

3. I observe, That when the Scripture calls this Covenant, The Covenant of
their fathers, or of the Lord God of their fathers, it is never so styled, to
the diminution or abatement of any Blessing, Privilege, or Favor that might
come to their seed by it, but rather for the advantage, and greater good of the
Children: See Exodus 3. 15,16. and 6. 3,4, 5. Lev. 26. 44 45. I will not abhor
them, etc. But I will for their sakes remember the covenant of their Ancestors,
whom I brought out of Egypt: So Deuteronomy. 4 31. So that in these, and diverse other
Scriptures, we see no such disadvantage to the seed by being under Parental
Covenant, as our Brethren call it; who first bring down Gods Covenant to a
Parental Covenant, and then make a very slight matter of that also; that it
cannot capacitate their seed to Baptism; Is not sufficient to establish their
seed to be a people to God; Will not reach beyond the minority of their seed,
and the like.

Object. But it will be Objected, That although these Distinctions be not so
expressly found in Scripture Phrase, yet the nature of the subject does admit
such Distinctions.

Ans. 1. Some of them cannot consist with the nature of the subject; as for a
person to be a Member, but not actually; a person in Covenant baptized into the
Body of Christ, and yet not personally; these are plain Contradictions in
adjecto, as we say, To be A Member, and yet No Member. As for this of Parental
and Personal Covenant, so much used, it makes not two Covenants, the Covenant
is but one, and that Gods Covenant, as is said: there is but a differing modus,
or manner of entering into it.

2. As for the rest, of Mediate and Immediate Members, Perfect and Imperfect,
and the rest: Suppose that in some sense the subject do admit them, yet they
can never bear up such Consequences as are built upon them: for, they are but
distributions ex adjunctis, and those common Adjuncts to many other Subjects,
which cannot make any essential difference: As when we distinguish the Church
into Visible and Invisible, it is still but one and the same Church: So
Church Covenant into Explicit and Implicit, there is still but one sort of
Churches or Covenants: So the Church is either Incomplete, without Officers, or
Complete, with her Officers; yet still a true Church, and not two sorts of
Churches. Such is this case, if we put twenty such Distinctions upon Members
from common Adjuncts, they make no essential difference. These things, besides
much more that might be said, to me afford this Conclusion, That in these
Distinctions, and the Consequences thereof, there is no Scripture Light, but a
Mist to darken the Free and Rich Grace of God, shining out in his Covenant to
the Faithful and their seed.

I return now to consider the Reasons of our Brethren, to prove, that parental
Covenant cannot capacitate their seed for Baptism.

Their first Reason is, For so the Covenant should be intailed to a thousand
generations.

Ans. What our Brethrens Parental Covenant can do I know not, but surely Gods
Covenant is An everlasting Covenant, Genesis 17. 7. to be a God to their seed,
viz. They keeping within the Covenant, from generation to generation: And if
the Lord will intail his Covenant, and the Means of Grace thereby, to such as
keep his Covenant, to a thousand generations, what hurt is in that? Blessed be
his Name for it.

Reas. 2. Ishmael and Esau had the Parental Covenant, but were not Established
thereby.

Ans. This was not from any insufficiency in Gods Covenant (for so I must call
it) but from their sin that continued not in it. By this Reason, Personal
Covenant by Profession of Faith and Repentance, is as insufficient; for such,
by their sin, may not be established.

Reas. 3. The immediate Parents Unbelief breaks off the Covenant from their
seed, Romans 11,20,21,22.

Ans. True; such Unbelief whereby they obstinately rejected Christ, Acts
13,45,46. Mat. 21,42,43. but this was not from any insufficiency in Gods
Covenant to Capacitate their seed to Baptism, or Establish a People, but from
their rejecting of the Covenant, in rejecting Christ, that Seed in whom all
were to be blessed.

Reas. 4. Baptism is, as Circumcision was, A Seal of the Righteousness of
Faith, Romans 4. 11. which is invisible in these children that should to (...)
Baptism.

Ans. This is true that as Circumcision, so Baptism is a Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith: And thence I infer that when God by his Institution
appointed that Seal to be transmitted to the seed of (...) as they continued in
the visible Covenant they were (...) of God as Believers in Ecclesiastical
account: and so it is in respect of transmitting Baptism; so long as the seed
of the Faithful continue in the visible Church, they are visible Believers in
Ecclesiastical account, and may so transmit Baptism to their seed.

Reas. 5. They allege Acts 2. 38,39. which, they say, restrains Baptism to the
next seed of such Parents as manifest Repentance and Effectual calling, and is
if more weight then any Argument from farfetched and (...) in consequences out
of the Old Testament.

Ans. To this Text is fully answered before; and, as was said, it favors the
Doctrine of the Synod, That the Promise or Covenant is the ground of Baptism.
And that this Text has no such Restraint, it may appear thus: Let all he
granted that is here said, yet suppose such visible Converts discover afterward
no sap or favor of Grace, to the fairest Charity, but continue still in the
Church, shall not their seed be Baptized? or must every Churchmember hold
forth a Profession of Repentance at the Baptism of every child? I suppose our
Brethren will not so affirm; and if so, then a Churchmember, though not
apparently a true Penitent, may have his seed Baptized. As for far-fetched
Consequences from the Old Testament, the following Discourse will show, that
none use them so much as our Brethren do.

Concerning the Answers here given to an Objection from Exodus 20. The Synod
does not make that Objection, but agrees with this Interpretation given in the
third and fourth Answer; viz. So that the Privileges are only continued to
the seed of the next Parents, that continue in the Covenant, and are not broken
off.

CHAP. IV.
Concerning the third Proposition.
Propos 3. T Hat the Infant Seed of Confederate visible Believers, are Members
of the same Church with their Parents, and when grown up, are personally under
the Watch and Government of that Church.

Our Dissenting Brethren, by their dilute interpretations of this Proposition,
seem to recede from their own Concessions: For this Proposition was propounded,
and earnestly promoted by one of the chief of them, as tending to issue other
Difficulties amongst us, and to Reform the corruptions of Youth: and there were
not above three noted that dissented from it. But when it was observed (as is
here said) that the other Propositions would be inferred from it, and so
strongly, that some said, The whole Cause was given up in that Proposition; Our
Brethren therefore now think to ease the matter by their interpretations: but
such they are, as cannot consist with the terms of the Proposition, as will
appear.

First, (say they) when it is said, They are personally under the Watch of the
Church; the meaning is not, that they have an actual, personal, and immediate
Membership, which is proper to those in full communion, but only that the
Church-watch, in the dispensation of it, should reach unto their persons: which
was publicly expressed in the Meeting House by us.

Ans. How inconsistent are these things? 1. These persons are Members of the
Church, but not actually: How then are they Members? potentially? so are many
that are fit matter for a Church, that yet are no Members: or are they so
habitually: surely they are actually Baptized into the Body of Christ, 1 Cor.
12. 13. And shall we Baptize actually, such as are not actually in the
Covenant? 2. They are personally under the Watch and Government of the Churches
yet the Church must not deal with their persons, but reach their persons at the
second hand, viz. by their Parents: (So indeed some expressed themselves, but I
thought it would not have been owned by the rest) But thus to reach their
persons, is not to touch them with any act of Church Government, but of
Family-government only. Yea, thus to reach their persons, is no more then the
Church may reach an Heathen servant: for the Church may Censure the Master, if
he restrain not the evils of his Servant, as well as a Father for the evils of
his Child.

Secondly, (say they) By Discipline, we do not intend Excommunication, which is
proper to Offenders in full communion; for how can they be cast out of full
communion that were never in it?

Ans. Then they must suppose that Excommunication is no part of Discipline, or
intend a Discipline ineffectual to Christ's ends: for what are Admonitions
unregarded, without that Censure to set them home? Mat. 18. Excommunication is
not to cast out of full communion only, but out of all communion: Let him be
as an Heathen and Publican. It is a giving up to Satan, for the destruction of
the flesh, that the Spirit may be saved, 1 Cor. 5. 5. and this sovereign
Medicine all that are within are capable of, and may stand in need of it.

Nevertheless, say they, the Church may disown them, and declare them to be no
Members, upon their deserting of the Church, and the Covenant of their fathers,
by such a Sentence as Peter pronounced to Simon Magus, Acts 8. 21.

Ans. 1. This disowning such as no Members, is a mere invention of man, never
ordained of Christ, nor tending to reach the ends of his Discipline: for,
though it seems to agree with Excommunication, in not owning them as Members;
yet it wants that awful dread of Excommunication, to humble the sinner, and
bring him in. Yea, thus to disown them as no Members, is to rid the Church of
any further care of them, as those without. But all acts of Christ's Discipline,
are acts of the love and compassion of Christ and his Church to the Souls of
offenders, to seek their Repentance and Salvation, 1 Cor. 5. 2. 2 Cor. 2. 6,7,
etc.

2. Acts 8. 21. gives no ground of this Practice: For, 1. Peter did not
presently disown him as no Member (neither indeed does the place refer to
Membership, but to the power of giving the Holy Ghost) but declaring his sin
and danger, he exhorts him to Repentance, and to pray to God for pardon, ver.
22. which implies, that upon his Repentance he was ready to promise pardon,
according to the end of Christ's Discipline: but persisting impenitently in his
sin, he might then be cast out. Besides, 2. This Sentence was upon one that
came in by Profession of Faith; and if that were Peter's meaning, to disown him
as no Member of the visible Church, and it be an Example to be imitated, then
any Member discovering Hypocrisy to a discerning Spirit, might presently be
disowned as no Member, which would make sad work in Churches.

3. If the Church may disown them, when they desert the Church and Covenant,
then they may, yea ought to own them as Members, when they own the Covenant,
and do not desert the Church.

I cannot but make a little pause here, before I passion; and seriously entreat
our dear Brethren, and all of their mind, to consider well how the Lord is
wont to deal with his visible Church, and all the Members thereof, in the Old
and New Testament, and compare therewith this their respect and care of the
Lambs of Christ's Pluck. When the Lord has once stricken a Covenant with his
People, taking in their seed with the Parents, Genesis 17. 7. Deuteronomy. 29,10,11.

1. What Abundant Means of their Salvation does he ordain, and cause diligently
to be improved to that end? Cain and Abel both admitted to Sacrifice; Abraham's
Commands were to his whole Family-Church, Genesis 18. The daily ordinary
Sacrifices, and the more solemn and extraordinary, were for the whole
Congregation, Lev. 4. 14,21. Numb. 15,24,25. To Israel pertain the Adoption,
the Glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the Service of
God, and the Promises, Romans 94. And how did the Lord follow his Church in all
ages by his Prophets, to bring them to Repentance? yea, when gone after Baal,
to reduce them by Elijah. How affectionately does the Lord by them plead with
his People? Jer. 2. and 3. Micah 6. Psalm. 81. 8, etc. So in the New Testament,
the Ministry of the Word, and other Ordinance, are given to the Visible Church
for their Salvation, 1 Cor. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11, etc. and Discipline to reduce
and save offenders.

2. Consider the Wonderful Patience of God in seeking the Salvation of his
visible Church. When the Children of God were so corrupt, that God resolved to
destroy all flesh; yet he spared them an hundred and twenty years, sending Noah
a Preacher of Righteousness to seek their good, Genes. 6. And how great was his
Patience to Israel and Judah, sending his Prophets early and late, out of his
compassion, till there was no remedy? 2 Chronicles. 36. So the Lord Jesus sent his
Epistles To the seven Churches of Asia, to heal their corruptions; and though
he threatened to Come quickly, yet spared them many years.

3. See with what Compassion and Bowels, of humane Affections, as it were, the
Lord expresses himself, when he is about to cast off a People he has been in
Covenant with: How shall I give thee up, O Ephraim? etc. my Repentings are
kindled together, Hos. 11. 8. So Christ, O Jerusalem, how often would I have
gathered thee, as an He^ her Chickens? etc. Mat. 23. 37. How did he Weep over
Jerusalem, saying, O that thou had it known at least in this thy day! etc. Luke
19. 41. This is Gods way. But what is our Brethrens Way to these Members of the
visible Church, to whom they confess the Promise does belong? Acts 2. 39.

1. Though God have stricken his Covenant with them, and Sealed it To be their
God, and own them to be His People; yet they will not acknowledge them Actual
personal Members, but in effect Distinguish them out of the Church.

2. They allow them no more acts of Church-watch and Discipline, then may reach
an Infidel-servant: and Excommunication, the most effectual Ordinance of Christ
to Destroy the Flesh, and Save the Soul, must not touch them.

3. So quick they are, that if the Lord be not pleased to give them Saving
Faith and Grace so soon as they come to adult age, Disown them as No Members,
and so let them go. Now how far unlike this is to Gods Way, who does not see?
And I must confess this is to me one great Argument, That the Way of these
Brethren is not the Way of God.

To proceed: Our Brethren to clear this Coast, think fit to Answer The Reasons
of the Synod to prove their Continuance in the Church. But the Reader must
note, That those Arguments are not applied to this Proposition in hand, here
being Eight Reasons to prove They are personally under the Watch and Discipline
of the Church, which are not touched by them. But the Reasons that our Brethren
here speak unto, are those brought by the Synod to prove the last Branch of the
sixth Argument for the fifth Proposition, viz. That Churchmembers admitted in
minority, understanding the Doctrine of Faith, and publicly professing their
Assent thereto; not scandalous in life, and solemnly owning the Covenant before
the Church, wherein they give up themselves and children to the Lord, and
subject themselves to the Government of Christ in the Church; That their
Membership still continues in adult age, and cease not with their Infancy.
And this is the rather to be noted, because if their Answers suit not the case
of such persons, then they are not pertinent to take off the Reasons of the
Synod. But let us see what is answered to these Reasons (though out of their
place.)

Reas 1. Because in Scripture persons are broken off only for notorious sins,
or incorrigible impenitency and unbelief; not for growing up to adult age, Rom
11. 20.

Ans. Our Brethren answer, Not simply for growing up, but for such accessaries
as may attend adult age. Romans 11. 20. does not say only for notorious sins,
etc. Negative unbelief, Neglecting the means of Grace, Not Professing the
Faith, and the fruits thereof, may give cause of breaking off. And to such,
though our patience and expectation ought to be large and long, yet it may be
tired out at last, and come a period.

Reply. 1. If our Brethren would but hold to this, it would tend much to our
desired Unity. For, hence it will follow. That their Membership received in
infancy does continue in adult age, until such Accessories do appear, and till
the Patience of the Church be tired out. 2. If it were granted that Negative
unbelief, manifested by Neglect of the means of Grace, Not professing of the
Faith, and the fruits thereof, might, after long patience, give just cause to
break them off; yet, by this Rule, the persons described in the fifth
Proposition cannot be said to be broken off, for they do Profess the Faith, and
the fruits thereof, by a life free from Scandal, giving up themselves to God,
and submitting to the Government of Christ in his Church: Or at least such as
these are still objects of the Churches Patience, and therefore not broken off.

And seeing our Brethren come thus far, I shall willingly meet them here, and
confess, That if Negative unbelief be manifested by Neglect of the means of
Grace, Not professing of the Faith (being orderly called thereunto by the
Church) and Continuance impenitently in such Neglects, after due means, web due
patience used by the Church, this would give the Church just cause to cast them
out for this were Incorrigible Impenitency in sin. And, Oh that we might meet
here! But when I consider many other Expressions in this Treatise, I fear my
desires will fail: For, if no act of Church Government may be put forth upon
their persons immediately, but by their Parents, how shall the Church come at
them, to put them upon such Duties, and deal with them for their Neglect
thereof? and when their Parents be dead, what shall the Church do then? and
when their Membership is owned only in general, as wrapped up in their
Parents, not actual or personal; yea, when their Personal or Foederal Holiness
is denied to continue in adult age? These, and the like Passages, Page
23,25,37. and in other places, do make me fear, that our Brethren will not hold
to their Expressions in this place.

Reply 2. Although Romans 11. 20. faith, Not only for notorious sins, etc. yet
it shows how the Jews were broken off, which we know was for Notorious sins,
and Incorrigible Impenttency, and Unbelief. And let any show, that any have
been broken off, or by Rule may be so, for Negative unbelief, without
impenitency added. The contrary we find 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. Mat. 21. 43. Acts 13.
45,46. and 18. 6 and 19. 8.

Reas. 2 The Jewish children circumcised, did not cease to be Members by
growing up to adult age, but continued in the Church, and were bound to the
Duties of Members, Deuteronomy. 26. 2 -- 10. O 16. 16, 17. Gal. 5. 3.

Ans. The circumcised Jews did not cease to be Members simply for growing up,
but for growing out of kind. Jer. 2. 21. They became degenerate Plants. Amos
9. 7. Children of the Negroes; Bastard Branches to be cut off, Job. 15. 2.

Reply. There is a double great mistake in applying these Scriptures. 1. They
do not speak of persons ceasing to be Members. As for Jer. 2. it was the Word
of the Lord to Jerusalem, ver. 2. and that in the thirteenth year of Josiah,
after the Covenant was renewed, and Religion greatly Reformed; and God calls
them His People, ver. 11,13 and therefore their Membership ceased not at that
time. So Amos 9. He Prophesied in the days of Uzziah King of Judak, and Joash
the son of Jeroboam King of Israel, in whose days God had not yet removed
Israel out of his sight. As for Joh. 15. 2. though the Lord does in his time
cut off unfruitful Branches by Death, or Church Censures, yet till he does so,
they are expressly said to be in Christ. So that these places speak nothing of
the ceasing of Churchmembership in adult age.

2. These places do not suit the persons in the fifth Proposition. Jer. 2.
speaks of such as Prophesied by Baal; That played the harlot on every high
hill, ver. 20. and are therefore called A degenerate plant, ver. 21. Amos
speaks of Israel in the corrupt times of Idolatry, and reproves their great
Covetousness and Oppression, Chap. 8. 4,5. And therefore if such as those had
ceased to be Members in adult age, it does not follow that the Membership of
these in question does cease.

What is here added about the phrase of Entering into Covenant, is a mistake:
for, the Synod speaks of Entering into a new Membership, not denying the phrase
of Entering into, Or Renewing the Covenant.

Reaf. 3. Those Relations of Bond-servants and Subjects, which the Scripture
makes use of to s^ forth the state of the children of the Church by, Levit.
25. 41,42. Ezekiel. 37. 25. do not cease with Infancy, but continue in adult age,
whereby they are engaged to duty when they are most fit for it. So here.

Ans. 1. The Relation of the Son of the Bondwoman may cease in adult age, as
Ishmael; much more of the Bond-servant.

Reply. The Relation of Ishmael ceased not by growing up to adult age, nor till
he was cast out for his sin. These in question are not cast out, or deserving
so to be: and therefore this Answer is impertinent.

Ans. 2. By this Reason, Moral wickedness should not cut off adult Members, for
that does not cut off the Relation of Bond-servants.

Reply. This Argument taken from the common nature of Civil and
Church-Societies, does not require they should hold in all things; as, that
they should be governed by the same Laws, and subject to the same Punishments:
that were indeed to make Similitudes run on all four (as we say.) It is enough
if they agree in that thing wherein they are applied. And this Application of
the Synod is clear in Levit. 25. 41,42. where the children of the Israelitish
Servants were to serve with their parents unto the year of Jubilee, which being
every Fiftieth Year, they were often grown up to adult age before that time: And
the reason why they should then go out, is, Because they (that is, Parents and
Children) are my Servants, faith the Lord. So that there is the like reason in
Gods Service, as in that Relation. And we see David delights to own himself
the Servant of the Lord in this very Relation: I am thy Servant, the Son of
thine Handmaid, Psalm. 116. 16. that is, engaged to the Service of God from his
Birth, and so for ever, as the Son of the Handmaid was, Exodus 21. 4. And yet if
the Similitude should be pressed so far, we know that the Moral Wickedness of
Murder, Adultery, and the like, would cut off Servants and Subjects by Death,
according to the Law of God.

Reas. 4. There is no ordinary way of cessation of Church Membership but by
Death, Dismission, Excommunication, or Dissolution of the Society; none of
which is the case of the children in question.

Ans. 1. This is to be understood of Members in full communion, which these
adult children are not.

Reply. If none of these belong to such adult children, to cause their
Membership to cease; then by their judgment, it seems, they have no Membership
at all, if neither Death, nor Dissolution of the Society, can cause it to
cease: which before they seemed not to own.

Ans. 2. There are many other ways of the cessation of Church Members; they
may Excommunicate themselves (at Mr. Cotton, The Assembly at the Savoy, and Dr.
Ames affirm.) Also by Withdrawings sometimes commanded of God, 2 Timothy 3. 5.
Romans 16. 17. Also by Apostasy, 1 Job. 2. 19. By Heresy, as Arrtan^, Quakers,
etc.

Reply. 1. If these adult children may Excommunicate themselves, then it is
yielded that they are Members in adult age. But if all these were granted, yet
none of them is the case of these in the fifth Proposition.

2. Here is a needless multiplying of particulars; All but a supposed Lawful
Withdrawing, are Subjects of Excommunication, as shall be proved. Concerning a
Lawful Withdrawing, that Turning away from such, 2 Timothy 3. 5. and Avoiding
those, Romans 16. 17. may more fitly be understood to be done, by not admitting
them into the Church, or casting them out if they be in; rather then by
Withdrawing from the Church it self for their sakes, which cannot be done
without Schism, except many Cautions be used. Neither can such Withdrawing
loosen a man's Relation to the Church, which no may call him to account for it,
and he is bound to render a reason thereof; else all Discipline may hereby be
made frustrate. Now if his Reasons be found just, it will be one with a
Dismission.

3. Concerning this Self-Excommunication: 1. The ordinary instances of Cain,
Ishmael, Esau, are not clear that they did Excommunicate themselves, but were
cast out by the Lord. The Curse of Cain, was to be A Vagabond and Fugitive in
the earth; which he understood of his casting out of the Church, From thy face
shall I be hid, Genesis 4. 14. As for Ishmael, the case is plain that he was cast
out by Abraham, the Governor of the Church, by the appointment of God. And of
Esau it is expressly said, that when he would have inherited the Blessing, he
was rejected, viz. of Isaac; after which rejection, he went away from the
Church in Isaac's Family. Concerning the instance of the Sons of Abraham by
Keturah, how long they continued to Worship the true God, or how they fell off,
who can say, or prove that they Excommunicated themselves, without any act of
God that had the nature of such a Censure? As for Open and Obstinate Heretics
and Apostates, which some call Excommunicate de Jure, that hinders not but
that they may, and ought to be Excomminicated in Fact also. But if we speak of
Gospel Times, wherein the Lord Jesus has so expressly instituted
Church Censures, for the saving of Offenders, and purging of his Churches; and
has confirmed the same with such Promises, to B^^de and Loose in Heaven, what
is Bound and Loosed on Earth, Mat. 18. I conceive (with due respect to the
Authors alleged) That no Member of a particular Church (having the Power and
Exercise of Church Discipline) can so cut off his Relation to that Church
actually, but that the Church may, and ought to dispense the Censures to him,
as the case shall require. My Reasons are:

1. From the Ends of Church Discipline; Reason 1.
viz. To reduce and save Offenders, Mat. 18. 1 Cor. 5. 5. To purge the Church,
1 Cor. 5. 7. To vindicate the Name and Glory of God, in bearing full testimony
against Scandals, 2 Samuel 12. 14. 2 Cor. 7. 11. You have approved your selves to
be clear in this matter: For the Example and Terror of others, 1 Timothy 5. 20.
Whence the Reason stands thus:

If the Lord Jesus has betrusted his Church with the Power of
Church Discipline for these and the like Ends; then it is the duty of the
Church to put forth this Power whenever these, or any of these ends may be
attained with the Edification of the Church. But there is no case can befall
any Church member, wherein these, or some of these ends may not be attained.
For, put case a Member be turned Arrian, Quaker, Turk, and what you will; yet
the Censure denounced will Acquit the Church, vindicate the Name and Glory of
God, in bearing full testimony against such Scandals, and tend to the Terror
of others; yea, who knows how far the Lord may improve it upon the sinner
for his good?

2. If in Scripture-patterns, Reason 2.
the worst of Heretics and Blasphemers were laid under Censures,
notwithstanding their supposed SelfExcommunication, then we ought to follow
such Patterns in all such cases. But such was the Practice in
Scripture-examples, Tit. 3. 10. 1 Timothy 1. 20. 1. Cor. 16. 22. Therefore, etc.

3. That Position that opens a door for Church Members to evade and frustrate
Church Discipline, Reason 3.
is not to be admitted. But this Position does open a door to evade and
frustrate Church Discipline. For, by this means, any Member in danger of
Churchcensures may Withdraw himself, Renounce the Church, and then they cannot
proceed against him: for, it were in vain to cut off a Member that has already
Excommunicated himself. If any shall say, It is sufficient punishment and
judgment of God, in leave a man so to Excommunicate himself. Ans. But how then
shall the Church be discharged of their duty to save the Offender by
Excommunication, that tends to destroy the flesh, and save his Soul? I never
read that God blessed Self-Excommunication to that end. Yea, by this Position,
a wicked Schismatical Member shall take the Keys out of the hands of the
Church, and Censure the whole Church, was often they do) and the Church has no
power to lay any Punishment upon him for it.

And hence those Scriptures alleged Hebr. 10. 21. 1. John 2. 19. may receive a
just Answer; for, that Forsaking of the (...) of themselves, and Going out,
does not exempt them from Churchcensures, or prove that they were cut off
before Church Censures. If the foot says, I am not of the Body, is it
therefore not of the Body? Or can this Withdrawing discharge the Church from
using the means of their recovery, or exempt themselves from the just Censure
and Punishment appointed Christ for such Offenders?

Reas. 5. These adult persons are Members or Non-members; if Non-members, then
a person admitted a Member, and sealed by Baptism, not cast out, nor deserving
so to be, may (the Church still remaining) become a Non-member, out of the
Church, and of the unclean world: which the Scripture acknowledges not.

Ans. 1. Members and Non-members are not opposites, but with taking in the
conditions of all opposites, as in this case (ad idem, or in the same respect)
they may be Non-members in full communion, and yet Members in Parental Right.

Reply. 1. This Distinction is not ad idem; for the want of full Communion is
not such a respect as makes a man a Non-member, for so a man under Admonition
for some Scandal, or in a Frenzy, should be a Non-member. 2. The question is
not, Whether these be Members in full Communion? but, Whether that Membership
which was sealed up unto them in Baptism, does continue in adult age? And this
seems once more here to be granted.

"Ans. 2. They may deserve Censures, though not put upon them."

Reply. This is not the case of these Members in question: And if it were so,
that they deserved Censures, yet no man is actually cut off, till the Censure
be applied. And, it they may deserve Censures, then are they Personal Members
under Church Discipline.

CHAP. V.
Concerning the fourth Proposition.
Propos. 4. T Hese adult persons are not therefore to be admitted to full
Communion, merely because they are, and continue Members, without such further
Qualifications as the Word of God requires thereunto.

Our Brethren granting this Proposition, yet in reference to the fifth
Proposition, are pleased by way of Prevention to state this Question; viz.
Whether there are, or should be in the Church, such persons as have publicly
and personally Covenanted, that are not in f^ll Communion? The Negative they
prove:

Reas. 1. Because public and personal Covenanting is the formality of a
Churchmember; such have all the constituent causes, and so all the
consequences of the Form, and all the privileges of that Subject, which in
this case is full Communion. Hence the Form introduced, and the Covenant
personally owned, does necessarily imply all the privileges belonging (...)
unto.

Ans. Every Public and Personal Covenanting is not the Form of
Church Membership. The Covenant was often renewed, publicly owned, or Entered
into, by such as were Members of the Church before; (...) 29. and other
Scripture, does appear. And this is the case of these in question, who were in
Covenant with God and his Church, and had the Seal of Baptism set thereto
before, Genes. 17. 7. 1 Cor. 12. 13. and therefore this Owning of the Covenant,
is only a manifestation of their continuance in it. And hence this is not the
Form of their Membership, but a Duty of their Covenant, and does not in itself
fit them for full Communion, except withal they hold out such Qualifications
as the Word of God requires thereunto. A Youth that has the constituent
causes of a Man. Soul and Body, with some Understanding and Reason, is not
thereby capable of all Privileges of a man; as, To Marry, Give good Assurances
of Lands, and the like. An adult person received into the Church by personal
Covenant, is not fit for the Lords Supper merely because he has Covenanted,
for except he has suitable qualifications, he will Eat judgment to himself.

Reas. 2. Because those that were admitted by personal Covenant in the
Primitive Church, continued in full Communion, Acts. 2. 41. 1.

Ans. There is not the same reason; for they were admitted in adult age, and
also endued with eminent Gifts of the Holy Ghost: These being admitted in
Infancy, do only by Owning the Covenant, manifest their continuance therein.
The Indians newly converted, and holding forth so much Faith and Repentance as
may admit them into the Church and Baptism, might yet need further Preparation
to the Lords Supper, not having such eminent gifts.

Reas. 3. Because this Doctrine presupposes, that what Knowledge, Faith and
Repentance is required in adult persons coming to Baptism, is not sufficient to
the Lords Supper.

Ans. This Doctrine does not suppose it; for it speaks only of such adult
persons as were Baptized in infancy, not to be Baptized in adult age. It
supposes only that persons Baptized in infancy, and continuing in the
Covenant, and visible Church, may yet be unable to Examine themselves, and
discern the Lords Body. And hence the Reasons which here follow, touch not this
case. And it is well if some of them do not argue Against the Baptizing of
Infants; or, That Infants Baptized may partake of the Lords Supper.

CHAP. VI.
Concerning the fifth Proposition:
Propos. 5. C Hurch-members who were admitted in minority, understanding the
Doctrine of Faith, and publicly professing their Assent thereto; not
scandalous in life, and solemnly owning the Covenant before the Church, wherein
they give up themselves and their children to the Lord, and subject themselves
to the Government of Christ in the Church, their children are to be Baptized.

This Proposition (say our Brethren) does stumble us most. Their Reasons are:

Reaf. I. Because, there being three Expressions propounded, this swerveth
further then the other from the Scripture.

Ans* Be it granted, that several terms and expressions of these Qualifications
were propounded; these only in conclusion were Assented unto. But if our
Brethren judge, That they all swerved from the Scripture, what matter is it
which swerved most from it? If this swerveth most, they have the more advantage
of Dispute against it. But seeing they stumble so much at this, I shall easily
remove this Block out of their way.

Obj. First, say they, in the former Expressions it was required, they should
understand the Grounds of Religion; here, no more then the Doctrine of Faith:
So that they may be ignorant of the Doctrine of the Moral Law, and so have no
knowledge of Sin, of the Duties of Holiness, Righteousness, Sabbaths, etc.

Ans. As if the Doctrine of Faith were not as large as all the Grounds of
Religion, both in the acceptance of Scripture, and of Orthodox Divines. Phil.
1. 27. when the Apostle exhorts them to strive for the Faith of the Gospel,
might they let go the Doctrine of the Moral Law, or any other Grounds of
Religion? 2 Timothy 4. 7. when Paul says, He had kept the Faith, did he let go
the Doctrine of the Moral Law, and other Grounds of Religion? Jude ver. 3.
Contend for the Faith; was not that (...) opposed to the filthy Dreamers that
sinned against the Moral Law? and therefore sorely the Doctrine of Faith
comprehends the Doctrine of the Moral Law. When our Synod at Cambridge 1648.
declared their Consent with the Assembly of Divines in England, in ^he Doctrine
of Faith; and the Assembly at the Savoy calls that Book A Declaration of
their Faith and Order; do they not mean by the word Faith, all the Grounds of
Religion, excepting only matters of Order? But what need more Instances, when
the Preface to this Book tells the world of A few Names that are steadfast in
the Faith and Order of the Gospel? I dare not be so uncharitable, to think,
that such persons do not hold fast The Doctrine of the Moral Law, and all The
Grounds of Religion. Surely the Synod intended it so.

Obj. 2. In the second Expression it was required, that they should be Examined
of their sense of their need of Christ, and desires after him; here, only of
their Assent to the Doctrine of Faith, which the Devils may have.

Ans. But if such sense of their need of Christ, and desires after him, should
not, upon such Examination, appear, but this Assent to the Doctrine of Faith,
with all the other Qualifications; Might not this suffice to show their
Continuance in the (...) Church? What if the Devils may give an Assent to the
Truth? it is not f^ee, but enforced; and they want all the other
Qualifications, that these have.

Obj.3. The former required, that they should give Satisfaction for any O^^^nce
they had fallen into; here, only that they are not Scandalous in life. The
former, viz. Offenses, comprehend Original Sin, or any other committed against
God or man, Jam. 3 2. Scandal in if, ^^oteth only, Notorious sins, and a
course therein.

Ans. That they stumble at this, must needs arise from a very rigid Principle
(whereof this Treatise has too many) For, who ever took up that of Original
Sin, as matter of offense to deal with his Brother for it? Or what Rule have we
to call for Satisfaction for that, or for all such Words or Actions as are
Offenses to God or man? A practice that the Apostle condemns in that very
place alleged, Jam. 3 1. Be not many masters; for in many things we offend
a^l: and therefore pity, and bear with one another* and be not so rigid to
require Satisfaction for every Offense. If this were not so, what use were
there of those Rules of Love, I Cor. 13. 7. Love bears all things. Gal. 6. 2.
Bear one another burdens. Col. 3. 13. Forbearing one another?

2. It is evident Luke 17. 1,2,3. that Offenses to be dealt with are Scandals:
Woe to him that scandalizeth one of these little ones; and Impenitency in any
such Scandal deserves the highest Censure, but repented of, cease to be a
Scandal or Offense, Mat. 18. yea, although such a Scandal should not be a
notorious sin, nor continued in but in one act: So that Not to be scandalous in
life, is full as large as that other Expression, and does include Satisfaction
for Offenses that are fallen into.

Obj. 4. In the former was said, They should own the Covenant of their Parents;
here, only the Covenant: which may extend to Grandfathers, etc.

Ans. I wonder how our Brethren could make to themselves such a Block as this
is to stumble upon, when as the Doctrine of the Synod is so express to the
contrary in the second Proposition, which affirms, That this right in the
Covenant is conveyed only by the next Parents, I Cor. 7. 14. If men have a
lust to contend, and raise Objections, they might as well have objected against
the former phrase, The Covenant of their Parents; for are not Grandfathers
Parents also?

These things (say our Brethren) thus weighed, may suffice to discover, whether
there be not just cause for us to deny our Consent to such kind of Members as
these.

Ans. But these things weighed over again by the equal Balance of the
Sanctuary, and right Reason, I not but the Judicious Reader will see how light
they are, and unworthy to sway the Judgments of such as our Brethren are. But
they add (as they had need) other Reasons of their Denial.

Reas. 2. Because this crosses the two former Propositions, which make the
proper Subjects of Baptism, Confederate visible Believers and their seed:
whereas these, though so qualified, are not (neither Parents nor Children)
visible Believers; for the vilest persons may have these, Romans 2. 18. and 10
19,21. yea, they that commit the sin unto Death may have these, Heb. 10. 26.
There are washed Swine, 2 Pet. 2. 20, etc.

Ans. 1. These Parents are Confederate visible Believers, as has been proved.
They are in Covenant with God, He is their God, God accepts them as His
People. His Children; the Lord has sealed to them the Righteousness of Faith,
Baptized them into Christ, and they Own this God, Submit to his Rules, etc. and
therefore in Ecclesiastical account they are visible Believers.

2. Here is a very palpable Fallacy in citing these Scriptures to prove the
contrary. The vilest persons (say they) may have these: Indeed the Scriptures
prove that some vile persons may have some one of these; as Romans 2. proves,
that wicked men may have knowledge; but these have knowledge, and also Not
scandalous in life, etc. and so may be said of the rest. But which of these, or
any other, does prove, That such persons as have all these Qualifications
conjunctly, are vile persons, or not visible Believers in Ecclesiastical
account, or in Scripture account, and not true Members of the visible Church?
It is true, that such as these may fall away, and become vile, Heb. 10 26. but
may not such as come into the Church by the fairest Profession of Faith, prove
so vile also? and were they therefore no visible Believers before such a fall?

3. These very Scriptures, or most of them here alleged, speak of such persons
(though so vile, as is said) who being adult children of the Church, did yet
continue Members of the visible Church, and they and their seed partake of
Privileges; and therefore such Scriptures cannot reach this case, to disprove
the Membership of these in the visible Church, because they are not visible
Believers, these being far better Members then those were: and I wonder that
our Brethren do not observe it; or if they do, why should they allege such
Scriptures in this case?

Object. But their giving up of themselves and their children to God, implies
Faith, 2 Cor. 8. 5.

Ans. Our Brethren grant, that it may imply Faith, but in persons no better
qualified it cannot imply it. There is a giving up of the Firstborn of man and
beast to God, Exodus 13. 2,12. and 22. 29.

Reply. To say, That in such persons no better qualified it cannot imply Faith,
and that without any Reason rendered, is against the Rule of Love, that hops
all things to be hoped, as this is confessed to be, viz. that it may imply it.
No, a person thus qualified in Knowledge and Conversation, may give up himself
to God in such a manner, that the most discerning Church would receive him as a
true visible Believer into full Communion regularly. The Eunuch's Confession,
that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, was justly taken for true Faith. To say,
There is a giving up of the Firstborn of man and beast to God (if it be not a
Scoff) it argues a very slight thought of so solemn a Profession before God
and his People: for what Comparison is there between these two?

Reas. 3. Where there is no Foederal Holiness, there is no right to Baptism.
But where neither Parent is a Believer, there is no Covenant-holiness, I Cor.
7. 14. where not only one of the Parents must be in Covenant, but a Believer,
that the children be foederally holy. Neither is it rightly Objected, That a
Believer is opposed there to an Infidel: for the children were not upon their
ceasing to be Infidels, Believers: So that themselves were Believers, or their
children foederally holy; They were Catechumeni, and Competentes, before
Fideles.

Ans. 1. Did the Primitive Churches receive any that were not visible Believers
into the Churches? Surely in the Apostles account The Church of God and
Sanctified in Christ Jesus, is all one, 1 Cor. 1. 2. So the Church of Ep^esus
and Colosse, are called Saints, and Faithful in Christ, Ephesians. 1 1. Col. 1. 2.
Why then is it said, that the Parents must be not only in Church Covenant, but
also Believers? as if the one did not necessarily suppose and infer the other.

2. That it is rightly said, That in ceasing to be Infidels they were Believers
in Ecclesiastical account, is evident, in that Infidels and Unbelievers are the
same in Scripture Phrase, and both opposed to Believers, 2 Cor. 6. 14. 15. Be
not unequally yoked with Unbelievers, that is, with Infidels, as appears ver.
15. What part has a Believer with an Infidel? Now I appeal to our Brethren,
whether this Rule of the Apostle would allow the Parents in question described
in the fifth Proposition, to Marry with an Heathen, Indian, or like Infidel; if
not, then in the Scripture account he is a Believer, for otherwise he should
not be unequally yoked with such an one.

3. As for that Distinction of Catechumeni, Competentes, and Fid^les, the
Scripture knows no such thing; for, Lydia and her house were Baptized
together, Acts 16. 15. and the Jailer and his house (...) way. That distinction
came into the Church afterward, and was applied to new Converts, as well as to
the Church-seed.

But our Brethren add further, That else, or otherwise were your children
unclean, cannot be meant only of Infidels; for so we may make mad work of
Scripture: as Deuteronomy. 4. 29. Jehovah is God, and none else; if any should say,
There may be another God to the Gentiles, it would be a sad Exception: So Rev.
2. 15. Repent, or I will come against thee; shall another Church say, It will
not be so with us?

Ans. That to be Unclean, is meant the uncleanness of Infidels, is clear by the
Rule of Contraries. For, if to be holy, be meant of the holiness of the
Covenant; then to be unclean, is the uncleanness of such as are strangers from
the Covenant, and so without God in the world, that is, Infidels, Ephesians. 2. 12.
And what are the children of such as have both Parents Unbelievers, but
Infidels in the Apostles sense? But for that inference, That by like reason
might be inferred from that proposition, There is no God else, that There may
be another God to the Gentiles; I confess my shallow understanding cannot see
any Comparison between those two propositions, but only that the work Else is
in them both; the one being a disjunct Axiom, Your children are clean, or else
unclean, and the other a simple Axiom, where the word Else is of another use
and sense then in the former. But be it so, that it is so sad an Exception from
a general proposition, Jehovah is God, and none else, to say, Yet there may be
another God to the Gentiles; or to say, The threatenings of Christ to the
Churches yet belong not to us: Our Brethren may then consider, when the Apostle
says of Church Members, Your children are holy, to make such an Exception, and
say, Not so, but only the children of Members in full Communion are holy,
whether this be not a sad Exception also.

Reas. 4. The being in Covenant does not privilege to Baptism, without visible
Repentance in Parents, Acts 2. 38,39. The Jews were in Covenant, and pricked to
the heart, yet they were openly called to Repent: So ^ohn Baptist thought, Mat.
^. 8,9.

Ans. 1. The Jews being in Covenant did privilege their children to the
Benefits of that Covenant they were in, viz. Circumcision, the Sacrifices, etc.
Romans 3. 1,2,3. But there was great reason they should be called to Repentance,
when they were to enter into the Gospel Dispensation of the Covenant, because
the Church of the Jews was grown so corrupt; and those in Acts 2. being guilty
of the Blood of the Son of God: and hence John was sent to prepare a people for
the Lord by the Doctrine of Repentance. But when Philip had to do with the
Eunuch, a godly Proselyte, he only called him to Faith in the Person or Christ
as the Son of God.

2. Though Faith and Repentance, in a visible Profession thereof, be required
at the first admission into the Church; yet these are not required in the same
manner in persons regularly admitted, to privilege their seed to Baptism. What
Rule or Example requires a Churchmember to make Profession of visible Faith
and Repentance, so often as he has a child to be Baptized? Or in case a
Churchmember declineth, and gives cause of much of the soundness of his Faith
and Repentance; What Rule will debar his child from Baptism, so long as he
continues a Member of the Church? Now our question is of Persons regularly
admitted, and continuing in the Church.

Reas. 5. The Covenant is limited to such as obey God, and therefore the
Privileges of the Covenant, Deuteronomy. 7. 9. Neh. 1. 5. Dan. 9. 5. He (...)
Covenant and Mercy to them that love him.

Ans. This is a frequent Mistake, to apply that which is spoken of the saving
Benefits of the Covenant, to the Outward Privileges thereof; the first God
performs to such as love and obey him sincerely, yet the other he continues to
all such as do not fall away from the Outward Profession of the Covenant. Take
these Scriptures named: Did not Church Priviledges belong to all Israel, when
Moses spoke that word, Deuteronomy. 7. 9. that God keeps Mercy and Covenant to them
that love him? and yet he gives a sad testimony of them, Chap. 9. 24. You have
been rebellious against the Lord ever since I knew you, So in Nehemiahs time,
did not all that were of the holy, seed enjoy Church Priviledges; when Nehemiah
sp^ke that word, Chap. 1. 5.? and yet the story speaks of many evils amongst
them, that show they were Scandalous in life which these are not, and have many
other good Qualifications besides that also.

Reas. 6. From the tenor and manner of the Covenant made with Abraham, Nehem.
9. 8. when God saw his heart faithful before him. So Genesis 17. 1,7. Walk before
me, and be upright, and I will be a God to thee and thy seed, etc.

Ans. This is the same Reason with the former, built upon the same Mistake, and
may have the same Answer. I readily grant* That all that Enter into Covenant
with God ought to Love him, Obey him Walk uprightly before him: and what is
said Gal. 3. 7,9. that They that are of the Faith, are blessed with faithful
Abraham: Faith and Holiness is the duty of every Churchmember, for want
whereof he falls short of all the Saving Blessings of the Covenant, But does
it follow, that such as are in Church Covenant, and do not perform these
Duties, are thereby deprived of the Outward Privileges and the Means of Grace,
and that before they be regularly cast out of the Church? Were there not many
corrupt Members in the Church, not only of Israel, but also in
Gospel-Churches, as ^f Corinth, Galatia, the Churches of Asia, Rev. 2. and 3.
who did enjoy Church Priviledges; till they were cast out, or till God actually
Removed their Candlesticks? It was indeed a ^in reproved to suffer such, but so
long as they were suffered, they regularly enjoyed the Outward Privileges.

Here our Brethren endeavor to Answer two Objections.

Obj. 1. The Covenant-Blessing was conveyed with Circumcision successively to
the following generations.

Ans. We must consider, that Gal. 3 14. that is expressed to be the Blessing of
Abraham that should come upon the Gentiles, not the Covenant of Jacob ( as Mr.
Cotton has judiciously noted upon the place.) N^w Abraham's Covenant, and the
Blessing thereof, i^ confirmed only to those (...) walk uprightly with God, as
Abraham did.

Reply. That difference Mr. Cotton put between the Blessing of Abraham and
Jacob, may hold in this, That God continued all the Sons of Jacob, and their
Posterity, in the Covenant; not so of Abraham: Ishmael and his seed, and the
Sons of Keturah, were not so; and so Esau and his seed, being the Posterity of
Isaac, were rejected. And that seems to be the meaning of that speech of
Jacob, Genesis 49 26, that His blessing prevailed above the blessing of his
Progenitors. But this difference cannot hold in respect of the tenor of the
Covenant made with Abraham's, Isaac and Jacob; for Ishmael, though graceless,
was taken into Abraham's Covenant, and continued in it, till for his sin he was
cast out. So Esau in Covenant, till for his Profaneness he was rejected, Heb.
12. Was not the continuance of the Covenant to the seed of Jacob, the
performance of Gods Everlasting Covenant made with Abraham, to be a God to his
seed after him in their generations? as is evident, Exodus 3. 15. and 6. 3,4.
Was there ever any Covenant made with Jacob and his seed, upon any other terms
then the Covenant of Abraham? Did not the Lord require Faith and Holiness of
the Posterity of Jacob, as he did of the seed of Abraham? and therefore this is
nothing to hinder the continual succession of the Covenant of Abraham in the
Gentile Churches.

Obj.2. It will be said, God promised that he would be a God to him and his
seed in their generations, for an everlasting Covenant.

Ans. Is it that all the carnal seed of Abraham, in all succeeding
generations, should have God to be their God? Then the Jews are not yet broken
off; contrary to Romans 11. This seed is I. Only such of the carnal seed with
whom the Covenant was established, by walking, in the steps of Abraham's Faith.
2. His spiritual seed, who are only meant (...) that Everlasting covenant.

Reply. 1. It is granted, that the Outward Dispensation of the Covenant is not
Absolute, but Conditional, in respect of the succession thereof: The Lord is
ever mindful of his Covenant, and that everlastingly; till his People break his
Covenant, he never casts them out. But there are many transgressions against
the Covenant, that do not break off a People from the visible Covenant, and the
Privileges thereof: and therefore so long as the Lord does not cast them out
of the visible Church (wherein his patience is very long) the Privileges
thereof continue to their succeeding generations everlastingly, even to such as
are here called the Carnal ^^ed.

2. It does not savor well, that our Brethren so frequently call the
Church-seed A Carnal seed: We know whose Phrase it is, and to what it tends,
even To deny Baptism to them. The Scripture calls them The holy Seed, An holy
Nation, Royal Priesthood, etc. ^our children are holy, I Cor. 7. 14. God never
enters into covenant with any as a Carnal seed, but as an holy People to the
Lord.

3. What difference is there between the Carnal seed walking in the Faith of
Abraham, and his Spiritual seed? if the Everlasting Covenant belong only to
such, then the Privileges of the Covenant belong not to any Churchmember,
till ^e come up to Walk in the Faith of Abraham, which is the Tenent of (we
know whom.)

Reas. 7. It is irregular to receive persons with no better Qualifications into
Covenant; we mean, Ignorant, unbelieving, and impenitent persons, into Public
and Personal Covenant. Church-covenanters must be visible Saints, Psalm. 50.
5,16. Faith, Repentance and Obedience are required to Covenant with God. It is
a palpable untruth for an Unbeliever to engage himself to keep the Lords
Covenant, whereof Faith is the condition, Joh. 3. 16.

Ans. 1. It is a great Mistake* to think these in question are to be received
into the Covenant, when they come to own their Baptismal Covenant publicly.
Our Brethren confess they are in Covenant, Acts 2. which is Sealed up to them
by Baptism, and that in their own persons, as was before proved from Deuteronomy. 5.
2,3. and 29. 10,11,12. This Public Owning of the Covenant, is but the
manifestation of their continuance in it, or a renewing of it.

2. To censure these for Ignorant persons, that understand the Doctrine of
Faith (which contains all the Grounds of Religion^ as is before proved) and for
Impenitent sinners, and Unbelievers, whom God has received, owned as His
children, and Believers, 2 Cor. 6. 14,15. who live without Scandal (which
implies regular Satisfaction for offenses) who give up themselves to God,
Submit to his Government; to lay all this upon them without Proof, is far
from the Rule of Charity. Surely, they are better Saint^ then those mentioned
by our Brethren Psa. 50. 5,16. Neither do th^se visibly hate instruction, in
the sense there spoken of, verse. 17. for they are charged to consent with
Thieves, to partake with Adulterers, to give their mouths to evil, etc. which
cannot be said of these.

3. What though Faith, Repentance and Obedience, and that in truth, be required
of all Covenanters with God; does it follow; that such as being in
Church Covenant want these things, or do not so clearly and fully hold forth
these by a visible Profession, that all such have no right to the outward
Privileges? This indeed is the manner of their Reasoning all along; but the
inconsequence thereof who does not see, that is acquainted with the Scripture
story?

Reas. 8. That Practice that exposes the Blood of Christ to contempt, Baptism
to profanation, the Church to pollution, etc. is not to be admitted. But the
Baptizing of the children of such as are not visible Believers does all this.
Therefore it is not to be admitted.

Ans. 1. I might grant the Argument: It does not conclude against these whom
God has received as holy, as visible Believers, Baptized into Christ, as has
been often proved from I Cor. 1. 2. with chap. 7. 14. and 12. 13. 2 Cor. 6. 14,15.

2. By this Reason, when Members received by Profession of Faith and Repentance
in adult age, do decline, and appear to have as little Faith as these are
supposed to have, though under no censure, such must not have their children
Baptized; or else all those consequences will follow. This may suffice to
Answer the Reason itself. The Proofs I shall touch afterward.

Reas. 9. Because these adult children, of they were not Baptized themselves,
might not be Baptized in this estate, and therefore cannot entitle their seed
unto it. A man must stand possessed of a right, before he can make it over to
another. Acts a non habente potestatem, are void in Law.

Ans. This is a strange kind^ of Reasoning* By supposing that a man has not
that thing which indeed he has and therefore he cannot convey that which he
has. Let me take away a man's Evidences, and Possession of his Lands, and it
is true he cannot make a good Conveyance; but may be not then convey what he
has Evidences and Possession of? There are some Members in Churches, who
suppose they were not admitted, would not now be admitted; does it therefore
follow, that their children may not be Baptized? If acts of such as have no
right and power themselves, are void; then acts of such as have a right and
power, are valid: Now these are Church Members, and Baptized, and therefore
their conveyance of Baptism is valid, by this Argument. And yet it would be
hard for our Brethren to prove, that these being Church Members so qualified,
might not be Baptized, if they had not been Baptized.

Reas. 10. Because there is but one way of Entrance into the Church for all
sorts of persons, which way is not here mentioned, and this way is Christ, Joh
10. 7. But this Proposition holds forth no personal Entrance by Christ: if
they be gotten in some other way, they are Thieves and Robbers. The danger is
seen in him that had not on the Wedding Garment, the Righteousness of Christ:
which being so pernicious, how can the Church be blameless in bringing them in
this way?

Ans. Let the interpretation of Joh, 10. be granted at present; I Answer, That
these children came into the Church by Christ, for they came in by the
Gospel Covenant, as our Brethren grant from Acts. 2 38 39. And is not Christ
the Mediator of that Covenant? Yea are they not Baptized into Christ? Are not
the Blood and Benefits of Christ Sealed up to them in Baptism? But our Brethren
seem wholly to forget that, or to make a Nothing of it.

2. When this Covenant (which is called The covenant of God in Christ, Gal. 3.
17.) is Solemnly owned by them, wherein they give up themselves to God, and
submit to the Government of Christ in the Church; Is there nothing of Christ in
all this?

3. The danger of wanting the Wedding Garment, is as great to such as come in
with the fairest Profession of Faith, as to these; and as the Church blameable
for admitting such, because their danger is so great, when such want the
Wedding Garment? But seeing our Brethren urge so much Joh. 10, let them
consider ver. 13. The hireling cares not for the sheep. We have more cause to
fear how we shall answer for our careless Neglect of these Lambs of Christ,
then for our Receiving them into the Fold of Christ, for which we have our
Warrant from Christ. And withal, let us remember that weighty Charge Heb. 12.
15,16. Looking diligently, lest any (...) of the grace of God, etc. lest there
be a profane person, as Esau, who for a morsel of meat sold his Birthright. It
seems the Apostle did think there was a Precious Birthright, and that it was
the duty of the Church to look diligently to the preservation and improvement
of it. Let us then take heed we do not take it from them, before the Rule of
Christ does require it.

By this whole Discourse, and by these Ten Reasons, we may now fully see upon
what Principles our Brethren ground their Ant^-Syn^dal^, or their Positions
wherein they Dissent from the Synod. And therefore, seeing the Prefacer
complains that Their Tenent is laden with Reproaches of Anabaptism, I shall
crave leave (before I pass on) to present unto their serious Consideration,
what Advantages they put into the hands of the Anabaptists, who, I fear, will
make such use hereof as our Brethren would not willingly allow them to do. It
is true, that our Brethren confess with us, That the Covenant of God with
Abraham and his seed, is the Gospel Covenant, and does belong to the Faithful
and their seed, Acts 2 38,39. But do they not with their Distinctions, in
effect, take away what they have given them? They are Members in general (say
they) but come to the particular, and it is only as wrapped up in their
Parents Covenant; they are not actual or personal Members. And that Membership
in their Parents, and their Foederal Holiness, reaches no further then their
Minority, page 37. And what Church-Ordinances are they capable of in that time,
especially (...) that were true which some suggest, That Ishmael came into the
Church by Profession of Faith as an adult Member at thirteen years of age? And,
if at adult age they come not up by Profession of Faith and Grace, to Enter
into personal Covenant, and so to a new Membership, (...) have no right to
Church Priviledges. And may not a Convent out of Paganism, upon such terms,
enjoy as much as this? And as for Church-watch and Government, it cannot reach
them, but by their Parents, as it may reach an Infidel-servant: and when their
Parents be dead, and they left to the care of such as are not of the Church how
shall it then touch them at all? And when their Owning of the Covenant is
accounted the Form of their Membership; what is this, but to make a Nullity of
their Covenant sealed in Baptism? So that it will, I fear, seem to the
Anabaptists; That to Baptize Infants, is to set a Seal to a Blank, or to a
Covenant of no use to them. Again, when our Brethren so often deny the visible
Covenant, and the Privileges thereof, to such as want the inward Grace; and
affirm, That the Covenant, and the Privileges thereof, are limited to those
that with Abraham walk with God, whose heart was faithful; who love God, and
keep his commandments, page 29. Will not the Anabaptists be ready to infer.
Therefore Infants wanting that Grace, etc. have no right to the Covenant, o^ to
Baptism the Privilege of it? Again, when our Brethren so often confound the
Outward and Inward Dispensation of the Covenant, alleging the Scandalous sins
of Church Members in the Scripture, to prove that these in question are
Self-Excommunicated, and have no interest in the Outward Covenant, or
Privileges thereof; Is not this a Mistake which they will make advantage of?
Lastly, when they say, That the Practice of the fifth Proposition exposes the
Blood of Christ to contempt, Baptism to be profaned, brings pollution into
the Church, etc. what are the Reasons? For (say they) i^ imparteth the Blood of
the Covenant to those that are not visible Believers, sets the Seal to a Blank,
severeth Baptism from the stipulation of a good conscience, brings the
uncircumcised in heart into the Sanctuary. But they often confess, that Infants
have no Faith, They are a carnal seed, etc. And is it not a just fear, that
the Anabaptists will be ready to infer, Therefore to baptize Infants, is to
expose the Blood of Christ to contempt, etc?

I know our Brethren will say, We do not require Faith and Grace in the
Infants, but in the Parents only: But yet when generally we ground the Baptism
of Infants upon the Covenant of God to the Parent and their seed, Genesis 17. Acts
2. 1 Cor. 7. and prove they are Disciples, Members of the visible Church, and
therefore to be Baptized; I wish our Brethren may consider, how greatly this
ground is weakened by Denial of Gods Covenant to their Persons, and only as in
their Parents; and by making it so slight a matter, as to wear out with their
Minority, etc. And also let them consider, how suitable their Notions and
Principles before named, are to the Arguments and Grounds of Denial of Baptism
to all Infants, as is easy to see in all the Books of Antipoedobaptists. These
things I mention, that our Brethren may keep further off from this danger,
which themselves count a Reproach.

I shall now proceed to consider the Answers of our Brethren to the Arguments
of the Synod for the proof of the fifth Proposition.

Arg. 1. These children are partakers of the main ground of baptizing any
children whatsoever, and neither the parents nor the children a^ put in any
bar to hinder it. This ground is the Interest in the Covenant, Genesis 17. 7
9,10,11. Act, 2. 39. Col. 2. 10,11.

"Ans. They answer in general, that Faith is the main ground of Baptism, Romans 4
11. Acts 8. 37 and 19. 4.

Reply. 1. Here is no answer to the Scriptures alleged, which are very full:
Genesis 17. 10,11. This is my Covenant which ye shall keep, Every Male-childe
shall be circumcised: It shall be a taken of the Covenant between me and you.
So Acts 2. 38,39. The Promise is to you and your children.

2. Faith is the Condition of the Covenant; yet the outward Seal had reference
to the outward Covenant it self: for Lo^, and other Believers, could not
partake of Circumcision, but by entering into that visible Covenant with
Abraham. And our Brethren afterward do grant, That the Church Covenant is the
next ground of the dispensation of the Seals: Now they that have the next
ground, are supposed to have the more remote.

Ans. 2. More particularly, they say, the Covenant is not the main ground of
Baptism. For, 1. though they had Abraham for their father, yet John' s Baptism
takes away that Plea, Mat. 3. 8,9. and calls for Repentance.

Reply. John took away their vain confidence in Abraham's Covenant for
Righteousness and Life, as the Prophets also frequently did, Is^^. 1. and 58.
Jer. 7. Mic. 6. But he took not away the outward Privileges of Abraham's
Covenant, as Circumcision, Sacrifices, etc.

2. John. indeed calls for Repentance in a people so corrupt, to fit them for a
more Gospel Dispensation, to make them a People prepared for the Lord. But that
is not the case of these in the fifth Proposition, who are in the
Gospel Covenant and have the Seal of Baptism.

2. We must distinguish (say they) between the Covenant of Grace, and the
Church Covenant, which differ very much: for the Covenant of Grace belongs
only to the Elect, and true Believers, which the Church cannot infallibly
judge who they are. But the Church Covenant (which is the next ground of the
dispensation of the Seal^^ requires mutual consent of them that are admitted
into communion; to walk with God according to the Gospel. The Covenant of Grace
is made to the children in the Parents, but is established only by ^he
^^stipulation of Faith and Repentance, Genesis 17. 7 9. Romans 11. 20. Thou stand
by Faith.

Reply. 1. I cannot see how these things can consist one with another. For, if
the Covenant of Grace belongs only to the Elect and true Believers; and this
Covenant of Grace be made with the child in the Parents: then the child and
Parents must be Elect, and true Believers; which will not be granted. Again, if
the difference of the Church Covenant stand in this, That it requires mutual
consent to walk with God; how shall Infants partake of the Church Covenant and
Baptism, whereof it is the next ground.

2. This Distinction, as here laid down, does not prove the thing it was
brought for, but rather yield the same: For, 1. It is yielded that the
Church Covenant is the next ground of Baptism; and that which is the next
ground and immediate, is the chief, for it supposes the remote; and the remote
grounds, without the next, could not give right to Baptism, and therefore this
is the chief ground. Besides, when it is said, that the Covenant of Grace is
made to the child in the Parents, then still the Covenant, even of Grace also,
is the ground of Baptism. But (say they) the establishment is upon the
restipulation of Faith: Thou stand by Faith, Romans 11. 20. Be it so, in
respect of the Covenant of Grace, and the saving Benefits thereof; yet the
visible Covenant, and Dispensation of the Ordinances, and Means of Grace,
remains to such in the Covenant as do continue in the visible Profession
thereof, as has been often proved. That Faith by which the Gentile-Churches
stand, Romans 11. 20. is such a Faith as is opposed to that Unbelief for which
the Jews were broken off: but they were not broken off for want of holding
forth positive Saving Faith to the judgment of Charity* but for positive
Unbelief, whereby they obstinately rejected Christ, Romans 10. 21. They were a
disobedient and gainsaying people. Acts 13. 45. The Apostle turned from them to
the Gentiles, because they contradicted and blasphemed. Mat. 21. 42,43. The
Kingdom of God was taken from them, because they rejected Christ the Corner
stone* See also Acts 18. 5,6. and 19. 8,9. And therefore so long as the Gentile
Churches do profess Jesus Christ, and his Gospel and Ordinances, they may stand
in the visible Covenant, (through the patience of God) though they, or many of
their Members, do not hold out such a Profession of Saving Faith visibly to the
judgment of Charity. otherwise we must Unchurch many such Societies of
Christians whom the Lord has not Unchurched, but continues to them the Means
and Ordinances of Grace.

3. I deny that there is such a difference between the Church Covenant and that
of Grace: for, as was said in the second Proposition premised, Chap. 2. there
is indeed a differing dispensation of the Covenant of Grace in the Church, viz.
Outwardly in the Privileges, Ordinances, and Means of Grace to the whole
visible Church; or Inwardly, in the Saving Benefits thereof to true Believers.
Now that the Dispensation of the Covenant of God to the whole visible Church,
is the Dispensation of the Covenant of Grace, is proved: 1. Because God gives
himself to be the God of all the visible Church, Genesis 17. I will be thy God;
and he avoucheth them to be His People, and they avouch him to be Their God,
Deuteronomy 26. 17,18. Now this is the first and chief Benefit of the Covenant of
Grace, and contains all the rest, as Mr. Cotton notes upon that Covenant. 2.
Because the Means of Grace and Life, and the offer of Christ and Grace, is
given to all in the visible Church, Romans 3. 1,2,3. and 9. 4. 3. Because all in
Church Covenant stand bound thereby to Believe, Repent, and perform the
conditions of the Covenant of Grace: and this our Brethren confess, that
Church Covenant requires they should walk with God according to the Gospel;
which is the Covenant of Grace. I have the more insisted on this Passage,
because the right understanding hereof, is of much use to the main Question in
debate.

That these in the fifth Proposition are still in Covenant, the Synod
^^proveth, Because they were once in Covenant, and never ^ut off (...) from it.

Ans. To this our Brethren Answer, The Lord himself discovenants them, Mat. 3.
Joh. 8. 39,40,41,42. where the Lord takes away their Plea of the Covenant, and
tells them they have the Devil for their Father. And that without any act of
Church discipline, etc. They may reject the counsel of God against themselves,
^s the Pharisees, Luke 7. They may be Felones de^se, as Mr. Cotton speaks, etc.
There are other grounds of breaking off the Covenant, besides notorious sins,
and incorrigibleness therein; as, Not standing by Faith, Not bringing forth
fruit, Mat 3. 10. Not doing Righteousness, I Jo^. 3. 10.

Reply. I have many things to Reply here. 1. Did the Lord himself discovenant
all those out of his visible Church, spoken of Mat. 3. Jo^. 8? Were their seed
thereby cut off from Circumcision? Were they excluded from the Sacrifices and
Temple-worship? Who can believe this? when we see the Lord Jesus so often
communicated with them in the Worship of God; when he calls them still The
lost sheep of the house of Israel; yea, the children to whom Bread did belong,
Mat. 15. 24,26. These things were spoken of the Jews in general, whereof those
Mat 3. Jo^. 8. were (...). They were indeed of the Devil, not of God, in
respect of the inward state, and saving good of the Covenant; yet still in the
outward Covenant, and under the Means of Grace.

2. If those Mat. 3. Jo^. 8. had been discovenanted of God, does it follow that
these in question are so? Are these A generation of Vipers, Liars, Murthe^^rs,
etc that live without Scandal, (...) to the Government of Christ, etc? If the
Lawyers and Pharisees rejected the counsel of God against themselves, in not
being Baptized of John; do these so, that being Baptized themselves, desire it
also for their Seed, and that in such in way, by Owning Gods Covenant, Giving
up themselves to God, Submitting themselves to Discipline, etc? If Mr. Cotton
did count such as Ishmael and Esau Self-murtherers, does it fellow that these
are such, that take hold of the Covenant, and that in some measure of truth,
for ought is yet proved to the contrary?

3. I must not pass over this Rigid and Dangerous Principle, without further
Examination. The Position of our Brethren is, That God himself does
discovenant, or cast out of his visible Church, such as bring not forth good
fruit, Mat. 3. that commit sin, are Liars, etc. Joh. ^. and that without any
act of Church-censure. Against this I argue.

1. That these were not discovenanted of God, I proved before. And it does
appear, That the Providence of God continued them under Church Priviledges and
Ordinances, at least till Gospel-Churches were erected, after the Ascension of
Christ.

2. If the Lord Jesus has ordained and commanded Church Discipline for the
saving of Offenders, and the Purging of his Church, then he does not
discovenant such without Church censures. But so it is, Mat. 18. 1 Cor. 5.
Therefore he does it not himself without them. The reason of the Consequence
is, Because if God himself did discovenant them, Church Censures were useless
and vain. To what end should the Church cut off one that is already a
Non-member? what have they to do with such as are without? why should Corinth
be blamed for suffering that Leaven, if God himself had cast it out?

3. This supposed Discovenanting by God himself, frustrates the great and chief
End of Church discipline, viz. To heal and save the Sinner: for, the Church
having now no power over them, they must perish, being without the Means of
their Recovery, except God restore them immediately; at least they are deprived
of that special Means appointed and blessed of God to that end.

4. What confusion would this bring into the Church? For, how shall the Church
know when God has discovenanted this or that man? whether so soon as he has
committed such sins, or how long Gods patience will bear with him? And how
shall the Church prove against any such, That God has indeed discovenanted
him? These things, and much more that might be said, may put our Brethren to
find some other meaning of Mat. 3. Joh. 8. 1. Joh. 3. 10. and such like
Scriptures.

Arg. 2. The children of the Parents in questions are either child ^n of the
Covenant, or strangers from it, Ephesians. 2. 12. Holy, or unclean, I Cor. 7. 14.
within the Church, or without, I Cor* (...) 12. such as have God for their God,
or without God in the world, Ep^. 2. 12. But he that considers the terms of
the Proposition, will not affirm the latter; and the former being granted,
infers their right to Baptism.

Ans. The Assumption is denied, because the children in question discovenant
themselves, not keeping the conditions of the Covenant; Not walking with God,
Not loving God, etc. Deuteronomy. 7. 9. as they that forsake the Covenant of their
fathers, Deuteronomy. 29. 25 And what do these that come not up to the conditions of
it? God may cast off for sins of Omission, 1 Samuel 15. so for not believing in
God.

Reply. This being the very Hinge whereupon chiefly this Question does turn,
viz. Whether, and how these Church Members are cut off from their Membership in
the visible Church? I desire the Reader to observe well the Answer of our
Brethren, and their Reasons thereof. Sometime they say, God Discovenanteth
them; which has been examined: Sometime, that They Discovenant themselves;
which also has been spoken to before. To this Refuge they now again betake
themselves. Their Reason here alleged I shall consider, which stands thus:
Church Members which do not come up to the conditions of the Covenant, viz. To
walk with God, Love God, keep his Commandments, Believe in God, etc. do
Discovenant themselves. But th^se Church Members described in the fifth
Proposition, do not walk with God, Love God. etc. Therefore they do Discovenant
themselves. The Proposition they would prove from Genesis 17 1. Deuteronomy. 7. 9. Psa.
105. 8. Deuteronomy. 29 25. To this I answer:

1. By denying the Proposition. As for the Proofs, Genes. 17. 1. Deuteronomy. 7. 9.
Psa. 105* These Scriptures prove it is the duty of such as enter into Covenant
with God, to Walk with God, To be upright, so love God, etc. and that God
performs to such the Saving Benefits of the Covenant: but they do not prove,
that simply by the neglect of the s^ duties especially without Impenitence
added, they do actually Discovenant themselves out of the visible Church and
from the Privileges thereof, and the Means of Grace therein. The gross neglect
of the duties of the Covenant persisted in obstinately and impenitently, may
deserve Censures: but that the want of such graces, and duties of the Covenant,
does actually cut off such from the visible Church, is an Assertion never heard
of in the Book of God, nor I think in any the best Reformed Church to this day.
Surely Ishmael and Esau did not Walk with God, Love God, Believe in God, in our
Brethrens sense; yet they continued in the Church, till for their manifest
Profaneness the one was cast out by Gods appointment, and the other rejected,
Heb. 12. 17. When Deuteronomy. 7. 9. Moses said, that The Lord keeps Covenant and
Mercy with them that love him, etc. were there not multitudes in Israel that
came not up to these duties of the Covenant, in our Brethrens sense, that yet
were Gods Holy People, Royal Nation, enjoying all Church Priviledges? and so
all along through the story of all the Scriptures. Deuteronomy. 29. 25. renders indeed
the cause of the great Plagues upon Israel, to be their forsaking the Covenant:
But what was that forsaking of the Covenant? was it their not coming up to
these terms of it, to Walk with God, Love God, Believe in God with a visible
saving Faith? Nothing less: but because they went and served other gods, and
worshipped them, ver. 26. As for the case of Saul, 1 Samuel 15. whom the Lord
rejected from being King, for so gross a disobedience to an express and
particular Command; yet we read not that he was cast out of the visible
Church: Nor does it follow, that because God may justly cut off a man from the
Church for not believing, or Sins of Omission, that therefore he does so; or
that therefore a Churchmember, by Sins of Omission, does actually cut off
himself from the visible Church. Surely these are worse then farre-fetched and
uncertain Consequences from the Old Testament.

2. For the Assumption of this Argument; They say (but without Proof) That
these Parents in the fifth Proposition do not walk with God, etc. according to
the conditions of the Covenant. I answer, These do outwardly and visibly, at
least, so Walk with God, Love Him, and keep His Commandments, as the Rule of
God does account A keeping of the visible Covenant: These Profess the Faith,
are not scandalous in life, give up themselves to God, submit to his Rules and
government; and were not such as these all along in the Scripture accepted as
the People of God in the visible Covenant? Deuteronomy. 5. when the people professed
to Obey Moses in all things, God saw they wanted an heart to fear him, and keep
his commandments, yet he entered into Covenant with them. How often are the Kings
of Judah, that observed the Ordinances of Worship, said to do that which was
right in the sigh^ of the Lord, and to walk in his ways, though they wanted
that upright walking with God, and love of God, which was required? See 2 Chronicles. 11. 17. 2 Kings 11. 2. and 14. 3. and 15. 3,34. And, Not to walk in the
ways of the Lord, is charged upon them when they walked after (...), In the
ways of Jero^oam. and the like. To conclude, I would demand of our Brethren
that hold this way of Self-Excommunication, Whether any Member does
Excommunicate himself by any act that is not Excommunicable (or matter of
Excommunication) by the Rule of Church Discipline? If so, let us have a Rule
for it; if not, surely these in the fifth Proposition do not Excommunicate
themselves, for no Rule of Christ would allow the Church to cast them out.

Ans. 2. The children in question (say they) are in a state of Neutrality at
present: and such Christ accounts to be against him, Mat. 12. 30. They are
neither hot nor col^, Rev. 3.

Reply. Mat. 12. 30. speaks not of such as these, for these are for Christ,
that Profess the Faith of Christ, and Submit to his government: That Saying of
Christ, Mark 9. 40. suits better with these, He that is not against us, is for
us. As for Rev. 3. Christ calls that Lukewarm Church, A golden Candlestick,
holds their Stars in his Right hand, offers to come in, etc. So that Christ is
not so quick in discovenanting lukewarm ones, as our Brethren seem to be.

Arg. 3. From the evil consequences of the contrary Opinion: as, 1. To deny the
Proposition, would be to straiten the grace of Christ in the
Gospel Dispensation, and to make the Church in the New Testament times, in a
worse case, relating to their children successively, then were the Jews of old.

Ans. I. This does not straiten the Gospel Dispensation, seeing it is granted
to be extended to all Nations, and to both Sexes, which was not of old.

Reply. This indeed the Anabaptists answer, but it does not reach the case.
For, such enlargement of the grace of God in Gospel Times, would argue rather
that it should be enlarged in this Point also, and not therefore straightened
here, because enlarged in other respect. Were it Objected to a Father, That he
straightened, his wonted favors to his children, in putting them out of the
Family; and he should answer. Not so, for I have taken in many adopted
children: would this answer satisfy? Or should he say, Not so, for though I
kept my Family with Pulse before, I now give them much better fare: would not
any man say, So much is the greater wrong to your children, both to put them
out of the Family, and deprive them of their share in the better fare allowed
to the Family. Just so is the case here.

Ans. 2. This does no more straiten the grace of the Covenant, then the keeping
of Baptized, especially covenanting Parents from the Lords Supper, seeing the
circumcised Jews were not debarred from the passover.

Reply. The circumcised Jews did not partake of the Passover, without suitable
legal qualifications, viz. A state of legal purity and fitness to eat it to the
Lord, and therefore they were to instruct their children in the meaning of that
Service, Exodus 12. 25,26,27. In like manner we debar none from the Lords
Supper, but for want of Gospel qualifications.

Ans. 3. Gospel Times are in many respects Times of Reformation, Heb. 9. 10.
and therefore to build so much upon the largeness of Jewish practices, is a
great sin, seeing it is a stretching of the narrow way that leads to life, to
be as wide as the broad way that leads most to destruction.

Reply. 1. We build not upon Jewish practices Ceremonial, wherein that
Reformation Heb. 9 10. did consist, as is plain in the Text: but upon the
Gospel Covenant with Abraham, and that in the substantials of it. viz. I will
be thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee in their generations,
exemplified in the seed of Abraham.

2. It is a strange speech to say, that This is a stretching of the narrow way
of life, to be as broad, etc. Surely, Gods enlargement of the Covenant to the
Posterity of Abraham in their generations, was an act of Gods grace, tending to
bring the more to life, by giving to them the means of grace and life, and
therefore was not the broad way to destruction. The straitness of the way to
(...), does not stand in restraining the means of grace to a few; for why then
should the Lord enlarge the Gospel to all Nations now, more then of old?

2 Consequence, To deny the Proposition, is to render the children of the Jews,
when they shall be converted, in a worse condition then they were under the
Legal-dispensation, contrary to Jer. 30. 20. Ezekiel. 37. 25,26.

Ans. This is denied, my more then that they should be in a worse state if they
shall not have an High Priest and Temple-worship, when they shall have in
Christ a thousand-fold more: So here is like reason in respect of His abundant
grace.

Reply. The loss of Shadows is nothing seeing they shall have the Substance in
Christ: but this being an essential Branch of Gods Covenant with Abraham, which
is the Gospel Covenant, it cannot be taken away without real loss; and the
more abundant grace, the greater is the loss, as was said before.

Ans. 2. This does no more put them into a worser state, then transmitting the
Covenant now only to the next seed, which before was transmitted to remote
Posterity.

Reply. The Covenant was all along transmitted by the next Parents to their
seed in the Old Testament: For, so long as they were not cast off by the Lord,
he accounted every generation to be His People, even in their worst times. So
that the transmitting of the Covenant and Church Priviledges, was still by the
next Parents; and when the Parents were broken off, their seed were broken off
also, Romans 11. 20. So that there is no such difference.

Ans. 3. To the Scriptures, (say they) that in Jer 30. speaks of their return
from Babylon: Ezekiel. 37. speaks of their Calling, when they shall be all
righteous, and nothing shall hinder the continuance of the Covenant, Isa. 60.
21. Joel 3. 17, etc.

Reply. If Jer. 30. has any reference to their return from Babylon, yet it
appears to look further, even to the latter times. For Ver. 9. it speaks of
David their King, whom God will raise up to them; and v. 24. of the latter
days: and Chap. 31. 1. At the same time I will be the God of all the families
of Israel. As for those places, Isa. 60. 21. J^el 3. that say, They shall be
all righteous, no stranger shall pass through them; so that nothing shall
hinder the continuance of the Covenant: The Covenant then shall be continued,
according to the Promise of God, to Abraham's seed in their generations, which
is enough to the scope of this Argument. Besides, this continuance of the
Covenant shall be by visible Faith and Righteousness, not always by real
Faith; for to think there shall be no Sin, no Hypocrites then, is groundless.
There is none righteous that (...) not, is the general state of all men in this
world, till we come to Heaven. And it is evident Ezekiel 37. 25. Zech. 10. 7,9.
that their seed are part of that righteous Nation.

3d Consequence. The denial of the Proposition, denies the initiatory Seal to
such as are regularly in the Church and Covenant, to whom the Mosaicall
dispensation, nay the first Institution in the Covenant of Abraham, appointed
it to be applied, Genesis 17. 9,10. Joh. 7. 22,23.

Ans. This is a begging of the Question: The children in question do not stand
regularly under the Church Covenant; the contrary is plain Jer. 9. 26. Romans 2.
28. Ezekiel. 34. 7 9.

Reply. The Question is not begged, but the ground of the Argument is proved,
Genesis 17. 9,10. Joh. 7. 22,23. to which no answer is returned.

2. Seeing these Scriptures Jer. 9. Romans 2. Ezekiel. 44. and such like are so often
alleged, and here with so much confidence in the present case, I shall Examine
them more distinctly.

The Question is, Whether children received into the Church, and Baptized in
Infancy, and being grown up, do understand the Doctrine of Faith, publicly
Profess their Assent thereto, are not scandalous in life, solemnly own the
Covenant before the Church, wherein they give up themselves to God, and submit
to the government of Christ in the Church; Whether (I say) such, do not stand
regularly* in the Church: and, Whether the Scriptures named do plainly prove
the contrary.

Now for the first, Jer. 9. 26. where the Lord threatens to punish the
circumcised with the uncircumcised; for, all the house of Israel are
uncircumcised in heart. To this I answer, 1. That this punishment was not
Discovenanting them, but the Sword. 2. But suppose Discovenanting be included
in the other; what were the causes thereof, by which they were proved to be
uncircumcised in heart, and therefore so to be punished? They were all
Adulterers, ver. 2. Liars, ver. 3. Slanderers, ver. 4. Diceivers, ver. 5. yea,
they walked after (...), ver. 14. And how then does this place plainly prove,
that the persons described in the Proposition stand not regularly in the
Church? As for Romans 2. 28. so often alleged, however it may have some reference
to the Doctrine of Justification, before spoken to, yet it seems the particular
occasion and scope of that discourse of the Jew and Gentile, is to prove, that
God distributeth rewards and punishments without respect of person, ver.
9,10,11 and to take off the lews confidence in Legal-priviledges in that
respect, ver. 13,17,18,19. 20. but however, it cannot be spoken with any
reference to Church Membership. Now in respect of Gods distribution of rewards
and punishments, Circumcision profited if they kept the Law, else not; and in
this respect, the Uncircumcision that kept the Law, was counted Circumcision:
and so in this respect, He is not a Jew that is one outwardly, etc. But to
infer, that every lew that was so outwardly only, wanting the inward
circumcision of the heart, was there by discovenanted out of the visible
Church, this were a strange Doctrine to Scripture-ears. To clear this further:
1. In what respect the circumcision is made uncircumcision, by breaking the
Law; in the same respect the uncircumcision is counted for circumcision, in
them that kept the Law: but this was never so accounted in respect of
Church Membership and Privileges; witness the case of the Centurion Cornelius,
and his devout Soldiers, and others, and therefore not so in the former. 2. He
speaks of the inward circumcision, as having its praise of God, not of men:
but we know the outward Circumcision is approved of the Church, though without
the inward, in respect of Church-standing and Privileges, and that according
to Gods Rules. 3. The Apostle fully clears his meaning, Chap. 3. 1,2 3.
affirming, That the advantage of the Jew, and profit of circumcision, was much
every way, and that in the committing the Oracles of God to them, which was a
Church-priviledge.

Lastly, Concerning this place, let it be noted what were the evidences of
uncircumcised hearts there alleged, viz. Stealing, Adultery, Sacrilege, etc.
ver. 21,22. which how well it suits to prove plainly, That these in question
are not regularly in the Church, let every one Judge.

Concerning Ezekiel. 44. 7,9. This place speaks of bringing in the heathen
strangers that were amongst the children of Israel, as ^s evident, in that it
is called an Abomination so to do: but to bring in an Israelite circumcised in
flesh, not in heart, was never counted an Abomination. Again, he speaks of
strangers uncircumcised in heart and flesh, which these children are not. 2.
Put case this place may by allusion be applied to receiving of Members into the
visible Church; we agree, that none visibly unholy should be received into the
Church: But our Question is of such as being holy, were regularly received into
the Church, and do not deserve to be cast out; to which case this place speaks
nothing.

Thus we see how little footing there is for our Brethrens Tenent, in these or
any other Scriptures they have alleged; as Jer. 2. 21. Amos 9 7. Mat. 3. Ioh.
8. and 15. which have been considered in their place. And I am the more
persuaded that this Way often our Brethren is not the Way of God, being built
upon so manifold mistaken and misapplied Scriptures; whereof many of them being
Old Testament Proofs, it appears our Brethren make use not only of far-fetched
Consequences, but of plain Inconsequences from the Old Testaments.

4th Consequence. That to deny the Proposition, is to break Gods Covenant, by
denying the initiatory Seal to those that are in Covenant, Gen 17 9,10,14.

Ans. 1. To refuse to Baptize one that is not regularly in Covenant, is not to
break it. 2. Then it is a breach like the great Sea, to deny Communion in the
Lords Supper to those that have laid hold upon the Covenant, and given up
themselves to God by solemn Profession of Faith and Repentance, which is now
strongly pleaded for.

Reply. 1. Whether these be not regularly in the Covenant, let the Reader judge
by what is said for it, and by the Scriptures alleged against it.

2. To deny Communion in the Lords Supper to such, is not pleaded for, much
less strongly; for, Solemn Profession of Faith and Repentance is not in the
Proposition. All that is affirmed, is, That the Church-seed, manifesting their
continuance in the Covenant by such qualifications, if they shall still be
wanting in ability to Examine themselves, and discern the Lords body, may be
delayed till they give satisfaction therein.

3. Our Brethren in this case deal very hardly and partially, with us, whilst
so often they compare these with the most scandalous persons reproved in
Scripture, and with them Discovenanted, as they pretend: and yet at other times
they lay it deeply to our charge, that we do not Receive them to the Lords
Table, upon such terms as are denied by them to be sufficient to continue them
in the visible Church.

Arg. 4. These Parents are confederate visible Believers in some degree, and
therefore their children are to be Baptized.

Ans. The Parents in question are not such, if we speak of true visible Faith,
which is required Romans 14. 1. Mat. 12. 20.

Reply. Be it granted, that we speak of true Faith visibly in some degree, yet
Romans 14. 1. speaks rather of a persuasion of the lawfulness of eating meats
unclean by the Law, as ver. 2. shows.

That these are visible Believers in some degree; is thus proved:

Reas. 1. Charity may observe sundry things for it, but nothing evident against
it.

"Ans. This is said gratis, and denied by us.

Reply. If our Brethrens Charity could observe nothing for it, they might then
show something evident against it, without which the Reason is not answered:
for, in discovenanting of regular Church Members, there ought to be such things
evident against them as de^^^^ Church Censures, Mat. 18. 15,16,17.

Reas. 2. Children of the faithful, qualified but as the persons in question,
are said to be Faithful, Tit. 1,6.

Ans, Every one not accused of Riot, to be concluded to be of the Faith, is not
the Apostles intent, not Orthodox: Faithfulness is taken for Fidelity, which
may be in Moral men.

Reply. Nor do the Synod so conclude: There is much more in the Text, then Not
given to Riot, viz. 1. Children of godly Parents: 2. Educated in the Faith: 3.
Not scandalous, or Not accused of Riot: 4. Not unruly, but subject to
Government: All which do suit well with the Proposition. And this sense of the
word is given by Orthodox Interpreters: Marlorat Expounds the word Faithful,
of such as are educated in the sound Doctrine of Piety, and in the fear of God.
Tailor, by Faithful Children, understands such as being instructed in the
Faith, are at least in external Conversation answerable to the Profession of
the Faith they make. And Reason would incline us to conceive, that the Apostle
would require in the children of Church Officers something of Piety, as well as
of Morality. Besides, the word (...) here used, is frequently and commonly used
in the New Testament, in the Synods sense, viz. for Christian Believers, Acts
10. 45. 2 Cor. 6. 15. Ephesians. 1. 1. 1 Timothy 6. 2. and 4. 3,10,12. and 5. 16.

Reas. 3. Children of the Covenant have frequently beginnings of grace wrought
in them in younger years, as Scripture-examples and Experience shows. Hence
this sort of persons showing nothing to the contrary, are in charity, or in
Ecclesiastical reputation, visible Believers.

Ans. It is extraordinary to have grave in Infancy, and therefore no Rule for
ordinary Church-proceedings.

Reply. 1. The Synod speaks not of Infancy, but of younger years, and that is
not so extraordinary as is objected: witness the hopeful signs of grace in many
that die in minority, and the Confessions of diverse, that hold forth seeds of
grace sown in their younger years. 2. We build not ordinary Church-proceedings
immediately upon this ground; yet these being Church Members, we may build
Church-charity upon this ground, that seeing some Church Members of this sort
have Faith in reality, all of this sort may be so reputed in Church-charity:
for so we judge of adult professors in the Church; we know some have grace in
reality, and therefore we judge so of all that sort, till the contrary appear,
though in the general we know Many are called, Few chosen: And what other
ground have we of Church-proceedings with Church Members, but Church-charity?

Reas. 4. These are regularly in the Church, and therefore visible Saints in
the account of Scripture, which is the account of Truth, I Cor. 1. 2. and 14.
33.

Ans. 1. The children in question are not regularly in the Church, for then the
Parents being dead, the children surviving should make a Church, enjoy
Ordinances, choose Officers, which is denied; and it is incredible to deny them
that power when their Parents are alive, and they will not be long kept from
putting it forth, though they may for a while.

Reply. 1. If we may thus argue, by putting cases, that for ought appears,
never yet happened in the world, viz. That all the Members in a Church should be
so taken away, that none remain but such as those children. By like reason one
may prove, that women and children are not regularly in the Church: for, if all
the men die, they should make a Church, choose Officer, etc. which will be
denied. Yea, thus I will prove, That this or that man is not regularly in the
Church; for, if all men die but one or two, they cannot make a Church, etc.

2. Were the Rules of Christ observed, such a case could hot fall out: For, (as
Mr. Cotton answers the Anabaptist in a case not unlike this) Let there be a
due watchfulness of the Church over these children to fit them, for the Lords
Table, and either the Lord, in the faithfulness of his Covenant, will sanctify
their hearts to prepare them for it; or else ^e will leave them to discover
their hypocrisy and profaneness in the sight of all, to prevent the pollution
of his Table, and the corruption of Discipline. Grounds and Ends of Baptism,
page 161,163. And had we thus done, through the Blessing of Christ, which he
has promised upon his Ordinances, such cases could not fall out; neither had
there been so much need or use of this fifth Proposition, that is now so great
a matter of Dispute; and I fear this Opposition of the Dissenters will increase
our Difficulties. Neither do I see so much danger of these not being kept from
putting forth a power to choose Officers, etc. if they were trained up under
Church Discipline, as in our Brethrens Way; who acknowledge them
Church Members, and cannot rid their hands regularly of them, without acts of
Church Discipline, which yet they deny to belong to their persons immediately.

3. If such a case should fall out, it is not impossible nor absurd to say,
That a people retaining the Essentials of a true Church, may fall into such a
degeneracy or decay, as to be unfit for Ordinances, or to choose Officers,
until they be further prepared by the Preaching of the Gospel unto them.

Ans. 2. To the Scriptures, 1. Cor. 1. 2. and 14. 33. they say, That by a
Church of Saints primarily, the better part of Saints are understood, the rest
Synecdochically, though not so in truth, yet so called.

Reply. If all be so called, though some be not so in truth, them the Argument
is yielded, That in Scripture and Ecclesiastical account, all Church Members
are Saints: and who shall tell us which are so in truth, and which not, till
impenitency in sin gives us cause to count them as Heathens and Publicans?

Reas. 5. Being in the Covenant, and Baptized, they have faith given them
indefinitely in the Promise, and sealed to them in Baptism, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. which
continues valid, and is a valid Testimony for them, whilst they do not reject
it.

Ans. The Promise is indefinite, not universal: whence the Argument must be,
Some circumcised or baptized ones are Believers: But these in question are
circumcised or baptized ones; Therefore, etc. or thus, The Roman Catholics are
baptized: Therefore, etc.

Reply. 1. I see our Brethren can make a false Syllogism, to decline the force
of an Argument that would rightly conclude. Thus; If some children, being under
that indefinite Promise, be Believers (for God is true of his Promise) then all
such children are not to be rejected as unbelievers, as our Brethren would: But
some baptized ones being under that indefinite Promise, are Believers:
Therefore. Now who can say who are such, and who are not, till they reject the
grace of the Promise, and by impenitency in sin are to be accounted as Heathens
and Publicans? For, though the Promise of Heart-circumcision being but
indefinite, is effectually performed to some only, not to all; yet they are
all alike to the Church, till the difference does some way openly appear. 2 To
apply this to the Roman Catholics, savours not of ingenuity: for are they the
seed of Confederate visible Believers, of whom our Dispute is? or are they
Regularly Baptized! or do they show nothing to the contrary, that profess
Popery?

Ans. 2. It is not an indefinite Promise there, because it is certainly made
good to such as return with their Souls, ver. 1,2.

Reply. This does not hinder the indefiniteness of the Promise, but confirms
it. And their effectual return to God is the fruit of that Promise, and
indefinite also.

Ans. 3. An indefinite Promise does not capacitate all children to receive the
Seals.

Reply. Neither is so much affirmed; but this, with the other Considerations,
does render them visible Believers in Ecclesiastical reputation, which is the
scope of this fourth Argument.

Arg. 5. The denial of Baptism to these, has a dangerous tendency to
Irreligion and Apostasy, because it denies the children of the Church to have
any part in the Lord, Josh. 22 24,25,26.

Ans. The Brethren deny the Consequence, affirming, That thirty or forty years
experience in New England, through the mercy of God, shows the contrary.

Reply. This is a bare denial, without answering the Reason from Josh. 22.
Surely that religious generation had a deeper sense of that danger, and more
solicitous care to prevent it, then they have.

2. When our Brethren in their Preface To the General (...) take notice of the
Many, Great, and Prevailing Corruptions of Trust, that need Reformation by
Church Discipline, this might abate our glorying of contrary Experience for
thirty or forty years, in respect of the danger of Irreligion and Apostasy in
the seed of the Church. But if this be so, it seems our Brethren do think
that there are many more then A few Names in N. England, that hold fast the
Name of Christ, and are steadfast in the Faith and Order of the Gospel, and do
not own so great an Apostasy of Elders and People, as the Author of the Preface
presents to the World.

Arg. 6. The persons in question are personally immediate, and yet-continuing
Members of the Church, and therefore their children are to be Baptized.

Our Brethren here only speak to the first Branch, concerning their personal
membership, having spoken to the third Branch before. But the second Branch
about their immediate membership they leave untouched.

Ans. If the meaning be, that the Promise to their believing Parents reaches
them, and that they are wrapped up together with them; the Assertion is
granted, as far as concerns the seed of Confederating Believers in their
minority: But if the meaning be, that they are Members by their own Personal
act, then it is denied.

Reply. This distinction of Members wrapped up in their Parents, and Members by
their own Personal act, is a Riddle that no Scripture does unfold. Let us hold
to Scripture-phrases, and the meaning will be plain and easy* viz. They are
Members in their own persons, by the Lords actual entering into Covenant with
their persons distinct from their Parents, and setting the Seal of the Covenant
upon their persons; as has been proved from Genesis 17. 7,9. Deuteronomy. 5. 2,3. and
29. 10,11.

Proof 1. They are personally holy, l Cor. 7. 14. therefore Members in their
own persons.

Ans. This concerns children in minority, or the seed of Believers and Members
in full Communion, and therefore it reaches them not when adult and grown.

Reply. Here our Brethren speak out; That the foederal holiness and
Church Membership of the church seed, wears quite out with their infancy or
minority though sometime they speak otherwise, as was noted upon their
Concession in their Answer to the Argument of the Synod, page 23. in the end.
But no Scripture will prove this; yea, the whole tenor of Scripture-stories of
the Church, convinces the contrary. See Deuteronomy. 5 2,3. Romans 3. 1,2,3. and 9. 4.

Proof 2. They are personally Baptized, the Seal of Membership is applied to
their own persons, which being regularly done, is a divine testimony that they
are in their own persons members of the Church.

Ans. So are the Papists in Rome; and are they personal Members? The
Shechemites and Edomites were circumcised: there is par ratio.

Reply. This is a very slight evading of the Argument, which speaks of
Baptism regularly done. I had thought our Brethren did not think Baptism
regularly done in Rome, or Circumcision regularly applied to the Shechemites
and Edomites: Or if not, could they suppose that there is par ratio a like
reason between Baptism regularly done, and not regularly done? Except they
should mean, that there is like reason between Baptism in Rome, and the
Circumcision of the Shechemites and Edomites; and that is granted.

Proof 3. They are personally under Discipline, and liable to Church Censures
in their own persons. See Propos. 3.

Ans. This is granted in the sense given before; yet not so personal, as to
have right to all Church Priviledges, as is confessed by all.

Reply. That sense given before, is confuted before. 2. If they have right to
all Church Priviledges properly belonging to Members as such, it is sufficient.
3. Their want of actual enjoyment of some Church Priviledges, is not for want
of right unto them, but for want of such Qualifications as may make them fit
for actual enjoyment of them, viz. Such increase of Faith as is requisite, as
Dr. Am^s well expresses it, Medul. Ltb. 1. Chap. 32. Sect. 13.

Proof 4. They are personally (by means of the Covenant) in a visible state of
salvation. To say they are not Members in their own persons, but in their
Parents, would be as if one should say, They are saved in their Parents, and
not in their own persons.

Ans. It is granted they are in a state of Salvation, and nearer the Kingdom
of Heaven then Heathens are: but they are not visibly at present in a state of
Salvation, Mark 12. 34. But to infer, That if they be not Members in their own
persons, but in their Parents, then they shall not be saved in their own
persons, but in their Parents; this is utterly inconsequent: unless it should
be said, that all, and only they that are Members in their own persons, shall
be saved; which were sad and Heterodox.

Reply. To grant they are in a state of Salvation, and yet not visibly so at
present, shows that this Argument is greatly mistaken. The ground of the
Argument is this: It is the Privilege of the Church (by Gods Covenant) to be
the Redeemed and Saved People of the Lord: Christ is the Savior of his Body
the Church, Ephesians. 5. 23, etc: Thus it is with the visible Church visibly: And
hence says Christ, Salvation is of the Jews, Joh. 4. 22* And so speaking of
the little ones, he says, Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, Mark 10. 14. And
hence the Inference is also much mistaken; which is this: If their Membership
(by means of the Covenant) sets them in a visible state of Salvation (as it
does, upon the grounds laid down) then, supposing this Membership be in their
Parents only, and not in their own persons, it would follow, that this visible
state of Salvation is in their Parents only, and not in their own persons: and
so if they be saved according to this Covenant, it must be in their Parents,
and not in their own persons. And hereby it appears, how greatly this Opinion
bereaveth the Parents of that hope and comfort they take in their dying
Infants, by reason of Gods Covenant made with their seed.

Proof 5. When they commit iniquity, they personally break the Covenant, and
therefore they are personal members, Jer. 11. 2,10. Eze. 16.

Ans. The Covenant there spoken of is the Moral Law, as the Texts show; which
any man never in, or cast out of the Church, may break.

Reply. Truly this Answer (as the rest) is far from satisfying the Arguments of
the Synod. The Texts alleged, expressly call their iniquities, A breaking of
the Covenant: and what then if the Texts speak of the Moral Law? is not the
observation of the Moral Law a duty of the Covenant, viz. To have God for our
God, To love him, Fear him, etc.* Or is the breach of the Moral Law, no breach
of the Covenant in them that are in Covenant, because others not in Covenant
may break it? What sense and reason is in this? When a Master charge his
Apprentice with breach of his Covenant in Stealing his Masters goods; should he
answer, It was no breach of Covenant, because others that were never in
Covenant, may be guilty of Stealing also? Would this answer prove it was no
breach of Covenant? Just so is the case here: When the Lord charge the adult
Members of the Church with breach of their Covenant in the Moral duties of the
Covenant, to say, The Covenant there spoken of is the Moral (...), which such
as were never in, or cast out of the Church, may break.

Our Brethren here think fit to make a stand; only concluding in the words of
the Presbyterian Ministers, wherewith they would seem to be well satisfied. But
the known Practice of-those Reverend Brethren, that do Baptiz^^ diverse Children
whose Parents they receive not to the Lords Table, does persuade me, that such
a Profession as is described in the fifth Proposition, would be readily
accepted of by them, as a credible Profession for the Administration of Baptism
to their seed. And this is the more evident to me, by that which is here
alleged in the second Paragraph, wherein they describe the persons to be
Baptized, thus: Baptism is an holy Sacrament, in which a person professing the
Christian Faith, or the Infant Seed of such, is Baptized, etc. which is fully
answered in the fifth Proposition.

Concerning the Sixth Proposition, which depends upon the Fifth, our Brethren
only declare their Dissent.

Concerning the Seventh Proposition, they say, It is caut^lo^^y penned, and do
not Object against it an only desire Care in the Application whereof, with
what Churches we have Communion.

Concerning the second Question, About CONSOCIATION OF CHURCHES. they have
declared their Consent in all the Propositions laid down by the Synod, and here
Object nothing.

And herein I do willingly and gladly acknowledge the ingenuity of our dear
Brethren; who though they be earnest and quick sometimes, in such things
wherein they differ, yet do freely declare their Consent in other things: which
gives me the more hope, that after a fair Debate of this Question, we may at
length meet sweetly in the same Truth, which perhaps neither of us do as yet so
clearly apprehend, as we may (through the help of Christ) attain unto. We know
but in part, Believe in part, and Prophecy in part, and are imperfect in all
we do; and therefore must wait for, and endeavor after further discoveries of
the mind of God.

And to this end (in case what has been, and is here, or what shortly may be
Published about this Question, should not clear up the Truth to satisfaction,
but that further Replies should be made) My earnest Motion and Desire is,

1. That all Reflections upon men's Persons, and other impertinent Discourses,
being laid aside, the main issue of the Question in Debate may be closely
followed; which, I perceive, is come in a manner to this narrow, viz. Whether
the Persons described in the fifth Proposition be regularly Church Members; for
this is all along denied by our Brethren, and several ways alleged, whereby
they should become Non-members, as, By their Self-Excommunication, By Gods
Excommunication, etc.

2. My Motion and Desire is, That the Scriptures alone, according to their true
sense and scope, may be made the Touchstone to discover the Truth: These are
able to make the man of God fully furnished to every good work. I deny not the
use of the Concurring Judgment of the godly Learned: And it is well known how
fully the advantage lies on the Synods side in that respect; yet I see men are
too apt to make use of Sentences of Authors that seem to favor their Opinion,
though indeed contrary to the meaning and judgment of those Authors: And this
tends to amuse and puzzle the common sort of Readers, and enlarge Disputes, but
does not tend to clear up the Truth. If these two things might be attended, I
not but this Case would have a speedy and comfortable issue.

Now the Lord God of Truth, Purity and Peace, direct all our hearts into the
Right Understanding, Unfeigned Love, and United Practice of his Holy Will in
all things. Amen.

FINIS.

