GODS MERCY, SHOWED TO HIS PEOPLE IN GIVING THEM A FAITHFUL MINISTRY AND
SCHOOLS OF LEARNING FOR THE CONTINUAL SUPPLIES THEREOF.

Delivered in a Sermon preached at Cambridg, the day after the Commencement, by
Charles Chauncy, B. D, President of HARVARD College in New England.

Published with some additions thereunto at the request of diverse Honored, and
much Respected friends, For public benefit, as they judged.

1 These. 5. 12. We beseech you brethren to know them that labor amongst you,
and are over you in the Lord, and esteem them very highly in Love for their
works sake. Printed by Samuel Green, at CAMBRIDG in New England 1655.

TO THE HONORED GOVERNOR OF THE MASSACHUSETTS JOHN ENDICOTT Esquire, TOGETHER WITH
THE DEPUTY GOVERNOR RICH. BELLINGHAM Esquire, AND THE REST OF THE HONORED BENCH.

AS ALSO TO ALL THE BOUNTIFUL BENEFACTORS OF THE COLLEGE SERVIVING.

AND TO ALL THE F AVOURERS, AND TRUE WELL-WISHERS TO THE FAITHFUL MINISTRY,
AND SCHOOLS OF LEARNING.

CHAPTER CHAPTER Wishes increase of Grace, and prosperity, as their Souls prosper.

Amos. 2. 11. And I raised up of your Sonns for Prophets, and of your Young men
for Nazarits, is it not so O ye children of Israel, says the LORD?


THE Spirit of GOD by the Prophet Amos seems to agravate the sins of Judah and
Israel mentioned from verse. 4 -- 9. by calling to remembrance the mereyes
bestowed upon them. And four mercyes especially are here mentioned. 1. The
destruction of the Amorite before them. ( under whom are comprehended all the
Canaanites,) which mercy is amplyfied two ways 1. by the mighty stature and
strength of this people [ hat their height was like the height of Cedar, and he
was strong as the Oaks,]

2. by their utter destruction [ yet I destroyed his fruit from above, and his
roots from beneath,] we gather the fruit of trees many times yet the tree
stands many a year and bears new fruits, so the Lord does impoverish a people,
and suffer all their (...) and substance to be taken away, or plandred by their
enemies, which do afterward recover themselves and flourish again, but when a
tree is rooted up, there is no more hope of it: thus did the Lord pluck up the
Amorites by the roots, not withstanding their cedar-like talness, and strength
as heart of Oak, this is the first mercy mentioned.

2. The Lord (...) them of their deliverance out of Egypt, verse. 10. which the
Lord often insists upon, (...) 3. Of their safe conduct through the wilderness
forty years together, and these were three great blessings, yet they were but
temporal* but the next and last passes all the rest, and is spiritual. 4. I
raised up of your Sons etc. this is that blessing that is now to be spoken of.

There be two general parts of the text.

1. A description of the spiritual benefit bestowed, in the first words [ I
raised up of your Sons etc:]

2. A testificatio^; that such a benefit was bestowed in the last words [ is it
not so O ye children of Israel says the Lord?]

In the description we may note 1. The cause and (...) of this benefit, [ (...)
the Lord] 2. The manner of working [ (...) up] 3. The benefit and effect it
self, [ (...) and (...)] (...) by the persons that were so raised up (...).

2. For the rest (...) it is set down in the form of (...) wherein note 1. who
makes the question 1. the Lord. 2. the persons to whom the question is made
[the people of Israel] 3 the intent and meaning of the question, which is a
strong and vehement asseveration. for the meaning of [ is it not so] is, that
it is certainly so.

Now to open the meaning of the words.

And I] that destroyed the Amorites etc: it was the self same person and power
that raised up these Prophets among you.

Raised up] word for word, I made them to arise, I made Prophets to arise from
among your Sonns, or I made them to be such, in this sense the word is used.
Deuteronomy: 34. 10. there arose not a Prophet since in Israel like unto Moses: and
among them that were of Women, there arose not a greater then John the Baptist.
so then here I raised up viz I made them to be Prophets. I raised them out of
low condition as if I had raised them out of the dust. I have raised up of your
Sonns] or from among your Sonns, that is some of your Sons ( says Mercer) if
they were Prophets, though strangers, it were no small mercy, but to raise them
up from among your sonns, such as came forth out of your own loins. ( as
Samuel and Jeremiah were) this fans exceeds the other. For Prophets] not only
to foretell things to come, but faithfully teach and instruct you, for there
were two sorts of the Prophets in these times of the old Testament:

1. such as were taught in schools (as Samuel) under the Discipline of other
Prophets, such were usually called the sonns of the Prophets, 2 Kings. 4. 1.
and 6. 1. this may appear by comparing together 2 Kings. 2. 12. and verse. 3. of
the same chapter verse. 12. Elishah said my father my father, the chariots of
Israel and the horsemen thereof, Elijah was not Elishahs natural father for it
is said verse. 3. Elijah was Elishahs master and so he was indeed, he taught
him and instructed him, therefore the sons of Prophets were such as were
trained up under the Prophets in good literature, and so fit^d for the office
of a Prophet afterward, 2. Others had their calling immediately from God, and
were by him extraordinarily inspired with gifts from above, as Amos. 7. 14, 15.
Amos says I was not a Prophet nor the son of a Prophet, but I was an
heardsman, and a gatherer of sycamore fruit: that is I was not trained up in
any of the schools of the Prophets, but I had another calling, until the Lord
was pleased to advance me to the office and dignity of a Prophet, and verse. 15.
He took me as I followed the flock and said Prophecy to my people Israel, both
these sorts of Prophets may be understord here, both such as had there
education in the schools of the Prophets, and such as were called immediately,
and extraordinarily inspired, God was the rayser up of them both, for humane
instruction is not sufficient to make any man to be a Prophet: yea and no less
power of God and grace is requisite to raise up your Sonns to be Prophets
whatsoever their educatio^ is, the^ where he does inspire others immediately
and extraordinarily, therefore where extraordinary means is wanting, the
goodness of God in blessing ordinary means must not be forgotten. [ Of your
young men] it is spoken of young men emphatically for it is a mighty change
that young men that are addicted to their pleasures and lusts, that now they
should be so changed as to preach Christ, and to savor heavenly things, and to
be set apart to God, [ To be Nazarites] the Nazarites were separati^^ (says
Mercer) men separated from vulgar delights, that they might apply themselves
and their study to the word of God and his worship. Some apply that which is
spoken of our Savior Christ Math. 2. He shall be called a Nazarene, to have
some reference to this vow of a Nazarite, but no doubt that place has respect
merely to the city Nazareth, which is derived of Natzar that signifies to
keep, and not of Nazar that signifies to separate, so the Nazarites were
separated from the vulgar sort of men to a strict course of life, the Law of
them is set down Number: 6. which ye may read at your leisure, now there were two
sorts of Nazarites some limited to a certain time, others were perpetual, and
these latter were consecrated to the study of the word of God, and trained up
thereunto from their childhood, under a severe discipline and austeer course of
life, that at length they might be able to go before the people of God, as
well by soundnes of doctrine, as by the example of an holy life. So that now
the meaning of the text is that although All mighty God had done great things
for Judah, and Israel, yet this benefit exceeded all the rest, that the Lord
had provided a faithful ministry, not only extrordinary, but such as were
raised from the posterity of his people by his blessing upon the schools of
learning and means of education, to be separated unto God and set apart for
the work of God in the salvation of men's souls.

Doct. It is a special blessing of God to his people, when he affords and
blesses the means of instruction for the education of youth, to raise up some
from our Children, and young men and to fit them for the work of the Ministry.

It is a blessing of God, for be says [I raised up] no creature alone can do
it, it is a special blessing, more then deliverance from any outward enemies,
as the Amorites and the C^nanites were, for they had but an arm of flesh, but
here are spiritual wickednesses that be vanquished, it is greater then the
deliverance out of Egypt, for many that were delivered from thence afterward
perished dude. 5. It is a greater mercy then the Lord showed to his people in
leading them through the wilderness forty years, though herein there was the
angel of Gods presence that went before them in the pillar of cloud and fire,
that directed them and kept them in all their way, yet neither was that mercy
comparable to that in the text, for that was mainly an outward help, for
notwithstanding that there were six hundred thousand of them, whose carcasses
fell in the wilderness, but in this spiritual mercy Eternal destruction is
prevented, this therefore exceeds all the rest, and there is an other kind of
the Lords presence walking in the midst of the golden candlesticks, which
brings us to spiritual and everlasting peace, and mercy in the ministry of
Gods servuants.

For the further proof of this ye may observe that the Lord much stands upon
this, on all occations as the greatest savor in sending of his prophets and
ministers, and messangers unto his people as 2 Chronicles: 36. 15. The Lord God of
your fathers form unto you by his messangers, rising-up early and sending them,
(when as Gods ministers rise up (...) is then God himself is said to rise up
(...), God will not sleep when his ministers (...) (...). why did the Lord thus
arise and send, because he had compassion on his people and on his habitation,
because of the bowels of his pity and compassion on the poor souls of his
people, so Jer: 3. 15. when he promises to give (...) after his own heart to
feed them with knowledge, and understanding, upon their unfeined repentance, yea
this is such a mercy that it may comfort the hearts of Gods people whatsoever
their afflictions be, as the Lord says Isai. 30. 20. though I seed them with
the bread of affliction and give them the water of affliction to drink, yet
their eyes shall see their teachers, and their teachers shall not be removed
into a corner any more, as if he had said though your afflictions are heavy yet
this shall be a mitigation of them, that you shall have faithful teachers to
instruct you still, this will surely mitigate and lighten all other
afflictions: yea this will lift up Gods people above all their afflictions,
will lift them up to heaven as it is spoken of Capernaum Mat. 11. and
observable is that of Paul Romans 15. 29. I know that when I come unto you I
shall come in the fu^ness of the blessings of the Gospel. ye see that there is
afulness of blessings in the preaching of the Gospel, they are but shallow
blessings in comparisson that we have in outward thing.

But now when the Lord raised up our sonns and young men to be our Prophets,
and ministers the blessing (...) increased, ye may remember how (...) Za^harias
was affected Luke. 1. ^7. when it was ^^vealed to him by the angel that he
should have a form that should turn many of the children of Israel to the Lord
their God, that (...) that he should serve him in the work of the ministry, and
should come in the spirit and power of Elias, what joy and gladness he was
filled with all? and brake forth into that heavenly song of praises unto the
Lord, and next unto the mercy of God in Christ; he praises him for John Baptist
and says verse. 76. Thou child shall be called the Prophet of the highest, for
thou shall go before the face of the L ord to prepare his ways, to give
knowledge of salvation to his people by the remission of their sins, this was
the great argument of his praises not only that John Baptist should be a
Prophet, and should give knowledge of salvation to Gods people, but that his
child should serve God in so high and heavenly a calling, and so great an
imploiment, so it was granted for a great blessing that the Lord promised to
Phinehas Num^: 25. 13. he shall have he and his seed after him, even the
covenant of an everlasting priesthood, because he was Zealous for his God, and
made an atonement for the children of Israel: if the Lord had not accounted
this a great mercy he would never have given it as a reward to his faithful
servant, neither on the contrary would the Lord have laid this as an heavy
judgment on Elies house, that he cut them off from his altar, that is, he
deprived them utterly from the office of the Priesthood, which afterward the
Lord did, when he cut off by the hands of Saul Nob the City of the Priests.
Thus the Point is sufficiently cl^^red by scripture.

Reason 1. This must needs be a great blessing, Because the ministry is
purchased at so high a rate, and the business was so great to set it up, now
the providing of an able, and faithful ministry cost much, and it was a mighty
busynes to set it up. Ephe. 4. 8. Christ ascended up on high and led captivity
captive, and gave gifts unto men: first that Christ must not only descend into
the lower parts of the earth, but he must ascend into heaven far above all
principallityes and powers 2. He must lead captivity captive, that is over sin,
satan, and what soever had led us away captive, to do this. if all the powers
of darkness could binder it, there should never have been a faithful ministry
set up, therefore Christ must captivate all these for this end, this shows the
blessing to be exceeding great, that so great a means was requisite for the
procuring of it.

Reason 2. There is in the same place annexed an other reason to prove the
greatness of this blessing; taken from the excellency of the end of it, ver:
11. 12. He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and
some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of
the ministry, (...) for the (...) of the body of Chris, as if he had said, that
this benefit is of so great a necessity, that it concerns both the gathering
and building up and the eternal salvation of the elect:

Object: it will be said, that this was but for a short time, that the Apostles
and Prophets and Evangelists did continue,

Answ: But we have the writings of the Apostles Prophets and Evangelists to the
end, and we must have Ordinary ministers, Pastors and Teachers, till we all
come into the unity of the faith, and the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, that is,
to the end of the world, and the consu^mation of all things, and therefore it
is an hellish delusion to conceive that the ministry should be lost quite and
dissanulled, by Antichristian superstition, for this assertion does plainly
annihilate both the Church and saints, and any farther salvation of any souls,
which were impious to conceive.

Reas. 3. I may reason from the difficulty of the work, and the calling of the
Prophets and Nazerites, it is a very high dignity, for our sons and young men
to be advanced unto, it is such a dignity as God only can bestow, and such as
they be raised up by God himself unto it, the Prophet is the name of Seers, 1 Samuel: 9. 9. they have better eyes then other men, they are the men of God, (as
the mountains of God, and Cedars of God are so called) by way of excellency,
the persons that have more of God in them then other men, they are (...) unto
God, (...): 10. 3. and they bring others also nearer unto God. Yea the calling
of a Prophet is such an honor, as that title was given to the Lord Jesus
Christ himself, Deuteronomy: 18. 18. So the Galathians received Paul as Jesus Christ
himself Gal. 4. 14.

Likewise to be a Nazarite is a mighty dignity, for our sonns and young men to
be separated to the Lord, and sanctified for his service, is no small
preferment, (they are called, (...) by the Septuagents) Lam: 4. 7. her
Nazarites were whiter then snow, purer then milk, more ruddy in body then
Rubyes, their poll^shing was of Sapphire: that is they were the most beautiful
persons in the sight of God of all others; this is a mighty excellency
therefore the blessing must needs be great.

Reason 4. It is an invaluable mercy, for Parents and old men, that their
children and young men are thus qualified and dignified, it is a singular
blessing to have a gracious child, 3 John 4. I have no greater Joy then to hear
that my children walk in the Truth, greatest joys are fruits of the greatest
blessings possessed by us. It is the fruit of Solomon's Proverbs, Chap: 10. 1. A
wise Son makes a glad Father, but to have a child, that will make others wise,
is a fart greater joy to a parent. Dan. 12. 3. They that make others wise shall
shine as the brightness of the so mament, and boy that (...) many to
righteousness, as the Stars for ever and ever: So what a joy is it for the
aged to see godly young ones growing up, that the Lord gives us hope of future
generations, ^say 58. 12. They that shall be of thee shall build up the old
wast places, and thou shall raise up the foundations of many generations etc.
It is more when they do these great things that shall be of us: viz. of our own
posterity, but next it is comfortable, when as the younger sort, are hopeful
and promising, that the Lord gives us to conclude that the future harvest is
great, when he sends forth already so many laborers.

Use 1. It is a ground of just double reproof,

1. Of our great unthankfulness unto God, that has bestowed this great mercy
upon N-England and let it be considered how it has been generally entertained
by the Country: I may speak unto you, Men, Brethren, and Fathers, in the
language of Samuel, 1 Samuel: 12. 7. stand still that I may reason with you before
the Lord, of all the righteous acts of the Lord, which he did to you and to
your fathers, and then he tells them of the Lords sending of Moses and Aaron,
and bringing them out of the land of Egypt, by the hand of these his servants:
So I might relate unto you, what the Lord has done for this Country, in
providing, and sending hither a faithful, sound and able Ministry to them,
that he has also in great part graciously preserved and continued unto them,
and as if this had been too little, he has added this in raising up of our
sons to be Prophets etc: he has wonderfully erected Schools of learning, and
means of education for our children, that there might be continually some
comfortable supply and succession in the Ministry, Is it not so O ye people of
God in New England? If it has been so, and be so still in a good measure then
let me testify against you in the Lords name for great unthankfulnes to the
Lord for so great a mercy. Now there be several degrees of this unthankfulnes.
As 1. To pass by a mercy without any serious acknowledgment thereof, as the
Lord complains, Hosea 2. 8. thou have not known, (or acknowledged) that I gave
thee thy corn and thy wine, and oil etc: 2. To slight any mercy of the Lord as
the Israelites did also, Number 11. 6. Our soul (said they) is even dried up,
there is nothing but this (...) before our eyes etc: 3. To deny any mercy of
God, as they did Numb* 14. 3. they did not account it a mercy that the Lord
brought them out of Egypt. 4. To account blessings for curses, as they at
another time, Deuteronomy: 1. 27. Because the Lord hated us, he has brought us (into
the wilderness) to destroy us. 5. When as we abuse Gods blessings to sin so
much the more against the Lord, as the same people did Hose. 110. 1. according
to the (...) of his fruit he has increased the (...): according to the
goodness of his land, they have made goodly images.

Now all this unthankfulnes is found in many, and in some measure some in all
at this day, for this great blessing of the Ministry and the means of the
continual success and succession therein.

1. Many will not acknowledge the mercy, but pass it by as a matter of little or
no worth: the great blessing of a painful Ministry is not regarded by
coveteous earth-wormes, neither do the schools of learning, that afford oil to
the lamps, come into their thoughts or language to praise the Lord for them,
this is that sin reproved in Israel Jer. 2. 6. Neither said they where is the
Lord that brought us out of the land of Egypt?

2. There are others that do slight these mercys some little good they apprehend
in it, to have a Minister to spend the Sabbath, to baptize their children, and
schools to teach their children, and keep them out of harms way, or teach them
to write and read, and cast accounts, but these despise the Angels bread, and
account it but light stuff in comparisson, of other things, these are like
Jeshurun, Deuteronomy. 32. 15. that are fatted with other contentments, and do lightly
esteem the rock of their salvation.

3. There are others that deny this to be a mercy there be many in the country
that account it their happiness to live in the wast howling wilderness, without
any ministry, or schools, and means of education for their posterity, they
have much liberty (they think) by this want, they are not troubled with strict
sabbaths, but they may follow their worldly bussiness at any time, and their
children may (...) for them at plough, or hough, or such like servil
employments, that themselves may be eased, whereas the scripture says 2 Chronicles:
15. 3. that they that are without a teaching ministry are without the true God
and without the law, surely so they are that do voluntarily make choice of such
a condition, but their practice about their children is little better then the
mercyless unnatural and profaneness of the Israelites Psalm. 106. 36. That
sacrificed their sonns and their daughters unto Devils.

4. Some go so far as to account these blessings to be curses, so as to say
that our ministryes are antichristian, and schools of learning popish, and the
seminaryes of wickedness, and looseness in the Country: it is not my purpose to
confute their scurrilous reproaches of the ministry, (which are sufficiently
consuted both by the doctrine and holy conversation of Gods faithful
servants,) nor yet to plead for any dissolute courses, or disorder that is
found amongst scholars, but I desire rather to mouth for them, and to pray
that some salt may be cast into the fountain that the waters may be healed, but
let not whole societyes or professions be charged or blemished for the ^aylings
or scandal us carriages of some: if there be (...), or had been more Judases
among the disciples of Christ, yet let not all the rest be indighted or
arraigned for the viciousness, and disloyalty of others.

5. Many do make wicked returns of these blessings, and fearfully abuse them,
aod seek what they can to weary out ministers, and to pull down schools of
learning, or which is all one to take away oil from the lamps, denying or
withholding maintenance from them, whereby they do as good as say let them
tumble and fall, raze them raze them to the foundations: There be others that
do foment and abett oppositions against Gods ministers raise factions in
Churches, and College, to make havoc and utter dissipation of all; I might add
also the poor and slender requital (to speak no worse) of such as have with
most faithfullness and diligence served the Lord and his Churches in works of
so great importance: But I will spare the inlargeme^t of these things, lest
that I pass my bouds both of my strength and time.

But now how extremely hateful to the Lord all this unthankfulness is, I need
not be long in showing; Deuteronomy: 32. 6. Do ye thus requite the Lord ye people
foolish and unwise? and Isay 1. 2, 3. Hear O heavens and give ear O earth, for
the Lord has spoken; I have nourished and brought up children, and they have
rebelled against me, the Ox knows his owner etc: and Micah 6. 2, 3. Hear O ye
mountains, the Lords controversy with his people, and he will plead with
Israel O my people what have I done unto thee? wherein have I wearied thee?
testify against me, for I brought thee out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed
thee etc: this unthankfulness is that which causes the Lord to take away his
blessings from us: Hosea 2. 8, 9. She did mot know that I gave her corn and
wine and oil, therefore will I return and take away her corn in the time
thereof, and wine in the season thereof, and will recover my wool and my flax,
given to cover her nakedness: there is the same reason in other blessings, as
if the Lord should say in this case, I will put out the light, and take away
the ministry, pull down the schools of learning, for this unthankfullness of
yours which also the Lord has already done in some parts of this Country.

The Second branch of this reproof,

2. This serves to reprove whatsoever other sins Gods people do commit enjoying
these great mereyes, look at this as an aggravation of all our sins that the
Lord has done these great things for us, he has subdued the (...) all our
enemies, Indians and others, whose hight was like the hight of Cedars, and they
were strong as the Oaks, he brought us out of the land of Egypt, out of the
iron furnace, from many grieveous taskmasters, from under the Prelates, who set
us to pick straws: He lead us through this wilderness, some near upon forty
years, and has strangely here provided for us: now I ^astly he has raised up
of our sonns for Prophets, and our young men for Nazarites: surely then the
Lord may justly take it unkindly at our hands, that we have so exceedingly
provoaked him by our many sins, and as he says for three transgressions of
Judah and Israel and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereon For
many, so he may say to us, for three transgressions of New England and for four
I will not turn away the punishment thereof. And if God will not turn it away it
is beyond all other power in the world to do it. There be diverse sins in
Israel and Judah here reproved, which it would not be hard to find in New
England, as the contempt of the Law in Judah, and that their lies caused them
to err. Suitably there is to be found in N-England the contempt of the word of
God and his Ordinances, and listening to lying books and pamphlets, that are
brought over into the country, whereby multitudes are poisoned amongst us: In
the Israelites he reproves these sins. Their false worship, ver. 8. they set up
false Gods, and diverse Altars, and turned Bethel the house of God, into
Bethaven, the house of iniquity: this sin of corrupting the worship of God, is
studied by many even in churches, though not in such a gross manner as Israel
did, we have not such Idols as they, but spiritual we have, in the fields and
in our houses. The Apostle calls coveteousness Idolatry. Another sin of theirs
was oppression, which no doubt abounds exceedingly in this country, and mark
what he says, they sell the righteous for silver and the poor for a pair of
shoos, scarcely any commodity can be had but for silver, but suppose a poor
man wants a pair of shoos, or other clothes to cover his nakedness, that has
no silver: truly he must be fain almost to sell himself, to get some mean
commodities. Another of their sins was that, they gave their Nazarites wine to
drink. but here I should rather say, ye give the Salvages and Indians wine and
strong waters, and truck with them for that which ye know they will abuse to
drunkenness, if not to murder. Lastly is is said, they commanded the Prophets
saying prophisie not, I will not so apply it, as if there amongst us any
command of Authority to that purpose, (yea we have cause to bless God for the
contrary commands and endeavors also of Government amongst us,) but there is
in too many places such carriage toward the Lords Prophets, and the Prophets
sons, that the ministry and schools of learning (as was said) are reproached,
desposed, impoverished, if not undone. Oh (says the Lord) verse 13. Behold I am
pressed under you as a cart is pressed that is full of sheaves: So the Lord is
pressed under such carnal Gospellours, He is crushed (as far as they can) by
such false-hearted professors, they lay all the load upon the Lord himself,
and no doubt but that the Lord will also d^s^ourthen himself of them: and it is
no mervaile if the Lord by his ministers cries out against such wickedness in
professors, and says as Isay. 22. 1. The burden of the valley of vision that
is, it is but equal if they that see more and know more then, others, and
enjoy more means do burden the Lord by their sins, the Lord in like manner
should lay upon them the heavy burden of the threatenings of his word, and the
execution thereof.

Use 2. This may serve for instruction to scholars and students, 1. First to
show them what they should mainly intend, study, and labor foe, viz. that they
may be Prophets and Nazarites,

1. Prophets, 1 Cor 12. last. Covet earnestly the best gifts. as goodness is
the object of the will, so the best things of the will rectified, and what are
the best things? 1 Cor. 14. 1. desire spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may
Prophecy amongst all gifts the gift of prophesying is the best, and what is
prophesying? but 1 Cor. 14. 4. speaking to edificatio^, exhortation, and the
comfort of others, this is a public and a spirituals good, and therefore of an
higher nature, and most of all to be attended by you, and aimed at in all your
studyes, It is a great matter also that the Lord takes the Prophets to be near
unto him, as in the placing of the tribes in the camp of Israel Number: 1. 50, 53.
the Levites were to pitch round about the Tabernacle of Testimony (where the
special presence of the Lord was) and the rest of the tribes without the
Levites (...) off, so the Prophets and Levites are nearest unto the Lord, which
is a matter of comfort, assuring them of the Lords presence, assistance and
protection in their calling, of dignity, as being next unto God, and in ployed
by him about greatest service; and also of duty, in strict keeping of the Lords
charge, and holy walking before him: for which purpose remember often the Lords
hand upon Hophni and Phtnehas, the sons of Eli, upon Nadab and Abihu, the sons
of Aaron, whom the Lord slew for their profaneness, and said (...): 10. 3. that
he would be sanctified in all those that draw near unto him, and before all the
people would be glorified, that is, that he would punish in some remarkable
manner to the view of all, the scandalous and wicked carriage of any that were
near unto him in that function.

2. Consider further it is that ye may be Nazarites, that is, set apart in a
peculiar manner unto the Lord, or separated unto him; Now there are Three
things in this separation unto the Lord.

1. A Sequestration from wicked courses and companys, and from common things.
From wicked ways and companyes, 2 Cor. 6. 16. Be ye separate and touch no
unclean thing etc: to use the vessels of the Temple to quaff and carrouse in,
was a Babylonish practice: yea there must be a sequestration from common
things, as the Nazarites were from creatures and worldly delights and
distraandions, my meaning (...), that you that are addicted this way should
have less to do with the world and worldly delights, and be less eumbred then
others with the affairs of this life. 2. In separation, there is employed a
dedication unto the Lord, things that were of old separated, were dedicated and
devoted to an holy use, as the Lord speaks of the Levites; Numb: 16. 9. The God
of Israel has separated you from the Congregation of Israel to bring you near
unto himself: thus Hannah dedicated her first born unto the Lord 1. Sam: 1. 18.
So are ye to be as persons devoted to the Lord. 3. There must be qualification
with Holiness, other things separated unto the Lord as the vessels of the
Sanctuary and ministry, had a kind of relative holiness but in persons
separated there should be inherent holiness, students and especially ministers
should have holiness upon their foreheads, that is, professed and practiced and
visible unto all. Thus you may see what it is to be a Nazarite, and what ye
should aim at in your studyes.

2. Hence students should be instructed how they may attain to these
excellencyes, and how they, may be had: for here we see that it was the Lord
himself that raised up these young ones to be Prophets, and Nazarites: and it
is not either your own study or parts, nor the teaching and instruction of
others, that can possibly raise you up out of that dunghill wherein youly, to
this degree to be true Prophets of the Lord, but it is the Lord himself that
must put underneath you his everlasting arms to raise you up: therefore it
concerns students to be much in prayer unto the Lord: daily and duly to draw
near unto the Lord, to beg of him the spirit of wisdom, and revelation, and a
blessing upon, and assistance in your studyes, prayer was one of Luthers
masters, and it was but reason that the priest should first offer up sacrifice
for his own sins, and then for the sins of the people, Hebbr: 7. 27. first
seek God for themselves, and then make intercession for others.

But now by the way, some may object, here the Example of the Nazarites that
they nourished their hair, they were not to suffer any raisor to come upon
their heads, aureng the time of their separation, Numb: 6, 5. here is a fair
plea for students, and ministers to wear long hair.

Answ, Because that this objection comes fair and full in my way give me leave
to answer this objection, there is some need of it, and take it thus.

1. The Nazarites had a special Commandment from God to nourish their hair,
they were not to suffer any rasor to come upon their heads, until their vow
was accomplished, and then they were to cut it off. Numb. 6. 18. But now all
christians have a contrary Commandment 1 Cor: 11. 14. Does not (...) it self
teach you etc: it is against the law and dark princples of nature, much more
against grace and the word of grace, yea (...) same (if persons be not quite
past shame) for men to wear long hair: here is a wide difference between the
old Nazarites and students now.

2. The Nazarites did nourish their hair out of obedience unto God and holy
devotion, whereas persons in these days do it out of pride, vainglory
effeminacy, and the like sinful motives, and for sinister ends.

3. They only amongst the people of God did nourish it, and none else therefore
this example does evidently prove that all the rest of Gods people in the old
Testament yea the Priests and Levites did not nourish their hair, so
Christians are now to cut their hair unless they can find any where (which was
never yet found) that the Commandment of the Lord has allowed it.

4. The Nazarites were to nourish all their hair alike, they were not to cut
off some part, and to leave long locks hanging down, as is practiced by some
now a days.

5. The Nazarites were to nourish their hair to burn it, Numb: 6. 18. But
students and ministers and professors in these days nourish their hair to
keep them from all deminution, it were much better they were burnt.

6. The Nazarites nourishing of their hair was to difference them from the
common sort: but now the nourishing of the hair, is to hold correspondency with
ruffains and swagge^ers and (...), yea the vilest persons in the country, yea
Indians and pagans whose abominable customs the Lord has forbidden his people
to follow, Levit. 18. 30.

Object. It is true that the Lord has forbidden unto men long hair, but what
is long hair? can any man prescribe out of the word of God any set size for
men's hair? if this cannot be done, why should any be offended at our hair as if
it were long This objection has been made by some, and generally stood upon,
therefore it is a fit season to give some answer to it.

Answ: 1. This is most clear that long hair (if menkind do wear it) is contrary
to the word of God, and to nature, and shameful as was said before.

2. It is no small reproach to the Lord aad his word, to find fault with long
hair, and yet that he should not give us to understand which is long hair but
that every man still is left to his liberty, to wear his hair as long as he
lists; this makes the Trun pet to give an u^certain sound which the Lord
approves not.

3. That he that would keep a good conscience in such cases and controversies,
wherein there appears any doubt, will make choice of the surer part, that is
that part wherein he may be sure not to sin against the (...): so will be do in
this case about the length of hair, short hair we may be sure will neither
offend God nor good men, but long hair may and does offend both: therefore be
sure that God do not account thy hair long.

4. Christians are bound to abstain from all appearance of evil. 1 These. 5. 22.

5. Christians are to do whatsoever is of good report Phil. 4. 8. But long hair
in menkind has great appearance of evil, and is of evil report.

6. All occasions of sin, as Just, pride, ensnaring our selves and others,
should be avoided by christians Jude 23. But such is wearing of looks etc:

7. Christians should give no offense to others, 1 Cor. 10. But this long hair
gives offense, 1. As giving an ill example to others, who are often induced by
their ill president and example to imitate and second them in their guise.
Hence it is that many even children will not endure their hair to be cut
short, because that such and such professors do wear it long. 2. It animates
and confirms others, especially profane ones, in their fantastic dress, and
nourishing of their hair. 3. It offenas and grieves the souls of many devout,
religions and gracious Christians, who do utterly disaprove it and condemn it
in their judgments, as well as p^^ctises.

8. The Scripture seems plainly to prescribe unto men the length of their hair,
Ezekiel 44. 20. compared with Lev. 19. 27. and 21. 5. They shall neither share
their heaas, nor suffer then looks (...) (...) long, (...) only shall poll
their (...), now every one understands what is meant by polling of the head, it
signifies the exiting of the (...) any part thereof is contrary thereunto and to
the word of God. But lest I should digress too far, thus I finish this use.
Take heed of that fearful threatening Psalm. 68. 21. God shall wound the hairy
scalp of such a one as goes on still in his wickedness. It is likely that there
were some such hairy wicked scalps and pates in those days, as there are in
these days. But consider that God in his due time will wound them.

Use 3. This may serve to work thankfulness in parents, and in all sorts of
people, especially in New England, seeing that the Lord has bestowed or
offered these mercyes to us all: he has raised up of our sonns for Prophets,
that concerns parents, some parents more nearly; and he has raised up of our
young men for Nazarites, that concerns all and all have or may have the benefit
of it: For besides the Lords former mercyes, in sending in to us the old stock
of faithful ministers, and thrusting out of his laborers into this vineyard,
(by the blessing of God upon whose labors, the Gospel of Christ, and the
powerful dispensation of Gods Ordinances has flourished many years, to the
admiration of all the christian world) I say besides those former mercyes never
to be forgotten, the Lord has graciously super-added this, in raising up not
only means for this end ( viz. schools of learning) but also from thence some
of our sons and young men to be (...) and Nazarites. Is it not so O ye people
of God in N-England? And if it be so, 'see what the Lord expects at our hands
in answerable returns of thankfulness unto him, and let us weigh seriously these
motives to such thankfulness.

1. Let us consider what benefit and comfort all sorts have by (...), when as
our sonns and young men are not only endued with the seed of knowledge and
grace, but such as are sent forth as seedsmen to sow the Lords good seed in the
hearts of others, it was the Lords blessing of Rachel, and Leah, that they two
built up the house of Israel, that is the Church of God by their posterity, for
sons to build up our own houses to be Banim and Builders thus according to
their name is a great blessing, but far greater, that they are builders up of
Gods Church and house, Psalm. 144. 12, 15. It is an happiness for Gods people
when they are in such a case that their sonns are as plants grown up in their
youth. But much rather to have the Lord for their God, and means to procure and
continue so Is it not so O ye people of God in N-England?

2. Consider the state of the Country where we live, which is such, that now
the old stock of the country is well nigh worn out, and there is no likelihood
of further supply that way: now ye know how Gods people are fastened here, that
if there should not be some supply by schools of learning, Gods people would
soon be left without a teaching ministry etc. as 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. Is it not so O
ye people of N-England?

Object: But may we not be sufficiently supplied from among our selves by the
gifts and indowments of gifted brethren?

Answ. I could with as Moses, that all Gods people were Prophets: But you shall
find it here, as in other trades, that there is a great difference between
those that have been bound apprentices to a trade and others that are handy,
and have gotten a little skill by the observation of others, this latter will
serve to patch or bungle, but wise men will rather choose to deal with those
that have been trained up in such a course: Thus from persons educated in good
literature we may rather expect that they should be work men that need not to
be ashamed etc: as Paul speaks to Tim: Isay 50. 4. they that have had an ear to
hear as the learned, and the Lord has given them the tongue of the learned,
are most likely to speak a word in due season to him that is weary etc:

3. Consider what helps diverse particular Churches have (...) from these
schools, in grievous breaches that have been made in them, when any of the
precious servants of God have been taken away, from hence others have stood up
in their steads and have made up the breaches comfortably, as it was sometimes
said in the like case, that the Sunn has set and yet no (...) followed. Is it
not so O ye children of my people?

4. Consider that this makes for the continuance of the Church and propagation
of religion, to after ages, for this was always found true, that where the
vision fa^les, there the people will be made naked Pro. 29, 18. they will be
naked Congregations, and naked souls, and naked familyes, and naked
posterities^ naked of what? naked of the righteousness of Christ which is put
on by faith, and comes by hearing, and the shame of this nakedness will appear
to God and man: naked of the Christian armor to defend themselves from
spiritual enemies; and where schools have been put down or ceased, there
church as have been unprovided, and religion has decayed and great ignorance
and errors have succeeded in after ages: but on the contrary this course of
the instruction of youth, is the means to provide for present and future
times: and why do men plant orchards, or preserve the breed of the best cattle?
but to provide for future times: but is not the pure religion of more weight,
and the providing for the souls of posterityes to the worlds end? this is an
other benefit of worth: is it not so beloved etc:

4. Let the Separation consider this, some of whom are averse to schools of
learning: that schools are available to raise up Nazarites and to further an
holy separation: which is commanded unto christians, 2. Cor 6. 16. Is it not so
beloved etc:

Consider how the sons of (...), papists and heretic^s, they compass sea and
land to support and spread and fortify the Synagogues of Satan, the dens of
devils, and suburbs of hell? should not the glory of God' and the salvation of
souls be deerer unto us, then their destruction and condemnation is to them?
all these things should forward our thankfulnss to God for these mercys.

But now it is not a verbal thankfulness that will serve our turn, (that would
be gross hypocrisy) but it must be really expressed, toward the education of
youth, and the encouragement of the ministry, and the propagatio^ of the Gospel.

The reality of your thankfulness let it be expressed in your future care.

1. To do (if it be in your power) as Hezekiah did 2 Chronicles: 30. 22. that spoke
to the heart of all the Levites, that taught the good knowledge of the Lord Yea
do as Nehemiah did chap: 13. 11. See that sufficient portions be allotted and
contributed unto them.

2. Do as Jehoshaphat did 2 Chronicles 19. 8. reach forth thine hand to send Levites
into the blind and dark places of the country.

3. Be at the cost to trayn up thy toward'y children in good literature:
parents are commanded to trayn up their children Ephesians. 6. 4. in putting
understanding and instruction into them: as if children were like bruit beasts
without it.

4. In relieving the sons of the Prophets, and the College, as Elishah did 1
Kings 4. 34. In setting up of free schools, as the Lord inables you.

5. If ye be poor, yet pray for posterity and means of education, and pray for
the peace of Jerusalem; and that Bethel, the house of God may not be turned
into Bethaven the house of iniquity, that schools of learning be not poisoned,
or the fountains corrupted.

Use 4. This point may serve for Information. To teach us, that Schools of
learning are approved and appointed of God, and of great importance for the
benefit of Gods people: Seeing that the Lord works with, and blesses this
means, for the laying up of provision, and making of supplys for the work of
the ministry; and the Lord here reckons it up as the chiefest of all the
blessings mentioned: and this was always one way (even when there were
extraordinary Prophets of raising up of Prophets etc: And there is much more
need of schools now, when those extrardinary Prophets are wanting.

Quest: What ground is there in the Scriptures, for Schools of learning?

Answ: Give me leave to show this as a matter called by many into question in
these days* (...) Now the Text, and the explication thereof before shows that
the Lord did approve of them in the days of the old Testament, that is the
intent of the frequent mentioning of the sonns of the Prophets, that is their
scholars that were trained up under them: besides 2 Kings 22.14. There is
mention of a College (where (...) the Prophetess, and no doubt many others
nurtured in a way of learning lived,) and the Hebrews have an usual word where
by they call their schools ( ieshibah) a company of scholars that sit together
to be taught: and Mal. 2. 12. the master and scholar is made mention of; Now
in the New Testament John Baptist had scholars John 1. 28. so the Pharisees had
their scholars Mat. 22. 15, 16. Paul was Gamaliels scholar Acts 22. 3. There
was a Synogogue of learned men disputing with Stephen Act. 6. 9. So there was a
school at Cormth Acts 19. 8. Timothy was Paul's scholar, 2 Timothy 3. 14. But the
example of our Savior Christ is above all, that kept a school, first of his
twelve disciples, then of the seaventy disciples Luke 10. that he also sent
forth to preach the Gospel. Yea there is a most deer and express Commandment,
that Paul gives to Timothy 2 Timothy: 2. 2. he says the things that thou have
heard of me before many witnesses, he fame commit to faithful men, who shall
be able to teach others also. Where we see that Timothy had many school fellows
that are called witnesses, and also that Timothy is commanded to teach others,
so it concerns such as God enables to teach them that may be teachers of
others, to instruct them in the things of God.

But now it will be very needful upon this occasion for us to consider what
weight there is in the objections that diverse in these days have printed
against them.

Object. 1. Mr. Dell in his answer to Mr. S. Simpson allows schools of the
prophets wherein Christian religion is taught, but against schools of humane
learning this is that that makes them Antichrists, seeing they are contrary to,
and do oppose Christ, this makes the universityes stews of Antichrist, houses
of lies, and to stink before God with most loath some abomination etc: with a
multitude of other reproachful terms which Luther and others have loaded
Popish Universityes withal.

Answ. 1. I do much desire that the opposers of schools and universityes would
speak plainly what they mean by humane learning, then we should easily come to
some conclusion. Therefore let this distinction be premised, that humane
learning may either be taken for all that learning that the heathen Authors or
philosophers have delivered in their writings: or else all other Arts besides
Theology, as they call physics, ethics, politics etc: take in also the
grounds of languages, Latin Greek and Hebrew. Now in the former sense, if Mr.
D. do mean by humane learning, all that learning that the heathen men have
uttered out of the light of nature: It will be a great oversight to pass such a
sentence upon it. 1. Because we find in Scriptures, some testimonies out of
humane writers, 29 (...): 1. 12. Act. 17. 28. 1 Cor: 15. 33. etc: which the
Spirit of God would not have (...), if their writings had been utterly
unlawful to read. (...) 2. There are certain principles of truth written,
even in corrupt nature, which heathen authors have delivered unto us, that do
not cross the holy writ, 1 Cor: 11. 14. does not nature it self teach you etc:
and it cannot be denied that all truth, whosoever it be that speaks it, comes
from the God of truth, as he is called several times And who can deny but that
there are found many excellent and divine moral truths in Plato, Aristotle
Plutarch, Seneca etc: and to condemn all pel-mel, will be an hard censure,
especially to call universities Antichrists for reading of them. Besides they
have treated of the works of God, most excellently in many places, and the
works of God ought to be declared by parents to their children, Psalm. 78. 2 --
6. Besides they have delivered many excellent sayings of God, and have attested
many Scripture historyes, as might be showed by several instances, out of
Justine, Tacitus etc: and Mr. D. is not ignorant of them, shall all these be
thrown away as antichristian, or as lies?.

Object. But they have much profaness and filthiness in them, and besides they
are made idols of in our universities, when as ^pse dixit, and their authority
goes for current, as Scripture it self amongst them.

Answ. But 1. All heathenish writers, have not such profaness in them. 2. Those
that have, let them be condemned and abhorred, and let not youth be poisoned by
them. 3. Let God be true and every man a liar, and let not man, especially any
heathen be deified, or his authority be accounted on, or go cheek by jowle with
the speaking in the Scriptures: this is indeed to be abhored whersoever it is
received, but abusus non tollit usum.

II. But now if humane learning be taken in the second sense, for all those
Arts that are commonly taught in Universities, as Physics, Ethics, Politics
Oeconomicks, Rhetoric, Astronomy etc: or also for learned tongues of Latin,
Greek, and Hebrew etc:

1. I will be bold to affirm, that these in the true sense and right meaning
thereof are Theological and Scripture learning, and are not to be accounted of
as humane learning. For who can deny, that the first and second chapters of
Genesis, and many chapters in Job, and the Psalms, and diverse other places of
holy Scripture, do afford excellent and sure grounds for natural Philosophy,
and a just systeme thereof: which Mr. Zanchy, Daneus, and diverse other eminent
Divines have opened and declared unto us? And where are there to be found such
Ethicall, Political, or Moral^ precepts, as are to be found in holy
Scriptures? or such principles for the ordering of our life's, families, or
common weals? let any man declare it unto us. And where are there such high
strains of all sorts of Rhetorical Tropes, and figures, to be found in any
Author, as there are in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles? and who can
imagine, but that the best and surest Chronology in the world, is to be found
in holy Scriptures, upon which all the computation of times in all ages in the
world depends?

2. Let all judicious men consider, what Mr. Dell graunts, though he speaks so
much against humane learning: I will relate his own words, because his books
are in few hands, and they that have them build much upon his judgment. He
speaks thus in his treatise of the reformation of learning.

1. I conceive it meet, that the Civil power, or chief Magistrate, should take
great care of the education of youth, as one of the greatest works that
concerns them, and one of the worthyest things they can do in the world,
insomuch, that what the youth now is the whole Common wealth will shortly be.

2. To this end it is meet, that Schools (if wanting) be Erected through the
whole nation, and not only in Cities and great Towns, but also (as much as may
be) in lesser villages: and the Authority of the Nation take great care, that
godly men especially have the charge of greater schools, And that the
Magistrate afford to this work suitable encouragement.

3. That in Cittyes and greater Towns, where are the greater schools, and
greater opportunities to send children to them, they teach them also, the
Latin and Greek, tongues, and Hebrew also which ought to be had in great
account with us, for the old Testament sake.

4. It may be convenient also, that there be some Universities and Colleges,
for instructing in the knowledge of the liberal Arts, beyond Grammar and
Rhetoric; as in Logic, which may be of good use in humane things, if reason
manage that art of reason But the Mathematics especially are to be had in good
esteem in Universities, as Arithmetic, Geometry, Geography and the like, which
as they carry to wickedness in them; so are they besides very useful in humane
Societies, and the affairs of this present life: There may be also in these
Universities and Colleges, allowed the studyes of Physic, and the Law etc:

5. Why the Universities and Colleges should be only at Cambridg and Oxeford,
I know no reason: and we judge it most prejudicial to the common good of the
Commonwealth, that these two Universities should make a monopoly of humane
learning to themselves. Doubtless it would be more suitable to a Commonwealth,
and more advantageous to the good of all the people, to have Universities or
Colleges, one at the least in every great Town, or City in the Nation, as in
London, York, Bristow, Exceter, Norwich and the like: And for the State to
allow to these Colleges an honest and competent maintenance, for some godly
and learned men to teach the Tongues and Arts under a due reformation. Thus
much Mr. Dell.

By all which it appears, that multitudes are deceived concerning this, as if
Mr. D. did utterly condemn Universities or schools of learning, or that which
is called humane learning, seeing that there is no art or tongue studied or
taught in Colleges but he allows (though with caution) and also he desires
there were more schools, Colleges and Universities then there are. Briefly Mr.
Dells project is this, and so far to be allowed, to put down heathenish
schools (where there be any such) and to erect christian, as himself speaks
page 19. in his answer to Mr. Simpson.

Object: But there is no necessity of Schools or Univer^^^yes, or any humane
learning to teach men Divinity, or to make able preachers of the Gospel: the
teaching of the Spirit of God alone is sufficient: which Mr. Dell proves by the
examples of our Savior Christ and his Apostles, seeing Christ himself had only
the unction of the Spirit. Isay 61. 1 -- 4. Luke 4. Mat: 13. 54, 55. Besides
when he would send forth preachers into all the world, he chose Fishermen,
Publican, Tent makers, plain men, and of ordinary employment in the world, and
only put his Spirit upon them Acts 2. 17. This argument is much stood upon by
Mr. Home, and Mr. Crandon against M. Baxter.

Answ. 1. It is a merve^lous mistake to reason from our Savior Christ and his
Apostles to these times: For our Savior received the Spirit not by measure
John 3. 24. and the Apostles had the miraculous and visible and extraordinary
gifts of the Spirit bestowed on them Acts 2. So the reason will stand thus. If
our Savior Christ and his Apostles, without other learning, by the miraculous
and extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, were enabled and furnished sufficiently
for the ministry; Then other ministers in after times (that have no such
extraordinary gifts) need no other learning, but the unction of the Spirit, as
if he should say, if Aholiab and Bezaleel were filled with the Spirit of God in
wisdom, and in knowledge, and all manner of workmanship, to devise cunning
works, (as they were Exodus 31. 3, 4.) then no man need to be an apprentice to
learn any Mechanical trade, seeing the teaching of the Spirit is sufficient
for any cunning work, who is there that would not account this reasoning
ridiculous? Surely if Mr. D. had not excluded Logic and reason out of Divinity
he would never have made such collections: It is much like his reasoning in an
other Sermon of his, the Scripture says that Christ shall Baptize with the
holy Ghost, and with fire, therefore there is no baptism with water to be used,
or to be in force. But forsooth what ever he says, ye must expect no reason
from him, ye must take all from him as dictates of the Spirit, and so all
Ordinances in the Church that the Spirit has appointed, the Spirit shall also
overthrow, yea I know no reason why Mr. Dell, or any other believer, upon this
ground, may not make an other Scripture, for if the same Spirit that indi^hted
or penned the Scripture, he in the same or the like measure in M. Dell or other
believers, as it was in the holy men of God and penmen of the Scripture, then
what Mr. D. and any other believers write or say, is of equal authority with
the Canonical Scriptures. So M. Dell and every believer is made a Pope, that
can not err etc: but here I will stop and spare.

2. I affirm, that the Lord Jesus and his Apostles were learned, and beyond
that which is attainable by ordinary teaching: For our Savior it is said Mat:
13. 54, 55. Jesus came into his own country and taught them in the Synagogue,
insomuch that they were astonished, and said, whence has this man this wisdom?
and John 7. 15. The jews marvielled at the teaching of our Savior, saying,
how knows this man letters (or learning,) having never learned them?
therefore it is certain that our Savior had learning, though never trained up
therein: and also that learning or teaching, is the ordinary way to attain to
learning, yea such learning as our Savior manifested in his ministry, (as the
Jews conceived) So I may say of the Apostles, though in a far inferior
degree: For with that effusion of the Spirit at Penticost, they had the gifts
of tongus the gifts of miracles, of discerning of Spirits, yea the gifts of
wisdom and knowledge, (the Pastors and Teachers gifts) mentioned 1 Cor: 12, and
also 1 Cor: 14. But will any man say that believers now have any such gifts of
the Spirit, or any promise thereof? Mr. D. in his answer to Mr. Simpson page 3.
(...) us of many promises of the Spirit to believers 1 Cor: 12. 13. Gal. 4. 6,
7. whence he gathers, that the whole Church of believers, and every true men
her thereof, do receive the Spirit of God. And who will deny that they do
receive it, to cry Abba father, to change, sanctify and comfort their hearts:
but there is more then these required to make an able minister, Gods ministers
must rightly aivide the word of truth 2 Timothy: 2. 15. must be apt to teach. 1 Timothy: 3. 2. must be able by sound doctrine. both to exhort, to convince the
gainsayers: They must have the tongue of the learned, that they may not be as
those unlearned ones that wrest the Scriptures to their own and others
perdition. 2 Pet. 3. 16. Now let any prudent man be judge in this case, whither
he think that every christian that has received the sanctifying Spirit of God,
is gifted thereby and qualified for the confutation of gainsayers, and the whole
work of the ministry.

Mr. Dell in his answer to Mr. Simpson.

Object: Humane learning is rather an hinderance then an help to the ministry
of the Gospel, and does rather unfit, then fit men for it: and the grace and
teaching of God only prepares and enables men to this divine work: learning is
so far from fitting men for this Gospel, and the ministry thereof, that indeed
there is nothing in greater enmity to Christ crucified nor more contrary to the
WORD of the CROSS then that: Yea nothing in all the world has been such will
cancer, savou^er, supporter and (...) of Antichrists kingdom, as humane
learning and Philosophy: This has brought in all the hypocr^sie, superstition,
false worship, sects and schisms etc:

Answ. It is to be feared that Mr. D. has been trained with humane learning,
as in some other of his opinions, so in writing of these things Let the reader
remember what approbation he gave to humane learning before, that he would
have it taught, not only in Universities, but in all Cities and villages: and
yet he has now so forgot himself, that though for humane and civil ends, he
did allow it, yet now he says, that it is enmity to Christ crucified, and
contrary to the word of the cross etc: wherein let the indifferent reader
observe with me a few particulars.

1. If Mr. Dell had allowed the use of Logic in Divinity, how should he have
dared to have allowed any of these humane arts, or languages for any end
whatsoever? Paul abhors that charge Rom: 3. 8. Let us do evil that good may
come of it, and their damnation is just that so reason. But Mr. D. says that
for humane ends (as for the Commonwealths sake) Schools, Universities,
Colleges, Grammar, Logic, Physic, Law, Rhetoric, Arithmetic Geometry
should be set up in every Town and City in the whole nation: which yet are no
better then enmity to Christ crucified, and contrary to the word of the cross,
the greatest introducers, favorers, supporters, and (...) of antichrists
kingdom, which have brought in all the hypocrisy, superstition, false
doctrine, false worship, sects and schisms, is not this to do evil, that good
(some outward good to civil society) may come of it? It is no matter how it
fares in the mean time, with Christ, or Antichrist, christian or antichristian
religion, it is no matter how much hypocrisy, or false doctrine, false worship
etc: be set up thereby, in every City or village in the whole nation, so that
their humane ends be provided for: Is not this man think you, a good friend to
Christ and Antichrist, to the Church and Common wealth? does this doctrine come
from the Spirit of God, or another spirit?

2. Antichrist himself and his adherents, take in all the rabble of locusts
crawling out of the smoke of the bottomless pit, take in all the popish tyrants
and all the devils in hell, (for these are all such as are in the world) yet
according to Mr. Dells Divinity, were never such introducers, or favorers etc:
of antichrists kingdom, were never such enemies to Christ crucified, or the
word of his cross, never brought in so much hypocrisy, superstition, false
doctrine, false worship etc: as humane learning, and yet how can he in any
sense, allow of any humane learning, or desire more Universities or Colleges,
would he have more Antichrists, more Devils etc: has not that man laid aside
natural Logic, and common sense and honesty, and put off his forehead that
writes thus?

3. Whereas he says that humane learning is rather a hinderance, then an help
to the ministry of the Gospel, and to all christianity; Let us consider a
little what truth there is in this assertion, to let pass what I said before.

1. I will premise what Mr. Crandon, and M. Horn do grant, that were no
friends to humane learning. Mr. H. graunts, some lesser usefullness some
sciences may afford (to Divinity) as the Mathematics to find out the bigness
of the Ark, the measures of the Temple etc: Astronomy to tell us what ^arcturus
and Orion, and Pleiades are; History and Chronology may seem to help to
understand the passages of the Monorchyes and visions in Daniel etc: Thus Horn,
but I should have thought that so strict a Divine would rather have scrupled
the very name of arcturius and Orion, which to find out, he must find worse
humane learning, that is, that is heathenish fables, which will tell of a bear
and a bears tail in heaven, where arcturius stands, and the Constellation of
Orion brings in Jupiter, Neptune and Mercury, how they did exurina illum
procreare. and that Diana for his valor in hunting, carried him up to heaven.
To have these and such things brought into the translatio^s of the Scripture,
would stumble a godly heart that knows the meaning thereof, as the rawest piece
of humane learning put in for Scripture, which Mr. H. swallows.

Now let me add what Mr. Crandons judgment is, he speaks thus in his writings
against Mr. Baxter. That Logical, Phylosophicall, and Metaphysicall
argumentations (mark he puts in Metaphysics too, which many will not own for a
distinct science) in natural, moral and oeconomicall questions (and these do
spread far in Divinity, as has been said before) may be useful: yea Logic
in its sober and moderate use applied as an instrument to (...) the contexture
and retexture of Scriptures, to find out the sense and meaning thereof: and
farther as by joining of Gospel positions together, it helps to (...) sure
and sound conclusions, may be profitably used in Evangelicall questions. Thus
Mr. Cr. which crosses Mr. Dells judgment. Let me add farther

1. How shall a minister without the knowledge of the Original tongues, either
translate the Scriptures, or when they are translated, maintain them against
the popish vulgar, or other diverse false translations, to be the infallible
truth of God? how shall he comfort a poor soul that says he is a reprobate,
and proves it out of 2 Cor: 13, 5. Because he knows not that Jesus Christ is in
him, if he knows not what adoki^os means. I might make innumerable such
instances, but I spare.

2. For Logic, let them tell me what a parologisme is, sam: 1. 22. without
some knowledge in Logic. what logicon gala means 1 Pet. 2. 2. For (...) is no
where used as it is translated (of the word) but Rom: 12. 1. It is translated
reasonable and if there be Logical and reasonable milk in the Scripture, take
away logic and reason, and the milk will be turned, neither will it be ^dolon
with out deceit. Yea how shall a man know when a Scripture is wrested, or
falsely applied, or a false use is made of it, or a false consequence is drawn
out of it, or a true, without some principles of logic, especially to hold
forth these things to others he must needs be a shameful workman, and many
times ridiculous, neither rightly apprehending, not dividing the word of
truth, that has no knowledge how to interpret the Scripture.

3. For Rhetoric, I would fain have the unlearned minister, or him that
understands not rhetoric, to give any tolerable sense of these places of
Scripture, and many the like (farther then they have been opened to them by the
learned) John 15. 1. I am the true Vine etc. John 1. 29. Behold the Lamb of
God. 1 Cor: 10. 4. The Rock was Christ John 6. 41. I am the bread that came
down from heaven. John 10. 7. I am the door of the sheep etc: add these places.
John 3. 13. No man ascends in to heaven, but he that came down from heaven etc:
1 John 3. 16. Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life
for us. John 21 last. There be many things that Jesus did, the which if they
should be written every one, I suppose that even the world it self could not
continue the books that should be written. and that Mat. 12. 20. as Jonas was
three days and three nights in the belly of the whale so shall the son of man
be three days and three nights in the heart of of the earth. I should be
endless if I should enumerate, what might be gathered in this case. But I shall
here have done with Mr. Dells arguments.

There is somewhat more in Horn, and Crandon, which I shall be brief in,
because as they state the question I should not contend with them.

Mr. Horn thus, That the study of Philosophy (though lawful to be known, and
in some points useful yet) is not necessary to the preachers or preaching of
the Gospel, nor the key of knowledge, without which men cannot understand, or
profitably hold forth the Trueths of Christ to others.

It is not denied, but what is necessary to salvation, may be both understood
and preached, without the help of Philosophy, it is enough if it be lawful
and useful, ( ad been ormelius esse) which is granted by him.

Now Mr. Cr. in his preface against Baxter, states the question thus. That
humane learning is of no force to decide, judge, and conclude any thing in
questions merely evangelicall, such is justification, and all other
Gospel-graces, and privileges. I suppose that Mr. Cr. shall neither have Mr.
Baxter, nor any protestant writer his adversary in that assertion. He that
shall say otherwise, shall make a Pope of humane learning, and an Idol, or set
up man above God, But for all this, these Revere^d men bring arguments that go
as far in overthrowing all humane learning, as Mr. Dell has done. Let me
briefly see the strength of them.

Hora. If Philosophy, Physics etc: had been needful for furnishing of men to
the Gospel, then Christ our Savior, who came to teach us the mind of God, and
to set on foot the preaching of the Gospel, would have delivered those sciences
unto us, at least a more perfect form of them then the Philosophers did or
could: But he did not so etc: therefore they are not needful etc:

Answ. 1. Take the force of this reason a pari, thus if the knowledge of the
Greek and Latin languages, had been needful for furnishing men to the Gospel
in all ages, then Christ would have taught those languages, and made Grammers
for the learning of them, at least in a more perfect form then any Grammarians
did or could etc: but he has not done so, therefore etc: would any wise man
think this to be a good consequence: yet the case is much alike; for both the
Original tongues, and the arts and sciences are like preparatives siting
persons to the preaching of the Gospel, (for that is meant by furnishing men to
the Gospel) But God is pleased to give to the sons of men to be exercised with
labor and study, in this and other kinds Eccles: 1. 13.

2. Christ has delivered to us those sciences (as far as is needful) in a
more perfect form, then any Philosophe of old has done, there was never such a
method of Physics or natural Philosophy, as is set down in the order of the
works of Creation, nor ever such a form of E^^icks, Politics or Oeconomicks,
as he has delivered in the Decalogue, and his own interpretation thereof etc:

Horn. The Arts and Sciences are of a diverse nature from the Gospel: that
being a revelation of Redemption, and way to Salvation for fallen man;
Philosophy but a purblind speculation about the nature of the creatures, and of
God as he stands in relation of a Creator and governor of them, etc:

Answ. 1. Not only Arts and Sciences, but the Law, both Ceremonial, and Moral,
and Judicial are of diverse nature from the Gospel, as it is the revelation of
Redemption etc, Is all therefore superfluous etc: 2. Whatsoever is contained in
holy Scripture, tends some way or other to the way of salvation for falnman,
and to make the man of God perfect, 2 Timothy: 3. 16, 17. So does the knowledge of
Gods works, which are sought out of all them that have pleasure therein Psalm.
111. 2. yea they all make for the glory of God Psalm. 145. 10 and the knowledge
of Gods works is laid down in holy writ, not in a purblind speculation about
the creatures, but in a way infallible.

3. Though the Gospel in a strict sense, signifies the glad tidings of
Redemption by Jesus Christ; yet it has a larger signification sometimes, as
Romans 2. 16. wherein the Apostle tells us of the day of Judgment, in which God
shall judge the secrets of men according to the Gospel: there the rule of the
last judgment shall be not only the Gospel in a strict sense, but as the Law
may be also comprehended under it: and whatsoever is contained in the
scriptures of the works of God, and as far as it concerns a minister to preach
all profitable and Scripture trueths, the knowledge of Arts and Sciences is
useful and expedient to him to hold them forth to his hearers.

Horn. The Law, or doctrine of the Lord is perfect, for conversion and
edification Psalm. 19. 7.

Answ. But this perfect doctrine, comprehends the doctrine of Gods works, which
is called Philosophy. Besides that perfection does not exclude, but presuppose
that same to gnoston tou theou, Rom: 1. 19. some common notions concerning God
and his works are left in every man still, that must not be extinguished.

Horn. If the said heathenish sciences are necessary to salvation, then we are
not complete in Christ but the contrary is affirmed Col. 2. 2, 3, 10.

Answ. Heathenish sciences are not necessary to salvation, nor simply to make
an able minister: a christian may be complete in Christ, and a minister, an
able minister without them, as the Apostles and many others have been. We
grant that all the treasures of soul-saving knowledge are in Christ, yet this
does not exclude the expedience of the knowledge of the Law ceremonial or
moral (which are metinoned in the same place Col. 2. 14.) though we may be
complete in Christ without seeking our salvation by them.

Horn. If we are to beware of Philosophy least we be spoiled by it, then it is
not necessary to teach and preserve us: but the former is true Col: 2. 8. and
by Philosophy the Apostle means not only Sophistry, but that which the wisest
Philosophers accounted Philosophy.

Answ. 1. No Christian (that I know of) will say that heathenish Philosophy is
necessary to teach or preserve him or others. 2. What Philosophy means, he
explains, and adds to Philosophy, vain deceit, and that is no better then
sophistry.

3. There are many false principles of heathenish Philosophy, as the eternity
of the world, the freedom of the will to goodness, the placing of the chiefest
good in contemplation, or in moral virtues such notions as these will spoil us,
and must be shunned. But there are many true principles, even amongst the
heathens, (which the Apostle calls, that which is known of God, as his
eternal power and Godhead,) these will not spoil us.

4, There is nothing so good, no not the Scriptures themselves, but they may be
abused, and it is good counsel to warn men to take heed that they be not
spoiled by the Scriptures abused: much more may we be warned that we be not
spoiled by the Philosophy of the heathens.

5. The word (spoiled) by an allegory, has respect to what he spoke before,
about the treasures of Christ or the word, verse 2. that which robs us of
these treasures, leaves us but poor creatures, but all Philosophical tenants
do not this.

6. I deny not but that (as Ames says, and it is alleged by Mr. Crandon) the
Schoolmen and Popish writers have made a very hodch-potch and mingle-mangle of
heathenish Philosophy and Divinity together, and so brought in many pernicious
errors into Divinity, and it is likely that the Apostle in this place
forewarnes the faithful to beware of such Philosophy, which is called Rev. 2.
the depths of Satan, But what is this to the forbidding of sober and Christian
Philosophy? What is added more then this by Mr. Horn has been answered before.

Mr. Crandon has objected another place against secular learning, that is Acts
19. 19. what is spoken of the Converts of Ephesus, while the Apostle was yet
resident among them, and consequently consenting with them, that they burnt
their books of curious arts: which though some would have to be understood of
conjuring books, yet I cannot assent to them, because this cursed, rather then
curious art, was proper and almost peculiar to the Eastern people, Jews,
Samaritans, Egyptians and Babylonians, the Greeks very little or not at all
studying it but placing all their wisdom in the arts, and these were Greeks
that burnt their books.

Answ. 1. Who ever expounded this place of other then Magic books? 2. If they
were not Magic (for the word is perie^ga, that is, curious, and superfluous)
could Mr. ^. find none such but Philosophical books? It is sure that as the
Greeks, some were Philosophers, so there were some Poets, tragoeaians and
comoedians, lyruks, as Aristophanes, Pin^ar, Sophocles, Euripides some Orators,
as Demosthenes, Isocrates, and some Physicians, as Galen, Hippocrates etc: they
might as well be those curious books, as the Philosophical. 3. If this
exposition of Mr. ^. is true, then it is a Christian duty and a note of a true
convert, to burn all Philosophical books, yea and in a public manner: which
were an hard saying, and I may question whither Mr. Cr. did ever give this
evidence of the truth of his conversion.

4. He seems to be greatly deceived, in that he restraines that cursed art to
those eastern countries, as though that Greece were free from such Devilish
practices: For the contrary may appear plainly in (...) Pollux, who is both
ancient and exact in setting forth the religion of the Grecians, (...). 1. cap.
1. parag. 18 -- 19. where he shows that they had their Oracles, and spirits.
that foretold things to come, their debacchantes, and numine afflatos, inspired
by the Devil, their raptures and enthusiasmes, extasyes, furyes, their
divinations, and where was the Delphick that is Apollo's Oracle, but amongst
them, with which they consulted upon all occasions, and for polytheisme, they
worshipped all the heathenish and Devil-gods in the world, and no God was
unknown to them but the true, which appears by that inscription upon the Altar
Acts 17. 23. To the unknown God, besides Acts 16. 16. etc: ye find mention of a
Spirit of divination which was called Python, (being like the Oracle of Apollo,
whither all the people came to ask questions) and OBH or eggastrimythos,
because the Devil filled the bellyes of their Prophets and Prophetesses, and
gave the people his answer in filthy manner from thence, and this example is
rather to be noted, because when the Damsel was dispossessed by the Apostles,
her ma^sters were so enraged, and made their complaint to the Magistrates, they
put the Apostles in prison for it, whence it appears that all sorts both of
Magistrates and people among them favored and maintained, such Devilish
practices. And also the like may be noted Acts 17. 22. where Paul says of the
Athenians, that they were in all things (...), fearing and worshipping (...), or
Devils, and false Gods: So that the Devil must needs have great power over
them. But thus much shall serve for answer to Mr. Crandon, the rest that he
brings is either answered before, or touches not this controversy.

To the only Wise GOD be all Glory for ever.

FINIS.

