THE CHURCH MEMBERSHIP OF CHILDREN, AND THEIR RIGHT TO BAPTISM

According to that holy and everlasting COVENANT of GOD, established between
Himself, and the Faithful and their Seed after them, in their Generations:
Cleared up in a Letter, sent unto a worthy Friend of the AUTHOR, and many
Years ago written touching that subject;

By THOMAS SHEPARD, sometimes Pastor of the Church of Christ at Cambridg in
New England.

Published at the earnest request of many: for the Consolation and
Encouragement, both of Parents and Children in the Lord.

Genesis. 17. 7. And I will establish my Covenant between Me and thee and thy
seed after thee in their Generations, for an everlasting Covenant, to be a GOD
unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. Mark 16. 16. He that Believes, and is
Baptized, shall be saved. Acts. 2. 39. For the Promise is unto you, and to your
Children, and to all that are (...) even as many as the Lord our God shall
call. 1 Cor.7. 14. Else were your Children unclean, but now are they Holy.
CAMBRIDG Printed by Samuel Green. 1663.

CHEMNIT^US, that eminent light in the Church of God in those elaborate works
of his against the Papists ( Exam* part 2. can 14. de Baptism) has this
memorable saying viz..

I T is not to be left free, to the choice of those who have been Baptized
(...) Infancy, when they come to be Adult, whether or no they will have (...)
confirmed, which was done in their Baptism; as though the Covenant of grace,
and Testament of pea^, which is offered and sealed up to little Children in
Baptism, should the^ first begin to be established, when the (...) of their
will, when Adult, is added thereunto: for from (...) is wick a ^^^^tion, the
Anabaptists imply have taken away, and Condemned Paedobaptisme; but such
Baptized little ones are to be admonished as they (...) what a Covenant of
Grace, and Testament of peace it is, which (...) entered into with them in
Baptism: and by what promise of grat^^^ (...) have likewise obliged themselves
unto Obedience to God, with there (...) of the Devil; and they are seriously to
be exhorted, that they render (...) to God for that wonderful great (...), that
they abide in that Covenant of peace, and endeavor to fulfill that obligation,
by mortifying sin, and (...) upon newness of life, and that they do this
freely, and sincerely: (...) they shall, through unthankfullnes, depart from
that Covenant, and ^^^^ment, that then they repent, and return to the Covenant,
and subject themselves again to that stipulated Obedience* But as for them that
shall (...) otherwise, the must severe comminations of the (...) and I (...) to
be heap (...) up, and set before, them; unto which says (...) communication is
to be added, for these are the weapon, of (...) 2. Cor. 10.

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
M ight I have had mine own choice, and desires granted, some other should have
performed the task of a Preface to the following Treatise of my precious and
much Honored Father; but being put upon it, by (...) worthy friends, whom I
knew not how to deny, I shall therefore humbly promise a word or two, in
tenderness to the Truth, and out of un^^^^ love to these especially of Christ's
poor sheep (how ever feeble, or diseased) that either have been, or may be in
danger of going astray from so great a Truth, as is the subject of the ensuing
discourse: being sincerely desirous, that they may be restored, and from thence
returned unto the Shepherd, and Bishop of our Souls, and may in nothing be
made a prey to him, who is our great adversary, the Devil, who walks about,
seeking whom be may devour. For we should not be ignorant of his devices.

The enmity put by the Lord between the seed of the Woman and the seed of the
Serpent, Genesis 3. 15. soon began to work, even in the infancy of the Church, in
the family of our first Parents, as we see Genesis 4.^. by the Martyrdom of
righteous Abel. No small portion of that fixed hatred, and hostility of the old
Serpent, has ever since been discovered against the young ones of Christ's
little flock. The multiplication of the Children of Israel, is the occasion why
Pharaoh deals so wisely as we read; endeavoring first by the Midwives,
secretly to destroy the male Children: and after that, more openly by an (...)
to drown them in his Egyptian waters; for which what ever his pretense might
be, alleged Ex^^. 1. 10. yet no doubt (as Calvin (...) place somewhat that
way hint's) Satan had a design therein, to cut of the name and posterity (...)
Abraham (who is the Father (...) them that believe, even of US all the Father
of many nations, Romans 4. (...), 16, 17.) and so to evacuate, and annihilate the
promise of God, even that great promise of his everlasting Covenant, to be a
God to him, and to his seed for ever, in their Generations. Hence also
afterward we find this spite of the great (...) of the brethren, vented against
these poor little ones, in the forbidding them Communion with the Church of God
in that Worship which God had instituted, and which he had Commanded his People
by the hand of Moses and (...), to observe, Ex^^. 10 3. (...) that they may
serve me, says the Lord but hardhearted Pharaoh see^^ to scruple whether the
young Children are a part of the Lord P^^ple, as appears by his question (...)
8. ( But (...) Moses pleads for (...) young, as well as the old; for the Sons,
and he Daughter, ve^se 9 but Pharaoh is of another apprehension, and
resolution, verse 10. 11. he will let the men go and serve the Lord, but not
the little ones. Again Haman the Agag^te we find is not satisfied with the
destruction of the old Generation of the Jews, ^ut the little children of the
Church also are expressly mentioned, and designed to the same condemnation, and
Massacre with their Fathers Es^^. 3. 13.

And much more of the like nature might be alleged out of many records both
ecclesiastical, and other, were it needful: the satan call delusions of those
(...) Ca^aphry^ians and (...) who were wont to mingle the Eucharist with the
blood of an Infant of a year old, (of whom Austin speaks, Tom. 6. (...)) are
not unknown. Not here to insist on that (...) of Herod's Infanticide, Mat. 2.
16, 17. We need not so much wonder at Haz^^ch cruelty against the Children of
Israel in staying their young men with the sword, and dashing their Children,
(...) dripping up their Women with Child, 2 King. 8. 12. seeing Satan has many
times prevailed with those who were Church Members, and o^ long standing in the
house of God* even the pa^ents themselves, to (...) their Infants and little
ones, which were the Lords Children and born unto the Lord, Ezekiel. 16, 2^, 21.
etc. Such an (...) that great adversary of our comfort, and Salvation (seeing
(...) self shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven) bear against these (...) whom
Christ has taken in to himself, and concerning whom (...) Savior profe^seth,
that of such is the Kingdom of God, (...) 18. 16. So does he envy to see them
in the arms of Christ and blessed by him, and to have any room in his house,
or so much as an extern^^ visible interest in the Covenant, with the initiatory
seal and livery thereof. Baptism being the seal to all Christianity, it is
Sathan's policy therefore to strike at that, that in cashiering it, he may have
at All; Hereunto tends his dealing with witches many times, (of which diverse
have spoken) in (...) them when they become first (...) solemnly to renounce
the Trinity (into the name of (...) they have been Baptized) especially their
salvation by Christ, and says (...) discovered C^p 6 sec.1 page 9^. in token
thereof to disclaim their Baptism.

An ill office and work then surely are they employed in; whose way and
endeavors, shall center in the accomplishing of that which Satan has been so
busily, and with such malignity, for so many ages undertaking, and no great
thanks will such receive for that l^bou^ from the Lord Jesus another day. If
Christ was so much displeased, that his disciples rebuked these, who brought
their children to him, Mark 10.14: And if the Apostle Peter received so severe
a check, as we read Mat. 16. 22, 23. for speaking that, which had a tendency
to take the Lord Jesus off from laying down the price of ^^^^^ption: how much
more then will he be now displeased if (...) such rebuke and warning given any
shall attempt to keep from him, and deprive him of, his Redeemed, whom he has
purchased by so dear a price ^o many, I mean, of his purchased ones, as the
number of the infants and children of Believers (dead, and alive, and to be
born,) amount's unto? why may we not believe, that an exceeding great multitude
of the S^eep that shall be (...) standing at the right hand of Jesus Christ in
the day of Judgment, shall be a company of these Lambs? As to withhold from
Christ so great a part of his purchase (the labor of (...)) must needs be no
other them highly Antichristian; so to make good and recover the interest of
Christ in such, and the Glory which he obtaines by them, according to the
enlarged grant of the charter of his new Testament (the scope, and work of
these few sheets) is a ser^ice pleasing unto Christ, who out of the mouths of
these (...); and sucklings even perfecteth praise, Mat. 21. 15, 16. and so I
trust will be acceptable to his People, who when as they must go down to the
dust and cannot keep alive their own Souls, yet may behold their seed
succeeding them in the service and worship of God, being accounted to the Lord
for a generation* Psalm. 22. 28, 29, 30, 31. ( ^vide Rivet in locum)
Schismatically to refuse to hold Ecclesiastical Communion with so great a part
of the Church of Christ as* the children of believers are (in many places, the
major part thereof) is a rigid and sinful Separation, and gratifying the
design of the Papists (the greatest Separatists in the world) as by and by may
be further seen.

And indeed the Lord ( avenging the quarrel of his Covenant, wherein he has
always been exceeding jealous) has manifested not a little of his anger, and
displeasure against those who have troubled these Baptismal waters of the
Sanctuary; The awful and tremendous passages of Providence recorded in several
histories, concerning the original and progress of Anabaptisme: and relating to
God's strange, judicial hand against so many of them that have been
through-paced therein, in delivering them up to spiritual, judgments, to believe
lies; and to fall, step by step, into almost all sorts of heresies, and to the
commission of the most abhorred impieties, and loathsome wickednesses, and
outrages, against the Commands both of the first and second Table, (as Luther,
Bullinger, Calvin, Beza, and others generally and abundantly testify) they are
very observable, and not to be passed over slightly; and may make every honest
and serious heart to tremble when ever he finds himself inclining to that
path: to this purpose, and concerning Anabaptism in this our age (beside many
other Authors I might cite) read only Baxter's Plain Scripture proof of Infants
Church Membership. Page 138, 139, 140-152. And as in the dawning of the
reformation, begun by those Worthies of Christ in the last Centurie,
Anabaptisme seems to be the (...) horse whereby so great confusion did be fall
that Israel, and was such Remora to that Glorions work then begun in Germany,
and other Neighboring Countries; so now in the further progress of that
reformation here in this our Israel, should Anabaptisme likewise (especially
accompanied with Donatisme it is wonded concubine) brood and become the
instrument or medium of our miseries and confusions, possibly then experience
(a slow, but many times a sure and severe instructor) may help some at length
to see farther into the mystery of this iniquity, then now they do. For in
truth it is not improbable, that the Man of (...) seeing he could not openly
and at once ruin the ^ef^rmed Churches in the days of those famous servants,
of Christ before expressed, did attempt secretly, and gradually to do it this
way; viz: by first sending forth his Emissaries among the Churches, who might
fill them with the Smo^ke of Anabaptisme, that so he might the more securely
pass to and fro, being undiscerned in such a fog: whence what mischief was
wrought, and what an hindrance those turbulent Anabaptists were to the Kingdom
of Jesus Christ in that age (for that was the first time of their swarming, as
the most Judicious have observed) by vilifying, reproaching, and decrying the
Ministry; crying up themselves as the most Godly, spiritual, and perfect*
Judging the Old Testament to be but as an Alma^^ack out of date; denying
Scripture-Consequences giving false interpretations of Scripture, especially by
Allegories wresting the same to their own destruction; making and something
schisms and factions in the Churches; denying the Magistrates (...) power in
matters of Religion; making their own fanatic spirit the supreme judge unto
all kind of disorder, etc: the writings of the Godly Learned in those times do
abundantly even to amazement inform us. And indeed the great consent and
harmony between the main tenets of the Anabaptists, and Papists in this point,
gives not a little ground for holy jealousy, too sadly to suspect at what
backdoor it was that the Anabaptist first crept forth. And hence it is that in
the controversies between the Protestants and the Papists, we shall generally,
and abundantly find, the Papists denying the Ho^^ness of the Infants of
Beleivers before Baptism; and how near of kin this is to Anabaptisme the
reader may easily guess: and in like manner denying that great truth (as is
afterward showed in this Treatise) viz. That the Covenant of God with Abraham
under the Old Testament, was the same for substance with what is now confirmed
with us under the New Testament, etc. which (it is known) the Anabaptists also
generally assert: Let me therefore propound a few instances this way, whereby we
may see what Patrons of Anabaptisme the Papists are, in regard of those
Principles (I mean) and radical errors wherein the Papists and Anabaptists
(although by diverse of them, upon the account of a diverse interest) Symbolize
and unite against the Orthodox, and speak herein, in a manner, the same thing
(distinguishing always between the Opinion, and the person; and between some
that are deceived, in other points Orthodox* and precious Christians; and
others that are Deceivers.) The mainpillars of Anabaptisme being no better*
then some of the Old rotten-studs and principles of P^pery, ^^^cht at first
from thence in all likely hood, and so inclining thitherward again* The D^alect
of the Anabaptist is generally (and too much by some) understood, and therefore
I forbear quotations out of their own writings* possibly some may not have so
much taken notice of the like, from the Papist, and therefore I shall briefly
manifest the same, by showing where we shall find some of the chief of those
Worthies that fought the Lords Ba^^les against Antichrist, opposing, and
confuting them both, therein: I will cite a few Particulars this way among many
the like which might be produced from several other eminent Authors, Holy,
burning, and shining lights in the churches of Christ, who have been the Lords
Witnesses against the (...) Spiritual Egy^^; and whose Testimony in this
matter concludes as strongly against the Anabaptists, having espoused those
Antichristian notions so ne^rly to themselves.

1. In those words of the Covenant ( I will be a God to thee and thy seed after
thee) neither life eternal is promised nor remission of sins, but only a
certain peculiar temporal protection. says Bellarmine, (agreeing therein with
the Anabaptist) against whom herein we find Chamier pleading for us, Panstrat.
tom. 4. Lib. 3 Cap. 3. Pa^ag. 9, 10. etc. and Rive^. on Genesis 17. 11. Again, we
read (says Bellarmine, the great Goliath of the Papists) that God promised unto
Abraham when he enjoined him circumcision, earthly, matters only, according to
the letter: that is, the propagation of a posterity, and the Land of Palestine.
read Ames opposing him: Belarm. Ene^v. Tom. 3. Lib. 1 Chap. 4. These. 9.

2. Touching the perverse and Catabaptisticall intent and meaning of that
expression of the Papists, viz. That Spiritual promises descend to us not by
carnal generation (as they call it the very Phrase of many Anabaptists, used
in a way of derision of the Grace of God) but by Spiritual Regeneration
etc.(they are the words of Bellarmine and oath Papists, cited and confuted by
Ames and others) read Ames his Answer thereto, Bell. Ener. tom. 3. Lib. 2. cap.
1. These. 5. (consonant to the Judgment of the Orthodox) viz. we acknowledge
indeed Spiritual regeneration to be necessary to the solid participation of
the promises; but that that Regeneration is part of the Promises, and belongs
in a singular manner to the Children of Believers, the very form^ of the
Covenant manifestly declares. Seelikewise Chamier largely replying for us
against Bellarmine, Stapleton, and others of the Papists* Pa^ strat. tom.4. lib
5. cap. 10. parag. 24, 25, 26, 27, etc:

3. The Sacraments of the old Law ( or Testament says Bellarmine had no
absolute promise of Grace annexed, and the promises annexed to thos^ old
Sacraments were fulfilled, although men did not believe. Read Ames against him
ibid. ^ 1. cap. 4. the. 5, 7. Again, the Papists [saith Chemnithold; that God,
by the Sacraments of the old Testament, which had eve^ the word of promise
annexed, did ex^tbite and conferr no grace to Believeres which [saith he] is
manifestly false; Circumcision alone [which, as he shows from Scripture, is
called the Seal of the righteousness of Faith] demonstrateth as much. And
thereupon he shows the reason why the Papists so much urge that difference
between the Sacraments of the old and new Testament, viz. because they
endeavor by any manner of means to defend and stablish the opinion they have
of their opus operatum Chemnit^y Exam. par. 2. de Sacram*sub canon. 2. What a
forcible engine of the man of (...) this is, and of what vast concernment as to
his interest, I need not here express, and what arrows of Anabaptisme, drawn
out of this very quiver, have been shot against the Orthodox in this point, is
known unto not a few.

Moreover, as to the comparison in Scripture made between the Sacraments of the
old and new Testament, that in 1 Cor. 10.1 -- 4. (among several other
Scriptures) is cited by Ames against Bellarmine where the Apostle speake's of
our Fathers being Baptized in the Sea etc: thereby intimating our Sacraments to
be the same for substance with theirs: or Sacramental signs and seals of one
and the same spiritual grace, so that the Covenant-mercies, or promises of
spiritual good are the same to us as to them: Bellarmine opposes this [as does
the Anabaptist] The Fathers [saith he] are said to eat the same meat not
because ours and theirs was the same, but because they themselves, all of them
did eat the same: but that meat and drink were not sacraments; they had no
promise ane^ed etc: Bell ener^. tom. 3. l.1. c. 4. th.10. and Cham. panstrat
tom.4. l. 3. c. 2.

4. The scripture no where call's Circumcision a seal. [saith Bellarmine to
Rom, 4.] unless it be in this place, where Abraham is spoken of, which is a
manifest argument that Circumcision was a seal unto Abraham alone Ames. ibid.
c. 1. th. 12. By this weapon also fetched out of the armory of Antichrist, has
the Anabaptist not a little gratifyed the common adversary.

5. The Papists generally assert, That the Baptism of John was not the same
for substance with the Baptism of Christ, nor had the same efficacy, as the
Baptism of Christ has. Which tenet see confuted by Cartwright on the new
Testament, Mat. 3. 11. and by Ames Beller. enerv. t. 3. l.2. c.5. th.1, 2. etc.
and Rivet Cathol. orthod. tractat, 3. qu. 2. and Chemnir. exam. part 2. de
baptism sub^^^on 1. and Chamier panstrat. t.4. l. 5. c. 12. still we see the
harmony between the Papist and the Anabaptist. And hence we find likewise the
Papist pleading for the rebaptizing of those who had received the Baptism of
John. Chamier ibid. cap. 13. paragr. 35. etc*

6. The Papists assert, that Laics [ as they call them, i. e. those that are
not on Office in the Church] may in case administer Baptism: yea that not
only men but women may do it. Read Ames his confutation thereof, Bell. enerv.
tom. 3. l. 2. cap.2. and Rivet against Ba^ly the Jesuit. Cathol. orthod
tractat. 3. qu. 7. add thereto Chamiers Panstr. tom. 4. 45. cap. 14. de
legitimo Baptism^ ministro* where, among other Passages, citing the thesis of
Suarez the Jesuit, viz: that any body whosoever, that can speak, and wash, may
be a sufficient Minister of Baptism; whether he be man or woman; believer or
unbeliever; baptized or not baptized, if so be he know how to wash, and utter
the Word: with a due intention, (...) assertio (says the Jesuit) est omnino
certa, But says Chamier in the name of the Orthodox, we teach the contrary,
viz. that the right of conferring Baptism belongs to those only who are
public Officers in the Church etc. which accordingly he there makes good
against the Papists.

7. Ba^ly the Jesuit (whom Rivet encountereth) to the Question between the
Orthodox and the Papists; viz. Whether the Infants of believers are holy before
Baptism? he answers roundly for them; NO. Rivet C^th Orthod. Tract. 3.9 3.

And touching that famous place controverted between ourselves and the (...),
in regard of their wresting, and perverting the sense of that Scripture, 1 Cor.
7. 14. [ (...) were your Children unclean, but now they are Holy] we may
observe how they (...) in e^e steps of the Papists that have gone before them
therein, ^as they likewise do in that noted Scripture Col 2. 11, 12* not
allowing Baptism to answer Circumcision according to the mind and meaning of
the Holy Ghost: wherein see Ames against them, Bel^ (...) Tom. 3. ^^. Ca^. 4.
These. 13.. and Rivet in Genesis 12 Exerc^: 88. Page 340. etc. Take a taste of that
1 Cor. 7. as follows; Barley ((...) Jesuit) before Cited, ibid: q^est. 3.
labors thus to avoid the dint of that text, The Apostle ( says he) either
speaks of a civil Sanctification before men, that the Infants should not be
ILLEGIT AM ATE or BASTARDS: or else of an Instrumental Sanctification, because
that one shall procure the Salvation of the other, etc. the like we find of
Bellarmine's apprehention and Judgment of the sense of that Scripture; Such
Children (says he) are said to be not (unclean) that is, infamous and
BASTARDS* but (holy) that is, LEGITIMATE, and free from civil ignomi^e: Ames.
Ibid. I^b. 2. C. 1 These. 6. The Rhemists also very perniciously abuse this
Scripture (and are not therein, without their Antipaedobaptisticall followers)
Blessed Cartwright excellently upon the place in his confutation of their
annotations on the New Testament defend's this cause of Christ against their
Popish glosses: It is (says he) one thing (oftentimes in the Scripture) to be
Sanctified, and another to be holy: as for you, you (...) in both: for when it
is said, the unbelieving party is Sanctified by the believing, it is not only
meant, as you say, that the Marriage is an occasion of the Sanctification to
the infidel party, but that the use of the infidel party, in Marriage company,
is Sanctified, or made holy and lawful unto the believing party; as meat and
drink is said to be Sanctified unto us by the word and Prayer, 1 Timothy 4. 5 and
as your Interpretation here is short, so in the exposition of the Holiness of
the Children, which are begotten in this Matrimony, it is utterly ^alse: and
first it is to be observed, that the Apostle speaking of the Children, does not
(as you do) apply one word of them to both saying that they are* Sanctified,
but says that they are holy; which is more then he had spoken before of the
infidel party for although our meat, and drink be Sanctified unto us, and that
the use of them is holy to those which are holy, yet the meats, and drinks
themselves are not holy: if therefore you were short in the interpretation of
Sanctified, you fail much more, in giving the same exposition (...) ^he
holiness of the children; for if the holiness here spoken of, be not in the
children when they are begotten, and born of the Parents, but come unto them
afterward by Baptism and Faith; there grows no sufficient comfort unto the
faithful party to continue in marriage with the Infidel, considering that
occasion of holiness might come otherwise then by marriage: For that which is
able to uphold the faithful in comfort, and strength to abide in marriage with
the infidel, is the knowledge that the Children begotten in that Marriage are in
Covenant, and are Childrenof Gods favor, and grace, walked in Christ's Blood,
and Sanctified by (...) Spirit: and if you well know what this Holiness of
Children newborn is; the Apostle tells you, Gal. 2. 15. That it is [ through
the Covenant] to be a Jew by nature, or birth, and if you will yet further
understand what this Holiness of Children is, the Apostle, in the same place
tells you; that it is, not to be Sinners by Nature as those which are born of
the Heathen, for as much as their sins who are in Covenant, are by Christ not
reckoned unto them. And this Doctrine of the Holiness of the Children which are
born of the Faithful, if you could not attain unto, (...) is so sensibly set
forth unto you, that unless together with the knowledge of the Truth, you are
also bereaved of your common sense, you cannot be ignorant of ^t: for how can
you but understand, that if the root be holy, the branch is holy, Romans 11. 16.
and if the first fruits be holy, the whole crop is holy All which privilidges
of Children newborn, sometime being proper to the Jews, are now our
privileges, as well as theirs; fit hence we are grown into one body with them,
Ephesians. 2. 15. and ( being Burges ses of the same Heavenly City that they are]
must needs have the same infranchisement, and Prerogatives that they have: not
that every one which is born under the Covenant is holy, but that they are so
to be taken of the Church, until the contrary do manifestly appear, etc.

By the premises we may see therefore whence [even from that MOTHER of harlots]
probably this Illegitimate birth, this antichristian sl^ud of Anabaptisme has
issued forth; yea and I also fear is like to be nursed, and maintained n it is
course, until God has (...) up those breasts, and rivers of spiritual Babylon,
in the mean while, Calvin's admonition touching Anabaptisme, may not be
unseasonable, mer^ise debet nobis esle suspectum, quicquid a tale (...)
produr^t. Op^scu^^ in Psychopannychia. Page 411. S. M.

There are some who though they grant the Baptism of some Children, yet
utterly deny the continuance of that Covenant-mercy of God to their succeeding
Generations, though the Church-society whereof they were Members be not
dissolved, nor the surviving posterity so much as deserve to be, by the
Discipline of Christ in his Church, excommunicated; This seems in truth to
arise from their not acknowledging sufficiently, or not abiding by the true
genuine grounds of the Baptism of those whose right to Baptism is
acknowledged by them.

For the information (therefore) of the minds of the weak and stablishing their
hearts in this Truth of God, according to the Scriptures, even in the Doctrine
of Paedobaptisme (a Doctrine of so great concernment, and of so much comfort
and encouragement, both to believing parents and their children, not in life
only but in death; whence it is that they only can be preserved against
sorrowing when they fall asleep, as others do, which have no hope) This ensuing
Treatise is at the earnest request of many worthy friends in the Author of it
(of blessed memory) now published, wherein we may see both; 1. The Membership
of the Children of Church Members proved to be of Divine institution, and
likewise 2. (among other things] The continuance of the Membership of those
Children, in particular Churches, when they are grown up, even until they are
excomunicated, unless there be ^dissolution of the person by death, or of the
Church-society: Instances hereof see in the preface to the act of the Synod
held at Boston. 1682 Touching, Baptism, and Consociation of Churches.
So that this latter is not a principle of Innovation, and Apostasy; but as it
was the Judgment of the Author of this following Letter (as is therein to be
seen and to manifest which was one special end of the Printing thereof) so was
it the light which others have held forth, who in their time were Stars not of
the smallest magnitude, whom we have here seen sometimes shining with him in
Christ's right hand, but are now set, and shining with that Sun of righteousness
in another World.

That there is no cessation of the membership of a person in this or that
particular Church (the Church whereof he is a member continuing in being,
together with the person himself) unles it be by means of a Church-act
intervening, is a truth of no small importance; And therefore as for that
notion which does obtain with some; That in particular Churches of Christ,
walking in the order of the Gospel, there are such (...) become
Ecclesiastically Felones de se, that is such Church Members wholly their
scandalous sin, do become their own executioners Ecclesiastically, cutting
themselves off from the Church, so as that they thereby become actually
non-members, and that the Church has no more power over them, either
Ecclesiastically to admonish them, or Excommunicate them; this seems unto me
to be but an humane (...), and not of Divine institution, yea in truth (...) to
the (...) of the Gospel. And therefore to apply it, (as to members in full
communion, so) to these Children of the Church whom we now speak of, is not of
God; as may appear by these reasons following.

1. Because it is unscriptural. In matters of Gods worship, a negative argument
is conclvsive; if that which is asserted; be not contained in the Scripture,
expressly, or by due consequence therefrom, it is to be rejected. To the Law and
to the Testimony.

(...) The Scriptures alleged by some, and thought to favor this notion of
Felones de se, are only such as do but lay down before us the sins of some
Church Members, and do not speak of the (...) ( punishment or censure) as it is
called, 2 Cor. 2.6. which in such case is to be inflicted, and therefore are
not (...)* only that which seems to have most weight in it, and to which
therefore I shall briefly reply, is that in Act. 8. 21. (...) part nor lot in
this matter* Answer. I would not say that this text, propounded with reference
to the children of the Church that are not in full communion, is not apposite,
because the text speaks of a member in full communion: though to say so much is
accounted by some a sufficient answer to such Scripture arguments, as conclude
against felones de se, from Church Members that are in full Communion ( (...)
Churchmembers) to such Church members as are not infull communion: But yet
having gained this fort; that what is in Scripture spoken of a member in full
communion, is applicable (as far^ as mere membership reaches) to a member that
is not in full communion we may now the more easily proceed in the after
discourse. To this Scripture (then, alleged for (...) dren of the Church not
in full communion, by their sin, when adult, to become felones de se as above
said, I answer;

1. That the objection from hence tend's as much to frustrate the Church act,
or censure of, excommunication upon members infull communion: and makes that
ordinance of Christ vain, and needless to the parents in full co^mmunion, as to
these children. 2. These words of the Apostle Peter, were indeed a dreadful
admonition, and the Apostle being a Church Officer, did judge this sinner to
deserve it for his simonie; so that he was not (granting the cessation of his
membership) felo de se. 3. By [this matter] spoken of in the text, seems most
properly to be meant ( not Church Membership, but) the power of giving the holy
Ghost spoken of in the context, which power Simon Magus would have bought with
money, and for which the Apostle rebukes him: and therefore his not having part
or lot in that matter, is to be understood directly with relation to that
Extraordinary power; the Apostle would have him know, that he should not share
in such a power or privilege as that was: 4. I would ask whether, if a Member
of a church be discovered not to have his heart right in the sight of God, but
to be in the Gall of bitterness and bond of Iniquity, stand convict of Simonie,
and the wickedness be so grossly aggravated as this Scandal of Simon Magus was;
I say whether the Church is not bound to bear witness against such an offender
by inflicting some Church-Censure (properly so taken) upon him? if it be said
^oe; then may it not be questioned, whether such a Church would not as well
tolerate any other pollutions and defilements in it whatsoever? The woeful,
fruit whereof who is there that does (...) easily perceive: On the other side
if it be said yea, that the Church is to Censure and Authoritatively to put
away from among themselves such a wicked person by excommunication, I then
demand (if this notion of felo dese be (...) and sound) how they can
excommunicate one wh^ is a non-Member before the Church can pass the sentence
of excommunication against him? whether does this Scripture Act. 8.21. give the
Church power over him by it is Discipline to censure him, who already (as the
objection speak's] has cut himself off from being a Churchmember? or whether
the Church has any part in him who has no part or lot in them, or in these
matters?

2. Scripture Example lead's us, to what is contrary to this Felony spoken of:
witness, under the Old Testament, Ishmael's being cast out, by Abraham who was
the chief Officer in that family Church. So the incestuous person under the
New Testament is not felo de se though guilty of such a sin as was not so much
as named* among the (...) 1 Cor. 5.1. but there is a Church-act intervening his
sin and the cessation of his Memberly-Communion with that Ch^^^ viz. a
delivering him [(...) such a one] unto (...). Hence as the Church of Ephesus is
commended for not bearing with them which are evil, Rev. 2. 2. so the Church
of Thyatira is rebuked for suffering that woman Jezebel, verse. 20.

3. Because this notion of Felo de se takes away the use of a Ministerial Judge
in the Church, in case of the offenses, and Scandals of this or that particular
Member of the Church, to determine of the same. Supposing a person could
ecclesiastically cut himself off from the Church by his very act of sin, there
would then he no room left for a competent Judge to enquire into the crime
whereof he is accused, and to make particular application of the Rule to the
case of the sinning brother, and pass sentence according to the true desert,
and nature of the offense. That God has ordained a ministerial judge is plain,
M^tth. 18.17. [if he neglect to hear the Church] the Church is to be heard; the
phrase of our Savior Christ implies judicial superiority on the Churches part,
and the inferiority and subjection of a part or member to that whole etc. but
now this Felony denies this order which Christ has established. Though a
person deserve excommunication perhaps, yet it must appear that he do deserve
it; neither does his wickedness for which he deserves excommunication, render
him a non-Member till he be excommunicated; and hence in this case is very
considerable what is asserted by that deservedly famous divine, Mr. Cotton, in
his book entitled [the keys of the kingdom of heaven] viz. Though the Jury
have given up their judgment, Cap. 4. Page 14.
and verdict, yet the Malefactor is not thereupon legally condemned, much less
executed, but upon the sentence of the judge in like sort here [saith he]
though the Brethren of the Church do with one accord give up their vote and
judgment for the censure* of an offender, yet he is not thereby censured, till
upon the Sentence of the Presbytery.

4. Because the binding and loosing, mentioned, Mar. 16. the opening and
shutting of the doors of the Church by the (...) the Kingdom of Heaven, belong
to the same power (...) subject: hence therefore as none may intrude himself,
or can regularly be admitted or let into this or that particular Church without
Church-act intervening, so none can be shut out, and deprived of that
Membership therein (as abovesaid,) without an act of the same power
intervening. Ej^sdem pocesta^s estligare, and solvere; cla^dere and (...) Mr.
Cottons keys cap. 7. page 45.

5. Taken from Mat. 18, 15, 16, 17, 18. Which command and institution, leaves
Churches under a solemn obligation of duty, that when this offending Brother or
Churchmember deserves excommunication that censure be duly inflicted on him;
so as that thereby ( viz. the sentence or censure p^st against him, in case he
will not hear the Church) he must be to the Church as an He then Man, and a
Pu^lican. so that it is not a matter of indifferency, [to be observed or not to
be observed] but after the steps taken [mentioned in verses 15, 16.] and the
brother remain obstinate, it is Christ's Charge that then that public process
[verse 17.] be attended, whereby the offender become's ecclesiastically bound
according to verse 18 Christ therefore requires a Church-act to intervene, as
abovesaid, and so the offender is not felo de se.

6. Because a scandalous Member of a Church, by (...) of Christ's Institution,
Mat. 18. 17. is to be accounted not as an Heathen and Publican* but still a
Church-Brother if he will ^ear the Church, this is clearly intimated in those
words (...) neglect to hear the Church) running conditionally which suppose,
that if he will hear, he is not to be as an (...) Membership shall not cease
notwithstanding the Scandalous sin Committed. Therefore by his wickedness and
offense he is not (...) de se.

7. Because this felony objected tend's to render that Ordinance of
Church-Censure and Admonition laid down Mat. 18. 15. etc. vain and useless, for
the (...), by his si^ becomeing a non-Member and so no Church-Brother, hence
let a private Member of the Church go to tell him his fault, in the since of
the text, which is in order to more solemn Church-proceeding and (...), in case
he will not hear; or let the Church require him in the name of Christ to hear,
in such a Church Way as is there spoken of; he may tell them that he is no
Brother of the Church, for he has by his offense ^ut off himself, and
therefore they have nothing to do with him: that that rule of Christ concerns
only the Brother or the Churchmember, not one that is out of the Church, as he
is, being felo de se, and therefore may say (according to 1 Cor. 5. 12.) what
have you to do to Judge me that am without? If his sin be not yet great enough
to render him felo de se, and he suspect that therefore the Church may have
power over him and is going about to bind him on earth, so that (being
thereupon also bound in heaven) he shall become bound from an orderly entrance
in at the doors of other Sister-Churches, without Repentance first held forth
to the acceptance of the Church which he offended; it is then but to commit
another fault whereby he may be sure he shall be felo de se, and so he is
beyond the Churches reach, and this frustrates Church Discipline, and renders
vain that ordinance of Christ above mentioned.

8. To deny the intervening of this Church-act of Excommunication is to deny
unto, and withold from a person deserving to be cast out of the Church, an
ordinance, and means which may be for the saving of his soul, 1 Cor: 5. 4, 5.
It is not enough to say that the felo de se makes himself no member; and so the
Church is freed from his communion which would pollute it, as fully as if he
were excommunicated; for God's means are not empty or vain means, and to
think to reach the full end, but not in Gods way, and by observing his means
ordained, is neither Christian wisdom, nor Gospel policy; yea to deny the
application of this ordin^ce of excommunication to the offending Brother is to
deny a means for the Salvation of his Soul, and to deny a remedy for his
Repentance, and the healing, and gaining of our Brother again.

9. Because the Holy Ghost command's the Church to Judge them that are within,
1 Cor. 5.12, Do you not judge them that are within? All that are within, are
subject to Ecclesiastical judicature, and therefore cannot by
Scripture-Warrant be felones de se.

10. Because this notion of felones de se evacuate's that power given of
Rebukeing before all, 1 Timothy 5. 20. which is to be done without partiality,
(whether they be young, or old, rich or poor etc.) ver.21 and so likewise takes
away that Authority given of reproving with all long-suffering, 3 Tim. 4. 2.
leaves no room for obedience to that command (2 These. 3. 15.) of Admonishing
the offender as a Brother etc. add thereto that this notion of the felo de se
supposes some disobedience in a Churchmember of an open scandalous nature
against which God has not provided the remedy of spiritual revenge in an
ecclesiastical way, contrary to that 2 Cor. 10. 6* where the Apostle says, we
have in readiness to revenge all disobedience etc. that this is spoken of
Church discipline is well cleared by that expression of worthy Mr. Cotton. viz.
the Apostles revenge of Disobedience by way of reproof in preaching does not
follow the Peoples Obedience, Keys Cha. Page 15.
but proceeds whether the people obey it or no; it was therefore their
revenge of disobedience by way of Censure in discipline etc.

11. The Notion of felo de se asserts the lawfulness of exclusion or shutting a
Churchmember out of the kingdom of Heaven by none of the keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, viz. by the sin of this felon, or gives the managing of
these keys, in a case which concerns the whole to act in (for such is the
non-Communion of a Member with the Church into the hands solely of a private
person: both which right reason does plainly condemn.

12. Because were the sin of a Churchmember of as high and heinous a nature as
(...), nay (which is more) though the Brother of a Church should turn Heretic
yet he is not immediately thereby a non-Member, or felo de se: he is not
presently to be rejected: but a first and second Admonition must be applied,
and in case of incorrigibleness then follows the Ecclesiastical rejection
spoken of, Tit. 3. 10. he must be rejected, but according to Gods Order, even
the order of the Gospel: for all things are to be done in order, 1 Cor. 14. 40.
so when the Apostle required the Corinthians to put a way from among themselves
that wicked person, it is to be understood of putting such away, and avoiding
such, and withdrawing themselves from such, and having no company with such
etc. All in due season, and all according to the order of Christ, even
according to that rule of delivering such an one unto Sath^^ as is expressed, 1
Co^. 5 and suiting with that other command of Christ, Mat. 18. according as the
nature of the offense is more or less heinous, proportionably is the (...)
either in case the offense be at first (...) in case the offense be at first
rise of (...) still we have no allowance from Scripture to entertain or admit
of the Opinion of this Ecclesiastical (...).

Having thus punished (...) Discourse I shall now very briefly acquaint the
Reader, in a word or two further, (...), the following cause, viz. that it was
written by the Authors (...) three months before the time of his Dissolution.
(...) sent to me who before the receipt thereof, was not so clear in the point
of Infant Baptism but was hereby recovered, and stablished in the trut^, and
dyed in the same Faith as the letter did persuade him, ( to use Mr. Fox his
Phrase, in his Book of Martyrs, touching that excellent letter which Philpot,
that Glorious Martyr, a little before his death also, wrote to a friend of his,
that was then a Prisoner, upon this very subject of Infant Baptism who was
thereby converted from the e^rour of his-way, Act mon. voi 3 Page 606 -- 610. s
m.
as is there to be seen. A letter exceeding web worth the reading and serious
perusally any, such especially as hesitate in this matter) The Reader may
please further to mind, that this was not intended by the Reverend Author for
the public view; but was only a private Answer sent to a special friend, for
his particular satisfaction, relating to some doubts mentioned in a letter of
his to my Father concerning this subject: Had he purposed to have Written, and
Printed off his thoughts to the World touching this article of Baptism I
question not but he would have been more polite and curious; and the
expectations of those who knew him thoroughly satisfied therein.

I would not detain the Reader by any further Preface of mine: and therefore to
conclude; May this from one who is now in Heaven, unto such as may have too
far engaged against God's Covenant-meries toward his, and our poor Children,
sent indeed-in-a special manner unto such* have a rich and effectual blessing
from the Father of lights (...) mercies; a better effect upon their hearts,
then that famous Letter had of Elijah the Prophet, upon Jeho^am to whom it was
sent, 2 Chronicles. 21. 12. (written, it is thought by diverse, before his Translation
to Heaven, but concealed until there was so fit a season for the presenting of
it) May this Writing (I say) and in such a season also, have a better effect
and fruit, even to bring them from the error of their way, into the paths of
Truth, and peace, and settle them, and others, more and more therein; That is
the sincere desire of the (...) thereof, who (...)

Thine to serve thee in our Lord Jesus. Thomas Shepard.

I. THOMAS SHEPARDIUS Anagr: Paradisus hos^em?
H E.! Paradisus alit Sanctis (...) hostem?
(...) Baptiz^m praecipit ^se De^s?
(...), clem^ns, (...) u^nis,
(...) gr^mi^ Ting^r ille suo?
(...) Ecclesia (matter) habe^i^,
(...) Sanct^s vox ait esse De^?
(...) sic Shepardius ^lim,
Non sic, (...) Scr^pt^ rei^u^t, a^unt.
Non sic Doctores celebrat quos sanct^or, at^s,
Anglia quos celebrat Prisca, sim^lque nova.
His ut^nam San^^^s Deus ipse laboribus almam
E^ superis, clemens, suppeditaret opem!
Qu^ fine, Doctores non ^ull^, scripta^nec ulla,
Errores poss^nt carnificare malos.
Jus confirmabas puerorum, Christ, tuorum*
A gre^to vellent cum* revocare (...);
Sa^git^, Lactentesque (...) defendito ab ^^ste
Q^i vellet l^udes ( -- cunque) ^perire (...).
Amen
Johannes Wilsonus Senior.
II. THOMAS SHEPARD. Anagr: o a map's thresh'd.
Lo here is a map, where we may see
Well, thresh'd an heap of corn to be
By Thomas Shepard's happy hand.
Which from the chafe pure wheat has fan'd:
The wheat is the Church Members right.
(Both great and little ones) to wit
Unto the seal of Baptism, all
That are within the Gospel call;
I mean Believers and their seed;
To whom the Lord has Promised,
To be their God; and does reveal
Their right to's Covenant and the seal:
On whom through Grace the Blessing came.
Of his dea^ servant Abraham.
Be they or Jews or Gentiles, now
No difference the Lord does know,
The promise is to us and ours,
As large, or larger: and God pour'^
His Spirit now as much, or more
Then e're he did on them before.
And if that they were Circumcised:
Then we are now to be Baptized:
Our Babes must now no less then theirs --
Be sealed (as of his Kingdom heirs)
Christ calls them his little ones,
And as his darlings He them owne's,
Denouncing against them a woe,
That are despisers of them, who
Offend the least of them, and such
As do their interest in him grutch.
^ri^pus, with Gaius, Stephanas,
With others, were not all through Grace
Baptized that of their Household were?
And Children who will doubt were there?
Then let us not to them deny,
Nor seem as if we did envy*
The privilege which God from heaven
Has through his grace and favor given.
Nor let us limit his good Spirit
In applycation of Christ's merit:
Whose blood was shed for them, as well
As those who them in age excel:
If such be taught of God, who dare
Deny, they his Disciples are?
III. THOMAS SHEPARD Anagr: More has passed.
M Ore from this holy pen h^th passed
The Baptism to defend
O^ Infants that Church Members are
(If well you do attend)
Then any Anti-baptists can
with solidness confute.
I wish with all my heart that God
will grant these labors fruit,
As good or better then the pains
by other Godly taken.
That thereby all his precious Saints
he would please to awaken.
That none may any more oppose,
with Zeal preposterous,
The Truth which Gods most holy word
commends unto us:
That who were (...) convinced by
this holy Shepard's voice,
Yet in his Letter left behind
they may the more rejoice.
He was a shining Light indeed,
few other ^acn are left,
The Lord vouchsafe we be not by
our Sins of them bereft.
And pour down of his Spirit more
upon his Sons surviving;
That will be more and more unto
Truth's lovers a reviving.
IIII. THOMAS SHEPARD Anagr: Armed as the Shop.
A Rm'd ( as the s^op of God's good word
Does weapons unto him afford)
De^end's the right of little ones,
Whom God* in the Church Covenant ownes
The (...) of this Church among,
To whom his Kingdom does belong,
And there withal the Seal thereof,
Through his free Mercy, Grace, and Love,
Yet are there some which them forbid
(As once his weak Disciples did)
To come to Christ, and scruple make,
Whether thereof they should partake?
But Christ was very angry for it,
As for such Zeal he did abhor it;
On come, said he, and welcomed such,
With tokens of affection much:
As if that they and scarcely any
But such as they might challenge any
Or part, or portion in his grace,
(So did his favor them embrace)
His Babes, his Lambs, his little creatures
He call's them. As for such defeatures,
Christ they defeat as well as them
Whom they presume so to contemn.
This holy Shepard is like David,
From Lyon's mouth, and B^^re's who saved
That little Kid; whom God did crown
With great and singular renown:
And so this Shepard has (no doubt)
A glorious crown his head about.
For all his labors, (and for this;)
In high and everlasting bliss.
And as the Lord does honor him
(For Christ his sake) so his esteem
Both is, and ought to be most rare,
Amongst them who Christ his followers are,
And oh how should we bless his Name
That on his* Son he powr's the same
Good Spirit that was in the Father
Or doubles it upon him rather:
LORD these Epistles do thou bless!
And as thy Truth they do confess
So make them precious in the eyes
Of all that do thy Gospel prize.
Amen
JOHN WILSON Senior
THE CHURCH MEMBERSHIP OF CHILDREN CLEARED UP IN A LETTER IN ANSWER To the
Doubts of a Friend.
W Hen we say, That Children are Members by their Parents Covenant, I would
premise three things for Explication.

1. That Children of Godly Parents come to the fruition of their Membership by
their Parents Covenant, but that which give's them their right, and interest in
this Membership is Gods Covenant, whereby he engages himself equally to be a
God to them, and to their Seed. This I suppose is clear.

2. That according to the double Seed, viz. 1. Elect Seed. 2. Church-Seed; So
there is a double Covenant, 1. External and outward: 2. Internal and inward.
And because the Covenant makes the Church, hence there is an inward, and
outward Membership, and Church estate: there is an outward Jew, and an inward
Jew, Romans 2. 28, 29. All are not Israel ( i. e. the elect Seed) that are of
Israel ( i. e. the Church-Seed or in outward Covenant) to whom the Apostle
says belong's the Adoption, the Covenants, and the promises, that is, the
external Adoption whereby God account's them his Children, or the Children of
his house, an family, the Children of the Church; and accordingly have the
promises belonging to them in respect of outward dispensation although they be
not Children by internal Adoption, to whom belongs the promises by effectual
and special communication of saving Grace: It is clearer then the day, that
many who are inwardly, or in respect of inward Covenant, the Children of the
Devil, are outwardly, or in respect of outward Covenant, the Children of God,
Isay. 1. 2. I have brought up Children, and yet Rebellious; and in the next
verse they are called [ my People] ( i. e. by outward Covenant) and yet worse
then the Ox, or Ass: Deuteronomy. 32. 19, 20. they are called Sons, and yet
provokeing God to revengefull Wrath; and Children, and yet without Faith. And
look, as some may be externally Dogs, and yet internally Believers: (as the
woman of Ca^naan, whom, in respect of outward Covenant, Christ calls a Dog: and
the Jews, who yet rejected him Children Mat. 15. 26) so many may be externally
Children, in respect of external Covenant, and yet internally Dogs, and evil
men, and we see that the purest Churches of Christ are called Saints, and
faithful, and Children of God and yet many among them Hypocrites, and
unbelievers; because they that in respect of Church estate, and outward
Covenant, and profession, are outwardly, or federally Saints; are many times
inwardly, and really un^ound: Hence therefore it is, that when we say, that
Children are in Covenant, and so Church Members the meaning is, not that they
are always in inward Covenant, and inward Church Members, who enjoy the
inward, and saveing benefits of the Covenant, but that they are in external,
and outward Covenant, and therefore outwardly Church Members, to whom belongs
some outward privileges of the Covenant for their inward and eternal good.

These things being clear, I the rather make mention of them, to undermine
d^vers usual objections against the Membership, and Covenant Interest of
Children; as, that they have no saving Grace many times; and that they make no
actual profession of any grace; and that many of them degenerate, and prove
corrupt, and wicked etc. for suppose all these, yet God may take them into
outward Covenant (which is sufficient to make them the Church-Seed or Members
of the Church) although he does not receive them into inward Covenant, in
bestowing upon them saving Grace, or Power to profess it, nay though they
degenerate, and grow very corrupt afterward.

3. Because you may question what this outward Covenant i^, to which the seals
are annexed; and under which we shall prove, Children are comprehended; and
because the Knowledge of it is exceeding useful and very pleasant, I shall
therefore (...) a short taste of it, as a light to our after-discourse,
especially as it is considered in the largest extent of it. This outward
covenant therefore consists chiefly of these three branches, or special
promises:

1. The Lord engages himself to them, that they shall be called by his Name,
or his Name shall be called upon them, as it is Isay. 63. 19. They shall be
called the Sons of God, Hos. 1. 10. and the People of God, Deuteronomy. 29. 12. 13.
Thou becamest mine, Ezekiel. 16. 8. They may not be his Sons, and People really,
and savingly, but God will Honor them outwardly (at least) with this name, and
privilege: they shall bear his name, to be called so, and consequently to be
accounted so by others, and to be reckoned as of the number of his visible
Church, and People; just as one that Adopts a young Son, he tel's the Father if
he carry it well toward him when he is grown up to years, he shall possess the
inheritance it self, but yet in the mean while he shall have this favor to be
called his son, and be of his family, and household, and so be reckoned among
the number of his Sons: see Romans 9. 4.

2. The Lord promises that they shall, above all others in the World, have the
means of doing them Good, and of conveying of the special Benefits of the
Covenant; Nay they shall be set apart above all People in the World, to enjoy
these special benefits of Remission of Sins, power against sin, eternal life,
etc. and shall certainly have these, by these means, unless they refuse them:
this is evident from these, and such like Scriptures and examples; what
privilege has the Jew (says the Apostle, Romans 3. 1. and what advantage by
Circumcision, if by nature under wrath, and sin* for upon that ground the
Apostle make's the question) he Answers it is much every way, but chiefly
because to them were committed the Oracles of God: i. e. the Word, promises,
Covenant: which are the ordinary means of saving grace* and eternal good:
others hear the word, but these in outward Covenant enjoy it by Covenant, and
promise; and hence these in the first place, and principally, are sought after
by these means; and therefore Christ forbids his Disciples at first to go
preach in the way of the Gentiles (persons out of Covenant) but to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel, Mat. 10. 6. and himself tells the Woman of
Canaan, that he came not but to the lost sheep of (...) house of Israel, Mat.
15. 24. And although he bid's his disciples go preach to all nations, yet Acts
3. 26. it is said unto you First has he sent Christ, because you are children
of the promise and Covenant, verse 25: Repent therefore, and be conversed,
verse 19. Do not resist, or refuse Christ, for he has First sent Christ to you
to bless you, and turn you from your iniquities; and the promise is full and
fair, Romans 11. 23. If they abide not in unbelief, ( i. e. in refusing grace,
and Christ when offered) they shall be graffed in, for God is able to do it,
and will do it: and the reason why the Lord gave his people up to their own
counsels; it was, because My people would none of me, after all the means God
used for their good, Psalm. 81. 11, 12, 13. And Deuteronomy. 7. 6. The Lord has chosen
you, above all people on the earth, to be a special people to himself, and
thou art an holy people unto the Lord: How a holy people? by inward holiness?
no verily, for many of them were inwardly unholy, both Parents and children,
but thou art holy, i. e. thou art externally sanctified, and set apart by
special means of holiness, to be a special people unto God. And therefore Isay
5. 7. the men of Judah are called Gods pleasant plant: i. e. planted into the
root and fatness of the Church, and therefore had all means used for their
further special good, verse 4. What could be done to my vineyard, that has
not been done? And hence it is, that though the word may come to heathens as
well as Church Members, yet it comes not to them by way of Covenant, as it does
to Church Members; nor have they any promise of mercy aforehand, as
Church Members have; nor is it chiefly belonging to such, but unto the children
of the Covenant and the promise, as has been said. And hence also it fallows
that God never cutt's off the seed of his Servants from the special benefits of
the Covenant, until they have had the means thereunto, and they have
positively rejected those means: and hence the Jews (who are made the Pattern
of what God will do toward all Gentile-churches, Romans II.) were never cast off
till by positive unbelief they provoked the Lord to break them off, by
rejecting and refusing the means of their eternal peace

3. The Lord promises, that the seed of his people (indefinitely considered)
shall have this heart ( viz: which would refuse special grace, and mercy) taken
away, as well as means used for that end: this is evident from Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
The Lord thy God r^ill Circumcise thy heart and the heart of thy seed, to love
the Lord: he will cut off the uncircumcision, and sin, and resistance of the
heart against God; he will take away the stony heart: not indeed from all, in
outward Covenant particularly; but from these indefinitely; so that there is no
promise to do this for any out of the visible Church, (though God of his
Sovereignty, and free mercy sometimes does so) but the pr^mise of this belongs
indefinitely to those of his Church, among whom usually, and ordinarily he
worke's this great work, leaving him to his own freeness of secret mercy, to
work thus on whom he will, and when he will: in the mean while no man can
exclude himself, or any others within this Covenant from hope of this mercy,
and grace, but may with comfort look and pray for it; for this is Gods Covenant
that the Redeemer shall come out of S^on, and turn away ungodlyness from Jacob,
Romans 11. 26, 27. for the Covenant of God does not only run thus; If thou
believe and receive grace thou shall have it; but thus also, I will Circumcise
your heart, I will take away the stony heart, I will turn away ungodliness from
you, I will enable to believe: And hence these three things follow from these
things thus opened.

1. That as the Covenant run's not only thus, viz. If thou believe thou shall
be saved, but also I will enable to believe; So a man's entrance into Covenant
is not only by actual and personal profession of Faith [as some say] because
God's Covenant run's a peg higher, viz: to make and enable some to believe, and
so to make that profession.

2. That the very outward Covenant is not merely conditional, but there is
something absolute in it: and hence it fallows, that it is a great mistake of
some who think that Circumcision, and Baptism, seal only conditionally [the
outward Covenant being [say they] merely conditionall] for those three things
mentioned in the outward Covenant you see are in some respect absolute, and if
the Covenant was only conditional, then the Lord was no more in Covenant with
Church Members, than with pagans, and infidels, for it may be propounded
conditionally to all such, that if they believe, they shall be saved, but
assuredly God's grace is a little more extensive to the one, then to the other.

3 Hence you may see what Circumcision once did, and Baptism now seal's unto,
even to Infants the seal is to confirm the Covenant: the Covenant is, that God
(outwardly at least) owne's them, and reckon's them among his people, and
Children, within his visible Church and Kingdom, and that here upon he will
prune, and cut, and dress, and water them, and improve the means of their
eternal good upon them, which good they shall have, unless they refuse in
resisting the means; nay that he will take away this refuseing heart from among
them indefinitely, so that though every one cannot assure himself, that he will
do it particularly for this or that person, yet every one, through this
promise, may hope, and pray for the communication of this grace, and so feel it
in time.

These things thus premised, to clear up the ensuing discourse, I shall now do
two things. 1. Leave a few grounds and reasons to prove, that Children are in
Church Covenant, and so enjoy Church Membership by their parents. 2. I shall
then Answer your scruples.

To the first; The truth of it is manifest, by clearing up this proposition;
Argum: 1.
viz: That one and the same Covenant which was made to Abraham in the old
Testament is for substance the same with that in the New; and this under the
new Testament, the very same with that of Abraham's under the old.

I say for Substance the same, for it is acknowledged that there was something
proper and personal in Abraham's Covenant, as to be a Father of many Nations,
but this was not of the Substance of the Covenant, which belong's to all the
Covenanters, and unto which the S^^l of Circumcision was set: for all Abraham's
seed, neither in those, nor these days, are the fathers of many nations, nor
did Circumcision seal it.

Again it is confessed, that the external administrations of this one and the
same covenant, are diverse; but still the Covenant for substance is the same:
For that old covenant was dispensed with other external signs, sacrifices,
types, prophesies, then this under the new. There was something Typical in
Abraham's covenant concerning Canaan a type of heaven but yet the same Covenant
remaine's now with a more naked manner of dispensation, or promise of heaven*
And hence it fallows, that if it may appear, that the Covenant it self is one
and the same, now, as then; then, as now; then it will undeniably follow, that
if the New Covenant under the Gospel be not a carnal Covenant, no more was
that: if the New Covenant be not proper to Abraham's natural seed, no more was
that which was made with Abraham: if the substance of that Covenant was, I will
be a God to thee and the seed, then this very Covenant remaine's still under
the Gospel, it being one and the same with that; if by virtue of that Covenant,
the Children were made Members of the Church; and hence had a Church
privilege, and seal administered; then the same Covenant remaining the same,
and in the same force, and benefit, our Children also are taken into the like
Membership. It remaine's therefore to prove that which all our Divines have long
since made good against the Papists, that the Covenant then, and now, is for
substance one and the same; or that the Coven^t made with Abraham was a
Gospel Covenant, and this Gospel Covenant the same that was made with Abraham.

1. The Covenant made with Abraham is renewed in the Gospel, as to the main
thing in it, viz. I will be their God, and they shall be my people, Heb. 8. 10.
Jer. 31. 33 and though the seed be not expressed, yet its understood, as it is
Genesis 17. 8. and if need be shall be proved hereafter.

2. Because Abraham's Covenant is of Gospel and eternal privileges. Not proper
therefore to him, and his fleshly posterity. For righteousness by Faith was
sealed up by Circumcision Romans 4. 11. which is a Gospel privilege, and is the
ground of all other privileges, and yet in Gen 17 7. there is no expression of
this righteousness* by Faith, but it is understood therefore in this, I will be
their God; So the promise of eternal life, and resurrection thereunto is wrapped
up in this, I am the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

3. Because there was never any Covenant, but it was either of Grace, or
works: that of works on mount Sinai, that of Grace which was made with
Abraham: and hence Gal. 3 17. The Covenant which was confirmed before by Christ,
(...) Law 430 years after cannot dis^null: and what was that Covenant before?
surely it was the Covenant of Gr^^^, becau^^ it was confirmed by Christ: and
what was this Covenant confirmed by (...), but the Covenant made with Abraham?
for of this the Apostle speaks, verses 14, 16. And he cal's it expressly by
the Name of Gospel, or the Gospel Covenant; verse 8, 9.

4. Because when God renews his promise and Covenant made with Abraham, with
his people at the plains of Moab, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. it run's in these words, viz: I
will Circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, now this is a Gospel
priviledg^, and a Gospel Covenant: as appears by comparing this text with Romans
10. 8. wherein the right^o^sness of faith, or the Gospel, is brought in speaking
the words of this Covenant, saying the (...) in thy heart and mouth, Deuteronomy. 30.
11, 12, 13, 14. Now if that place, Genesis 17. 7. should be said to be obscure
concerning the promise [I will be a God to thy seed] yet here in this place God
speak's plainly, which by comparing the scriptures is a Gospel promise, and of
a Gospel privilege and therefore to be preached by Ministers of the Gospel,
and to be believed by the professors of it.

5. Because this promise [I will be a God to thee and thy seed] does not belong
to Abraham and his seed as after the (...), or as lineally descended of
Abraham: but as believers, and this is most evident Romans 11. wherein it is said
of the Jews, 1. That they were broken off (made no people no Church* by
unbelief, verse 20. (...) 2. That by Faith they shall be graffed in again,
verse 23. If therefore they were broken off the Church by (...), then they
stood as members of the Church by (...): and if by faith they should be graffed
in, then they stood by faith at first: Against is said in this Rom 11. 28. that
they are love^ for the (...), surely not as (...) fathers, but as spiritual by
faith: and hence (...) 9. 8. it is expressly said, that God found Abraham
faith, (...) before (...), and made a Covenant with him.

Again if the posterity of Abraham were Members upon this ground only or
chiefly, viz. because they were (...) of (...), then (...) Romans 11. 20 could
never have been cast off from being Members of the Church, because they were
always the natural offspring and posterity of Abraham. Hence therefore it
fallows that if they were ingraffed in the Church as (...) (the Fathers as
actually believing the Children as (...) apart by (...) of God to be ^ade to
believe and in their Parents Faith accounted believers) then all believers at
this day have the same privilege and the Covenant then being made only in
respect of Faith, must needs be Gospel Covenant, the same with God's Covenant
at this day. And hence also it fallows that if they were Members as Believers,
then not as Members of that nation. They were not therefore members of the
Church, because they were descended of Abraham, and were in a national Church,
and were by generation Jews. Circumcision was a Seal of Righteousness by Faith,
Romans 4. 11. therefore they were sealed as believers.

Thus much for the first argument, wherein I have been the larger, because much
light is let in by it, to answer diverse mistakes. I shall name the rest with
morer brevity.

Argum: 2. If it was the curse of Gentiles, to be strangers to the Covenants of
promise (made with the Jews) before they became the Churches of God; then by
being Churches, this Curse is removed; and hence Ephe. 2. 12, 13. The Apostle
says they were strangers to the Covenant, and Commonwealth of Israel, but are
not so now. If you say that the Ephesians were in Covenant, but not their seed,
and so they were not strangers? I Answer that the Apostle does not set out
their cursed estate merely because they were without any Covenant, but because
they were strangers to that Covenant of promise which the Israelites had; for
if their children had it not, they were then as without Covenant* so without
God, and without hope, as Pagans are, which is notoriously cross to the current
of all Scripture, as may afterward appear.

Argum: 3. The Apostle expressly says [ Your children are holy] 1 Cor. 7 14.
and if severally holy, then of the Church, [for real holiness cannot be here
meant] and in the Covenant of its even as it is said Deuteronomy. 7. 6 thou art an Holy
people unto the Lord thy God: few of which number were really and savingly
holy, but they were all so federally, or by Covenant, and so became Gods
special Church or people.

If you say, That this holiness is meant of matrimonial holiness, viz. that
your children are not ^ast^rds, but legitimate: The answer is easy; for upon
this interpretation the Apostle's Answer should be false; for t^en if one of
the parents had not been a Believer, and so by his Believing Sanct^f^ed his
unbelieving W^fe, their Children must have been Bastards, whereas you know that
their Children had not been in that sense unclean or ill^g^ti^ate, although
neither of them were Believers: for the Apostle's dispute is plain, viz. that
if the Believing Husband did not Sanctify his unbelieving Wife, then were your
Children unclean, i. e. say you Bastards, but it is evident that Children may
be, in this sense, clean, and yet no Faith in either Parent to Sanctify one
another to their particular use: unless you will say, that all Children of
heathens are Bastards, because neither of the parents Believe.

Argum. 4. Romans 11. 17. The Jews are cut off from the fatness of the Olive
tree, and the Gentiles put in, or ingraffea in their room: Now this Ingraffing
is not into Christ by saving faith, for it is impossible that such should ever
be broken off, who are once in; it must therefore be meant of their ingraffing
into the external state of the visible Church, and the fatness and privileges
thereof; of which Church Christ is the external and political head, into whom
(in this respect) they are ingraffed by external visible Faith and Covenant.
Hence thus I reason; That if the Jews and their Children were ingraffed members
of the Church, then the Gentile Churches ingraffed into the same state, and
coming in their room, are, together with their Children, members of the
Church: when the Jews hereafter shall be called, they shall be ingraffed in as
they were before; them and their seed, verse 23. In the mean while, the Apostle
put's no difference between the present ingraffing of the Gentiles now, and of
theirs past, or to come, and therefore they, and their seed are ingraffed
Members now.

Argum: 5. Because there is the same inward cause, moving God to take in the
Children of believing Church Members into the Church, and Covenant now, to be
of the number of his people, as there was for taking the Jews and their
children: for the only cause why the Lord took in the Jews and their Children
thus, was his Love, and free grace, and mercy De^. 4. 37. because he Loved thy
fathers, therefore (...) those their seed, which choosing is not by eternal
Election or choosing to glory; for many of their seed never came to Glory; but
unto this privilege to be his people above all others, in outward Covenant with
him; which is exceeding great Love, if you Remember what has been laid of the
branches of this outward Covenant* and visible Church estate. And hence (...).
10. 15. (...), had a delight in thy fathers, hence he chose then seed above all
people, as at that day, viz. to be his people: so that I do from hence fully
believe, that either God's love is in these days of his Gospel less unto his
people, and servants, then in the days of the old Testament, or if it be as
great, that then the same Love respects the seed of his people now, as then it
did. And therefore, if then, because he loved them, he chose their seed, to be
of his Church; so in these days, because he loves us, he chooses our seed,
to be of his Church also.

Argum: 6. Because our Savior speak's plainly of all Children who are brought
to him, that of such is the Kingdom of heaven: and none are ordinarily heirs
of the Kingdom of Glory, but such as are of God's visible Church, and Kingdom
her^^. The objections against this place; I think not worth confuting, because
I hope enough is said to clear up this first particular, to prove the children
of confederate believers to be in Covenant, and Church Members.

I now proceed to the second thing, viz: to answer your objectio^s

Object: 1. If Children (say you) be members as it was in Abraham's Covenant,
then wives and servants, and all the household are to be taken in; for so it
was, Genesis 17. and Genesis 35. 2: 3. and then what Churches shall we have? but such
as you fear, God will be weary of and angry with.

Answ. Churches at first (by your own confession) were in families, where
therefore God's grace did the more abound, by how much the less it did abound
abroad: And hence Abraham's family and household was a Church of God; but yet
consider withal* that all were not of this Family-church, merely because they
were of the family or household, but because they were Godly, or the children of
such as were godly in the family; for Abraham's servants and household, were
such as he could and did Command to keep the way of the Lord, and so were
obedient to God in him* Genesis 18. 19. and we see they did obey, and did receive
that new, strange, and painful sign of Circumcision: about the nature and use
of which, no doubt he first instructed them, and in the place you mention, Genesis
35 4. they gave to (...) all (...), and (...), to worship God more pu^^ly And
it is evident, Ex^^. 12. 4^ that every one in the family had not to do with the
(...) of the Church, and therefore ^ow not of the Church though of the finaly:
for (...) was not to eat of the (...) was every one who was bought with money
to eat of ^t until they were Circumcised, ver. 44. nor were any such to be
circumcised, until they were willing and desireous to eat the P^sseover, and
that unto the Lord; then indeed they, and theirs were first to be Circumcised,
ver. 48. and although this be^^ot exprefly set down, Genesis 17. in Abraham's
family; yet I doubt not, but that as one Scripture gives light unto another,
so, this Scripture in Exo. shows the mind of God in the first beginning of the
Church, as well as in these times: if therefore the servants who were godly in
the family, were only to be circumcised, and their children born in the house
with them, then this example is no way leading to corrupt Churches, as you fear
it will; but rather the contrary, that if (...) servants then, were received
into the Church together with their seed, much more are they received now: And
if they did not defile the church then, neither should we think that they will
do so now. And I beseech you consider of it, that God ^as then as careful of
keeping his Church holy as in these days, especially in the first constitution
of it, as in this of Abraham's Genesis ^7. And hence God was as much provoked by
their unholiness then, as by any unholiness now, 1 Pet. 1 16. Suppose therefore
(as you imagine) that all the household, whether profane or holy, were to be
received into the Covenant, and so to the seal of it, do you think that this
course of admitting all profane persons then, would not make the Lord soon
weary of, and angry with those family-churches, as well as of national, or
congregational now, upon the like supposition? if therefore any servants born
in the house, or hired, were admitted, surely they were not such unholy ones,
whom the Lord could not but be as much angry with, then as now; but they were
godly and holy, at least in outward profession, upon which ground the Lord
commanded them to be Circumcised.

I know there are some and very holy and learned also, who think that if any
godly man undertakes to be as a father to an adopted Pagan or Indian, that such
an one, not grown up to years, is from the example in Genesis 17. to be received
into the Covenant of the Church, and the seal of it: and I confess, I yet see
no convicting argument against it, if it could be proved that some servants
bought with Abraham's money were such, and were under years, but I see as yet
no convicting argument for this assertion from this example; and therefore I
stick to the former answer, and see no reason, from any rule of charity, but to
believe that all those in Abraham's family, were either visibly godly or the
children of such; to whom Circumcision belong's: and consequently might as well
partake of Church Membership, as Abraham himself; which sort of servants in
these days may as well be admitted to Church Membership, without fear of
defiling the Church, as their masters themselves.

Object: 2. If Children (say you) be members, then all Children, good and bad,
must be received, as Jacob and Esau etc:

Answ. Why not? for if there be any strength in this Argument, it holds as
strongly against the admission of professing visible believers: where, though
all are externally, and federally holy, yet some, yea many, yea the greatest
part of such may be inwardly bad, and as profane in their hearts, as Esau: and
must we therefore refuse them to be Church Members because many of them may be
inwardly bad? verily there must then never be Churches of God in this world. So
it is among children, they are all outwardly holy, yet many of them may be
inwardly unholy, like Esau, must we not therefore accept them to Membership? It
is a miserable mistake to think that inward real holiness is the only ground
of admission into Church Membership, as some Anabaptists dispute, but it is
federal holiness, whether externally professed as in grown persons, or
graciously promised unto their seed.

Reply 1. But you here Reply, If so, then they are of the Church when they are
grown up, and profane, until they are cast out: and to take in profane, is
sinful, Ezekiel. 44.

Answ. It is very true; For it is herein just as it is in admitting professing
believers, they may prove profane, and continue so in Churchmembership, until
they are cast out; but is this therefore any ground to keep out those who are
personally holy by their own profession? no verily, why then should such as are
parentally, and federally holy be kept out from Church Membership because they
may prove prophone me, and being profane must (...) Church Members till they
be cast out.

Reply 2 But then (you say) they must be Church Members though their Parents
themselves, and the whole Church be unwilling thereunto, even as (say you) a
man that marries a woman, her children must be his, and he be a Father to
them, though he and she, and they should say be shall not be a father in law to
them.

Answ. This similitude of marriage does neither prove, nor illustrate the
thing; For the relation between father and such children is absolute and
natural, and hence continues though they say he shall not be their father, and
though he profess he will not; but the relation founded upon Church Covenant,
between member and member, is not natural, nor only, and allway absolute; but
also conditional, which condition not being kept, the relation may be, and is
usually broken; for look as the Jews were not so absolutely God's people, but
if they did in time reject the Gospel, they were to be cast off, and indeed are
so at this day, Romans 2. 25. Hosea 2. 2. Acts 13 46; 51. So it is with all
Gentile Churches, and the members thereof:and as for that which you last say,
That they may refuse their Parents Covenant at age, as well as own it, and so
may members go out at pleasure, which is disorder. I answer, That the like may
be said of such members as come in by personal profession, for they may
renounce their own Covenant with God and the Church, one may do so, and so may
twenty, yet though this be wickedness and disorder, yet the Church may proceed
against them, and so it may against their Children, who are bound to own the
Covenant made with God, and of God with them in their Parents, as well as any
Church Members are to own their own Covenant by their own personal profession.
What disorder therefore will come in as you conceive this way will come in by
your own way, and what course you should take to heal the one, by the same you
may heal the other.

Object. 3. If Children (say you) be members; then their seed successively,
until they be either dissolved, or excommunicated; and if so, then what
Churches shall we have?

Answ. 1. What Churches shall we have? Truly not allway Churches of Angels and
saints, but mixed with many chaffy hypocrites and often times profane persons.
But still I say this objection holds as firm against gathering Churches of
visible professing believers; For God knowe's what Churches we may have of
them, even heaps of hypocrites, and profane persons, for I know not what can
give us hope of their not apostatizing, but only Gods promise to be a God to
them, and to preserve them; and truly the same promise, being made to their
seed, gives me as much ground of faith to hope well of Churches rising out of
the seed of the godly, as of the professing Parents themselves. I know one may
have more experimental charity concerning some few professing the fear of God,
but my Churchcharity is equal about them, especially considering, that those
whom God receiv's into Church Covenant, he does not only take them to be a
people to him, but to establish them to be such, viz: for time to come. And
hence God is said, to establish his Covenant with Isaac, not Ishmael who was to
be rejected, Ge^. 17. 19. and God is said, to gather them into Covenant to
establish them to be a people, both young and old, present posterity, and that
which was to come, Deuteronomy. 29. 11, -- 15.

2 God was as Holy, and as exactly requiring holiness from the Jewish Church,
as well as from Christian Churches; now do you think that the Covenant which
then wrapped up the Jews children into Church Membership, was an highway of
profaneness, and unholyness in the members thereof, and of defiling and
polluting Gods Church? or was it a way and means of holiness, and to keep them
from being profane? to affirm the first is something Blasphemous, and ^very
false, for it is expressly said (...): 13. 11. that as the girdle cleaves to
the loins of a man, so he (...) the whole house of Israel (not grown men only)
to cleave to him, that they might be to him a people (which was by Covenant)
and for a name, for a praise, and for a glory; Gods name, Glory, praise was the
end; and the Covenant was the means hereunto; and therefore it was no way or
means of unholyness in that Church: but if you say, it was a means of
holiness; why then should we f^ar the p^lluting of Churches by the same
Covenant, which we have proved, wraps in our s^ed also? indeed they did prove
universally profane in the Jewish Church; so they may in ours, but shall man's
wickedness in abuseing God's grace, and forsaking his Covenant tyet^e hands, or
heart of God's free grace from taking such into Covenant; what though some aid
not Believe? says the Apostle, Romans 3. 3, 4. s^all their unbelief make the
Faith of God without effect? God forbid.

3. Suppose they do prove profane, and corrupt Churches; yet even then, when
they are corrupt, they are such Churches, where ordinarily God gathers out his
Elect, and out of which (till purer are gathered, or these wholly rejected)
there cannot be expected ordinarily any salvation: for so says our Savior,
salvation is of the Jews, ^o^: 4. 22. even in that very corrupt, and worst
estate of the Church that ever it was in.

Object. 4. If children be members, then they must come to the Lords Supper,
for you know no difference between member and member, in point of privilege,
unless they be under some sin.

Answ. 1. Yes verily, there is a plain difference between member and member
(though professing believers) in point of privilege, though they lie under no
sin: for, a man may speak and prophesy in the Church, not Women. A company of
Men may make a Church, and so receive in, and cast out of the Church, but not
Woman though professing Saints.

2. All grown men are not to be admitted (though professing Believers) to the
Lords Supper; my reason is; A man may Believe in Christ, and yet be very
ignorant of the nature, use, and ends of the Lords Supper, now such may be
Baptized as soon as ever faith appears, Mark 16. 16. but they may not be
admitted to the Lords Supper, because they will be guilty of the body and blo^d
of the Lord, if they through their ignorance, cannot discern the Lords body. I
know no reason but ignorant persons may be as well suspended from the use of
this privilege, though they be true believers (for faith may consist with much
ignorance) as well as distracted persons, who notwithstanding may be believers
also.

3. If therefore children be able to examine themselves and discern the Lords
body, they may then eat; and herein there is no difference in this privilege
between member and member.

4. Children not being usually able to examine themselves, nor discern the
Lords body, hence they are not to be admitted to the use of this privilege:
and yet they may be such members as may enjoy the benefit of other privileges
even that of Baptism: for baptism seals up our first entrance into the
Covenant. This first entrance is not allway by personal profession of Faith,
but by Gods promise of working, or of vouchsafeing the means of working of it,
now Children (as is proved) being under this Covenant (as we see all the
posterity also of Abraham was) hence though children cannot profess faith, nor
actually examine themselves yet they may receive, and must receive baptism,
being already under Gods Covenant; but because the Lords Supper does not seal
up this first entrance, and first right to the Covenant, but our growth and
fruition of the Covenant; hence this act on our part is required to participate
in this, which the Apostle calls self-examination, and the act of taking, and
(...) Christ, and of ^iscerning the Lords ^ody), and of doing this in
remembrance of Christ: which every baptized person, and Churchmember is not
allway able to do. A child may receive a promise aforehand of a rich estate
given him, and this promise sealed up to him, his father receiving it for him,
but it is not fit that he should be put to the actual improvement, and fruition
of that estate, until he is grown up, understands himself, and knows how to
do it: so it is here, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper requires ability, 1. To
take Christ as our own. 2. To eat Christ, that is, to take fruition of him: the
which acts of faith, God does not require of all those immediately, who are
wrapped up in Covenant with him.

Object. 1. But here you say, that that examination 1 Cor 11. is required of
all that be members, and that at all times*, as well as at their first coming
to the Lords Supper.

Answ. This examination is indeed required of all those members who should
partake of the Lords Supper, but it is not required (as you seem to say) of
every one to make him a member, so that none can be a member, but him that is
able to examine himself; for Gods Covenant to work faith, and to give power to
examine one's self afterward, may make some as truly members as those who are
able to act and express their faith. Now I have proved that Gods Covenant is
aforehand given to children: and to give them the seal of their first entrance
into it many years after, is as vile a thing, as for them that are able, and
fit to examine themselves, to have this Sacrament of the Lord, Supper denied,
or delaied till many years after.

Object. 2. But you say, It Is left to every ones conscience to examine himself,
not that others should examine them, and consequently if* children be members,
then it must be left upon their conscience.

Answ. We know in our own consciences that Children usually cannot examine
themselves, now if the Elders and the Church are bound to see Christ's rules
observed by others, and if this examination be the rule that all must walk by
who participate here, then they must not suffer such young ones, no nor persons
grown up, and entered ^n by personal profession, to receive this seal, as they
know are unable thus to do: I think if Churches should degenerate in these
days, this course of Discipline should be attended (especially by the Elders)
toward ^^y of their members, which way soever they have entered, whether by
their own, or by their parents covenant: And I have often feared that there is
some need already of it, even toward some who enter by their own covenant, and
may have says, but are miserably to seek in the nature, use, and ends of the
Lords Supper, and consequently unfit to discern of Christ's body, and so to
come to that Sacrament.

Object. 5. If Children may be members, and yet not come to the Lords Supper;
then it may come to pass that a whole Church may be a Church, and yet not have
the Lords Supper, or ought not to have it.

Answ. 1. So there may, for a Church may be a true Church,and yet want the
benefit of some one or more of Gods Ordinances, sometime Pastors, sometime
Elders, sometime Seals.

2. A Church of professing Believers may degenerate, and turn profane, and
sottish, and to have no just right to the Seals; and their Officers may leave
them, and so have no use of the Seals: yet I suppose it is a Church of Christ
still though degenerate, though unfit to enjoy Seals; will you therefore think
one way of (...) Membership unlawful, viz. by professing their Faith? Because
such a rare thing as this may happen? why then should you think the way of
(...) Membership unlawful because of the like rarity in such a d^^k and gloomy
state of them as you mention?

Object. 6. If Children be Members, then (...) will be many in the Church, who
are not Saints by calling, (...) in Christ Jesus, which ought not to be (...)
Church could (...) so may (...) plainly seen.

Answ. 1. I do think it is true, that poor Children may be and are (...) upon
with (...), any (...) bought ^f unbelief, (...) of them as Children of wrath by
(...), and not with such high thought^ of Faith, as Children, and Sons of God
by promise, as I have shown. And I think herein is out great sin, as it was in
Christ's own disciples, who were the first* that we read of that would not have
little Children brought unto him, for which he rebuked them, showing their
privilege; and for want of which faith in Gods promise about our children,
certainly God smites, and forsakes many of our children.

2. If therefore you think that Church Members must consist only of saints by
calling; so that your meaning is, such saints as are so by outward and personal
profession, from the call of the Gospel, are only to be Church Members; this is
an error: For, 1. You know that they who define a Church to be a number of
visible saints, they usually put this phrase in, [ and their seen] who may not
profess faith perhaps as their Fathers do: and you shall find that the Israel
of God under the old Testament, are all of them said to be adopted, Romans 9. 4.
chosen and called, Isa^ 41. 8, 9. and faithful, Isai. 1. 21. and yet we know
they were not all so by personal profession, but in respect of their joint
federation, and the outward Covenant of God with them. 2. The outward Covenant
is not allway first entered into by personal profession of faith, but by Gods
Covenant of promise to work, or to use the means to work faith: Hence it
undeniably follows; that as many may be in Church Covenant before they profess
faith personally, so many may be members of the Church without this profession
of faith; for this Covenant of working faith (as has been formerly explained)
does not only belong to the Jews, but to Gentile Churches also, and Believers;
as has been proved, and might further be confirmed.

Object: But say you, If we saw hypocrites, we were to cast them out as well as
profane persons: and we see no grace in many children, and therefore they must
not be received in.

Answ. 1. If you see children, of whom you cannot say that they are faithful
personally, yet they may be faithful federally (as has been showed) for they
may lie under God^ Covenant of begetting faith, by some means in them; and
then you are not to cast them out, but accept them, as God does.

3. The children of godly parents though they do not manifest faith in the
Gospel, yet they are to be accounted of Gods Church^, until they positively
reject the Gospel, either in themselves, or in their Parents; and therefore God
did never go about to cast off he Jews, and their seed, until they put forth
positive unb^l^e^; the Lord promised to give them the means of Faith, and did
so: and when Christ was come, and the Gospel sent first unto them for their
good, the Lord herein fullfill'd his Covenant-Mercy, as toward his Beloved
people; but when they rejected these means, and cast off Christ, and his
Gospel, then Romans 11. they were broken off, and not before. Now hypocrites are
such as profess Christ in words, and yet deny Christ in deed,* Titus 1. 16. 2 Timothy 3. 5. Hence they are such, as positively refuse Christ: hence the case of
children in whom no positive unbelief appears, is not the same with this of
hypocrites, or profane persons; and when young Children shall grow positively
such, I know not but they may be dealt with as any other Members, for any such
like offense.

Thus you see an answer to your Six Objections. In the end of your paper there
are TWO QUESTIONS, which I suppose may not a little trouble against their
Baptism and membership. To these briefly.

Quest. 1. What good (say you) is it, either for a wicked, or an elect Child,
till he be converted, to be in the Church? or what good may any have by being
in the Church, till they can profit by what they enjoy?

Answ. 1 The Apostle put's the like case, and gives you an Answer Romans 3. 1, 2.
what advantage has the Jew, and what profit is there of Circumcision? what use
or profit could the Infants then make of their Church Covenant, Membership, or
Seal, who understood none of these things? do you think the Lord exposed his
holy ordinances then unto contempt? and is more careful that they may be
profitably used now? was there no good by Circumcision? yea says the Apostle,
much every way.

2. What profit is it to persons grown up to years, and yet secretly
hypocrites, who enter into the Church by profession of the faith? you will say
there is good and profit in respect of the privileges themselves, but they
abusing them they had, in this respect, better have been without them, because
they bring hereby upon themselves greater condemnation. The same say I of
children, whom God receives into his Church, by promise, and Covenant of doing
them good, although at present they may not be so sensible of this good.

3. To speak plainly, the good they get by being thus enriched is wonderful:
and here there is more need of a Treat^s^ then of a Letter, to clear up the
benefits from all Scruples, arising by being in outward Covenant, in Church
fellowship, even unto Infants: I confess I find little said by Writers upon
this Subject, and I believe the doubts against childrens Baptism, as they
arise by blindness in this particular; so I think that God suffers that opinion
to take place, that by such darkness he may bring out light in this particular.
I will only hint unto you some few of my many thoughts, which have long
exercised me for many years in this thing. The good by childrens membership,
especially when Sealed, is in four things.

1. In respect of God. God shows hereby the riches of his grace toward them, in
taking them to be his people: In Adopting them to be his children: In
preventing them with many special promises aforehand of doing them good; by all
which, the Lord does as it were prevent Satan, in wooing their hearts as it
were, so soon to draw them to him before he can actually (...) to draw their
souls from him. So that I beseech you consider, suppose they cannot as yet
understand, and so make profit by all this, yet is it not good for them, or for
any of us to partake of Gods grace, before we know how to make use of it? is it
not good for God to be good to them that are evil? is it not good for God to
glorify and make manifest his grace to man, though man knows not how to make
use of his grace? was it not rich grace for Christ to wash Peter's feet, and yet
he not know at present what it meant, only (says Christ) thou shall know it
afterward? is it not good for God to give life to us, and to let us be born in
such and such a place of the Gospel where it is preached, and to lay in mercy
aforehand for us, before we know how to be thankful, or know how to use any of
these outward mercies? and is it no mercy or favor to have so much spiritual
mercy bestowed on children aforehand, before they can be thankful, or make use
thereof? Deuteronomy. 7. 6, 7. The choosing of them to be his people, above all other
people (which you know was from the womb) it is called Gods (...) his Love upon
them, and the reason of this Love, verse 8. is said to be, because God loved
them, this love was not Electing, and peculiar love, (for thousands of these
perished and went to hell) but it was his external adopting love to choose
them to be his people, and to improve all means for their good, and to give
them the good of all those means unless they refuse: and to give indefinitely
among them, and particularly to many of them, such hearts as that they shall
not be able to refuse the good of those means (as has been showed formerly)
this is love, great love and mercy; not shown or promised to any who are not of
the visible Church throughout the whole world. By which God is glorified; and
let him be so, though we cannot see how to profit by it, when it first break's
out; Have not you profited much by considering Gods preventing grace, long
before you understood how to make use of it? has not God received much glory
from you for it? has this grace then think you, been unprofitably spent on
Gods part? No verily: The case is the same here, David blesses God; for bring
his God from his Mothers belly, and from the womb, Psalm. 22. 9, 10. and Gods
grace is shown through this expression, Isai. 46. 3.

2. The^e is much good hereby in respect of the Parents; for, suppose the
children cannot profit by it, yet Parents may, and it is in respect of them very
much that God looks upon their children, thus to receive them into Covenant,
Deuteronomy. 4. 37. For, 1. Parents may hereby see, and wonder at the riches of Gods
grace, to become a God* not only to themselves, but to take in their seed also,
whose good they prize as their own, and as if done to themselves: hence Abraham
fell down upon his face, adoring God, when he heard of this Covenant, Genesis 17.
See also how Moses aggravates this love, in the eyes of all that had eyes to
see, Deuteronomy. 10. 14, 15. 2. Hereby God gives Parents some comfortable hope of
their childrens salvation; because they be within the pale of the visible
Church; for as out of the visible Church (where the ordinary means of
salvation be) there is ordinarily no salvation, Acts 2. 47. So if children were
not of Christ's visible Church and Kingdom, we could not hope for their
salvation, no more then of Pagans, or Turks; for if they be without God, they
are without hope, Ephesians. 2. 12. and to be without hope of such, to whom God
has made such promises of salvation, not given to Pagans, nor proper to
Abraham, is very hard, and horrid to imagine; for the promise run's
universally, that the Seed of the upright (whether Jews, or Gentiles) shall be
Blessed. Psalm. 112. 1, 2. Prove. 20. 7. 3. Hereby Parents are stirred up the
more earnestly to Pray for them, because God's Covenant and promise is so large
toward them, at which Prayer look's, and by which it wrestle's with God, and
hence, we find that Moses, and others, they use this argument in their Prayers;
oh God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: etc: 4. Hereby they may not only hope, and
Pray, but are encouraged to Believe, concerning their Children and the rest of
those who are in Covenant among them, that God will do them good, as they
conclude mercy to the remnant, forgiveness of their sins, with faith, upon this
ground, thou will remember the Truth to Jacob, and thy Mercy to Abraham^, sworn
unto our Fathers in days of old, Micah 7. 18, 20. This indeed is the childrens
faith for themselves, and their children: but so it may be a ground of Parents
faith: And if we pray for our children, why should we doubt (leaving only
secrets to God) if we see them die before they reject the Gospel positively; I
see no reason for any man to doubt of the salvation of his child if he dies, or
that God will not do good to his child in time if he lives. 5. This stirrs up
their hearts to be the more sincerely holy, and keep in with God, because of
their children; and to educate them with more care, and watchfullness, because
they are the Lord's Children as well as theirs; they are not common, but holy
vessels, and therefore let them see that they be not defiled; and hence we
find, that when God exhort's to any duty of holiness in Scripture he often makes
this the ground of it [ I am your God] and hence God aggravates their sin in
offering their children to Molech, Ezekiel. 16. because they were his children,
that should have been better used.

3. In respect of themselves, the good is very great. 1. It is a special means
to prevent sin, Deuteronomy. 29. I make this Covenant, not only with him that is
present, but with your seed also, who are not here, verse 15. Lest there should
be among you man, or woman, family, or tribe, whose heart turns away from God,
and lest there should be a root of gall and wormwood: and indeed it mightily
works on the heart to think; shall I whom God has chosen* to be his, be my
own; or be the Devils, or be my lustsetc? 2. It Is a strong motive and
engagement upon them to forsake sin, even the uncircumcision and sin of their
hearts, as is evident, Deuteronomy. 10. 15, 16. The Lord had a delight to choose the
seed of your fathers, even you to be his people, as it is this day: what
fallows? Therefore Circumcise the foreskin of your hearts, and be (...) more
stiff-necked: 3. It Is a special help, as to avert their hearts from sin, so to
convert and turn them to God,and to make them look toward God, that he would
turn them, when perhaps they are without any hope (in other respects) of mercy,
or of being able by any means they can use to turn themselves; this is
evident, Acts 3. 19. with verse 25. Repent and be converted, for you are the
children of the Covenant, which God made with our fathers; this draws their
hearts, when they see, how God call's them to return, Jer. 3. 22. Come unto me
ye back sliding children etc: we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God,
When backsliding Ephraim could not convert himself, he cries unto God, oh turn
me, and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord my God, Jer. 31. 18. which
places cannot be meant (...) being their God only by internal Covenant, in
giving to them the special benefits of the Covenant, for then they should be in
Covenant with God* and have remission of all their sins, etc. before they were
turned, or before faith? and therefore it is meant of being a God in outward,
and external Church Covenant, which is no small motive, and loadstone to
Believe. And although many do not believe, and will not be turned, yet this
Covenant is an high privilege, and great favor, fit in it self, to draw to
God, though many believe not* and hence the Apostle says, that the privilege
of the Jew is great, in having God's Oracles (which contain God's Covenant)
committed to them, though some believe not, which unbelief make's not (he
says) the faith of God, i. e. God's promise or Covenant of none effect, or an
uneffectual, and fruitless Covenant: for this word of God's Covenant shall take
some effect among some such as are in it; which therefore is a privilege,
though many perish, as is evident, Romans 9. 4, 6. 4. It Is a special means of
binding them fast to God, when they are turned: Ier. 13. 11. as the girdle
(...) unto a man, so have I caused the whole house of Israel; to cleave unto
me, that they may be for a name, and glory, Deuteronomy. 30. 20. thou shall cleave
unto him, because he is thy life, and the length of thy days: he was not their
life spiritually, and savingly, (for many thus exhorted, (...) dead, and in
their sins) but federally, or in outward Covenant. 5. If they shall forsake,
and break loose from God, and from the bond of his Covenant, and have (as much
as in them lies) cast themselves out of Covenant, by their own perfidiousness,
and breach of Covenant, that one would think now there is no more hope; yet it
is a special means, to encourage their hearts to return again: even when they
seem to be utterly cast off, and therefore it is said Jer. 3 1. though thou have
committed whoredom with many ^overs (whereby the covenant was broken) yet
return unto me: so Deuteronomy. 4. If when you are scattered among the nations, and
shall serve wood and stone, and be in great tribulation, if from thence thou
seek the Lord thy God, thou shall find him, he wi^^ not forsake thee; and what
is the reason of it? viz. his remembrance of the Covenant with their fathers,
for so it is Deuteronomy. 4. 27, 28, 29, 30 31. But I forbear to name more such things
as these which come by outward Covenant to Inchurched Members.

4. (...) respect of others their good is very great; for, 1. now they may
enjoy the special watch and care of the whole Church, which otherwise they must
want. 2. They hereby have the more fervent Prayers of others for then (...):
and hence Romans 9. 1, 2, 3. we see how Paul upon this ground had great zeal in
his prayers for the Jews, not only because his countrymen, but especially
because to them did belong the Adoption, and Covenants, and they had gracious
Fathers etc. so Psalm. 89. 49. Lord remember thy former loving kindnesses, which
are sworn to David in truth. And hence we see Moses often pleads and prevails
with God in prayer, for the sinning Israelites, viz. oh Remember Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob.

Now I pray you, lay all these things together, and then see whether you have
any cause to say; What profit is there by Covenant and Church Membership of
persons not yet able to profess the faith of Jesus Christ?

Quest. 2. You say* when families were Churches, all of the family were of he
Church, and when a Nation was a Church, all that were of that nation were of
that Church; But now Believers being matter of the Church, what of (...) were
admitted, till they can hold forth visible faith, would not many of (...)
things be more clear?

Answ. In these words there is a threefold mistake.

That all of the family and nation in former times, were of the Church: this is
false, for God never took any (...) his Church, but as they were Believers, at
le^^ (...), in that Nation; I say Believers: which either are practiced
believers: or pro^ised believers; such as by outward Covenant shall have the
means to be made believers in (...); and hence you have heard, that the Nation
of the Jews (...) by Faith, and were broken (...) by unbelief, and if any
rejected the Covenant: as (...) and (...), they were (...) of that Church,
though they did, and might dwell in (...) nation, as (...).

2. You think that Visible personal Faith only, makes the Church, and members
or it; which ^^in error, as may appear from many things already (...): for
Children may be in Gods account professors or (...) Faith parentally, as well
as personally (...) the profession of their parents, as well as in their own;
And sense you shall had, that the Covenant God entered into with the Parents of
Church Members personally, the Children are said, to have that Covenant (...)
with them many hundred years after; See for this purpose, among hundreds, their
(...). Scriptures, (...) 2. 5. In Hagg^i time God is ^id to make a Covenant
with them th^^ then they came (...) of Egypt (which was a^t personally, but
parentally) so Ha^es 12. 4, 5. when ^od entered into Covenant with Jacob at
Bethel; God is said to speak (...), who lived many years after; and ^ence the
Children many years (...), challenge Gods Covenant with them, which was made
with their Fathers for them, (...) 7. 19, 20. Hence also (...) Children are
said to co^^ to Christ (who were not able to (...)) but only were brought in
the arms of others to Christ. It Is (...) thing among (...), that a Father ^ay
receive a gift, or Legacy given to him, and his heirs, and he, and his heirs
are bound (...) perform the condition of the Covenant, and promise by which it
is conveyed, and that the Child does this in his Father.

3. You think that if men only, grown up, and able to profess, Faith, should
be, if the Church, then all things would (...) more clear (...) Children: Truly
I belie^e (...) ground, before said downing (...), 1. Hereby pollution of (...)
Church (...) avoided, but rather introduced, to exclude (...) from an^ holy*
making. Covenant, ^s we have proved. 2. Hereby that rood and benefit of their
Covenant, should be (...) not gai^^d) by excluding them out of Covenant, until
they can personally (...) of the Covenant: The wisdom of man furthers not the
Rightousness (...) me conclude with the naked profession of my Faith to you in
this (...) of defense against all that is said by Anabaptist against baptism
of (...).

1. That the Children of professing Believers are in the same Covenant God made
with Abraham; Abraham was a Father of many nations, and not of one nation only,
and hence the same Covenant made with hear, and the believing Israel in that
nation, the (...) Covenant is made with all his behaving seed (...) all other
nations. 2. That Baptism^ is a seal of our first entrance, and admission into
Covenant: and therefore is to be immediately applied to children of believeing
parent, a^ soon as ever they be in Covenant, and that is a^ soon as they become
the visible seed of the faithful for (...) Covenant to Abraham r^n's (I will
be thy God, and the God of thy seed) not only (...) and seed, but Church-seed,
(as has been showed) not only of his seed in that (...) nation, but in all
Nations.

Th^se two things I cannot tell how to avoid (...) of, the^ (...) clear: and
the ignorance of these make (...) as they are called (...) yet met wit^ (...)
thing written by (...) any considerable w^ight (...) throw the^e. But I (...)
My prayer is and (...), That (...) Lord (...).

FINIS.
Preface, (...) L^ne 20. read wonted (...) have fought. p. 7.^ 28. r. spirit^,
(...) 29. (...). In (...) page. (...) for now (...).


