OLD MR. DOD'S Sayings;

OR, A Posie gathered out of Mr. DOD's Garden.

Collected by R. T.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by Marmaduke Johnson: 1673.

Old Mr. Dod's Sayings.
NOthing can hurt us but sin; and that shall not hurt us, if we can repent of
it. And nothing can do us good but the love and favor of God in Christ; and
that we shall have if we seek it.

2. No man is in a sad condition, but he that has a hard heart, and cannot
pray.

3. So much Sin, so much Sorrow; so much Holiness, so much Happiness.

4. Make thy sin thy greatest sorrow; so shall thy sorrow never hurt thee. Make
Jesus Christ thy greatest joy, so shall thou never want joy.

5. A man that has the Spirit of prayer, has more then if he had all the
world.

6. Two things he commended to a Married Couple, Cares and Strifes: for the
first, Let your Cares be, which shall please God most: For your strifes, let
them be, which shall love one another best: so will your cares and strifes be
to purpose; so will all needless cares and strifes vanish.

7. If you be in a Married Estate know and believe it, Though you might have
had a better or richer wife or Husband yet sure enough you could never have had
a fitter, Because it was so appointed by God in heaven, before it could be
accomplished here on earth; and therefore, though mutual love be not performed
to thee, yet do thou thy part in obedience to God, and thou shall be sure to
have comfort in the end, though God exercise thee with chastisements for a time.

8 There can no afflictions and miseries befall us, but by Gods appointment;
and cannot hurt us, but must needs do us good, if we be Gods Children. But
first, be sure you mix not sin with them, for that only makes them bitter.
Secondly, Look not at the rod, but at him that smites; for that causes
fretting and fainting both.

9. If thou desire to be assured thy sins be forgiven thee, labor to forgive
injuries and offenses done unto thee, according to that in Mat. 6. 14, 15. Four
things consider to this end; 1. Christ example, who forgave and prayed for his
enemies. 2. Christ's command, When ye pray, forgive, if ye have ought against
any man. 3. Christ's promise, If ye forgive, ye shall be forgiven. 4. Christ's
threatening, If ye forgive not, ye shall not be forgiven.

10. In all miseries and distresses, it is best wisdom to go to that friend that
is most near, most willing, and most able to help; such a friend is God.

11. He would often say, he had no reason to complain of his crosses, being
they were but the bitter fruit of his sins.

12. Where sins lie heavy, crosses lie light: and contrary, where crosses lie
heavy, sins lie light.

13. Either Prayer will make a man give over sinning, or sin will make a man
give over praying.

14. Four things we may learn from children. 1. They take no unnecessary care.
2. They sleep without malice. 3. They are content with their condition. 4. They
are humble; the child of a king will play with the child of a beggar.

15. There is no affliction so small, but we should sink under it if God upheld
not; and there is no sin so great, but we should commit it, if God restrained
not.

16. If we be railed on, or reviled, or injuriously dealt withal by friend or
foe, we should be more troubled for the sin against God, then for the offense
done to our selves.

17. A godly man is like a sheep, every place is the better for him where he
comes. A wicked man is like a goat, every place is the worse for him; He leaves
a stinking favor behind him.

18. Sanctified afflictions are spiritual promotions, and are far better for a
Christian then all the silver and gold in the world; being that the trial of
our faith is much more precious then of gold that perishes, 1 Per. 1.6.

19. Directions for the Lords day. Make the Sabbath the market day for thy
soul. Lose not one hour, but be either praying, conferring, or meditating;
think not thy own thoughts; let every day have its duties; turn the Sermon
heard into matter of prayer; Instruction into petition, Reproof into
confession, Consolation into Thanksgiving: Think much of the Sermon heard, and
make something of it all the week long.

20. Directions for every day. First, for Morning. Every morning presuppose, 1.
I must dye. 2. I may dye ere night. 3. Whither will my soul go, to heaven or to
hell? Secondly, for Night. Every night ask thy soul these questions. 1. Have I
twice this day humbled my self before God in private? 2. How did I pray? in
faith and love? 3. What have my thoughts been this day? 4. What have I been in
my place and calling? 5. What have I been in company? Did I speak of good
things? or did I hear, and with Mary lay up? 6. If God with the morning renewed
mercies was I thankful? 7. If the day afforded me matter of sorrow, did I fret?
or did I lie in the dust before God? 8. When you have done, where you have been
failing, confess it with sorrow; the less work you will have to do when death
comes. Thus every night reckon right with thy God. This has been my daily
course, and shall be my practice till I dye.

21. What we win by prayer, we shall wear with comfort.

22. There is a twofold Assurance: 1. A sunshine. 2. A moonshine assurance in
Heb. 10. 22. The moonshine is that of the word, to the which we do well that
we take heed, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5. 2. Pet. 1. 18. The first is given but to few, and
that but seldom; and that either upon some great duty to be performed, or some
new condition of life to be entered into, or upon some great sufferings to be
undergone, of which one faith, The hours it comes is but seldom, and the stay
of it is short. The second is that we must trust to, A relying upon the sure
word of God by the faith of adherence, when we want the other, the spirit of
full assurance.

23. For the comfort of Gods people, he observed out of the 129 Psalm, That
though the wicked were the plowers of the righteous, and would plow deep, make
long furrows, and even plow their hearts out if they could; yet the righteous
Lord that sits in Heaven, laughs at them, and cuts their cords, and they then
can plow no more.

24. In case of persecutions, and other sufferings, Gods people should
seriously consider these four things: 1. God wills them and sends them: now
God's will is a perfect rule of righteousness, and what God does, is so well
done, that it could not be better done. 2. There is need of them, or else we
should not have them. 3. Their number, measure and countinuance, is determined
by God; they are but for a moment, and last but for a few days, Rev. 2. 10. not
too heavy, too many, or too long, as the Devil would have them; not too few,
too short or too light, as our corrupt natures would have them. 4 Their end is
a weight of glory, and the crown that attends them, everlasting, 2 Cor. 4.17

25. Three things make a man count himself happy here below: 1. To have a good
estate. 2. To have it in a good place. And 3. By good Neighbors. Now these
three, they that die in the Lord, eminently enjoy. 1. Their heavenly
inheritance is great; Eye has not seen, nor ear heard the like, 1 Cor. 2.9. 2.
It Is in a good place, 2 Cor. 5.1. Heaven, which is a House made for them, and
made by God, and therefore must needs be good. 3. By good neighbors; God,
Christ, the spirit, angels, and saints. Adam had a good inheritance, and in a
good place, but he had an evil neighbor of the Devil, that troubled him, and
marred all: but there is no ill neighbors in Heaven.

26. The Passions of God's people do not hinder the success of their Prayers;
Elias was a man subject to like Passions as we are, and he prayed, and was
heard, James 5. 17.

27. Three things do concur to the making up of the sin against the holy
Ghost: 1. Light in the mind. 2. Malice in the heart. 3. The insensibleness of
the sin: He that fears he has committed it, has not committed it.

28. The reason why many are not wrought upon that live under powerful means of
grace, when many that live at a great distance, and come seldom under a
powerful preacher, are wrought upon by it; he used to give by this similitude:
As in a Market Town, the Towns people matter not so much for marketwares, as
they that live in the Country, they come to buy, and must and will have what
they want, what ever they pay for it; whereas they that live in the town, think
they may buy at any time, and so neglect buying at present; and at last,
oftentimes they are disappointed.

29. To persuade us not to return railing for railing, he would say, that if a
dog barked at a sheep, a sheep will not bark at a dog.

30. Four arguments against immoderate cares for earthly things, that we might
not dishonor or deny God, he observed out of Mat. 6. 1. It Is needless. 2. It Is
Brutish. 3. It Is Bootless. 4. It Is Heathenish. 1. Needless, What need we care,
and God too? verse. 30, 31, 32. Our heavenly Father knows we have need of these
things, and he bids us be careful for nothing, but cast our cares on him who
cares for us. 2. It Is Brutish, nay more then brutish, v. 26. Consider the
fowls of the air, and ravens that he feeds, they toil not. 3. It is bootless,
and to no purpose: v. 27. Which of you by taking thought, can add one cubit to
his stature, or penny to his estate? 4. It is heathenish; After all these things
the Gentiles seek, v. 32.

31. Many in the world take their Saintship upon trust, and trade in the duties
of religion, with the credit thy have gained from others opinions; they believe
themselves to be Christians, because others hope them to be such; and so
zealously trade in duties that lie outmost, to keep their credit; but never
look for a stock of solid Grace within; and this undoes many.

32. As we read of daily bread, so of a daily cross, Luke 9.23. which we are
bid to take, not to make: we need not make crosses for our selves, as we are
too prone to do; but let God make them for us: Crosses being made in heaven
best fit the Saints backs; and we must not lay them down, till they and we lie
down together.

33. It was a notable saying of a holy man, Quench Hell, and burn Heaven, yet I
will love and fear my God.

34. It is not crying out upon the Devil, nor declaiming against Sin in Prayer
or discourse, but fighting with the Devil, and mortifying our lusts, that God
chiefly looks upon.

35. The empty Professor disappoints too at once. 1 The world, who seeing his
leaves, expects fruit, but finds none. 2. Himself, who thinks to reach Heaven,
but falls short of it.

36. The only way for a distressed Soul that cannot fasten on former comforts,
by reason of future backslidings, and so questions all his somer evidences, is
to renew his repentance, as as if he had never believed.

37. Some are apt to think, if they were in such a Family, under such a
Minister, out of such temptations, the Devil would not meddle with them as he
does: but such should know, That so long as his old friend is alive within, He
will be knocking at the door without.

38. The seeds of sin were sown so deep in the Nature of the Devil, and the
Saint, that they will never be rooted out, till the Devil cease to be Devil,
and sin to be sin, and the Saint to be a Saint.

39. The sinner is the Devil's miller, always grinding; and the Devil is always
filling the Hopper, that the Mill may not stand still.

40. There be some sins that an ignorant person cannot commit; but there are
far more that an ignorant person cannot but commit.

41. There be five ties by which the God of Heaven has bound himself to be the
Saints Lifeguard against the powers of Darkness: 1. His relation to them as a
Father. 2. His love to them, in respect as they being the birth of his
Everlasting Council, as pertakers of his own likeness. 3. The price of his Sons
blood, and his Covenant with them. 4. Their Dependence upon him, and
Expectation from him, in all their straits. Now the Expectation of the poor
shall not perish, Psalm. 9. 18. 5. Christ's present employment in Heaven, is to
see all things carried fairly between God and them.

42. Brown bread with the Gospel is good Fare.

FINIS.

