SOLDIERY SPIRITUALIZED, OR the CHRISTIAN SOLDIER Orderly, and Strenuously
Engaged in the SPIRITUAL WAR, And SO fighting the good Fight: Represented in
a SERMON Preached at BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND on the Day of the ARTILLERY ELECTION
there, June 1. 1674.

By JOSHUA MOODEY Pastor of the Church at Portsmouth in New England.

1 Timothy 6.12. Fight the good fight of Faith.

2 Timothy 2.3. Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ.

Ver. 5. And if a Man also strive for Masterie (...) is he not Crowned except
he strive lawfully.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by Samuel Green. 1674.

To the much Honored, the Artillery Company in BOSTON.
Honored and Beloved,
THe Ensuing Word is the Lords, is Mine, is Yours, and is to be looked at as a
Message from the Lord, by me, to your selves, (to your selves I say, nextly and
immediately, yet not so restrictively, but that all others in like capacity
with your selves; yea all Christian Readers into whose hands it shall come, may
look at themselves as concerned therein)

It is the Lords as part of his Counsel, Mind and Will: some of the great
things of Gods Law lately Preached, now written to you.

It is mine, as an Instrument (however unworthy) in the composing, then
dispensing, now publishing of the same.

It is yours, as I was called by you to this work, a Servant to you therein,
and as by this presentation it is now made more especially yours.

As the Lords* you are most solemnly Commanded; as mine, most humbly entreated;
as your own, strongly obliged to peruse, understand, receive and practice what
is here sent you.

I could not think any thing of mine worthy of the public view; but seeing
your selves thought otherwise, and others, whom I honor and reverence were
like minded with your selves; I thought meet to submit to persons of better
judgments. And therefore have permitted it to pass the Press, being not able
to be inexerable to the Importunity of my Friend^, nor daring to be disobedient
to the Commands of my Superiors, and the desires of Superiors (in Case, and
in this Case) I account Commands.

The Lord expected that all the Israelites in the Wilderness should contribute
something toward the building of the Tabernacle; and that none might plead
Poverty as an Argument for their Exemption, ordered their bringing and promised
his accepting of Goats Hair and Brass, as well as silk and silver, Chittim Wood
as well as precious Stones, (see Exodus 25.1 -- 8) I was thence encouraged to
bring my Oblation, when called for, of what was under my Hand. He that has
received but one Talent must lay it out, not wrap it up. The Lord is no hard
Master, he accepts according to what a man has, not what he has not, (2 Cor.
8.12.) and men should do the like. If what is here done may (though but in the
least degree) promote the work of the Lords house among you, or elsewhere, I
shall attain my End, and be abundantly rewarded for my Labor.

If any that were mine Auditors should object the difference between the
SerSermon as then preached and now written. I must own it, and add that it was
^f force, not choice, my Memory not serving me at any Time to Remember Words,
nor at all Times things in their proper places. You have it in the Press (...)
it was intended for the Pulpit, and as you should have had it there (at least
^or the Substance) if I could.

As for my manner of speaking in the using of many Metaphorical Expressi^ns,
and Allusions unto the Calling, Pastures, and motions of Soldiers, and ^his
often in your most common and familiar Terms and Phrases, though it may
possibly grate upon some Critical and captious Ears, yet I hope it will be at
least excusable or tolerable to your selves, It being done chiefly for your
sakes. My aim being to Spiritualize your Calling as Soldiers, and to ^el^ you
a little of that much of Heaven that is therein contained, I had no readier way
before me to do it then this. Had I been to handle the same Head of Divinity on
another occasion and before another Auditory, I could and should have sought
out other words, but as matters were Circumstanced, I am willing to believe
that these may not be to the Charitable and teachable, altogether unacceptable.
My Auditory, Subject, Occasion being Military, and my Text Metaphorical, if my
discourse had not been in Terms and Language somewhat answerable, it had not
been suitable. I conceive a man should take Measure of his Theme to out out his
Language by, and make it up something according to the mode of his Auditory, I
do not mean so as to please men's Humors, but to suit their Conditions,
provided always be keep within the Bounds of a Scripture mode and Cut.
Edification was my End, and Familiar plainness one of the means conducing
thereto. If some things seem blunt and homely, yet I hope they are all the
words of soberness, and may have their use, if soberly and seriously read and
improved. Nor is such manner of speaking on like Occasion without the Warrant
of Scripture Example

I End with two Requests, First, that you will vouchsafe acceptance of this
presentation as a Token and Testimony of the Sense I have on me of my
Obligations to you for your favorable Construction and kind Entertainment of
my poor Labors already manifested by you: Next that you will join with me in
fervent Prayer to the Lord of Hosts that he who only can, would teach us all to
profit, help us so to run that we may obtain, so to fight, not as those that
beat the Air, but beat down, and keep down sin and the rest of our Spiritual
Enemies, lest while speaking to others, heating or reading what comes from
others, any of us should be cast away. To his blessing I commend you and these
Endeavors for you, and remain

Your Servant in your Spiritual Warfare Joshua Moodey.

1 COR. 9.26. So Fight I, not as one that beats the Air.
IT is commonly and not inconveniently said, that a Man's general and particular
Calling are the two Legs on which he Travels through the Wilderness of this
World, from Egypt to Canaan, he that fail^ in either of them will prove a lame
Christian, he may happily hop or creep, but will not be able to go uprightly,
much less will he run the Race that is set before him so as to obtain. To use
both these Leg, and yet to set the best Leg foremost, I mean his General
Calling, and to make the other, viz, that of his Part^cular subservient to his
General, is the Duty of every one that will be and appear to be a Christian
indeed. But so to do, we may say of it, this is a labor, this is a work. Oh
how hard is it for these not to Interfere one upon another, and Interfereing
how dangerous, how pernicious! And the more, because the General Calling, and
so the One thing necessary usually comes by the worst of it. The many things do
so clamorously and cogently call for Attendance, and we are so ready to be at
their Beck when they call, that it is many to one, if the one thing be not
neglected and overlookt by means of the many.

To prevent this, besides the Cautious, Counsels, Warnings, Commands, Promises
and Threatenings that the Scripture is full of, to make us look to the main
chance, to mind the great business that is before us: I say besides all these
means, the Lord takes care to make us spiritual in all our Employments, by
spiritualizing all our Employments. Yea, all our Relations and Conditions as
well as Employments, are so improved to our Hands by the Spirit of God in his
Word as that they may be useful both as Monitors and Helpers to mind us of, and
further us in those matters that are of most solemn and momentous, because of
Eternal Concernment. Thus our hungring, thirsting, eating, drinking* sleeping,
wakeing, walking, sitting, wo^k^ng, resting, etc. Thus the Relations of
Husband, Wife, Parents, Children, Masters, Servants, etc. are particularly
mentioned as full of precious and practical Instructions.

Thus our Call^ngs, Functions, or Occupations, whether mo^e liberal or
Mechanic* each of them bears twins, and there is none barren among them. The
Lesons the God i^ teaching us out of our proper Vocations are so many, so
spiritual, and so pertinent, that they are enough to leave us without excuse,
if we are not spiritual in them, and learn not to be more spiritual whiles
about them. To give a Taste in a few Instnaces.

The Physician and Surgeon when visiting or administering to the sick or
lame, giving Purges, Cordials, etc. setting bones, applying Plasters, etc. may
be minded of his own Condition by nature, convinced of his need of Christ,
directed to apply himself to Him, as the great Physician, Soul-Physitian, who
is anointed and appointed by the Father to bind up, heal, recover, yea to do
that which is out of the reach of all Physic, viz. to quicken the dead, Joh.
5.25. see also Hos. 6.1, 22. Psalm. 146.8. and 147.3. Jer. 8.22 Mal. 4.2. Luke
4.18. Psalm. 51.8.

The Merchant is advised among all his dealing and trading in the world, to act
the part of that wise Merchant, by selling all for the Pearl, which will be the
best, and should be the first bargain he makes, Math. 13.45, 46. And he is
assured by Christ the wisdom of the Father, that he can deal in no Commodities
that will yield him like Profit, Prove. 8.11, 18, 21. but what ever else he may
get, if he neglect this, will come to a bad market at last.

The Factour that is employed by others, having an estate of theirs to manage
to whom he must give an Account; His very calling minds him of his Relation to
God the High Possessor of Heaven and Earth, from whom he has those daily
Consignments of Life, Health, Food, Raiment, Gospel, and all the precious
things thereof, of all which great Betrustments he must one day give an Account
to his Principal, and woe to him, if through his Sloth, profuseness, or
otherwise he disenables himself from rendering to his Owner his Own with
Advantage. Indeed we are all Stewards of the manifold Grace of God, (1 Pet.
4.10.) And that Text, that awful Text should lie down and rise up with us, and
keep upon our hearts all the day long, Luke 16.2. Give an Account of thy
Stewardship, for thou may be no longer Steward.

The Husbandman should own God in that wisdom he teaches him about his Calling,
Isai. 28.24, 29. and know that himself is Gods Husbandry, 1 Cor. 3.9. and that
therefore he ought to be so toward God as he expects his Land to be toward
him after all the costly and expensive Husbandry that he has been the Subject
of, Isai. 5.1 -- 4. The dealing of Husbandmen is much in Earth, and lest they
should lose and bury up their Souls alive therein, and so miss Heaven, God has
put a great deal of Heaven into their Earth and there they may find it, their
fencing, clearing, plowing, sowing, weeding, plucking up the thorns, waiting
for the former and latter rain, reaping, gathering into the Barn, threshing,
winnowing, are all made in Scripture similitudes, and so teachers of Heavenly
things, see Math. 13.3 -- 9. and ver. 18 -- 23. with ver. 24, 25. etc. Math.
3.10, 12.

The Fisherman if he will read, Math. 13.47. may thence learn to catch the
Kingdom of Heaven in his Net, and some spiritual Good with his Hook and Line.
And it is observable that in ver. 52. of that Chapter: he be-speaks his
Disciples as persons well instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven, by means of
those similitudes which out of their Secular Affairs and ordinary Employments
he had borrowed and suited to their Use.

It would be endless to particularize, for even from the King upon the Throne
to the Hewer of wood and drawer of water, the Lord is in his word teaching us
by such familiar and known Metaphore taken from those Callings that we are
versed in, in so much that all sorts of men may say concerning the voice of God
in his word, as they in another Case. Act. 2 8, 11. How is it that we hear from
thence in our own Tongue wherein we were born, and in the proper dialect of
those Employments to which we have been bred, the wonderful Counsels of God
declared ^o us! the Lords manner of speaking as it helps us to the
understanding of what he says, so his love and Care therein should quicken us
to the practice of what we understand. They that would see more of this may
consult these and such like Scriptures, Joh. 15.1, 2, 5, 7. Math. 9 16, 17. and
19.24. Luke 12:19, 20, 21. Jer. 18.1 -- 4, etc. confer Romans 9.21 Psalm. 2 9.
Math. 7.24. etc:

But to avoid any further skirmishing at a distance, and to come to a more
close Engagement with my Text, in which the Calling or Profession of the
Soldier is made use of a^ Instructive to the Christian.

My work this day principally is to attend a Call from, and so to speak
something to Soldiers, and I knov no better way to speak to their
Understandings and Hearts then to speak in their own Dialect* to treat them not
only as Christians but also as Soldiers, or as Christian Soldiers. And
therefore my discourse shall be a Divinity-Lecture to such, i. e.
Military-Divinity or Divine Soldiery, for the doing of which my Text
advantageth me, as having in it the great wo^k of a Christian in working out
his Salvation, set forth under the Meta^hor of fighting, and the manner of
doing that, by the manner of doing this, [ So fight I]

I might give you the Coherence of the Text with the former part of the
Chapter, and of that with the latter part of the foregoing Chapter, which for
brevity sake I omit.

It may suffice to say, that having exhorted them to run the Race that is set
before them, and u^ged his Exhortation from the Example of other Runners, and
Strivers or Wrestlers, who were careful and intense in their way, though the
Argument or Motive to urge them thereto were small and inconsiderable compared
with theirs. The one being a Corruptible, the other an Incorruptible Crown. He
does now in ver. 26. reinforce his Exhortation to them by the proposal of his
own Example before them, and that under a double Metaphor.

1. Of Running, concerning which he speaks*

1. Affirmatively, I so Run. 2. Negatively, not as uncertainly.

2. Of fighting, which is before us in the words read, where the Apostle
presents himself in the Equipage of a Soldier, whose Business is Fighting,
amplified from the manner of his doing it, [ So fight I] and how, he sets down
in the Text, Negatively, [ not as one that beats the Air] In the Context
Affirmatively, [ I keep under my Body, etc.] Together with the Reason o^ the
whole [ Lest while I preach to others, I my self should be a cast away.]

So] i. e. So as he had before expressed, lawfully, and so as to attain the end,
and so as to have that success, the keeping of the Body under.

Fight I] The Greek word here rendered [ Fight I] is by the Latin pugilem ago,
which most properly notes to fight with the fist. Pugil from pugna; and that
from pugnu the Fist, though we use pugna for any manner of Fighting, for a
battle or Skirmish where Swords and other Weapons are used; and so Pugil is
rendered a Champion or streng Fighter. [Fight I] then may be, I act the part of
a Champion, Now a Champion is supposed to be not only a Soldier, but one
singularly qualified and eminently accomplished for what he undertakes, one that
is both Strong and Skilful. Hence Great Goliath was called the Philistines
Champion; 1 Samuel 17 23, 51. So that to Fight like a Champion means to Fight
like an able, Skilful, Active man, a man of whose Fighting well, there is Great
Expectation, and upon whose so doing there is no small dependence.

Not as one that beats the Air] A very significant Expression borrowed from
those that make a Flourish with their Weapon, make a show of doing much,
whereas all they do is but a m^er show, an empty show; they draw the Sword and
wave it too and fro, but hit nothing besides Air with it. This same Apostle
has a Parallel Expression that will give some light to this, 1 Cor. 14.9. He
that speaks unintell^gible words, he speaks in the Air, i. e. he speaks
insignificantly and unprofitably to his Hearers, whose Ears may have the Sound,
but themselves not having the Sense of what he speaks, his words fly into the
Air, i. e. are to no purpose. He makes a Great Sound with his high and hard
words, but they are Airy, there is nothing in them to the Hearers. So here;
some men's Actions are as empty as other men's words, nothing but a Flourish in
the Air. This Phrase may be answered by the Latin Ventilare, which (besides
other significations) means only to Flourish. The Poet speaking of one that
was but a Flash, a Bubble, a Vapor, says of him, he spreads abroad his Arms
indeed, makes a show, pretends to something, but verberat istibus Anras, He
strikes nothing but Air with his Blows. Many will so do, speak big, and look
high, make a very fair Flouris^ with their Swords, wave their Weapons too and
fro, carry them over their Heads, and round about them very neatly and
dexterously, so that they appear very Skilful, able and valiant men, that can
dare and do much; but this is only while there is nothing but Air before them,
upon which they may strike while they will without any danger of being stricken
again, such may pass for fair Flourishers, but are no Fighters. It is not so
with me (says Paul) I have something before me besides Air, and therefore have
other work to do then to beat That. I have an Enemy before me which I must
strike, and strike down too, and that at my utmost peril.

The Sum is, he commends to them by his own Example, Fighting for their work
and Employment, and by his Negation of beating the Air only, he implies and
intends the Contrary Affirmative, viz that he was thorough, intense and in good
earnest about his work, he did not make a show only, then he did do the thing,
there was not an outside, an appearance only, then there was the substance, the
reality, and as he did, they ought to do also. Hence take up this plain
Doctrine.

Doct. To be in the Equipage or Capacity, and to perform the work of a
Soldier, and that vigorous^y, stoutly, strongly, strenuously, is the Duty
incumbent upon every Christian. The Calling and Employment of a Soldier is
that also of a Christian, in which he is to acquit himself strenuously and like
a man. He that will be a Christian indeed must be a Christian Soldier and that
in deed, in reality, not in show or appearance, he must fight not flourish
only, be a Soldier and that in actual Service too, [ So Fight I] in the
present Tense, fighting is with every Christian always in the Present Tense. A
Christian must engage in a spiritual warfare, and therein he must not be like
one that beats the Air. No, but he must act the part or do the work of a
Soldier, and that in good earnest. He must not be the picture of a Soldier, a
Fencer, a Stage Player, one that comes on the Stage and for pleasure, sport or
in jest only personates a Soldier, when he really is, and means nothing less,
but he must buckle to the Business of Fighting like a man that aims to make
work of it. In a word, we need not alter the Terms of the Text. It is the Duty
of every Christian to look at and carry himself as a Soldier in the Fight,
wherein he is to behave or demean himself not like one that beats the Air.

The Doctrine has two parts in it, The one, the calling or Employment of a
Christian, viz. he is to Fight, the other contains the manner of his doing it,
not slightily, but Substantially, not in jest, but in good earnest.

I shall draw forth each part by it self, and speak to each singly by way of
Explication and Confirmation, and then make some Application of both together.

The first Part of the Doctrine.
A Christian must be a Soldier. That which I mean by it is that there is a
great Harmony, Likeness, or Similitude between the work of a Soldier and that
of a Christian. The A^t of Soldiery does fitly resemble the Art of
Christianity, and may be profitably improved to set forth the Nature thereof.

That this is so, and wherein it is so, will appear if we Consider,

1. That the Spirit of God often puts the Name of Soldiers upon Christians,
and be-speaks them in Terms borrowed from that Profession: the Saints also have
familiarly professed or confessed themselves to be such. See 2 Timothy 2.3, 4* and
4 7. 1 Timothy 6.12. and 1.18. So Paul calls Archippu^ his fellow Soldier, Philem
2. and that not only as a preacher of the Gospel, but as a Christian. Hence we
commonly and Scripturally call the Church on Earth, the Church-Militant, i. e
the warring or warfaring-Church, the Army or fighting Company, So Cant. 3.7, 8.
and 6.4, 10, 11. There are two parts of the Church of Christ, (answerable to
the two places where they are, or States wherein they are, Earth and Heaven,
Grace and Glory) viz. that which is Militant, and that which is Triumphant,
that which is yet warring, and that which is now in Triumph after the end of
the War, wherein they have been Victorious, and their being Triumphant
hereafter, speaks them Militant now.

2. The Qualifications or Indowments of Christians are such as are the
Characteristical Notes or Badges of good Soldiers; the same Excellencies that
speak a Soldier, spiritualized make a Christian too. Take those
Accomplishments which are requisite in a Soldier, and he that has them (taken
I mean in a spiritual Sense) is a Christian also. Counsel and strength are for
the war, whether Literal or Spiritual, Isai. 36.5. Skill, will, Strength,
Activity, Valor, Courage, complete a man for either Employment. Understanding
to know his weapons, and skill to use them, prudence and wisdom in taking the
right means and Season, Strength to undergo what is propounded, and Courage and
Confidence to face and grapple with Difficulties* not to be scared with words
and sh^ws, or frighted with false Fire, are necessary Qualifications for
Soldiers and Christians, and for no Soldier more then for a Christian
Soldier, and in no warfare more then the Spiritual. Courage in special is
Essentially needful to both. The Timero^s Cowardly or Fearful lead the Van of
them that are sent to the Bottomless Pit, Re^ 2^.8.

3. If we look into their Accoutrements as well as Accomplishm^nts, the
Resemblanc^s will further appear. A Believer fitted for Service and fixed for
his Employment, as such, is like a Sould^er in the Field completely armed Cap a
pe. You have the Christians Armory, Ephesians. 6 11 -- 17. which sufficie^^ly proves
his Soldiery. Truth is his girdle, R^ghteousness his Breast-pla^e, Preparation
of the Gospel his Shoes, Hope h^s Hel^^et, the Word his Swo^d, and now when
these are on, he is fit to me^t with Principalities and Powers (at least when
by Prayer, which follows in the next words, he has engaged the Lord of Hosts
to be with him) What will you call one so equipped or accout^ed but a Soldier,
and what is he to expect but Fighting? He is not thus armed (sure) either to
play or sleep. If God provides, sends him and wills him to put on this Armor,
you may readily conclude what Service he is to go upon. If the Lord of Hosts
arrays him thus with Truth, Righteousness, p^eparation of the Gospel of Peace,
puts hope on his Head, Faith in the one Hand, and the word in the other, and
bids him thus stand, yea, and withal bids him to call these his Belt,
Breast Plate, Headpiece, Sword and Shield, no wise man but will account such
an one sufficiently minded of a warfare before him. God would never have called
his Graces in the Believer and his word given to him, Arms and weapons, if his
Calling had not been Military, and his work Fighting. If God bids men Arm, they
may expect that the next word of Command will be Fall on, or else they will be
by the Enemy fallen on, and so they must look to fall down. And this makes way
for the next particular.

4. A Christian must be a Soldier and be in actual Service too, if we consider
the multitude of Enemies that are about him to keep him doing. When God has
given a Christian his Armor, he will soon see those that will necessitate him
to put it on and use it too. No sooner has the Lord armed him, but the Enemy
will alarm him, and put his Armor to proof, whether it be Armor of Proof or no.
He is no sooner converted but be set, Enemies surround him, assault him, so
that he must either Fight or dye. The way to Heaven lies through the Enemies
Country, and no getting through but by force of Arms. He must dispute every
step at the Swords point. Heaven wust be won by the Sword e're i^ be worn. Your
Spiritual Enemies will do as they, Numb. 20.21, 22. not suffer you to pass
through, but come out against you with a strong hand, and you must not turn
away from them but Fight them as, Numb. 21.22, 24. The Lanes are filled, the
Hedges lined with Enemies to impede your March Ca^aan ward, so that you must
engage against them, or shamefully retreat and loose all. Then, He that has
but what he wins by the Sword, gets no farther then he Fights, and holds, and
keeps no more then what he keeps by the same means which he gets it by, sure
this man is a Souldi^r, and such a life is a Soldiers life* But such is the
Case of a Christian. Ergo.

It would be endless to reckon up all his Enemies. Time would fail, should we
only call over their Names and no more. But there be these four Heads which
have thousands under them, viz. Sin, Self, Satan, World. I aim not at
accurateness of distinction, (for I know that Self is Sin) but at tha familiar
plainness which may be Intelligible unto all, and they are commonly so
distinguished.

1. Sin, which is in and about, and does so easily be-set us, Heb. 12.1. and
must be fought by those that will run the Race set before them, who must
therefore Fight as well as Run. Sin I say, which on thy first coming to Christ
thou must renounce* and wage war with ever after. A war and a bloody war
too must be waged agaidst Sin, Heb, 12.4. You must be professed Enemies to Sin,
draw upon it where ever you meet it, keep it off at the Swords Point, stand
upon your Guard, if it gets within you it kills you. Sin that deceitful thing
that so often does deceiv us under a Color of being other then indeed it is.
Sin that attends us in every Business, and lies in Ambush behind and in the
midst of all our lawful Employments, and while we are busy about them surprises
us at unawares. Sin that pretends in a friendly manner with Ioab to kiss thee,
2 Samuel 20.9, 20. but suddenly and unexpectedly wounds thee fatally. Now with
Sin thou must not compound or make a Truce, but Fight it at all Times, do not
spare Sin at any Time, for it will spare thee at no Time. It will mix it self
with and mischief thee in every Duty, Business, Employment, when hearing,
reading, praying, etc. Do not trust it for it will deceive thee, and be against
thee 1 Samuel 29.4. To be ever at variance and in actual contest with Sin is our
work, and therefore this of a Christian with Sin is rightly called, The Holy
War.

2. Self, A close Enemy because within thee, and the more dangerous because so
close. Of sinful self, that saying holds true, where shall one find a worse
friend then one brings from home? An Enemy that lurks in thine own bosom, and
thence is advantaged to do thee the more Harm. They are bad Enemies that are of
a man's own House, worse that are of his own Heart. Against these thou must be
ever watching, or else wilt be fooled and foiled by them. There is in thee an
old Man, a Body of Sin, an Army of Lusts that are still warring against thy
So^l, 1 Pet. 2.11. Thou need not beat the Air for want of an Enemy to
strike. Thy Body thou must beat, yea, beat down, yea, keep down. There be
strong Castles and high Towers within thee, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. that will never
yield on Composition, but must be taken by Storm. Thou have a Self that must be
denied, subdued. A self that mixes itself with all thy Duties, concerns it self
in all thy Businesses, yea, with all thy Graces. (As there is pride with
Humility, yea, pride of Humility) Thy sinful self must be mortified, and yet
still there remains a Righteous self, (as some Divines call it) that will do
thee as much mischief as the other, Our own Righteousness is as great an Enemy
to us as our Unrighteousness, our self Righteousness as dangerous as the other.
Paul thought he had gained something by his exact walking in the Profession of
a Pharisee, having framed and stablished a Righteousness of his own, but he was
fain to love all, deny that Self too, that he might w^n Christ, Phil. 3.4, 9.

A Christian therefore must be a Soldier for he has in him two contrary
Principles, yea, two Armies engaged one against another, ( Gal. 5.17,) lying
one against another (as the Greek word imports) like two Armies lying
entrenched one against the other, or like an Army beleaguering a City. There
are fleshly lusts, actings, sti^rings on the one side; spiritual desires,
motions tendencies on the other, each side contending for its contrary Obj^cts
and Ends. The Current of Natural Corruption runs downward, that of Supernatural
grace moves upward. These two contrary streams (...), and hence there must
needs be an actual Contest; one draws backward, the other forward, hence there
must needs be a perpetual War.

3. The Devil has a quarrel to thee, and Fight thee he will, and Fight him
thou must. The first Cry of the New born Babe of Grace (says a Divine) alarms
all the Devils in Hell against him; what then shall he do if he cannot Fight?
He must not fly, (unto God indeed he may fly, but from the Devil he may not,
must not fly,) nor must he yield, then he must Fight, stand his Ground, resist
him steadfastly in the Faith, and so make him fly, ^ Pet. 5.9, with Jam. 4.7.
Thou may and ought lift up thine eyes to the hills from whence comes
thine help, dispatch Faith in Prayer for Auxiliaries from Heaven, but thou must
Fight as well as pray, wrestle in prayer, pray and wrestle, and that not with
God only (as Genesis 32 24.) but with Satan too, Ephesians. 6.12. give no place to the
Devil, the while, Ephesians. 4.27. ^ate him not an Ace, veer him not an inch of
ground, do not yield an hairs breadth, nor a minutes Time, we must ever watch
and war against him as our Adversary, 1 Pet. 5.8. He follows thee from Bed to
Board, from Company to thy Retirements, from thy worldly occasions to thy
Closet, into thy Garden, Field, Ship, Shop, etc. From thy house to Gods house,
and there he stands at thy right hand. He is ever with thee, seeking Occasions
against thee. When he seems quiet, seems conquered, then perhaps most to be
feared, sometimes he retreats, goes forth, withdraws, but it it is for
Advantage, that he may get stronger possession with seven Spirits worse then
himself. It may be said of him, as it was of Marcellus the Roman Commander, he
was never quiet, nec Victor, nec Victus, neither beaten, nor beating, neither
overcome nor overcoming. In Conversion we run away from Satan's Colors and
Service, whose Slaves we naturally are, and enter into Christ's Pay, hence Satan
pursues us (if possible) to regain us, and we have no other way to help our
selves but by Fighting him. To be well acquainted with his methods, Stratagems,
devices, to watch him narrowly, and Fight him stoutly will be thy Interest.

4 The World, one of the Devils Instruments, that he uses in the War, he is
therefore (in part at least) called the God of this World, the world (I say)
that choaks the word, and then undoes the Sinner. Beware of being entangled in
the affairs of this life, if thou have taken upon thee Christ's Warfare, 2 Timothy
4 4. Rather let thy Warfare especially be against the world and thy being so
ensnared by it, He that while he lives in the world has the world his Constant
Enemy, he must necessarily be a Soldier* Unto the world we must be weaned, and
God often imbitters the Breasts of worldly comforts, dries them up, yea,
crucifies the world to us, makes it as it were dead to us, that we may the more
facilely get Victory over it. The world Fight^ by presenting present sweet
pleasant things to allure to sin and dete^ from obedience. Pleasure, profit,
Honor, are its baits to allure and draw to sin or disobedience, there be also
many fears and discouragements whereby it deters and drives back from the way
of obedience, Hence the World fires on both sides; so must we also. Now look
upon all these Enemies of our weal, these constant, perpetual, deadly Enemies,
and say then if a Christian can be other then a Soldier, and see if all these
will not keep him ever in work. The New man has the Spirit and the word that
set in with him, and the Old man has the Devil and the world to help him, each
Party has its Auxiliaries, Heaven, Earth and Hell are engaged in this War,
there is great siding and betting on either side, and there must be great
Fighting by him that means to win the Day.

And hence what is the Scripture, but the Divine Art of Military-Discipline, or
the Art of Divine-Military-Discipline? where God is presented as Sovereign,
Christ as General, all that will be Saints are his Followers, alias Soldiers,
having given up themselves to him, or listed their Names under him, they are
required to march and follow him in the Spiritual Warfare against those
forementioned Enemies, there are also directions how to Fight this good Fight,
Encouragements to hearten them, threatenings to quicken them, Examples of those
whose valor has been crowned, and Cowardice punished, the noteable Exploits
that have been done by Believers by the strength and grace of their General,
these and such like things are the sum of the Scriptures. As in the second
and third Chapters of the Revelation, that which is driven at in the Epistles
to the seven Churches of Asia, and is the scope of all the Directions,
Counsels, Promises, Threatenings that are there set down, or discoveries of the
Lords mind there made to them, is to make them good and so v^ctorious Fighters,
to put them on Fighting, and so as not to beat the Air, but to overcome their
Spiritual Adversaries, as appears by the Common Close of each Epistle, [To him
that overcometh] will I do so and so; why truly just so the very same is the
scope of all the Scriptures to help us to Fight this good fight, and to finish
our Course, that we may have the Crown at last.

This also is the Lords aim in every Sermon we hear, to instruct us in the
Theory, and so fit us for the Practice of what may speak us such as the Text
and Doctrine speak of. Every Sabbath day is a Training day, wherein we receive
Instructions and Directions from the Lord concerning our Duty, our work as
Soldiers, and all the week after we are to act over the Lessons which we then
learn. Jesus Christ our King, our General, knowing the multitude of Enemies
within and about us, gives the same order which David did, 2 Samuel 1.18, viz.
that we should be taught the use of the Bow, and instructed how to use our
Spiritual Armor Regularly and successfully.

5. The promised presence and Assistance of God with his people in this world,
in all their Businesses, Undertakings, Exigents whatsoever, is delivered in
such Metaphors as confirm the Assertion before us. He is with them, but how? as
their Shield, Buckler, High-Tower, Fortress, strong-Hold, etc. All which with
many such like, intimate and infer that they are in a Militant warfaring
condition in this life, because otherwise there would be no need of those
things. The Lord wanted not words to express his Affection to his people by,
but he uses these as most significant, because most suitable to their
Condition, and so most Intelligible by them, and acceptable to them.

Besides, that the Reward at last is for Overcomers, a Crown to be put upon the
Head of Overcom^es, when they come into that Glorious Triumphant state whither
the Lord is leading them, Now the great Triumph is at the end of the War
(though Saints have some beginnings of it now, 2 Cor. 2.14.) the Crown is for
the Overcomers, the Overcomers are the Fighters or Soldiers; and therefore all
Believers who shall be crowned must also Fight. All that are saved are crowned,
all that are crowned do overcome, all that overcome must Fight, Ergo all the
Saints that shall be saved must Fight.

Second part of the Doctrine.
That in this fighting they must be vigorous and in good earnest, not like such
as beat the Air. Take this one Argument to confirm it.

Reas. Because no other acting but vigorous strenuous acting will attain the
end, no other will serve the Turn, all other motions will be to no purpose, he
that uses them will be never the better, and as good never a whit, as never the
better. He that only beats the Air, will never beat his Enemy, and he that
beats not his Enemy shall be beaten by him. None but he that Fights valiantly,
courageously, strongly shall overcome, and none but he that overcomes shall be
crowned. Sin and Satan will not be scared and frighted away (as was hinted) by
squibs and Cracks, nor daunted with great words, nor made to fly with a mere
flash in the Pan. Beating the Air will never beat the Devil the Prince of the
Air. No, you must run sin through and through, your Sword up to the very Hilts,
Ehud-like, prick it to the Heart, else it will not die; you must hit the
Old Man under the fifth Rib and let his bowels out, else you do nothing. If
thou deal gently with sin it will be thy Master, but if thou will master it, do
as Joab did by Absalom who ran the darts through the very Heart of him. When
you come to deal with sin and Corruption, do your work substantially and
thoroughly, get it fast nailed to the Cross of Christ that it may not have its
liberty, else you will never secure your Comfort now. nor your Crown hereafter.

Many will sometimes in a Fit talk of what they will do against sin, promise to
leav it off, forsake it, kill it, give out that they will come out with such a
force against Sin, as that they make no doubt to storm and take it; But Sin
will give such Braggadochio's leave to talk and vapor, and will give like
Answer to them as Ahab to Benhadad, when he said, that the dust of Samaria
should not suffice for handfuls, etc. Let not him that puts on his Harness,
boast as he that puts it off, 1 King. 20.10, 11. Many will declaim much against
Sin, while in the mean time they nourish and cocker it; but Sin cares not for
words, values only blows, and downright blows too. The Lord hates Cowards and
curses deceivers both in his worship, and other work and Service too, See,
Mala. 1.14. with Jer. 48.10. Fighting weakly offends God, and advantages and
encourages the Adversary. Beelzebub (says one) like the Flies medles not with
flesh that is boiling over the Fire, but when raw or cool will fly-blow and
corrupt it. The Application of it is Easy, if thou art fervent in Prayer, warm
in Duty, vigorous in thy opposition of Satan and Sin, Satan will avoid, Sin
will yield, but if thou be cold and remiss, Satan will grow more bold, and Sin
more strong. If thou art but a Fen^er, a Stage Player in Religion with a Button
on the Point of thy Rapier, Satan will not be afraid to come near thee; but if
he see that thy blood is warmed, and thy Spirits are up, and that thou offerest
the naked point to him, art resolved to Fight at Sharps, and layest about thee
like a man, he will stand further off.

When thou go out against Sin thy great Enemy, perhaps thy deceitful Heart,
that secretly too much loves Sin, will be ready enough to give such a Charge as
David did to the Captains, (2 Samuel 18.5.) deal gently, etc. But Christ stands
in the Ga^e as thou a^t going forth, and says, for my sake, and for thy Souls
sake, and as ever thou will appear before me with joy at the End of the war,
deal severely, deal sharply and thoroughly with Sin and the Old Man. Thy
Commission is to take, kill, burn, sink, destroy all sin and Corruption, etc.
which are professed Enemies to Christ Jesus, and not to pity or spare any of
them. It is like that sometimes given to Saul against Agag, 1 Samuel 15.3. Then
if thou spare any under what pretense whatsoever, thou will be indighted, tried
by a Couneil of War, found guilty, eondemned, and executed for Rebellion,
stubbornness, Witchcraft and Idolatry. and so justly rejected or cashiered.

It is a silly thing when the signal of Battle is given for men to charge with
nothing but Powder, which will only make a sound, give crack, but do no
Execution, and yet such Fools are many Professors, they talk of Religion, talk
against sin, charge it highly, and discharge whole vo^ies of words against it,
but there be no Bullets, they are not in earnest, make a great noise, a loud
report* but the Report is all. They make a show as Children do with their
wooden Swords and Pot-guns, but they draw no blood, no wounded lust drops down,
no bleeding Corruption lies gasping for breath, or breathing its last, Sin is
as strong, lust as hail, corruption is as found as ever it was, and so will be
notwithstanding their beating or breaking the Air with their empty words and
unprofitable discourses. Away with such Childrens play, this play-Fighting,
Fighting in Jest will never attain the end to make thee a Conqueror in
earnest; It may serve for a show, and so Sin may be mortified in show, and thou
saved in show, but damned in Reality. If thou let go sin which God has put
into thy hand, without putting it to Death, (as he did him who was appointed to
Death, 1 King. 20.42.) and if thou only beat the Air, not it, (be sure it will
go.) Thy life must go for its life.

No acting but Strenuous a^^ing will do against the Old man, thou must fall on
him courageously, stoutly, the word in the Content signifies to box and thump
manfully to be about the Ears of him and beat him all black and blew. Beza on
Luke 18.5. where the same word is used tells us that a Noun from this Verb
signifies bruizes that are black and blew from the settling of the blood there,
and indeed it is as Solomon says, Prove. 20.30. the blewness of the wound
cleanses evil, etc. So must Sin and the Old man be Served, else nothing is
done, beating the Air then in these matters will not avail.

Thus the Doctrine has been in some measure explained and proved; we shall now
improve it in some few particulars.

Is the Life of a Christian a Soldiers Life, and is he so to act as has been
said? Then this informs us something of the Nature of,

1. The profession and practice of Religion, that it is no such easy, slighty,
indifferent busin^ss as many Professors make of it. Indeed to talk of Religion
and make a Flourish is easy, to beat the Air is not difficult; to seem
Religious is facile, but to be Religious is hard and will be found so. He
utterly mist^kes the matter that dreams of taking his ease, and nourishing
Sloth in a Christian Life, that as soon as he has given up himself to Christ,
that now his work is over; I tell thee no, the War now begins, now there are
two Principles in thee, and those in an hot dispute at the Swords point, and
there must be bloodshed and loss of Life on the one hand or the other, And
sure this is no Childrens play. God knows the Sloth and slightiness of man's
Heart naturally, and therefore meets with it by setting forth a Christians
Employment under such Metaphors as will allow of no Lazines, Exempli gratia
Math. 11.12. The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and they take it by fo^ce,
Sin make^ a violent opposition against thy going to Heaven, and therefore thou
must also make a violent Resistance. If Sin and Satan can (...) hinder it thou
shall never have possession of Heaven given thee, however not a peaceable and
quiet Possession, and therefore thou must make a forcible Entry. Again, Luke
13.24. you hear of Striving, being in an Agony, like men that are a wrestling,
who tug and pull, and shake one another, taking all Advantages to give each
other the Foil or Fall. Paul used the same word of himself, 2 Timothy 4.7. I have
Fought, etc. I have striven that good strift, have well acted the part of a
Wrestler. Striving implies action, Intenssness of Action, and that against a
great deal of opposition. So [ Running] in the Context is used in the same
Sense, now Running is opposed to standing still, and also to moving slowly, it
is a vigorous, lively motion. So 2 Pet. 1.5, 10. Giving all Diligence, Jude 3.
Contending earnestly, Psalm. 63.8 Following God, following him hard, and that
with the Soul, Romans 12.11. Fervency of Spirit, warm and vigorous acting.

But I need not go from this Metaphor of the Tent, Fighting is work, not play,
hard work, (2 Timothy 2.4.) men's work, dangerous work. And let us about this War,
Consider that it is.

1. Near us, yea, within us, not at a distance, two Men in every Christian.

2. Between us, our selves and our selves are the parties concerned.

3. Politickly and powerfully managed on either hand, by the Parties and their
Auxiliaries.

4. Mortal, not some small blows, light scarrs, but Death on the one or the
other side is the end of it.

5. Soul-Warr, the soul is warred against, 1 Pet. 2.11. and the Eternal Weal or
Woe of the soul is the result of it.

6. Irreconcilable without Atonement.

7. Constant without Interm^ssion,

8. Perpetual without End, till death puts an End to the Combatants and combat
both at once.

I say, Consider these particulars, and then say when may a Christian be Lazy
or slothful? what leisure-Time shall he find to gratify a sluggish Spirit?
where is there any room for slighty and superficial Carriages in his work? At
what time may he have a License to say to his Soul, Soul take thine Ease, eat,
drink, and be merry, (at least in that sense as he did, Luke 12.19. and many
still do) when will it be lawful for him to lay down his Arms, put off his
Sword, unbend his Bow? where will you find from God or from the nature of the
work any allowance or Countenance for that dullness sleepiness, security and
Indifferency that finds so much Countenance among men? And do not wonder to see
in your ^ourny Heavenward the way bestrewed with dead Carcasses, and to see
such Troops of dastardly Cowards, and white livered, ^aint hearted, milk sopps
upon their Retreat, and when you come there do not wonder to see so few
Professors there, but rather that any should so Fight as to Overcome, that
considering the opposition, any should obtain.

2. Then it will be good prudence for ^^l that are looking Christ-ward to sit
down first and count the Cost, Luke 14.25-33, Christ's deals plainly with us and
tells us what we must trust too, let not us deceive our selves. Zebeaes sons
were for a Kingdom, but Christ tells them of a Cross, a Cup, a Baptism and a
bitter one too, Math. 20.22, 23. and so should we tell our selves of the War
as well as the Reward, of the way, as well as the End, not only of the Crown to
be worn, but of the Sword, that by which it must be won before worn.

Many when they hear of the Gospel and word of Grace, they like the (...)
Ground (Math. 13.) Immediately receive it with Joy, perhaps are told of the
War, but do not consider of it, or if they do it is the Plunder and Triumphs
that their mind is mainly on, hence when they meet with blood and and wounds,
repent of their choice, when Persecution arises they are offended, and lay down
their Profession as hastily as they took it up inconsiderately, ver. 5.20, 21.
Its good therefore for a Christian to look before he leaps, lest after he has
advanced he draw back again, throw down his weapons, run away from his Colors,
and make a shameful Retreat.

The Lord Jesus looks back on all that are following him, and says, I have a
Crown for you, but you must Fight for it; a Kingdom for you, but you must take
it by Force. What ever Christ proposes to us we should Consider of. Now his
question to us is, (and should be ours to our selves) Can we Fight? can we
venture where Arrows and Bullets fly? can we Face an Army? can we endure
Hardship as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ must do? Can we bid defiance to Sin,
send a Challenge to our bosom lusts? can we be content to live a life of
opposition to every Sin? We are naturally for Ease and quiet, would fain live
without Care and fear, meet with no cross or trouble, swim down the Stream
without any stop or check, not to have a strong Tide to row against, or be
forced to turn it up against a Trade-wind of perpetual Opposition. Most are
like Issachar to whom rest is sweet, Genesis 49.14. whereas we should be like
Judah, and diverse other of the Tribes who are described to be of warlike
Spirits, some with open force, others with subtle Stratagems engaging against
their Adversaries, Only that Tribe was dull and low-spirited. We are therefore
to examine our own Hearts, God will try them and so should we. The Lord would
not lead Is^ael by that way lest they should see war and so recant, Exodus
13.17. but God will lead us that way where we shall see War, and that way we
must go or none, for there is no other, and woe to us if we do recant.

Great will be the Advantage that will acrue to us by due Consideration of
these things before hand, hereby we shall be put into a posture of Expectation
of difficulties, and hard Hardship in this Warfare will be no new thing to us,
and so we shall not be so likely to be Surprised or offended. Expectation will
put upon preparation, and that will be very profitable Christ told his
Disciple^ that his end in warning them of Persecution before hand was to
prevent (...) being offended when it came, (Joh. 16.-14.) Again, it will
prevent our Apostatizing and falling back from our Profession after we have
engaged in it. Apostasy from a Profession made, arises from want of due
pondering what we did when we first made it, and were like to suffer in the
prosecuting of it. Therefore let us be advised and deliberate in taking up a
Profession of the Name of Christ, lest that which was rashly enterprized be
groundlesly deserted.

3. Let no poor sincere hearted Follower of Christ be discouraged, as if all
were not well with him because he meets with much Fighting and Opposition, no
peace or quiet; Enemies come on him like the waves of the Sea, scarce can have
one resting day or night, the Devil ever beating up his Quarters, his own
Treacherous Heart often betraying him to Satan's tempta^ions and Allurements,
etc. Why know this is no strange thing, see 1 Pet 4.12. Paul could tell you as
much as all this upon his own Experience, ( Romans 7.) He stood to his Arms when
he first engaged for Christ, and never laid them down till he came to lay down
himself in the Grave. It was no Argument that Nehemiah and his Company were not
about Gods work, because they were fain to hold the Sword in the one hand, and
the Trowel in the other, Neh 4 17, Rebecca had ^o just cause of fear by reason
of the struglings and Fightings within her, Genesis 25.22, 23. She had conceived
by the Son of the Promise, only there were Twins. Say not then, if so, why am I
thus? Nay, if so, how can it be otherwise then thus? If a Believer, thou go
with Twins (the one the Old man that is in thee naturally, the other the New,
begotten in thee by Christ Jesus) and these two must and will, yea, cannot but
Fight and struggle, for they are contrary, see Romans 7.23. with Gal. 5.17. Thou
may bind the Old man indeed and keep him Prisoner that he shall not run, but
can never so bind him as that he cannot Struggle; He will Rebel while he has
a Being, and while thou have a Being in this Life he will have one too.

To you that are discouraged because you feel the Body of Sin in you Fighting
and disturbing you, let me say, there is one though you should not feel it, and
to feel it is a mercy, yea, to feel and Fight it is a Duty That it is there is
most certain, that you feel it there speaks some Life, that you Fight it some
Strength also, and consequently your Frame is in some measure right, as well as
your state good.

It is the Condition of every man to be either taken Captive or in War: if
Captived at Satan's will he may have a kind of peace or ^he present, but no wise
man will think such an one safe; if in War it speak^ (...) gotten out, or at
least getting out of his Snare, and that is comfortable.

Then let not Satan b^ff^e th^e, and make thee wound thy self with thine own
weapons which thou should use against him. War against Sin, if from a
Principle of Life within thee, is a most certain Sign of a good Estate.

Its true, there may be a kind of a War between a Natural enlightened
Conscience, and a carnal unrenewed Will; and between the sensitive and rational
Faculties in an unregenerate Man, but if the war be between two Men in thee,
be sure one of them is the New Man: and if there be a new Man in thee, there is
Christ in thee, and if Christ be in thee thou shall Overcome. Those other
strivings of Reason or of a natural and enlightened Conscience, are not against
Sin as such, and so not against all Sin, are usually weak, nor do they grow
more strong, are inconstant, and by Fi^ts only, not out of Hatred of Sin, but
will consist with a Trade of Sin, at least with an Allowance of some
secret-darling Sin. But if thou find the war against Sin as such, all Sin,
constant, gr^wing, and such as proves thee an utter Enemy to all Sin, so that
thou can say thou would never Sin more, etc. if so, thy Struglings should
rather encourage thee then otherwise. Do not expect an End of this War while
thou live, only live a Life of dependence on Christ, and from his death and
Resurrection daily, fetch renewed strength and Grace. What would poor combating
Paul have done with his Body of Sin had it not been for Christ? Romans 7.

4. This Doctrine may also serve to give an Alarm to the secure, quiet, easy
Professor, and that on a double Account, viz. 1. If thou be not engaged in this
Spiritual Warfare. 2. If though in a Sense engaged, yet not Strenuously.


1. Know, if thou art no Warrier, thou art no Ch^istian. If there be no War,
there is no Grace, if thou know not what it is to be a Champion, then not what
it is to be a Christian neither. He that is no Soldier of Christ is no Servant
of Christ. All Christ's Followers have their Names in the List of those that
Fight the Lords Battles. He that now is, and ever was in peace, so continuing,
now is and ever shall be without true peace. Do not cry peace, because thou
never knew War; Cujus Contrarium. He that never knows War shall never know
Peace. He that will be crowned must Overcome, he that will Overcome must Fight,
then judge what will become of him that does not, cannot, will not Fight. You
are either with Christ, or against him, Fighti^g for Christ or in Opposi^ion to
him, there is no Neutrality here, mind what was said in the former use, if not
in War then a Captive, oh do not bless thy self because thou art quiet and at
Ease, are not in Trouble as other non, No, its a Sign that the strong man*
A^med has Possession of thee and there o^ al is in peace, methinks it should
be a Sta^t^ing and (...) thee to hear that thou art the Devils Captive, Slave,
Vass^l, as (...) is that is not a Soldier of Christ. Thou that have no war
with Sin (...) sure thou have no Peace with God. It is said, Genesis 1 4. that
when News came to Abraham that Lot was taken Captive, he and all his Company
were up in Arms presently: why let every secure Sinner know, every quiet sinner
that has not yet given up his Name to Christ as a Soldier under him in this
Holy War, I say let him know that the Lord has sent me to him this day, as
his Messenger in his Name to bring him these heavy Tidings viz. that not his
Friend, Acquaintance, Relation, etc. but himself, and that not his Body only,
but his Soul, his precious, Immortal Soul, his darling, that is more worth in
it self, and should be to him then Ten thousand Worlds, is taken Captive by
Satan, and there without Infinite Power and Grace, like to be a perpetual
Bondslave. That roaring Lion thine Adversary the Devil has seized thee, thou
art in the Dragons claws, and if thou bestir not thy self speedily he will drag
thee down into his Den, his Cave, the Bottomless pit, from whence no Ransom
shall ever fetch thee; No Ransom but Christ's now can, and when once the day of
Grace is over, (which how soon it may be, God only can tell) that shall not
neither. Oh is it possible for any secure Sinner to be so fast asleep as not to
take this Alarm! God forbid. We account it a miserable thing to be taken
Captives by a cruel Adversary, and carried at a great distance from our homes
and Relations into the Enemies Country, where we are like to wast away our
whole life Time in hard and rigorous Service, in hunger, thirst, nakedness, and
want of all things; and we think that all which hear of our Case are obliged to
pity and pray for us, yea, and (if there be need and hope) to contribute
something toward our Ransom: apply it then to thy Soul-concerns, and think
what it is to be in the Hands, and at the will of the Devil, the greatest
Tyrant that ever was, to Serve him with the greatest Rigor, in the hardest
Service, for the longest duration, viz. that of Eternity, in the greatest
penury of all things, no rest night nor day, nor the least drop of water to
cool their tongues, and when thou have thought of this, say if it be not a
Condition Infinitely more miserable then the other, and then again say, if it
be not amazingly strange, that the same persons that would be so much affected
with the other, should be so little moved with this. Oh why does not the world
ring with the doleful Complaints of such poor wretches? why do they not fill
Heaven and Earth with their Cries, and (being first alarmed themselves) alarm
both to contribute to their Relief? Alas they know not that they are poor and
miserable, etc. (Rev. 3.) they feel not the Iron yoke upon their Neck, nor the
Chains of darkness at their heels, at least they do not feel Sin to be as a
Yoke, as Chains, cords and Fetters, hence not startled, not affected; but (
miserable self-destroying sinners that they be) stop their Ears at the
Proclamation of the Year of Jubilee, the acceptable Year of the Lord is not an
accepted Year to them, they turn their backs upon the tenders of Liberty, hugg
their chains, c^^se their Captivity, love their Bondage and refuse to go out
free. Hence though we see such persons daily, we hear any of them crying and
bemoaning themselves but seldom, hence in stead of following Christ who would
lead them out of this Slavery they rather prepare War against him, and use
their utmost Endeavors to keep themselves in. Well, one of the next mercies to
the giving of Jesus Christ to a poor sinner is the making him thoroughly
sensible of his misery, and disquieting and distressing him thereupon with on
Christ. Oh pray for that work to be wrought, and pray that none may (as it is
frequent for many to do) look up a little at the first hearing or reading of
such a Truth, but soon lay down their drowsy heads again, and make a Shift ere
long to get asleep again, and dream that notwithstanding all that has been
said, they shall have peace.

2. It alarms them that though they make a show and pretend high, yet in
reality do play rather then work, talk rather then Fight, and so indeed do but
beat the Air. Christ loves to see a man that girds up the loins of his mind,
and buckles to his work, that puts his Bones as well as his Brains to it, and
lays about him like a man. There Is many that make a Shift to pass among men
for Christians, who yet will want a place to hide their Heads in at that day
when the Great-General shall appear, because they have been only personaters of
the Christian stage players in Religion, that never yet had the Courage, or
will, to Face any beloved sin, or give it one sound Blow. Thou have Flourished
thy Weapons about thine own head, but never gave one downright Blow upon
Sins Head; this is not like Christ, nor will be liked by him; For when Christ
is brought in as returning from the Fight against his Enemies, Isai. 63.1, etc.
his Garments are all red with their Blood. It far better becomes the Coat of a
Christian Soldier to see it sprinkled with the Blood of Sin, then to see i^
spotted with the Flesh, the former should be labored for as honorable, the
latter hated as reproachful, Jude 23. which yet is the Condition of every
las^e, easy Fighter. In stead of garments rouled in sins blood, they are rouled
in Sins filth and pollution.

5. Be we all then Exhorted to stand to our Arms, Let us Fight, Fight the good
Fight, and so Fight.

Fight] do not play, idle, sleep when there is so much work to do, so many
Enemies to oppose, woe to him that now stands with his Hands in his Pockets, or
his Arms folded one in another in the Sluggards posture, as if there were
nothing to do. Oh its a busy world, and Fighting a busy work.

Fight the good Fight] Fight for Christ against Sin, etc. that is the good
Fig^t. And so Fight] not with their tongues, but Hands and Hearts, not with
Flourishes but Realities, not with words but Actions; So Fight that you may
Overcome, not ever Fighting and never Conquering, ever learning and yet never
understanding. Be often pressing on our Souls the necessity not only of doing
but [ so doing] without which all our doing is nothing worth and tends only to
self-undoing. Fight we must, and conquer we must, or else it will be ill with
us. We are in the same Case as those Soldiers whom when the Commander had
landed on the Enemies Country* he burnt up their Ships that transported them,
and then told them that they must either eat up these men ( i. e. their Enemies
before them) or drink up that Sea, intimating that there was no way left but to
it they must, and that upon the peril of their lives. God has set us here in
our Enemies Country where we must either Fight manfully, or die shamefully. Now
to further us in this our work, take some Directions and Encouragements, and
that,

1. Unto all those who are or would be accounted Christians, and therefore must
be Soldiers.

2. To those in particular, who are Soldiers and also Christians, or to
Christian Soldiers and Soldier Christians.

To the former let me say these following words, and that,

1. By way of Direction, 1. Make sure that your Names, and Hearts as well Names
are given up to the Service of Christ. Remember that in your Baptism you took
Press-mony from the Lord, engaging you to serve him in the War, against the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and as you grow up he expects that you should
Answer for your selves, what side you are for. All men are Soldiers either in
the Devils Regiment, or under Christ's Banner. Be not then halting between two
Opinions, be not Neuters, but deliberately make your choice. Jesus Christ is
lifted up as an Ensign to the Gentiles; and wherever the Gospel is preached he
sets up his Standard, and causes it to be proclaimed by sound of Trumpet, that
whoever will fall off from Satan and come and put themselves under him, they
shall be welcome to him, and protected by him. Oh then when he says who will thou be for, say, let thy Soul say, Lord I will be for thee and for no other.
He off^rs thee Conditions of Peace, comply with them then, for thou can not
meet him in an Host^le way with thy poor, miserable, naked Soul, who has his
twenty Thousand As Luk 14. yea, Ten Thousand Times Ten Thousand to wait on him.
Do not then harden thy heart against him, for thou will not Prosper Th^^ submit
to him, and be free in it. All Christ's Soldiers are Volunteers, Psalm. 110.3.
They are the men of Desires that offer themselves willingly, Judge 5.

2. That being done, enquire who are Christ's Friends and Foes, and let them be
thine too; do not mistake and Fight Friends, while thou compliest with Foes,
and if thou do the former, thou will not shun the ^a^ter. Do not as they,
Isai. 5.20. hugg a Lust when thou should stab it, embrace a darling sin when
thou should cut the throat of it, l^ve ^he World when thou should hate it.
(...) contra do not be shy of Holi^ess when thou ought to seek, pursue and
perfect it, etc.

3. Be at peace with God, get and keep him on your side, and then none can be
against you, at least shall not hurt you, Rom 8. Nothing will more further and
succeed you. War with Sin then your peace with G^d. When Saul's Time of
Punishment for his Treachery and Cowardice drew nigh, he bustled all he could
to save his Stakes, but God was departed from him, and then there was no help
for him. Heaven would not, Hell could not relieve him though he implored Aid
from both, see 1 Samuel 28, and Chap. 31. But if God be on your side, victory
must needs be there too.

4. Be Courageous, Courage is an high Accomplishment of a Soldier, and most
indispensibly requisite in a Christian. Faint Hearts will show themselves false
ones, when the pinch comes. How often did the Lord say unto Joshua, (Chap. 1.)
Be strong and of a good Courage, and it was on the same account that we are,
when he was going to War for Canaan. Hear the Lord saying to us as to them,
Deuteronomy. 20.1-4. and say we to our selves, and one another as they did, 1 Samuel 4.9.

5. Get well armed. Good Armor will help to good Courage, he that is unarmed
or ill armed must needs be faint-hearted, and one Coward is enough to spoil a
whole Company. The Lord has a good Armoury where you may be furnished. See
Ephesians. 6.10, etc. And when you have this Armor, prove it, try what your Faith
can do, what your hope, etc. can do. Suppose Cases of Diffi^ulty, as David
does, Psalm. 27.1, 2, 3. and supposing your selves to be in such Cases, see what
work you can make of it, suppose the loss of friends, near Relations, Estate,
Health, yea, suppose Death looking in at your window, try if you dare face it,
make proof of the strength of it, and see if you are able to grapple with it.
Supposed Cases will furnish and fit you for real Cases. Be often handling your
Arms, and use will make you prompt, the frequent handling them will help you to
handle them handily, expertly, dex^erously, successfully.

6. Be at variance with every sin, get inward, settled, radicated heart-Hatred
against sin as such, and then thou will oppose every sin. Correspondence with
one sin will ruin thee. Do not spare any because a little one (thy doing so
will be a great one) neither dare to connive at any, because sometime a dear
one, and still a secret one. God sees, and is a witness of all secret sins, (
Jer. 29.23.) Be not bold, do not adventure to commit one sin in hopes of a
pardon, lest the Lord of Hosts should answer thee as sometimes a Commander did
an offending Soldier who pleaded that it was the first Time, or he had done so
but once, quoth he, Soldiers must offend but once. To sin once is once too
much.

7. Begin with Sin betimes, ere it grows to an Head and the Conspiracy
strengthen. Achitophels Counsel was fatal if it had been followed. I will
pursue him this night, while weak and weary, 2 Samuel 17.1, 2. Let this Counsel
be acceptable to thee, it is (as was said of his) as if thou should ask
Counsel at the Oracle of God, nay it is the Oracle of God, follow Sin this
night, resolve against it this moment, and pursue it speedily. Sin is like Fire
in the Housetop, either quench it presently, or else all will be in a Flame
within a few moments, and in ashes within a few more. The Twig will come up
easily, but the Tree when grown up will be Invincible. Sin is a great Breeder,
a little Company will soon increase to a potent Army. And it will grow strong
as fast as numerous. Then take the little Foxes, (Cant 2, 15.) the old ones may
be too sub^le and too nimble to be taken Begin with Sin as soon as it begins
with thee, nip it in the bud, crush it in the Egg, the first risings and
motions of Sin do thou rise up in Arms and move against. The Emphasis of
Achitophels Counsel lay in the Circumstance of Time [this Night] and hence
Hushai's policy was only to strike at that, and by so doing enervated and
weakened the whole, so that it was turned to folly. The Conscience of many a
sinner is so far convinced of that plain Truth that sin must be fought, that
the Devil sees it bootless to beat him out of that, dares not say the Counsel
is not Good, only it is not good at this Time, what need make so much have
as to go this night, stay and sleep upon it, to Morrow is a new day, another
Time may do as well, and thus while the sinner delays, Sin increases, delaying
to oppose sin is a sin, and gives way to more sin, and the renewing of the Act
strengthens the Habit. Custom in Sin will prove a second Nature, and be as
incureable as the Ethiopians Color or the Leopards Spots. Unto none is it of
so great Concernment to take the very nick of Time as Soldiers, especially
Christian Soldiers. The Bratts of Babylon may more easily be dashed against the
Stones, if we take the Season for it, but if we let them grow up they will
become more formidable, and hardly Conquerable.

8. In stead of making any Provision for, endeavor to cut off all Provision
from the Flesh, watch against the occasions of Sin, and resist them strongly.
It Is accounted good Policy in War to leave as little Provision as may be in
the Enemies way, men will burn and destroy even in their own Country to prevent
the Enemies finding relief. How foolishly do they act then who pretend to Fight
Sin, and yet secretly supply it with Provision and Ammunition to carry on the
War? The Flesh has many Inventions to provide for it self, will shift
noteably, and the Devil is a careful Cater and Purveyor for it, it needs none
of our help. He that keeps not himself from the Occasion, cannot expect that
God will keep him from the Sin. Some Lusts like some strongholds may be easier
starved then taken by Storm, yea, no lust will ^e taken that is not starved, or
dye if you give it meat.

9. Plant your main Battery against your nearest and dearest Sins, your own
iniquities. Deal with that Sin that is as a right hand, and eye, and deal most
surely there. Those that thou art most endangered by, thou should make most
Opposition against. If there be any thing tha^ holds Correspondence with the
Enemy, no wonder thou art betrayed. Satan could do Christ no harm because he
found nothing in him, Joh. 14.30. The less thou have in thee for Satan, the
less can he do without thee against thy self. And indeed it is little that he
does against thee without thee, I mean, without thine own having an Hand in it;
the most he does is to strike Sparks upon our Tinder or Powder, to bring Fire
and Bellows to our dry S^ubble, do but damp that combustible matter that is in
thee, and he will lose much of his labor. Fight neither with small nor great
but with the King, was a Charge he gave his Soldiers, (2 King. 18 30.) So let
us Fight mainly against the King-lusts, commanding Inclinations and Desires.
When the Enemies and Traitors within are conquered, executed, at least the
Leaders or Heads of them, thou will with less danger oppose the Rest. Let the
Head-sins be taken off, and the other will fly like the Philistines when
Goliath their Champion was dead.

10. When Sin begins to fall follow it close, give it no breathing, no
recruiting Time, pursue thy victory, lee it not have leisure to rally, but
follow the Chase till none be left remaining. The Sun shall stand still at
Joshua's prayer to give him opportunity to be avenged on his Enemies, Chap.
10.12, 13. If thou have a Spirit to pray and pursue Sin thou shall want neither
light nor help to give it an utter overthrow.

11. Be much for Order. Christians are Soldiers and that in actual Exercise,
now Soldiers in Exercise, at least if they exercise well are great observers
of Order. What is an Army in a Rout, or Christians out of their places? It was
both sightly and safe for Israel that came harnessed out of Egypt to march in
such exact Order through the wilderness. Hear his saying concerning them, Numb*
24.5. Order is Beau^y and safety. Then let each know and keep his own place,
and not while inquisitive into other men's places and duties, neglect his own.
Let Leaders lead, and let the rest follow; let Commanders command* and let the
rest obey, else there will be Confusion. They are the best Soldiers that can
keep from a Rout, and the next best that can rally soonest. The best will
sometimes miss it, but miserable are they who when out cannot bear to be
reduced or brought in. As much as possible keep in; if out, as soon as possible
fall in again. Keep in your places and you keep out of danger. Strayers from
their Colors or straglers from their places will soon be snapt up.

12. Be constant in Christ's Service. His standard is ever in the Field, do not
fly from your Colors. The work of Christian Soldiers is not a Battle but a
War, when once listed never freed, no not after sixty years, as in Isreal's
Camp. Beware of neglecting any Season of going to War, 2 Samuel 11.1.

You read that David had a Battle, and yet again a Battle, and yet again a
Battle, 2 Samuel 21.15, 18, 19* 20. No discharge in this war till death comes,
and he is your last Enemy, 1 Cor. 15 26. you must Fight till you die upon the
place. Resolve to live and die Fighting, and then you shall live and die
Conquering, yea, you shall be more then Conquerours, Romans 8.37.

Then lose no Time. Alexander being asked, how he did so much, conquered so many
places in so little time, Answered, (...) by omitting no opportunity. We have
many Enemies to conquer, and much work to do in a little Time, we had need lose
none, but by redeeming it to make more. Christ bade them gather up the
Fragments, (Joh. 6.) which proved more then the whole that they had at first.
Sure our Time is as precious as our Bread, we should then preserve and improve
every Inch, bit and Crum of it, let none be lost; do not whittle out our
precious Time into chips, break it in pieces, crumble it into bits; should we
gather up those Fragments of Time spent in vain chatt, needless Recreations,
etc, perhaps it would be more then the whole that many of us have ever made
good use of to this day.

13. Unite firmly, strongly and closely together. Christian-fellow Soldiers
you are Members of one Body, yea, members one of another, th^n be one, and of
one Heart at least though you be not always in all things of one mind. It was
the Devils maxim of old, and Machiavels since, divide and Conquer. It was
Christ's mind of Old, and his Apostles since. Be of one mind, live in love and
peace, etc. 2 Cor. 13.11. Peaceableness and Innocence are Good Qualifications
in Soldiers, and so in Christians, Gentleness in Soldiers makes them
Gentlemen Soldiers. All Christ's Soldiers are of peaceable, meek, gentle,
quiet, tractable dispositions. Innocent also as Doves, (Math. 10.16.) do
violence to no man says John Baptist to the Soldier, (Luke 3.14.) be
spotless, harmless, and without rebuke (yea, among a crooked and perverse
Generation that will provoke) says Paul to the Christian, Ph. 2.15. Christ's
Soldiers ride on white Horses, clothed in white Linen, Rev. 19.14* viz.
Holiness, Righ^eousness, Equity, Innocence; to have an hand in any of those
dirty Actions of injuring, wronging, or quarrelling with any of your
Fellow Soldiers or others, will be a spot soon seen on, and a blemish to your
white Coat.

But especially Covet her Characters of her self, 2 Samuel 20.19. I am one that
is Faithful and peaceable in Israel. The Lord is a man of War, Ex. 1^.3. yet
the God of peace, Heb. 13.20. Christ is the Captain of the Lords Host, yet the
Prince of peace, Josh. 5.14 with Isai. 9.6. The Spirit maintains the War with
sin and Satan, and yet one of his main fruits is peace, Gal, 5.22. while at
War with all Gods Enemies, Be at peace with all his Friends, and as much as
possibly in you lies with all men. Saints have the most warlike, and yet the
most peaceable Spirits of any men in the world. Their wisdom is from above,
and that is first pure, then peaceable. Let there be no Faction, or Fraction
among us. If one Body, dread that there should be a Schism in the Body. Let not
Christian Soldiers delight to keep at a double, (perhaps it is too often
double double) distance. If we are quarrelling one with another when we should
be joining shoulder to shoulder to oppose the common Enemy, we shall make
matter of sport for our Adversaries and shame and misery for our selves. And
when our Captain comes to look on us, if he find us quarrelling and Fighting
one with another, we may expect that he will frown, yea, and Fight too, beat
us, punish us altogether. It is usually observed that in Controversies and
Contentions, though one party might be mainly to blame at the beginning of
them, yet if they continue long, it is much if either be wholly Innocent.

Our being Soldiers says we must Fight, but our Rule as Christians tells us
against whom we must Fight viz. sin, etc. and for whom viz. for Christ and the
Common Faith, not one against another, nor for our Lusts, and yet from them all
our Wars and Fightings come, Jam. 4.1, Small matters often make Great Breaches,
A little Earth sometimes, a Fancy, a humor, a Lust, etc. why better lose much
of our Earth, Fancy, etc. and all our ill humors and Lusts then any of our
peace. The Fig Tree Jud. 9.11. feared losing its sweetness if it should accept
of promotion over the Trees: I am sure while we contend for promotion over
others, contend to promote our wills and humors above others (and the Text
tells us Prove. 13.10. that only by pride comes contention) we lose our peace,
our quietness, our sweetness, and sour our selves, into a frame unpleasing to
God and unprofitable to our selves and others, and the Gain will never
countervaile the Damage. One of the highest pieces of Soldiery is for a man to
Overcome himself, and he that has attained that skill will be a Conqueror
where ever he comes, no evil shall overcome him, but he will overcome it by
doing of good, (Romans 12.21.) and that is the noblest conquest in the world.
Mistake not Courage and valor to think it consists in rendering evil for evil,
(no, when thou do so thou art overcome, and show thy self a Coward) or
being able to give persons as good as they bring, to be even with them, stand
out stiffly against them and not yield, etc. No, he is truly Courageous and
stout hearted that can stoop rather then quarrel, yield rather then sin.
Abraham showed as much true Christian magnanimity when he yielded to Lot to
prevent strife ( Genesis 13.) As when he faced all those Kings and delivered Lot,
Genesis 14. True magnanimity shows it self in an utter Impotency and inability to
do any thing against Truth and peace. Courage of the right stamp appears in
daring to grapple and Collar with thine own Lusts and Corruptions, in enduring
hardness, (2 Timothy 2, 4.) and hard dealing too, without being put out of thy way
thereby.

Then set all Christians move, act, harmonize as one Body, and members of the
same Body. Refer our zeal and host for the Enemy, and then lay it out when it
may praise God, and be sure the wrath of Professors of Religion one against
another does not work his praise, but (...).

Martial Discipline is (...). Woe to those that begin, woe to those (...) that
(as G^d gives opportunity) come not with their Pain of (...) to help to put ou^
the Fire of Contention. God is angry at our being angry with one another, our
selves are woefully distempered and damnified, others Scandalized and hardened,
Satan only smiles because he gains the while. In these pudled waters the Devil
accounts (because by experience he finds) that it is good Fishing, and though
he cannot Fish out (no more then he could winnow out, Luke 22.31, 32,) any true
Grace, yet he may deprive us of the present, profitable, and comfortable
Exercise of it; and he may, and often does at such Times fish out all the
seeming grace of an Hypocrite, and make him manifest in his own Colors.
Quarrelling Times are trying Times, and manifesting Times, those that have any
Faith, love, patience, etc. it will then appear; and those that had nothing but
a show of these will then show what they had. Yea, the Saints themselves when
troubled, shaken and disturbed by the Storm of Contention, do cause more filth
and froth to rise then either themselves or others thought to have been there.

Offenses have been and will be, Controversies and Divisions have been by Satan
raised and fomented in all Ages, which have occasioned great digladiations
among Christians. Hence Pulpits and Presses have been more then glutted with
many Polemick and unedifying Discourses, besides sharp Debates in private, by
which much precious Time has been wasted, that will be dearly missed one day.
And for men either in public or private Capacity to be much (much more to
delight to be much, and being much will breed delight) in those matters, to
travel far in that Road, how well it suits with their feet who are to be stood
with the preparation of the Gospel of peace, (one piece of our Spiritual Armor)
I leave them to Judge who have for any considerable Time worn that Shoe. To
study to disquiet Lust and sin in our selves first, and also in others is given
us in Charge, but in the mean Time to study to be quiet in our selves and with
others, lies very fair and full in our Commission and Instructions, 1 These 4
11. with 2 These. 3.12. That the Sword should devour for ever while there is any
Sin remaining to be the Antagonist, must be for ever owned; but if the Sword
devour at all, much more for ever, while our Brethren are the Subjects of it,
this will be bitterness in the latter end, 2 Samuel 2.26. Let Pulpits ring with
the Everlasting Gospel, the bitterness and vileness of Sin, the excellency of
Christ, the freeness of Grace, the necessity of Faith and Holiness toward God,
Superlative Love to Christ and to one another as our selves; and let private
discourses and Occasional Conferences between Fellow Soldiers throughout the
whole Army, be the Echo of such Counsels, and our Carriage and Conversation
toward God and one another, the Examples of those Rules, if (I say) men were
thus busied they would have little list or leisure to quarrel, and many of our
endless and fruitless Controversies would die alone. There is a great deal of
Profaneness, Sensuality, worldly mindedness, pride, want of Love, etc. againgst
these let the voice he lifted up like a Trumpet, and when men write against
these, they may be allowed some Gall and Vineg^r in their Ink, only let us
spare our Brethren.

14. Walk humbly both with God and among men. If Humility be not one of the
pieces of our Spiritual Armor expressed, Ephesians. 6. yet it is the Grace of the
whole. Humility in a Soldier sets him forth more then all his Bravery besides;
so Humility in a Christian is the very Bravery of a Christian. Its called his
raiment, 1 Pet. 5.5. And indeed the rest of our Graces are so ragged that we
had need have the upper Garment of Humility over all, lest the shame of our
nakedness appear. Vainglory, which is the proud man's study, is an empty study,
a vain study. Do not talk great words: nor make great shows or Flourishes, but
do great things. Neither should the Soldier or Christian be a Vapor, a Flash,
a Bubble, Vo^ preterea nihil, but be a through and substantial doer in all that
he does do, and let thy deeds speak, and they will say enough, Prove. 31. ult.
Do high and loud deeds: while you speak little and low words, say little, but
do the more, do not speak swelling words, but do swelling works, and these
works will speak words big enough to guard thee against obscurity or oblivion,
will get thee a Name and Fame that shall never be forgotten.

15. Know your strength lies more in, and your success is more from the General
then your selves. The Security of our Lives is more from the Grace in Christ
for us, then from the Grace from Christ in us. Indeed we must keep our Graces
bright and in Exercise, our weapons on and in use, let not our Swords rust in
our Scabbards that they will not draw, etc. yet still the Exercise of our
Graces when we have them, and their success when we use them is from him
without whom we can do nothing. He gi^ds us and prospers us. Eye him, imitate
him, keep him near us, with us, within us, and then we shall be more then
Conquerours through him that has loved us. He only who died for Sin, can be
the death of Sin in thee.

16. Finally, Think much of your last Enemy Death, with whom also you must
combat, and this part of your War will give you a full dischage from all the
Rest. It becomes Christ's Soldiers to be no strangers to death, who are called
so often to Face it, and ever to carry their Lives in their Hands.

And you aged Christians, you old, beaten, experienced Souldi^rs, do not carry
all your Experiences with you into the Grave. You have been long acquainted
with Satan's method and manner of Fighting, and versed in the Stratagems of
War, you may be of excellent use and great bl^ssings among a Company of young
Beginners, spend what you may of the (...) Time that is left you in
instructing, informing and encourageing those that have as yet learnt but a
little War. Your Gifts and Experiences were given you to profit withal, and
therefore did the Lord help and comfort you, that you might communicate to
others for their Assistance, what he has been pleased to impart to you. And it
will much conduce to your comfortable laying down your Heads in the Grave, that
you shall leave others behind you who are engaged in the same War with your
selves, and likely through Grace to manage it well.

2. By way of Encouragement, let me add a few words.

And Suppose you heard our Great Captain speak^ng these words to us this day,
to hearten us in our work; and if any need Heartening Courage and
Encouragement, it is the Soldier, and if any Soldier it is the Christian, unto
whom it had need often be said, as Isai. 35.3, 4. Then ( Fellow Soldiers) let
us know;

1. We have a good General, one that is Sk^lful, able, Compassionate, etc. the
Lord of Hosts, who when all the Armies of Sin, Lust, etc. are gathered together
against us, and the Devil the Leader of the Black Guard, he can Command and
Countermand them all.

2. We have a good Cause, The War with Sin and Satan, etc. is a just and and
lawful War, and also profitable, no plunder like the profit to be had in this
War.

3. We have good Company, good Fellow Soldiers, all of them like the Children
of a King, nay indeed they are such.

4. We a^e all well Armed, each part Armed, and the Armor of each part
Impenetrable.

5. Our Enemies are already conquered by Christ Jesus our General.

6. We War not at our own Charge:

7. Nor in our own Strength, for in the hottest and sharpest dispute, we have
our Leader with us, ordering matters himself, and affording us strength from
himself. He is with us in the Fight, be it in Fire, water, Furnace, etc. see
Isai. 43.1, 2. Dan. 3. He is like that Commander who was never wont to bid his
Soldiers [Goe] but [ Come] himself being ever present with them, and going
before them. see Romans 8.31, 37. Psalm. 118.7. Heb. 13.5. Psalm. 18.1, 2. 1 John
4.4.

8. If we are indeed his Soldiers, he will preserve us and see us all forth
coming. Have we given up our Names to him, believed on him, then he will keep
what we commit to him till that day, 2 Timothy 1.12. He can, and does warrant all
our lives throughout the whole War, which no General on Earth can do. All that
Fight for, and with Christ, shall live with him. Say not, I shall one day fall
by the hand of Saul, Thou shall never fall by the hand of Saul, nor Devil
neither. Let no man's heart fail then, but be of good Courage, Act. 27.22. Not a
man of you shall lose his Life. Numb. 31.49. After that Engagement with Midian
in the Wilderness, it is said, they numbered the people, and there lack^d not
one. When the Book of Life, the Muster-Roll, in which the Names of all Christ's
Soldiers are lifted, comes to be brought forth and opened at the end of the
War, if our Names are there we shall be called over, and every one be able to
Answer to his Name. Let us but know that our Redeemer lives, Job. 19. and then,
because he lives, we shall, Joh. 14.19. And what should then daunt us? His Life
for ours we shall all be safe. No sooner are we listed, but all our Lives, yea,
the lives of our Immortal Souls are ensured in Heaven, and Christ's Life is the
pledge and pawn for ours, Joh. 11.25, 26. who would not Fight under such a
Commander? Our Captain cannot die, he was once dead, but he is now alive, and
lives for ever and ever, Rev. 1.18. he dies no more, and his Life is the
Security for ours.

Cheer up Fellow Soldiers, take heart in Grace: it is true we have many
Enemies, many Swords, Pikes, Bullets about us, the Arrows fly thick, and these
and those drop down on our right hand and left, but it is with us, as 1 Samuel
22.23. they that seek our Life seek Christ's Life, but with him we shall be in
Safety. They that seek to take away thine, must seek, and find, and take away
His too, or else miss their Aim, for thy Life is bid with Christ in God, Col.
3.3. When Christ comes to give an account of his Soldiers under his care to
the Father, he will say (as Joh. 17.) Father I have not lost one of them, not
one of my true-hearted Soldiers how weak soever, The Cowards, the Traitors
indeed are gone, but not one of the rest. Paul could say, I have Fought, etc.
and so there is a Crown for me, 2 Timothy 4 7. what he said at the end of his
Course, thou may say at the beginning of thine, (for Christ that is the
Author is also the Finisher, Heb. 12*2.) and it is as true Divinity to say, he
that is Fighting (in the present Tense) is sure to be crowned, as he that has
Fought in the preterperfect Tense: if Finishing thou art as safe as if thou
had Finished. If you Fight the Lords Battles, your Souls are bound up in the
Bundle of Life, 1 Samuel 25.28. The poor Believer though he has an Host to break
through, where he shall be sure to have one thousand Swords drawn, Guns
levelled, Pikes directed at him, yet is sure to escape, he that carries him on,
is obliged to bring him off with Honor and Safety.

9 Our Warfare shall not last long, much less always. It was a comfortable
word to them, and should be to us, [ your Warfare is accomplished] I^ai. 40.1,
^. Yet a little while and Friendly Death (a welcome Messenger to every
warfaring Christian) shall in the Name of the Captain command you to lay down
your Arms, never to strike one bloody blow more, but to come and enjoy the
sweet of all that you have been laboring and Fighting for. And then will be
the first and last Time that this word [lay down your Arms] shall be heard by
you, first, for you must Fight till you die, last, for you shall never take
them up more, and so have no occasion to lay them down any more. The Gospel
has been sounding a Charge to us all our Life Time, but Death shall sound a
Retreat, when we shall return to the Headquarters that our General has taken
up, and prepared for us, ( Joh. 14.2, 3.) and there be fairly and safely lodged
for ever.

10. We shall then be all Crowned that have been thus Fighting. The Senate of
Heaven has decreed a Triumph for every Overcomer, Heb. 12.1, 2. Not only the
Generals, Commanders, some few eminent Christians, but every common Soldier
shall ride into the City, the heavenly Jerusalem in his Triumphant Chariot,
laden with the Spo^ls of his Enemies, and crowned with the Merits of his
Savior. Every true, hardy, courageous Soldier shall then be found to be an
Overcomer, every Overcomer shall have a Crown, every Crown shall be a Crown of
Glory, an incorruptible crown, now reserved, then put on, and worn, and that
never shall fade, or wear away. Oh think how Heaven shall ring with that joyful
Shout, those heart-ravishing Acclamations that shall then be given, when all
the whole Army of the Church-Militant shall meet and become Triumphant! How
shall they congratulate one another, and Christ welcome them all, into the
Possession of that Kingdom prepared for them from before the Foundation of the
World! There will be opportunity enough to all Eternity to recount their
dangers, their hard Encounters and narrow scapes* how often there was but a
step between them and death, and yet they are safe. Then shall God have the
Glory of his Power and Grace in keeping them through Faith unto Salvation; that
though they were so often, and so often at the Swords point, at the Canons
mouth, yet they came off, so many Ambushments laid, and yet not surprised, so
many Mine^ sprung, and yet not blown up, Pharaoh holding them in Bondage with
all his might, when out, following them to bring them back, the red Sea before
them, often ready to perish for hunger and thirst, fiery flying Serpents,
Enemies, etc. in the wilderness, Jordan in their way, Anakims and walls to
Heaven, yet being helped to follow the Lord fully, courageously, as Joshua and
Caleb did, they shall say, when Possessed of Glory, as Joshua did, Chap. 23.14.
Behold not one good thing is failed of all that the Lord in his word spoke
concerning us, or promised to us. Encourage and comfort your selves, and one
another with these words.

I shall close with a few words to those that have been the Occasion of this
present Assembly, and what I say to you, may be of use to all of like
Profession with your selves.

You called me hither, ( Worshipful, Honored and Beloved) that I might (to
give it in your own words) dispense to you some word in the Name of the Lord
for your Encouragement in your work; I shall therefore according to your desire
present you with a word of Encouragement, and a word of Advice also.

By way of Encouragement, my Text has matter enough.

1. I need not insist largely on (though my Text will bear it,) the Lawfulness
and commendableness of your Employment as Soldiers, which yet may be mentioned
as a word of Encouragement to you; and that is hinted here and elsewhere in the
Scripture where the Lord makes use of this as one of the most fit, suitable and
significant Emblems of a Christian Life, which he would not do, at least so
much, if the Calling it self were not lawful. There is a Generation that call
these Exercises carnal Exercises, and your Weapons carnal Weapons, but God
has said enough in his Word to stop the mouths of such Gainsayers, and I am
apt to think that one main Reason why they call these weap^ns, carnal weapons,
is because they be not in their own Hands, though if there, I fear they would
be carnal weapons indeed, and it may be carnally and cruelly used; Witness the
Stories of others that have pretended to like Principles, till opportunity has
given them Advantage to discover themselves.

Indeed the first War that we read of in Scripture, viz. Genesis 14. was begun by
those that we have no ground to believe were any of the best of men, yet that
gave occasion to Abraham that holy, rightsous, Pattern-Believer to draw the
Sword in the same Chapter, having before hand prudently trained up his Servants
unto Military Ex^rc^ses, that they might be fit to go forth to War when
Providence should put them upon it. ( ver. 14.) The word there rendered [
trained] does not only signify trained up in Religious Educa^ion, as it is
used, Prove. 22.6. But also initiated or instructed in Military skill, as the
Scope of the place, besides the Sense of the word seems plainly and fairly to
carry it. So that as Abraham was the Great Pattern Believer, so he was in this
Chapter the Great Pattern-Souldier, exemplary and imitable both in training up
his men before hand to have them ready, and also in leading them forth to
actual Service when there was occasion. Nor need any of the Children of Abraham
(as all Believers are) doubt to imitate (rather they are to account themselves
obliged to imitate) their Father in that which is so many ways warranted, and
wherein he was so prospered and succeeded, and upon his return from which so
extraordinarily blessed, as you find in the same Chapter. Sure the Lords so
blessing him upon such a warlike Exploit intimates his acceptance of him
therein, and helps to warrantize the like practice to us.

Thus David was a man after Gods own heart, and yet a man of war, 2 Samuel 1^.8.
Had his mighty men trained to Service, about him, made a Law in Judah
thereabout, 2 Samuel 1.18. that there should be Tra^^^ng-daies (as we call them)
Times set apart to ^each the Art of Soldiery. The Bow being a principal
Instrument then used in War, is Synechdochically put for every weapon of war,
and their learning the use of that, intends their Skill in the whole Art.
Solomon in his best days, and before his Apostasy, though a King of p^ace, yet
provided for War, and so did Asa, 2 Chronicles. 14 6, 7, 8. he took the Advantage
of the peaceable days they had to fit themselves for war. So they are
commended for their ability to keep Rank, and use the Sword with both hands, 1 Chronicles. 12.38.

The Benjamites skill in slinging Stones at an Hairs-breadth is upon Record to
their Commendation, and sure they had not that Skill naturally, but by use and
Exercise.

You find also that Nehemiah when about the wall of Jerusalem had his Fighting
Tool in one hand, and working Tool in the other, Chap. 4.17.

Let me add a place or two out of the New Testament, Luke 3 14 when the
Soldiers came to John Baptist and asked what they should do, he bids them not
lay down their Arms, but use them well, not violently, injuriously, etc. and to
be content with their wages, though to take wages, i. e the wages or Stipend of
Soldiers, though to do the work of Soldiers, else it had not been lawful or
rational to take wages, though the Calling and Employment of Soldiers is
lawful. Some in our days would have said, man thou may not Fight, thou must
not meddle with that Profession any more, it is not lawful for thee to be a
Soldier, but the Baptist knew better.

The godly Centurion that had not his Fellow for a Believer in Israel, did not
lay down his place, give up his Commission or disband his Soldiers (which
doubtless he would have done if it had not been lawful to be a Soldier) no,
but he keeps up good Discipline among them, maintains his Authority, and has
them at his B^^k, Math. 8.8, 10. You read also of Armies following Christ on
white Horses, Rev. 19.14. I might further urge it from the Law of Nature. Self
Preservation is one of the Prime Dictates of Nature. It is rivetted into our
very Beings as Creatures to preserve our selves, we must uncreature our selves
if we renounce that. Sure God has not given to all other Creatures an Instinct
to preserve themselves, (some by hiding, some by flying, others by Fighting,
etc.) and in the mean Time left (...) a tame Fool to be a Prey to his Adversary.

Again, The Law of Faith speaks the same thing, for it does most strongly and
indispensibly put upon the use of means. Abraham could (for ought I know)
believe as much as any man alive, even in hope against hope, and yet Abraham
could not believe Lot out of Captivity, (though he could believe Isaac out of
the ashes) but rather chose to use men and means to Fight him out* This Great
Believer was a great Soldier. It is true, the main Security of the Believers
is their Faith in God, but still in his own way, viz. in the use of means where
God gives opportunity, without doing of which you cannot trust God. He knows
not the Nature of Faith that knows not the activity of it in the use of means.
Faith is a most Active, obedient Grace. You spoil its acting while you are not
found in a way of Obedience. In putting it out of that way you ham-string,
enervate it, clipp its wings, and then how can you expect it should go, act,
fly?

We might argue also from the unreasonable, envious, quarrelsome, injurious,
cruel, yea, murtherous Spirit that is in sinful man, which will not be kept
from doing wrong but by such means. Were all men rational and Religious,
Conscientious and pious, then beat their Swords into plow-Shares, etc. The
command of God, and the Royal Law of doing as we would be done by, would secure
all men's persons and Estates; but all men have not Faith, nor love, nor
obedience, nor do they use Conscience neither. The enmity between the seed of
the Serpent and the woman, which appeared betimes in the Example of Cain and
Abel, and inclined the one to Hatred and Opposition, should prompt the other to
self-preservation and the means of it.

What War is lawful and when, I shall not dispute, but that a Defensive War
is lawful is beyond dispute, to Fight for the Cities of our God, as 2 Samuel
10.12. or to recover ours out of the Hand of violence, as Genesis 14. So Jephthah
went to War against those that would have put him out of the Inheritance which
God had given him, Jude 11. and he was one of those that acted in Faith, Heb.
11.31, 33, 34. together with others there mentioned, while* subduing Kingdoms,
wa^ing valiant in F^ght, and turning to flight the Armies of the Aliens.
Christ's forbidding to resist evil, Math. 5.30. etc. refers to private persons
in a way of Revenge, vid. Perkins in loc. Nor had Peter a Call at that Time to
resist Authority in that way, Math. 26.52. who was therefore bidden to put up
his Sword, and they are threatened to perish with the Sword that do unseasonably
and injuriously use it. Not but that the Civil Power may, and ought draw the
Sword in Case. It Is true, we read of a Curse against them that delight in War,
Psalm. 68.30. and no less are they cursed that come not to the Help of the Lord
against the mighty, Jud. 5. and do but only beat the Air, and not bath their
Swords in Blood when they do come, Jer. 48.10. That then is the first word of
Encouragement to you in your work, viz. that you have good warrant, Scripture
warrant for your Training days and Military Exercises, and that the Lord does
Countenance and require these preparations, that you may be ready to serve the
Lord and his people, when he calls you thereunto.

2. A second word of Encouragement which I may add, and that from my Text, is
that Great is the Honor which the Lord puts upon you as Military persons,
especially in such a Capacity as those that do willingly give up themselves to
the Service of God in such Exercises, and that not only in that he speaks of
the Saints, ( the excellent ones upon Earth) in your language, but also in that
the Lord is often in Scripture calling himself the Lord of Hosts, so also a Man
of War, Exodus 15.3. The Son of God also is Captain General, (as Mediator)
under his Father, see Psalm. 45.1 -- 5. Besides the most eminent of the Saints
all along have been Soldiers, (I mean properly so) Father Abraham was free of
the Souldiers-Hall, and had an Artillery Garden at his house, three hundred and
eighteen in his trained Band, Genesis 14.14. David in like manner, 2 Samuel 17.8.
Indeed, God and Christ, and all the Saints upon Earth are of your Company,
which is much for your Honor. Again, much of the Scripture is spent about
Soldiers, and Soldiery. How many Chapters in Sacred Writ are no other but so
many Lists of the Names of Soldiers that have been in former Ages, and how
many more are spent in reciting the noble Exploits and valorous Attempts and
Enterprises of Soldiers? Twice over in two several Chapters, viz. 2 Samuel 23.
and 1 Chronicles. 11. are the Names of David's choice, expert Soldiers, called his
Worthies, set down. Besides a large Catalogue of the mighty men that helped
David is expressed, 1 Chronicles. 12. the expert Commanders and able Soldiers that
came in to them, till they became a great Host like the Host of God, ver 22.
Now to have such frequent and Honorable mention made of Soldiers in the Word
of God, and to have so considerable a part of it so spent, is a great Honor to
Soldiers, and shows the great delight that the Lord of Hosts has in his
Soldiery, it tells us that they are persons whom the Lord delights to Honor,
And Honor is a good Encouragement and Spurr to a Soldier. Your Employment is
no base, low, Inferior Employment, but one highly honored by the Lord.

Soldiers, know that the Lord has put a great deal of Honor upon you, for
which you are exceedingly beholden to him; carry it humbly, thankfully, and
serviceably toward God under the Honor He conferrs upon you. See that you
Honor him, who thus honors you. If God will Honor those that Honor him,
(1 Samuel 2.30.) Then surely those should honor him whom he honors.

3. A third word of Encouragement I shall take from the great use that God has
all along made of Military men in his Church. To be useful and serviceable is
an Honor, (for the more serviceable the more Honorable) especially to be so
directly and immediately serviceable to God and his Church, as Soldiers have
been, yea, are, and shall be even to the very last. And this is a further
Encouragement. Though properly the Lord needs no help against the mighty, yet
he uses them, and one Reason is for the Honor and Encouragement of them that
he uses. Christ may make use of you to be great blessings in the places where
you live. It is a Blessing to a people to have mighty men and men of War among
them, as appears, because it is a great judgment to have such taken away from
them, Isai. 3. Be encouraged then, for you are useful, and may be made great
Blessings, and that is a blessed thing.

4. Great is the Affection that God has for such, especially for them that
offer themselves willingly unto that service. (provided that their Hearts be
right therein, for the Service and Glory of God,) Gods heart is toward such as
Deborah's was, Judge. 5.9. Now that Gods heart is toward you, (...) presence
with you, while you are with, and for Him, is a very comfortable, heartening,
and encouraging word to be spoken at the Head of an Army, see 2 Chronicles. 15.2.

5. The main Scope of the whole that I have spoken may be improved by way of
Encouragement, viz. that you are both much enlightened about the Nature of, and
furthered in the managing of your General Calling as Christians by your being
Soldiers. As your Christianity will help your Soldiery, so be sure your
Soldiery (if the fault be not your own) will noteably help your Christianity.
Every Training-day may be a learning day to you, while training you may be
working for God and Christ, and for your Souls too. If your Soul-work may go
forward amain while you are exercising your Arms, it cannot but be a great
Encouragement to them that know they have Souls, and know the worth of them.
You that are Soldiers (as I have already hinted) are eminently beholden to God
in that he is full, large, and pa^ticular in Spiritu^lizing your Calling, in
putting so much of Heaven thereinto, that if you will seriously attend, you
cannot but find it. Truly our going with an Earthly mind about our Earthly
work, with a common-Heart about our common Employment, is that which spoils us
in it, and makes us lose the best Good, even the spiritual Good that might be
gotten thereby.

Unto this word of Encouragement, I shall add a few words of Advice.

1. Propose right Ends to your selves in these Exercises. There are good and
useful Ends of them, let those good Ends be your Ends. If your Ends are not
right, you may be Soldiers but scarce Christians. Now the Great End of all our
Undertakings, and of this in special, is the Glory of God. Whatsoever you do,
do it to the Glory of God, (1 Cor. 10.31.) Let the Service of God and his
Church be the mark you aim at, the white which you desire and endeavor to
hitt, which if you do you shall be sure to get the prize. Had we never read
ought of Ioab save that one Speech, 2 Samuel 10.12. we should have in Charity
accounted him not only a Soldier, (as we say) every Inch of him, but a pious
man also; However he deserves to be Chronicled for it, and imitated in it. [
For our people and for the Cities of our God] Come not into the Field to show
your Bravery, etc. but come to do Service, to learn Skill, and so prepare for
further Service. Do not Exercise that you may know, or be known to know, but
that you may do, and do for the people and Cause of God and Christ, for whom to
shed your Blood, is the best way to preserve it, to lay down your Lives, the
best way to save them.

2. Then be serious in your work, as those that have so high an End, and mean
to do your utmost to attain that End; If this be your End, then do not go about
your work like men that beat the Air. I may use the Apostles Expressions, and
propose his Example to you, (For your ultimate End in your particular Calling
is the same with his in his General Calling and your Activity in every Business
and in this especially, is to have the same Common End) so run that you may
obtain the prize, and so labor not as uncertainly, and so meet, Exercise,
train, (as you call it] not as those that beat the Air. God makes use of your
Calling as Soldiers to set forth the Calling of Christians by, a Calling
wherein the greatest accurateness, exactness, Care, Skill, Diligence is to be
used: then so do your work, so mind your Business, that as Religion honors
your Calling, so your exactness and compleatness in your Calling may honor
that Religion which you profess, and which honors your Profession.

You called me hither to speak to you a word in the Name of the Lord, then, In
the Name of the Lord I say to you in the words of my Text, again, be not like
those that beat the Air, and in the words of Solomon, Eccles. 9.10. what ever
your Hand finds to do, do it with your might.

You much Interest or concern the Name of God in your Military Exercises, you
Invocate the Name of God in the morning when you come together, you desire
something to be spoken to you in the Name of God upon these Occasions, then, in
his Name, I beseech you to hear what is now spoken in his Name, viz. Play the
men, not the children, not the Fools. To pray for the presence of God when you
go about a Business, and then to play when you are at it, not to be thorough
and serious in it, is to pray God to come among you to see you play the
children or Fools, as if the infinitely holy and wise God would be pleased with
the Sacrifice of Fools, Eccles. 5.1. (which Text though it relates principally
to worship, yet it holds by proportion in any thing that is called serving of
God.) To supplicate Gods presence, and then to take no Care to do ought worthy
of his presence, to desire God to look on, when you have nothing but a vain
Heart, and a slighty, heedless Carriage to show him, how near this comes to
mocking of God you may sadly Consider. God is a man of War, and delights to be
among such, to deign them his presence when they desire it, but I tell you he
has a Curious and skilful eye, and therefore it becomes you to behave your
selves as becomes his presence. I have seen some Artillery men as really
serious when they have been at training as when they have been at prayer, and
so to be is very pleasing both to God and man.

I shall make bold to insist a little upon this Direction; Here is a Great
Assembly and many Soldiers are present from all parts, it may not therefore be
amiss and unseasonable to give something by way of General Direction unto what
is regular, and of Reprehension to what is otherwise, in this matter now before
us.

It is too palpable and obvious not to be taken notice of, that there is a
great deal of slightiness and frothiness in Military Exercises, or in men,
while Conversant in those Exercises; Your ordinary Training days are accounted
Recreation-dayes, play-dayes, sporting-dayes, and they are often, and by many,
spent in vanity and Licentiousness, as if vain merriment, Idleness,
Voluptuousness and Excess were the work of the day, as if there would be no
reckoning for so many days in a year unprofitably spent, nay, as if there
would be no reckoning for men's taking occasion to make Provision for the Flesh
at such (...) when they should be Serving God, not with their Bodies only, but
with their Spirits also. But suppose there be not, (as I hope among your selves
there is not, you pretend to higher things, and I hope better things of you
though I thus speak) I say, suppose there be not any of these Extravagancies,
yet now will you be able to Answer for bare non Proficiency, and for
sligh^iness and heedlessness, the Cause of it Know, that when you have given up
your Names unto such a work* then to neglect Attendance either not to come at
all, or to come late to study Excuses for your neglect, to be among your sheep,
ships, etc. as they, Iud. 5.16, 17. you may possibly save your Fine among men,
but with God will not come off so easily. Or if you do come, and that (...)
Season, so as not to be pricked for want of Answering to your Names, and spend
the day in the Service, and yet not so seriously intensly, heedfully, as to
make some Addition to your skin or Dexterity by every days expense, how will
you be able when called to account for that day, (and every day is a Talent and
must be reckoned for to say, Lord thus much gained.

Oh let not Soldiers be like school-Boyes, as not to care how little they have
for their Money, how little Time at their Books, or how little good they get in
that Time. Be not ever Training and never gaining any skill by the Exercise.
Better stay at home and work, then come into the Field and play, to spend Time
and get no skill, nor perhaps aim to get any, will not pass for well spending
of Time. You Artillery men should be Artists indeed, each of you Able to d^^ll
a Company, to lead an Army, able to keep Rank* your selves, and teach others to
do so too, your being an Artillery Company speaks that you are, and aim to be
somewhat more then Ordinary. And truly you will never do as you ought to do,
till you make Conscience of doing as you ought. Conscience of duty will make
you attend duty, and be intense in your Attendance, the way to be succ^ssful
also.

It Is a Good Rul^ in any Business, (and surely in yours) to argue thus, either
this is Gods work that I am about, or not, if not, lay i^ aside, give over,
take your Names out of the List, wholly withd^aw, appear no more; but if it be
Gods work, then do it wi^h your might, remembering the workless grave toward
which you are marching, as also the danger you are in of that dreadful Sentence
against the deceitful dealer in Gods Service, Ier. 48.10. You are therefore to
be grave and serious in your deportment^ Gravity in a Soldier especially while
in Service, is very commendable. It Is a weighty work that you are about, and
getting skill therein, may be as much as your Lives are worth. Matters of Life
and death are solemn ponde^ous matters, (and these are, or you know not how
soon they may be such, what ever men think of them) and therefore to be gravely
managed. Edge Tools are not to be played with. Over much lightness in men's
Hearts and Spirits and want of being Grave and deliberate, often Times occasion
much mischief, in these Exercises. Frequent Examples show us what comes of
rashness and rudeness. Youthful vanity, precipitancy, jestings, frolicks have
(and that not unusually) sorrowful Catastrophes, sad and and better
Conclusions. Soldiers have no Law for being lawless. Headiness and Hast^ness
makes way for Repentance at leisure, when he that walks gravely and regularly
walks safely, and so spares himself that labor. Then mind your Business, as
those that know it is Gods business, mind your work as those that have a mind
to work, and to be gaining by their work.

Mind and attend to the word of Command, which you cannot do with g^zing,
smokeing, and chatting away this Time; want of men's giving up themselves to the
work when they are at it, because they do not Hoc agere, nor give heed to what
is commanded, and so by them to be done, I say, this is the Cause why often
Times they are so unbandy at their Business, and so unhandsome in performing
their postures, do not keep Rank and File, are routed in their marches,
Counter^marches, doublings, wheelings, all in a baddle and ridiculously
disordered. Heedlessness in work makes confused work.

Excuse my plainness with you, I cannot charge any of your selves upon my own
Knowledge with these disorders that have been reproved, if any are guilty,
those that deserve, may very well patiently bear Reproof; those that do not
deserve it, may well be quiet, while others are reproved that do, and may also
take it as a word of Caution to themselves, yea, and Commendation too; for a
Reprehension to the Guilty is implicitly a Commendation to them that are
otherwise. But thus be in good earnest.

Perhaps your Exercises may look like beating the Air, because you are not
called forth to real Service, but know, that preparation for real Service is
real Service, and if you do nothing but beat the Air now, you will be like to
do little toward beating your Enemy then. Act so in your preparation, that it
may appear you have not been trained up for nothing. We read of the Enemies
being skilful to destroy, Ezekiel 21.21. which speaks need of our being skilful to
defend. Study to be mighty men, and men of War, (as Isai. 3.) the Bulwarks of
the place while you live, that you may be as they, 2 Samuel 1.17. honorably
Epitaphed, and bitterly lamented when you die. Be ambitious of being like to
those who are for their skill and valor recorded in Scripture as worthy of
Imitation, see. 1 Chronicles. 5.18. and 12.8, 21,, 30, 32, 33, 38.

You know not how soon the Lord and his people may have occasion for your Help
against the Mighty. It is true God has been very kind to New England, no
breaking in, nor leading forth, nor complaining in our Streets, this last year
also, this dangerous year, this threatening year, so like to prove a bloody one
to us, as well as to many other places, I say, this year is you see fairly gone
off the Stage. We had the last week our Great Solemnity, our Beginning of a New
Year, or New Years day, wherein we had opportunity of setting up our Eben Ezer
and saying, hitherto God has helped us. We may bless God and say with him,
Psalm. 55.18. He has delivered our souls in peace from the Battle that was
against us, for there were many with us. It is true also, that this year begins
with the Tideings of Peace, we have had the Dove sent in among us with an Olive
leaf to give us some intimation of the Abatement of the flood, and Hopes that
it may not reach us; And the God of peace grant that there may be Peace indeed,
a well grounded and settled Peace: Peace with God first, as the Cause, and then
with men as the Effect, peace with Truth, peace with holiness, and that will be
a firm, long-lasting, everlasting peace.

But yet for all this, I could not see Cause to preach on that Text, Isai. 2.4.
Beat your Swords into Plow-shares, etc. I think rather that of Luke 22.36. or 2 Samuel 1.18. or Joel. 3 10. would be more suitable. I fear the Nations have not
forgotten War as yet, nor will they unlearn War wholly, till they do unlearn
Sin and Lust more, from whence their Wars come, till pride lower and strike,
the Wars will never end. While there is Flesh as well as Spirit in the new
man, there will be Wars within; and while there are carnal men as well as
Spiritual in the World there will be Wars without. Therefore while we pray for
the peace of Jerusalem, we are to provide for the Wars that will be made
against Jerusalem, as knowing that the Church on Earth is the Church-Militant,
Jerusalem shall be a quiet habitation, but we must not antedate Gods work. That
Time shall come, but in the mean Time we must handle our Arms, as well as
Ploughs.

Antichrist must Fall, and the Enemies of the Church shall be overcome by a
material Sword, as well as by a Spiritual one. The Prayers of the ^^ints have
long cried, their tears have cried, their blood has cried, the bowels of
Christ have long yearned over them, and himself has long waited to to see his
Enemies made his Footstool, and therefore sure it cannot be long. And what an
Honor will it be to be called to that work, and dexterous at it when called to
it. When Abraham was called to follow God in a way of Reformation, and God had
in that way blessed him outwardly too, he could not but know that the Enemies
about him would envy him not only as Religious, but as prospering outwardly in
a Profession of Religion, which might give him just occasion to train up his
Family to Military Discipline, as we read, Genesis 14, 14. that he might be in a
posture ready to receive them if Occasion should be. We in this Wilderness,
both on the account of our Profession and Prosperity under it, have long been,
and still are an Eyesore to the Adversary, there are, that are consulting to
undermine us, and we should be endeavoring to secure our selves, not only by
p^aying, that no foot of pride may come against us, nor hand of violence move
us, but also, if any such should come by preparing before hand to give them
such a Reception as may discover, that as we were forewarned, so also
fore-armed.

Great are the things that a Religious people have to defend, viz. besides
their Lives, Liberties, Relations, Estates, etc. the Name, honor and worship
of God, the pleasant things of his House, those Great Betrustments which the
world cannot boast of, and are more worth (...) all the world, and hence they
should labor to furnish themselves both with Skill and ability to defend and
maintain what God has given them, or else they will act both irrationally for
themselves, and unthankfully toward God that has so privileged them. The
Faith and the pleasant things of Zion are worth contending for, and that not
with the tongue and hear^ only, but with the hands and Sword also when God
calls thereunto.

Great also is the Advantage that a people get by being expert for War, their
being so, may be a means to prevent War. The report of a people's being a
warlike people may be of singular use to them, the same of their skill may be a
means to prevent their using it. Whereas the Security of a people invites an
Enemy, and renders them liable to be a P^ey, see Judge* 18 7, 8, 9.

Times of peace are Times to prepare for War, and if we miss it in our
preparation, we shall be fearfully hurried and blundred when we come to action,
we cannot promise our selves to be saved then, unless we be diligent in
preparation now. If War comes, the comfort of having done our duty, and the
profit of being in a readiness, will make amends for the trouble; if it comes
not, our peace will bear the Charge of our preparation. Thus be intense about,
and serious in these Exercises, make Conscience of gaining Skill, and of
spending Time so as may best conduce to that End. So do in these as well as
other matters, as you would be glad to have done when an Enemy comes, yea, when
Christ shall come. Train as in the sight of an Enemy, with whom you (...) be
(...) to Fight. Train as doing Service to Christ, and in the sight of Christ,
who will one day reward every days Service, and this days Service, if you
diligently and obediently serve him therein.

3. Be Spiritual and He^venly in all your Military Exercises, that you may be
good Christians as well as good Soldiers. It is good policy and prudence for
pious Rulers to command and Countenance the training up those that are under
their Government unto Military Skill, so that if need be, they may be able to
speak with the Enemy in the Gate, and under their approbation and Authority,
you list and Exercise your selves in these Affairs. Will it not then be much
more prudence and piety in every man that should be Master of himself, to
command his whole man to follow the Lord Jesus in the Spiritual Warfare, to
list every Faculty and member of Soul and body under Christ's Command, and
deliver them up to his Service, that under his protection he may Fight and
overcome his Spirit^al Enemies? Art thou a Leader, and have a Charge of a
Company ab^ut thee? Consider then the great Charge that is left with thee, as
to a little world within thee, a little Army consisting of Soul with it is
Faculties, the body with it is members, like the Cavalry and Infantry, horse and
foot, and these thou must train up in the Art of Spiri^ual Soldiery.

Art thou under Command, and to be led by others, then remember that Christ the
great General expects like obedience from thee as the Centurio^ had from his
Soldiers, Math. 8. to come and go and do at his pleasure. He that can drill
that little Company of himself, and teach every part its proper motions and
Postares is a complete Soldier indeed. You are laboring to be exact
Soldiers, what, and bungling Christians? Oh for ^^ame! what, lead an Army, and
be misled by a single, silly lust? do thou know all the Postures of a
Soldier, all the Facings, Firings, Wheelings, etc? and yet a^ ignorant, dull
Soul as to spiritual Soldiery? God forbid. Art thou laboring to be a
Soldier, and take no Care and Thought to be a Christian? how sad will that
be? God expects of all us that live under the Gospel, that we should be
Artillery-men, and he expects of you Artillery-men that you especially should
be exact Christians, as having such a Calling as will greatly advantage you
thereunto, in many respects above other Callings. The very sight of your Arms
and Weapons should affect you with some Spiritual Consideration, and the
handling of them put you upon like Actions. Your Soldiery and Religion do
Border so near together, that they are in a great measure both of one language;
the Christian and the Soldier may, and ought understand one another, and both
the language and work of the latter will help to familiarize that of the
former. Take a touch of it in some few Instances.

Your listing of your selves, minds you of that great duty of giving up your
Na^es to Christ as your General, and your doing it voluntarily, should put you
in mind of, ( Psalm. 110*3.) and make you pray heartily, to have it cleared up
to you that you are some of the people that God in a day of Power has made
willing. The Soldiers listing of himself is the Christians Conversion, turning
from Sin, Self, etc. unto God, by Faith and Repentance, and this of Effectual
Vocation will lead you up to Election, and this known, will make Election also
known, see ( Romans 8.30. with 2 Pet. 1.10.) and help you to read your Names in
the Lambs Book of Life; the Joys of which Condition, and Privileges belonging
unto which, no tongue can tell.

Upon listing you are obliged to attend on the Seasons, and at the places of
Exercise, to do all the duties that the entering of you^ Names in the L^st do
besp^ak; Christians, know, that to be called Christians is a Privilege, but
withal it is la^en with duty, your Name in Christ's Ro^l does signify your
I^^^gement to be for him, to follow him as his Soldiers, to Fight under his
Banner and no, other, to wait on him at all Times, and in all places and ways
of his Appointment, there to be ready to Answer to your N^mes when called, and
upon the Intimation of any Service to be done for him to say (as he Isai. 6.8*)
Here am I se^d me. Woe to him that in a P^ofessi^n aims only at a Name, (as
they Isai 4.1.) to take away his Reproach, or gain a little R^p^^e in the
World. Either appear in the work of Christ, or Cut thy Name out of the List.
Christ will not bear long, be sure not always with Christians in Name only;
but as you Soldiers do one of another, so will Christ require of you the
Service and ^uty o^ your places. But if you are alive only in Name and dead to
the work o^ your Calling, expect to be judged by Martial Law; and be sure you
will find Christ very sharp against Hypocrisy. When you come into the Field
completely armed, let your Arms about you make you turn to Ephesians. 6. where you
have the Armor set down that every Christian must put on, and see if you have
it all, and also if it be well fixed, and you thereby ready for Service. To
want any piece of Armor, or to have any of that which he has either unsightly
or unserviceable will be as ridiculous and absurd for the Christian as the
Soldier. Christ will have your Armor viewed to see if you have all your
Acco^tr^ments, according to Law, be so fixed that you may not be afraid of
coming to the Test. When commanded to fall into your places, think how ill
Christ will take it to find you ou^, and that either from ignorance of them, or
unwillingness to be brought into, or kept in them; you have, as Soldiers, your
Order, your distance to be observed, even Ranks, or straight Files are often
called for among you, (and perhaps no oftener then there is cause enough)
observing your right hand men is also required, with many the like, which make
you a sight comely in the eye of your Friends, and terrible to your
Adversaries. Now know, that all things in Christ's Army are to be done decently
and in order, (1 Cor. 14*40.) and what is orderly will be decent. Each one has
his particular place, peculiar station, and his proper work in that place or
station assigned to him, and that not only as referring to our selves,
absolutely considered, but relatively also, as concerned with others among whom
we walk. Beware of looking into other men's duties, so as to overlook our own:
and yet again remember, we are our Brethrens keepers, and are so far also to
eye and observe them, that if they do well, we may imitate them, if otherwise,
we may be Instruments to reform them by setting a better Example. Keeping thy
Heart with all diligence, and making straight steps to thy fee^, ( Prove. 4.25,
27.) are directions that their Parrallels in Soldiery may bring to
Remembrance. While you begin your Exercises with Prayers, (as you do if
Christian Soldiers) Remember that Scripture, Prove. 3.6. and be practically
convinced of the need of Prayer, all manner of Prayer, Ephesians. 6.18. which he
adds unto their being armed. When we mean that a Child is dead born, we say
it is still-born* because living Children usually come into the World crying,
thou may have a Name of being new born, but be sure thou art dead, if thou
do not pray, and irregular, if thou do it not in all the Seasons of it, and
that with all manner of Prayer too, see 1 These. 5.17. with Ephesians. 6.18. Prayer
should be an Introduction to work, and be sure matter will succeed with thee in
the War, according as the Hand of Prayer is up or down Ex. 17.^1. You are
often commanded silence, (and it is pity there should be so often need of
commanding it, there being ever need of attending it, as that without which no
other word of Command can be obeyed, because not heard and understood, and
Solomon Eccl. 9.17. will tell you that the words of the wise (...) heard in
Silence; Christians, let your Souls be silent and still before the Lord,
Commune with your own Hearts and be stil^, Psalm. 4.4. that you may listen to
what God has to say to you. The noise and D^nn of carnal reasonings, worldly
lusts, and Businesses, immoderate desires after lawful things, with inordinate
ones after unlawful, these and such like make such a Clamor and sound in men's
ears that Gods voice is not heard by them, and so they bring themselves into a
Confusion, for want of knowing and understanding the word of Command. Keep in a
still, quiet posture, then sit to hear and obey.

Face to your Leader, is a word of Command you often hear of also, and you have
one General Command for all, in Heb. 12.2. that you should do all your motions
with your Face to your Leader, run your whole Race looking to Jesus. A look to
Jesus, gives both direction how, and strength wherewith to run, work, Fight.
Keeping your eye Christ-ward, will be of more Advantage to you in your Combat
then either Sun or wind which Combatants have so much regard to. A new look to
Jesus will give new legs to run, new hands and Skill to Fight, and a constant
Facing Christ-ward will keep you in a right Fighting, and so overcoming posture.

And when so Facing, you are bidden march, mind your Duty of pressing on
forward, (Phil. 3.14.) you must move and promove in your Christian Course, yea,
and let your eyes look straight on, and right forward, without turning to the
right hand or the left, Prove. 4.25, 27. And while you follow him as your
Leader, where ever he goes, you are sure to go right, and certain not to go
into any difficulty, out of which he will not also lead you in the End. This
Leader never misleads any that follow him. All your lawful Facings are toward
him, and marches after him. Beware of Confusion in your Counter-marches, it is
dangerous to see Christians march Counter, but a pleasant thing to see them all
minding the same things, and moving the same way.

Stand] in Opposition to going back by sinful discouragements or forward by
Giddy presump^ion. Stand your Ground, and maintain it against Sin and Satan,
give no place to either. Let no Opposition fright you into a Retreat, Gods Soul
takes no pleasure in them that draw back, or give out, Heb. 10 38. Stand still,
you must, to see the Salvation of God, Exodus 14.13. Only know, your Time to
stand, and your Time to Advance, and know, that you have no Time to Fall back.

As you were] if spoken to men in a Rout and Confusion now, who were sometimes
in Order, is good, and is the Sum of this word of Advice, from Christ to
Ephesus Rev. 2.4* ^. where they are minded of the loss of their first love, and
willed to remember from whence they are fallen and do their first works; from
which Text we had a solemn word from the Lord by the mouth o^ his Servant in
our late General Assembly, the Lord grant that it may ^^ ^^ceived, remembered
and attended as the voice of Christ, and happy New England, if after all our
disorders, we may at last rally, and be [ as we were] indeed (...) [ as you
were] be taken for men's being in the same Condition that they have been long
agone, after much Time spent, and many means used for then bettering, if still
they are Ignorant as they were, Scepticks as they were, ^^^ma^, slighty, or
Superficial as they were, loose and profane as they were, of such it may also
be said, they are Fools as they were, Children as they were, Slugg^^us as they
were, turning like the door upon the Hinges, doing without any thing done,
moving without any progress, and are themselves in a peri^^ous Condition, being
some of them that help to make perictous Times, 2 Timothy ^.1, 7. ever learning
and never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth.

Make good your Leaders Grownd] A seasonable word of Command for the rising
Generation in New England. Could we be with God as our Fathers were, he would
be with us as he was with our Fathers. Did not our Fathers do Justice and
Judgment, and it was well with them? Jer. 22.15, 16. To imitate them will be
our prudence, and weal. God remembers the kindness of our youth, then was
New England h^liness to the Lord, as Jer. 2.1 -- 3. Our Fathers found no
iniquity in God to give them any occasion to change their God, or the ways of
serving and worshipping their God. The same God should be ours, and he is the
same, and his ways the same. Gadding to change our way will not please him. We
are in a way of Reformation, if God discovers to us farther then to them that
were before us, thankfully improve that light, only let that Ground which they
gained (for which also they had Scripture-Ground) be first maintained or made
good.

The Beat of the Drum, the Sound of the Trumpet is of great Use to Soldiers,
and to Christians as much, Know, that God also calls you to hearken to the
Sound of the Trumpet, Jer 6.17. viz. his voice in his word, and that especially
in the public dispensing of it by his Watchmen, whose work it is to lift up
their voice as a Trumpet. Then when the Trumpet is blown, do you attend, Amos 3
6. yea, and bless God that it is not your portion to dwell there, where the
Trumpet gives an uncertain Sound, 1 Cor. 14.8. File-Leaders (as w^^l as chief
Leaders) see how you lead, have a Care to go right, lest you mislead others,
and their miscarriages be charged to your account. The Examples of Leading men
are leading Examples, and if bad Exampl^s then m^sleading ones too. Peter's
Example before others, was in a Sense Coercive or compelling to them. Gal*
2.13, 14.

As Soldiers you set your Watch, and place your Sentinels, and I am sure, as
Christians you have as much need, while you are in the Enemies Count^^ (...) he
in yours. The Enemy lies entrenched within view, you had need keep your hearts
with all diligence, and often walk the Rounds, as careful Commanders will in
person do, walk up and down the World with your Souls under necessary and
Consc^^^tion, Obligations to Attend that duty, so frequently and solemnly urged
in the Scriptures, see 1 Pet. 5.8. with Mark 13.33, 37.

When you are commanded to Charge, present, give fire, it is a shame and
trouble to you to miss Fire, or make only ^alse Fire, or when a mark is before
you not to (...): it think then how it offends Christ, disadvantages you now,
and will grieve you another day, if the result of all your Profession and
pretended preparation has only been a little false Fire, a form of Godliness
an empty ^^ame, Then be sure to be well f^xed, and take good Aim, be not like a
deceitful Bow, do not shoot at Rovers, lest you miss the Mark and lose the
great Prize, which as Professors of the Name of Christ, you pretend to be
laboring after

In Sum it will be your Honor as Soldiers to be accurate and punctual in
all your postures and Exercises; and it will your great Advantage as Christian,
if you can (and you see if you will you may) turn all your Exercises into
Spiritual and special use.

Whether any of you may ever be called as Soldiers, to make matter to fill up
the Pages of future Histories with your warlike Exploits and valorous deeds in
taking of Cities, overrunning Countries, etc. we know not; but if you be good
Soldiers of Christ in the Spiritual warfare, that is the way to lasting
honor. He that rules his own Spirit, is better, and shall be more honored and
reward^d then he that win^ a City, Prove. 16.32.

Only this you must all know that both as Soldiers and Christians your
strength and Success lies in the Lord of Hosts, not in your selves. I ^ust not
to your Number, strength, Activity Courage, etc. The Battle is not always to
the strong, nor the Race to the swift, Eccl. 9.11. man is not saved by his
Strength, an Horse is a vain thing, Psalm. 33.16 17. In every Engagement as men,
as Soldiers, as Christians, there may be enough of our own weakness seen to
humble us, and in all our Success enough of Christ's Power and Grace to occasion
us to g^ve him all the Glory. You are never like to have better Prosperity in
either Warfare, then when you go forth sensible of your own Impotency, because
you then fairly and professedly leave Room for him to advance his own Honor.
see 2 Chronicles. 20.12. And be sure, when we come to see how our matters were
brought about, we shall set the Crown on the Head of Christ, and throw down our
own Crowns at his feet.

To conclude with a word of that which shall shortly put a Conclusion to all
our Exercises in this World whether Military, Civil, or Religions. Know, that
Death our Enemy is upon a swift and speedy march toward us, and we are (...)
him, and therefore must necessarily meet quickly, between this and that the
Time is but short, over a few days ( moments it may be) the day will discover
what we have been, and done. We are now all of us training (...) under the
doctrine and Discipline of the Lords House, and possibly (yea, probably) in
this Life he may pu^ u^ to the Trial what we have gained, some such plunge we
may be brought unto, as wherein we shall have occasion to use all the Skill
that ever we have had an opportunity of getting. He may call us to combat with
Persecution, Poverty, Reproach, Bereavements of Relations etc. or at the utmost
Death will try us all, Death, (I say,) which among men of all Ages and Sexes
takes promiscuously according to the Commission which the Lord of Life and
Death has given it, though ordinarily, those that are in the Front are nextly
for present Service, who d^scharge, and Fall off, and make way for the next to
be Front. So one Generation passes away, and another comes in its Room, Eccl.
1.4. ever in motion, going off, and coming on the stage each hour and moment. I
may not unfitly liken the whole Race of Mankind, or all the men in the world
to a well-Marshall'd Army, (well Marshalled I say, for notwithstanding al^ the
seeming, and in themselves real Confusions that there are, the Lord orders all
wisely, and at the end will discover when all is put together, beautifully too)
upon a march to meet with Death, where the first Rank discharge, (yea, and are
discharged too) Fall off, yea, Fall down, never to return or rise more, and
then the next is first, and so on; there are Old men, middle-Aged, and young
ones, in the Front, Center, and Rear of the Army, The Old Fall off, the
middle-Aged Advance, the Younger are drawing after, now, though sometimes here
and there one of the younger ones may be picked out of the Rear by a Shot out
of Deaths murdering piece, yet we commonly say, and truly, Young ones may die,
but Old ones must. It Is a usual word of Command among you, The first Rank make
ready, they especially should be ready, but i^ is a duty for us all to watch
and pray always, that we may be accounted (...) to stand when the Son of man
shall come. Let all our Care and motions through out our whole Life tend to the
fitting us for a safe, Honorable, and comfor^^^ble Exit at last, that when we
come to look Death in the Face, or to look back (and we should often look back)
upon our Life past, we may neither be afraid nor ashamed to die.

But perhaps some may think that I have Charged too far and that it is Tim^ to
draw off, I shall therefore immediately discharge you of your present
Attendance; Only that I may not leave you within fight of Death without a
Prayer for you, give me leave in so many words, to close with my Desires on
your behalf* ( and sam nil nisi vota supersunt)

In general, my wishes for you are, that you may be blessed in the Name of the
Lord, and from the House of the Lord.

More particularly,

That the Lord will bless your Labors, accept your work. Eccl. 9. (...) and
increase both your Number and Skill, that he will teach your hands to War, and
your fingers to Fight, Psalm. 144.1. grant that your thoughts, words, and
Actions in this Affair especially, may be acceptable to him; and may you have
all Encouragement and Countenance from men too.

That the Lord will make you all Christians, as well as Soldiers, yea,
excellent Christians, and accurate Soldiers.

That if it be best for his Glory, the Common good, and your particular weal)
you may not be used in any other Military way then in this that you are in, of
Preparation. You honor God in the use of this means of his Appointment to
prepare for War, and he can honor you by preventing any further use of this
preparation.

That if the Lord has further occasion for you, he will make you offer your
selves willingly, yea, though it be to the jeoparding of your Lives to the
Death in the High places of the Field, Judge. 5.2, 9, 18.

And then that the Lord of Hosts himself will encourage your Hearts, strengthen
your hands and cover your Heads in the day of Battle, Psalm. 140.7. And Gods
presence wit^ you, together with the Goodness of his Cause, while you follow
his Advice, will both put and maintain valor in you, and be a safe protection
over you.

Finally, for your selves, and all of us here present, (your Fellow Soldiers
in the Christian warfare) let us beg that when we come to lay down our Arms at
the Graves side, and there to take our final discharge from all kind of War,
we may be able each for himself to say with some of our latest Breath, in the
language of that Good old Soldier of Christ, 2 Timothy 4.7. I have fought a good
Fight, I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith. Henceforth there is
laid up for me a Crown of Life, which the Lord the Righteous Judge shall give
me at that Day, and not to me only, but to all them also that love his
appearing.

FIN^^

