A YOUNG MAN'S LEGACY TO The Rising Generation: Being a SERMON Preached upon
the Death, and at the Desire of John Tappin of Boston; Who deceased at
Fairfield the 10th of October 1672. being in the Nineteenth year of his Age.

By SAMUEL WAKEMAN, Pastor of the Church of Christ there.

Eccles. 7.2. It is better to go to the house of mourning, then to go to the
house of feasting: for that is the end of all men, and the living will lay it
to his heart.

Eccles. 11.9. Rejoice, O young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee
in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the
sight of thine eyes: but know thou, that for all these things God will bring
thee into judgment.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by Marmaduke Johnson. 1673.

A YOUNG MAN'S LEGACY TO The Rising Generation.
Eccles. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the
evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no
pleasure in them.


BE pleased to understand, That the Text that I have now read unto you, is not
of mine own choosing, but was chosen by him (a little before he left us) who is
now in another World. It was his earnest desire about two or three days before
his death (being apprehensive that his change was at hand) that I would Preach
a Sermon for him upon this Text: His surviving Friend and Companion, who held
him very dear, and with whom he left it to prosecute this his desire, has been
unsatisfiedly urgent with me in this behalf, That the earnest desire of the
dying, and the will of the dead as to this matter might be fulfilled; which
seconded by others, has drawn me to this, which it may be I have been too loath
to attend. I would not reluct or deny, when man's will and desire carries with
it any signification or intimation of the will of God, or shun any occasion or
opportunity of doing any the least good which his Providence is commending to
me, and such I dare not say but this is. You may look upon this Sermon then as
the Request of the Deceased, as The Legacy which this Young man has left by
his last Will to the Rising Generation. Methinks it seems to me, that our
business with this Text at this time (mine and yours) is from the becknings of
Divine Providence thereunto directing: for not only the desire of the deceased
(calling us as it were with his last breath to the consideration of this
Subject) but his Death, nor his alone, but that of others, lately taken away
(both among our selves, and in Neighbour-Plantations) whose gray hairs and
wrinkles of Age, Death has prevented: and the solemn and awakening Providence
of God in these Dispensations, are loudly calling me and you, and all of us
((...) You^ger sort especially, who are apt to put it off) to an early, timely
remembering God, according to the Counsel given in our Text, Remember now thy
Creator in the days of thy youth, etc.

THis whole Book is in the substance of it a serious calling men back unto God,
a recalling men that are forget^^ng God, forsaking their own mercies, and
following after lying vanities, from those vain, emp^y, fru^tless pursua^ces,
to the remembrance of him. The sum of this whole Discourse (wherein Great and
Wise and Experienced Solomon is giving us in his own account, that we may know
what to trust to) stand upon these two Points.

1. That the Chief Good of the sons of men is not to be found in all Creatures
under the Sun, nor in men's labors and travails about them; all the good that
by the greatest industry can be gotten out of them, being but vanity* and
vexation of spirit, as he after a through tedious search had found by woeful
experience.

2. That man's Happiness is to be found only in God, and in the being unto Him.
This is that great Conclusion that he is laying down as the sum and issue of
all, in the 13 th Verse of this 12 th Chapter; Let us hear the Conclusion of
the whole matter: Fear God, and keep his Commandments* for this is the whole of
man. Upon these grounds we have him throughout this Discourse, as cautioning
men against Creature-pursuances, and seeking happiness where it is not to be
had, and nothing can be extracted by the most skilful Chemistry but vanity and
vexation of spirit; so, calling them to the Creator, and the remembrance of
him, in whom, and wherein, their Happiness does indeed consist.

Amongst many other Arguments, Motiv^s and Persuasions, which we have used all
along in this Book, to dissuade men from an over-mindfulness of, thoughtfulness
about, and eager seeking happiness in the Creature, the Wiseman drawing
toward a conclusion, is urging home this great Argument, taken from the
brevity of life, the certainty of approaching death, and the solemn and
momentous Consequences attending and following upon it. We have him sometimes
touching upon it before, but more fully falling in with it at the 7 th Verse of
the 11 th Chapter, and prosecu^ing it to the 8 ^h Verse of this 12 th Chapter.
Of (...) the Arguments which to untye and take us off from the Creature as
vain, and provoke and necessitate us to the remembrance of God, there is none
more plain sensible, palp^ble, pressi^g* cog^nt, and that may go further to
convince flesh and blood, a (...) himself, th^n the (...) of the brevity of
Life, and the l^ng Eternity (...); the (...) of (...), and the strict Account
that follows it* (...) most (...), taking ^p evident, the W^se-man is rese^ving
(...) provi^g in the last p^^ce, taking in with i^ (as we were sayi^g) (...) of
the foregoing, and urging (...) home in the (...) of that, (...) beg^nning of
this Chap^er, especially up in (...), that are (...) t^ please and pamper
themselves in (...) flourish^ng Age, putting (...) day f^r off. Bu^ in a few
words to come to our Text.

From this m^in Argument, taken from the brevity of Life* the (...) of Death,
and the momentous C^nsequences attending it, which we (...) the Preacher
proposing in v^r. 7. and 8. of the foregoing Chap^er, (...) light is sweet, and
a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the Sun: (...) a man live many
years, and rejoice in them all, yet let him remember (...) of dareness, for
they shall be many; all that comes is vanity and (...) and cuttingly applying
to young men, that are most apt to put it (...), in ver. 9. R^joyce, O young
man in thy youth, and let thy heart (...) the days of thy youth, and walk in
the ways of thy heart, and in thy sight of thine eyes: but know thou, that for
all these things God will bring thee (...) judgment: We have him making two
Inferences, or exhorting to a twofold duty; the forme^ we have in the last
Verse of that Chapter, the latter in the first Verse of this, in the words of
the Text: Both which he is backing with the former Argument, the brevity of
Life, and the certainty of approaching Death.

The first Inference or Duty exhorted to in the last Verse of the former
Chapter is, Therefore remove sorrow from thy heart, and put away evil from thy
flesh: so I do, may the young man think, while I rejoice in my youth, and my
heart chears me, while I walk in the ways of my heart, and in the sight of
mine eyes; if this be not to remove sorrow from my ^^art, and put away evil
from my flesh, what is? Such indeed is the opinion of the flesh touching
sensual pleasures, but sure the judgment of ^he Spirit of God is quite
contrary hereunto, and it is quite another thing that is here intended, viz.
the putting away sorrow, by the putting away sin; the removing of the Effect,
the evil of affliction and suffering, by removing the Cause, the evil of
concupiscence and inordinate aff^^cti^n, according to the truth of that which
he is elsewhere speaking, Prove 14.13. Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful,
and the end of that ^irth is heaviness. A holy heart and a merry heart go
together, and a ^inful heart and a sorrowful heart cannot, will not be long
asunder; be that puts not away the evil of sin from his flesh, cannot long put
away the evil of smart and suffering: whatever vain sensual men may imagine,
the winding up will prove that of the Wiseman true, Prove. 11.29. As
righteousness tends to life, so he that pursues evil, pursues it to his own
death: and the Reason backing it is bottomed upon the same main Argument, the
flittingness, brevity, and uncertainty of Life, even in the young and lusty;
for Childhood and Youth is vanity, i. e. are fading, passing, uncertain, soon
spent^ Young men may bear and behave themselves as if imagining their hot
blood, lusty bodies, activity, beauty, would last always, and their youthful
pleasures never be at an end; but, Childhood and Youth are vanity: Death may
not wait till they be gray headed; or however, the earliest Morning hastens
apace to Noon, and then to Night.

The second Inference or Duty exhorted to, you have in the words of the Text,
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth. As in the former he was calling
off from sin, vanity, the empty pursuance of the Creature, so in this he is
calling to, and putting upon the remembrance of the Creator, q. d. relinquish
your vanities, and your sensual pleasures and contentments, which will be
bitterness in the latter end, and set your hearts seriously Godward, turn your
thoughts toward the minding him. And this Exhortation of young men to the now
remembering of their Creator, is urged upon them by the same main Argument
still, The flittingness and vanity of Life, and the approaching certainty, and
the evil and dark days of old Age and Death, While the evil days come not,
etc. as in this and the following Verses; q. d. old Age and Death are hastening
upon you, and will certainly and soon overtake you. It is the former part of
the Verse, Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, that I shall
insist upon, taking no further notice of the latter, but as it may be an
Argument to enforce this. And here because I study expedition, and the
Explication will necessarily take up some room and time, as also that the
Reason of the duty here required of us, is couched in the expressions wherein
it is commended to us, We shall first lay down the Conclusion or Point of
Doctrine from the words, and then open it to you, and fetch the Reasons out of
its own bowels. The Observation then (according to the terms of the Text, which
we shall after more fully unfold) is this: Doct. That it is every man's Duty,
every young man's Duty, now in the days of his youth, to Remember his Creator.
Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth.

It is every man's duty to remember God, it is every young man's duty to do it
now in the days of his youth. For the clearing up of the Doctrine, and m^king
way for the Application and Improvement of it, we have three things to handle
and unfold: (1.) What this Remembering our Creator (^he duty which the Text and
Doctrine calls for) is importing. (2) The Reasons of our so doing, which the
term of Creator is implying. (3.) Why the Younger may not put it off, but it
must be now done, now in the days of their youth.

I. What this remembering God, remembering our Creator is importing. Remembering,
commonly in Scripture acceptance, is not strictly taken for the simple act of
memory, the mere retaining a thing in our heads, nor is so here to be taken for
any one simple act of the Soul, nor yet diverse and continued acts of one and
the same Faculty; but it is taken for the complete, entire motion of the whole
Soul, the whole man toward God. It is the common saying of Divines, That words
of knowledge of sense in Scripture, imply affection and action, cogitation and
practice, take in both the head and heart, include the whole Soul: by one word
of knowing, remembering, and the like, is included the complete, entire motion
of the whole Soul, the whole man toward God. Such is the combination and
concatenation of all the Faculties of the Soul, as of Links in a Chain, that
draw one and draw all, break one and break all; upon this account any one act,
or the act of any one single Faculty, as knowing, remembering, etc. is usually
in Scripture put for the complete, entire motion of the whole Soul. The term of
our remembering God, so of his remembering us, is used ordinarily not strictly,
but in such a latitude as we have been speaking, if you consult Neh 4.14. Judge.
8.34. Lev. 26.42. Luke 23.42. and a number of Texts more that might be named
and recited (but I fear to be tedious) you will find the sense of the phrase
to run according to the breadth which we have been saying. In a word, we then
remember God, not when we barely think of him, but when as such we
affectionately and practically acknowledge him, when we really own, and bear
our selves toward him as our Creator; in sum, when the whole entire motion of
the whole Soul is Godward.

Thus briefly and in general. But because the burden of the Duty of the Text
hangs upon this word Remember, we shall yet a little further unfold it, and
show you yet somewhat more fully, distinctly, and particularly, what the
remembering God is implying and inferring, briefly.

1. Remembering God, is implying and inferring converting, turning unto God,
Psalm. 22.27. All the ends of the world shall remember and turn unto the Lord:
All men naturally are forgetting God, and turning from him, and men then
remember God, when they convert and turn unto him: men naturally too earnestly
remember the Creature, and forget the (...) off from God, disacknowledge,
disown him, which is (...) in Scripture, A forg^tting G^d, Deuteronomy. 6.12. Job 8
13. Jer. 3 (...) 23.35. So on the contrary, converting, turning unto God,
(...), owning of him, is in Scripture sense, a remembering (...) you may see
Ezekiel. 6 9, 10. and elsewhere.

2. Remembri^g God* implies and takes in our setting up God (...) our
glorifying him as God, our remembering God to be our (...) high God our
Redeemer, our remembering God to be, and (...) making him, as he truly is, the
object of our esteem, love, (...) light, rest, trust, and dependence: As our
converting and (...) God, so our cleaving to him, staying and abiding with him,
(...) accounts highly esteeming of him, delighting, ^esting, trusting (...)
relying and depending upon him, is our indeed remembering of (...) forget God,
according to Scripture^language, when we depart (...) in these respects, God
complains, Deuteronomy. 32.18. Of the Rock (...) thee thou art unmindful, and have
forgotten God that formed thee (...) you may see before in ver. 15. But Jesurun
waxed fat and (...) then he forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed
the Rock (...) salvation; they were gone off from God in love and esteem. (...)
God is said to be forgotten, when we go off from him, as in love and esteem, so
in trust and dependence, Isa. 51.12, 13. I, even I (...) comfort you, who
art thou that thou should be afraid of a man (...) die, and of the son of
man that shall be made as grass? and forgett^^^ (...) Lord thy Maker, who has
stretched forth the heavens, and laid the (...) of the earth?

3. Remembering God, includes an actual, practical acknowledgement of him, in
respect of service and obedience to him, Deuteronomy. 8.11. (...) that thou forgettest
not the Lord thy God, in not keeping his comman^m^^^, and his judgments, and
his statutes, which I command thee this day (...) forget God, is to disobey
God, or not to do the will of God: it is (...) of Israel, Judge. 3.7. And the
children of Israel did evil in the sight of (...) Lord, and forgot the Lord
their God. So Jer. 3.21. They have pervert^d their way, and have forgotten the
Lord their God. Ezekiel. 22.12. In (...) have they taken gifts to shed blood, thou
have taken usury and increase, and thou have greedily gained of thy neighbor
by extortion, and have forgotten me, says the Lord God. So wicked men in
general that disobey God, and walk not according to his will, and rule, and
command, are said to forget God, Psalm. 9.17. The wicked shall be turned into
hell, and all the nations that forget God. Job 8.13. So are the paths of all
that forget God, and the hypocri^es hope shall perish. To remember God then is
to obey him, to do his will, as God is said to forget us when he does not our
will, attends not our desires, our prayers, Isa. 49.14. But Sion said, The Lord
has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me; so we do indeed forget God,
when we do not his will, answer not his desires and commands. And as God is
said to remember us, when he does according to what we would, when he hearkens
to us, Genesis 30 22. And God remembered Rachel, and God hearkened to her, and
opened her womb: So we remember God, when we do according to what he would,
when we hearken unto him. We then indeed remember him, when we actually and
practically acknowledge him, in respect of service and obedience.

4. And lastly, (not to multiply particulars) the remembering God, comprehends a
thankful acknowledgement of, and ascribing to him. You may see what is spoken
as to this, Deuteronomy. 8.10, and the following Verses* When thou have eaten, and art
full, then thou shall bless the Lord thy God, for the good land which he has
given thee. Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God -- lest when thou have
eaten, and art full, and have built goodly houses, and dwelt therein; and when
thy herds and thy ^^ocks multiply, and thy silver and thy gold is multiplied,
and all that thou have is multiplied, then thine heart be lifted, and thou
forget the Lord thy God -- and thou say in thine heart, My power, and the might
of my hand has gotten me this wealth: But thou shall remember the Lord thy
God, for it is he that gives thee power to get wealth. So Deuteronomy. 6.10, etc. God
is in like manner cautioning (...) them thankfully to remember him, and to take
heed of self-ascribing: See Judge. 8.34. Psalm. 78.35. Romans 1.21. not thankfully
to acknowledge and ascribe unto God, is to forget him, not to remember him;
remembering him, implies thankful acknowledgement of, and ascribing to him. To
Remember God, is then to convert and turn unto him, Know and own him, To set
him up, delight, rest in, and trust and depend upon him, To serve and obey him,
Thankfully to acknowledge and ascribe unto him. This, and whatsoever else of
knowledge, acknowledgement, esteem, homage, love, delight, trust, dependence,
service, obedience, thankfulness, and ascribing, is due from the Creature to
the Creator, is implied and wrapped up in this, Remember thy Creator: We may say
of this, as the Apostle, Romans 13.8, 9. He that loves another, has fulfilled
the Law: for this, Thou shall not commit Adultery, Thou shall not Kill, Thou
shall not Steal, Thou shall not be ^ false Witness, Thou shall not Covet: and
if there be any other Commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying*
namely, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self: So, He that remembers God
fulfils the Law, discharges the duty of a Creature to his Creator: for this,
Thou shall know him, Thou shall own him, Thou shall love him, Thou shall trust
in him, Thou shall serve him, Thou shall ascribe unto him: or if there be any
other Commandment, if there be ought else that is matter of duty from man to
his Maker, it is briefly comprehended in this saying* namely, Remember thy
Creator. Now of the things which we have spoken, this is the sum; That to
remember God, is really, heartily, affectionately, practically to own and
agnize God for God, and to honor and glorify him as God; and this is to be
indeed godly, to be really religious, Religion being nothing else but a
Doctrine of remembering God, knowing and owning God. But so much what this
Remembering God is importing.

II. The second thing to be spoken to is, the Reasons and Grounds of our so
doing, which the very term of Creator is implying. It is not unusual in
Scripture for men bespeaking God in Prayer and Thanksgiving, to present God
under such suitable Notions, such Titles and Attributes, as may most fitly set
him forth as the Author and Bestower of the desired or obtained good, as you
may see Genesis 43.14. Jer. 14.8. Psalm. 28.1. and 144.1, 2. so God speak^ng to us,
and requiring duty from us, is clothed with such Considerations, presented
under such Notions and Titles as may carry with them the ground and reason of,
and motive to the duty called for, as in Isa. 8 13, 14. Jer. 5.22. and
elsewhere. So here, there is Reason, Ground, Motive enough, in the Notion and
Title of our Creator that God is set forth by, to put us upon the duty
required, the remembering of him: O come (say they, Psalm. 95 6.) let us worship
and bow down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker. And this is their Motive,
Psalm. 100.1, 2, 3. Make a joyful noise unto the Lord, all ye lands: serve the
Lord with gladness, and come before his presence with singing. Know ye that the
Lord he is God, it is he that has made us, and not we our selves; we are his
people, and the sheep of his pasture. At that day (says the Prophet, Isa.
17.7) a man shall look to his Maker, and his eyes shall have respect to the
Holy One of Israel. To whom should the Creature have a respect^ul eye, which
should he look, but to his Maker? whom should man remember, but his Creator?
But that we may more fully see this, we must know, that the term of Creator
here used, sets forth God as the Author of our Being out of nothing, so of all
our Being and well being, our bringing into Being, our continuance in Being,
our preserva^ion, our well-being; all the administrations of God about us as to
this, are wrapped up in his being set forth as our Creator; nor only so, but
consequently, the Right that he has in us, the Regiment and Dominion that he
has over us, and the Disposure that he has of us, are here included. These
things considered, Why we should Remember our Creator, is most evident, and the
Reason runs very strong. But to touch some things.

1. Because God being our Creator, the Author and Fountain of our Being, is the
End of our Being: the first Cause must needs be the last End; he that made all
of himself, made all for himself, Prove. 16 4. The Lord made all things for
himself: Romans 11.36. For of him, and through him, and to him are all things: Of
whom, and through whom are all things, to him are all things; he that primarily
made all things of himself, made all things ultimately for himself.

2. Because God is not only bringing us into, but continuing us in Being,
preserving, and administering to our well-being: we must all of us bespeak God
in Job's language, Job. 10.12. Thou have granted me life and favor, and thy
visitation has preserved my spirit, i. e. Being and well-being, and
continuation of both: He is styled, The preserver of men, Job 7.20. He holds
our soul in life, Psalm. 66.9. In him we live, and move, and have our being,
Acts 17.18. He maintains, and blows up the spark of his own kindling; He
gives to us life, and breath, and all things, ver. 25. of the same Chapter: It
is from his careful Providence, that is continually exercised about us, that
such frail needy creatures are supported and supplied, having a subsistence,
and a comfortable one. God is not like the Carpenter or Mason, that builds
the House, and then leaves it to it self, or the care of others, but he
keeps up what he sets up: we should quickly lose all, and sink into our
nothing again, did not the same hand that brought us out of nothing, keep us
where we are. And to whom then do we owe our service? whose are we? whom should
we remember? to whom should we be* but his, to him, from whom we have our
maintenance and preservation, who is not our Maker only, but our continual
Upholder, and most bountiful Benefacto^?

3. Because God being our Creator, is our Proprietor, Possessor, Owner, Lord,
Governor. As the Lord builds the house, and keeps it in repair, so he
holds it himself; as he built it for himself, so he continues to be the
Proprietor* Owner, Lord, Governor, Possessor of it; as he puts not man out
of his own hands in respect of preservation, so neither in respect of
possession and dominion, Isa. 43.1. But now thus says the Lord that created
thee, O Jacob, and that formed thee, O Israel -- thou art mine. To whom God
says, I have created, I have formed thee, he says also, Thou art mine It is
most probable indeed that the Prophet here speaks rather of spiritual then
natural formation, of Gods making them in Grace then in Nature, but the reason
holds the same and alike good in both; God is said to possess us upon a
Creating account* his forming is phrased his possessing of us, Psalm. 139.13.
Thou have possessed my reins, thou have covered me in my Mothers womb, so he
possesses us upon a Creation account: as he possesses us in making, so he
possesses us having made us. God then challenges us, and lays claim to us
in the most Absolute Right, for it is beyond us to imagine, nor indeed can
there be a more full and undoubted Right and Title, then Creation gives; he
being our Creator then, is in the most unquestionable Right our Possessor,
Proprietor, Lord, Owner, Disposer, and we are his possession, for his use, at
his dispose, bound thereunto in the highest and most unquestionable Right --
More might be added, from the knowledge God has of us, as being our Maker, and
intimately acquainted with us; He that made man, knows what is in man; he
that formed the heart sounds it, John 2.25. Psalm. 33.15. Heb. 4.13. Acts
15.18. Psalm. 139.1, and the following Verses: and from the power that he has
over us, being easily able to reach us, and punish us at pleasure, for all our
forgetfulness of him, and neglects of duty toward himself, the same hand that
made can break us, he that built can easily pull us down, 2 Kings 5 7. J^b 10
8. Psalm. 104.29, 30. but I may not further amplify these things. Let what has
been said suffice, as to the Grounds and Reasons of the Duty, which the term of
Creator is imply^ng.

III. The third and ^ast thing to be spoken to* for the clearing up of the
Doctrine is, Why the youngest may not put it off* but they are now to remember
their Creator, now in the days of their youth. We shall fetch the Reasons of
this also out of the Text it self, and they are (but to name them as it were)

1. Because young men now in the days of their youth* owe their Creator this
present debt of remembrance; this debt of duty and acknowledgement, is due from
man to his Maker, as (and as soon as) years of discretion render him capable of
it: This debt does not come to be due in Sickness, at Death, or in old Age, but
it grows upon us with our capacity, from our very Cradles, it is from first
to last Gods due, and our duty according to our capability, it is as well our
duty that we remember him in our youth, as in our age, it is as well his due,
that we remember him now as hereafter, every man is deeply obliged (as you may
see from the grounds before given) to remember his Creator, and young men will
find, if they examine them, that those reasons lie as hard upon them as the
gray headed* Is God the God of the Jews only? says the Apostle, is he not also
of the Gentiles? Yes, of the Gentiles also. Is God the Creator, Preserver,
Proprietor of the old man only? is he not also of the young man? yes, of the
young man also. Every man is indispensibly, presently bound, it is the young
man's now duty, ^t is Gods now due.

2. Because as it is young men's now duty, Gods now due, that they remember him,
so God calls for it now, it is Gods due from young men that they remember him
now in the days of their youth, and God gives not day for payment, he
requires it out of hand of the Youngest. Look through the Scriptures and you
will find (I may not stay to instance in particular) all the commands of God
respecting turning from sin and vanity, and the neglect of him, and turning to,
remembering and acknowledging of him, to lie upon you in the present tense, as
what is to be now, instantly, presently, and without delay attended.

3. As it is young men's now duty, Gods now due, that they remember him, and God
now calls for his due, so now is the fittest time of payment. It is Gods now
due, and God requires it now, and such may best do it, and discharge it now,
in the days of youth* there is no such season as this now, these days of
youth are affording; this reason you have expressed in the text, and prosecuted
in the following verses, Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth,
while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I
have no pleasure in them, etc. I do but merely touch these things here, because
as time will g^ve leave, we shall have occasion to improve them further in the
Applica^ion of the Doctrine, which we now come to. And the Uses we shall make
of it are only these two, (1.) For Conviction and Reprehension. (2) For
Exhortation.

Use I. is for Conviction and Reprehension of men's forgetting God, men's
forgetfulness of God. Is it every man's duty, every young man's duty (as you have
heard) now in the days of his youth to remember his Creator? How is it God is
so forgotten as he is? Men forget him in their youth, and remember him not in
their Age; of young and old it may be complained as of Israel, Hos. 8.14.
Israel has forgotten his Maker. The charge, Ezekiel. 23.35. Thou have forgotten
me, and cast me behind thy back, may be sadly applied to persons of every
esta^e and condition. God for the most part is fo^gotten, he is thrown by in
the world, by all sorts and ranks of men; the Vanities of the world t^ke up the
minds of the younger sort, and the Cares of it drink up the spirits of the
elder. When shall we be merry? say young men; and how shall we be rich? say old
men: but none says, Where is G^d my Maker? as it is complained, Job 30 10 If
men may but have their Profi^s, and the^r Pleasures, and the world go well with
them, God may go there he will, for any (...) that they regard him. Whosoever looks
upon the present Generation amongst our selves, and here, and there, and
everywhere, and sees how little God is minded by men that are well and warm in
the world, will find reason to revive that old complaint, Hos. 13.6. According
to their pasture* so were they filled; they were filled, and their heart was
exalted: therefore have they forgotten me. In Sickness perhaps, at the gates of
Death, under some sore Affliction, it may be said of them, as of those Psalm.
78.34, 35. When he slew them, then they sought him, and they returned and
enquired early after God: and they remembered that God was their Rock, and the
high God their Redeemer. But take men in their ruff and jollity, and pride, and
plenty, and self-sufficiency, and most true is that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 10
4. The wicked through the pride of his countenance will not seek after God; God
is not in all his thoughts. A day of Sickness, of distress, of want, may bring
them to some remembrance of God; but let them shake off their fears and
sorrows, recover their health, repossess a full estate, and how soon are they
in their tune, Jer. 2.31. We are lords, we will come no more unto thee? O sad
world! O sad world! how do men having the world, live without God in the world?
live on Earth, as if there were no God in Heaven, either in regard of any need
they have of him, or duty that they owe him. O how much is God forgotten in the
world! how little is he remembered amongst men! and that man should not
remember, but forget his Maker, what strange impiety, what provoking sin is it!
One would think that whatsoever men forget, or were unmindful about, it should
be rather of any thing, rather of every thing, then his Creator, the God that
made him, the God that is (as you have heard) the Author and End of his Being,
that is his Upholder, Preserver, and gracious visitant every moment; that is
his Proprietor, Owner, Possessor, Lord, Governor, that challenges him in the
most Absolute and unquestionable Right; that is thoroughly acquainted with him,
and as thoroughly able to reach and punish him for all his neglects of duty
toward himself: yet alas, what does many a man less remember, more forget then
his Maker? At that day (says the Prophet in the place beforementioned, Isa.
17.7) shall a man look to his Maker, and his eyes shall have respect to the
holy One of Israel: but at this day the contrary in sad experience is to be
seen, and said of most men, They look not to their Maker, and their eyes have
no respect to the holy One of Israel. Oh how little Godward, their Maker-ward,
do most men look? how little respect have they for him? they have enough, and
more then enough for the Creature, but they have little or none for the
Creator. Alas, how do men gad up and down the world, setting their eyes upon
things that are not, scrabling here as if the dust of the earth would not
suffice for every man a handful, but thought-less of God, and forgetting their
resting place? Oh! to look with an awakened understanding upon rational
Creatures, men of Gods own making, and made for, and made able and meet for
this end and purpose, to remember, know, acknowledge, own him their Creator,
and then consider how little they do it, how mindless, regardless, forgetful of
God they are, How astonishing is it, and yet alas how common! O it is a strange
sinful doleful world, wherein it is so rare to find a man seriously mindful of
his Maker: Alas Sirs, men mindless of God, are mindless too what it is to be
mindless of him; but to an enlightened, to an awakened mind, what does a
sinful, thoughtless, God fo^getting world like, but a mere Bedlam --

But in the further prosecuting, and more distinct handling of this Use, we
shall attend these two things: (1) We shall show you what this sin is. (2) What
a sin it is. We shall first show you what this sin is, setting it before you
(...) the Evidence of it, that the guilty may know they are guilty. And then
nextly we shall set it before you in the Aggravations of it, that the known
guilty may know how guilty they are.

I. Our first work then is, to set before you this sin in the Evidence of it,
to show you what this sin is, thereby endeavoring to convince men of it (what,
how fearful a sin it is for man to forget his Maker, for the creature not to
remember his Creator, we have next to show you) The present enquiry is, Whether
you are not guilty? Whether you are not of the number of those that so do? And
here for a more full discovery, and the bringing home the guiltiness of
God-forgetting sinners to themselves, with greater Evidence and more full
Conv^ction, We will say something (1) As to the Matter of it: (2.) As to the
Manner of it: and in both endeavor to make it undeniably apparent to the
guilty, that they forget God.

First; As to the M^^ter of it. Forgetfulness of God is threefold:

1. A forgetting that there is a God; not that the being of God is wholly rased
out of the minds of men, and utterly lost as to any rememb^ance of him, but a
mindlesness, thoughtlesness of him, as we are said to forget that which we do
not think of, that which we do not mind, and they may well be said to forget
God that mind him not, that think not of him, that are not frequ^ntly think^ng
of* (...) Being of a God to themselves: and how many (...) thus forgetting God,
of whom it may be said as (...), Psalm. 10.4. God is not in all his thoughts.
There is here (...) the world, that denies the Being of a God, but there are
too many that do not deny, yet forget that there is a God, that think slightly
and seldomely of him. Oh! men's minds are strangers to the serious thoughts, to
the real and awakened apprehensions that there is a God. And to think of God,
of the Being of a God slightly, seldomely, now and then by the by, is to forget
him. O Sirs, do you not desperately forget your Creator? may you not be called
and construed (and that truly) Forgetters of God, when the reality, the
indeedness, awfulness of his Being, is the least thing thought of or minded?
when the Creature swallows all, the Creator has not one thought of a hundred,
a thousand it may be.

2. A forgetting who, and what manner of God he is. As they may truly be said
to forget God, that remember not that God is, so they that remember not, that
forget who and what manner of God he is, this (as well it may) is called and
accounted a forgetting God, as you may see Psalm. 50 21, 22 Verses compared;
These things have thou done, and I kept silence; thou thoughtest that I was
altogether such a one as thy self: but I will reprove thee, and set them in
order before thine eyes. Now consider this ye that forget God. And how thus
forgetful of God are men, they think but slightly, but too seldomely, that
there is a God, but they are much more thoughtless, who and what manner of God
he is; men much forget that God is, but much more who and what God he is. The
Being of a God as slightly passes the minds of most men, as his Name does
their mouths; but to the serious thoughts, the indeed remembrance of who and
what manner of one he is, they are altogether strangers; the serious thoughts,
the heart-aff^cting remembrance of his Greatness, Power, Glory, Holiness,
Goodness, Mercy, Loving kindness, of his Omnipresence, Omniscience,
Omnipotency, Justice, Dreadfulness, is not with men. The No^^on of a God, That
there is a God, may pass men's thoughts sometimes, but O it is a God of Clouts,
in comparison of what God is that possesses the minds of the most men.
Consider now then, do thou not thus forget God? some slight thoughts that
there is a God, it may be sometimes come across thee, but the serious thoughts
who and what he is, the great and dreadful God, and thy Maker, do not possess
and abide with thee, and will thou call this to Remember God? it is to forget
him, thou do not remember, thou forgettest him, nay thou fo^gettest him while
thou rememberest him, not remembering him as he is, and who and what manner of
God he is, in thy remembering of (...).

3. A forgetting what God requires, our duty toward him, and the due
acknowledgement which we owe him. Man then forgets his God, when he does not
remember to discharge the duty of a creature to his Creator, when he does not
convert, turn to, set up, glorify and acknowledge, love, fear, serve, obey,
trust in, depend upon, and ascribe unto his God, the neglect of any of this, or
ought else (not to (...) upon particulars) that is matter of duty from man to
his Maker (all (...) the remembering God implies, as we have before told you in
the Explica^ion of the D^ct^i^e) is ^o forget him. Every impenitent unconverted
sinner, that is no truly and unfeignedly turning unto God, is forgetting of
him. Every hypocritical Professor, that has a form of godliness, (...) the
power of it, that says, Lord, Lord, but does not own the Lord for God, nor set
him up as God, delighting, resting in him, relying, depending upon him, ^s
fo^ge^ting of him. Every ungodly liver, that cries it may be with I^ra^l, My
God, I know thee, but casts off the thing that is good; that profess^th to
own God, but shakes off the yoke of ob^dience, gives him not that p^actical
acknowledgement of service and subjection, is forgetting of him. Every
unthankful wretch, that is not acknowledging and ascribing unto God as his
great Benefactor, but (while his ^ips (it may be) complement God in his formal
prayers with a Lord I thank thee) Sacrifices to his net, and says in his
heart, My power, and the might of my hand has gotten me this wealth, is
forgetting of him. To conc^ude, every one that is not owning God as God, the
Lord for God, his Maker for his God, and Lord, and Governor, not profess^dly
only, but really, affectionately, practically so acknowledging of him, is
forgetting of him. And now Sirs, I beseech you to look into your own hearts and
lives, is this to forget God? do not you forget him? Be not deceived, God is
not mocked; there are too many such as the Prophet speaks of, Jer. 12 2. Thou
art ^^ar in their mouths, and far from their reins: O there are many that have
God in their mou^hes, that are casting the remembrance of him out of their
hearts and lives, as undoub^edly all do, who know God, but glorify him not as
God, as verily all do that honor God with their lips, but set up, esteem, set
by, and serve the creature more then the Creator, as certainly all do, who with
their mouths show much love, and yet indeed are lovers of pleasures more th^n
lovers of God, as without all contradiction all such do, as profess to know
God, but in works (...) him, being abominable, disob^dient, and to every good
work (...). Surely, if all must go for forgetters of God, (as undoub^edly all
(...), the^r profession to the contrary notwithstanding) that forget what God
r^quires, that pract^cally disacknowledge and disown ^im, the number of those
that remember him will be found very small. Men much forget that there is a
God, are little in serious thinking, and realizing his B^ing to themselves; men
more forget who and what manner of God he is, are les^ in drinking in,
digesting, and applying to themse^v^s the consideration of it, their minds are
not possessed, seized, seasoned with it, but m^n most forget what God requires,
are least of all in the real practical remembrance of him, as is lamen^ably
evident in the lives of men* and if the case stand thus, O consider every o^e,
Art thou one of that small number (a small number they are) that do indeed
remember God? is thine one of those few Names, or art thou not adding one sad
careless sinner more, to the mult^tude of those that forget him -- But

Secondly, As to the manner of it: there is also a threefold forgetting, or not
rememb^i^g God.

1. A forgetfulness arising from the weakness of our Natural abilities, (not as
natural mee^ly, bu^ as en^^ebl^d by the corruption of Nature which is in all)
when though we are careful, yet we cannot remember God, such a forgetfulness
there is even in the best of Gods own, such as most remember him they do not
think of him, acknowledge him, glorify* serve* obey, ascribe unto him* as they
should and as they would, it is of weakness, it is afflict^^g* it is what they
bear as their burden, that they no more seriously remember that God is, what
manner of God he is, those suitable acknowledg^ments that they owe him, that
they no more remember to know him, no more remember to love him, no more
remember to desire him, no more remember to delight in him, to depend upon, to
live to, to walk with him; that God is no more in all their thoughts, no more
always before their eyes, no more in their affections, no more actually,
practically remembered by them in the whole frame of their conversations, in the
whole course of their lives: they can truly say, The spirit is willing, but the
flesh is weak; that to will is present, though how to perform they find not;
they would, they are careful, take pains, strive, labor, pray, but alas they
cannot remember him as they would. This, thoug^ it be such a forgetting God as
we have cause to groan under, and say of it as the Psalmist, This is my
infirmity, yet such though they forget God more then they would* more then they
should, yet do they remember him, and are said upon the account of g^acious
accepta^ion of what they do and desire to do, to remember him. But there are
two other sorts of forgetting God, which who so do, may be truly and with a
w^tn^ss said to forget him: and they are (1.) A careless forg^tfulness of God.
(2) A careful, a studied and affected forgetfulness of God.

1. A careless forgetfulness of God when men are careless, take no heed to
remember him, but lightly, slightly pass over the rememb^ing God as a matter
not to be minded; and alas, how common is this? how many are there that cannot
here wash their hands, but have a Conscience within telling them, that it is
not of weakness because they cannot remember God no more, but of (...)
carelesn^ss that they take no heed to remember, that they do so much forget
him. O is not this the true, but sad case of many of you, that you can bring
forth and bend your abilities upon other a^counts, you can take pains to mind
the Creature, the World, your busi^ess, your occasions, your pleasures, your
vanities, but the remembering God easily slips from you as a sl^ghted thing, men
have memory for any thing, every trifle and gewgaw can be thought upon, but God
is forgotten from men's mere slightness and mindlesness of remembering him. May
not God bespeak many of you (of the younger sort more especially) as he does
his people, Jer. 2 32. Can a maid forget her ornaments, or a bride her attire?
yet my people have forg^tten me days without number. Can a maid forget her
ornaments, or a (...) her attire? no, she will not easily forget these; yet my
people have forgotten me days without number: q* d. A maid will much more set
by her rich Apparel, then my people do my me; or, I am not so much to them as
fine clothes, or their vanity, their bravery, their ornaments, their attire,
these are things thought upon, these stick in their minds, they want no memory
for these, they think and think of these, but I am lightly and long forgotten.
O Sirs, is not this true of some of you? let Conscience speak, your own hearts
be judge between you and the Searcher of hearts, whether a fashionable Suit, a
gay Coat has not been more to you then God? whether you have not more given
your minds, devoted your selves: to your Toys and Trinkets, and unnecessary
Curiosities, then your Maker? Must not many a Young man, many a Maid in this
Assembly say, if they will speak truth, I never gave my mind so to think of
God, or have ever been so thoughtful about remembering my Creator, as about my
new Clothes, my Hoods and Scarfs, and superfluous Bravery; these I have been
giving my mind to, but I have been merely careless, and taken no heed to
remember that God that made me: and sure such may be said to forget God, who
prefer every vanity in their hearts and thoughts before him, who mind not to
be mindful of him, who have minds for other things, but none for God, the
remembering him is merely slighted, let pass, let slip, as a matter of no
moment, of no worth, weight or concernment.

2. There is as a careless, so a careful, a studied and affected forgetfulness
of God, which you would do well to think whether you are not also guilty of:
you take not pains, do not give your minds to remember God, nay do not you
take some Pains, give your minds to forget him? have you not been shifting
off, and out of (...) the thoughts of God, that he is, what manner of God he
is, what he require, the duty that is (...) and that acknowledg^ment that
b^longs to him from you, when God in Ordinances ha^h been c^ming in upon your
Spirits, minding you of himself, and your duty to (...)* or when in solemn and
awakening Providence^* (...) been drawing near you with the remembrance of his
being (...), the God in whose hands your breath is, and whose are all your
w^yes, and whom you ought to glorify, have you not been as it were saying to
him, D^part from us, we desire not the rem^mbrance of thee, nor of our duty
toward thee. In a word, as it is said of those, Romans 1.28. that they did not
l^ke to retain God in their knowledge, may it not be said of you, You do not
like to remember God, to retain the remembrance of him. It is said of the
wicked, Psalm. 10 4. God is not in all his thoughts; or as your margent has it,
All his thoughts are there is no God (i. e. as some carry the sense of it) he
puts God out of his thoughts all he may, he does not like to retain God in his
thoughts, in his remembrance; Art thou such a one that do not like to retain
God in thy knowledge, the remembrance of him that he is, who and what manner of
one he is, what he requires, thy duty toward him, but art suppressing and
shifting off such unwelcome thoughts? take it home to thee, thou art not only a
careless, but a wilful, careful forgetter of God. It is a very lamentable
thing to see men take no thought to remember God, but slightly pass it over as
a thing not to be minded; but, O how unexpressibly dreadful is not only the
careless* but the careful, studied, affected forgetfulness of God, when men
not carelessly only, but carefully cast off the remembrance of their Maker. But
of this we have next to speak -- Having thus set before you this sin in the
Evidence of it, what this sin is, that the guilty may know they are guilty, I
proceed,

2. To set it before you in the Aggravations of it, what a sin it is, that the
known guilty may know how guilty they are. Certainly forgetfulness of God,
howsoever it may seem no great matter, and the commonness of it may cause men
to be the less affected with it, has more in it then slight inconsiderate
spirits are aware of. There is a strange kind of proneness in men to imagine,
if they are not given over to an excess of riot; if they are not given up to
these and those sins, which the world calls Scandalous, that their estates are
good, or at least tolerable, though they never seriously apply themselves to
remember God their Creator, but forget practically, disown and disacknowledge
him all their days. Thou art pleasing and flattering thy self, it may be, I am
not as many other men, I live in no gross sin, I am no Adulterer, Fornicator,
Drunkard, Thief, unjust (...), is it a light thing* must it now go for no (...)
sin for the c^eature to forget his Cre^tor, for man to disown, d^sacknowledge
h^s M^ker? (...) thou indeed think this is no great matter? and that seei^g
(...) art no Adulterer* Drunkard, etc. no gross sinner (as thou art pleased to
call i^) God may easily overlook and put it up that thou art forgetting,
sl^ghti^g, disacknowledging, disowning him all along. Bethink thy self, man, is
it indeed nothing or next to nothing, a small matter with thee, to love and
serve the creature more then the Creator, to remember too much every vanity,
and forget the God that made thee? O that men were sensible, that they did but
know how dreadful and provoking a thing this is, and of how dangerous
consequence unto themselves! We shall say something (though we must be brief in
either) both of the greatness, and of the danger of it.

First, The greatness of the sin of forgetting God, may appear:

1. From the deep obligation that lies upon you to remember him as he is your
Creator. Look back upon what has been said before, and consider what
obligation Gods being your Maker lays upon you to remember him; you are wholly
God's in all that you are and have from first to last; you are, and have
nothing, but what you are and have from him and for him. To forget,
disacknowledge him therefore (being every way as deeply bound as is possible or
imaginable) must needs be a great wickedness, a transcendent evil. O Sirs, do
but seriously consider how much you are indebted unto God for all things, and
all along from your first Being until this now, and sure it will appear a
strange, horrible, unreasonable, unthankful, vile, inexcusable thing, to forget
and disacknowledge him. O think, I beseech you, how can it but be a sin of the
first Magnitude to forget, disown God, who has not only done so much upon a
Creation account, but is doing so much every day upon a Providential account,
to make himself remembered by you? sure there can be no room to think it a light
thing to forget and disacknowledge God, while his daily, hou^^, visitations,
and gracious remembrances of you, have any room in your thoughts: What, forget
him that visits you every morning, and minds you every moment! We have the
Psalmist in a rapture of holy admiration, Psalm. 8.4. What is man, that thou art
mindful of him? or the son of man, that thou visitest him? That God should be
mindful of man, so remember, visit him, what a wonder is it? That man should be
mindless of God, forget, disown him, what a wonder is it? That God should be
thoughtful of and about us, is a wonder of mercy and condescension; that we
should be thoughtless and unmindful of God, is a wonder of unreasonable and
unthankfulness, for the friend to forget his friend, any poor indigent creature
his most liberal Benefactor, for the Child to forget and disacknowledge his
Father that begat him, the Mother that brought him forth, the Parents that
nourished and brought him up, is nothing to this, for the creature to fo^get
his Maker. The bodies that you bear about you, all your bones, all the mercies
you receive, all the creatures you enjoy and behold, are your d^^y
remembrancers of God. O that you would think your lives are filled up with
mercies, you are daily laden with benefits, and there is not one blessing which
any of you have, but it has from God this written upon it, Remember me. When
God puts Bread into thy hands, he says, Here, eat and remember me; when he
fills thy Cup, he bids, Remember me; when he puts Clothes upon thy back, he
says, Remember me: God gives thee all, and he gives thee all to lead thee to
himself, the remembrance and acknowledgement of himself. And, O man, is it
nothing for all this to forget and disown God, to whom thou art so obliged and
indebted? That God that has as it were studied so many ways to fasten himself
in thy remembrance, can thou make a light matter of it, or how can thou
look upon it otherwise then an intolerable inexcusable evil, to sin against
such merciful multiplied, and obliged remembrances of him? How can thou but
say, How shall I do this great wickedness, and sin against God? O how will thou
ever be able to hold up thy head, that God that thus deeply and dearly deserved
to be remembered by thee, shall question thee for thy forgetfulness of him? will thou then be able think thou, to make as light a matter of it as thou now
do, when he himself shall reason out the case with thee, when he shall say,
Did I indeed make and maintain thee? did I house, and lodge, and feed, and
clothe, and deliver thee? did I visit thee every morning, and take care of thee
every moment, and all to forget me? Sinner, God forgetting sinner, can thy
heart endure, or can thy hands be strong in the day that God shall thus deal
with thee? Now consider this ye that forget God, lest be tear you in pieces,
and there be none to deliver.

2. (I see I must but name things) This forgetting God must needs be no light
sin, nor a little provoking, having in it, carrying with it, arguing, and too
evidently holding forth much contempt, a low and light esteem of him. That
which a man esteems he keeps in memory, he treasures it up there, is mindful,
thoughtful of and about it: remembrance and esteem run together, as you may see
in that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 137.5.6. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my
right hand forget her cunning; if I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave
to the roof of my mouth: why, whence was this? you may see in the next words,
If I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy. But to forget argues a light
esteem, Jer. 30 14 All thy lovers have forg^tten thee, they seek thee not: q.
d. Time was they do^ed upon th^e, but now they care not for thee, they come not
at thee: a man's mindfulness of any person or thing, thoughtfulness about it,
argues it to b^ of some account with him; but when a man forgets a thing*
especially when he carelessly, purposely, wilfully forgets it, it evidently
shows that he sl^ghts and contemns it: To forget God then is highly to contemn
him, mainte^^ly to despise him; and is it a light thing to let light by God? is
it a contemptible matter, to contemn him? O man, who is God thy Maker, thy
Creator, that he should be thus sl^ghted and contemned by thee* as if he were
not to be regarded, not worth the minding? and who art thou, his own Creature,
made by him, and made to g^o^ifie him, that thou should thus contemn him? O
that thou would but think what it is for a little piece of breathing
creeping Clay, formed and molded, and animated and quickened, and kept alive by
God himself, to do him such indignity, and cast such contempt upon him as to
forget him -- But

3. Consider, this cannot but be a great and provoking sin, not only from the
contempt it calls upon God, but also from the extreme unreasonable wrong and
injury that is thereby done unto him. God made all things for himself, is the
Owner, Proprietor of them, and in the highest and most unquestionable Right is
challenging them for himself, his own glory, and what more unreasonable then to
deny it him? what more injurious then to frustrate his end as much as lies in
you? The whole Creation, all ^he rest of the inferior Creatures, have a
mediate reference unto the glory of God by and through man; man by forgetting
God breaks the last link of the Chain, and unloosens the whole frame. It is you
Sirs, you that forget and disacknowledge God, that stand between him and his
glory and service which he should have, as from your selves, so from all the
rest of the works of his hands; when the motion of the Creature God-wards, Gods
glory-ward, comes to you, you stop it, divert it, give check to it. I beseech
you Sirs seriously think, what does that man do, and what does that man
des^^ve, that does what in him lies to destroy and undo all that God has done,
to render the World useless, and this glorious Frame of Beings good for just
nothing. Art thou a forgette^ of God? thou art the man that art doing what in
thee lies to be frustrating God of his end, and abridging him of his glory in
all.

4 ^he greatness of this sin further appears, in that it is not only a
contemning, vilifying, injuring, robbing God, but it is a kind of nullifying
and (...) of him, a mak^ng him no God, so far forth as any forget and disown
God, so far forth they un Be, (...), un-God him to themselves, which is as far
as they can go to un Be, to un-God him in himself, from whom, in whom all live,
and move, and h^ve their being, is a high imp^ssibi^ity, infinitely beyond all
c^eated power which he himself has made: it is not the fools saying in his
heart, There is no God, and in his life, There shall be none, will make none;
the Athei^t cannot think him out of Being, but men go as far as they can this
way, while they forget and disacknowledge him, making him no God unto
themselves: you cannot dethrone him from his glory, or disp^ss^ss him (...) his
Eternal Power and Godhead, but you may, yea such as forget and disacknowledge
God, do nullify and un-God him to themselves, say he shall be no God to them,
which is as much as they can do, men can bid no higher, reach no further, then
by forgetting him to say, There is no God, and by disacknowledging him to say,
He shall be no God to us. Thou that forgettest God, think of this, the heart of
God thou can not reach, thy arm is too short to take his Crown from his Head*
but, O Traitor, Rebel, unthankful wretch as thou art, thou art doing what thou
can do un-God God, un-Be thy Maker, to nullify him who has granted thee
life and favor, and whose visitations sustain thy spirit. Thus do thou
requite the Lord who is thy Father, (thy Creator) who has made thee and
established thee. But

5. The greatness of this sin is yet more evident, in that it is a Mother-sin,
the Root and Cause, and Fountain and Original of all other sins. In this all
sins are virtually, eminently, radically contained, the forgetting God (as we
have before described it, forgetting that there is a God, who and what manner
of God he is, what he requires, the duty and acknowledgement that we owe him)
is product^ve of any, of every sin. From hence are those multiplied
wickednesses and enormities that the live^ of men are full of. See what is
said, Psalm. 50 18, 19, 20. When thou saw a Thief, then thou consentedst to
him, and have been partakers with the Adult^rers: thou gave thy mouth to
evil, and thy tongue frames deceit* thou fittest and speak against thy
brother, and slanderest thine own Mothers son What is the reason of this? why,
as it follows in the next words, These things have thou done and I kept
silence, thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy self. O did
not men forget that God is, as to any serious thoughts of his Being; so, who
and what God is, and what duty and acknowledgement they owe him, men would not,
durst no Whore, and Steal, and Slander, and Lie, etc. We have (not to stand
upon i^) the Scripture frequently giving in this as the reason of the vileness,
unreasonabless of men, their forgeting, their not remembering God, Psalm. 14 ^.
Ezekiel. 22.12. Hos. 8.14. Psalm. 54.31, etc. The fear of the (...) (as the
Wiseman speaks, Prove. 6.10.) is the beginning of wi^^ome, the knowledge, fear,
the remembrance and acknowledgement of God, is the fountain and wellhead of
Piety and Religion, the beginning and maintainer of all holiness and honesty of
heart and life, and it is forgetfulnes^ of God that is the root of all
profaneness, dishonesty, wickedness. Men are prone to flatter themselves (as was
before intimated) that they are not gross sinners, and men are apt to promise
themselves that they will not be such, though they do not apply themselves to
the indeed remembering God, but believe it, Sirs, that man does not know whither
he shall be left, o^ what wickedness he shall be given up to, (whatsoever he
may hope, or think, or persuade himself) that sets not himself to the indeed
remembering and acknowledging God; alas, how many such have been sadly left*
that as little thought it by themselves as any of you can do, who had they been
foretold what they should be and do, would have answered with Hazael, Am I a
(...)* that I should do such great things? flatter not thy self man, If thou will not remember God indeed, be thoroughly godly be ^^od in good earnest, thou
can not tell how bad, how v^^e and wicked thou shall be.

6. And lastly, there is yet this more, manifesting the exceeding greatness of
this sin, that it is against the light and law of nature it self. Such as
forget and disacknowledge God sin against their very Reason it self, against
their certain knowledge, against the clearest light, and strongest conviction
of a natural Conscience. That there is a God that made us, and we ought to
remember him, that there is of duty and acknowledgement due to him, is a truth
generally, deeply, and in ^ibly engraven upon the hearts of all: whosoever he
be therefore, whosoever thou art that forgettest and disacknowledgest God, thou
art convicted by thy own Conscience, thou art condemned by thine own heart,
thou art going against the shining light and strongest evidences of thy own
reason, and (...) God shall Judge thee according to the Law of the remembrance
of him written in thy heart, thy sin will be found to be so much the more
(...)* hateful, inexcusable, by how much thou have gone against the very (...)
of Nature, thy own certain knowledge, and reason it self. (...) much of the
greatness of this sin.

Secondly, A few words of the danger of it. Possibly some that (...) little or
nothing aff^ct^d with the greatness of this sin in it self, may (...) somewhat
awakened with the consideration of the (...). Consider then

1. The forgetting and disowning God will (...) him to forget and disown you. 2 Chronicles 15.2. The Lord is with y^u (...) with him, and (...) ye seek him he will
be found of you, but if ye (...), he will forsake you. Remember God, and he
will remember you; own him, and he will own you: but di^acknowledge him, and he
will disacknowledge you. Relations are mutual, and the due of Relates each to
other, is reciprocal; if thou do not remember and own him as thy Creator, he
will not remember and own thee as his Creature, and what can be worse then
this? S^e what God threatens, Jer. 23.39. Behold, I even I will utterly forget
y^u, and I will forsake you: and it is spoken of, as you may see by the
Contex^, as the ^^rest doom, the heaviest burden that can be laid upon the
back o^ a poor creature. Forge^ God, and it will come to that which the Prophet
speaks of, Isa. 27.11. He that made them will have no mercy on them, and he
that formed them will show* them no favor. It is an Argument much made use of
in Scripture, moving the Lord to remember us in mercy, moving him to compassion
toward us, to tell him that we are his creatures, that he is our Maker, and we
are the work of his hands, Job 10.3 9. Psalm. 118 8. Isa. 64.8. but not to own
him as such, invalidates this Argument, such forfeit the favor and merciful
regard of the God that made them: and if this be the doleful condition of such
as do not remember him, that he that made them will not have mercy on them, and
he that formed them will show them no favor, it is high time for every one to
look about him. A day may come man (do not thou think so?) when thou will be
glad to plead the Privilege of a poor Creature with the God that made thee,
but will not God stop thy mouth with thy not remembering thy Creator? Do thou
not know (or do thou think thou shall never know) what it is in a day of
extremity to have no where else to fly, but to the mercy of the God that made
thee, to the favor and pity of the God that formed thee, and to have this way
blockt, to have God shake thee off, and forget and disown thee (as thou have
done him) as to showing thee any favor? Think thou the time will never be
(as little as thou carest for, or stand in need of God now) when thou shall
know thou stand in as much need of God, as he does of thee? thou stand in
as much need of his merciful remembrance, his beneficence, as he of thy dutiful
remembrance and obedience.

2. Consider, the not remembering, the forgetting God will provoke him to blow
upon, and blast you in all your Enterpri^es, rendering them fruitless and
unsuccessful, rendering them vain and empty and vexatious: it is Gods (...) and
presence that is the happiness o^ every condition, that sweetens all our
^^^^yments, and succeeds all our undertakings* and it is the absence of God,
his disfavour, that makes all but a mere he^p or vanity and vexation, and such
as forget God (though the world smile upon them for the present) shall at la^^
^inde this so to their sorrow, Isa. 17.10.11. Because thou have forgotten the
God of thy salvation, and have not been mindful of the Rock of thy strength,
therefore shall thou plant pleasant plants, and shall set it with strange
slips: In the day shall thou make thy plant to grow, and in the morning shall
thou make thy seed to flourish; but the harvest shall be a heap in the day of
grief, and of desperate sorrow. The plain meaning of it is, that howsoever
those that forget God pursue the world, may go smoothly on for a while, yet
vexatious disappointment will be the issue, a ruinous heap, irrepairable
frustration, causing grief and desperate sorrow, shall be the harvest which the
flourishing see^^^ time of all their cunning, careful, painful, pleasing,
promising proj^cts shall afford them. You may see how the awhile flourishing,
but af^er-withering estate of such as forget God is described, Job 8.11, etc.
and frequently elsewhere in Scripture. I beseech you think of it, for a time you
may thrive without God in the world, the more you forget him, the more you may
prosper, and the more you prosper the more you may forget him, as too many
times men do; they feel the world a com^ng, and cool apace Godward; the world
grows upon them, and God grows more and more out of remembrance with them:
think, I say, whatsoever your present flourishing estate may promise you, the
harvest will be a heap in the day of grief* and desperate sorrow.

3. Consider, the forgetting God will provoke him to bring upon you Spiritual
Judgments, to give you up to blindness of mind, hardness of heart, to
infatuate and beso^ you, leave you to a ^eared Conscience, and a senslesness in
sinning. You have, Psalm. 81. God calling upon Israel (while he g^aciously
remembers them of himself) to be owning and acknowledging of him, but they will
not; and what comes of it? ver. 11. So I gave them up to their own hearts
lusts, and they walked in their own counsels. You may read (and tremble to
read) what is said of them, Romans 1. that when they knew God, did not glorify
him as God, that did not like to retain God in their knowledge; that for this
cause God gave them up to vile affection, to a reprobate mind, to be filled
with all unrighteousness, to all excess of, and besottedness in sinning. A hard
heart, a reprobate mind, a s^ared Conscience, a being past feeling, a
committing sin with greediness, are the s^d effects of not remembering, of
forgetting and disacknowledging God. And Oh that those of the younger sort
would think of this, that (...) of mind, that hardness of heart, that
spiritual stupor and benumm^dness of Conscience, that greediness in sinning,
that excess of riot, which many run unto, and which grows upon them with their
years, are the sad and vindictive effects of their not remembering and turning
to the Lord in their younger time.

4. And lastly Consider, God will find a time to remember such as forget him,
he will find a time to be remembered (and sadly remembered too) by such as most
slight him, God will have his glory, his acknowledgement, he will fetch it out
of those that forget and disacknowledge him upon earth, in Hell, Psalm. 61 17.
The wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the nations that forget God; then
and there God will be righted, he will come ever with thee for all thy neglect,
contempt, forgetfulness of him, and casting him behind thy back, Prove. 16.4.
The Lord has made all things for himself; yea even the wicked for the day of
evil; q d. God will not lose his labor in making them neither, he will have
his honor out of them too, in their perdition and destruction; as God says of
Zidon, Ezekiel 28.22. that he will be known, glorified, sanctified in her, in the
executing of Judgments: so if now thou will not voluntarily remember,
acknowledge, glorify him, a day is coming when God will make thee remember,
acknowledge him, serve to his glory (though little to thy benefit or comfort)
whether thou will or no. Lay these things together then, and think, that as in
nothing you so much remember your selves, your own concerments, as in
remembering God, so in nothing you so much forget your selves, your own good,
as in forgetting and disacknowledging him. -- I have been longer upon this Use
then I intended, and must necessarily be more contracted in what remains.

Use II. is for Exhortation, and earnest persuasion unto all and every one to
remember his Creator, and do it now, Remember now thy Creator, etc. doubtless
it is a duty incumbent upon all, and of every age, to be now attended by them;
the notion of a Creator challenges this at every man's hand, and that presently
and out of hand, be they young or be they old, have they more or have they less
neglected it, it abides the now duty of every one: it is the sin of such that
have forgotten God in their youth, but it is their duty to remember him in
their age; have thou forgotten God so long or so long? it lies upon thee now to
remember him. Somewhat would have been spoken more generally unto all (but time
scanting upon us) we shall especially urge the Exhortation upon such as are the
persons to whom the Text is directing it. And I beseech you, my Brethren of the
Rising Generation* Suffer the word of Exhortation which speaks to you, and to
every one of you in particular, Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy
youth. It is not said, Remember now your Creator, or let all men remember now
their Creator, but Remember now thy Creator: that none may put it off to the
general, God puts it home to each one in particular. To thee young man it is
spoken, and to thee young woman; to thee John, and to thee Thomas, to thee
Mary, and to thee Sarah, the Exhortation as much, as particularly concerns
thee, as if thy Name were written in the Text: and, Oh that I might be a poor
Instrument in the hand of God, to bring home this word to thy heart! Oh that I
might be thy effectual Remembrancer upon the account! Oh that I might persuade,
prevalently persuade thee, now in the days of thy youth to remember thy
Creator! Oh that now man, now in the days of thy youth, while it is yet
morning with thee, thou would take time at advantage, and improve this
present, precious, peerless season, which will be but for a little while, in
the serious applying thy self hereunto, and minding the God, and thy duty
toward the God that made thee, now while the evil days come not. Remember and
turn unto him now, set up, and acknowledge, and love, and fear, and serve him
now: Do not think there is no such haste, if any man may put it off for a while
I may, there can be no great danger or damage in deferring it a little: There
is such haste, no man may put it off, no not a while, neither may thou, the
danger, the damage of deferring but a little, a week, a day, may be thy eternal
undoing. O do not think it is duty indeed to remember God, it is matter of
importance, it is what must be done, I will do it, I will do it more, I will be
more serious in it hereafter; but look upon it as thy now duty, as matter of
importance and necessity to be done, and to be done to purpose, to be seriously
dealt in now: truly hic labor, here is the difficulty; to persuade men that it
is duty to remember God, to convince men of the necessity of it, that it must
be done, is not hard, but alas to prevail with men to do it now, instantly,
presently to attend it, here is the d^fficulty and impossibility with the most
men; and it is this, O it is this, the now remembering God, that I would fain
persuade thee to. And to press home this Exhortation to a present remembering
God, to the doing of it now in the days of youth, I might muster up a
multitude of cogent Considerations, but I shall only request you to reflect
upon, and reason a little with you from the Grounds which we before-intimated
to you, why the youngest may not put it off, to be now remembering their
Creator. Consider then

1. That thou remember thy Creator is due unto him now, it is his now due, it
is thy now d^ty. Do not look upon it under the notion of duty only, a thing of
necessity, what must have a time to be thought on, but be pe^swaded to think
of, and consider it more nearly, as matter of n^w duty, that which lies upon
thee with the greatest necessity that can be, not sometime, but now at this
present time to be attended. Questionless that is duty, that it is of
necessity, and that it shall be done, they will find a time for it, is with
most men: Sure thou art saying in thy heart (thou that at present art most
remiss, negligent and forgetful of God) I will remember and turn unto the Lord
sometime or other before I die: thou art intending, purposing* promising thy
self, that though at present thou art too neglective, yet it shall not be
always thus, hereafter thou will be more serious, and if it be done at any
time, it will be as well as if thou did it now. Have thou not some such
reasonings of heart as these? To which I answer, That though such indeed be the
bottomless Mercy of God, and the boundless Merits of the precious Bloodshed of
the Lord Jesus, that upon a sound and soaking Repentance, and serious
remembering of him at last, those that have long, ever so long neglected it,
shall be graciously forgiven, yet it is not otherwise all one to forget,
neglect God this day, week, month, year, though thou should remember him the
next. Man, it is thy duty now, it is Gods due now, thou may not think it is
well enough, or it is all one, if thou remember and turn unto him any time
hereafter; the duty of to day cannot be done to morrow, thy now duty, the duty
of thy youth, cannot be done hereafter and in thy Age, though the neglect may
be repented of and pardoned, which how seldom it is we shall hereafter show.
And besides, Oh that thou would think what it is to abuse thy God, because
thou hopest to find him so exceeding gracious, what it is to neglect duty, and
purpose to repent when thou have done as a remedy, which is to make the best of
thy case. O do not thus put off God, whatever thy future intendments may be, in
delaying his now due, thou may no^ thus deal with thy fellow creature, Prove.
5.27. Withhold not good from them to whom it is due; we may not defer and put
off the payment of what is due to men, as the Scripture plentifully speaks, and
will thou thus deal with God?

2. Consider, as it is thy now duty, God's now due, that thou remember him; so
God calls for it now: (...) not lawful for me to do what I will with my own?
says the man in the Parable, Matthew. 10.15. May not God when he will call for
his own? God claims no more then his due, his now due, but this he is making
present challenge of, and calling for without delay; thou can not say but
thou art his debtor, nor art thou able to make any pretense that it is not yet
due, nor is there any room of an excuse for thee that it is not demanded, God
makes present demand* he gives thee no time to put it off. Had God left it as a
duty indifferent to be at any time done, provided it were done; had God said,
See thou remember me sometime or other, it had been but wisdom for thee to do
it to day, that know not whether thou shall have a morrow to do it in; but
God (...) it ^ow, (...) it is (...) disobedience (purpose as thou will for the
(...) now. It is ours to do as what, so when God requires, (...) put off when
God calls, is a great degree of disobedience sh^uld^t thou afterward attend
it. The great ones of the World, thy b^gger (...) Creatures, man, will not
brook it to have their Commands trifled, their Subjects and Servants dare not
do it, what they Command, and when they Command must be attended: when the King
commands Haman, as you may read in the story, ( Esth. 6.) take the Apparel,
and the horse, as thou have said, and do even to Mordecai the Jew, though it
were a matter went as much against the hair as might be, he presently attends
it, as you may there see; and is it for thee lightly to put it off, when God
calls, Remember now thy Creator. O young men, I beseech you look upon it as a
dreadful, provoking, dangerous thing, to sl^ght and put off the Commands of God
when he calls for present obedience. Do not only look upon it as a dreadful
thing altogether to put off the Commands of God, but to do it at all; and O now
comply with the now Call of God. O that it might be with you, as the Psalmist
speaks of himself, Psalm. 27.8. When thou said, Seek ye my face: my heart said
unto thee, Thy face Lord will I seek. Make God such returns, when God says,
Remember now thy Creator, let thy heart echo unto the Command, and say unto
him, My Creator Lord will I remember. I made haste and delayed not (says
David, Psalm. 119.60.) to keep thy Commandments: so the Call, the Command of God
being upon thee, make haste and delay not to attend it.

3. And lastly, consider, as thou owe thy Creator this present debt of
Remembrance, and he calls for, and makes demand of it now, so now is the
fittest time for payment, thou art now in the best capacity to do it, now in
the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, before those times of
less advantage, of greater disadvantage overtake thee, no time to this present
time, no age to the days of youth, thou have now such a price in hand, as thou will never enjoy more; it is the argument which David by his messengers
improves with Nabal (1 Samuel 25.8) We come in a good day give I pray thee, etc.
God is come unto thee in a good day, while he calls upon thee now in the days
of thy youth, while the evil days come not, to remember him. O think man, will
there ever be a fairer opportunity then now is, or will thou ever be in better
capacity then thou now art, thine eyes may weep over this when lost, but will
they ever see such another season as these days of youth are now affording
thee? will thy capacity, ability be greater or better then now it is? or will
thy work be easier then now it is? or will thy hindrances be fewer, thy helps
and advantages more, then now they are? if not, why should thou put it off,
why should thou not make use of this present time? Sure thou judge it
requisite, indispensibly requisite, to remember, turn to God, seek him, serve
him, and that in good earnest, thou can not but, know it is what must be
done, or thou art for ever undone; And why may not what must be done be as well
done, yea better done now then put off longer. O think seriously of it, if thou
ever meanest to remember God, now is the time, now in the days of thy youth is
the fittest, fairest opportunity. And because this is an argument of weight,
and such as may b^eake off all delays, were it but well thought of, let me
request thee a little more particularly to consider,

1. This is the best, the fittest time, because now the work will be most
^eizable and facile; the sooner thou set upon the work to remember and turn
unto God, the easier it will be, and the longer thou art putting off, the more
difficulties and disadvantages will attend thee in it, and if this be so in a
work of that necessity and importance as this is, certainly it concerns thee to
look about thee presently. But this is so; for, (1.) Thy delaying, deferring,
putting off, does dispose thee more and more still to delay, defer, put off:
the longer thou art putting off, the stronger will thy disposition be to be
putting off still; the old Saying is full true here, Qui non vult hodie cras
minus aptus erit, He that will not to day, shall be less fit to morrow; he that
puts off now, will be more prone to put off hereafter; he that defers for the
present, will do it much more for the future. Let me ask thee, (and I beseech
thee seriously consider of it) Do thou find thy self more disposed to take
the present time that now is, by all thy past puttings off? nay, do thou not
find that the more thou delayest and put off, the more thou may, and
that thou art so much the readier to do it still, by how much the longer thou
have done it already? and if this be the effect of former put offs as to the
present, thou may easily gather what will be the fruit of present put offs
as to the future. O believe it, every days procrastinating, every weeks, and
months, and years proroguing and putting off, sets thee further off upon this
account. Alas man, thou go on from day to day, from one time to another,
feeding thy self with future hopes, promises, purposes and intendments, while
every day a greater indisposition, dilatory dangerous death threatening temper
is growing upon thee. And (2.) Consider, as thy indisposition, disaffection is
strengthened by thy delaying, so every day the letts and hindrances, and blocks
and difficulties in thy way are heightened. Do thou not think thou would
find enough to do of it now to turn over a new leaf, forget thy vanities,
forsake thy sins, shake off thy loose Companions, and set thy self to a serious
remembering, converting and turning to the Lord, and will not custom in sin the
longer thou go on in it, render thy return (...) the more difficult, Jer. 13
23. Heb. 3.7, 8, 13. Alas, the work is difficult, the hindrances many, thy
heart so averse and indisposed, that thou know not how to persuade and
overcome thy self to set upon it presently, and yet art thou bold to delay it,
presumptuously promising thy self the doing of it, when thy indisposition will
be more, and the difficulties greater then now they are. Thou may flatter
thy self while thou art putting off now, and putting off then, with the hopes
of a future repentance and conversion, but certainly Satan who is laboring thy
ruin, upon a more probable ground promises himself his prey, while putting
off to deliver thy self, thou art every day more entangled in his snares, and
the way of thy repentance blocked up, and rendered more difficult and unlikely
every day then other. Do but seriously think of this, and sure thou will see
little reason to be delaying and putting off any longer; thou will see great
reason to set thy self to a present remembering thy Creator, to a now converting
and turning unto God. Did thy delay advantage thee, it were somewhat; did it
facilitate thy work, did it wear out the hindrances it were somewhat, nay did
it not disadvantage thee it were more tolerable; but when such is the evident
and apparent disadvantage of delay, O that ever thou should be guilty of this
manifest folly, yea madness, as to put it off full. And (3) Consider, that ^s
by delaying and putting off to remember thy Creator, thou art increasing thy
own indisposition, and the letts and difficulties in thy way are daily
heightened; so also (which is as considerable as any thing) thou art set further
and further off the efficacy of helps and means hereunto conducing: thy
continuing to refuse, resist, put off, has a probable and woeful tendency to
take off the edge of any Convictions, Admonitions, Persuasions, and make them
of no force with thee. What is the reason of (which we see in sad experience to
be so) the little efficacy the Ministry of the Word has upon the hearts of men
that have ^^en long under it, nay the less efficacy then formerly. Time was, it
may be, that an awakening Sermon would have more moved them then now it will,
is it not hence, that they have so long put off the Calls of God, that they are
now become powerless. I have read of a Roman Senator, with whom poison had lost
its force, having by degrees long habituated himself to it, when he would have
poisoned himself for the (...) of a more shameful death, he could not do it, it
would not work with him: the Word of God is said to be (...) powerful, and
mighty in operation, but many a man delays and dal^ies with it so long, till
it become to him dead, powerless, and inoperative. O^! were this thought of,
how rarely are such wrought upon to remember God in their Age, who have been
called upon (as thou now art) to Remember their Creator in the days of their
youth; it is rarely, very rarely found, but men born and brought up under
Means, are savingly wrought upon, converted and turned to God if ever, before
they pass the fl^wer of their Age, and men brought under Means not long after
they first enjoy them. The Word of God is wont early (if at all) to take indeed
hold upon the Spirits of such as are born and brought up under it, and it is
ordinarily made quickly (if ever) an indeed convincing, converting, saving Word
to them that are brought under it: for God eff^ctually to convert, and call
home to himself in elder years, such as have not enjoyed the Means in their
younger time, is more common* but to g^ow aged under Means, and then to be
wrought upon, is a sight seldom seen. Look into the Scripture and see, i^ thou
can fi^de one Example of such a thing; look into thy own Experience and
think, how many have thou known savingly wrought upon in their old Age, in
their declensions, that lived constantly under the Means of grace in their
younger time. Many the sad and dreadful Examples of men grown Sermonproof,
senseless, past feeling, upon whom the Word has no power (unless to blind and
harden them further) that being often reproved, persuaded, called upon, have
stood out, put off, are before thee in the Bible upon record, and in present
sad Experience; there are many, very many that having turned a deaf ear to the
Calls of God to Remember their Creator in the days of their youth, are
strangely infatuated, besotted, hardened, rendered senseless and obdurate in
their Age; but there are few, very few, very very few, if any, that neglecting
the Calls of God to remember him in their youth, have attended it in their old
Age. Man, believe this, that as thou have little, very little cause to hope
that the Calls of God resisted, refused in thy youth, will be savingly
eff^ctual in thy Age; so thou have much, very much cause to fear, that the Word
that now avails not with thee to bring thee to a serious remembering of God,
will be judicial^y sealing of thee up under blindness of mind and hardness of
heart, for refusing and putting off his Call: thus it befell the Jews in like
case, Isa. 6.9, 10. But I hasten.

2. Consider, now in the days of thy youth is the best, the most opportune
time to Remember thy Creator (not only for the facility of the work, as has
been said, but) because thou shall be sure to find God facile in accepting and
remembering thee, now remembering and turning to him, ^s God has sadly and
severely threatened such as put off his Call, put off when he calls, to remember
and turn unto him, the slipping of their ^eason, that they shall after find
the door of acceptance shut against them, Zech. 7.13. and often elsewhere; so
God has graciously promised and laid forth his readiness to show mercy unto
such as remember and seek him betimes* in Prove. 8.17. and other places, you may
see the promise of finding made over to early seeking; and to this purpose is
that of the Prophet, Isa. 55.6. Seek ye the Lord while he may be found* there
is a season, there is a while, when God may be found, but put off a while, miss
this season, and the case may be altered. You may see God at once and together
( Prove. 1.23, and following verses) promising as to the present, and threatening
as to the future; I entreat thee to take notice of it, God calls thee, Remember
now thy Creator, etc. and as to the present attendance of his Call, thou have
many gracious Promises; but as to the future, if thou will adventure to delay,
dally, and put it off, the sad threatenings of a too late, look wishly upon
thee. Well may I say of thy now remembering God, now i^ the days of thy youth,
as the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6.2. Behold, now is the accepted time, now is the day of
salvation. O now man is a time of acceptance, a salvation day; O now, now
remember and turn unto the Lord* without any more delay or longer putting of^;
set thy self seri^usly to seek and acknowledge him: O be not guilty of that
great imprudence, to put off and trifle away a sure season of gracious (...)
acceptance, and by thy so doing run thy self upon the woeful hazard of sav^ng
the ^oor of Grace and Mercy shut and bolted against thee, (...) by its standing
wide open invites thy entrance, but lay hold upon the now season as the
acceptable time, the day of salvation.

3. Consider, now in the days of thy youth is the best, the fittest time to
remember thy Creator, because this is acceptable to him, worthy of him, (as I
may so speak) but to put him off to elder years, to old age, is to offer him
great indignity, and cannot but be exceeding provoking, he is worthy of the
first and best to whom thou owe thy all, and to devote and dedicate to him
the morning of thy time, the flower and strength of thy age, this is worthy of
him; this God takes well, takes kindly, you may see how affectionately, how
pathetically God bespeaks Israel upon this account, Jer. 2.2 Go and cry in the
ears of Jerusalem, saying. Thus says the Lord, I remember the kindness of thy
youth, he takes this so well, he accepts this so kindly, that he will after
pass by many backsl^dings and infirmities, as you may see by what follows in
the beginning of the next Chapter: God will not easily cast off such as early
cleave unto him Honor the Lord with thy substance, (as it is Prove. 3.9) and
with the first fruits of all thine ^ncrease* it is applicable to what we are, as
well as what we have to our selves* ou^ abilities of body and mind, as well as
our outward estates, and by it we see that God challenges our whole, but he
lays a peculiar claim as i^ were to our first and ^^st, as to the first fruits
of old. To put him off th^^ with the worst and l^st, the dregs of thy time, the
decays of thy strength, what i^ it? to think to put him off thus, how
unworthy, how provoking (...) it? shall the flesh, and world, and Devil be
first minded, regarded, served, shall these go away with the first and best of
thy time, strength, abilities, which is Gods due, and will it be enough to put
him off at last with the dregs and leavings of all; do thou thus require the
Lord? O think what contempt this reflects upon God, what indignity is hereby
done him, how unworthily, how unreasonably thou art dealing with him and how
provoking it must needs be to him; think of the argument in the Text, Remember
now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor
the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have (...) pleasure in them* (...)

Thou art now in thy prime, in thy strength, in thy flower* thy spirit is
lively, thy memory fresh, all thy abilities strong and vigorous, but this will
not always last; the impotent, unpleasant, listless times of old age are
hastening upon ^hee. Now therefore Remember him, do not put him off till then;
Alas (...), to delay now (...) he calls upon thee, now in the days of thy
youth to remember him, with purposes and intendments of doing it hereafter,
what is it, but implicitly to say the first and best is too good for God; when
thou have laid out the prime and choice of thy time and abilities elsewhere,
thou art purposing and intending to reserve for and bestow the refuse, the
leavings upon him; when the world and flesh have drunk up the wine of thy
strength and time (as I may so speak) then God shall have the lees: Oh man, is
not this the very reason why the call of God to remember him so little prevails
with thee, but that thou art putting off and delaying of it* is it not this,
because thou have other lovers to take up thy present thoughts* hence men hope
they may mind their pleasures in their youth, and then hope they may mind the
world in their middle age. In elder years they hope, they purpose and intend to
remember their Creator, nor would they intend him this allowance neither, but
that they know the days of their youth will not always last, and that the
days of old age and death must and will overtake them; God is made a mere
reserve, they will mind the world, their pleasures while they may, and mind
God at last because they needs must, upon the account of a mere self-necessity.
Is it not very thus with thee man, and do thou think this will do? is it
reasonable, is it right, is it equal, thy self being Judge, that the first
fruits, nay the whole harvest it may be, the flower of thy youth, and the
strength of (...) age, shall be other where bestowed, and God put off with the
(...) ^^eanings, is this right, is it equal, is it worthy thy Maker m^n, that
the flesh* and world, and devil, should skim the Cream and drink the top* be
first and best served, and the God that made thee, maintains thee, and must
save thee or thou perishest everlastingly, be served with the last and worst?
Look into Mal. 1.14. (...) the deceiver, which has i^ his (...) ^^ock a ma^e*
and voweth and sacrifices to the Lord a corrupt thing; for I am a great King,
says the Lord of hosts, and my name is drea^ful among the heathen. Dwell a
little upon that sad text; does it not suit thy case? thou may (and probably
wilt) put a cheat upon thy own poor immortal soul, but will God be mocked? let
me tell thee, that not unseldome the dregs of Gods anger come to their portion,
that are presuming to put him off with the dregs of their Age; take heed man,
lest it prove thy case; thou may ( Esau-like) find no place for repentance
(not really in thy self, nor yet with God) though thou seek it carefully with
tears; thou may mourn at the last, when thy flesh and thy body are consumed,
and say, How have I hated instruction? thou may sorrowfully remember in thy
shrivelled Age, when thou have run thy course, and worn out thy time and
strength in the service of sin, and art now dropping into another world, and
^ndressing to the fire, the seasonable instructions thou sometime had; thou
may ^owl upon thy bed at last, when the sorrows of death compass thee about,
and the pains of hell get hold upon thee; thou may then profess to repent
and turn to God, when thou can enjoy the world, serve the flesh no longer,
but will God call such hypocritical sorrow, merely to save thy own skin, such a
seeming conversion, Real Repentance? may thou not expect that God will make
thee the same answer, which it is said he did to a wretched old man, who now
being ready to die, would needs repent and turn to God, Vbi consumpsis^i
farinam ibi consume furfurem, Where thou have spent thy flower there go spend
thy bran? may thou not justly dread that God will none of thy dregs? Thou
art now running out thy life in a wretched forgetfulness of God, and think
to cure all by a taking on to repent, and crying God mercy at (...) but have
thou not cause to fear that when at last ca^^, in old Age, upon a Deathbed,
when going out of the world, thou art crying him Mercy, that God will send thee
in the day of distress to the gods whom thou have served to save thee? that he
will say to thee, N^y, now even make an end as thou have begun, make thy best
of that thou have esteemed better and remembered more then we, I will none of
thy leavings; the world and thy lusts have had thy first fruits, thy main
^a^vest, let them take thy gleanings too. O take heed man, lest it come to
this; but now, O now, in the time of acceptance make haste to turn unto him.

4. And lastly, Consider, now in the days of thy youth is the best* the
choicest, and most advantageous season to remember thy Creator, because hereby
thou shall best provide (most abundantly, most surely) for thy own good and
comfort, as is notoriously evident. But to instance briefly in three things.

1. Hereby much sin, and consequently much sorrow, many tears and temptations,
many a sad thought will be prevented: thou can not but know (if thou know
any thing) that every day thou art deferring and putting off to remember God,
every day thou art going on to forget, neglect, disacknowledge him, thou art
making work for Repentance, thou art hereby laying up sorrow for thy self, if
God shall hereafter give thee Repentance; or if not, treasuring up wrath
against the day of wrath, and the revelation of Gods righteous judgment: Thy
present neglect most obviously runs thee upon this dilemma, either many
sorrows, sad throws of heart, if God peradventure will give thee Repentance
here, or eternal sorrow in the place of sorrow, where there is nothing but
weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth hereafter, and who would wittingly
make a rod for his own back? who would willingly persevere in a course of
laying up sorrow for himself? who would do knowingly, continue to do that, that
he must sorrowfully undo, or suffer eternally for? who would thus wilfully make
work for Repentance? Believe it man, if ever God give thee sound Repentance,
Repentance unto life, thou will find sin evil and bitter enough, thou need
not aggravate it* when thou indeed come to make work for Repentance, thou will then know what it is to have made so much work of Repentance, when God
shall set thy sins, thy neglects of him, a course of forgetting, slighting,
contemning him, that thou have long run on in, in order before thee, though it
be in order to thy Humiliation, Repentance, Conversion, it may make thee wish
again and again thou had never stood out so long, and stored up so much
sorrow for thy own soul. Let me here intimate to you a little more particularly
two or ^hree things, I will but intimate them, though well worthy your serious
consideration. (1.) As we have been saying, Be sure the more thou multipliest
to sin, the longer thou art going on in a course of forgetting God, the more
thou art multiplying thy own sorrows if God vouchsafe thee Repentance. (2.)
Late Conversions are like Births in those that are ancient, not without much
difficulty, a hard travail, many throw^, difficult deliverance* God saves
some, though more seldomly, that have longer put him off, but it is then so as
by fire, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 3.15. or as it is Jude ver. 22.23. And
of some have compassi^n, making a difference, and others (...) with fear,
pul^ing them out of the fire: so God acts, such a difference he makes, in
seasoning some with his grace in their young and tender years, and more easily
work^ng them to himself, whilst others that run on are saved with fear, and
pulled as brands out of the fire; many fears, heart-misgiving, despairing
thoughts such are ordinarily attended with, God commonly makes those that long
put off, a Magar-missabib if ever he show them mercy: such are more seldom
humbled, converted, saved, and when they are, it is not without much ado. (3)
The sins of youth, which such have deeply run into, and long run on in, (though
God do at last recover them by a sound and soaking Repentance, and save them
through much fear and terror) remain many times a Corrosive gnawing upon their
Spirits all their days, the sting of such and such a sweet sin that they have
been deeply in, sticks with them to a dying day; it is made the hypocrites
portion, to have his bones full of the sins of his youth, Job 20.11. but it is
many times the lot of such whom God has brought home to himself by a sound
Repentan^^, to be made to possess the iniquities of their youth, as is evident
from Jobs complaint, Job 13.26. and David's prayer, Psalm. 25 7. Upon this
account, by remembering and turning to God now, thou may happily prevent such
sins, which should God give thee hereafter Repentance, may stick with thee to a
dying day, and bring down (as Jacob speaks) thy gray hairs with sorrow to the
grave. See then this advantage in a present early turning unto God, it will
prevent many sorrows, a great deal of sad work. O therefore take the Wise-mans
counsel in the last Verse of the foregoing Chapter, Therefore remove sorrow
from thy heart, and put away evil from thy flesh, do not put it upon thy self,
but take the course, the only wise way to remedy and prevent it, which he
prescribes in the Text, Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth.

2. As hereby much sin and sorrow will be prevented, so hereby thou shall
abundantly provide for thy own good, comfort, benefit in after-time: if God
take thee sooner hence, it will be well thou art ready; if not, thou will
abundantly reap in thy Age the benefit and advantage, the good and comfort of
thy early remembering and turning to God. Yo^th or Spring (as one says) is the
Seed-time of grace and godliness: if in the Spring no Seed be sown, or none but
Cockle or Darnel, or such Weeds, what hope of Harvest, or what a Harvest may be
expected? Forgetfulness of God in time of youth, causes old Age to perish, to
be good for nothing; so some carry the sense of that* Job 30.2. (...)* was
perished, i. e. their old Age was good for nothing; but an early Seeds-time is
a good presage of, and preparatory to a plentiful Harvest of grace, joy, and
comfort in aftertimes. Consider more particularly a few things here* but to
touch them. (1.) To remember and turn ^o God, to be good, take a right course
betimes, is the way to be (...) good, to be settled and established in the way
of God and godliness in Age; the sooner thou art seasoned with right
principles, pious principles in youth, the more deeply and indelibly will they
be (...) into thee ^n Age, Prove. 22.6* Train up a child in the way he should
go, and when he is old he will not depart from it. The Proverb is, A young
(...) and an old Devil: but the Spirit of God knows better, and tells us* A
Saint in youth, and an established Saint in Age; that which is sucked (...) in
youth, and a person is then seasoned with, becomes well rooted and settled in
him in Age. As it is a dreadful thing to grow* Aged in sin, because such are
hardly removed: so is it a happy thing to grow Aged in Grace and Godliness,
because such are most firmly established: but the only way to this, is to
begin betimes. (2.) In remember, turn to God betimes, to begin to be indeed
good early, is the ready way to be good indeed, to be eminently good; a forward
Spring and Seeds-time, is here the forerunner of a plentiful Harvest; as he
that begins betimes, and long continues to drive a gainful trade, is long in
taking in and treasuring up* must needs be well stored and furnished, so it is
wi^h the early Christian in his age, he is rich in grace, in spiritual
experiences, etc. Those ordinarily are most fat and flourishing, and bring
forth most fruit in their age, that begin betimes. Oh think, how rich in
knowledge, practical saving knowledge, how strong in faith, how in^imately
acquainted with God, how humble, holy and heavenly minded, how abounding in
every grace, and rich in all manner of good works, might thou be, would
thou be persuaded now in the days of thy youth to remember thy Creator. O be
indeed good, godly now, this is the way to be good indeed, eminently good and
godly. (3.) The last advantage that I shall name as to this, that thou shall
have by an early (...) unto God, is this, It will greaten thy reward in heaven;
none shall serve God for naught, begin quickly, and hold on carefully and
cheer^^lly, thou (...) lose nothing by it, 1 Cor. 15.58. indeed the reward
(...) of work, it is of grace, but yet it is according to work, 2 Cor. 9.6.
b^gin ever so soon, and follow it ever so diligently, and continue ever so
(...) shall then receive a full reward for every moments service.

^. And lastly, Hereby thy own good and comfort shall be as (...) abundantly,
so most certainly provided for. (...) and then (...) wilt be sure to do it, but
neglect it n^w, and thou art not certain of a future time to attend it. Were
there nothing in all that has been already said, yet one would think there
were enough in this one Consideration, were it seriously thought upon, to put
an issue to all thought of delaying, and pu^ting off, and put thee upon a now
present remembering God, without more ado, or whiling it off any longer.
Childhood and Youth are vanity, it is the Argument in the last words of the
former Chapter, by which the Exhortation in the Text to a timely remembr^ng
God, is as it were ushered in; and were it laid to heart, sure it would make
thee lay by all delays. Thy flourishing Youth, man, (O think of it) is fickle,
flitting, frail, subject to Death as well as old Age, Jam. 4.14. For what is
your life? it is even a vapor: Man's life in general is so, the young man's
life is even a vapor as well as the old man's, as we see in continual
experience. Death's Motto is Nulli Cado, I give place to, I spare none. We are
like Venice glasses; not those that are first made are first broke, but those
that are first knocked Death is often sudden and unexpected in its approaches;
the evil day is very nigh sometimes, when men are putting it furthest off: The
fool in the Gospel-Parable lessons us, how prone we are to cast up our Accounts
for many years, when it may be we have not one night to live. The notion of
Death is too apt to look to all men, especially to young men, like Ezekiel's
Vision, Chap. 42.27. The Vision that he sees is for many days, and he
prophecieth of times that are afar off. Young men look it may be on the
gray headed as well on their way to the Grave, and happily think it is time for
old men to think of dying, but from themselves they put it at a great distance;
but most true it is, that Senibus M^rs in januis adolescentibus in insidiis,
Death is oftentimes as near the young man's back as it is the old man's face,
even while he says of Death, (as the unfaithful Servant in the Gospel of his
Lord) He delayeth his coming, it comes in a day when he looks not for it,
and in an hour when he is not aware of, and calls him off, and sends him
(unprepared as he is) to the Land of Darkness, whence there is no redemption. O
think man, has not death surprised many a poor unprovided sinner, that put the
evil day far off as confidently, and upon as good grounds as thy self? Has not
Death prevented many a careless in conside^a^e Loyterer, who looked as little
for his coming as thou do, and whose purposes for the future were as hopeful
as thine now are? Have thou not fo^lowed m^^y a one to the Grave, that had as
probable Arguments for a longer life as any thou can have? Continual
experience tells thee, it is not thy Youth, or Health and Strength, that can
save thee, or so much as a little while Reprieve the Arrest of Death; how do
thou dare then to put off one day, when thou know not but it may be thy
putting by for ever? Do but suppose (a dreadful yet probable supposition) while
thou art putting off and delaying a little, and yet a little longer, Death
should step in and prevent thee: O methinks this Argument* if nothing else
will, should effectually deter thee from loytering, and thoroughly awaken thee
to a now remembering thy Creator.

I have said what I shall say upon this Text, beseeching you that it may be
thought upon, and beseeching God to give his blessing: But I have another
Subject, that I must crave a few minutes time, and a grain or two of patience
more^ to say something of; and that is the Young man lately deceased, at whose
Request, and as whose Bequest, you have had this Sermon; and it is not the
Commendation of the ^ea^ that is the thing intended, he needs it not, but the
Instruction of the living. As his Death in the time and manner of it was a real
Sermon upon the Text, of which we have been speaking, so (in other respect) was
his Life also in some good degree: and I have two sayings (to young men
especially upon this Subject) 1. In some things observable in him as to his
Life, he was a Pattern for your Imitation. 2. In some things observable about
him as to his Death, he was an Example for your Admonition.

First, In some things observable in him as to (...) Life, he was a Pattern for
your Imitation: but to intimate some few things of special remark.

1. He was a young man of an innocent Conversation, of a civil, sober
Behavior; he was not of a debauched dissolute life, nor did he run with others
to that excess of riot which (with sad hearts) we see many young men do; his
Conversation was not spotted with such marks of deboistness, as are too visible
upon too many of his Age. Now though Civility, Sobriety, Morality, are not
Grace, yet they are Jewels of price, that have an amiableness and loveliness
both in the eyes of God and good men: it is said of the young man in the Gospel
story (in Mark 10.21.) that when Christ had heard from him what he had done,
how he had lived, that he was a civil, sober, moral man (though evident it is
by the story that he was a stranger to the power of godliness) that Je^us
beholding him, loved him. Not but that I am persuaded better things of the
young (...) of whom we are speaking, and things that have accompanied
salvation, though I (...) us speak: but to show you, that a mere Civil, Sober,
Moral man is otherwise by God looked upon, then others are that are Scandalous
and Profane: Christ has a comm^n (...) even to the better sort of ungodly men,
more then to the worst; a civil^ sober, outwardly conform^ble life, has its
account with God: not that I would have you rest here, I hope his Example led
you h^gher.

2. He was a young man of a serious Spirit, he had some real weight with him,
and worth in him. It is said of him by those of the Family where he formerly
sojourned amongst us for some time, and now lately died and took his leave of
this world, Tha^ they never heard a vain misbecoming word come out of his
mouth; and his Conversation was according* he was not vainly given, nor spent
his time in Drinking, Gaming, Company-keeping, as many do, but wa^ much in
Reading, and took delight, when his other business afforded him any leisure, to
be amongst his Books and Papers; and very ready he was upon occasion for the
help of others upon such accounts. Alas, a young man of a serious Spirit, that
is of some weight and worth, that is something besides mere froth and vanity,
that minds something worthy a man, is too rare a sight amongst us. Oh the
exceeding vanity of the younger sort! (and too many of the elder too) Alas,
what a mere Bubble of Vanity, wrapped up in a bundle of fine Clothes, is many a
young Man, many a Maid? their clothing may be costly, but their hearts, their
minds (as the Wiseman speaks, Prove. 10.20) are little worth. O how empty are
they of all that is of worth, that good is, but running over with mere vanity,
and superfluity of naughtiness, as the Apostle speaks, Jam. 1.21. Men's minds
and mouths run over with very froth and vanity, scarce a serious thought in
the one, or a sober savoury word in the other; not a Bible or a good Book in
hand the week long it may be: you had a better Example in him then this comes
to.

3. This young man (as is credibly testified of him) was a dutiful Child to
his Parents; he was inured to bear the yoke from his youth: he could almost
say, as the Son in the Parable to his Father, Luke 15.29. (...) transgressed I
at any time thy commandment. Never but once (as himself was saying to an
intimate Friend of his not long before his death) was he unseasonably absent
from his Fathers Family in all his life. Young men, I am afraid it is not once,
nor twice, nor thrice, nor ten times, that will excuse some of you. It Is the
complaint of Parents, of Masters, (and a sad complaint it i^) that they cannot
keep their Children, their Servants in, but that they will be out at all hours,
and if you observ^ ^t, the bottom* Argument is, Others do so, and they must and
will. O that you would be persuaded to follow his better Example.

4. To add no more: He was a young man that seemed to savor of, and aff^ct
the best things. What is said of young Abi^ah, 1 King. 14.13. appeared very
hopeful concerning him, that in him there was found some good thing toward the
Lord God of Israel. I do not doubt but that it may be truly said of him, That
he had more Sermons by him of his own handwriting, not only then the most of
the young men in Fairfield, but then most of his Age have. His writing Sermons
at Meeting was commendable and mutable, as also the after-improvement that he
made of them; his Notes were not laid by as useless, or served to put under
Pies, but they were overlooked and repeated by himself, and to others as
occasion offered. The Sermons that he took here the last Winter (as I am
informed) have been since called over in his Fathers Family. That he was ready
and forward upon such accounts, is the account that such give of him that best
knew him; and as to this, there is one thing more that would not be omitted,
That when he came now lately out of the Bay, a little before his last Sickness,
that being at Sea upon the Sabbath, and seeing the Morning well spent, and
nothing going forward of a Sabbath days work, he began to mind them (though
the youngest of the Company) of the Day, and Duty thereunto belonging, desiring
they might go to Prayer, and he would repeat a Sermon to them, which
accordingly he did both Forenoon and Afternoon. Young men, let I beseech you
his Example upon these accounts Provoke your ^mitation.

Secondly, As in these things observable in him as to his Life, he was a Pattern
for your Imitation; so in some things observable about him as to his Death, he
was an Example for your Admon^tion. Very briefly but to touch upon two or three
things, lest I utterly tire you.

1. The Time of his Death, being in the flower of his Age, little more then
Eighteen, is for your Admonition, to Remember now your Creator in the days of
your youth, who are now in your bloss^me* he was not arrived at the strength of
his Age, he was but newly come as it were ^o years of discretion; Art thou past
a Child? do thou begin to understand thy self? it is dangerous for thee to
put off God, the remembering thy Creator not for a longer, but for any time: Art
thou Fifteen, Sixt^en, Eighteen years old? it is too great an adventure to put
it off till thou art Twenty, or One and twenty. Thou art young, and strong, and
lusty, and think thou may more boldly adventure, measuring thy Life by
the ^ge and Constitution; but are these certain Evidences as to adventure thy
Soul upon? are these such infallible Probabilities as to run the hazard of thy
hopes for Heaven upon? The Example that is before thee in this young man (whom
Death scarce suffered to be (...) a man^ may convince thee of the contrary. O
who would not be always ready, when his Summons are so exceeding uncertain.

2. The Manner of his Sickness is Admonitory also, and may lesson you this,
That it is good doing your great Work before the evil days of Sickness come.
Alas, there is little time, room, opportunity or abi^ity then, A pained Body, a
distempered Brain, a disturbed Spirit, disability of Speech, necessary Rest,
and these and those Attendances, incapacitate, divert, take up the time, and
leave men commonly but a sorry opportunity of doing any thing to purpose for
their Souls. I was with him diverse times in his Sickness, yet had opportunity
but once to say any thing to purpose to him; one wh^le sl^mbe^ing, another
while distempered in his Head, or busily taken up by his bodily necessities and
attendances. O man* Death may snatch thee away suddenly, it does not give every
one a week or ten days warning, but if not, a leisurely Sickness may afford
thee little leisure for thy Soul.

3. How it was with him in his Sickness too, how his Spirit wrought, may
admonish you to make through work of your great Work. It was d^fficult to him to
speak from an obstruction in his Throat, and somewhat difficult to understand
him when he did speak, and so the less can be said, but so much (...) substance
might be gathered from him, That he looked upon himself an undone man without
an interest in Jesus Christ; yet he was not without some hope that he was at
peace with God in him, yet not without fears, bemoaning himself in respect of
his hardness of heart and blindness of mind, and that he had been no more
thoroughly wrought upon by the Means that he had formerly enjoyed. O Sirs, Dying
times are ^rying times; to die causlesly confidently I am afraid is too common,
but to die groundedly comfortably is a great work. O do, do thoroughly what thou
have to do, man, when Death comes thou will not find it is too well done.

FINIS.

