AN HOLY CONNECTION, Or a true AGREEMENT Between Jehovahs being a WALL of FIRE
to his People, and the GLORY in the midst thereof: Or a Word in Season to stir
up to a solemn Acknowledgement of the gracious Protection of God over his
People; and especially to a Holy Care that the Presence of God may yet be
continued with us.

As it was delivered in a SERMON Preached at Hartford on Conecticut in N. E.
May 14. 1674. being the Day of ELECTION there:

By JAMES FITCH Pastor of the Church of Christ in Norwich.

Exodus 33.^^.16 (...), it thy presence go not with us, carry us not up (...).
For wherein (...) Land ^hy People^ (...) in thy (...), is it not us that thou
(...).

1 King 8.57, 58. The Lord ^ur God (...) as he was with our Fathers, let him
not leave us nor (...), that he may (...) our heart^ (...) him to walk in all
(...).

(...). ^ 19. Yet thou in thy (...) not in the W^lderness, ^he Pillar of the
(...) the Pillar of F^re by night to show them (...), and (...) they should go.

Hos. 4 5 An (...) create upon every dwelling plac^ of Mount Sion, and upon her
Assemblies a Cloud and Smo^^ (...), and (...) of a flaming (...) Glory shall
(...).

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by Samuel Green. 1674.

At a COURT of ELECTION held at HARTFORD May 14th. 1674.
It is Ordered that the Thanks of this Court be returned to the Reverend Mr.
James Fitch for the great pains he has taken in Preaching the Election Sermon
before this Court, and that he be desired to grant a Copy of his said Sermon
that it may be Printed. Extracted out of the Court Records,

John Allyn Secr.

Christian Reader,
IT is amongst the sayings of the Wise Man, A Word fitly spoken is like Apples
of Gold in Pictures of Silver, Prove. 25.11. A Word aptly circumstanced in
respect of time, and other concurrences i^ ^f singular usefulness, weight and
excellency: Did the Discourse following not suffic^ently commend it self, or
needed there any further Testimony to be added thereto; we might with
confidence affirm, that it was indeed a Word fitly spoken, well Timed, and
otherwise also Circumstanced as to them to whom it was delivered: and surely it
is no other to such to whose perusal it is now presented.

The Condition of Gods Wilderness-People (with other considerations also
attending the same) bear full witness to it therein; when the Glory is
departing (may we not say in some, Oh that it were not in great measure
departed) and the Defense also with it; what more seasonable or fitly-suited
then such a (...) the design whereof is to awaken and advise to a Faithful
Endeavor for (...) very and Continuance of both; How far or by what gradual
Removes (...) is made already, with reference to the Lords People here in (...)
Societies in particular, is not so easy nor all things Conside^ed so (...) to
determine; that there is indeed a diminution or abatement of the Glory in the
midst of us (an awful presage of its yet further and at last final withdrawing,
if not timely prevented by an intervening Repentance, Faith and effectual
Reformation, thereby stirring up our selves to take hold of God.) that we are
in danger also of being deprived of the Wall of fire about us (threatening
Aspects of Providence of late appearing towa^ds us therein) cannot well be
denied by them that have been studi^us to keep the eye upon things past and
present. Time was that Israel was holiness to the Lord, then all that devoured
him did offend, evil came upon them, as in Jer. 2.3. But is it so at this day
in respect of degrees? alas how low are we fallen? though we doubt not but the
Lord has his number, and that very considerable, whose hearts he keeps up in a
holy warmth and forwardness of love ^o him, his will and ways, yet how many
have forsaken first love; (may we say the love of N. Englands Esp^usa^s) upon
the decays whereof, or neglect to r^cover it, a ^emova^ of the Candlestick is
expressly threatened, even ^h^re there are many things ^o amendable, Rev. 2.2 --
5 that the Lord has indeed been the Glory and Salvation (...) peop^^, and
therein grea^ly manifested his mercy toward us amidst many provocations, is
always to be acknowledged with great thankfulness; that the some Lord is our
alone hope in both respects for the future, it concerns us deeply, nothing more
deeply to Remember. Alas what are we if the Lord leave us? if the glory depart
from us what shall we be? but a dishonor to his Name, a reproach to Religion,
a Shame to ourselves, and Grief to others, a very heap of Sins, and Chaos of
Confusion; if the Wall of Fire forsake us, what shall we be, but a prey to them
that are ready to devour? how soon and easily will our Adversaries have
occasion and spirit to say insultingly enough, they are bread for us? how
resistless an inroad will all manner of Evil and Enemies make upon us?

Observations of what has been, and is, with intimations also about what may,
or is like to be, according to Scripture discovery and the Lords w^nted way of
dealing with a professing privileged People; may not too easily be overlookt.
However the great work still remains, (which without peculiar help from above
will certainly fail in its accomplishment) viz. that we believe in earnest, and
demean our selves as believing, that our All is in the hand of God; In respect
of Glory, and Defense, we stand and fall therein as his pleasure is to deal
with us; One thing only we may further remark, that our great Concernment is so
to carry in several Capacities and Performance of Duties therein, that the Lord
may be and continue to be the Glory in the midst of us, so shall we without
failure experience the fulfilling of his (...) Wall of fire shall not be
wanting: That it may so be, is the (...) Aim of the ensuing Sermon, wherein the
Learned Author, a Faithful Servant in his Masters Work according to the Wisdom
given him, Warns, Counsels and Excites, with reference to what may further the
attainment of such an end.

That this also amongst other the Labors of the Lords Worthies formerly, and
of late may be made successful by a Blessing from Heaven; to awaken the secure,
and buicken the backward, to Rouse sinners, and Recover Saints to a right sense
of their several Duties in this dark and threatening day; That the work of our
God may appear unto his Servants, and his Glory to their Children, that his
Enlightening, Converting, Sanctifying, and therewith also Protecting, Saving
Presence may be with us, that the Beauty of Truth, Peace and Holiness, an
increasing shine of zeal for God, the Purity of his ways, and Fellowship with
him ^herein, may yet be found amongst us; and that upon all the Glory may (...)
and always be a Defense;

Is the Hearts Desire and Prayer of us, who are thine in him that is the
Savior of all men, especially of them that Believe.

John Whiting. Joseph Haines.


ZECHARIAH 2.5. For I says the Lord will be to her a wall of fire round about,
and will be the glory in the midst of her.


IN the foregoing part of this Chapter we have the Prophet^ Vision specified,
and the sense and meaning of it.

First. The Vision of a Man with a Measuring Line in his hand, to measure
Jerusalem in the breadth thereof, and in the length thereof, in the first and
second Verses.

Secondly, the sense of this Vision Explained and Confirmed.

1. Explained, That Jerusalem should be Re-inhabited and Replenished, in the
third and fourth Verses.

2. This confirmed with a promise of the Lords presence with them, in this
fifth Verse: In which we have; (1) A promise of the Lords protecting presence,
and that likened to a Wall of fire round about; For (...) the Lord, will be to
her a Wall of fire round about. (2.) a promise of (...) Lords glorious presence
in the midst of his people, for says the Lord, (...) will be the Glory in the
midst of her. (3.) Let us consider the Copulation, yea, the Connection of these
two, when the Lord was the Glory in the ^idst of Jerusalem, then he would be a
Wall of fire round about them, and his being a Wall of fire round about them,
was in order to his being the Glory in the midst of them, for so it is
expounded in Isai. 4.5. Upon all the Glory shall be the defense: Hence the
Doctrine is this; Doct. When the Lord is the Glory in the midst of a People
then he will be a Wall of Fire round about them.

The Lords protecting presence as a Wall of fire round about his (...) and his
Glorious Presence in the midst of them are concomitants, the one does
inseparably accompany the other. For the Proof and Explication let us consider:

1. When Gods protecting presence is like a Wall of fire round about (...)
People. 2. When the Lord is the glory in the midst of a People. 3. The (...) of
the Relation and Connection of these.

First, Gods protecting presence, as a Wall of fire, is when the Lord does in
an evident manner, and terrible manner protect them.

1. In an evident manner; making his Protection as manifest to his People as if
they see a Wall of fire round about them, Isai. 26.1. In that day shall ^he
Song be sung in the Land of Judah, we have a strong City, the Lord will appoint
his Sal^at^on for Walls and Bulwarks: Then is the Wall too high for the Enemy
to Scale or climb over, then it is too deep to be undermined, and then the Wall
is too high to be broken down or battered; and the Lords Salvation as a Wall of
Defense in an evident manner, is, when the Lord does defend his People, either
only by his own hand, or in an extraordinary manner, blessing small and weak
means for their defense.

First, Sometimes the Lord does defend merely and only by his own hand; and
that is either by taking away the desire of the Enemy, that the Enemy shall not
desire to do his People any harm as the Lord Promised to his People of old,
when they went up to appear before the Lord thrice in the year, at that time no
man shall desire their Land, Exodus 34.24 they should at that time be so safe
from invasion; or if the Enemy shall desire and attempt to do his People harm:
yet sometimes the Lord by his immediate hand stirs up the spirit of some
Cyrus to be their Protector, as the People, of whom the Text does speak, did
find it upon experience, Ezra 1.1. or if the Lord shall permit the Serpent to
cast (...) of his mouth Waters like a flood after the Woman fled into the
wilderness: yet the Lord who rules in Heaven above, and on the Earth, will
sometimes make use of the Earth to help the Woman, and the Earth shall open
(...) mouth and swallow up the floods the Dragon had cast out of his mouth,
(...) 12 15, 16. and thus he does defend his People only by his own hand.

Secondly, Or by his blessing of weak and small means for their defense and
that is, either when his People are in a fearful and affrighted posture, (...)
it was with the King of Judah, and his People when they heard of the
Confederacy of Syria and Ephraim against them, the heart of the King of Judah
and his People were moved as the Trees in the Wood are moved with the wind,
Isai 7.2. and yet the Lord made it manifest, that they were but as the two
tails of smoak^ng fire brands, soon extinguished, ver. 4. or when his People
are in a divided state, that they cannot so unite in the (...) of means for
their (...) they might, as it was in Deborah's time, for the divisions of
Reuben were great thoughts of heart, and again for the divisions of Reuben were
great thoughts of heart, Judge. 5.15. and yet the Lord gave them a Song of
Triumph, and the conclusion was, O God let thine Enemies p^rish, and those who
love thee be as the Sun when it goes forth in its might, and so the Land had
rest, Judge. 5. ult. and in what a feeble state was Jerusalem in Zerubbabel's
time, as to defend themselves by any outward means; what a day of small things,
and yet the Lord said, not by might nor by power but by the Spirit of the Lord,
and what art thou great mountain before Zerubbabel, Zech 4.5, 6. and thus the
Lord defends in an extraordinary manner, by blessing weak means.

2. A defending in a terrible manner; we read in Exo. 14.24. that the Lord in
the Morning watch, right early and timely looked forth upon the Host of
Egyptians and troubled them: it was a dreadful dismaying and confounding look,
and he looked through the Pillar of fire, called a Pillar, noting strength and
stability; but it stood as a Wall of defense between the Israelites and the
Egyptians their Enemies: and in our Text we read of a Wall of fire, it scopeth
at the same, to show us how effectually but in a terrible manner the Lord does
defend his People; and that is in such a manner as is terrible to the Enemy,
and sometimes at the first appearance of it, is terrible to the Lords people
themselves.

1. In such a manner as is terrible to the Enemy, sometimes the Lord by his own
immediate hand does dart into their minds such affrighting Fantasies, and
dismaying apparitions as shall fill their Ears, Heads and Hearts with such
confounding noises and reports, which shall make them like the Syrians of old,
whom the Lord caused to hear the noise of the Chariots and Horsemen, as the
noise of a great Host, and they rose (...) and fled away, 2 King. 7.6. we read
of Zions Enemies in Psalm. 48.5, 6, 7, 8. they saw, they were troubled, and they
hasted away, Fear took hold of then as of a woman in travel, there thou
breakest the Ships of Tarshish, as we have heard so we have seen in the City of
our God, he will Establish (...) Selah: This is to defend his People in such a
manner as is terrible to (...) Enemies.

2. And sometimes in such a manner, as at the first aspect and app^^^rance
seems terrible to his people: the Lord will sometimes make (...) of a
terrible means to be the carrier of the answer of the Prayers of (...) People,
Psalm. 65.5. thou do answer us by terrible things in thy righteousn^ss O God
of ou^ Salv^tion, and the Lord chooses to relieve by terrib^^ things, Isai.
4.3. thou d^dst terrible things which we looked not for when (...) came down,
and the Mountains flowed down at thy presence, we did no more expect relief by
such a means then to see Mountains to melt and become a plain; it is of our
selves to destroy our selves, but it is the Lord alone can save us by
destroying means, to make use of a Bear to preserve a Lamb is a strange and
mavelous thing, but Persia was likened to a Bear, in Dan. 7 5. and Cyrus the
King of Persia must become to be Protector of the Lambs company, Ezra 1.1, 2.
this is to defend his People by a Wall of Fire in a terrible manner.

Only let us distinguish of the degree of Protection:

First, Sometimes the Protection is total and full without any loss at all to
Gods People, that whatever the Blasphemous threatenings of a Rabshekah has been
in the day of Reproach and time of Zions trouble, yet the Lord puts a Hook
into the Nose, and a Bridle into the Lips of the Enemy, and would not suffer
them so much as to come into the City, nor shoot an Arrow, nor come before them
with a Shield, Isai. 37.38. then the Protection is total and plenary.

Secondly, Sometimes the Lord only defends the Body of his People, the most
considerable part of them, and then the loss they suffer shall be valued at a
very considerable price; when Joshua had lost about thirty six men, and had
sought out and removed the accursed thing, it then must cost the Enemy no less
then twelve thousand lives, Josh. 7.8 -- 25. the Lord will make it manifest
that precious in his sight is the death of his Saints, Psalm. 116.15. if a Godly
man did foresee at what price the Lord of Hosts does value his life, and how
many lives it must cost the Enemy, if he does suffer the loss of his own life
in the cause of God, and for his People, it would make him surely content
Sampson like, to lay down his life even among the Philistims: thus you have
heard how the Lords protecting presence is as a Wall of fire round about the
Lords People, the conclusion of this, who is like to thee O Israel? a People
saved of the Lord, the shield of thine help, the (...) of thine excellency,
thine Enemies shall be found Liars to thee, and thou shall tread upon their
high places, Deuteronomy. 32. ult. and of this protect^^g presence, as a wall of fire
the Lords People both in Old England and (...) New England have enjoyed their
time of experience in days of old and lately, and in particular this Colony
has ^ound it to be true: let your Enemies in this case be Judges; here are
many of you in this great Congregation, now appearing this day before the Lord,
who are his witnesses, and are ready to say, as we have heard so we have seen
in the City of our God, the Lord is (...) to be a refuge, Psalm. 48.2. he was
thus known in days of old to the confusion of your Enemies, and in that day
known to you for your abundant joy.

But at present let us tarry no longer upon the proof of that which is so plain
in the Word and Works of the Lord, in the several Generations of the Saints;
and to our own experience in days of old, and to this very day: but let us
proceed to enquire when will the Lord be a Wall of Fire round about a People?
the answer to this is from the second part of the Doctrine, When the Lord is
the Glory in the midst of his People, then he will be a wall of fire round
about them; and therefore let us enquire concerning this Glory, omitting the
multiplicity of Interpretations of that Word, and coming as nextly and directly
to the true Gospel sense of it (as I ca^^ I take it may be thus described: This
Glory is the Splendour and Shine of Divine Excellency; as God is a God of Mercy
and Holiness, appearing in the Glass of his Word and Ordinances, whereby he
transformeth a People into his likeness, and disposes them practically to his
praise and Glory.

1. A Splendour and Shine of his Divine Excellency, it is the Glory of the Sun,
Moon and Stars, 1 Cor. 15.41 their Splendour in the Light and Beams suitable to
their Celestial nature and excellency; we read of the Glory of the Son of
God, John 1.14. We beheld his Glory as the Glory of the Son of God; that is,
the Shine of his Divine Excellency suitable (...) and becoming him as he is the
Son of God: The Glory of God in the midst of a People, is the Splendour and
Shine of his Divine Excellency in the light, Rays and Beams thereof suitable,
his excellent Being and well-becoming his Divine Perfection; for how great is
his Goodness? how (...) is his Beauty? Zech. 9. ult. and upon this Splendour is
the promised defe^^^ Psalm. 80.1. O thou that dwell between the Cherubims,
shine bright, and it follows in the second verse then stir up thy strength
and come and save (...)

2. The Shine of Divine Excellency, as God is the God of Mercy as Holiness; for
as God is the God of Nature and rules the Creature^ (...) there is a Shine of
his Divine Excellency, in Framing and Ruling of (...) Creatures, Psalm. 19.1.
The Heavens do declare thy Glory, and the Fir^^^ment thy handy work; but the
Glory of which our Text does (...) seems rather to be the Shine of his Divine
Excellency more (...) as he is the God of mercy and Holiness, of Grace and of
Purity.

First, As he is the God of Mercy and Grace, intending especially (...)
Splendour and Shine of his Mercy, as in the forementioned place, Psa. 8^ ^^ O
thou that feedest Israel give ear, and hadest Joseph like a (...) dwell
between the Cherubims shine bright: who dwell between the Cherubims, who
were nigh to the Mercy Seat, Exodus 25.21, 22. And the Mercy Seat was a Type of
the Throne of Grace, where Christ our merciful High Priest is enthroned, and
from whence for his Mercy sake he has promised to meet with, and graciously to
commune with his People in the times and cases of difficulty whatsoever: O thou
that dwell between the Cherubims shine bright; the shine of his Mercy from
the Throne of Graces, and then it follows, stir up thy strength and come and
save us.

Secondly, As he is the God of Holiness; the shine of his Mercy in a very pure
and holy manner called the Beauties of Holiness, Psalm. 110.3. and the Cherubims
which are called Seraphims in Isai. 6.3. were crying in the Temple, Holy, Holy,
Holy Lord God of Hosts: and when the Lord does appear amongst a People to be
Glorious in Holiness, then he will be fearful in Praises, and do wonderful
things for their safety, Exodus 15.11. Jer. 2.2, 3. I remember the kindness of
thy youth, the love of thine Espousals when thou wentest after me into the
Wilderness, Israel was Holiness unto the Lord, and they who destroyed him
should then surely offend, and evil shall come upon them says the Lord, So
that upon this Shine of Mercy and Holiness amongst a People is the defense
promised.

Thirdly, Appearing in the Glass of the Word and Ordinances; there is a Glory
appearing in the Glass of divine Providence, and is called a Glory, Exodus
16.7, 10. but the Glory in the midst of a People seems to be rather a Glory
appearing in the Glass of the Word and Ordinances; that which was typified by
the Glory which came first into the Tabernacle of old when finished, Exodus
40.34. the Glory which likewise came into the first Temple, 1 King. 8.10. the
Glory which came into the second Temple of which our Text speaks, and is so
expounded in Ezekiel. 43.4. and applied to that very time in ver. 7. For (says
the Lord) the place of my Throne* (...) of the Soles of my feet, where I will
dwell amongst the Children of Israel, and this Tabernacle Glory, and Temple
Glory was a Type of the true Gospel Glory: for now as in a Glass (namely) in
the Glass of Word and Ordinances we behold the Glory of the Lord, 2 Cor. ^^ ult
and a Type of the Glory of the new Jerusalem spoken of in Rev 21 and upon this
Glory thus shining in the Glass of the Word and Ordinances is the promised
defense, Isai. 4.5.

Fourthly, Whereby the Lord transformeth a People into his likeness, and
disposes them particularly to his Praise and Glory; this is effectually and
indeed the (...) People in the midst of whom he will be the Glory, and round
about whom he will be the Wall of fire, for they have not only the Glory set
before them as in a Glass; so its before multitudes in the Glass of Word and
Ordinances: but they by beholding of this Glory are transformed from Glory to
Glory by the Spirit of the Lord 2 Cor. 3. vlt. and thus its a Glory amongst
them by way of transformation, and therefore we say does practically dispose
them to his Praise and Glory, that such a People have not only Glory set before
them as a copy, ^^tern, and Example, as the Rule is the Idea or Example of
Eupraxie (...) Well-act^ng, but its a Glory in the midst of them by way of
imitati^^ and practice, effectually and practically a Glory in the midst of
them. And here let us take a brief view how this Glory did appear in the (...)
of this People of whom the Text does speak, by way of transformatio^ and
imitation, practically and effectually respecting their Church and Ci^vil
State, in Rulers and in People.

1. In General, Let us Consider then the hearts both of Rulers and People were
set to seek the Lord their God with their faces Zionward weeping, they did go
to join in a Covenant not to be forgotten, and that in a da^ of public
Humiliation; their Hearts subscribing with their Hands, Neh. 9. ult. and they
entered into a Curse and into an Oath, to walk in the Law of the Lord, Neh.
10.29. Into a Cu^se and into an Oath, O Dreadful (...) yet a very beautiful
Solemnity they did put upon the staff of beauty (...) Covenant of their God.

2. More particularly, then the People did lay to heart the evil of (...) and
wept sore because of the Abominations committed, Ezra 10.1 and they trembled at
the Commandment of the Lord, ver. 3. and then was tha^ harmonious speech heard
among them, so full of the Splendor of (...) and Godliness, some in the name
of many others, saying to Ezra, Aris^^ this matter belongs to thee, only be of
good courage and do it, and we are wi^^ thee, Ezra 10.4.

3. And yet more especially, how did this Glory practically appear (...) the
Rulers of the Commonwealth and of the Church, (...) as (...) their purging
Pollutions out of the Temple, Neh. 13.5 -- 8. in reform^^^ biting Usury, taking
(as it were) the prey out of the teeth, yea, break^^^ the Jaw Bone of the
Oppressor, Neh. 5.1 -- 15 and then they did (...) partially proceed without
fear of any or favor to any whomsoeve^ (...) appears in that matter of
removing strange Wives, Ezra 10. severi^^ ^^gainst those who profaned the
Sabbath, Neh. 13.

To conclude this, How did their Magistrates their nursing Fathers, ^^rubbabel,
Mordecai, Nehemiah and others shine with pious policy, religious righteousness,
and holy courage, that Zions Judges were restored as at first, and her
Counselors as at the beginning, as was promised and prophesied concerning
them, Isai. 1.16, 17. and the Glory of the Lord thus appeared by way of
transformation and imitation, practically and effectually in the (...) of this
People, accordingly his protecting presence was as a wall of (...) round about
them.

Let us now consider the Reasons of the Relation, and the connection (...) these
two; why the Lord will be a wall of fire round about a People ^hen he is the
Glory in the midst of them:

Reas. 1. Because he is the Glory in the midst of them: he will not give his
Glory to another, Isai 42.8. you know what Joshua pleaded, Josh. 7.9. that the
Enemy would come and cut off their name, and Lord what will thou (...) for thy
great Name, it is as if he had said, were it only the cutting off our Name, and
the throwing down and burying our Honor in the dust, we should be silent, it
becomes us to put our mouths in the dust, and to keep silence, for unto us
belongs shame and confusion, but Lord, its thy Great Name, and what will thou
do for thy Great Name? was it ever (...) while the Lords Glory is in the midst
of a People that he would (...) to be laid waste, this cannot be with respect
to his own Name (...) Glory.

^eas. 2. Thence follows an endeared respect the Lord has to a People while he
is the Glory in the midst of them; for he loves his Glory, and therefore has
an endeared respect for those who are transformed into his ^^keness, he loves
them as the apple of his eye, as in Zech. 2.3. After the Glory says the
Prophet, I am sent to the Nations who spoiled you, for he that touches you
touches the Apple of mine eye says the Lord: and we read (...) the Church was
compared to a Candlestick, and the (...) ^^^mon-wealth and Church were likened
to two Olive (...) to stand on the right side and left side of the Candlestick,
(...) supply it (...) golden Oil, that which is very precious, that the light
^f Grace an^ splendour of Godliness might appear in them; and while (...) thus
sto^d with the Candlestick, they stood before the Lord of Hosts, (...) Lord of
the whole Earth, as his anointed ones, and who should touch his (...) to do
them any harm.

Reas. 3. The Conclusion of this is, if the Lord does promise to pro^^ct and
defend us, it is upon condition that we be directed and ruled by ^im, if he be
the wall of (...) its upon condition that we do receive and set up himself as
the Glory in the midst of us, the Pillar of Fire was to be for Direction as
well as for Protection, Isai. 33.22. the Lord is our Judge; the Lord is our
Lawgiver, the Lord is our King and he will save us; while the Lord rules among
us as our Judge, our Lawgiver and our King, so long he will save us, Numb.
23.21, 22, 23. Balaam knew this to be verily true, to the confusion of all his
Enchantments, for he (...) the shout of a King is in the midst of them; and it
follows, there is (...) ^^^chantment, against (...), nor Divination against
Israel, and to this tim^ (...) shall be said, what has God wrought? not but
that the Lord may (...) time preserve a People in the midst of whom he is not
the Glory, but (...) he be not the Glory among them, and has no purpose to set
up his Glory in the midst of them, it may be rather called a reserving them for
an evi^ day to come then at present a preserving of them. Let us now proceed to
the Use:

Use 1. By way of Information: In the first place it may serve to discover to
us the way of the Lords dispensations and manner of his dealings with a
Professing People, while he is the Glory in the midst of them, and makes them
to look forth as the morning, fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, and terrible
as an Army with Banners, Cant 6.10 but if the time be come for the coals of the
fire of the Lords anger to be scattered (...) a People, first his Glory departs
out of the Temple, and then out of (...) City, Ezekiel chap. 10, and 11. the Glory
first d^parts out of the Church, (...) then out of Court and Commonwealth, and
their G^ory becomes like (...) setting Sun, the sha^ows of the Ev^ning are
stret^hed out upon them, the Enemy then says* (...) us arise and go up by
night and destroy her Palaces* J^r. 6.5, 6 its now Zions night and our time,
let us now go up and desire^ her Palaces.

2. (...) way of Information, we may see what Glory the Lord is engaged (...)
defend: its when h^ is the Glory in the mid^t of a People; (...)

1. He is not engaged to defend carnal Pomp and (...) he has purposed to
stain the pride of all such Glory, (...) contempt the hon^u^^ble of the ^arth,
Isai. 23.9. this the (...) is doing upon the Kingdoms of the World at this
time.

2. Neither is the Lord engaged to defend the place where (...) he has been
the Glory and has put an honor upon that place, Ier. 9. ^^ go to Shiloh and
see what the Lord has done, Shiloh was the first pla^^ where the Ark of the
Lord was settled, after his People had possession (...) (...) Land of Canaan,
and Shiloh was the first place where the Glory of Go^ was seen by the People in
a settled manner, Josh. 18.1. but the time came when he forsook his Tabernacle
in Shiloh, and the Tent which he had pitched amongst men, and delivered up his
strength unto Captivity, and his Glory into the Enemies hand, Psalm. ^8.61, 62.
the Ark of the Lord, the means of divine strength, and the glass of Divine
Glory was taken, thence (...) lamentation, the glory is departed from Israel,
for the Ark of the Lord (...), 1 Samuel 4 ult.

(...) Neither will the Lord be engaged to defend that People who has (...)
Visions of his Glory and of his greatness, if they be but mere ^isions, and
have wrought no gracious reformation, and no glorious ^ransformation among
them, we read of a People who had seen his Glo^^ and his greatness, and after
all the Visions they had of his Glory, yet his wrath was made known against
them according to his Oath, against them in his anger that they should never
enter into his rest, and they perished in the way, and we read of a burning
kindled under a Glory, and as a fire shall consume, Isai. 10.16. this is verily
true, not only concerning all carnal pomp and worldly Glory, but of all such
persons who with a carnal eye acting under the power of carnal and inferior
Principles have been beholding Divine Glory in the Glass of Word and Ordinances.

^se 2. This Doctrine calls for Self-examination; Let us Examine ^^^selves,
and commune with our hearts according to the former Do^^^^ne, we live in
perilous days; are some Storms blown over ^ worse then those may soon come
upon New England, will the Lord be a Pillar of fire round about N. Engl. how
pleasing would this be not only to Grace but to Nature, for the sake of your
Wives and your Children, and the Cities (...) our God? but the Answer to this
question depends upon an answer to another question, whither the Lord be the
Glory in the midst of his Churches (...) New England? I cannot say much to the
Answer of so hard a question, (...) expedient for me upon this occasion to say
all I can; but I (...) present to your considerations two Rules of Trial.

The (...) that which is most manifest is, when the Lords glory in the ^^dst of
(...) is a rising glory like the rising sun powerfully convincing the
beholder^, like a rising sun looks forth as the Morning, so heart gladding to
^he faithful in Israel while they behold the Lord arising gloriously into his
(...) place, adorning Sanctuary means with his Salvation, and makes his ^^ints
shout for joy, this argues clearly Is^i 32 9 when Zions voice speaking to her
Ch^ldren so comfortably, come suck of Zions breasts and be satisfied, milk out
and be delighted with the abundance of her glory, this argues very comfortably
indeed for a People, Isai. 66.11. and then the Glory proves to be an
affrighting Glory to those who are not faithful in Israel, that they are afraid
in their close places and dare not openly show themselves, Psalm. 18.45. and
some of them in their affrightment are driven to give God Glory, Rev. 11.13. so
that when the Glory in the midst of a People proves to be so heart-gladding to
the faithful, in spirit affrighting to the unfaithful, and thus powerfully
convincing (...) holders, doubtless the protecting presence of the Lord shall
be in a (...) as manifest for their safety, this was the state of N. England at
first (...) first glory, but we must come lower and proceed to a second Rule of
(...)

2. When there is somewhat of a divine Glory yet breaking throu^^ the Clouds of
all those things which are against a people, that thoug^ (...) be a cloudy day,
and yet a day the light does prevail, that though a tim^ of Eclipse and yet not
so total but the light may be seen: now I beseec^ you suffer me to exemplify
in some plain instances; if Christ has some^thing against a Church or
Christian Common wealth, because they have left their first love and do not
their first works, and they are in danger (...) the removal of their
Candlestick if they do not speedily repent, and (...) if there be a shine in
the midst of those clowdy declinings of that whi^^ Christ owneth and calls
labor, work and patience, and cannot (...) them who are evil (who are
manifestly and convictingly evil) (...) if there be yet any of the splendour of
Grace and Godliness (...) through those clowdy declinings, this at present
bails them, and the (...) at present preserves them, and continues waiting and
striving with (...) that they would return and do their first works: but this
is only genera^ let me speak yet a little more particularly, whatever the
inormities (...) scandals of some may be, yet if there be a considerable numbe^
of (...) who shine, but especially if the ruling and carrying (...) Grace and
Godliness this will argue for that People; if (...) them a very considerable
number of those who (...) God on their Forehead, Rev. 7.4. and have the
qualifica^^^^ (...) company spoken of in Rev. 14.1. standing upon mount (...)
the Lamb of God, if yet a considerable number of those who sigh be (...) of the
abominations committed, Ez^k. 9.6, and weep s^rely because of (...) evils, as
you heard of the People of whom the Text speaks, but (...) if the Ruling
party do, though through many difficulties shine in (...), and the Glory of God
appears as of old in the T^bern^cle of (...) Congregation of the Lord, to the
suppressing and confounding of (...) scandalous practices, Numb. 14.10. so if
there be a divine Glory appearing in Church Assemblies, and Court Assemblies,
and makes the head of the Malefactor to bow down with shame, and others to
hear and fear but in no wise to sadden the hearts of the Righteous, whom the
Lord will not have made fad.

Honored and Beloved in our Lord, the Question now by way of trial (...)
whether a Church or Christian Commonwealth be like Rebekah of (...) who felt
two Nations, and two manner of People striving in her (...), a Jacob and an
Esau, this is beyond question, for it has been al^^^es thus more or less in
any Christian Commonwealth; but the que^^ion now with us is, which of these do
prevail? whether Jacob prevails (...) the Church, and prevails in the Court
and Common wealth, then we may conclude they are blessed, and shall be blessed,
and shall in many times and c^s^s see the face and faithfulness of the God of
Israel while they behold the face of an Esau.

Use 3. In the nex^ place let us proceed to a Use of Exhortation; we see upon
what condition we have and hold the Lords protecting presence, (...) upon
condition we have and hold his glorious presence in the midst of us, his
protecting presence round about us is for the sake of his Glory (...) the midst
of us: its in vain for us to think or act as if we would hold (...) protecting
presence, if we do not practically hold up a high esteem (...) Glory in the
midst of us.

Beseech you accept of some means, some Motives;

The first Rule is, Let us call to mind the first Glory in the first planting
of New England, and of the Churches here; let us not speak or think of this to
the undervaluing of that Glory which yet remains, (that is far (...) my
scope) let us be humbly thankful for that, but as a means to retain (...) is,
and to recover what is lost (if it may be) and when we call to mind that first
Glory, shall not our hearts be poured out within us? not (...) how the Lord did
make his Name Glorious by (...) through Sea perils, and Wilderness dangers,
Isai. 63.14. (...) that (...) Glory which did then appear, multitudes (...)
con^^^ted to thee (...) Zion, ^hine heart afraid and yet enlarged, Isai. 60 4
5. Let (...) say Multitudes, multitudes were converted to thee, even to thee O
(...), to thee O New Haven, aad to thee O Windsor, and the same (...) be laid
of many Churches of Christ in New England; and then (...) Hearts were afraid,
(not with base slavish fear in times of danger,) and (...) enlarged: O the
uniting Glory then manifest from the shine of mercy from the Throne, Grace
Ruling and Ordering both Rulers and People under the Glorious Banner of true
Gospel holy Love, for the Banner over them was Love: then were Colonies united,
and Courts united, Magistrates united, and Ministers united, Churches united,
and Plantations united; and that strengthening Exhortation how effectual it
wa^? Hag. 2.5, 6. Be strong O Zerubbabel, be strong O Joshua the son of
Iosedech, the Priest, be strong all ye People of the Land, be strong, be
strong, be strong this threefold Cord how strong it is? and then you were
terrible as an (...) with Banners, that your dread fell upon all your Enemies
round (...) and if any adventured to spoil you they did surely offend, so as
evil (...) and that speedily upon them from the Lord, looking upon them throu^^
the Pillar of fire in a terrible manner.

2. Let us in the second place consider, that the gradual withdrawings o^ the
Lords Glory from a professing People are imperceptible things, and are not
discerned, unless it be by those who have the eye salve of the Spirit, and are
held under special awakenings: As first the withd^awing of tha^ inward and
heavenly, that hearty and most real communion with (...) and one with another
in the ways of God, that, which while enjoyed makes a Christian society a
Heaven upon Earth, and worthy to bear (...) Name of the Heaven spoken of in
Rev. 12.1. and that which was (...) by the Glory which came into the inward
Court of the Temple, but (...) this is withdrawn, there may remain a shine of
Ordinances while they (...) administered in external order, and an outward
decency; but thi^ is (...) a shine in the outward Court of the Temple, and if
they be only in for^^ and not in power, that form may be s^^n defaced by
time-serving Princ^^ples, or there may be a holding of the form and yet a
denying of the ^^^wer of godl^ness, 2 Timothy 3.7. But such withdrawings none of
first do discern, unless they be such who have the Eye Salve of the Spirit
spoken of in Rev. 3.18. and are held under special awakenings upon their (...)
Consciences (...) Hearts; others Laodicean like, see not (...) at last the
shadows of the Evening are stretched upon (...) to the darkness of the
midnight, and so to utter (...) and ^^^struction.

3 If we will have the Lord to be the Glory in the midst of us, we (...)
practically deny any glorying in any thing else: we must put far (...) us
glorying in our shame, as those whose belly is their God, and mind ear^^^ly
things, their end is destruction, Phil. 3.19. we must put far from us (...)
strife and en^ying, glorying against one onother, or over one another, Jam. ^^
and we must put an end to that glorying which is no better then a being haughty
because of a holy mountain, Z^ph. 3.11, 12 if the Lord will be our Glory he
will m^ke us and keep us a humble People by Blasting our fruits, or threatening
us with a Sword, or by some humbling means or other, if the Lamb of God be our
Glory we must cast down our Crowns before him* Rev. 4. and esteem it our Glory,
and rejoicing that he has made us (...) Jam. 1.10. and that through his Grace
we can stoop low to him, and (...) another in the fear of God.

But I beseech you let the Exhortation come down yet more particu^^^ly: we read
of an Exhortation in Psalm. 24.6, 7 lift up your heads ye (...), and open ye
everlasting doors that the King of Glory may come in; who is the King of Glory?
^he Lo^d strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in Battle, some think this firstly
relates to the opening of the Temple Gates and Doors, when the Ark was to be
brought in, upon which between the Cherubims the Lord was said to dwell, 1
King. 8 2 -- 5. but let me use the same Exhortation to you Right Honorable and
Beloved in our (...) Jesus Christ; you who sit in Judgment, open your Doors,
your Court Doors that the King of Glo^^ may come in, and be the Glory in the
(...) of you; he is come in already, we bless God for his presence among (...)
but O that he would come with a greater Splendour of his presence, (...) mighty
in Battle, he will defend himself, and he will defend you (...) is the Glory
in the midst of you.

(...) a Civil Beauty and Moral Glory in a Court, while speech and ^^lence are
well observed and rightly ordered, but the Shine is when Wis^ome, Righteousness
and such like virtu^s are with such a divine luster and ^^thority that it
commands the Ears and Hearts of those who are your Auditors to bless, and the
Eyes of those who behold that they cannot but give Witness while they see
Righ^eousness like a Robe, and Judgment like a (...) 11 -- 14 that is the
Glory in the midst of a Court.

(...) Civil Policy needful in Civil-Estate affairs, but the shine is in (...)
Wisdom from above; Civil Policy is a good Servant, but ^^vine Policy must be
the Master and Ruler: Civil Policy makes the (...) of a Court to shine with a
Humane B^auty, and a Moral Luster, but (...) Divine Policy makes to shine as
an Angel of God, as was said of ^^lomon, that is the Glory in the midst of a
Court.

There must be an Acting and Ruling according to Humane Laws, and (...) Patent
Liberties, and Charter Privileges, but the shine is in Divine ^^ws, upon
Humane Laws, as Humane Laws are reducable to, or subordinate to Divine Laws,
and in no case whatsoever to be contrary to the same, and when the manner of
enquiring into a case, and executing of the Law is with the Splendour of pious
wisdom and religious impartiality, this is your wisdom among the Nations,
that shall make them say, what people are like to you, who have G^d so nigh?
Deuteronomy 4 6, 7. this is the way to be instrumental to put the Crown of the glory
of pardoning favor upon the people, Jer. 5.1. Run you too and fro, and see if
you can (...) a man who executes judgment and seeks truth, and I will
pardon it, (...) the way to fear (...) and honor the King, and (...) to (...)
with thos^ (...) are given to change, Prove. 24 21. the good Lord perform that
good (...) more abundantly to you, Isai. 28.5, 6. that he may be to you the
Crow^ glory, the Diadem of beau^y, the Spirit of judgment to you who sit in
judg^^ment, and of strength to you who turn the batail to the gate.

And let the Exhortation now come to the Temple-gates, O ye Temp^^^gates, lift
up your heads that the King of glory may come in! we hope the Lord is already
come into his Temple, and we think we would not (...) what yet remains of his
presence in his Temple after all our declinings (...) divisions, not for all
the glory of all the Kingdoms of the world, but (...) he would come with a
greater Splendour of his mercy and holiness, (...) grace and purity, we heard of
the glory that it is a Shine of Gods (...) excellency as he is the God of mercy
and holiness, of grace and (...)

But surely Gospel glory is contempered of Gospel peace and (...) pu^ity, of
Gospel privileges and Gospel power, of Gospel (...) Gospel discipline, to have
and hold a proportionable (...) these; we say a proportionable respect to
these, to be as verily, (...) and thoroughly faithful in the exercise of Gospel
discipline for the (...) of Gospel holiness, as ex^ensive of Liberty for the
honor (...) and me^cy, I am persuaded in this we generally agree, (...) would
Shine more in the practice of it, this would be a (...) of us. We must put and
keep a clean and clear (...) clean and the unclean, or otherwise holiness will
(...) Ezekiel. 22.25. and yet we must not call that unclean (...) God (...) clean,
for Gospel mercy and love will take that unkind at our (...) Acts 10.15. now
the Lord direct our feet to stand in a (...) place (...) Courts of our God, and
if we thus keep his charge and walk in his (...) we shall have places with
those who stand by, nigh unto the (...) Z^ch 3.7.

5. Let us use only such means for our defense as is consistent (...) glory of
God among us, Zion complains of two sorts of enemies; some foreign, they
likened to Lions, Bears and Leopards, Dan. 7.5. the Babylonian compared to a
Lion, the Persian to a Bear, and the Grecian to a Leopard, and some intestine
and domestic enemies, likened to Foxes, Cant. 2.15. take us these F^x^s, they
spoil the vines: such was the Samaritan who craftily pretended to help, but
intended to hinder the people of God, Ezra 4. and such Tobiah and Sanballat,
who many ways (...) to hinder the work of God, Neh. 4. The Lord preserve
New-^ngland, Courts, and Churches from any such Confedaracy with the one,
^^toleration of the other, as cannot consist with real fidelity to the Lords
(...), nor real duty to our King, Isai 8.21. and you who are our Souldie^y and
Instruments in the Lords h^nd to turn the battle, I beseech you Consider, upon
what condition we have the Lord to be our defense, it is upon condition that he
be our glory, behave your selves in all your military affairs and concernments,
(not as the profane Soldiery of the world) but with such a Splendour of
religious courage and pious magnanimity, with such sparklings of a Spirit of
Faith, Prayer, and Piety, as becomes the guard of New England Churches, that
the Angels who wait upon New England Churches, and the glory of God in the
midst of them, may delight to be your guard, and to be with you in the Camp,
and if it must (...) to the trial, you will soon perceive, that you have more
for you (...) come against you.

(...) me now add a few words to you who are the Freemen, respecting the wo^k
of the day, the Election of your Rulers* the Lord persuade ^our hearts to put
far from you (...) sidings and party-taking Interests, (...) to side only
with the Lord and his glory, and therefore to choose such whom you (...)
persuaded in the sight of the Lord, will be instrumental (through the Lords
blessing) to hold up the glory amongst you. That it may be said of this Colony,
as of Judah of old, yet ^udah rules with God, (...) faithful with the Saints,
Hos. 11. ult. so that it may be said, yet (...) Colony rules with God, and is
faithful with the Saints.

^n the last place, let us all bow down, and beg earnestly of the Lord for
(...) visions of this glory. Multitudes see a glory, and yet they (...)
understand not, they see and perceive not* (...) 6 9, 10. B^hold ye (...),
wonder, and perish, Act. 13 41. they beheld that which causes (...) to wonder,
and yet wondering they perish, the Lord grant that we (...) have a transforming
sight as you heard out of the 2 Cor. 3. ult. when (...) had been upon the Mount
conversing with the Lord, his countenance shined with the reflection of the
Beams of Divine Glory* the Lord grant that our Rulers when they appear amongst
the People may shine as those who has been upon a Holy (...) with the Holy one
of I^rael, and that we also may shi^e in pious subjection to them in, according
to and for the Lord* we are all Ex^^^ted to shine as Lights in the midst of an
(...) Generation, (...). 2.15. O that Magistrates might more and more shine,
and Deputies shine, Ministers shine, and Church Members shine, and Heads of
Families shine, and this will be the means to make the Rising Generation shine
in Grace and Godliness, (...) else will at least make them ashamed to appear in
a profane posture: be its not Natural nor Moral Abilities, nor common gifts of
the Spirit can help us with these transforming Visions, we must down upon our
knees at the Footstool of the Lord, and beg of him, that if we have found
favor in his sight, if New England has found favor, if your Courts and
Churches has found favor, if we have found favor for our selves and for
ours, that the Lord would show us this Glory, that yet we and ours may be for a
People, for a Name and for a Praise to him.

And now I beseech you to accept of some Motives to settle the Exhortation:

1. Let us Consider, That if this Glory leave us what have we by way of
Exchange? Jer. 2.11. My People have changed their Glory for that (...) does not
profit; if the Glory of this Holiness leave us, what is then (...) us but a
turning the Grace of God into lasciviousness, Jude 4. and (...) shameful, if
the glory of this Gospel, Love and Mercy leave us, what is (...) left us, but
unchristianly Divisions and B^tings, until we be consumed one of another, Gal.
5.15. ^f this Glory leave our Government, then our Aristo^crisie will
degenerate into mere Tyranny, and our Democrisie into Ana^^chy and Confusion.
You know what the Kings Daughter (...) with her Brother, when he would have
forced her, 2 Samuel 13.13. Nay my Brother deal not so foolishly, and as for me
whether shall my shame go: shall New England Churches be forced and spoiled of
their peace and puri^^ by their Brethren, yea, by their Children the rising
Generation: (...) Brethren, let me this day plead the cause of your Sister, do
not so foolishly with your Sister. Nay Children, let me plead the cause of your
M^^ther* deal not so foolishly with your Mother, but if it prove so, (...)
whether shall her s^ame go? where shall she be able to hid^ her (...) Christian
World? if this Glory departs from New England Churches* (...) they shall be
left either to dry Breasts, or to a miscarrying Womb, or (...) bring forth
Children for the Murderer, f^r the Murderer, Hos 9.12, 13, ^8.

2 Let us yet more particu^arly consider: That if this Glory leave us, we are
of all People the m^st miserable; ^ts so commonly seen when this Glory leaves
a People, that they are commonly left so such sins that Sodom claims kindred
with them* and God calls her their si^ter, Ezekiel, 16 49. and Samaria not
committed half the Abominations they are left to commit, ver. ^2. and awful
consideration respecting the rising Genera^^on; and then the punishments will
be proportionable with the sins in a ^egree, Amos 3.2. you I have known of all
the Families of the Earth, and you I will puni^h; and now I cannot wholly omit
the consideration, what befell the Posterity of those People of whom the Text
speaks, when they forsook the Lord and the Lord forsook them, Famous Cotton
tells (...) in his Exposition upon Can^. 3.3, 4. that A^tiochus (...), that
little Horn spoken of in Dan. 8. w^o ^axed great, and came in upon him, and
threw down the true Worship of God, robbed the Temple, took away the daily
Sacrifice, set up the stature of Jupiter, Olympius, ( the abominable things)
and took the Circumcise Children and hanged them upon the Ne^ks of their
Mothers, such horrid Outrages: and he further warns us what sins made way for
these miseries; they were affected not only with being like (...) other Nations
in respect of Leagues, but in respect of many evil ^ustomes and Degenerate
Manners, and at last left to such bitter Divi^^^ns, that Brethren complained
one against the other to Srangers, yea to (...) States.

Learned Hui^ in his Exposition upon Dan. 8. says what probably were the sins
which made way for such Calamities; the Table of the Lord was become
contemptible among them Mal. 1.7 the Sacrifice consisted of the (...) and sick,
ver. 8. their Priests became M^rcenary, and Holy things of base account, ver.
12 13. a robbing of God of that ought to be for the maintenance of his Worship,
Mal. 3 8 Religion a vain and bootless thing wi^h a (...), the proud pr^zed and
pref^rred, and the (...) slighted and ^^spised, ver. 14, 15 and th^se made way
for the flood of Calamities, and the Outrages committed by that little Horn,
who waxed great, in Dan. chap. 8.

My Scope in speaking of these is, that we may see that if this Glory leaves
u^, to what sins and sorrows we and ours shall be left: the Lord ^^ke
New England wise by the harms of others; he has this year sent this Warning
pe^^e while the Enemy came upon our Borders; O that we (...) take warning by
these things.

3. The Motive contained in the Text and Bosom or the (...) the Lord will not
be engaged to defend us if we do not keep his Glory in the midst of us; he will
not account it honorable to keep house if the house be filled only or
principally with vessels of dishonor and reproach: In a great ^ouse there are
some Vessels of Silver and of Gold, of Wood and Earth, some to honor and some
to dishonou^, 2 Timothy 2 20* the Lord purge us that we may be Vessels of Honor,
and the Lord will love to keep us in the Horse, and to keep House with us; we
must Honor God or else he will honor himself by throwing us down, and we must
prepare then for E^y's Doom, upon which fo^lowed the Lamentation of that godly
Woman, with which she breathed out her Soul, the Glory is departed from Israel,
1 Samuel 4. ult she heard of the death of her Father, and of her Husband* but the
loss of these did not ly so near her heart as the loss of the Glory, and
therefore above all she lamented that: they told her of a Mad Child she had
brought forth, but she did not mind nor regard it, but said, Icabod, where is
the Glory; O that more of this Godly Spirit was manifest among us, that
whatever our losses are we may not lay them to heart in comparison of the loss
of this Glory, and whatever our enjoyments (...) we may not regard them but
call them Icabod, where is the Glory?

Lastly, Let us in the l^st place Consider by way of comfort to those who are
Faith^ul in this matter, of holding up this Glory among them according to the
measu^e of their Abilities and opportunities in public or private occasions
and concernm^nts; the Lord knows you have a (...) work in hand, and much
opposition from without and within, (...) your comfort, the Lord is your
Defense, (...) good, your strong hold, N^^. ^ 7. and if ^o keep your self and
y^urs clear of the sins of the (...) the Pride, the Prodigality, Vanity and
Vileness, those sins f^r which (...) V^ol of Gods wra^h is pouring out upon the
Nations, and New-En^^^^^ has felt some of the d^ops of those Viols; you shall
be the Lo^ds (...) M^l. 3 17 and if you cannot deliver the P^o^le amongst whom
(...) like N^ah, Daniel and ^ob, you shall deliver your own Sou^, (...) 14 14.

And before we conclude, let us tune one Song of Thanksgivin^ (...) the Lord
not only for his protecting a (...) Presenc^ in d^yes (...) remembering the work
of the Lord, and his wonde^s of old, Psalm. 7^.1^ (...) for th^se many years,
while the Lord has been p^uring out his (...) upon the N^ti^n^, yet he has
kept it as in Cha^b^r^, Isai 26 10 and (...) last year, while the Enemy was on
our borders, and many Thoug^ (...) (...) Fears what the Event would be, but we
have heard the Lord (...) to us, Rise my Love and come away, the Winter is
past, and the Rain is over, the voice of the Turtle is yet heard in your Land,
Cant. 2.11, 12. O that we could rise so that this Glory might rise in our
Churches and Courts, in our Families, and in all our concernments: But is there
not a rising Glory in some Churches upon whom the shadows of the Evening have
been stretched? are there not some pulled as Brands out of the Fire, who were
in the Flames? the Lord increase their number, and their glory, and who knows
what yet the Lord may do for those who yet (...) like the Burning Bush, but the
good will of him who dwelt in the Bush pity and preserve them; only let us not
be high-minded but fear, and yet in fear hope in his Mercy, for Salvation is
nigh to them who fear him, that Glory may dwell in our Land, Psalm. 85.9.

FINIS.

