A SERIOUS EXHORTATION TO THE PRESENT and SUCCEEDING Generation IN NEW ENGLAND;

Earnestly calling upon all to Endeavor that the Lords Gracious Presence may
be continued with Posterity.

Being the Substance of the LAST SERMONS PREACHED

By Eleazar Mather, late Pastor of the Church in Northampton in New England.

Judge. 2. 10, 17. And also that Generation were gathered to their fathers, and
there arose another Generation after them which knew not the Lord nor yet the
works which he had done for Israel -- They turned quickly out of the war, which
their fathers walked in, obeying the Commandments of the Lord; but they did not
so Psalm. 78 3 4 5. --, Our fathers have told us -- We will not hid them from
their children showing the Generation to come the praises of the Lord. He
appointed a Law in Israel, which he commanded our fathers that they should make
them known to their children, that the Generation to come might know them, even
the children which should be born, who should arise and declare them to their
children. CAMBRIDGE: Printed by S. G. and M. J. 1671.

TO THE CHURCH AND INHABITANTS OF Northampton in N. E.
Beloved in the Lord Jesus,
H ow the gracious Presence of God did accompany your faithful, and now
blessed Pastor, during the time of his Ministration (even for the space of
Eleven years) in the Gospel amongst you, it needs not, (nor is it meet) for me
to say, your selves having been Witnesses thereof, and many amongst you being
the seals of his Ministry. I have heard it from sundry of you, that in his
latter time you observed more then ordinary of God to be in him and with him:
In which respect it may be presumed, that any thing of his will be welcome to
you, our more especially his last Labors. Wherefore the ensuing Sermons are
commended to your serious and practical perusal.

What is here Published, is done from your Pastors Notes, as left written with
his own hand, which indeed come every way short of what the same Sermons were
when delivered viva Voce. Had himself emitted them, they would have been far
more accurate. Nevertheless, I was willing that these should come forth,
because the Matter therein contained is weighty and Spiritual, and the Manner
of handling serious and searching; and partly because they were his last
Sermons It is said, 2 Samuel.22. 1. Now these be [the last words] of David the
sweet singer in Israel: Remarkable words they are, because the last words. Some
observe, that the Swan a little before death sings the most sweetly. These
Sermons are the Cygneae ( conciones) Cantiones ( as famous Whickers last Sermon
it not unfitly styled) the Swan-like Songs of him that was once a sweet Singer
in your Israel. The dying words of a Father are to be much remembered: Behold,
here are the dying (and yet living) Sermons of him that was your Spiritual
Father.

But especially I was inclined to Publish what is here presented to you,
because the dying Counsel which my Reverend Father ((...)) left with me, was,
that I should seriously endeavor the good of the Rising Generation in this
Country (a) See my Fathers Life, p. 27.
What my Father said in the particulars and circumstances of it, I communicated
to my Brother, (a Brother he was to me by Nature, as well as in the Lord, which
last is indeed, as the (b) Fraters in seculo fratres in Domino, quae posterior
major est and melior fraternitas. Ambros. (...) Chrysostom.
Ancient observes, the greatest and best Fraternity) which occasioned him to
Preach these Sermons, and causes me now to expose them to public view, that
so you especially that are of the Rising Generation, not only in Northampton,
but in other places in this Country, may (if it be the will of God to bless
Endeavors that way) be awakened to consider the things that belong to your
peace, and that before they are hid from your eyes. However, what is here done
shall turn for a Testimony.

There was another Sermon intended by the Author, which should have been
directory to those of the Rising Generation, as addition all to the Motives
which concern them: But (as Elihu speaks in another case) at this my heart
trembles, and is moved out of his place, that those who are the spes gregis,
the Hope of the succeeding Generation, should by the Lord be snatched away,
when they are in the midst of their days, and also in the midst of faithful
endeavors for the good of their Generations. That blessed Man Mr. Cotton in his
sermons on Psa. 116.15 preached upon occasion of the death of M John Oliver.
unto whom New England does under God owe it self more then unto any man, was
much moved when but one Minister, being young in years, was taken away by
death, Because (said he) it portends evil to the Rising Generation. What shall
we say then, when not one, but many such are taken away? Is there not evil to
come? Is it nothing, that besides former Strokes, which have been exceeding
awful and tremendous, the last year, within the space of a Twelve-moneth, no
less then Eight persons were taken, that were to our Israel as the Chariots and
the Horsemen thereof? Is it nothing that since that, even this Year also, of
those in the Ministry amongst our selves, a greater number then that have been
near unto death? Oh that I might prove a false Prophet when I often say, The
Gospel I fear is going, the Lord Jesus is departing from these Costs. But it
will be well if Divine (c) Vide his Poems of the Church Militant.
Herberts words prove not oraculous, viz. That the Sun of the Gospel which is
come into these Western parts of the World, shall return again from hence. Will
the Lord do any thing, and not reveal it unto his servants the Prophets; Our
Prophets have foretold us of these days. To suppress what some of late upon
Deathbeds have expressed: Our Prophets and our Fathers have forewarned us of
what is like to come. Renowned Hooker would many times express his fears, that
God would punish the wanton spirit of Professors in New England toward
Magistrates and Ministers, with the loss and want of able men in both Orders.
Is not this fulfilling? Some, it is true, that have too much of that spirit
which was in the Wilderness of old, when it was said, You Moses and Aaron have
killed the people of the Lord, think that God has taken away his Servants in
wrath to them, and in mercy to those that survive. But if it be so, how then
comes it to pass, that breaches are not made up again? There have been many
bereaved Congregations of late; Either the Lord raises up no Supply at all for
them, or it is long first, or it is in such a way as causes many sad thoughts
of heart. Surely these things proclaim aloud, that there is wrath in Heaven
against us, if we turn not to him that smites us Shall we not be afraid when
the Trumpet has been blown? Not only the Trumpet of Gods Works, but of his
Word also has sounded loud in our ears. Shall it be forgotten that the Lord
did long since stir up the Spirit of that holy Man of God Mr. Shepard, to
Preach many Sermons from 2 Chronicles. 12 8? There are solemn Passages in those
Sermons, too many here to be mentioned. And elsewhere the same Author has
awful Expressions. In one place be thus speaks, (d) On the Parable of the
Virgins, p. 96.
O New England, New England! I dare not yet tell thee what Christ Jesus has to
say to thee. In another place thus; (e) In Sound Believer, p. 250 first Edit.
Verily I am afraid such a dismal night is toward -- such fore Afflictions of
Famine, War, Blood, Mortality, [ Death of Gods precious Servants especially]
that the Lord will fill the hearts of all Churches, Families, Christians, that
shall be saved in those days, with such rendings, tearings, shakings, anguish
of spirit, as scarce never more in the worst days of our forefathers, and that
this shall continue until the remnant that escape shall say, Blessed is he that
comes in the Name of the Lord; Blessed be the face and feet of that Minister
that shall come unto us in Christ's Name. And again, (f) Ibid. p. 346.
Verily the time draws on, wherein the Lord will come for fruits from his
Vineyard, and if he finds it not, assuredly he will not be beholding to us for
obedience, [ He can raise his glory out of other people, and carry his Gospel
to them] who shall bring forth the fruits of it. [ The Lord will shortly lay
his Ax to the Root of our Tree] and if we will not serve the Lord in this good
Land, in the abundance of peace and mercy, we shall serve our enemies in
hunger, cold, and nakedness. Thus he. And (g) Mr Norton in the Life of Mr.
Cotton, p. 46, 47.
another that was once a famous Seer in our Israel, had solemn thoughts
concerning this thing, who faith, Now our Candlesticks cannot but lament in
darkness, when their Lights are gone; and the thrones of David mourn, that so
many of many of our late Worthies can be seen there no more; our desirable men
that remain, remove from us, and few there are that return. And as for those
that rise up amongst our selves, such is the portion of this Jerusalem, (that
though for her time she has not been an unfruitful Mother, yet) they are but
few that will guide her amongst all the sons whom she has brought forth, yea
very few that take her by the hand of all the sons that she has brought up.
What the Counsel of the Lord is concerning the bereaved Churches of
New England, is a solemn and awful Meditation. The non-considering that the
righteous is taken away from the evil to come, was a symptomatical and
threatening incogitancy in Isaiahs time, etc.

Now if the Lord should be provoked to deprive succeeding Generations of the
Gospel, New England which has been a Goshen, will become the darkest place
under Heaven, Yet I cannot but here further take notice of the weighty words
which are fallen from a judicious Pen writing to a people that once enjoyed
great and precious Means of grace; Such a lamentable condition (faith (h) Dr.
Tuckney in his Epistle on Mr. Cottons Book or Eccles.
he) has been and may be the lot of such praces and people which God has
sometimes highly honored, when they grow fat and wanton together Beth-el has
proved Beth-even. In after-time we find young profane Mockers in Bethel, and
scornful Neuters in Penuel. Go to Shiloh: Think of the sometimes glorious
Churches of Asia: As Empires and Kingdoms, so particular Churches have their
periods. I have sometimes on purpose visited some places where God has before
planted his Church, and a faithful Ministry, to see if I could discern any
footsteps and remembrances of such a mercy, and so they were all grown over
with thorns, and nettles had covered the face thereof, and the stone wall
thereof is broken down: and which is more sad, in some of them never, in others
very hardly built up again; God proving severe when we grow wanton, and so as
he removes the Candlestick, when we play or fight by the light of the Candle
set up in it. So he is very hardly induced to set it up again in that place
where it has been wantonly or frowardly put out. There are more hopes of
recovering a particular person fallen, by virtue of an Everlasting Covenant
made with him; but a particular Church or people (unless it be that of the
Jews, who in the great lubile after their Rejection shall again return to their
former possessions) cannot claim the like privilege of such a Covenant. The
Ark never returned to the same place from whence it was in a way of judgment
removed. And the glory of the Lord, when after its gradual removes was at last
quite gone from the first Temple; was not fully restored in the second, until
Christ's first coming, nor will it be in their Rejection till his second. I
think there will be found very few instances of Gods Presence and Ordinances
long enjoyed by a people, and after abused and rejected, if thereupon lost,
easily (if at all) restored. The Faith once delivered to the Saints, is not
wont to be either received or lost the second time, etc. Haec ille. I omit here
the Conjecture of Learned (i) See his letters to D. Twyss and conjectur a de
Gogo and Magogo
Mede, that the Apocalyptical Gog and Magog shall arise out of America. Our
making or (k) See a dying Testimony against this evil in the ensuing Sermons p.
24, 25.
difference between the Children of the Church, and the Children of Infidels,
has a direct tendency thereunto.

Now Mercy forbid that these things should ever be verified upon New England.
Yet it must needs be acknowledged that the Gospel has not been valued as it
ought to have been.

But (Beloved) although I have thus spoken, I intend not thereby any reflection
upon you who were the peculiar Charge of him whose dying words are thus
received before you. You have approved your selves an obedient people unto them
who have had the rule over you. Only it remains Brethren, that you be
steadfast in the Faith and Order of the Gospel, which your blessed Pastor did
from the Lord instruct you in. Remember also his Conversation. Some of your
selves observed, that in his latter years he grew exceedingly in the grace of
God, which caused you to fear and say that you should not enjoy him long,
because you saw that he was ripe for Heaven.

Sic Rosa sic Violae prima moriuntur in herba,
Candida nec toto lilia mense nitent.
Follow him as he followed Christ: Then as you were his Joy here, you will be
his Crown, when you shall see him again in another and a better World. I rest,

From my Study in Boston in N. E. 1. 1. 1671. Yours in the Lord Jesus, Increase
Mather.

A WORD TO THE Present and Succeeding Generation IN NEW ENGLAND.
1 Kings 8. 57. The Lord our God be with us, as he was with our fathers: let
him not leave us, nor forsake us.
IN the beginning of this Chapter we have the Historical Relation of a General
Assembly of the Representative Body of Israel, the end whereof was the bringing
in the Ark of God into its proper place; from ver. 1, to 6. This occasion
Solomon improves unto the manifestation of his Piety toward God, and Respect
toward Israel; as will be evident by taking of the several parts of this
Chapter, which are four:

1. His Benedictory Oration, from ver. 14, to 22.

2. His famous Prayer, from ver. 22, to 54.

3. The Blessing of his People, to ver. 62.

4. His Festivals, or offering Sacrifice, from ver. 62, to the end. The Text
falls within the third of these, soil. His Blessing: Where we have

First, A thankful Acknowledgement of Gods mercy, ver. 56.

Secondly, A renewed Prayer for Gods Presence, in this verse. So that this
Verse is an earnest Petition, expressed

1. Affirmatively, by way of Supplication.

2. Negatively, by way of Deprecation. In the former we have 1. The Petition it
self, The Lord our God be with us. 2. The Illustration, As he was with our
fathers. In the latter there is a gemination of the same Request, by diverse
expressions importing the same thing, Let him not leave us, nor forsake us. And
all this is to note the weightiness of the thing prayed for, and earnestness of
desire that it might be granted. Whence the Doctrine to be observed from the
words, is

Doct.

That the Continuance of the Lords gracious Presence with a People, from
fathers to children after them, is a special favor of God, and much to be
desired by all that are cordial to the weal of the Israel of God. Or thus: That
the Lord would be graciously present with the succeeding Generation, as he was
with their fathers, not leaving nor forsaking of them, is the great desire of
those that wish well to the Lords people.

See some Scriptures for this.

That the Lords gracious Presence is a special favor, and much to be desired,
see Genesis 26.3. This we see was Moses his great request, Exodus 33. 15. q. d.
what is an Angel without thee? what is Canaan without thee? See also Josh. 1.
5. and Judge. 6.16. And that the succession of the Lords Presence from one
Generation to another, is especially to be desired, see 1 Chronicles. 22.10. and
28.20. Psalm 90.16.

A few words briefly for the Explication of this Doctrine: Application being
the main thing intended.

Quest. 1. What is meant by the Lords being with them?

Answ. First, there is an Essential Presence of God, whereby he is every where;
not excluded out of Hell, Psalm. 139.7. this is not the thing that Solomon
prays for here.

Secondly, there is a Gracious Presence of God; and this is the thing here
desired: and this contains as much good as possibly can be desired;
universality, fullness, perpetuity of good is in the Lords gracious Presence.
This in the inchoation of it is the beginning of Heaven, in the perfection of
it it is the compleatment of Heaven. Now God is graciously present diverse ways.

1. By his Providence, there is a special Providence of God toward his People;
the Lord does in a special manner see and take notice of his people, as here
ver. 29. His eyes are open upon his Temple, and upon his Church continually, 2 Chronicles. 16.9. preserving and providing for them, Gen.28.20. and 48. 15, 16.
Heb.13.5, 10. and protecting of them, Isa.43.2. and comforting of them, Chap.
41.17.

2. By his Ordinances, whether in Church or Commonwealth. In this respect was
Solomon's Petition: The Temple was a visible Testimony of Gods Presence, as here
ver. 13. An house for the Lord to dwell in, in settled place for him to abide
in; and therefore the name of that place where Ordinances are set up, and
managed with power and glory, is said to be Jehovah-Shammah, Ezekiel. 48.35. The
works of God are seen in the Sanctuary, Psalm. 68.24.

3. By his Spirit, working grace in the heart: there is the in-dwelling
Presence of God in the Heart, as in a Temple; Rev. 3.20. Sup with them, i. e.
keep a continual feast in their hearts.

Quest. 2. What is here meant by fathers?

Ans. In general; All Superiors, and Ancestors. There are fathers by natural
generation; immediate, as Abraham to Isaac or mediate. In a word, all
Progenitors, Deuteronomy. 10.28. Fathers by age, 1 John 2.13. Fathers by office, in a
Civil sense, 2 Kings 5.13. and in a Spiritual sense, 2 Kings 13.14. Those that
are instrumental in regeneration of sinners, are Spiritual fathers to them, 1
Cor. 4.13.

Quest. 3. What is meant by leaving or forsaking a people, which is the
contrary to be with us?

Ans. These two words note the same thing; one and the same thing is implied
under these diverse expressions: but the word is doubled, to signify
earnestness of desire not to be left, q. d. Do not let any thing befall us,
that may look like leaving or forsaking. To the more full understanding of what
is intended hereby, it will be convenient to show the various acceptations of
these two exprrssions. 1. Leaving, is sometimes taken for committing to
another trust, Genesis 39.6 q. d. Let us not be committed unto others. 2. To
desist, or break off from a thing, Joh. 9.27. so here; q. d. Do not break off
former kindness: That faithfulness and mercy that fathers had experience of, do
not out a stop to it at their children, but let there be a succession of grace
to their Successors. 3. To cast off by way of contempt, Prove. 3.3. Hos. 4.11.
And for that word Forsake, it signifies liberty or freedom in leaving, 1 Samuel
9.5. So here; when the Lord gives over to care for a people, and suffers them
to do as they will, and shift as they can, then he forsakes. 2. To loosen, or
break in pieces: Isa 33.3. When tacklings are loosened, and the Lord sets a
people adrift as it were, and lets them go off to Sea, then does he forsake. 3.
To pluck up and break down, Isa. 168. The word there is the same that is in the
Text. 4. To scatter, Judge. 15.8. So here Solomon prays that the Lord would not
suffer them to be scattered.

Quest. 4. Why should we thus pray? and why in special for the Lords Presence
to succeeding Generations?

Reas. 1. Because of the good that is in the enjoyment of Gods Presence, even
all good, Genesis 17.1 Psalm.30.5. and 63.3. Have him, and have all: A man cannot
want light if he have the Sun, nor water if he have the Fountain, nor any good
if he have God, Psalm. 23.4.

Reas. 2. Because of the evil that ensues if God leave: Woe to such, Hos.9.12.
Woe to them when I depart from them; the Lord is angry indeed when it is thus.
A Parent is angry when he casts his child out of doors. Deuteronomy.31.17 Mine anger
shall be kindled, and I will forsake them, many evils, shall befall them, so
that they will say in that day, Are not these evils come upon us, because our
God is not amongst us? There is no help in Heaven for us, if God leave us: This
is the bitterness and venom of all Gods Judgments. As every affliction is
sweetened with Gods, presence, so the Lords dereliction imbitters every
affliction: this reaches the heart, Psalm. 42.10. yea if God leave a people,
then they are sure to be given up to utter ruin. If the Soul leave the Body,
it becomes loathsome, and must be buried: so it is here. To see a Soul
forsaken of God is a doleful sight, a flood of vengeance then breaks in, and
there is no bank to keep it out: for if God leave all Creatures leave too, so
that men shall find no succor or favor elshwere; Then delivered into hands
of Enemies, 2 Kings 21.14. Psalm. 21.11. yea, then men will be a terror to
themselves, 1 Samuel 28.15. In a word, to be cast out of Gods presence is the
beginning of Hell, Matthew. 25.41.

Moreover, there are special Reasons why the Lords Presence should be desired
to succeeding Generations, which shall be but mentioned.

First, from the less to the greater: we desire other blessings for Children,
much more should we desire this, you desire to leave an inheritance to your
Children, Prove. 13.22. and 15.14. there is much more reason to desire that
they might inherit the Lords blessing.

Secondly, Because they have as much need of the Lords Presence as their
fathers, their fathers could not live and glorify God in their generation, had
not the Lord been with them, no more can those that succeed them, there is like
ground to desire for the one as for the other, in respect of need, that one
has as well as other: 1. In respect of the weightiness of the work; the work
of one Generation is no less then of another, which is to serve God, and
advance the Interest of Religion. 2. In respect of Instruments that carry on
the work; Alas! poor feeble creatures, little children, and what can children
do in Family-affairs? 1 Kings 3.7. 3. In respect of Adversaries, difficulties:
Not age, but always there is much to hinder the work of God, within are the
same corruptions, Pride, Unbelief, and without are the same worse enemies; nay,
later ages are and will be worse then former, 2 Timothy 3.1.

Thirdly, Because this is the Generation-work of every one, to pray and labor
that the Lords Presence may be with succeeding Generations.

Fourthly, Such as do not thus, will incur the brand of Apostates, and be
cast off from God for ever for casting off God, 2 Chronicles. 15.2.

Fifthly, It makes much for the glory of God, that the gracious Presence of the
Lord should be continued from fathers unto children, therefore this is much to
be desired and prayed for. But to apply this.

Use 1. Hence take notice what bottom and foundation it is that we stand on;
all good is wrapped up in this, The Lords being with us. Can we say that we are
safe because of former mercies? The Lord has been with us in days of old,
has blessed our fathers, and are we therefore secure? No verily, he that has
been with them, may leave us; he that has been a Savior in former
Generations, may become a wayfaring man, as a man astonished that cannot save,
Jer.14.8, 9. If we forsake him, he will forsake us, notwithstanding all former
engagements. It is not what God has done heretofore, that will make us a happy
people at present: it is the wisdom of a people to discern the Lords
dispensation, Psalm. 107.43. and an heavy sad Judgment it is, not to discern
the Lords departing, Hos.2. Are you like to have good days? Are things like to
go well in your time? Is Truth and Peace like to be in your days? If the Lord
be with you, as he was with your fathers, then it will be, otherwise not. Oh
therefore learn to know the footsteps of God in your own Souls, for the Lord
draws near by his Spirit, and departs first by the Spirits departing; therefore
consider of this, have you as much of God as your fathers had?

Use II. What are we to think of them that never prayed such a prayer as this
is? Verily they bear little love to the place or people where they live, that
never made this request. Many pray for a good Harvest, outward temporal
mercies, but not for the Lords Presence: yea, some there are that are not
sensible of the Lords departing from them, but if they have outward Comforts,
all is well; others care not for Gods Presence, Job 21.14. A miserable frame
this is: for, They that are far from the Lord shall perish, Psalm.73.26.

Use III. Take notice of the Presence of God, how he does come or go, approach
near, or draw off from us. If this be the great thing to be desired, then it is
the duty of all to observe, what grounds of hopes, what of fears, respecting
the Lords being with us, as in days of old. Much of the Lords Presence has
been showed unto this people in these Ends of the Earth, Deuteronomy 32.2, 10, 11. We
may truly say with the Church, Psalm.44.1, 2. We have heard with our ears, O God
our fathers have told us, what works thou did in their days, in times of
old, how thou did, etc. It stands all to consider (both such of former
Generations, that are yet surviving, and those of this other Generation, that
are succeeding in the room of their fathers) What is God with us as in times
past? God was with them, and is he with us as he was with them? Let us view the
footsteps of God, and mark whether the Lord be with us as in days of old. And
for that end I shall spread before you some Signs of the Lords leaving a
People. And the first is this.

First Sign. When the Lord gives up a people to a slight spirit, not minding
the Lords Presence, whether with them, or far off from them: Surely the Lord
cannot be very near unto that people, that are not sensible of it. The presence
of Gods grace is a very evident sensible thing, and therefore if men feel not
this, nor mourn not for the want of it, it is a symptom the Lord is withdrawn.
Hence the Lord warns his people, Jer. 6.8. Be instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my
soul depart from thee; if unsensible, and unmindful, I will be gone further and
further from you, Jer. 26. when people are left to a regardless heart,
respecting the tokens of the Lords displeasure against them, Hos. 7.9. Gray
hairs are here and there upon them, and they know it not; feel other things
leave them, but not the Lord. It is not with them as it was wont to be in
respect of Trade, the fruits of the Earth, etc. this they take notice of, but
take no notice how it is with them in respect of the Lords Presence. Jer 44.17,
18. Then we had plenty of victuals, and were well, and saw no evil; (...) since
wanted all things, have been consumed by the sword, and (...) the famine: They
take notice of outward plenty, and outward scarcity, of abundance and plenty
respecting things of this life, but as to the Lords Presence with them, not a
word spoken of that. As men's hearts upon serious consideration of the Lords
nearness to, or removal from them, are affected or not affected therewith, so
is the Lord answerably abiding with, or learning of a People. The Lord is far
gone, when there is no enquiry whether he be gone or no. Oh what cause of
awakening upon this account? What is the stirring Enquiry of men in these
days? What is the solemn Enquiry that passes from man to man, from Plantation
to Plantation from Generation to Generation? Is this the Enquiry of the old and
gray headed, Oh, is the Lord with us as he was wont to be? Is this the demand
of the Rising Generation, Have we as much of the Presence of God, as our
fathers before us had? Do we live as near, are we as much acquainted with God?
Is the same Spirit poured out upon us that was on them?

2. When the Lord takes away the chief Instruments and Means of his Presence,
and gracious Blessing to a People. When men have a mind to depart, and remove
their dwelling, they will send away their Plate, and such things as are of
greatest worth and price with them; so here: Is not the Lord packing up the
chief Goods he has, and removing them away, when he takes away Props and
Pillars? this declares that he has left the house, and cares not much though
it tumbles down, Isa. 3. 1, 3, 8. When Ordinances are gone, and they that
should dispense them gone, this is a sign that God himself is gone, 2 Chronicles.
15.2. A General when he gives order to remove his Standard, it is an evidence
that he himself is resolved to go thence; so it is here: As such are pledges of
the Lords Presence, so their removal, especially when there are not others of
the like grace and holiness to stand up, and fill their places, declare that
the Lord is upon his departure. It went full ill with Israel when Joshua, and
the Elders that outlived Joshua were gathered to their fathers. It was a true
and weighty speech of one, viz. That the Deaths of godly Elders, often proves
Deaths-day of Religion, or at least the day of Deaths wound to Religion. Its
both a sign and an occasion of degeneracy, and so of the Lords Spirit departing
from a people. There is a special hand of Gods Providence exercised in the
decease of his Worthies; It is either in great wrath, or in great mercy: If it
awaken not to a Spirit of Mourning and Supplication, unfeigned and universal
Repentance, its a sure sign its in wrath, and speaks nothing but woe to that
people. Isa. 57.1. The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart, and
merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away
from the evil to come. When the Kings special Favorites are dismissed from
Court, its a token the King intends to remove from that place, where his
Majesty was wont to reside: So when God dismisseth his righteous ones, it is a
sign that he himself will be gone ere long.

3. When outward prosperity is unsanctified, when the abounding of temporal
blessings is accompanied with the abounding of sin. Though prosperity in it
self be of that nature, that it is hard to judge of love or hatred, presence or
absence of God, with or from a people thereby; yet as it is attended or
accompanied, so it is evidential, though not in it self, yet in the effects and
concomitants, and consequents of it: when prosperity falls on a people that
have learned to want as well as to abound; when creatures are means to convey
divine favor from God, and hearty obedience unto God, then they are signs of
the Lords presence with a people, Joel 2.26. But when men have prosperity,
outward riches, and know not what to do with them, besides making gods of them,
this is a sign that the Lords gracious presence is not among a people, when men
lose Religion in the world, and what they get-in temporals they lose in
Spirituals, Psalm. 106.15. Outward prosperity is a worm at the root of
godliness, so that Religion dies when the World thrives, Deuteronomy. 28.47. and
32.15. There is sometimes a palpable difference as to Holiness, between a low
under state, and a flourishing thriving condition: for the former, see Zeph.
3.11. for the latter, see Hos 13.6. Oh consider, the time was when less of the
world, but was there not more of Heaven? less Trading, Buying, Selling, but
more Praying more watching over our own hearts, more close walking; less
plenty, and less iniquity; men lay aside old Prayer, are almost afraid to put
up the New England Prayer, Lord keep me poor, and keep me humble. In a word, if
I were to point out a people from whom God is going, by one sure Character, it
should be this, Such people as can make up that they want in God, with the
presence of the Creature; can stop the crannies, and fill empty places of the
Heart, with Creatures and Creature Comforts: they have not so much as they were
wont to have, yet can fill up the room of God with worldly delights; though God
be absent, yet if they can get more of the world, that serves turn, Jer. 2.13.
Hence men's hearts say, How shall I live without my State, Honor, Peace,
Friendship? but not, How shall I live without God?

4. When a Spirit of Division and Contention in matters of Gods Worship, is the
Spirit of the Times, and thence Religion turns into Faction, that is an
evidence that the Lord is a leaving of a people. The Lord cares not to dwell a
shaking tottering house long: A Spirit of Love and Unity is an evidence of the
Lords presence; God is love, and where love rules, God dwells, 1 John 4.16.
Where Brethren live together in unity, there the Lords commands the blessing,
even life for evermore, Psalm.133.1, 3. Unity keeps God amongst a people, 2 Cor.
13. 11. but when Societies crack in pieces, room is made for God himself to be
gone: What father loves to dwell among fighting and quarrelling children? His
voice to such is, I Will be gone until you agree. When a House is a-fire, what
wise man will continue therein? Again, a Spirit of Contention is an evidence of
Gods anger and displeasure against a people, Lam. 4.16. and speaks ruin each
to other, Judge, 9.20, 23. Numb. 21.28, 29. especially when a blessing is taken
away from the means of healing, Jer. 14.18. Hence this evil follows upon such
division, that Religion is turned into Faction, Godliness lies in Parties and
Siding, and in this and that particular Apprehension. As Jehu destroyed the
house of Ahab, and the Worshippers of Baal, out of a factious Spirit, and
thence measured all Religion according to his own factious Spirit, 2 Kings
10.15, 16. And thus it was in Christ's time, there was a division touching
matters of Religion, some for one way, and some for another, and thus
contending about Circumstances, they lost the Substance. In a word, when men
become most irreligious in their Religion (I cannot speak it nor you hear it
with grief of heart enough) Religion is the occasion of our Contentions and
breach of Peace.

5. When the Lord withholds the efficacious and victorious operations of his
Spirit from his own Ordinances, that though men have them plentifully
dispensed, yet they are but as a dead letter, they are the words and breath of
men only, without life to their Souls: for as on the contrary, no surer pledge
of the Lords presence with a people, then when the Spirit accompanies the
Ordinances, and makes them effectual for the good of Souls: when the Lord is at
the heels of Messenger, and strikes home to the heart of poor creatures, that
see God himself in Ordinances, 1 Cor. 14.25. this is a sign the Lord is with
them: so when they are continued to men, but the Spirit is not in them, they
have them, but no God in them; when the Lord absents himself from those set
meetings for people to meet him in, now its undeniable the Lord is leaving such
a people. But when is this, you will say, what the efficacy and overcoming
power of the Spirit is withheld from Ordinances? Answ. This is matter of great
weight, and therefore I shall a little stay upon it, and show you when it is,
in these specialties.

1. When men's hearts are not stirred, and quickened, and warmed by them, when
the Word is lodged only in the Porch, and never comes into the House: Men get
something to talk of, and hold up a Profession in the world, and bear up the
Name of Religion withal; but their Hearts are not wrought upon: There are not
suitable Impressions upon men's Hearts, to the Notions that men have in their
Heads; for the Word comes in power, when it passes through all outsides, and
enters into the heart, Psalm. 45.5. Heb. 4.12. A discerner of thoughts and
intents of the heart, makes the heart naked; so e contra, when the Word is
without power and virtue on the Souls of men, when God is not in it, when the
Word is light without heat or life, as the Sun under a Cloud, it warms not the
Earth. Saints are wont to say of the Word, By that I have been quickened, Psalm.
119. But when the Word is like a cold fire, that men sit by and find no
warmth, surely the Spirit of God is not there, for the Spirit quickens, 1
Cor.3.6. Joh.6.63. If Christ speak, then there is life.

2. When Ordinances are only occasions and means of disquiet, and of disrest
unto men, but have no further efficacy upon them, but to cause them to go with
galled and condemned Consciences; some have not so much as this, live and die
in Security, having not one awakened thought all their days: But not many that
live under the dispensation of the Gospel, but the Word is to them at
sometimes, as Rev. 11.0 a Word that did torment them that dwell on the Earth.
Though they live under means of grace, and the Eternal Spirit is wrestling with
them, yet they are so shut up under unbelief, and so in league and love with
lust, that the Word does but torment them. There is a generation of Christless
sinners, that fret with indignation and vexation, that they cannot enjoy
pleasures, and follow lusts with quiet and peace; and if they would speak out
what is in their heart, they would say to Christ, as the Devils, Mat.8.29. Art
thou come to torment us? or as it was with those that heard Steven, they were
cut to the heart, and gnashed on him with their teeth, Acts 7.54. Men that are
in love with lusts, they cannot endure that God should come near them, they are
not able to bear the strokes, whereby he would break their stiff Spirit, but
grudge against the Lord-himself, and fall out with the Word that would convince
them, Romans 2.8. Hence in the secret of their hearts they could be glad to hear
no more such Awakening, Heart-searching, Soul-rowsing Truths: They say to God,
Depart from us, Job 21.14. They pronounce that Sentence upon themselves, which
the Lord will pronounce at the last day. A sad thing when a poor creature is
Damned above-ground.

3. When the Word of God does blind and harden men in their sins and vain
hopes, but not convert and save them from their sins. Then God is with his
Word, when he does not suffer poor creatures to escape from him, when he will
not let them alone, but plucks them by the hair of the head as it were out of
the fire; when he makes the Devil deliver many sinful redeemed Souls, then the
Lord is with them indeed: but when it is otherwise, the Lord is not in his
Word, Mat. 13.15. Men come into the world and know not wherefore, and go out
and know not whither: though they have many Advantages, yet they stand it out
to the very last; they have been put into sad plunges in their own Spirits, but
have got over them, and so go to Hell insensibly. When God is in his
Ordinances, then it shall be said, This and that man was born there, Psalm.
37.5. but when few newborn Christians, this is a symptom God is not in his
Word. As when the Seed is sown, and rots under the clods, but never springs up,
there is no blessing, but a secret curse on it. Oh consider of this! Are
Conversions frequent amongst us? Is God pulling men out of this rueful state?
If the Lord deay this to his Ordinances, its because he is not in them. Oh
fearful wrath! to have them, and be hardened by them, and the abuse of them to
answer for another day! To have them, and yet to be plagued more then Sodom and
Gomorrah that never heard of them, in that day of Eternal Judgment!

4. When Ordinances are unprofitable, and empty things, void of Spiritual
advantage; when men use them but as bad bargains, they lose rather then gain by
them: as it was with them of old, Mal. 3.14. What profit? etc. Hence take up
that quarrelling Complaint, Isa. 58.3. Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see
not? etc. When God is in them, then they bring on to more fellowship with God
and Christ Jesus; then those that live under them are growing up in the fear of
the Lord as David (Zech.12.8) as the Angel of the Lord before them, vigorous
and active Christians, as it was with the Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 1.3. When the
Sun arises with healing under his wings, then they grow up as Calves in the
stall, Mal, 4.2. As a watered garden, Isa.58.11. And this will be
proportionable in root as, well as branches, not all head and no heart: but
when the contrary hereunto is true, that men languish and wither and fall away,
time is spent in vain, these unprofitable hours of life, or if they gain, it is
only in some things and not in others; Alas! that men should spend time to no
purpose; that men live in the light of Gospel dispensations, and yet walk in
the darkness of their own hearts, not knowing whether they must go to Heaven or
Hell at last, little stability, little comfort by all the means they enjoy!

5. When men can bear the Lords absence, the hidings away of his face, and not
lay it to heart as the saddest evil. They keep Sabbaths, and enjoy no God in
them, yet the heart breaks not though it be thus: this is sad indeed. It Is a
token that the Lord is not wholly gone, that he is not so gone but that he may
return again, when he gives a heart to mourn after him, as they 1 Samuel 7.
lamented after the Lord: but when men can go days, weeks, nay it may be
months together, and no living communion with God, and yet never cry, mourn
and lament after him, this says the Lord is gone indeed, and so gone that
unless thou awaken speedily (for ought I know this very Sermon) he will never
return more, but leave thee desolate and forsaken to die in thy sins. Oh! shall
the Lord depart from thee, and have this to charge upon thee, That he went away
from thee for want of being entreated to stay with thee?

Use IV. May be a word of Exhortation. Oh make this your main business, to keep
God with you from Generation to Generation: I beseech you let this be the care
and prayer of every one, The Lord our God be with us, as he was with our
fathers. But this Use respects both the first Generation, and this other
Generation. 1. The first Generation, that have been betrusted with the
management of the Kingdom of Christ and the Interest of Religion (mostly)
hitherto; Labor to keep God still with you, even as in days of old, and also
to leave his Presence with the Generations that are to come after you, that you
may say upon your deathbeds, when you are leaving the world to them that
succeed, as sometimes old Israel did to Joseph, Gen.48.21. Behold I die, but
God shall be with you.

Here consider a few things.

Motive 1. This is the great End why the Lord has betrusted you, as he has
with his Gospel, and why he has done for you such great things as he has
done, that so he might propagate Religion to those that come after you, Psalm.
78.5,6,7. It was not for your sake only, but for the sake of your Children,
that God made himself known unto you; now I beseech you let not the Lord be
disappointed of his end. God has not given his Gospel unto men, that a few old
Christians may enjoy something of the Presence of the Lord while they live, and
then carry away the Gospel and Religion (as Viz. Worthy Mr. Mitchell
one said) into the cold graves with them when they die; No, but that they
might hand down Religion, and engage the Lords Presence with the Generation
after them. Its part of the Generation-work of every Christian, to do his
utmost that the Lords Name and Honor may be held up to the succeeding
Generation. If you think that all the duty that lies on you is respecting your
selves only, you are much mistaken: A godly man's work reaches further then so
Psalm. 77.18, 19. It Is a sad sign God has forsaken a people, when they are
unmindful of the work of their Generation. That was David's Spirit, that he
would endeavor that Gods Name should be declared to, and embraced by the
people that were to be afterward, Psalm.45.17. and Moses his Prayer, Psalm.
90.16. and the Lords Promise, Isa. 58.12. Thou shall raise up (Hebr. settle)
the foundations of many Generations, of Age and Age, i. e. Lay such foundations
of Holiness as shall endure from Age to Age.

Mot. 2. To you is committed a special opportunity of propagating Religion, and
the Presence of God to the Rising Generation.

1. In respect of the Lord himself, he will do much at the Request of his old
Servants. A man will do much at the importunity of an ancient Acquaintance;
Paul thought there was something Argumentative, when he writ to Philemon, that
he was Paul the aged; and David made use of the like Argument with respect unto
himself in reference to this duty, Psa. 71.9, 18. The Lord knows not how to
deny an old Disciple any thing. You may go to the Lord, and tell him, I have
served thee so many years, and thou have never denied me any good thing to this
day; I have asked much, and had much, now I come to ask for the continuance of
thy Presence with the succeeding Generation, deny me not now, Lord.

2. In respect of men. As for those that are to succeed, they that are
gathering to their fathers have an opportunity to do good, by distilling the
things of God into their hearts. Joshua and the Elders their Presence did tend
much to the promoting of holiness, Josh. 24.31. Judge. 2.7. Whilst Jehojadah
lived there was an advantage in that, 2 Chronicles. 24. God and Nature has put an
advantage into the hands of the Ancient; Levit. 19.32. Thou shall rise up
before the hoary head, and honor the face of the old man, and fear thy God; I
am the Lord: q. d. You deny me to be Lord, if you do not acknowledge Age.

Mot. 3. Consider, that it is for a Generation that I speak, and such a
Generation as that by many weighty and momentous Considerations you are bound
to tender. As to a Generation; for a Generation, David thought it was matter of
great moment, Psalm. 71.18. q. d. I had rather die, then outlive the opportunity
of making known the Lord to the Rising Generation. It is not one, or two, or a
few, but a Generation that I plead for; and it is not only a Generation, but
your Generation: now I come near indeed, a Generations that proceeds from your
own loins, and from your own bowels: Methinks this should prove a very feeling
Argument. 1 Chronicles. 28.9 Now Solomon my Son; not Soloman a Son, but Solomon my
Son, I charge thee by the Bond of Relation, that thou serve the God of thy
fathers. And hence Solomon himself acknowledges his care and instruction. What
he received from his Parents, was an effect of their endeared affection to him,
Prove. 4.3, 4. Fond affections will vent themselves in foolish and temporal
things, but sanctified affection in care to promove holiness, and engage the
continuance of the Lords Presence. Oh what love, what affections, what bowels
toward your Children? Have you none? or if you have, how do they put forth? I
labor they may have something to live upon when I am gone, they must have
House and Land, etc. and shall they not have a God? Shall they have your
Estate, and not have your God to be their God? Again, they are a Generation of
your betrustments, a Generation committed to your care and charge to bring up
for the Lord, and so in that sense said to be the Lords Generation, Ezekiel.
16.21. God betrusted you with them respectively to educate for himself. Again,
are they not a Generation devoted to the Lord? Prove. 31.2. Sons of vows, more
particularly devoted to be the Lords, cast upon him from the womb, Psalm. 22.10.
Again, are they not a Generation for whose sakes you ran great hazards? Was it
not for their sakes that many came hither? was not this the end? I pray
consider what was the thing proposed? Why came you into this Land? was it not
mainly with respect to the Rising Generation? And what with respect to them?
was it to leave them a rich and a wealthy people? was it to leave them Houses,
Lands, Livings? Oh no: but to leave God in the midst of them. Again, are they
not a Generation that call for the utmost care and help that may be afforded to
them on all hands, a poor needy Generation hard bestead, it may be more then
their fathers in some respects, Temptations as great, Corruptions as strong,
Hearts as bad, and having been freed from such Persecutions, Afflictions, etc.
they have not had such opportunities their fathers had, to know and see what
was in their hearts. Me thinks I see them like a company of Children in a Boat
that is driven out to Sea, may be it may come to shore, but in greater danger
to sink or drown then otherwise. Yea, are there not sad symptoms of the Lords
departure from them? Is not all in hazard to be lost? What think you of a
Vessel at Sea that springs a leak, and takes in water apace, and Mariners some
dead, many sick, a few left to keep Pump going, Are they not in danger to sink
and perish in the waters? Is it not so here? Again, if you consider the time
past, or time to come, they both put you upon the utmost care and diligence.
Time past: How much time is gone, but how little is done for the Rising
Generation? little Faith, little Prayer, little, Pattern-walking. Nay, are
there not many that lay stumblingblocks in their way? I know men are apt to
complain against the Rising Generation, and it cannot be denied but that there
is cause enough, I would to God I and all the Lords people were rightly
sensible of it; but I beseech you consider whether you give not too much
occasion thereunto: Do they not see your Pride, your Worldliness, your Passion,
your Vanity? and does not this harden and stumble them? And if not so, yet Duty
is neglected; it may be if you prayed more, they would be more gracious: Or
with respect to time to come, it is but a little while like to be with you, we
may improve that of the Apostle, 2 Per. 1, 13, 14. shortly you must put off the
earthly tabernacle; therefore improve your little time for the good of them
that are to come after you.

Mot. 4. Sincere Endeavor to continue the Lords Presence with
after-Generations, shall not be without some good success. I dare be bold to
say that the Lord will not leave your Posterity, unless by your remissness you
declare you do not much care whether he abide with them yes or no. Do you your
duty, and the Lord will not lie behinds hand (...) that which is his work: If
you begin to be glutted with the Presence of the Lord your selves, that you do
not think it worth the pains taking, to leave Him and his Presence as the
greatest Blessing to your Children after you, then no marvel though he remove
away: But if you are resolved to keep him not only with your selves, but with
yours also, I tell you he cannot find in his heart to leave either you or
them, Prove. 22.6. In an ordinary course of Providence it shall be so; then be
able to say, as David to Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 28.20. The Lord God, even my God
will be with thee he will not fail thee nor forsake thee.

Mot. 5. What Comfort will this be, when upon good grounds you are persuaded
the Lord will be with those that come after you, even as he was with you? No
greater joy, then that you have had a care of Posterity, and that it has not
been in vain, 3 John.3.4. this glads the heart of godly Parents, Prove. 23. 15,
16, 24, 25. See Deuteronomy. 30.2.

Quest. But what shall we do that we may retain the Lords Presence with us, and
convey the same to those after us?

Answ. Be willing to do what you can do: (this makes way for all other
Direction) Oh! do what you can for the future Generation. Its true, you cannot
give them regenerating and sanctifying grace, but let not that discourage you
from what you can: and though you cannot, yet know that one can, who is
infinitely more gracious to the Souls of men then thou art. Neglect not duty,
because you cannot do morethen your duty: Oh live a great while in a little
time; Do more in one year, then in seven before: as Israel in the Wilderness
made more dispatch of the way the last year, then in thirty before; so here,
respecting the Rising Generation. But more particularly.

1. If you would have the Presence of the Lord continued to those that are to
come after you, then make sure of this, that you enjoy and special Presence of
God your selves. If you would leave Gods Presence with others, you must be sure
to enjoy God your selves: If God in Christ be your God, then you may have hopes
that God will be the God of your seed, according to the Promise. Genesis 17.7. He
that has no interest in God, cannot insure any interest to others: He that
has only a visible interest, an interest in the visible Covenant, he can do
no more for his child but leave that unto him, he cannot believe for any more,
nor act faith for any more: An hypocrite cannot believe that God will be the
God of his child by special grace, for he that has no faith to lay hold of
God for himself, has not faith to lay hold of God for his child: Be sure
therefore of this, that you are under the Promise and Covenant in the Spiritual
part of it. You never knew yet, but the Lord did take hold savingly of some at
least of the posterity of those that were indeed godly. David, a man of great
observation and experience in the world, tells what he could say to this, Psalm.
37.25. Nay, its made some kind of evidence of Sincerity when a man's repentance
is such, as that father and his child repent too, Deuteronomy. 30.6. Not but that a
man may repent, and his child never repent; its possible that a man may be
converted, and children many of them never converted, but it is not usual: this
is something a rare thing, that a man should be godly, and his children all
ungodly; most ordinarily if a man turn with all his heart, his children turn
too, sooner or later, more or fewer of them.

2. Be very careful in the due performance of Family Duties, toward them that
are under your charge. This is the Lords great Command, Deuteronomy, 6.7. and Abraham's
special Commendation, Genesis 18.19. the want of this the Lord punishes with
rejecting such children, 1 Samuel 3.15.

But what are these Duties?

1. Oversight of the ways of the Family, that they yield outward Obedience to
God, and particularly in Sanctifying the Sabbath. You shall find Religion
lives and dies, as men are exact or remiss in observing the Sabbath: And it is
observeable, that the very words of the fourth Commandment does expressly bind
all Masters of Families, (which is not to be found in any other Commandment)
Thou, and thy Son, and thy Daughter, Exodus 20.10. the Lord speaks by name of
Family-governours, as if it were to make them Overseers of sanctifying the
Sabbath.

2. To instruct them in matters of Religion, that they may not only profess
it, but feel the power of it in life and conversations. Thus were Parents
commanded of old, Deuteronomy. 6.7. Prove. 22.6. 2 Timothy 3.15.

3. A careful Endeavor that they may profit by the Public Ministry. When
Ministers work in Public is done, the Family work begins: for this, see
Christ's example, Mark 4.13.

4. A declaration of the admirable works of God for his people, Josh. 4.6, 21.
Psalm. 22.31. and 78.4.

5. By giving them a good Example: Precept without Patterns will do little
good; you must lead them to Christ by Examples as well as Counsel; you must set
your selves first, and speak by Lives as well as words; you must live Religion,
as well as talk Religion, Josh. 24.15. This is rather to be attended, because
Families are the Seminaries of Church and Commonwealth. Keep the Lord with you
in Families, and keep him then in all Societies; let him go thence, and he will
quickly go from the rest. Here begins all Apostasy and degeneration; the ruin
of Churches and Country springs from thence: Ruin Families, and ruin all: So
on the other hand, keep God there, and keep him everywhere. The Generation to
come will reap the fruit of Family Education; such Children as you bring up,
such Parents will they be, when you are gone, to their Children, and such
Children shall they have who are Parents in the next Generation. You then that
are Governors of Families, are the very making or marring of the world,
Psa.1.44.12. Unless Posterity be polished, hewn and squared by Domestical
Discipline, they are never fit to be stones in Gods building. Are not some
Parents worse then that rich Glutton, who being in Hell desired concerning his
fathers house, that they might be forewarned, and therefore desired Abraham to
send Lazarus to his brethren to testify to them, that they come not to the
place of torment, Luke 16, 27, 28? But you will not admonish them, you will not
teach them Moses and the Prophets, you will not show them the danger hanging
over their heads, you will not lead a good Example before them while you live.
Oh! you may fear that your Children one day will curse you, and wish that they
had been the Children of Indians rather.

3. Keep as much of God as you were wont to do in your own Hearts and
Conversations: Suffer not the Lord to go away in any degree or measure out of
your hearts. In a word, keep up the life and power of godliness in your own
Souls. The Lord never takes away his visible presence from the succeeding
Generation, unless he take away his secret inward presence from former
Generations. The second Generation seldom or ever prove total Apostates, but
the fist are deep secret Heart-revolters. Heart-sins in the first, grow up into
Life-sins in the second; if you decline at all, they will decline altogether.
The loss of the first love is enough to remove the Candlestick, Rev.2.4, 5. You
complain against the Pride, Profaneness of young ones, and alas that there is
such cause! Oh but who is there amongst you that cries out of the secret sins
of their own hearts? Those sins of a second growth of Profaneness in some.
Worldliness in many, Deadness and Formality in all; Ah! who is it that looks on
the hard heartedness, impenitency of this second Generation, and says that now
the Lord is punishing my hard heartedness upon my Child, he is whipping me on
his back. Men, Brethren and Fathers, You had once another Spirit, had you not?
A right New England Spirit. Oh! should I knock at your breast, and ask, Is the
old Zeal, Love, Heavenly-mindedness that was in this Heart twenty, thirty years
ago, is it there still? Are you the same men you were? Are you not strangely
changed? Have you as much of God as you had? Has not the World got something?
Wife and Children something? Trails and Temptations of a New Place, or hard
beginnings got something? Oh! have you not lived to see much of your former
life and godliness laid in the grave? Have you the same Hearts you had? Are
your worst days now as good as your best then? so it is with growing Saints
that live much with God: Or rather is not the contrary true, that you are grown
old and grown cold; cold indeed, cold at heart; Aged in years, and decayed in
power of godliness! But why do I complain? Let me persuade; Oh recover, recover
strength for your own Souls sake, and for the sake of the Generation that is to
come after you. How can you hope that you should ever find much of the Lords
Presence, if you that once had it lose it, and see it no more? If in (...) time
Professors and Lukewarmness go hand in hand together, then in those that come
after you Profession and Profaneness shall go hand in hand together: If you
keep your Religion and Forms with their buts, they that succeed will be
Professors with their buts. You are Christians, Ay! but cold, but dead, but
lifeless: They shall be Professors, but vicious, but jeering, but scoffing, but
drinking Companions. What hopes that the next Generation will ever enjoy much
of the Presence of Gods grace, and power of godliness, if you see it dead and
buried before you go to your graves? I remember what the Prophet Elijah said to
Elisha, if he could see when he was taken up in the fiery Chariot, it should be
so, but if not, it should not be so, 2 Kings 2.10. I allude to it thus; If the
Rising Generation could see you going to Heaven with a great measure of Zeal,
Life, Spiritualness, then there might be some hopes, that they that are left
behind might enjoy a double portion of your Spirit; but if they see your Life
lost, Love cooled, Godliness decayed, how can it be?

4. Lay out Faith and Prayer for them to the utmost: There is no help in Earth,
but there is help in Heaven. Plead with God, and plead hard, Believe, and
believe strongly: Pray more, and speed better; the Lord will suffer himself to
be Commanded in this case, Isa. 45.11. you have very good hold of God in the
Word, Deuteronomy.30.6. and when you pray, you must pray feelingly, i. e. with a heart
sensible of their sins. Let the sins of the Rising Generation, be the burden
of the first Generation; their Unbelief, the matter of their Complaint before
the Lord. Many complain their Children have not such Privileges as they ought,
I pray God grant that they may all have what the Lord has appointed for them:
But alas! where is the man that complains, that his Child wants saving
knowledge of Jesus Christ? Oh where is the Parent that says in bitterness of
Soul, My Child has a hard Heart, and a proud Will, an unteachable Spirit;
Civil he is, but alas, that is all the Religion I can see? Oh that there were
more of those Complaints in secret before the Lord! I verily believe the Lord
will awaken a Spirit of Prayer, before he gives us any sure pledges of his
abiding with us in all sorts of men amongst us. See how David prays for
Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 29.19. and this will fetch blessings, Win it in Heaven, and
wear it in Earth. Monica, Austin;s Mother, after she had cried and wept to a
godly Minister for her then ungodly Son, was answered by that good man, Fieri
nequit ut filius tantarum lachrymarum pereat; It cannot be that a Child of so
many Prayers and Tears should perish. And it is observeable, That before the
Lord give out any special Generation-mercy, he humbles, he prepares his people
for that mercy by deep humiliation, he usually lays them exceeding low as in
first Conversion, with respect to personal mercies, so with respect to
Generation-mercy. The continuance of the Lords Presence Generation after
Generation, is a very signal mercy, and God the Lord will humble his people in
order to this mercy, and this humiliation will cause you to sanctify Gods
Name, though he should take away his Presence, Ezekiel. 3.12. Secondly, He brings
a sentence of death on the mercy, that to the eye of Sense and Reason there is
no likelihood that ever it should come to pass, nay it grows more unlikely
every day then other; as with Israel in Egypt, Exodus 5. Isaac must be bound,
laid on the Altar, the knife at his throat, that so Faith might receive him, as
it were from the dead. Truly this makes me hope that the Lords Presence may yet
continue with his people in our Generations, because that mercy seems to be a
dead mercy: There is no likelihood that it should be so, the knife is at
Isaac's throat; Faith can fetch Isaac from the Altar, Isa. 26.19. When Churches
are dead, and the Members of Churches are dead, yet then the Covenant lives,
the Promise lives. Oh look to the Lord in that word Isa. 65. 22, to the end,
and 62.9.

5. If you would have God to be with you and yours after you, then see that
you, each one in your respective places, are with and for the Lord: You have
the duty and encouragement laid before you, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. A professing People
they always break with God first, before he breaks with them. It Is the very
end of the Lords works and dispensations to you, that so you might be for him,
Isa. 43.21. Quest. But you will say, What is this to be with the Lord? How
shall we be so with or for the Lord, as that we may be sure he will still be
with and for us? Ans. Work, and work for God in your several capacities;
Parents, Husbands, Wives, if you do not work for him, you are not with him:
Mark 13.34. He gave to every man his work, and therefore it is that their
working with God is said to be a being with God, Hos. 9.8. The watchmen of
Ephraim was with my God; i. e. they did the work of God: and so walking with
God, as you may see by that of David, 1 Kings 4. and of Hezekiah, 2 King. 18.
6,7. 2. Be for the special interest of God: Mat. 12.30. He that is not with me
is against me; Zech.9.7. He that remains shall be for our God, i. e. for his
Glory, for his Christ, for his Cause. Labor therefore for a Public Spirit,
let all your own interest give way to his; Oh let nothing be dear in comparison
of Christ and his interest, Acts 20.24. To be of a private Spirit is not to be
for God. 3. In a special manner see that you are for his Institutions: This is
called the Kingdom of God, Acts 1.3. If for Christ, then for his Kingdom.
That man is not for God or Christ, that is not for Ordinances: These are called
the Name of Christ, Acts 15.14, 16. He that is not for building Gods
Tabernacle, would not indeed that God should have a Name amongst men. Remember
what you said when you came into the Church, Isa.44.5. I am the Lords;
especially see that you be for those Institutions and Ordinances that are
ordained by Christ, to bring the Rising Generation into a professed subjection
unto the Gospel of Christ. Oh take heed how we turn them out of Gods
Inheritance, lest you bring, a curse upon your Souls, and their Souls after
you. 1 Samuel.28.19. When God takes them into his Covenant, he says he will be a
God to them, Genesis 17. Take heed how you deny them any part in the Lord, lest
thereby they turn to serve other gods, Josh, 22.24, 25. Where the Lord will
enlarge Covenant-mercy, Oh tremble to straighten it or bound it to the Precepts
of men: we and our poor Children after us, have need enough of all the grace of
the Covenant, let us not despise it, or cast them out our selves from it. If
that be the Lords word, that the children of his servants shall continue, and
their seed be established before him, Psalm. 102. 28. Labor not to make that
Promise of no affect: Most certain it is, that the Lords Presence is to be
sought and enjoyed in Gods Ways, and in them only, Will the Lord abide with a
Generation that have nothing to do with a Church State, Ordinances, Ministry,
and the visible outward Administrations of the things of his House? I know he
may for a while; But will he long? No verily, if they must have nothing to do
with these, God will have nothing to do with them.

6. Maintain a Spirit of Love toward God, and toward one another: If you
love, he will not leave you. Be not like Ephesus that lost their first love,
but repent and do your first works, Rev.2.3. Love is a uniting grace, and will
not let the person beloved go: This keeps God in Heaven, because nothing but
love is there; for where that is, he will be, 1 John 4.18. Joh. 14.23. If ever
the Lord leave you or yours after you, it will be because he is not loved: and
if it be asked why did the Lord so soon forsake his people, after that he had
done so much for them? the Lord will answer and say, It was because I could not
have their hearts, I went away for want of love. Oh! it is matter of sad
lamentation, that there is such a spirit of dying affection toward Christ in
New England. There is sad declinings in the Spirit of the Churches, the Lord
knows: If the Lord take away any thing of his Presence, they can make up the
want of God in the enjoyment of the Creature; as some men do when they pass by
old hedges, they throw bushes in and stop up gaps, so do men stop all their
gaps, all their breaches, with brambles and bushes of Creatures: yea some, if
the Lord take away any choice mercy from them, what do they do? why, they grow
jealous of him, and love him the less; the reason why he takes away their
beloved, is that he may have their whole heart, Hos. 2.6. Ah! how many
particular persons are there unto whom Christ is a stumbling block? some
offended at one thing, some at another; some like not this Rule, some not that
Command; some are displeased at this Providence, and others at that: Oh that
you would consult with your own hearts! Have you quit one lust for Christ? more
delight it may be in vain jollity, then in secret Prayer. 2. Love one to
another, 2 Cor. 13. Breaches make way for God to be gone:

7. Get a sympathizing Spirit with the gasping, groaning, bleeding and dying
condition of that Generation that are to succeed you. Oh! look upon them with
an eye of pity, and let your hearts mourn much for them in secret. It may be
they speak not for your compassions, and how shall they? many of them know not
their own misery: but their condition calls aloud for all the Prayers, Tears,
Faith of the Lords precious ones amongst us.

1. Take a view of their present state; And what is it? Is it not that which
justly deserves all the compassions that may be? If to be without God and
Christ, and in danger of death and ruin every moment; if to be dead to all
Calls, and bold and desperate in ways of Sin and Security, be a condition to
be pitied, many of them need pity. Ah! did thy Redeemer mourn over thy Soul,
and have thou no tears for others? It Is said of Christ when he came to Lazarus
grave, He wept, because he loved him; Do you not go to the graves of dead Souls
every day? but where is your affectionate rolling of bowels? where are your
sighs and groans? possibly one may hear you complain and bewail their
deprivement of outward Privileges; Oh but where is that man, and where is the
woman that bewails before the Lord and Spiritual misery of young men and women?
that faith in secret, Oh what Preaching do they enjoy, what Sermons do they
hear, what Means do they partake of? Oh but what hearts have they? Oh how
blinded, how hardened, how unperswadeable! as if the the Lord sent his
Messenger upon that errand Isa. 6.10.

2. Consider present Providence, and they call for pity and compassion toward
them: The things that concern their peace and comfort cannot be effected an
accomplished for their good, much taking, but little practicing: Nay, that
which concerns their Interest is made the Butt of Contention, as if the Lord
would divide his people, when they are conspiring to promote the welfare of the
Rising Generation. Again, those that are most likely to promove their best
good, are snatched away apace one after another. What will become of poor
Children, when Heads of Families die? what will become of unskilful Passengers,
when Pilot and able Steerman is taken away? What will become of this
Generation, when these that should lead them and light them in the way of
Heaven, may not live out half their days amongst them! Good Lord, let not that
befall them, Dews avertat Oxen!
that sometime did Israel of old, that they should have such Prophets as should
make them vain, and speak a vision of their own hearts, and not out of the
mouth of the Lord; that should say to them that despise God, The Lord has said
ye shall have peace, and to every one that walks in the imagination of his
own heart, Not evil shall come to you: so that they should strengthen the hand
of evil doers, that none return from his wickedness, but that from the Prophets
of Jerusalem profaneness shall go forth into all the Land, Jer. 23.14, 16, 19.

Again, 3. If you look to what their condition is like to be at last; Will God
bear always with a carnal unfavoury Generation? Must they not bring good
fruit, or else will they not be in danger to be cut down? Mat. 3.10. Will a few
Leaves of Civility and Formality save them from the curse? will such lifting up
to Heaven not make way to the thrusting down to Hell? Mat. 11.23. This I will
say, that amongst the posterity of a professing people, they will either be the
most happy, or the most unhappy Generation. Oh! go get a spirit of pity then;
You can do but little, but can you not pray? have you no bowels? have you no
tears? Oh go draw them on to godliness, bring them near to God by Faith and
Prayer, yea and by all ways of his appointment, count it not want of grace so
to do; Whether think you had more grace, Christ or his Disciples? yet we see
Christ was tender toward Children, and loath to reject them, when as his
Disciples were rigid toward them.

But it is time for us to address our selves to this present Generation. I may
speak unto you in the words of Daniel, (Dan. 5.27.) Wherefore let my Counsel be
acceptable unto you, retain the Lords Presence with you. I know it is a very
difficult thing to speak prevailingly unto a Generation that have been brought
up under the solemn Warnings of Gods Word, and yet not wrought upon; It Is a
very difficult thing to do good in a backsliding time, when men have been
accustomed to send away the Lord from their hearts: It Is now a hard work to
persuade men to hold him by main strength, and not to let him go. In times of
degeneracy there is not much likelihood of doing much good, Jer. 25.3, 4, 5.
Secure hearts that have had many Means, many Warnings, many Years, and not
awakened, if one should rise from the dead to such an one he will do little
good, Luke 16.31. Yet I will cry once more what the Lord will do, though
methinks my work is something like Ezekiels, Chap. 37. who was there commanded
to prophecy over dead bones: I know I have dead hearts to deal withal, but
yet the Lord may breathe the breath of life into them; Therefore, O Generation,
see ye the word of the Lord, Jer. 2.31. You that are the succeeding and
surviving Generation, whatever you part with, part not with God, keep God with
you whatever you keep, or not keep. And to stir up hereunto, let me spread
before you these Considerations.

1. That the Lord will most undoubtedly leave and forsake you, unless you do to
the utmost of what you can do to keep him amongst you. The Lord is resolved on
it, he will not abide with you, except you do besiege him with your prayers,
tears, cries and groans not to be gone: Solomon did no more then need required,
when he cried to him, Be with us. Verily the Lord will not thrust himself upon
such a Generation as do but little care for his Presence; If you are of an
indifferent spirit, at a kind of disway in your own thoughts as it were, the
Lord will soon resolve the case, Psa. 132.11, 12. And therefore take the
Counsel and Lord gives, Jer. 6.8. Be instructed, lest my soul depart from you.
Make no other account but the Lord will take away his Presence and leave you
desolate, except you rowse up out of your Security, and be more in earnest with
him then you have been hitherto. Those endeavors that you have put forth, will
not keep God amongst you: If you seek him with all your heart and soul, you may
find him, Deuteronomy. 4. and after the same manner that he is found, he is kept
amongst a people, and therefore I may make use of those words, Who is on the
Lords side, who? Who is bent to keep the Presence of God with them, as he was
with their fathers, who? Ah! how will you ever be able to stand before God,
men, or your own Consciences another day, when it shall be charged upon you,
that it was because of your sloth and negligence and supine security that God
is gone from the midst of you?

Mot. 2. There is no little Expectation concerning you; You are a Generation of
great hopes and great fears: The Lord expects much from you, that you will do
much for the glory of his Name, Isa. 63.8. He said, Surely they are children
that will not lie; he has been expecting a long time, Luke 13.7. and your
predecessors, those that have been before you, all their expectations under God
himself, are in you: they hope you will stand up in their stead, and bear up
the Cause of Religion when they are gone: And so also you are a Generation of
great fears; some they have a holy fear concerning you, such a fear as was
sometimes in the heart of Job toward his Children, Chap. 1. lest you should
sin against God, lest you should forget God, and the things of God: yea the
Lord is pleased to express himself so, as if he had some fears concerning the
rising and succeeding Generation of a professing people, Psalm. 78.5. And some
they have a sinful fear; Satan and all wicked men they are afraid what you
will do, they are afraid lest you should strengthen what your fathers have
done before you: And I pray take notice what you have in your hands, it is to
promove or interrupt the glory of Religion; you will be isntrumental (above
what your fathers have been) either to the advantage or disadvantage of
Religion; the Name of Christ will either gain or lose much by you. If two
Generations be for God and the ways of God, this will be for the honor of
Gods Name; and therefore it is that the Lord is so delighted in his Name, I am
the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the God of three Generations. it is
greatly for the glory of God, when Truth has the advantage of a double
Generation; so on the contrary Religion will suffer exceedingly if you desert
it. If it be said, that the very children pulled down what their fathers
builded, 1 Chror 28. 1.
this will cast dishonor upon the way they walked in, Judge. 2.17. and the Lord
complains of wrong and reproach cast upon him, when men turn away from him to
ways of sin, Jer. 2.5. I may allude to the words of Paul spoken in another
case, 1 Cor. 9.15. It were better for me to die, then that any should make my
glory void; it were better for you to die, then that Gods Name should suffer by
you, as it will suffer if you keep not the Lords Presence with you. Oh take
heed what you do, take heed how you sad the heart of God, and godly men, and
how you glad the heart of Satan and the wicked.

Mot. 3. Consider that it is the turn of your Generation to stand up for God,
and what can you do for him if he be not with you? Elders are gathered a way
both in Church and Commonwealth, their work is done as to many of them
already, and the Gospel and Ordinances are to be transmitted into your hands,
the Affairs of Christ's Kingdom will be upon your shoulder; Your fathers before
you served God in their Generation, Judge. 2.7. Acts 13.36. they lived and died
in the faith of the Gospel, and the profession thereof, and now you come to act
your part, the Lords voice to you is, Look, you now to it, I trusted your
fathers, and gave them my Laws and Statues, and they were faithful to their
death, and now they rest from their labors, and their works follow them, and
now I put the like upon you that I did upon them: Oh how will you manage this
betrustment without the Lords Presence? Consider 1. The greatness of your
Generation work; it is too heavy for the shoulders of any Angel in heaven to
bear: Look at personal concerns, look at public concerns, its not work for
men, for our selves, but for God. 2. The days wherein you live are backsliding
times, evil days, 2 Timothy 3.1. times of great degeneracy and Apostasy: Alas!
little humble walking now, little self-denial, little holiness; Oh how weighty
and difficult is their work, that are now called out to stand up for Christ? It
is difficult at any time, Onus humeris Angelicis formidandum, as Chrysostom
faith concerning the work of the Ministry, A burden that the shoulders of
Angels might shake to come under, but especially in such times wherein we are
fallen: How hard is it to keep up an House when it is falling down, to keep the
Ship from sinking, when the leak that is sprung has almost filled it with
water. 3. The hands that help they are but few, and those that hinder are many:
what can be done at such a time as this, if the Lords presence be not with us?

Mot.4. You have many special Engagements to hold God with you, he is your
fathers God, and not willing to leave you: The holy Ghost gives counsel not to
forsake our fathers friend, Prove.27.9. much less your fathers God. It Is an
heart-endearing consideration, that God was the God of Relations, this helps to
sweeten the presence of God to us; as men in other things they will not part
with what was their Progenitors, Oh this was my fathers, and I will not part
with it: so here, Exodus 15.2. he is a God left, commended and bequeathed to you
by your fathers; Those that knew how good he was, left this with you as their
most weighty Counsel, that whatever you did, you would make choice of the Lord
to be your God, 1 Chro. 28.9. 1 Kin. 2.3,4. 3. You have the pattern and example
of those that were before you to encourage hereunto: what is it not well with
them? did they not live in peace and die in comfort? Peace and truth was in
their days; they never repented of their choice they made: verily their
holiness will be a dreadful witness against you, when the Lord shall say as
Jer. 22.15, 16. But Gods Presence was life to them: we may well say as Ruth 1.
16. Entreat me not to leave thee, or to return from following after thee;
whither thou go I will go, thy people shall be my people, and thy God my
God. 4. The cost and care that Predecessors have been at, that so they might
leave God with children, is to be seriously thought of; they may say of the
Gospel and Ordinances thereof, as 2. Sam. 23. 17. They purchased them with
hazard of their lives, as sometimes Jacob gave Joseph a blessing, that he took
out of the hand of the Amorites with his sword and bow, Genesis 48.22.

Mot. 5. What will become of you if God be not with you? what a condition will
you then be in, if God leave you and cast you out of his sight? Jer. 16.12, 13.
1. Your sins will be worse then the sins of others, 2 Kin. 21.11. 2. You will
not be one whit better in respect of any Spiritual advantage, that you have
sprung from those that had the Lord to be their God, Ezekiel. 16.2,3,4,5. Isa.
57.3,4. 3. The want of Gods Presence will bring a curse upon all blessings, and
make your condition more miserable then the worst. In this life nothing but
plagues, woes, miseries, Hos. 3.3. Deuteronomy. 31.17. yea enemies that shall prey on
you, will pretend they do it justly, Jer. 50.7. Ordinances, Sabbaths, Sermons,
shall blind, harden, and seal you up in sin. Oh! to be prayed, heard, wept
down to Hell, how dreadful is that? You shall be plagued above others, Amos
3.2. Gods hand will follow you, Judge. 2.15. and at last you shall die in sin,
Ezekiel. 18.9, 10. and be cast off for ever, 1 Chronicles. 29.9. Jer.16.12,13. and go
to Hell, though the children of Abraham, Luke 16.24. your godly Parents will be
so far from helping you, that they will rejoice and bless God for executing
Justice upon you to all Eternity; neither your fathers, nor the God of your
fathers will own you: But oh let it be our prayer and care, that the Lord our
God may be with us, as he was with our fathers, let him not leave us nor
forsake us.

R Eader, The Author had intended another Sermon by way of Direction (...)
those of the Rising Generation, to show them what course they must take, that
(...) the Lords gracious Presence may be successively continued. But here God
took him thus serving his Generation, who are by reason of the Authors death
deprived of the benefit of those Meditations.


