USEFUL INSTRUCTIONS for a professing People in Times of great SECURITY AND
DEGENERACY:

Delivered in several SERMONS on Solemn Occasions:

By Mr. Samuel Willard Pastor of the Church of Christ at Groton.

Ezekiel. 3. 17. Son of Man, I have made thee a Watchman to the House of Israel:
therefore hear the Word at my mouth, and give them warning from me. Amos 3. 8.
The Lord God has spoken, who can but Prophesy? Jer. 2. 31. O Generation, See
ye the Word of the Lord: have I been a wilderness unto Israel? a Land of
darkeness? wherefore say my People, we are Lords, we will come no more unto
thee. Haggai. 1. 5, 7. Thus says the Lord, Consider your ways. CAMBRIDGE:
Printed by Samuel Green. 1673.

Jer. 7. 12. But go ye now unto my Place which is in Shiloh, etc:
IN the beginning of this Chapter, the Lord sends by his Prophet, to call Judah
and Jerusalem to true Repentance, encourageing them (...) it by a promise of
establishment of their peace and mercies, in case they would so do, ver. 1, 2,
3, and 5, 6, 7, etc. That this coun^ell of his may take effect upon them, he
endeavors to reclaim them from their vain confidence in their external
worship, and enjoyment of the Temple and Ordinances, ver. 4. After which he
enlarges himself by a Declaration, of their hypocritical dealings, and false
trust in the Temple, as if it were a sure safeguard to them from punishment,
notwithstanding all their wicked abominations, ver. 8, 9, 10. which vanity, he
declares to be a changing of a place of holy worship, into a den of robbers,
ver. 11. and then gives them to understand that he takes notice of it: And in
the Text further calls them off from their vain confidence by sending them to
Shiloh, to take notice of his dealing with them for their sins.

From the context, diverse Truths are Observable.

Doct. 1. When God is never so much provoked with a people, He yet tenders them
terms of peace, before he cutts them off. In the three last verses of the
former Chapter, he shows what they were; a rebellious and counselless people,
on whom he had laid out much cost, to whom he had sent many messengers, who had
spent their breath and lives to no purpose, and yet here again he sends an
invitation to repentance, with a conditional promise of good; before he
denounces hi^ last sentence against them. The like we shall find. Chap 4. 1.
and 3. 1. and 18. 11. etc.

Reason 1. From the great desire which God has that sinners should (...) that
he may verify that truth. Ezekiel. 18. 11. That sinners may know where the true
and proper cause of their destruction lies, that it is in themselves, and not
in him; they shall not have the blame to lay upon God in the least, and
therefore he proffers pardon and mercy, holds out the flag of peace before
them, that if in the time of truce they will come in, they may, and welcome.

Reas. 2. From the Attributes of mercy and long-suffering, which discover
themselves in withholding the stroke of vengeance, and holding his hand back.
Ier. 3. 12. 2 Pet. 3. 9. God will have a time for all his Attributes to appear,
now is the day of mercy, and now God will let sinners have large trusts of it,
he warns, yea, follows on to warn and persuade with a people; that if it be
possible (...) escape

Reas. 3. For the advancement of his glory by his patience, God aims at
himself, his own glory in all his doings: now by this Clemency of his he will
gain honor, either to his mercy in their welfare, or his justice in their
ruin; which every way God will be a gainer hereby: if they repent how will
they magnify his patience and so bearance: if they be obstinate and perish,
how eminently will he clear his justice in their ruin?

Use 1. This may convince us how unreasonable a thing it is to sin against God:
is God so unwilling to punish, so desirous to do us good, so ready to pardon
us, who would sin against, and provoke such a God? bold, presumptuous, and
horrible is that spirit of iniquity, that makes Gods patience and mercy his
encouragement to sin; would we deal so (...), who would take encoucagement? to
vex and anger one that is good and patient to us: that is the aggravation of
their sin Psalm. (...) 43. their deliverances were the occasion of their
presumption to (...).

Use 2. What encouragement is there here to us after all our grievous sins to
return to the Lord by Repentance, God is yet ready to receive us, and (...)
store his mercies unto us, and therefore let us be quickened up by this
consideration. motive.

1. Consider the wonderful self denial that there is in God, he needs us not,
but could do well enough without us, being self-sufficient in himself, yea,
has Angels which attend upon him, and that he should accept of dust and ashes,
much more unprofitable sinful creatures, and receive them into mercy; oh what a
condescendency is this!

2. Consider, the wrong we do him will fall upon our selves in the end, we may
fight against him, but they are arrows shot up against heaven, which will fall
down upon our own heads Ier. 7. 19. we may think what we will, but the issue of
such provocations, will be the impe^^tent sinners confusion; briers and thorns
must not think to thrive again the devouring fire.

3. Consider, The benefits of Repentance will redound to our own good Jer. 7.
5, 6, 7. we shall taste the sweet of it; to escape from misery, to enjoy the
benediction of God, and sweet fruits of peace, will be our advantage: let it
then break our hearts to consider, that after all our sins, God has yet
wid'ned arms to receive us into: if a man find his enemies, would he not
destroy them. 1. Sam. 24. 19. yet has God had ^^nifold opportunities and
sufficient provocations, and has not (...) use of them.

Doct. 2. True Repentance is the best and only way for the settlement of true
peace: this the Lord propounds to them as the way and means to settlement, that
they may dwell in that place for ever: and to that end he call^ them up, not to
a feigned, but a true repentance; if they had a desire to prosper. Ier 4. 1. if
you will return, return to me. i. e. be sure to repent aright, do not turn from
one sin to another, do not wander from that mountain to this hill, change one
Idol for another; but go back again to your God: hence the Lord shows that to
be the reason of the continuance of their sorrows. Isa. 58 2, 3, 4. and Zech 7.
5, 6. they had pretended services, fastings, etc. but they did it not to God,
it was not in a right manner.

Reas. 1. From the difference between true and feigned repentance, in the one
there is a free and hearty renouncing of all sin: a sight of it, a sorrow for
it, and a forsaking it; this the Lord himself has constituted as the way to
enjoy mercy. Prove. 28. 13. this has a firm promise made to it. Isa. 1. 19,
20. when as feigned repentance it a mocking of God, as the Lord declares, and
therefore denounces that threatening against it Isa. 29. 13. 14. God will not
be mocked by sinners; that Repentance which God will only own and acknowledge,
comes from a deep touch and sense of the bitterness of sin. Ier. 2. 19.

Reas. 2. Because it is only true Repentance which sets us in the way of (...)
peace.

1. God only is the Author of true peace. Isa. 57. 17. if ever the creature be
truly enstated in peace, God must speak it to the soul, (...) all the world
should declare amity with the creature, yet if (...) do not set his seal to it,
it is but a blank, and signifies nothing

2. Sin has cut the creature off from the right and true foundation of (...),
what peace, etc. 2. King. 9. 22. God will not, cannot, (...) blessings and
peace to impenitent and hypocritical sinners; he ^ould wound the great
Attribute of his holiness, if he should so do.

3. It is only by true Repentance that we heartily renounce sin and (...) under
the condition of peace, Ier. 3. 12, 13. God sets forth tenders of peace before
vile sinners, but there are Articles of composition, terms of agreement, which
the Creature must needs consent to, if he desire good, or otherwise the treaty
must break off, and be put to an end.

Use 1. Here see the dangerous estate of an obstinate people, who refuse to
hearken to the counsels of God; if once iniquity increase to obstinacy, and
renounce repentance the only way of pacification, the condition of such a
people is become desperate, Ezekiel 14 13 as long as there remains any remorse
upon the consciences of a people there may be some hope of them, because they
are not without capacity of attending the way of peace, but if conscience be
stupefied, and the sense of sin obliterated, what hope can there be; and
therefore as we would avoid utter ruin, have a care of adding obstinacy to all
other sins, if we will yet repent there is hope, but if we are resolute our
case i^ past hope.

Use. 2. To direct us to a right way of settling our selves on such a firm way
of peace as shall stand; let us forsake our sins and return unto God from whom
we have turned away; though we have departed away from God into sin, yet let us
not stand it out against him: Motive.

Consider, Our league with Hell and Death will not do, Isai. 28. 18 we may go
down to Egypt and ride upon Horses, but these shall not save us, Isa. 3^
beginning, though we should add to own the strength of all the Creation, and
engage the whole world in our quarrel, yet we (...) not think to be too hard
for the Almighty, none ever tried a fall with him but they were thrown.

2. So long as we persist in a way of sin God has a quarrel against us, Isai:
57: ult: wherever God finds wickedness there he stands off from the sinner; we
may make flourishes of great matters in forms of Religion, etc: but if sin be
still covenanted with, and we maintain our rebellion, the return will be, who
required these things at your hands?

3. No peace like that whose foundation is laid in true repentance, for its a
peace whose Basis is peace with God, and that gives peace with all things, ^ob
5: 19: and its an inviolable peace, a league which can never be broken: Oh!
labor we then after this peace, if we clap up a peace and God be not in it, be
will disanul all that is done, but enter a covenant with him and the world
shall never be able to overthrow it, Earth and Hell shall not prevail against
it; let us then confess our sins to him, and cast our selves before him, and go
with them, Hos (...)

Doct: 3 True repentance is always attended with a through reformation: If ye
thoroughly amend your ways, etc ver: 5. the Lord there declares what a manner
of repentance it is that he looks for; not a verbal, in a few empty
Confessions, nor a formal, in a few dejected and cast down looks: like theirs
in Isai: 58: beginning but here, and in the sequel he declares if they will
have peace what it is he expects; the sum of which is, let all which has been
amiss be mended, turn over a new leaf, reform your hearts and ways, your souls
and lives, and that I will accept of.

Reas. 1 Because such is the vile and loathsome nature of sin, that cannot be
indeed seen in its own colors, but it must needs be odious and abominable in
our eyes: It has so much of contrariety in it, to the holiness of God, and so
much vileness, and filth, and abomination that none can see it but must needs
hate it; when sin is truly seen, it then appears to be sinful, Rom: 7: 14: that
is the very worst name that can be put upon it, viz: its own: men see sin many
times in its effects, and that frights them, but it cannot make them hate their
sin, but they think it good enough if it had not such consequences, but when
the face of it is uncovered and the souls eyes opened, now he stands off, his
affections are slain.

Reas. 2. From the Inconsistency of hating sin in the heart, and closing with
it in the life and practice: will we always keep company, and hold intimate
fellowship, and drive a constant trade and commerce with one, the sight of whom
we loath, an unreformed life is a plain denial, and contradicting of all our
verbal and professed repentance, Tit: 1: 16: If we live in sin it makes nothing
to the credit of the world, much less to the all seeing eye of God to speak and
profess against it.

Reas: 3 From the nature of true repentance, which is a change from what we
were to some other thing; a change of affections, a change of profession, and
not only so, but also a change of objects, a turning from the creature to God,
Jer: 4: 1: now this implies a through reformation, when the creature casts off
all other things which it has pursued, and seek to God alone.

Use 1 This may call us to the Examination, whether ever we truly repented or
no of those sins which we have so often confessed to God, viz: where is our
reformation? Search thoroughly one and another of us, remember what we have
confessed, and with what shows of sense and sorrow, as if those sins had indeed
been a burden to us, and we desired to be rid of them, but have they been
amended, have we truly relinquisht them? if not, assure we our selves God looks
at himself as mocked at all this while, and therefore if we be defective in
this essential and substantial part of our repentance, never enquire or ask of
God wherefore his hand is stretched out still against us, after so many Prayers
and supplications have been poured out before him on solemn days:

The Reason is obvious and plain, and he that runs may read it:

Use (...) Hence therefore let this truth move upon us, to persuade us, and to
reclaim us from words to works; from profession to practice, from confession to
amendment: we have begun a good work in confessing, but it it go no further the
work is spoiled; add we therefore now to it, reformation, let us turn away
from those sins we have drawn up so many protests against, and let us show a
practical hatred of what we have verbally renounced.

Doct. 4 The b^st^ou ward privileges in the world, if once they come to be
^rusted in, are no better th^n lies; ver 4. trust not in lying words, the
Temple, etc. i. e. they have as great and grand a delusion in them, and as
surely deceive any that place their confidence upon them as any other deceit in
the world whatsoever: they are no better shelter, nor will afford any greater
security and safeguard to the soul then any other vain hiding place; and
therefore, they that trust in them trust in falsehood; a lie is that which is
spoken to deceive the creature: thus when men speak of their privileges, and
rest on them, they deceive their own selves.

Reas. 1. Because God give^hi^ blessing with these priviled^es but
conditionally, i. e. according to the creatures improvement of them; if they
will make use of them aright they are a special benefit to them, otherwise not,
1 Chronicles: 28: 11: and therefore positively and absolutely to trust in these, and
not to carry a respect to the condition which is annexed to them, it is to
neglect and abuse Gods order of blessing, who together with privileges,
promises good to the faithful improver of them, but threatens wrath, and
denounces his judgments against the abusers of it, and is therefore a great
deceit.

Reas. 2. Because the greater the blessing is, if not answerably improved, it
brings the greater curse upon the Creature: Mat. 11. 2^. that is Capernaum^
sin, abuse of Gospel privileges, and therefore a special and extraordinary
doom is past upon them; the greater the mercy is, the more sadly is God
provoked by the abusing of it, and therefore who ever escape, it is like to fare
ill which such as those. Ans. 3. 2.

Use 1. To reprove our carnal confidence in the enjoyment of the means of grace
and privileges of the Gospel: you that trust in your interests you have
Sabbaths, Sacraments, liberty of nearest communion with God in his Ordinances,
etc. and hereupon you are ready to think that God loves you, and will not bring
a scourge upon you, but conclude your selves to be exempted from any danger of
misery and desolation; let me tell you; you trust in lying words, you lean
upon such a prop as will certainly fail and deceive you in the latter end.
Consider, Jer. 9. 25, 26.

Use 2. To awaken us to be think our selves what use it is that we make of the
means of grace which we have and enjoy, what good we get by the Ordinances:
think it not enough that we have and enjoy them; you have the temple of the
Lord among you, the Word preached from Sabbath to Sabbath, and the Sacraments
administered; these are high privileges, but all the benefit is in the use of
them, if we have them only to look upon, and boast off, and not to improve for
our conversion to God, and help forward in his ways, they will become a snare
to us in the end.

Doct. 5. It Is the great sin of a professing people, in the times of Apostasy,
to cover their gross iniquity under the veil of privileges and performances.
ver. 8, 9, 10. they thought if they did but come to Gods house, and perform a
few Ceremonies there, offer sacrifices, etc. they might take the liberty to
steal, murder, swear, and what not; thus we read of that bold and impudent
woman, who had not her name for nothing. Prove. ^. 14, 15.

Reas. 1. From their presumptuous trust in their privileges, as though God
were bound to preserve his Temple, he has no other habitation in the world,
and therefore he will never depart from hence, his glory is involved in our
preservation, and will he laugh in our ruin: if he should destroy us, his name
would be routed out of the earth, and therefore there is no danger that ever we
should be cut off, or cast out; this was their presumption. Mich. 3. 11. the
Lord is among us, no evil can betide us, and therefore they steal, judge for
reward, wrong the innocent; there is no danger.

Reas. 2. From the secret Atheism and hypocrisy that is in the heart of vain
man, who thinks God takes no notice of their wickedness, but is deceived by
their pretended services; men consider not that Gods all all seeing eye
penetrates into all corners of the earth, and the secrets of the heart, and
hence they think they may sin unseen. Ezekiel. 8. 12.

Use To quicken us up to examine our selves, whither or no we are not going
into Apostasy by this; ask every one his own heart, can we not lanch forth
into any sin, do violence, steal etc. and yet go and stand before the Lord and
say, we are delivered to do all these abominations: Sin and pray, and pray and
sin again, with as much greediness as ever; come before God and make our
confessions, tell him a large story of what sins we have been overtaken
withal, and seem to beg his presence and help against it, as though we were
willing and desirous to be rid of it, and yet go away, and strive no more
against the temptation, nor set our selves in opposition against the sin then
we did before; but entertain the same with greediness, the very next time we
meet an opportunity and provocation, be as vain, as passionate, etc as ever;
and when all is done, then come and rense them over again in few tears and
empty confessions: and so wipe our mouths, and say, what have I done; if the
matter so with us, this is an evidence to us of the depth of hypocrisy in our
hearts; well, let us look to our selves, we may thus please our selves into a
vain hope and soul delusion, but let us know that God and our sins will find us
out.

Doct. 6. Hypocritical service is no better the^ robbery, pretended service to
God: to come reaking from our sins into the house of God to perform a few
formal duties, and when we have done, to go thence again with more greedy
desires after it; what is this, but to turn the house of God into a den of
Robbers.

Reas. 1. Because God is hereby robbed of that glory which is due to his Name,
who requires hearty service; which the hypocrite offers up to the Idol of his
heart, and not unto God; he gives that glory which is alone due to God, to his
graven Images, to his own by ends and aims; God requires the heart, because he
knows that that is the leader of all the rest of the faculties, and it is his
due, for he made it; but the hypocrite steals the best piece of the sacrifice
from God, and is not this Robbery.

Reas. 2. Because the sinner hereby robs himself of all the good which he
should otherwise get by his (...) that were done in sincerity. Ezekiel. 14. 7, 8
God has made great promises to sincerity, in manifold expressions in
Scripture, but he denounces s^re woes upon hypocrites, destructive desolation
and ruin; so that it is (...) lost, and (...) ourselves out from good.

Use To condemn that spirit of hypocrisy which is ready to seize upon our
hearts, will you give entertainment to secret sins, and forsake God in your
hearts, live in a way and course of disobedience, and yet here come before God
in solemn and serious duties, as though you were good Christians; God looks
upon you as no better then a company of Robbers, you do at the present rob him
of his glory; but, assure your selves, he will not be a looser by you, the time
hastens when he will come and recover his honor out of your hands: and you rob
your selves of all the good you might get by such opportunities as these; oh!
if such duties were done in truth and sincerity, they would b^ing in a
plenteous harvest; fasting days would be our best feasting days, God would both
accept of us, and also crown us with admirable blessings; but it we will come
with an Idol in our hearts, cry out against such sins as we bear an entire love
unto, confess those evils we never intend to leave off in our course, assure we
our selves we shall be found the greatest self Cheaters in the end.

Doct. 7. God takes notice of, and will find a time to punish the wickedness of
a sinning people; for both these are understood in the words. ver. 11. I behold
it, and will requ^te it: so Psalm. 35. 22, 23.

Reas. From the Attributes of Omniscience and Justice.

1. God knows all things, nothing can escape his sight, because his eye is
every where. Pro. 15. 3. he knows all things, even the secrets of the hearts of
men, for he made them, every room and corner of them; he therefore keeps a key
to them, he must needs be Omniscient, for he is Omnipresent in all places, by
his essential presence; intimate with all things: Acts 17. 28.

2. He observes all things, and there is reason for it, because he administers
the affairs of the whole world; Psalm. 33. 13, 14, 15. All action of the
creatures in the world flow as to their principle from him, and therefore he
cannot but take notice of them

3. He will requite, for he is just and cannot but give them their demerit Jer
5. 29 he is the judge of the whole world, and therefore must be just, he is the
highest and supreme ju^g beyond whom there is no appeal, and therefore had need
be just; yea, he is engaged by his Word to do justice and execute judgment upon
sinners for their sins

Use 1. To show us how vain a thing it is to go about to deceive God with vain
service, whiles our (...) estranged from in; if we had to deal with man like
our selves, we ^^ght easily cast a (...) before their eyes, and make them
believe strange matters, but God who can in no ways cheat or deceive, though we
cover our service with a cloak of deceit, yet God can tell us whether it be
alive or dead; and if we go about so to serve him, he will make us to know
sooner or later, that he took good notice of them in the day when he comes to
set our sins in order before us, and tell us this we did at such a time, and
that abomination at another time: See Psalm. 50. 18. etc.

Use. 2. This may certify the sinner, that God will take a time to reckon with
him, the alseeing eye sees thee, and cannot choose but take notice of thee, and
he will call thee to an account, though be may seem to wink at present and not
to take notice of thy ways and doings, but to let thee alone; yet I promise
thee time will be when thou shall know it to thy cost, that he is not such an
one as thou art, nor did ever give his consent to and approbation of thy ways
and doings: and therefore is there any here that lies and lives in sin; deceive
not thy own soul, but let it awaken thee to look about thee, and make thy peace
with God, for otherwise what he has spoken he will perform, he will not come
short of his threatenings any whit more then his promises, let then that counsel
be acceptable. Am. 4. ult. meet God with Repentance, before he meet us with his
heavy plagues But I come from the Context to the words of the Text: God having
counseled and warned them; the further to awaken and effect their hearts, and
preserve them, sets a lively example before them: in every way suiting and
answering the present state of Jerusalem, he therefore sets it forth. 1. By the
title it once bare, the place etc. 2. By the evils which were brought upon it:
where, 1. The author, God himself: what I did. 2. The procuring cause, the
wickedness of my people Israel: Hence.

Doct 8. The example of Gods judgments upon his own people for their sin and
wicked Apostasy, are very useful and solemn considerations for all professors
of Religion: the Lord sends lerusalem to Shiloh, and for what end, only to see,
what he did, and for what, to view his judgments in their causes and effects;
to see, i. e. not only to look on, but to consider them seriously, and to make
use of them to themselves; and learn something from it for their own
conviction; by comparing cases together.

The ground of the truth we may understand if we consider a few propositions:
viz.

1. God has one rule of dealing with all his externally covenanted people in
the world, and that because the covenant with them all runs upon the same terms
and conditions, for it is a conditional Covenant; in the which there is a
promise and a threatening, a promise annexed to obedience, but a threatening
denounced against disobedience. Isa. 1. 19, 20. It is true, God reserves a
sovereignty to himself as to the circumstances of his dealings with his people
in one place or in another; without either infringing his Covenant, or rendering
to the creature a Reason of that variety; hence, possibly patience and mercy
may longer wait upon some then others, some God may come severely out against,
for breach of Covenant, and to others he may condescend to allow a greater
space to repent in, as he pleases, and he does not the least wrong or injury
in so doing, because he is both supreme, and has ends in all his judgments,
beyond the capacity of the creatures finding out; but, as to the essence of the
Covenant, he thus far stands positively and absolutely engaged to reward
obedience, and to punish disobedience; which flows from his everlasting
righteousness.

2. Examples of Gods judgments upon his own people for their sins, are evident
confirmations and testimonies that he is a God who proceeds impartially
according to his own Rule; as when Laws are executed according to the tenor of
them upon malefactors in the Kingdom, we now know that such Laws were not mere
scare-crows, made only to fright, but not to hurt, but that there was reality
in the Lawmakers, and that they were really set against such evils to subvert
and root them out, and may teach others to expect what to meet with, in the
like cases: so, when God punishes sin in his people according to his
threatening in his word, we now see that those threatenings are realities; that
his orders and constitutions are not bug-bears, but realities, that sin shall
not go unpunished. Hence God declares in his word, that he will be known to be
God in his judgments. Exek. 28. 22 if men will not believe the word, that God
will do as he has said, but presume upon his mercy and patience; when he takes
his rod into his hand, now he is mad, that believes not.

3. Hence, Examples have matter of precept in them. Gods judgments are
documents, there are doctrinal conclusions to be drawn for our instruction out
of them, hence, we shall find God in Scripture calling upon his people to look
upon Examples. thus, Luke 17. 32. 2. Pet. 2. 4, 5, 6. etc. If God have thus
dealt with such a people, we may thence conclude he will deal so with those
that are so qualified, if we enjoy the same privileges that Israel did, and
make no better use of them then they made of theirs, we may expect to be
visited as well as they were, and not only may we argue a pari, but also ab
impari, from the lesser to the greater; if Israel so privileged were not
spared; how much less shall we be spared, who exceed them in privileges, if
sinners under the Law found no favor, how much sorer punishment may sinners
under the Gospel expect: God writes his severe truths with the blood of his
disobedient Subjects, and makes their ruinous heaps to proclaim knowledge and
counsel to the rest of the world: Sodom's ashes, Shiloh's fire, Ierusalem's
desolation, are uses of instruction to the Inhabitants of the Earth.

4. Examples are of wondrous benefit to give efficacy to Doctrines, and move
upon the affections, and bring them to consideration, they are useful to
persuade; and to move the soul to make out after God: Psalm. 78.6, 7, 8.

1. Because there is a natural sympathy between the children of men, there is a
kind of a fellow feeling of sufferings; when we read only of Doctrines, these
may reach the understanding, but when we read or hear of Examples, humane
affection does as it were represent to us the case as our own; whereupon the
judgments of God, do in the very hearing dwell upon the thoughts, and take
upon the heart: when I read the story of Sodom's overthrow, me thinks I see the
Sun rising in glorious brightness, the Sodomites sporting and pleasing
themselves in their opulence and security; when on a sudden, me thinks I see
the heavens covered with those sable clouds, and hear the great Cannon of
heaven thundering down tempests upon them, and the streams of fire with horror
and dread, till I behold a proud City, on a sudden become a desolate heap; when
I read Ierusalems history, me thinks I see the battering Engines placed against
the walls, the proud enemy climbing up the battlements, the feeble and
saint-hearted Citizens flying into corners, overtaking by the insulting foe;
who without mercy or pity sheaths his sword in their bowels; methinks I see
the fireballs flying (...) and fro, and the glorious buildings, the work of
many years, yielding to that prevailing and mercyless enemy, I hear the cries
of ravished virgins and bereaved Orphans, yea, I look on till I see all Gods
threatenings fulfilled, and the glory of the Nations stripped of all ornament and
become a widow, etc.

2. Because examples come in by the senses, and these have a great stroke to
more the affections, and they persuade the heart of man. Lam. 3. 51.

3. Because Examples have an awakening voice in them, when judgment comes into
the world, it carries awe with it, it sensibly moves the soul to have
consideration; such as these are natural influences upon the heart of such as
have any remainder of an acting conscience in them. viz.

1. Why may not the same judgments befall us, what grounds have we to promise
our selves security, and immunity from the same plagues and miseries which are
upon others.

2. Hereupon they put the c^eature in mind of its ways and doings, what they
have been; now conscience, if it be not altogether seared and benumbed, reads
the creature a more close and severe Lecture then usual, now those sins that
he had before lived in forgetfulness came afresh into his memory.

3. Hence they are to put the creature into fear of the same wrath and terror,
as Scholars, when they see their Master take the rod in hand, to punish
offenders; every one presently considers what his faults have been, and if he
have been tardy, he stands quivering, and quaking, fearfully expecting when his
time and turn will come to be called sorth.

4. Now the soul is put upon the study and consideration how to prevent and
escape severe and like plagues, now he be-thinks himself of making his peace of
coming and seeking a pardon; for fear least by obstinacy he bring himself to
^^ine.

5. Now the creature is alarmed to Repentance, he had calls before, but those
he regarded not, but now he sees there is no longer delaying and playing with
the threatenings of God, and now, if ever, is the soul in a likely way to be
reclaimed.

Use Of counsel and exhortation to us, in the words of the Text, go to Shiloh,
etc. In the prosecution of which use, I shall.

1. Bring you to Shiloh, and show you what God did to it, and for what,

2. Draw some useful instructions from the consideration of Shiloh, and press
them in a few words of counsel.

1. Then, go to Shiloh: and here consider, 1. What Shiloh was, 2. What were
their sins. 3. Gods judgments on it.


1. What Shiloh was, we have it in the words of the Text in two things.

1. It was Gods place: i. e. a peculiar place which he had chosen to himself,
his chief place.

2. It was the place where God set his name at the first: i. e. It was the
first Tent, or Tabernacle where God see up his Ordinances, and called his name
upon it, after he had given to his people Israel possession of the land of
Canaan: as we shall find in Joshua 18. 1. here it was that after the Arc had
been unsettled for 40 years and upward in the wilderness, (...) first chose it
a fixed place, here was God worshipped first after he had granted a settlement
to his people Israel. The Tabernacle was a Testimony of Gods presence with his
people, hither the Tribes came up to worship, here it was that God manifested
his great glory, by this it was that God declared Israel to be a peculiar
people to himself, so that Shiloh was not only a part of God dwelling place,
for so were all the Tribes, nor only a habitation of Gods people, for so were
all other Cities, Towns and Villages where Israel dwelt, but it was the place
of Gods manifesting himself to his peole, his especial habitation.

2. What was the wickedness of Shiloh; for the Lord shows that it was for that,
he did that to it, which he had done; Text, now we shall see the sin of Shiloh,
if we look into 1 Samuel 2. 12. etc. which was the sin of the Priests in
contemning the Ordinances of God, giving an evil example to the people, and
enriching themselves in a way of abuse of Gods Institutions, and thereby
discouraging the people from serving of God, and of Eli in bearing with the
wickedness, and not severely punishing the sin of his sons, which God
interprets as a preferring them before him. ver. 21. etc. and Psa. 78. 41. to
60. where their horrible ingratitude in forgetting Gods mercies, and woeful
Idolatry is declared this was Isreal's sin, the Priests and people were polluted
and defiled, and alienated from God; there was a continuance of Ordinances and
sacrifice, but both abuse of Ordinances and Idolatry, both in profession and
practice.

3. The judgments of God upon his people Israel, and upon Shiloh in particular:
we shall find recorded in scripture, what God did to it; for that is the thing
which God would have in especial be minded, look into 1 Samuel 4. 10, 11: where
you shall find the judgment denounced, and more amply we shall read of the
execution of it in Psalm 78. 59. to 68. where we have described unto us, the
effects of their sins.

1. In (...) of Gods affections from them, turning of his former love into
hatred, ver. 59. God had formerly loved Israel, they were to him a choice
people, tender as the apple of ones eye, tenderly taken care for, and foltered
by him, protected from evils, dandled in the lap of his providence, and
singularly respected by him; as we shall find amply related to us in Deuteronomy. 32.
7, etc. But now his heart was hardened against them, and his former love turned
into abhorrence and detestation.

2. The consequents following upon this, or the tokens whereby God signified
and expressed his displeasure unto them, which are.

1. God departed and forsook them, even his own house not only the other
Cities, of Israel, but even his own tent at Shiloh, (...).

2. When God had left them, all miseries followed, (...) etc. their crown was
taken from their head, and their enemies which formerly were tributary to them,
now lord it over them, yea, an universal d^^^ge of miseries came upon them, as
you may there read. Thus you (...), once chosen by God, where he set up his
Ordinances, made his (...) to dwell, and shone forth in his wonderful glory:
forsaken by God, and buried in its own ruins, altogether disowned and refused
as a place of abhorrence and contempt.

3. Let us consider what we may learn at Shiloh, observe here even from the
consideration of this example.

1. That God has no where on earth so engaged himself and his presence, but
that sin may drive him away: where was his name greater then at Shiloh; there
was the Tabernacle, there was the Priests and Levites serving, there were daily
morning and evening sacrifices, thither came the tribes yearly to appear before
God, there were the seals of Gods Covenant, yet is Shiloh deserted and
destroyed; Jerusalem may also witness this truth, the once dwelling place of
God, where the Temple was, the place whereof God had said, this is my rest for
ever, here will I dwell, for I have desired it. Psalm. 132. 14. but now behold
it deserted and twice made the subject of Gods fury, and not so much as the
ruins of it left to testify what it was, a (...) not to be found upon a
stone; hence therefore learn we not to promise our selves security if we be
found in the ways of sin, whatsoever engagement and covenant God may seem to
stand bound in unto us, God knows how to keep up his glory in the world, though
we be ruinated, he can keep up a Church in the world, though we be left de
^late; the stones of the field, if he but speak the word, shall rise up
children of Abraham; the remotest ends of the earth shall come in, and the
children of the Kingdom shall be thrust out; let not this therefore be your
rest.

2. That Sion affords no more security to sinners then Sodom, Shiloh is as
dangerous a place to sin in, as any in the world; if a people in covenant with
God, be found rebellious, he will spare them no more then any other people, may
he will begin with them. Am. 3. 2. judgment shall begin at his house; Shilohs
ruins are a memorial of this, and declare how vain it is to take sanctuary in
the Tabernacle, and shreud our selves from judgment under pretense of Gods
covenant; Jerusalem smarted (...) for this sin, if Ioab be a man of death, it
avails him not to take (...) the horns of the Altar:

Learn we therefore from hence, to beware to our selves, how we make bold to
sin, and think the Covenant shall save us, if God find us rebellious, and bold
sinners, though we should hide our selves in the Tem^le, and take refuge under
the pretended shadow of Gods promises of favor and love to us, God will yet
find us out, and will not spare us; whatever they plead for themselves. Mat. 7.
21, 22. yet Christ's answer still is, I know you not; I tell thee, when God
shall come forth to execute his judgments upon sinners, thy church membership,
thy privileges shall not save thee, God will no more regard thee for all this
then if thou went an Indian; except it be to punish thee the more, because thy
sins have therein been greater, and more heinous: if such pleas could have
prevailed, who could have pleaded more then Shiloh and lerusalem.

3. General Apostasy makes way for general calamity, learn this in Shiloh; the
Priests violated Gods Ordinances, and the people they provoked him with their
Idols, and then see the effects. 1 Samuel 4. 10, 11. Israel is smitten, 30000
stain, the Ark lost, the Priests stain, read this also in lerusalem. 2 Chronicles.
36. 15, 16, etc. hence therefore what greater request can we leave with God
this day, than this, that he would prevent our general decay in grace, and to
that end, that he would restore the fallen, prevent the back^liding, and settle
hi^ own, that mercy may be settled among us; pray for rulers in Church and
Commonwealth, that they may do right, and give good examples, and for all the
body of people, that sin do not grow and increase among them; if once we see a
spirit of prevailing corruption spreading it self among us, we may read leading
symptoms of destruction (...), and therefore may be roused up to ply the
throne of grace, that such sad causes may be removed, and so our eyes may not
see the natural direful effect that flow from them.

4. Lenetie in Rulers, brings ruin upon a people, whether in common wealth or
in Churches: Rulers may be good men in themselves, so was Eli, but if they give
way to sinful forbearance in the executing of Justice according to the will of
God, they are not occasions only, but leading causes to the undoing of a
people, because such a spirit animates wicked spirits, and makes them bold to
do perversely upon presumption of a pardon, or to be past by with some (...)
proof; God charge Shiloh's destruction upon Eli, who was (...) Israel, and
when his Sons the Priests did wickedly, he connives so far, as only to rebuke
them, who being gotten beyond remorse or sense of reproof abused their Fathers
patience, to add to their Rebellion; therefore must Shiloh be laid wast.

Hence therefore, let this teach us to pray unto God, to put a Spirit into our
Rulers, Zealous against Sin, especially in these times of prevailing iniquity;
and let us, in our place encourage them in so doing, by rejoicing in acts of
Justice and severity, against such evils as grow and thrive among us: Pray that
they may not respect persons, nor encourage some in sin, by sparing others;
especially remembering, that as long as such a spirit is in Rulers, what ever
sins there be in a people, the^ (...) still some to stand in the Gap.

5. The greatest Mercy abused by sin, give God the highest provocation God
recounts what he had done for them, and what they had done against him, Israel
sinned greivously, after such and such favors, and when God heard this, when
this was the report brought him of the improvement that they had made of all
his mercyes, this brings them into abhorrence: and good reason there is for it,
for every mercy is an obligation laid upon the creature to obedience; hence the
greater the mercy is, the stronger tie lies upon the creature; to sin therefore
against mercy, grace, and special mereyes, is to break Gods strong cor^ of
Love, then which, what greater provocation can there be: Consider David and
Han^^, 2 Samuel 10. Ingratitude in return for friendship, is the (...) hard to
bear of any thing. Ask we then our own hearts, what (...) we have made of all
those great mercies which our God has bestowed up on us: great favors we have
had, equal with those he had showed to his people at Shiloh; yea, if all things
be considered, we may well say, Superior unto them, in as much as the lays of
the Gospel afford far greater light, then the days of the Law did; and have we
remembered what God has done for us? so as to make our returns unto him; has
he had his tribute of thankful Obedience? have we lived up to our enjoyments?
have we been singular in holiness? as we have been singular in the means of
holiness; of have we not rather grown vain and loose, and profane? despising
of the means, and hardening our hearts against the Counsels of God? if it be
so with us, Go to Shiloh, and tremble.

6. A (...) forsaken of God are in the road way to all misery: we read, (...)
sakes his Tent which was in Shiloh, and what follows, but ruin and waste, and
an universal deluge of destruction: all woes follow when he is gone, Hos. 9.
12. and reason there is for it; for his favor is the life of a people, his
protection is their only defense; well may it therefore be said of a people,
deserted by God, their rock has sold them into the hands of misery: fear we
therefore to provoak God to leave us. Consider,

1. All our blessings are in his hand, he holds us as his dispose, if any
people in the World, then to be sure we are at Gods provision, who have no
store but what his yearly blessing brings in unto us.

2. Sin will provoke him to leave us, for he is a God of (...) to behold
iniquity, i. e. with love, liking or approbation; his holiness engages him to
manifest signal discoveries of the contrariety which he has against sin.

3. If when he repoves our sins, we harden our selves in them, it is a sure
sign that he is forsakeing of us, Jer. 7. 28. Have we therefore given to God
any provocation to unsettle himself, an think of a removal away from us: Oh
let our repentance fetch him back and settle him.

Lastly. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Living God: The
Charracters of Gods wrath, and impressions of his Judgments remaining upon
Shiloh, teach us this Lesson: If God come once to abhor a people for their
sins, and fall upon them in his Judgments; he meets them not as a man, but
gives them a Divine siroak; if he (...) angry, his very countenance is terrible
and amazing. Psalm. 18. 8 (...) 3. what is he then, when he poures out his
displeasure: (...) then from the example of Shiloh, to fear and dread
provoaking the great God to wrath against us: what ever causes moving to this
occasion, are in Gods goodness removed away from us, yet the remembrance of our
sins is matter sufficient to humble us before God this day; Better it is for us
to bow our selves before him, left he break us in pieces: and therefore let it
be our great endeavor to meet God in the way by Repentance, before he come
home to us in wrath, and fall upon us in his fore displeasure; let that be the
great practical lesson that we learn at Shiloh. For motive:

1. Consider, God will not bear with sin, let him find it where he will: He is
no respecter of persons, circumcised, or uncircumcised, if uncircumcised in
heart: Jer 9. 25, 26. if he find it in Church, or Commonwealth, in Rulers, or
Subjects; where he finds it, he will punish it.

2. God is yet willing to be met with Repentance, (...) many signs and tokens
of Gods desire rather that we should (...) then dye, hence has he drawn out
his long suffering to so long a thread as he has done; by following with
counsels, and piece-mealing out his judgments.

3. There is all Reason we should acknowledge and repent, we are not able to
give a good Reason, only we have sinned against him, that was unreasonable:
Ier. 2 5. and if so, then needs must it be Rational, that we should see the
evil, and take the shame to our selves of such unreasonable doings.

4. If God once take us in hand, he will be known, and make us to know too, how
sad and miserable a thing it is for us to enforce him to cut us off; do we
provoke him to (...), do we not rather provoke our own souls to ruin: Oh
remember! remember! if we have made him our adversary by sin, he is yet in the
way, though he may be coming in judgment, yet he waits to be gracious he has
waited long, turn not his patience into fury, why should we be made like unto
Shiloh: God is merciful, true, but he is just too, and he can make his wrath
known, ask Shiloh else, and they can tell you (...) story of it: Look on
Shiloh, Look on Jerusalem, look on the (...) of desolate Churches, and take
warning by these to fall down before God, to receive his reproofs; if you be
wise, be wife for your selves; turn to him, for why should (...)

ISAIAH. 26. 9. When thy Judgments are in the Earth, the Inhabitants of the
World will learn Righteousness.
THis Chapter is a Song, Celebrating the Prays^s of God, in his Judgments on
his Enemies, and favors to his People; and is full of Spiritual matter.

The Song is appointed to be Sung by the Faithful at their deliverance from
the Babilonish Captivity. In this 9th verse. The Church Declares;

1. Her own Frame under the Judgments of God: namely an Earnest and early
Desire after him: In the night, Signifies in the dark and gloomy times of
affliction, when they were under the Tyranny and Captivity of the Enemy, shut
up as it were in darkness.

2. What should be the Frame of all that* see or hear of Gods terrible doings
in the world, ^it should teach them Righteousness: of which latter we may at
this season make some improvement; and a little to open the Words.

[When thy Judgments;. etc.] Judgments are Acts of Divine Justice, Vindicative,
all Gods dispensations to the creature, are called either acts of Mercy or
justice; Not as if there were a contradiction in these two; God is Just where
he is Merciful, i.e. his being merciful does not infringe or wrong his
justice at all: and where God is Just, he is Merciful also, in this world;
because his justice is here dispensed with moderation; though the time be
comeing when he will execute justice without mercy:

But wherein any act of Divine Providence, one of these Attributes is more
visible to the creature then the other, thence it receives its Denomination.

Judgments, are Judicial acts of Gods Severity in the World, wherein he
declares himself to be set against sin or sinners; Some translate it
Chastizements: Judgment sometimes intend proper act; of Revenging justice; when
God comes forth to right himself upon his enemies, in their wonderful
destruction: Sometimes severe afflictions, though intended for the amendment of
those who suffer them: the word signifies properly, a doing right.

[Righteousness] The word signifies Truth and Equity: it is oftentimes in
Scripture restrained to second Table duties, and then it is distinguished from
Holiness, which referrs to first Table duties, but here, as in many other
places, it is used more largely, to signify a reformation of Life, and
universal Anastasy, or Reclaiming from their former sinful courses.

[Will learne] This is spoken as if such an effect should come to pass in all
that should see and hear of Gods judgments; for the Scripture speaks of some,
that when Gods hand was upon them, they sinned yet more: thus Ahaz: 2 Chronicles.
28.22. but it is spoken either,

1. By way of Presumption, as if they should say, surely they will learn
righteousness. or,

2. Expressing what ought to be, as if it would be; such a thing should be, and
if men were in a right frame, it would be: the meaning is, that there is matter
enough in Gods judgments to awaken the world to righteousness. Hence,

Doct. The Judgments of God in the World carry along with them an universal
awakening call to Righteousness. When God comes forth riding in his fiery
Chariot, and dispenses terrible things among the children of men, it sends
forth a loud cry to the world to reform and amend their ways. By way of
Explication, Consider a few things.

First. All judgments are of God, it is said thy judgments, they come from
him: here observe,

1. Some judgments are more immediate, they come by an unseen hand and in an
unknown way, we see the effects, but are not able to track them in their
causes; of such as these, even an Egyptian Magician must say, lo the finger of
God.

2. Other judgments come mediately by the mediation or efficiency of
Instruments, second causes are the next occasion of them, and these are either.

1. Devils, who have a great stroke in many effects of providence, they come
by Divine permission, God giving them a license, so far as he sees meet for his
own ends; and sometimes they come with a Commission from God on his errands,
who shall for us persuade Ahab to go to Ramoth Gilead and fall? I, faith the
Devils, go, says God, and prosper, 1 Kings 22. 20. etc.

2. Men, who are many times the means of bringing sore and sad, calamities
upon their fellow creatures, being used and improved by God to that end, by
Wars, and desolations that follow then, upon, thus God used the Philistines,
Syrians, Assyrians etc. to afflict Israel and Judah.

3. Bruit beasts and unreasonable creatures, who serve their great Lord against
man, when he rebels against God, which otherwise should have been subservient
to him: thus the fiery Serpents in the wilderness, the two she Bears, to tear
in pieces the mocking children, thus Locusts, Caterpillars, Palmer worms etc.

4. Elements, Stars, Rivers, Vapors, Rain, Drought etc the Stars fought in
their course against Sisera, the brook ^^ishon swept them away Judge 5.

By all these means God may bring severe punishments upon the creture for his
sin: but all these are from God, they are his Judgments, and come of his
errand. This appears;

1. From the Supreme Efficiency of God; all creatures move as they are moved by
him: in the matter of the action, if he give not his Efficiency, they can do
nothing at all: in him we live, move and have our being: his Efficiency is the
first mover, he is as it were the first wheel of the great clock of the world,
or the spring of this watch: Second beings have an operation, but it has an
absolute dependence upon his Co-(...) that if so much as a dog wag his tongue
against us, there is (...) only Divine permission in it, but Divin Efficiency
also.

2. From his Providential Ordering of all the affairs of the world: God sits
King upon the flood Psalm. 29. 10. He is Sovereign disposer of all things, and
therefore good and evil comes from him, whoever it be that does it. Amos 3.6.
God says David, bid Shemei (...).

(...) 3. Because Prayer to God has been the means of turning aside judgment,
yea even then when Instruments have done their worst, the people of God in
their distress, have but acquainted God with it, end sought him in the case,
and the buisiness has been done: thus David prays to God to turn the counsel
of Achitophel into foolishness, and its done; and he who formerly was looked
upon to speak Oracles, is now disregarded: Hezekiah does tell, go into the the
house of God, and spread Rabshekah's raling letter before him and leaves the
case with him; and the next news is, an Angel is sent from heaen, who slayes
in one night an hundred, four score and five thousand of his enemies, 2 Kings
19.35. Hence we have the Churches confidence in Gods protection, enabling them
to sound a challenge to their enemies to do their worst against them. Isa. 8. 9,
10. there is their boldness, God is with us.

Secondly. All those acts of Divine Providence, wherein God discovers his
severity in any degree against sin, are properly the Judgments of God: wherever
God lays his heavy hand upon a people: whether.

1. In Revenging himself upon his enemies, by cutting them off, or sorely
visiting them.

2. In Punishments and (...) upon his people, when for their amendment he
brings disappointments and afflictions upon them; for in both these God does 1.
Show himself set against (...): 2. Do right.

Thirdly, Judgments are either

1. More ordinary dispensations of Divine Providence, such as are more common;
as the usual afflictions which God brings upon any in way of penalty, viz.
Sicknesses, Crosses, Losses, Poverty, (...) Rain, Famine, Pestilence etc these
are Gods usual Scourge, (...)

2. More (...) some remarkable (...) not usual does (...) as are more (...)
frequent, such as Possession by Devils, Deaths by Thunder and (...) and the
li^e.

Pourthly, Judgments are either

1. Private and Personal, when God shows his severity upon persons or (...) are
singled out from others to be the subjects of afflection. Or

2. General and Epidemical Visitations, when God comes and brings a (...) go
upon a Country or a People.

Fifthly, Judgments are either

1. Outward, when the next and immediate subject they (...) upon is men's Bodies
or Estates, and damnifie them in either. Or

2. Spiritual. When they seize upon men's Souls and Spirits; as Distractions.
Desperations, etc. I mention these distinctions, partly that we may be the
better directed to a careful observance, that we may discover God coming in his
several awful dispensations upon us, and purely because we may improve some of
them in the Application.

Sixthly, All Judgments whatsoever, and in what way soever they come, are
Doctrinal, they bring instruction and teaching along with them, to those that
either see or heart of them; they are speaking Providence.

Here consider, 1. That they are Doctrinal, 2. How far they are so.

1. That all Judgments are Doctrinal, will appear, if we consider,

First, that Judgments in relation to the subject of them, are acts of the
Sovereign Justice of God. There are (...) in this Position.

1. They are Acts of Justice, because God visits none beyond their sins desert:
whatever Gods dealing be to any, he will vindicate himself that he does them
no wrong, there is sin enough in the creature to make him to justify God when
^e judges, Psalm. 51. 3, 4. Job 40 4, 5.

2. They are Acts of Sovereign Justice: which appears, because God does not
visit all alike in the world, whose sins are alike, but picks and chooses as he
sees meet, some to be monuments of his severity, whiles others are left. Gods
Sovereignty herein appears, because he follows no other Rule but his (...)
pleasure, in making choice whom to dispense Judgments, and whom to leave; so
that sometimes he leaves, and lets alone, such as have been (...) sinners in
many aggravating respects, whiles he takes other (...) have not been so
notorious: and therefore our Savior Christ, to them enquiring about the man
born blind, removes the cause from them to Gods Sovereignty, Joh. 9. 2, 3.

Secondly, they naturally teach these lessons:

1. That God is a just God, that he is set against sin, and will not always
(...) with sinners: days of patience make sinners forget, yea Atheistically
think God is not holy and just; but he is known in his Judgments, these are
beginning discoveries before the great and general Assizes.

2. That God will sooner or later be revenged upon sinners: every monument of
Divine Revenge lectures out what others may look for and expect at the hands of
God. Gods Judgments declare that sin shall not always go unpunished, that
though there be a day of forbearance, yet there shall also be a day wherein
they shall receive their wages.

3. That there shall be a great Day of Judgment: for if some sinners are here
taken, and others in this world forborne, according to the pleasure of Gods
Sovereign will, this shows that there must be another day above and besides all
these Judgement-dayes, wherein God sits upon some sinners in this world.

4. That there is no security in a state of sin, though we are not such
notorious sinners as others, yet are we under sin; we lie open and liable to
the Judgments of God, and may as soon as others be made monuments of it. It is
no cloak to say, I am not as bad as such and such. Art thou out from the
promise of Gods special grace? thou art every day open to Judgment

5. That there (...) our peace with God: if God (...) the Scepter, and (...)
upon sinners, we are in a dangerous state as long as we are not agreed with
him, but have him for our adversary. And hence the conclusion is to teach men
righteousness, to forsake those sins that are provoking to God, and lay hold
upon him in a way of true Repentance, in time, for his mercy, le^t we also be
made monuments of his wrath* this is the voice of all the Judgments of God
which they speak to the (...).

II. How far they are Doctrinal: This is considerable, ^^ther in respect of

1. The Judgments themselves. All Judgments serve to teach, they have a voice
in them, but some cry louder then others. There is a voice in common calamities
and disappointments, but a louder voice in extraordinary Judgments; Natural
causes bring awful. Judgments, but more awful when they are Preternatural;
every sickness and disease, every cross and loss speaks, but when God goes out
of the ordinary path, here is a more awakening Call. In a word, the (...)
stupendio^s and admirable the Providence is, the louder is the voice of God,
and more clear to be heard, for then the Lion roars, (...) 3 8.

2. Of the Places wherein they are:

(1.) Judgments remote have a voice to us, let them be never so fa^ off (...)
we have any cognizance of them, for the Text limits it to no narrower bounds
then the World.

(2.) But Judgments near are more loud: when a fire is in our neighbors house,
it then bids us to look about us to secure our own*

(3.) But Judgments at home are most loud of all, in our Town, on in our
Families, for then God cries among us, yea the stroke of his R^d is upon us,
and therefore i^s high time for every one to see to himself.

3. In respect of Senses:

(1.) Judgments heard of are awful, for this is a great sense of discipline.
But

(2.) Judgments seen and felt are more dreadful and awakening; and the Reason
is, Because these Senses are more intelligent, and less f^ll^cious: we may
question the truth of reports, but what we see and feel we have less cause to
suspect* If any Sense can inform without fallacy, it is these; as also these
are the most affecting Senses, The eye affects the heart, much more then when
the hand of God lies heavy upon a person.

Seventhly, It is the will and command of God that his Judgments should learn
men righteousness.

Reas. 1. Because he singles out some to show his judgments upon, and takes
not all sinners as he might do: this shows that God would have men improve this
day of his presence to Repentance. God has Pleas enough against others, and
might have executed his wrath on them, but when he does not, he shows that he
would have others to get good by it.

Reas. 2. Because God in his Word calls men to consider and observe his
Judgments; he declares it to be his will, that when he visits any in severity
for their sins. All Israel should hear, and fear, and do no more so. When God
would reclaim Judah from their vain confidence, and awaken them to repentance,
he sends them to Shiloh, to see what wastes and desolations he had there made,
Jer. 7. 12.

Reas. 3. Because none of Gods Providence are in vain, God does nothing in the
world to no purpose.

Reas. 4. Because God does by his awakening Judgments teach them he intends
good to: David professes, Thy judgments make me, afraid, i.e. afraid to sin,
afraid to be licentious and remiss in my life and ways.

Reas. 5. Because God does charge the neglect of this duty upon Judah as a
great, grievous, and provoking sin: when he had executed his judgments upon
her sister Aholah (Israel, the ^en Tribes) that Aholibah (Judah) held on her
own old courses of sin, and was no what affected there withal, nor did by it
learn to amend, Ezekiel. 23.

Use 1. Or Information of our judgments in diverse things:

1. That Afflictions and Calamities are not by casualty, they are Gods
Judgments, ordered and ^ore-determined by him; not a Sparrow falls to the
ground without him: and therefore let it teach us not to slight them, o^ look
upon them in a negligent manner, as things that come promiscuously, and
imprudently to pass, but by the wise disposal of God. See God in all that falls
out in the world, and adore him.

2. That it is our duty to look beyond Instruments in every Judgment that
befalls us. It is true, Instruments are some of them rational some are (...);
and hence some Instruments may be (...) give opportunity, may in a way of
Equity b^ proceeded against: but we must not rest in the malice of Instruments,
but look (...), and see the hand of God: its a foolish dog that runs after the
stone, and minds not the hand that threw it. If we look upon the most ^ational
Instruments, as they be in the hands of God, and consider them as under his
Sovereign (...), they are no more then (...) or Knife, or any other instrument
in the hands of a man: The Assyrian my (...) Isa. 10. 5. Hence God is
nevertheless to be seen for the malice of spite of the creature, because he
improves even the wrath of man to his praise, and the remainder of wrath he
restrains. ^earn we hence in all the Judgments that befall us, not so much to
say what means the instruments, but what provokes God, though Syrian before and
Philist^m behind, yet ^et Israel return to God that smi^es him.

3. That times wherein god brings his Judgments among a people, are solemn
times, and ought to be (...) with solemnity; they are times of serious
consideration, H^g. 15 and humiliation. God when he visits a people in
Judgment, bids (...) he trumpet. (...) a (...) assembly* return to the Lord
with weeping, willing, and lamentation. J^^ 2. 1, 2, 13. We are not therefore
before God this day in this solemn duty, uncalled for.

4. That no person that sees on hears of Gods Judgments is unconcerned: if he
be an inhabitant of this world, there is a voice to him. Learn we therefore to
have a care of disinteresting our selves, or saying, What relation has this or
that to me?

5. That the more of Gods Judgments have been among a people* the more God
will have against them, if they repent not; God will have despised Judgments
to lay to their charge: it will be an heavy aggravation of such a peoples sin,
that they have not only had and enjoyed Gods Ordinances among them, but those
backed with his Truth-confirming Providence, speaking once and again, speaking
to many Senses at once, and yet they have got nothing by them; this is an
argument of an exceeding hard heart. Gods Judgments in this world, if we
repent not, will not mitigate but increase our judgments and woes in another.

Use II. For Reproof. And here let me come home in this Use and the next, to
the case and providence which has occasioned this days solemnity, the awful
Judgment of God that is among us: and the Reproof is, That (...) Judgments o^
God that have befallen us, and (...) more nor (...) made use of by us then it
is. Let this consideration have its weight in humbling us this day before God.

1. We may all (...) with our own hearts, that we are no more affected with it,
that there is so much ice and coldness in us, that our affections are scarce
warmed with such a providence; we may lay our hands upon our mouths, and be
angry with our selves, that we find such a chilness upon our affections. But

2. Particularly, those deserve a Reproof,

First, That make all their application of those whom the Judgment is upon: Oh
the spirit of censure that is in too many, and there they rest; Surely there is
some special reason, some more then ordinary provocation, why else is God come
out upon that Family, rather then upon any other Family? I do not here speak to
make those whom the Judgment nextly concerns, to be regardless of Gods hand
upon them; no, let them know that God calls them into the School of Search, and
would have them in particular try what is the meaning of his so severe coming
out against them, that they may learn to (...) in silence, and justify him:
But I speak to others, who are apt to judge of persons by providence, though
Scripture teaches us that all things fell out alike unto all. And therefore
let such consider,

1. This practice is contrary to our Saviors precept, who admonishes others
by such providence to learn this lesson, that except they repent, they shall
likewise perish, Luke 13. 2, 3. it seems personal application suits better, its
the wisest way to bring all things home to our own Souls; that might be
profitable to us.

2. This is to forget our own sinfulness: whiles we judge and censure others,
we do tacitly justify our selves, and think our selves better then others; we
interpret our merit rather then (...), mercy to be the distinguishing cause:
and is not this to lift up our selves too high?

3. This is to forget divine Sovereignty: God all this while is not adored by
us in his Supreme uncontrolable disposal which he has of all creatures, to lay
his hand where he pleases, without giving account to the creature. Consider
well with thy self, and it may be thou have been ten times a greater sinner, if
all the circumstances of aggravation were well pondered and weighed, but God
(...) ends best known to himself has thus dealt.

4. This is the way to rob God of the glory of his goodness to thee in
preserving thee from this sad Calamity, ^hereas if thou reflect inward, thou
might see so much of provocation in thy own heart, and so many grievous
obliquities and wanderings, that it would set thee into a rapture of
admiration, at the unspeakable favor which appears in thy preservation, who
might have been chosen in the room of this person, to have been hung up as a
sign, and a wonder, and an astonishment, for others with sad hearts to have
looked upon.

5. This is not to learn Righteousness; for that is only by drawing
conclusions home to our selves, and making the case our own: yea, this is a way
to harden our hearts in wickedness. Let us therefore learn to make a better use
of this tremendous Providence.

Secondly, Those that look not beyond Instruments. There is a great deal of
enquiry made about the Devils agency, and raising of Spirits against such as we
are ready to think may be his subservient actors in this case, but how many are
there that look no further. Consider,

1. This is to forget the Supremacy of Divine Providence; we do not remember
that God sits and rules over Men and Devils, and that in such an uncontrolable
manner, that Earth and Hell cannot move to any act upon the creature, unless he
permit them.

2. It tends to hinder the right efficacy of this Judgment upon the Soul; for
it raises, and humbles not the Soul of the creature: it is the way to
provocation and exasperation, to bitterness and rage, from the consideration of
the virulency of the enemy, and that we have (...) deserved it at their hands,
etc. whereas if we looked beyond these, to God the prime Efficient, it would
teach us silence, and holy submission: I was dumb, etc. because thou did it,
Psalm. 39. 9.

Thirdly, Those that look upon the Providence with slighty and common
affections, whose hearts are not awed by it, but look upon it as matter of
(...) or no concernment, are as jocund, as vain, as light, as frothy as ever
they were: there are too many of these Consider,

1. This argues that God is not feared by such hearts, those that fear not God
(...) his Judgments, especially in such Judgments, may well be thought not to
fear him at all. Assure thy self if this Providence, so solemn, have left no
impression upon thee, thou have a heart as hard as (...)

2. (...) should learn Righteousness: the Affections are the feet of the Soul,
if these move not, there is little good to be hoped for in such an one, and
therefore never look that such should get any good by it.

Fourthly, Those that have lost their Affections: it may be many were at the
first, at the newness and strangeness of the sight and spectacle, filled for a
season with consternation; but now they are gotten to their old wont again, and
recovered their frights and amazements, dried up their fears, and wiped their
eyes, and they are where they were before: this shows that this Judgment had
(...) depth of efficacy upon your souls, it was only something external; it
shows what your nature^s is. Oh, that is of a cold nature indeed, that will
freeze while the fire is under it. Let all such consider, that they contemn
God, and harden their own hearts, and if he do not wonderfully set in, it will
be to their own destruction.

Use III. For Exh^rtation and Direction. Oh let it be an awakening word of
Counsel to us all. We are now come together to affect our souls with this
stupend Judgment of God which is among us, the Lord in mercy grant that it may
teach us Righteousness; the voice of God cries aloud by it to this poor Town in
a special manner, the Lord give us an hearing ear: let it be our great request,
that he would bore our ear to instruction, that it may not pass by without
doing us true and saving good. For Motive:

1. Let us consider the awfulness, of the Judgment it self: this is none of
those ordinary dispensations of Gods Providence which are frequent and usual in
the world, to be sure not among (...); it is no common sickness and calamity,
and yet if it had been no more it had been our duty to have wisely considered
it, and given attention to the voice of it; but it is extraordinary and
stupendous: it is not usual for God to give Satan such liberty and power, so
to rock and torture, so to hurry and perplex poor creatures, and therefore
something (...) special to be learned by us, when God has leaves the common
track, and comes in so unwonted a way of Judgment.

2. Consider how nearly we are related unto it above other in the Land: there
is a voice in it to the whole Land, but in a more (...) manner to poor Groton;
it is not a Judgment afar off, but it is (...) us, yea among us, God has in
his wisdom singled out this (...) Town our of all others in this Wilderness,
to dispense such an amazing Providence in, and therefore let us make a more
near and special use of it: Let us look upon our selves to be set up as a
Beacon upon (...) Hill by this Providence, and let those that hear what has
been done among us, hear also of the good effects, and reformation it has
wrought among us.

3. Consider what advantage we have above others to be affected with it: others
indeed may hear of it, relations may be carried from one place to another, and
that may affect, yet not so much as when it is seen. Why, we may say as Job, I
have heard of thee with the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee.
Reports may be carried various, and that may wound a great part of the credit
of it abroad in the world, as not knowing how or where to fasten their belief;
however, when never so truly reported, it cannot carry the life of the thing
with it: but we have seen, yea seen such things as one would think might melt,
or break an heart of stone; we may carry about with us every day, the very
pourtraicture of those Hellish and Diabolical Cruelties, those strange
Gestures, those dreadful Voices: and therefore if we be not awed and affected
by it, who should?

4. Consider how sad it will be for us, if we be not awed and affected with
this Judgment, if we learn nothing by it: Oh how much will God have against
us, above others! the nearer he has come to us, and the more we are concerned
in it, and the louder the Cry has been to us, will all have their particular
weight to increase our condemnation, God will lay every circumstance to our
charge, and as he has singularly revealed his mind to us in it, so he will
have a singular provocation by it. Oh! little do we know how much this
providence slighted and misimproved will add to the weight of our sins, and
increase of our woes. Let it then be a solemn lesson to teach us Righteousness.
For Direction:

First, Let us all in general learn something by it, let it afford us some
practical conclusions, which may be for our use and benefit to instruct and
teach us in ways of Righteousness; namely,

1. Learn by it that Satan is busy in places of Gospel light, to seduce and
draw away Souls from attending the means of grace. The Light of the Gospel does
not clear and free places from Satan or his bold Temptations, these infernal
Spirits of darkness will come thither, and there endeavor to raise mists and
fogs to seduce souls; and therefore let us learn not to live securely under the
enjoyment of the Gospel of grace, but to spend our time of sojourning here in
holy fear.

2. That there is no place free, no not the House of God from Satan's
Temptations: when thou art in Gods House, and thy bodily presence to attend the
Ordinances, the dispensing of the Gospel, Satan will come thither, as he often
did to this poor creature, he will do all he can to steal away thy mind and
meditation, he will begin a part with thee that shall last as long as the
Sermon, and thou shall go away without receiving one word of instruction. Oh
how can ^e please thy fancy, and delude thy soul! and therefore let it awaken
thee to be careful to keep thy foot when thou come to the house of God, if
thou would not offer the sacrifice of fools, Eccles. 5. 1. The feet of the
soul are the Affections, learn to be more watchful over them, to keep them from
wandering, lest Satan meet and make a prey of them, and so steal away the feed
of the Word from thee.

3. That discontent lays us exceeding open to the assaults of Satan, and gives
him more then ordinary advantage to make discoveries of himself to us: little
do we know how we do as it were invite the Devil by it. In any Government,
discontented persons are fittest for Traitors to work upon: by discontent we
discover a weariness of Gods Government, and therefore Satan is emboldened by
it to come, yea to make his Apparitions, and strike in to the drawing over of
poor creatures to enter a Covenant of Rebellion with him, and a wonder it is if
any at such a time escape. Learn we therefore to be more watchful over our own
hearts, beware how we give any way to secret uprisings against the Providence
of God.

4. That this world would be a sad place to live in, if it were not for Gods
overruling Providence. Oh how busy is the Devil, that great Adversary of
Souls! and ^ow full is he of Cruelty! did not God restrain his rage, he would
soon make poor Mortals incapable of living here below: By the Claw you may
judge of the Lion. We find in Jobs case, he goes to the outside of his
Commission: and here you have a lively spectacle of his venom and spite; Oh
then let it awaken us to see by whom we are every day preserved and protected
from the rage of Devils, God only: Alas! what were we in the hands of these
infernal Powers, if Gods Omnipotency did not restrain them. Let this make God
more glorious in our eyes.

5. That there is no safety but under the wings of the Lord Jesus Christ: he
only is the strong man that can secure us from the possession of Satan. Satan
rules and reigns in this world, and you see how much power he holds over the
children of disobedience. And therefore learn hence both to bless God for
Christ Jesus, who came into the world to destroy the works of the Devil; had he
not come to set up, his Kingdom in this world, the Devil would have reigned
Lord and King in all Souls, he only is able to dispossess the strength, and
uncastle the Powers of Hell: as also to fly under the wings of this Redeemer
for safeguard, that we may be freed from these cruel Enemies.

6. That visible Privileges are no security from Satan: it is not enough to be
baptized with water, unless we be also baptized with the holy Ghost, and with
fire; it is not enough to be a Member of the visible Church, if we be not also
of Christ's invisible Flock: Satan is not terrified by these outward things, he
is not afraid to assault those that are Christ's nominally, and to endeavor to
make them his own really. (...) it teach us then to beware that we trust not in
lying words, have a (...) of crying The Temple of the Lord; Satan desires no
better advantage (...) us, then to draw us to rest secure upon this bottom.
Bless God for our Privileges, but rest not in them; prize, but do (...) them,
if you would not be made the prey of Satan.

2 (...), Let us all in particular learn righteousness by this monument that is
before us let it awaken us all to reform our hearts and lives, to be more
careful to and over our selves for the time to come; let it indeed appear that
we have been proficien^s in this School of Gods Judgments, that God has
brought Correction and Teaching together, that so in the winding up it may be
found an happy Judgment. Let us therefore apply it to our selves in our
particular respects.

1. Let it be a Doctrinal Providence to Young and Old.

First, To you that are Elder, and more grown up in years, let it awaken you.

1. Consider how many more provocations God has had from you, then he ^ath had
from this poor creature; how many more Ordinances and Providence have attended
upon you, then ever did upon her: think how long you have lived in Gods world,
and yet have done him little or no service since you came into it: and
therefore let this awaken you to see how it stands with you, how the matter
goes between God and your Souls, whether you are secure under his wings, and at
peace with him. When you see one so much younger then you thus visited, Oh
think upon what ground you stand, fear the like or worse, if you are yet in an
uncertain state. Let it in a (...) manner awaken old ones to make their calling
and election sure, considering how much danger you are in.

2. Let it teach you how much you have had of the patience of God exercised
toward you, that God has born with and for born you so long; you have lived a
great while longer in the world, and it may be have been more enormous and
flagitious in your lives then ever this poor creature was: possibly you have
lived in scandalous sins, and grievous pollutions: if you should consider, and
ask a Reason why God has taken her and not taken you, you may see and say,
that if God had gone according to outward appearance, or extremity of rigor,
there had been transcendently more ground why he should have come upon you. Oh
then, when you see one so young, and one not observed to be guilty of any
flagitious crimes taken, while you are by Gods goodness spared, learn to admire
at, and worship the patience of God toward you.

3. Let it therefore teach you to amend your ways, and reform your lives, and
that speedily: it may be a great argument to quicken you up no longer to use
delays, nor put off God coming to you in his Word, and persuading you by his
Spirit to repent and return to him. Oh see in this lecture upon what slippery
and dangerous ground you stand, and have stood all this while, and if God had
been severe toward you, you had not had this opportunity of being called to
Repentance; and then learn to shake off all delays, to put by all excuses, and
bless God that you yet have an opportunity.

Secondly, You that are Young ones, behold here one of your Tribe and Form, as
I may say, one of your own years picked out of you by the wise Providence of
God, to be made an object of Gods severity, and man's pity. Out of doubt (...)
especial Cry to you Young ones, to Remember your Creator (...) of your youth:
you have been often counseled and admonished in the House of God, yea
earnestly and compassionately entreated to devote your young time to God, to
give up the prime of your years to him; but you have slighted and disregarded
such Counsels and Calls, and have taken up (...) that you would have your
childish and youthful vanities, let God by his (...) say what he would to you:
Well, now God has (...) in his Providence, and thunders out his mind to you
in (...) sad Object, and what do you now say to it? will you hear Gods voice,
or will you for (...)? are you still resolved in your (...) courses, or will
you learn Righteousness? if you would but (...) your ears, you might here
observe God speaking something to you.

1. Learn, that there is no safety in (...) with the Spirit of God; who comes
early to bespea^ your Souls for God. God shows that he has a quarrel with the
Youth for slighting and despising Counsels and Reproofs, he would that you
should know he is in haste for an answer, and will not wait long if you (...)
away your time: God looks that where there is so much of Gospel light, and so
many endeavors used by Church and Commonwealth for the instruction of Youth
in the Ways of God, there should be answerable improvement made, and will have
you to know that his patience will not wait so long as in places of ignorance.
Let it therefore teach you to beware how you presume upon hereafter, and
promising your selves that there is time enough, you may follow your vain
courses yet a little longer: Whiles you are thinking it is too soon to repent
and amend, how soon may God come and declare that it is too late, that his
patience is spent, and there is no more room left for Repentance.

2. That either God or the Devil will have your young time: you are here at
your choice, God by his Word and Spirit is tendering you to receive you into his
service, and declaring how acceptable and pleasing it will be to him, but if
you will not give your time to him, you will to a worse Master, the Devil
stands waiting, yea endeavoring for you, and if Gods yoke please you not, he
will easily persuade you to take his, and though that may seem delightful for
the present, yet know it, it will be bitterness in the latter end.

3. That if Young ones will not have Christ to reign over them; he may give
them over into the hands and power of Satan: if Christ's sweet government do not
please you, you shall be left under the tyranny and cruelty of the Devil. Oh
then learn hence not to despise and contemn the Calls of the Gospel, left God
come out in Judgment against you, and put you into the everlasting possession
of that cruel Enemy of your (...).

II. Let (...) teach both Parents and Children: Here is something (...).

First* (...) to you that are (...) ^o you (...).

1. (...) Childrens Souls: here you may see how open they are by nature to
Satan's temptations, how they every day go in danger of those fly and subtle
assaults of this politic enemy of their Souls: let this lie near your hearts.

2. Hence let this teach you to be careful in Educating them in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord, which is the only way and means to prevent this
adversary. If you have hitherto been remiss, learn now to be more careful and
vigilant about it, let it be a quickening providence to rouse you up from this
neglect, by teaching you the great weight of the duty, even of as much moment
as the precious lives of their poor souls.

3. Let it teach you to begin with them betimes, do not defer instructing of
them too long; you see Satan will set upon them early, he will not delay long
before he comes and uses his endeavors to draw your Childrens souls away
after him: and therefore if you would prevent him, do not you delay, but be
dropping in instruction as they are able, and as soon as they are able to
understand any thing.

4. Whithersoever they go, bear a holy jealousy over them, lest they should
offend God, and provoke him to leave them to the Devil: you cannot be always
with them, nor constantly have them under your eye, but wherever they be, be
sure let your hear^ go along with them, have a righteous fear concerning them
you see Satan is ready to take all occasions to insinuate himself into them,
and therefore for ought you know they may have the Devil in their company; let
that direct your souls to heaven for them, that God would look to them, and
preserve them: Job offers Sacrifice for his Children, when met in lawful
recreation, lest they sinned, and cursed God in their hearts, Job 1. 5.

5. Be more watchful over them hereafter, then you have been heretofore; have a
care of (...) them have their (...), to go and come where and when they please,
and especially in the night, be sure take an account of their business, and
hold your Parental Authority over them, keep them within their bounds, you had
better bear their hand thoughts of you now, then see them made vassals of
Satan, and left up to Gods Judgments. If your Children resist or contemn your
Authority, the Will of God is that you should not ^ear with them, no^ spare
them; it is a great deal better they should live in Bridewell under restraint;
then in your families at their liberty.

6. See to your own lives, that they be exemplary to your Children, if you
teach them never so carefully, yet if you unteach them again by your vain
conversation before them, its little the better; think how much advantage you
put into Satan's hands against your Children, to draw them into sin by your
example, he knows well enough what a taking argument this is with Children.

7. Rest not satisfied, but be constant and earnest with God for your Children
till you see Christ formed in them, as knowing that till then they are in
Satan's Kingdom, and under his Jurisdiction. Oh what bowels of affection, what
(...) requests might this providence arm us withal! how strong might it make
us with God for our Children! O pity them in a state of unregeneracy:
Chri^^less souls are naked souls, and therefore lie open to the enemy; cease
not therefore night nor day begging for them. See in this providence their
danger, and let it quicken you to importunacy.

Secondly, Children do you learn something hence also.

1. Learn to hearken to the loving and wholesome Counsels of your Parents, and
not to slight or despise their Admonitions and Reproofs. You see here how open
you are to Satan's assaults, and if you will not hear God speaking to you by
your Parents, it is just with God to leave you to the Devil, to hear him: know
it, when your Parents speak to you, and advise you for your good, God speaks to
you by them, and if your eye despise them, God may suffer these infernal Ravens
and Eagles to pick it out, and eat it. One would think this Monument might make
you fear and tremble.

2. Learn hence not to trust to your Parents Covenant, or to think that you
shall be saved by their Faith, or by it secured from Satan: it is true, you may
fare the better by them and for them, but if you rest upon their godliness for
your security, you are deceived: you may be the natural Children of godly
Parents, and yet the spiritual Children of the Devil, Joh. 8. 43, 44. Know it,
it is not enough to be the Children of godly Parents, unless you do inherit
their graces: seek therefore that, or else Satan has you at his beck.

3. Rest not upon your Parents Prayers; think it not enough that your godly
Parents pray for you to God, and therefore you are safe: true, Parents Prayers
are a great benefit to Children, but if they be trusted to, they will prove a
mere delusion. Abraham prays for Ishmael, but he (...) not for himself: God
may answer your Parents Prayers in another way, they shall not lose them, but
yet if you rest there, they may but increase your woes. Let this therefore call
upon you to make your own peace.

4. Learn to obey your Parents in all their lawful Commands, and that in
obedience unto God: acknowledge their authority and jurisdiction over you, and
though they restrain you from that which you may think to be a lawful liberty,
yet be obedient in all things lawful, for though the thing be a matter
indifferent, yet if you disobey and displease your Parents in it, be sure you
lay your selves open to Satan.

III. Let it teach both the Regenerate, and Unregenerate.

First, You that are Regenerated, and brought home to God, you may learn
something here.

1. Let this providence teach you to magnify Gods grace, that has taken you
out of Satan's Kingdom, and translated you into the Kingdom of his own Son.
Whenever we see any left by God, and in any ways in the hand of Satan, and
under his power, how should it (...) us with God-glorifying thoughts, at the
consideration of his wonderful love to us. Now is a time to consider who made
the difference between two pieces of the same clay, to remember how opposite we
were to any saving good, what pains God took with us, what persuasions he used,
and how contumeliously we often handled his Spirit; (...) consider that if his
love had not carried him against our hatred, had (...) he pitied us, when we
did not, could not pity our selves, we had yet to this day been under the
dominion of Hell.

2. Let it awaken you to walk worthy of your vocation; you now see your
calling, you are called out of Satan's kingdom, you are delivered from the
powers of darkness, labor then to walk no longer in the vanity of your minds:
Are you Gods Children? Live in holiness, 1 Pet. 1. 14, etc. Oh that this
Providence might awaken those that have given up themselves to God and his
Service, to consider whether we have not too much gratified Satan, by being too
light, too vain, too excessive in taking liberty in worldly mirth and vanity,
too little spiritual in our course and conversation among men. Let it then be a
word of Warning to us to be more serious and cautious to our selves and ways
for the time to come.

3. Let it move in you earning bowels of compassion toward those that are yet
in Satan's Kingdom, and under his spiritual Jurisdiction: you may here see a
little, though but a little, yet so much appears here visible and
demonstrative, as may give a glimpse of discovery how sad and doleful the
condition of poor unregenerate sinners is, who are spiritually possessed by
Satan: Let it then rouse up in you bowels of pity, when you look in the faces
of any such, ^et it make you to mourn over them, and pray for them, and counsel
and advise them as God gives you opportunity, that if it may be, you may be
helpful to their escape out of the paws of the devouring Lion.

4. Let it awaken you to watch your ways and actions, to be careful to your
lives and courses, how you carry it before them who are yet in their vanity,
lest Satan make you his Stales to allure poor souls by. If the Devil can belie
the people of God to encourage others to hearken to him, be sure he will make
his market of your failings, negligent walkings, and whatsoever is done amiss
by you at one time or other, to draw others more fearlesly after him; and will
it not be a sad thing that souls should follow Satan to their eternal ruin and
perdition, and you the live-birds that have drawn them into this net? For the
Lords sake, for the love you bear to poor souls, if there be any pity, any
compassion, any desire to Gods glory, or others Salvation, look to your ways,
and see they be exemplary.

Secondly, You that are Unregenerate, labor to hear the voice of God in this
Providence, and learn by it.

1. Let this Example teach you how cruel a Master you serve: you see here, that
Satan (whatever pretenses he makes, and fair promises he seeks to delude poor
souls withal) is in his heart set against all mankind, and he seeks only to
destroy them; and if once God less him loose, and gives him liberty, he will
soon show his own nature, and give evidence of his Cruelty. This you have seen
is but a little of that bitter spite he will exercise upon those who shall be
wholly delivered into his hands. You have little cause to boast of your
condition, its a cruel bondage, you are in the hands of one whose tender
mercies are cruelty. Oh that this might make you weary of Satan's government,
that it might make you begin to discover his policies, and flee from him.

2. Let it show you the great danger you go in every hour of being made a prey
to Satan. Consider how ready this Adversary is to fasten his Talons upon poor
creatures, if God permit him: and consider that thou have no security, no
ground to promise thy self that God will defend thee from him, no not for a
moment, it is Gods goodness that he has hither to afforded thee his
protection, but thou have no promise that he will continue it: Yea consider,
how many Calls and Counsels, how many Providence and Ordinances thou have
despised, how often God has come to thee, and wooed earnestly for thy soul,
used heartbreaking entreaties with thee, endeavoring to insinuate himself
into thy very soul, and yet thou have hardened thy heart against all, and
resolutely refused: think then, what have thou to say for thy self why thou
may not speedily hear God say to the Devil, Take the full and everlasting
possession of such a soul? and what will become of thee then?

3. Hence let it be a loud Cry to you to Repentance: You have had many Cries in
your ears from the Word, but you have not believed the report which Gods
Messengers have brought. Oh that you would believe when God adds such a
Confirmation to the truth of his Word! read your own state in this poor
Monument, and think by what you see in her, what is like to become of you in
the state you are in; hearken, and you may hear God crying to you by her,
Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

Lastly, let me return once again to all that are here in Gods presence this
day to humble themselves before him: learn we hence, for this day, and
hence-forward, these two Lessons.

1. Let us all examine by this Providence what sins they have been, that have
given Satan so much footing in this poor place: sure the voice of God is loud
to us, and bids us to bring this matter upon ^^rch; for though God be Sovereign
yet it is to us a time of Consideration when Gods hand is out against us, Hag.
1. 7. Let it then bring us upon a serious Trial of our selves and ways, that
we may be able to trace God in his Providence, and acknowledge his righteous
Judgments; let us ask whether our Contentions have not set open this door, and
invited Satan in? I am sure these carry a very great resemblance of the Devils
Cloven Foot. Have not our HeartDivisions grieved away the Spirit of God, and
given Satan this advantage? I am sure they leave a people faulty, Hos. 10 2.
and therefore say them open to severe punishments: these have been too general
sins, and what have been in particular? What a deal of Wordlymindedness in the
elder sort? the vanity and looseness in the younger, increased to such a height
of impudency. Let me add, the general light esteem there has been among us of
Gods ^oly and precious Ordinances, and contempt of his Messengers: these are
crying sins, and therefore, may well be answered with loud-speaking Providence.

2. Let us all join heart and hand to drive this Enemy out again. Let that be
our great business this day to implore God, and beg his assistance and
direction in so great a Work as this is; and let us forthwith set upon it, and
follow it might and main: and that in repentance of, and humiliation for what
is past, and reformation for the future, let us search and try our ways, and
turn again to the Lord; Let us lay aside Envy and Malice, throw down our
Contention and Strife, and take up Peace and Love. Let the Aged reform their
Earthlymindedness, and the Youth their Vanity, their Night-walkings, and merry
Drinking-meetings; let the Judgments of God awe our hearts, and leave such
impressions behind them, as may powerfully lead us in ways of Righteousness,
that God may delight to dwell among us, and tread Satan under our feet.

ISAIAH 21. 11, 12. 11 The burden of Dumah. He ca^eth to me out of Se^r,
Watchmen, what of the night? watchmen, what of the night?

12 The watchman said, The morning comes, and also the night: if ye will
enquire, enquire ye: return, come.


TImes of public Calamity, either felt, or justly feared, are trying Times;
these do call in a solemn manner for Consideration, and especially to enquire
into the Causes, and bethink of the sad Events. This is New-Englands day,
wherein God has at least taken the Rod into his hand, and is showing some part
of his severity toward us; and though he mix it with much moderation, yet there
is a great deal of bitterness in the Cup: it is time therefore humbly to enquire
into the grounds, and consider of the Consequences of these Calamities. The
Text before us may afford us something by way of Instruction and Direction in
this enquiry.

The words ate a Prophecy against Dumah, delivered by way of Question and
Answer.

The Question is propounded ver. 11.

The Answer short, full, and sharp, ver. 12.

The meaning of the words take up as they come to be handled in particular.

The burden] i. e. A Prophecy containing Threatenings of Wrath, and Predictions
of Misery: an ordinary phrase it is among the Prophets, to express any Vision
of sad consequence. See Chap. 13. 1 and this Chapter, ver. 1, 13. and therefore
the Prophet interprets the sense of the word, ver. 2. An hard Vision. See also
2 Kings 9. 25. Jer. 23. 33. and elsewhere. Hence*

Doct. The denunciations of Gods wrath against a sinning people is a Burden, a
thing heavy and grievous. In diverse considerations.

1. They are a burden to Gods Messengers: i. e. grievous and hard to them,
their spirits are oppressed, and many times even overwhelmed within them, to
fore-think of the message they have to deliver. See ver. 3. 4. Chap. 15. 5. and
1^. 9. Jer. 48. 31, 32. and 4. 19, 20.

2. They are a burden to the People to whom they are sent. This in two respects:

(1.) They are a burden of grief and sorrow to the godly, who hear and fear,
Hab. 3. 16.

(2.) Of indignation to the wicked, who cannot endure so much as to hear of
them, the very Threatening is to them intolerable, Amos 7. 10. 2 Chronicles. 36. 16.
Jer. 26. 8, 9.

3. In some sense they are a burden to God, who speaking after the manner of
men, expresses a rel^n^ing at the very mention of it, Hos. 11. 8, 9.

4. A burden in the Effects of them, or matter of Threatening contained in them,
which is sore and heavy to bear: Context, ver. 2.

The Reasons are:

1. Of the first; From the sympathetical compassionateness of Gods Messengers
toward their fellow creatures, there is a (...), A love of man naturally in
man, this is increased by grace: this we see eminent in Paul, Romans 9. 1. and
Moses, Blot me rather out of thy book.

2. Of the second; From the sense of the severity of Gods displeasure in the
godly, and hence it produces sorrow for their sins.

(1.) It brings sin to mind, which is the Cause, Psalm. 25. 17, 18.

(2.) The people of God know what a sad thing it is to have to do with an angry
God Psalm. 76. 7.

3. Of the third; From the pride of heart which is in the wicked, Jer. 43. 2.
they are too good to be reproved, will not hear by reason of the height of heir
spirits, think so well of themselves, that they cannot believe that God is
displeased at them.

4. Of the fourth; From the compassions of God toward poor sinners, he herein
discovers his merciful Nature, Hos. 11. 8

5. Of the fifth; From the aversness of the nature of man from sorrows and
miseries: they are against our nature, and therefore must needs be burdensome;
yea they are Punishments, and are therefore grievous.

Use 1. See here a Reason why Gods Warnings and Threatenings find no more
welcome, and why plain Preaching Ministers are (...) sinning man is gotten
above warning, though by our sins we are pulling down Gods Judgments upon our
heads, all this is nothing, but he that tells us plainly of them, and
represents the anger of God before us for them, he is the troubler of Israel.

Use II. Learn hence to interpret the Threatenings of Judgment denounced by
Gods Messengers in the best sense, when they tell you of Gods wrath. Oh do not
think th^^, tell you as they would have it, or that they take any delight in
bringing such heavy tidings, but they must say as God commands them, Jer. 28.
6. they can be gladly content that the threatening may never be fulfilled.

Use III. Here is a mark to distinguish the people of God from hypocritical
Professors: when God tells us plainly of our sins, and speaks of his wrath,
it is indeed a burden to all; but how? why, the wicked endeavor to throw it off
themselves, and cast it upon Gods Ministers, and violently to pull their
shoulder from under it; but the people of God sit down under it, and bear it
patiently, yea take up a new burden of sorrow for the sin which has procured
it, Lam. 3. 27, 28, 39.

Use IV. Learn hence what use to make of the threatening of Gods Judgments, and
Reproofs of your sins, if it be a burden to hear of them, what then will it be
to bear them? if you cannot endure to sit quietly whiles you are told of them,
how will you endure when God shall do according to the word of his Messengers?
Let such thoughts as these move you to prepare your selves, this use God would
have these burdens attain, Amos 4. 13.

Of Dumah] i.e. Of the Land of Idumea, the place of the posterity of Esau,
called Edom: these were, though of the posterity of Abraham and Isaac, yet a
Nation rejected by God, and become an Heathen Nation; and yet God tells them
aforehand what he intends against them, and condescends to give them a Warning
to Repentance. Hence

Doct. God, though grievously provoked, yet seldom brings desolating
Judgments, before he gives warning. Edom, though out of Gods Covenant shall
nevertheless hear from God before they feel his wrath, and Babylon, and Arabia,
and Tire, etc. as we find scattered in the Prophesies, how much more a people
in Covenant with him.

Reas. 1. Because this is the day of Gods for bearance, and therefore he will
exalt it toward sinners, and make them to taste of it. It is the time wherein
Justice is moderated by Mercy.

2. That sinners may have an opportunity to repent: when God speaks to them
before he strikes them, he puts a price into their hands, (...) on it as such a
season, Rev. 2. 21.

3. To take off all excuse in the day of Vengeance, that all mouths may be
stopped, sinners shall have nothing to say for themselves, as having been warned;
they shall have no plea, shall not be able to say, We never heard of it: no
cloak shall be left them.

Use. This may be a Rule to teach us what use to make of those manifold
Warnings which God vouchsafes to afford unto us.

1. Hearken to his Warnings, hear his Threatenings, attend to them, and believe
them.

Quest. How does God warn us?

Ans. First, By his Messengers, these are Ambassadors, to declare the mind and
counsel of God, and proclaim his Judgments.

Obj. But Revelations cease, how then can they give us a true account of the
mind of God, and his purposes of bringing Judgments ^n its?

Ans. God gives a greater portion of his Spirit to his Ministers, then to
others, and by that Spirit he extraordinarily

1. Stirs them up to a consideration of his mind and counsels: he directs
their thoughts that way.

2. Discovers to them the sins of the times and places they live in, makes them
to observe the frames and manners of the people he sends them to.

3. Enables them to compare his ancient dealings with sinners, in the several
respects and circumstances, and hence to draw conclusions, and hence verifies
that promise, Amos 3. 7. Now these Conclusions are a sure word of Prophecy: for

1. The Rule is standing, Crying sins are answered with certain Judgment. God
is the same he was, his Holiness and Justice remain inviolable, and
unchangeable, and therefore sinners have no hopes to escape, if they remain in
their sins.

2. Like sins bring like Judgments; Sodoms sins are followed with Sodoms
plagues; and therefore if our sins answer former times, we may expect our
sufferings to be like theirs.

3. The Prophesies of the Prophets were cautioned with the condition of
Repentance, either explicit, as appears by the invitations to repent annexed
to their Threatenings frequently; or at least implicit, Jer. 18. 7, etc. so are
theirs.

Secondly, By his Providence: gathering of Clouds, and some drops of rain
presage^ (...) Signs speak, the Rod has a voice in (...) and may be heard,
though it be but shaken over us.

2. Let the Patience of God break our hearts, and lead us to repentance, Rom.2.
4. Remember, God might have stricken when he warned us; he might have made our
plagues seven times heavier, when he did lay some gentler stroke upon us; he
might have made haste, begun, and made an end with us in one day, after he ha^
so long in patience waited upon us.

3. Give credit to Gods Threatenings, do not think he is in jest, look at such
times wherein Ordinances and Providence concur in denouncing wrath against us,
to be real tokens of Divine Displeasure, and to have a loud voice in them; and
therefore let it teach us to meet God, and that without delay.

He calls, etc] Here is the question or Introduction to the Prophecy.

He] i.e. Some Person, or Messenger.

Calleth] i.e. Comes to enquire.

To me] i. e. Isaiah.

Out of Seir] Mount Seir lying in the Land of the Edomites, is taken for the
whole Land of Idumea.

Watchman, what, etc.] By Watchman is meant the Prophet, these are called
Watchmen by God, because he sets them to discern his wrath, and give warning to
the people. The meaning or intent of the Question is diversely understood: I
find a twofold interpretation.

1. Some take it to be an expression of the bitterness and anguish of the
Edomites, concerning the future event of those troubles which were beginning
upon them: it seems War was threatened by the Assyrian; through which anguish
they send to the Prophet, to know what was likely to ensue, what troubles they
should meet withal: for Night is here a Metaphor of the time of affliction, as
it is often in Scripture, Isa. 26. 9, etc. and then the ingemination of the
Interrogatory, implies an earnestness of desire to be informed.

2. Others understand it to be spoken in a flouring way, and so they call the
Prophet Watchman by way of derision; as if they should say, Isaiah, you pretend
to be a Watchman, and have foretold much of the time of trouble and desolation
to come upon us, but we still enjoy the morning of prosperity, we are a free
people, and not in subjection; come, what do you say to it now? Either
interpretation will stand with the Analogy of Faith: though I think the latter
to be more suitable to the Answer given in the following verse; in which sense
the doubling of the Question is an aggravation of the scoff in a sarcasmous
speech.

From these words observe,

Doct. 1. Times of Calamity are fitly compared to the night season.

There is much of Analogy in these.

1. In the night nothing can be distinguished from the darkness, all things lie
equally mantled under that black (...) hence the Grave is called A land of
darkness, because all meet equally, and (...) there: in times of Calamity the
affliction is universal, good and bad are not to be distinguished by the
outward face of Divine Providence, Eccles 9. 1.

2. The night is a joyless time, darkness and obscurity hide from us objects of
joy and mirth: in times of Calamity objects of joy are removed, these outward
symptoms and expressions of delights and pleasures are removed, Jer. 7 34.

3. The night is full of terror, the darkness has a kind of influence upon
our fantasy, leaving an impression of strange apprehensions and possessing us
with fears. Calamitous times are fearful and terrible times, fill us with
suspicions, a man knows not whom to trust, lives in a fearful expectation of
sudden miseries to seize upon him.

4. The night is a solitary time, breaks up societies, and scatters them to
their several Chambers, to feed upon their melancholic thoughts and fears.
Troublesome times bring places full of inhabitants to fit solitary.

Use. I. See here a Reason why the people of God ought to do their utmost to
prevent the day of Calamity: though they shall get good by all Providence, yet
no affliction is in it self joyous, but grievous, and they shall find a great
deal of night of trouble at such a time. Hence wonder not to hear them so
earnest to depreca^e that day, and labor to with God for a prevention of it.
Christ himself, in whom was no sin, begs again and again, if it be possible
that the Cup might pass away from him; how much more they that have sin as well
as sorrow to grapple withal.

Use II. See here the Analogy between Sin and Sorrow, both are in Scripture
called darkness: hence the punishment is suitable to the fault, God pays men
in their own Coin; if men will hurry themselves into the shades of sin, God
justly brings them into a land of darkness, and of the shadow of death.

Use III. This Consideration may warn us to have a care how we provoke Gods
Judgments against us, to bring wrath upon us; we may be ^old and fearless
while the day time lasts, and our Sun of prosperity shines upon us, but if we
pull down Judgments upon our heads, we shall find the night to be

1. Joyless, we shall see the difference between joy and sorrow experimentally
when God shall have removed our comforts away from us, our peace, our outward
supplies, all our precious things, we shall then feel what it is to be
benighted.

2. Terrible, full of amazement. Ah! little do we know what the terror of this
night mean, to be oppressed with pining hunger, with pinching penury; to hear
the cries of Children following us for bread, and none to give them; to hear
the found of the Trumpet, and Alarm to War; to hear the cries of the wounded,
and see the slain in our gates; to fee the raging of Famine and Pestilence, and
natural affection changed into a Tyger-like Cruelty, tenderhearted Mothers
shutting up their bowels of pity, and laying violent hands on the Children they
have born; to go into Captivity, and serve an Enemy whose tender mercies are
cruelty; to live in fear of every sight, every noise, left it should be some
messenger of Death, or that which is worse.

3. Solitary and lonesome, when you shall be made desolate, and like Job. who
was made a stranger to the wife of his bosom^; and hence you shall have that
which will fill head and heart full of perplexity: how careful then should we
be that we provoke not God against us, to bring darkness of adversity upon us.

Doct. 2. It Is the guise and disposition of the wicked, to despise and (...) at
the Threatenings of Gods Judgment against them, especially if God delay
execution.

Thus the Edomites here, they had been threatened, but they yet were in peace,
and thoug^ the Enemy was coming, they yet are secure. See also for this,
Eccles. 8 11. Ezekiel. 12. 22. Poor sinning man, though he might read the (...)
of death in himself, yet is not willing to believe any evil till he feels it.
It God delay, his Messengers presently are Liars.

Reas. 1. From the natural (...) possesses the hearts of the unregenerate:
sinful man is naturally secure, which security arises from

1. Their not seeing and being affected with their sin, justly provoking of
God, Mal. 2.7. men grope in their darkness, and cannot see wherein they have
done amiss. Men. especially if they have taken a form of godliness, and begin
to be sticklers in Religion, they observe not that they want the power, and
having taken up a good apprehension of themselves, the Word of Conviction
passes by as a thing in which they are not concerned. Hence they wonder that
God should have any thing against them, they cannot believe it, and so they
despise, and make a mock of those that tell them of Wrath against them.

2. Their misinterpretation of Gods patient dealing with them: Natural men make
a God to themselves of their own Minds, Psalm. 50.21. if God delays them, then
presently he approves of their ways, at least they must have him a God all of
mercy, they exalt his Compassion to the injury and violation of his Holiness
and Justice; and so, what should be a means of their Repentance, 2 Per. 3. 9.
is an occasion of their hardening.

3. Their false hopes and promises of their escape, their Covenants with Hell
and Death. Isa. 28. 17, 18. make all men (thriving in the wo^ld in a way of
wickedness, and being rooted deep in their outward enjoyments) begin to account
this a kind of Deity to them, and hence build up their hopes and thoughts upon
an unchangeable estate, Psalm. 49. 11. and hence can disdain, and flout away the
denunciation of a change.

Reas. 2. Because their present prosperity so takes up their senses, that they
despise God, no wonder then if they scoff at his Threatenings. Pharaoh sitting
in the Pomp and Glory of the Crown of Egypt, demands, Who is the Lord? Natural
men are ready to say (in times of prosperity) with Niobe, Major sum quam cui
passit fortuna nocers. I am greater then the hand of Providence can reach to do
any injury to, and hence beat a Challenge to the Almighty, Job. 21. 13. 14.

Use 1. See here a Reason why Gods Messenger are so slighted by a secure and
prospering people: when they speak of days of wrath, men do not believe them,
their Preaching is accounted as false tales and vain stories why, men liv^ at
case, and therefore they are accounted fools that speak of a storm, and are
made a May Game (...) here of the Prophet: and no wonder, for they do so by God
himself; I spoke to thee in thy prosperity, and thou would not hear. Men are
short sighted, though they can discern the signs of (...) yet they are not
willing to see any thing of the signs of Divine Displeasure, and if they see
nothing, they will believe nothing, yea though they do see they are not willing
to believe.

Use II. To convince us of, and humble us for even this very sin before God
this day. God has given New England many days of prosperity, it has been day
with us a long time, but meanwhile sin has been growing upon us, and
increasing, and Gods Messengers have dealt faithfully (...) and told us of it,
and warned us by the clear demonstrations of the Word of God, that Judgments
hang over our heads, but have not these Admonitions been despised and mocked by
us?

Quest. You will say, How?

Ans. 1. Some have mocked them in plain terms, we have not been clear of this
brazen-faced impudence, some to flout at the Warnings of God, yea to hate those
that have been most serious in reproving our sins, especially that have pointed
(...) out.

2. Others have no believed, (...) hose not a few neither, but the most; we may
almost use the (...) demand, Isa. 53. 1.

3. Have not these Warnings been practically slighted and disregarded?

1. How few hearts have been affected? and not to be affected, is a degree of
mocking: how few m^^ing hearts? how few that hear and fear? how few tremblers
at the Word of God? or that with old Eli sit by the way, trembling for the Ark
of God? We can sit under the Convictions of the Word, and no whit convinced;
little remorse when these burdens are laid upon us, and we go away and wipe our
months, and say, What have I done? We (like deaf men) startle not when the
Tran per founds, because we will not hear it.

2. What little care is there to return and meet God by repentance, and what is
this (...) then to slight and mock God.?

Obj. But many days of Humiliation have been kept?

Ans. True; and to what purpose?

1. Where is the Refo^mation that has followed? in Isa. 58. the Lord owns that
only as a true Fast, which is a day of Reformation (...) but what has been
amended? if we (...) miss before, we are so still, notwithstanding all that is
made to appear to the view of the world: and this is a manifest mockery.

2. Have we not kept days to encourage our selves to sin more boldly upon a
new score, with the Where in Prove. 7. 14, 15? thought to have cleared all old
scores with God by an overly Consession, that, so we might more securely run
into new arrerages: and is not this a great mockery, to think to pay God with
such counterfeit Coin? What have we to do then; but to confess and bewail this
sin before God, and labor to amend it? For Motive: Consider,

1. God will make you to know who sent these Messengers, that it was not of
their own heads, nor on their own errands, that his Ministers came to you, but
that it was from him, Ezekiel. 2 5. and that you have not scoffed and neglected
them, but God himself: you shall see this.

2. Gods patience has a bounded time, Hab, 2.3. God may delay long, he will
not do so always; know it, he is just as well as merciful: God will take a
season, find out a fit opportunity to be known in his Judgments upon those
who despise his patience, and reject his counsels and fore-warnings, he will
not strive always with man, who is flesh, Genesis 6. 3.

3. Such a spirit will provoke God to make haste, Ezekiel. 12. 23. if God send,
yea rise up early and send, and so far condescend to a rebellious people, as to
send Messenger after Messenger, and Message upon Message, and these mocked and
despised, that news quickly comes there is no remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. this
ripens men apace for destruction.

4. Such a spirit is an immediate forerunner of swift Calamity, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 1
-- No surer and more infallible token of great Calamities to be hastening upon a
people then this, when God tells them of trouble and calamity, they cry Peace,
Peace, and lay themselves down (in despite of all Counsels and Warnings) upon
the bed of Security, and take their case in sin without remorse. Let us then be
deeply affected with this evil, as knowing that there is nothing whereby we
have more (...) provoked God, and ^exed his Spirit, then by this. lie low
before him in the sense of it, it may be he will pardon and forgive it.

(...)

You see Edom here makes a great do of Enquiry: there is an hypocritical and
false, and there is a sincere and true Enquiry made about divine Dispensations,
and the one apparently, and to the view of the world, may be as earnestly
pressed as the other.

Reas. 1. Because there are other things which may excite such an Enquiry,
besides the fear of God; viz.

1. A natural fear, which may be sti^red up at the first hearing of
Threatenings, and discovery of tokens presaging Calamity; the sight of dismal
Clouds, and the noise of some terrible Thunder, cracks, do at the first carry a
kind of consternation along with them: and this makes men, till by degrees
they outgrow their affrightment, to be very sedulous to know what thes-things
mean.

2. A naturally busy talkative spirit, that loves to be busy, talking and
discoursing, many affect to be in discourse, and hence they enquire that they
may have something to spend time in discourse.

3. A desire to be thought wise, discerning and prudent, hence men will enquire
for light: we love to have the esteem for prudence and discretion, to be
accounted men of discerning spirits, that observe and know the times, and hence
take some pains in searching.

4. An ironicall and flouring spirit: such this seems to be in the Text, not
that we have any true desire to know any thing, but in disdain of Gods
Ministers: we enquire of them as for knowledge, but in the meanwhile look upon
them to have no more knowledge of the mind and counsel of God then ourselves:
with this spirit those proud men seem to have come to enquire of the Prophet.
Jer. 43.

Reas. 2. Because there are other ends of such Enquiry, besides such as
accompany sincerity; viz.

1. A bare desire of external knowledge and discourse: there is seated in man a
great natural desire of the knowledge of the Nature of things, and that
especially of future Contingencies; hence men take a great deal of pains, and
busy themselves much in seeking to know such things, when it is to no other
end but to know.

2. An intent to ^avill at Gods dispensations, Isa. 58.2. Some enquire to no
other end, but that they may pick a quarrel with Divine Providence, and charge
the ways of God with injustice, as if they were wiser then God, as if he did
not Rule the World by an equal Law.

Use. 1. For Trial: there is much talk now a days amongst us, about the
Judgments of God, and those awful Providence that are rolling over our
heads: there is a great Enquiry made, but let us not think or conclude our
selves ever the better, because we are among the number of those who are
possibly the most forward upon this account, but examine our selves whether we
do it in sincerity or in hypocrisy.

Signs of hypocritical Enquiry.

1. When we enquire more after the Events of Calamity, then the Causes
procuring of it: thus those Id^^tans, What of the night? i. e. What is like to
come upon us? So there is much enquiry, what the issue of these rolling
Providence is like to be; what things are like to come to: but there are few
say, What have I done? wherein is the Lords anger incensed amp;c.? this shows
we are more afraid of sorrow then sin, when we look so much at the Rod, and not
at the hand which wieldeth it: This argues a spirit of hypocrisy, for we
neglect our work; which is to search and try our hearts, and meddle with Gods
work, whose Sovereignty it is to rule and order the affairs of the whole World
at his own pleasure.

2. When we enquire more after Natural then Spiritual Causes: we are very
inquisitive to know what may be the Natural Cause of these Blastings which have
for many years diminished and corrupted the best of our Grain; and hence, many
projective endeavors in vain attempted to prevent it, by a seeking to remove
that Cause, which we are to this day baffled in, and as far off to seek as
ever: but the Causes Spiritual (which are more manifest, and easy to be
discovered) are slightly sought after, and so but little endeavor to remove
them, hence no wonder that the Effect remains, we enquire in hypocrisy.

3. When we enquire, but it is without any desire or willingness to see the true
Reason or Causes, or be convinced of them, we enquire with a ^inde of
fore-stalled and prejudicate spirit; we have taken up already what our
determination is and must be: hence this it is, and no other thing, hence we
arm our selves with a resolution to outstand all Conviction, and so lay a block
in the way to prevent any efficacious meeting God in such a way as might remove
his hand off from us, and prevent the process of more and worse miseries.

4. When we enquire, but never intend to reform: this was the enquiry of those,
Jer. 43. their promises were indeed fair, but when the Prophet had gone to God
and enquired for them, and brought them word back again, (...) they discover
their hypocritical heart, Chap. 44. 16. they would make a formal kind of
process, as if they had been desirous of Gods counsel to direct them; and had
the Answer been to their minds, what godly men might they have past for: Has
God told us nothing? have not his Messengers pointed at something? have not the
very Providence themselves given light to our enquiry? but all this while,
where is the amendment? who turns from his evil way to the Lord?

5. When we enquire, but not of Gods Watchmen: times have been when they have
been esteemed, and looked upon as Watchmen indeed, who were best able to inform
us in the Counsels of God; but now who more blind then they in our practical
judgment? a prejudicial eye is cast upon them, and they laid by as useless. Oh
how is the cavilling of an Anabaptistical and censorious spirit (who can spit
his venom in the face of Magistracy and Ministry, and make these the Causes of
all our Trouble) set by among many? whiles the faithful Warnings of Gods
Servants are contemned.

6. When possibly we enquire of them, but with a slighty and disdainful spirit:
Oh how many go with their nice Queries to their Ministers, when they despise
them in their hearts? and either lay snares for them, as they dealt by Christ
himself, Is it lawful to pay tribute, etc? or at least do not go to them as
such whom they do indeed look upon and esteem to be sent of God, and therefore
may hopefully expect to receive better information from them, then from others,
hence they little regard, and less do they practice.

7. When we enquire, but we are not willing the Cause should be in our selves,
but in others: and hence though we enquire with some earnestness, yet if the
Answer (though true) touch us, and our Corruptions, we cannot bear it; this
shows that we enquire with a censorious (which is an hypocritical) spirit: we
regard not how much blame be laid upon others, but are willing to take none of
the blame and shame of the sin to our selves; and therefore come not up to
this, which is the only sincere first Enquiry, What have I done?

Use II. To humble us for our hypocrisy upon this account: and how much cause
the best of us may have to take the shame of this sin upon us before God this
day, if we did seriously enquire, we might in some measure discover: let us
then bewail it seriously. For Motive: Consider,

1. It is no light matter to mock God; (...) we do in every act (...)
hypocrisy: God is not mocked, says the Apostle, i. e. he will not be put off
with, nor will he put up our mockeries.

2. God and year sin will find you out: God discerns the heart, and therefore
it is no mocking of him; he is a jealous God, and therefore he will make you to
know how ill he takes it, he will smoke against your best services, that you
may understand your hypocrisy is observed by him, Isa. 58. 1 --

Thus much of the Question of the Idumeans.

The Answer of the Prophet follows. The Answer is short and full.

The Watchman i. e. the Prophet Isaiah. Isaiah owns his Office, though they put
it upon him as a scoff and mockery, but ^he is not ashamed of it in the least.
Hence

Doct. The Ministers of God are not ashamed of their Office, though the world
seem to despise and flout at it. Let the men of the world think never so
undervaluingly of the Place and Work they are in, they yet prize and esteem it.

Reas. 1. Because it is an Office instituted by God, and therefore will be
defended, and vindicated by him: he owns them, though the world despise them,
and he will take upon him to plead the Cause of his despised Ministers.

Reas. 2. Because it is a high and honorable Office, though despised: let the
world look upon it with an eye of disdain, yet it is in it self a dignity, an
honor; Ministers are Ambassadors from God to men, 2 Cor. 5. 20 now the Majesty
of the Prince is represented in the Ambassador, God looks that part of his own
honor is engraven upon this Office, Ministers therefore have no reason to be
discouraged by the contumelies of the world.

Reas. 3. Because it is a Work which is accompanied with the glorious power of
God, and made a means of the Salvation of Gods Elect: this is Paul's reason why
he is not ashamed of the Gospel, Romans 1. 16. When they see God putting forth
his power, and making the stoutest sinners fall (like the walls of Jericho) at
the sounding of the Preaching of the Gospel, and many souls by their Ministry
brought effectually home to God, this is enough to make them disdain the
standers and (...) of men, and glory in their Ministry.

Reas. 4. (...) with God: Ministers look not for, not would be satisfied with
an earthly reward; their praise is of God and (...) shall not lose their
reward, and they dare trust him, and can cheerfully endure, and meet with all
that reviling and contempt which wicked men delight to be venting against them:
the Crown will more then pay for all.

Use. Learn hence to have a care that you contemn not Gods Ministers, and above
all the Office of the Ministry: doubtless the low esteem of this great Work
appearing by too many evident symptoms, is, one thing for which God is now
pleading with us, and therefore seasonable at this time to be hinted to us. Oh
beware of this sin. Consider,

1. If we despise them, we despise God, Luke 10.18. the Prince accounts all the
affronts and indignities offered to his Ambassadors, to bear a proper respect
to himself; and do you then think that God will bear it? Moses may hold his
peace, Gods Ministers may pity and pray for you, yea will; but God will not
suffer his own glory thus to be trampled upon, nor his Servants thus to be
abused.

2. If we contemn them, and receive not their Ministry, it is the ready way to
be given up by God to a spirit of delusion, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10 Observer, and you
shall se^, this has been the door out of which so many have gone away into
those giddy distempers which they are now inflicted withal, even those many
Enthusiasms of the Devil; an undervaluing of the Ministry, an elevating and
(...) up private gifts, ^amp;c. which has led men by degrees to those great
Apostacies, whereby their light (which would have shone clearly in its proper
Orb) has spent it self in a blaze, and gone out in a stinking snuff.

The Watchman said] i. e. from God, and by his direction, we here see the
Prophet gives them a serious Answer. Hence

Doct. Whatever end a people have in enquiring, it is the duty of Gods
Ministers faithfully to answer them according to the mind and counsel of God.
See Jer. 42. 19, 20. the people they dissembled, but Jeremiah tells them the
truth.

Reas. 1. From the nature of their Office, which is to be Watchmen, which
depends not upon the acceptance, or not acceptance of their Message, but is an
absolute duty, whose neglect cannot be displeased withal: whether they will
hear or no, Ezekiel must discharge his Office, Chap. 2.7. yea, it lies so upon
him, as the neglect of it b^^ngs him under the dreadful (...) of Gods wrath.
Chap. 2. 18. ^e breaks his change if he neglect it, yea and hazards the undoing
of (...) whom he is set up to be a Watchman.

Reas. 2. Because God will have a rebellious people left inexcuseable, Ezekiel. 2.
5. though the prime end, and natural tendency of the Ministry, be for the
Conversion and good of the people to whom they are sent, yet God in just
judgment will sometimes have it to be to increase their Condemnation, and to
make their misery more dreadful: Line upon line, etc. is sometimes given to
make a people stumble and (...) Isa. 28.13. all this is for Gods glory, the
shine of the glory of his Justice, when he shall come to recover the honor of
his despised Counsels and Warnings, and plead with a people for their wretched
and inexcusable violation of both Covenants.

Use I. See here a reason why Gods faithful Ministers use so little humane
policy in the execution of their Place and Office: should they connive at our
sins, few pillows under our elbows, fawn upon us, or at the least speak in the
dark and aloof off, they were most likely, in an eye of humane Reason, to live
more quietly, and less hated: he is ready to be accounted our enemy who tells
us the truth. How easily might they accommodate themselves to humane
affections, but they dare not do it, but speak plain; not because they are
ignorant of the probability of what entertainment they are like to meet
withal, but because they dare not to be false to the charge and trust which
God has laid upon them. I confess, concerning some things there may be an
indiscreet zeal, in these there is a time to hold one's peace; but in the
discovery of the Counsels of God, and laying open crying sins, etc. it is not
the fear or favor of man, but the awful command of God, which must be, and is,
the Rule of the serious Minister, who being sent from God, must deliver his
Embassy.

Use II. Learn hence how faithful God is to us, how unfaithful soever we be to
him, and to our own souls; might we have our own desires, we would hear nothing
else but soothing and pleasant words; he that preaches sin and wrath, is a
Legallist, a Micaiah, he never speaks good to us; thus would we go sleeping and
secure to Hell, run our selves jocundly into all misery, such enemies are we to
our own souls: but how faithful is God, who seeing us falling into the seas of
wrath, sends to awaken us out of our sleep, to tell us of our evil ways, and
to reclaim, and bring us back. That God has ordained and set up the Office of
the Ministry under that solemn and dreadful charge, As they will answer it in
the great day, If they will not bring the guilt of the blood (...) upon their
own heads, to tell sinners of their ways, and (...) seasonable and constant
warning; herein is the Faithfulness of God, and his great Goodness wondrously
exalted.

Use. III. Learn hence to account a plain-dealing Ministry to be of God,
however they cross our corruptions: if any in the world are indeed sent of God
to us, then surely those, who laying aside all selfends and worldly interests,
lay themselves open to the hatred and persecution of the world, hazard to lose
our love and good will, to be evil spoken of, to suffer want, and hard usage
among us, rather then be silent in an evil day; rather then hold their peace,
and let us alone in our sins, or palliate and dissemble with us in the Cause of
God and our own souls. Pray to God that you may always have and enjoy such
Ministers, and that he would put this Spirit into his Ambassadors.

The morning someth, and also, the night] Here the Prophet answers them
according to their particular enquiry about the success. In which observe

1. A Concession; The morning comes: It is true indeed, you do for the present
enjoy a season or prosperity, though evil have been denounced against you; and
it comes still i. e. you have still a short season behind of day.

2. A Warning and also the night: i. e. as you have your morning, so assure
your selves you (...) have your night; think not, nor deceive your selves into
such a foolish hope, as to promise, your selves you shall rever (...)
adversity, because you now live at case and prosper.

3. The words carry in them the face of an Argument: he compares their
condition to a Natural day, in which there are two constituting parts, viz. Day
and Night, light and darkness, which naturally follow one upon another: the day
of the people of God usually (as the Natural day) begins with darkness, and
ends in (...); the wickeds day begins with morning, but shall end with night.
Hence if they look for right to follow the clearest day, why do they dream as
if sorrow could not come in the room of their present pleasure and delight?
Hence

Doct. 1. (...) an hundred and forty years, ^are with the (...)

Reas. 1. Because this is the day of Gods (...) ^ance: God is perfectly just,
and he shall be known to be so in the day of vengeance, when the great Assizes
shall be set, and he shall render unto every one according to their works; but
mean while he has a day of mercy, wherein (without any infringement to his
Justice and Holiness) he moderates the Sentence past upon sinners; and delays
the full execution of it, meanwhile conferring much of his goodness upon them.
Now the season of the shine of this Attribute of Mercy, appearing in his
Clemency and Benignity, is properly here in this world: God will have the glory
of all his Attributes shine out and appear in his Efficiency; now there is no
room for, nor knowledge of his Patience, Long sufferance, and Goodness in Hell,
where the Cup of Wrath is without mixture: God therefore now makes it appear in
the (...) of wrath fitted to destruction, Rom.9.22.

Reas. 2. Because God has in his Decrees, not only laid men out for
punishment, but for their measure and degrees of punishment, which they come to
by the height of their sin, and by the number of Mercies abused: this is an
awful, but an undeniable Truth, That God has not only designed such sinners
to destruction, but has allotted them their place in Hell; Judas is gone to
his place: there is a Hell more and less tolerable, Mat. 11.15. as also that
men come to this, by their abusing and misimproving of mercies, Romans 2.5. hence
therefore sinners must have such a time of Patience, so many Mercies, etc.
beyond which, as they shall not be spared, so before which they shall not be
disturbed, but let alone till their measure be sulfilled, till they are ripe,
and fully fitted to destruction, Genesis 15.16.

Use. 1. Learn hence, that outward prosperity is no sure token of Gods special
favor, Eccles. 9 2. a person or people may have and enjoy the worlds
abundance, and over (...) in the outward things of this, life, and yet be the
hated of God, such whom God turns like Oxen, into a rich Pasture, where they
may be fatted up for the slaughterhouse of Hell: reckon not therefore upon
this. Hive any of you escaped the (...) which God has been (...) do not sooth
up your selves with this, and (...) selves into an opinion this God loves you
(...) the letter; a dear child of God may be under the most severe (...),
whiles thou that art no, (...) may be a (...). (...) and solemn Examination
of our selves, what (...) have made of those many days of prosperity which we
have (...): it is not enough that we have had them, but how have we improved
them. Know it, the day of Reckoning is coming, and then an account will be
taken, when the more any have received, the more they will have to answer for.
We have been a people wonderfully favored by the Lord, but let not this make
us secure; who knows but we have turned Gods great Mercies into great Curses by
abusing of them: it is time then (now God is coming to recover his Mercies out
of our hands) to ask our own hearts, whether we have not highly abused, yea so
that if Repentance prevent not, to our final destruction.

Doct. 2. A people in the very height of outward prosperity, may be very near
to ruin and destruction. The Prophet speaks here quick, as of sudden Changes,
The morning comes, also the night; intimating, as if there should be no long
distance between their morning and night, as if it should be a short morning, a
day soon changed into night. You remember how it was with the Old World, and
with Sodom, who were taken in the height of their pleasures, in the top of
their prosperity, and suddenly brought to a final end, and fearful desolation;
and out Savior Christ speaks of such times in the days of the Gospel, Luke
17.26, etc.

Reas. 1. Because such days ripen men faster for destruction, Romans 9.22. the
more men have, and abuse, the deeper they run into Gods debt-book, the larger
accounts they have: the better the Pasture is, the sooner the Ox is fat; now
you know the Ox is not taken from his Pasture, till such time as the day of
slaughter comes, hence God takes men in their height, and makes them come down
wonderfully.

Reas. 2. From the nature of Patience, which as it can bear and endure a great
deal, and a long while, so when it once comes to be worn out, and provoked,
breaks forth into a most sudden and direful flame: Loesa patientia fit furor;
Jer. 4.4. That anger which is not suddenly and speedily stirred up, when
kindled is most furious and unappeaseable.

Reas. 3. From the nature of sin, which the more goodness of God it enjoyes,
the more it heightens it self into boldness and violence: Sodoms fullness (which
called to glorify God) was an occasion of the crying sins that were among
them; hence they pull down wrath, and there is no remedy.

Use. This may convince us of a great (...) the Goodness and rich Mercy of God
expressed to usward in the every thing, in that he has not brought our
Calamity and Desolation on us all at once, but has come by degrees, he has
not dealt with us as with Sodom, whose desolation came in a day, sudden as a
Whirlwind; whose morning was fair and clear, who saw the Sun shine upon them,
the same day wherein they were over whelmed with a storm of Fire and Brimstone.
Our Sun has been obscured, our day brought to the twilight, before sudden and
thick darkness: these are tokens of Gods long suffering and great favor
toward us; hereby God gives us further warning, and more space to (...). Oh
let us then make this use of it; God shows by this that he is willing to be
stopped in his way, to accept the sacrifices of an humble spirit.

Doct 3. God would have us in the Morning to think of Night. Whiles times of
peace and plenty continue, God would that we bethink our selves of a change,
Eccles. 11.8. God would have these Edomites to consider that Night would come
after their Morning was over.

Reas. From the sutableness and seasonableness of these thoughts at such a time.

1. The se^ions consideration of it may be a means to prevent it: by removing
the Cause, the Effect cease; God brings sorrow for sin, Repentance stops him
in his course, and brings back his favor. A wise and holy improvement of the
day of Gods goodness and favor, causes the Sun to stand still in our
Firmament, and the day of prosperity to last: but the sinful abuse of it
hastens the setting of our Sun, and coming of the black and dark night; now to
think of this beforehand, affords us a solemn and awakening Motive carefully to
improve our time of visitation, whereby we may enjoy a blessed lengthening out
of our tranquillity.

2. The due improving of these thoughts may be a means to fit us for the Night:
Forewarned (as we say) and fore-armed; the expectation of storms and tempests,
drives persons to seek a seasonable shelter and hiding place from the wind and
rain: this makes serious souls prepare to meet with their God. They that never
think nor consider of a change, never think of being emptied from vessel to
vessel, are like fishes taken in an evil net, are horribly unprepared; but the
serious expectation of days of Calamity, will drive us (if any thing) to make
our peace with God, to take up our shelter under the wings of the Lord Jesus
Christ, (...) evil of these evils overtake us not.

3. These thoughts (...) make us wise to improve our morning to the best
advantage: when we see night coming, and a great deal before us to do, this
doubles our diligence, whiles many times we idle away much of the day, as long
as we think it a great while to night; as long as we (...) the Sun to be in its
height, we sleep, but when it is near setting, (...) redeem the time. Oh how
laborious Christians should we be, how sedulous in the work of God, if we did
but carry along with us in our minds the thoughts of the evil day, did we but
with a cautious expectation every day look for a change!

Use. 1. See here how grievously they provoke God, who in the day of their
prosperity mind nothing but their case and pleasure, Amos 6. 1. -- it is an
iniquity which God cannot bear, as follows in the sequel: it is a note of a
wicked man, when he enjoyes the favor of God, to do nothing but spend his
days in mirth; there are the afflictions of Joseph to mind, yea also and our
own change to mind: what was the ground of Jerusalems destruction but this?
Lam. 1.9.

Use II. This may be for Direction to us, what use to make of the consideration
and fore-thoughts of the night of Trouble, in a few things:

First, Consider what just reason we have to expect a night, a change, more
sorrows still; viz.

1. The grievous loss of precious time in the best, Oh how much of our time
here have we wasted away, aliud agendo, in that which profits not. None in the
world ever enjoyed a happier advantage to serve God in, then we have done for
so long a season in this Wilderness, wherein we have enjoyed peat^, and the
liberties of the Gospel, liberty to be as good as we will, and all
encouragements to serve God; but oh how much have we been wasting away
unprofitably, in Contentions, and busy Wranglings about matters of an
inferior consideraton, about our worldly Cares and Perplexities, etc. We have
used but little care to redeem those precious hours from those encompassing
vanities which beset us.

2. (...) provocations of Gods wrath in many, which may make God say of us as
of Israel, that we press him as a Cart is pressed with the sheaves. Oh how many
crying sins have been sound among us? Should God come and (...) with us, (and
indeed so he does, and has been pleading with us a great while) and (...) over
to us a Bill of our several Items, how few need he leave (...) those (...)
against Jerusalem, in that heavy Accusation accorded Ezekiel. 22.14. I need not
mention in particular, Crying (...) been found, and are prevailing, and shall
not God visit for (...) things? will be not be avenged on such a people, who
promised, and gave (...) of better things?

Secondly, Consider what Warnings God has given us:

1. In the Ministry: Has it not been the voice of God in the mouth of all his
Prophets, has there not been a full and universal consent of all Gods
Messengers, that God has a Controversy with his people, and cannot be silent?
How long has this been a Conclusion, and they have been faithful to discharge
their duty, and acquit their Consciences on this account by declaring it: this
we have heard often proclaimed, and by sound demonstration cleared to us, but
we have made too light of that, Ministers must say something to keep up their
credit, and keep the people in awe. And therefore

2. God has warned us in his Providence, that so he might make us believe his
Word in the mouth of his Messengers: and that not only by many Signs and
Prognostics usual forerunners of calamitous times, but also by the
Vaunt-Courriers of his Army of Judgments, beginnings of sorrows; many have
been the sad and awakening Providence of these latter years, he is a stranger
in our Israel who is unacquainted therewithal. It we will not credit the Word,
yet let us believe the Rod; if in the Morning we have been easily deluded into
false and vain hopes, to think it would never be Night, yet one would think,
when the Sun seems to be setting in our Horizon, and the dusk of the Evening is
coming upon us, we should now be ready to give credit to it, unless we are
fallen into a Lethargic, and dead sleep of Security.

3. Now let us bethink our selves how it may be prevented: to what end should
we be warned, but that we might endeavou to prevent and escape the drinking the
dregs of this Cup, whereof we have been already made to sip?

1. Believe that God is yet willing to be stopped, he shows how unwilling he is
to (...), and therefore is ready to be stayed. God loves to be hindered in these
proceedings he himself looks to set if there be any to stand in the gap, and
make up the breach, and he is grieved when (...) none: (...) encouragement; The
God of Israel is a merciful God, and will be ready to extend that mercy to us,
notwithstanding any advantage he has in his hand against us: he therefore
(when in the midst of Judgments) swears, that he delights not in the sinners
death, and calls upon them to return to him, Ezekiel. 36. 11.

3. Improve the means of prevention that are appointed by God: as there is a
possibility of stopping the process of Gods wrath, so there is but one only
way whereby it can be done, and that is by returning by a through Repentance, by
a confessing and forsaking those sins that pull down wrath; we must confess,
that he may be acknowledged Just; we must forsake, because the Cause must be
taken away before the Effect cease.

4. Prepare that if the Night come you may make advantage of it for your good:
though the Night has many sad disadvantages, yet it has its advantages too;
though it pay the sluggard with shame, yet to him that has done his work, it is
sweet, and helps his rest: if it find you in a way of righteousness, it can do
you no hurt, it shall do you a great deal of good. Oh prepare, get your sins
pardoned and done away, if the guilt of these remain, they will interpose as a
thick and dismal Cloud, between the light of Gods countenance and your souls,
then it will be a black and dark night indeed: get into Christ, make him your
shelter and rock, he is a sure refuge, and the tempest cannot break through him
to do you any harm, though it should bear down, and wash away the clay house of
your earthly tabernacle, yet it cannot keep you from, but will hasten you to a
more speedy possession of your Eternal Mansion, your house of rest, whose (...)
and maker is God.

If ye will enquire, enquire ye:] The Prophet having answered their Question
about the Events of Providence, and confirmed his forewarnings, by taking off
the objection from present prosperity, and ascertained them of the hastening of
their Calamity; being desirous to prevent their utter desolation, adds a (...)
of serious advice to them from God, wherein he tacitly reproves the hypocrisy
of their former inquisitiveness, and calls up to sincerity in their enquiring.
Hence

Doct. 1. Hypocritical service is in Gods (...) no service. Edo^^ makes a
seeming enquiry, out they did it not in earnest, hence the Prophet speaks of it
as (...). The (...) much, and were angry that God did not answer them, (...)
their ^ffliction still remained on them; God tells them he looked upon it as no
Fast, Isai. 58.3.

Reas. is, Because it

1. Comes not from a right principles; Grace, which only can do any thing
acceptably to God: where there is not this, the Sacrifice is an abomination.
That which has the matter of visible service in it, is looked upon as the
greatest sin, Isa. 66.2.

2. Is not done in a right manner, viz. Sincerity of heart. God requires the
heart in every service, for that commands all the faculties, and what way that
goes, thither indeed all aim; hence the complaint is, Their heart ^as not
upright toward God.

3. Neither does it aim at the right end, viz. the glory of God: this is the
end of all true service, to bring glory to our Maker, and if this be not our
aim and end, God is not indeed served in it. Now every hypocritical service
wants all these ingredients, and therefore is not a serving of God, hence no
wonder if he do not accept it.

Use. This may be for Trial, to see whether our services and enquiries have not
been hypocritical, whether or no we have not drawn near to God with our lips,
whiles our hearts have been far from him: Surely there is great reason why we
should make such an enquiry an this is, if we consider what effects have
followed upon our fastings.

1. How little fruit of Reformation has there been on our part: what one thing
has there been amended? what public sin has been reclaimed? is there ever
the less vanity, pride, profaneness, oppression, contention? or do not these
and the like evils seem rather to inarease and grow more after all? and is not
this a note of hypocrisy, to confess, and seem to bewail, and yet not to
amend, but grow worse?

2. Wherein has there been a removal of the Rod on Gods part: do not our
calamities seem to increase, and the stroke to be more and more heavy? we lost
many Instruments of the glory of God, and suffered many bodily Calamities, and
Blastings of our labors, and we have fasted, but his anger is not turned away,
but his hand is stretched out still; yea more varieties of sorrows are heaped
upon us: we may therefore well examine our own hears, what is the reason of all
this, unless we have not yet indeed turned to him who smote us, the Lord our
God.

Doct. 2. Whatsoever (...) we make, yet God knows with what hears we come to
him, to ask (...) and direction from him. The Idum are seem earnest and urgent,
but yet the Lord tells them that they make none ( i. e. no acceptable) enquiry.

Reas. From his Omniscience, Psalm. 94.8. Heb. 4.13. he is the heart maker, and
therefore has the power of discerning the heart, and all the motions and
turnings of it; all the nooks and corners of it are open: it is so full of
deceitfulness, that we cannot know it thoroughly, but he perfectly and exactly
views, and discerns it; if he did no: know the secrets of our hearts, if any
thing were (...) from him, he were not God.

Use. Learn hence that you cannot deceive God, man you may put off with fine
words and fair p^etences, but not so God: has not God made it to appear that
he will not be mocked by us? we have offered up to him hypocritical services,
and accordingly we have been paid: we come with an Idol in our heart, and he
has answered us according to our Idol. Let us then look to our selves, and
bew^re how we come before him, with what heart we come into his presence: know
it, if we sow wind, we shall reap the east wind; we may think to deceive and
put him off with our mockeries, but he observes and takes notice even of those
thoughts, and will make us to see and feel that he i^ d^spleased with them:
Bring then no more vain oblations, offer up no more heartless sacrifices to
him, but come loathing our selves, taking the true shame of our sins, and with
a real desire to be rid of them, and we shall be accepted.

Doct. 3 Those that would be instructed by God, in the grounds of his quarrel,
and means of restitution, must enquire in good earnest. God loves no this
hypocritis, and it we bring it, he will answer accordingly, Ezekiel. 14 4. God may
indeed answer those that enquire in hypocrisy, but it is an unwelcome answer
he gives them, viz. a commision, and a ratifying of his Threatenings, and an
(...) fulfilling of them: All the news that Edom hears, is, That their Night
shall come on them, the (...) determined shell be brought to (...) them: but
God gives an answer of peace only to those that enquire in sin^^ity.

Reas. 1. Because this hypocrious is are great reason of the continuation of
Gods anger, and there (...) must be (...), (...) before God (...) 4. they had
sinned, and God had afflicted; they (...) God had added to their affliction,
and they now would (...) the iniquity of their fasting procured the (...); Is
this such a Fast as I have required? hence God direct the (...) to fast aright,
in the sequel. Judah had been full of (...), but God was (...) Isa. 1. he tells
them how they should come and reason out the case with him, and enjoy pardon
and mercy at his hands, ver. 16, 17.

Reas. 2. Because there can be no hope of true Reformation, where there is not
sincerity in (...) enquiring: if we enquire hypocritically, we cannot (...) to
spent; for the very first step to repentance, is a serious (...) and enquiry
into our hearts and ways, Lam. 3.40. Those proud men, Jer. 43. they come in
hypocrisy, and hence when they have an answer from God, and are counseled for
their (...), they take up a resolution that they will not do according to the
word of the Lord.

Use. I for Trial: Le us examine whether this be not the reason why God has
not yet made us to see, and be sensible of the grounds of his Contest with this
poor Land. This is the great and general complaint, We have fasted and prayed,
sought and enquired, but his hand is stretched out still, and he is yet pleased
to hide the reason from us, and not to let us know why he (...) with us. Oh, do
not charge God (...) of (...) or hard dealing: God, though he be Sovereign, and
not (...) of any of his matters, yet he is a gracious God, and (...) to the
humble soul to make a discovery of his Counsels, would we know why God hides
his mind from us; look upon our selves, did we ever yet enquire in good
earnest? Gods hand has been heavy on this account upon us.

1. In some things God has di^^ded the Apprehensions of his Messengers, as is
too manifest and apparent; and this is your (...), which ought to be your
sorrow, for if in any point the (...) give an uncertain sound, yours is the
suffering (...) to be, (...) yet this is a general outcry, What do you expect
from (...) what do you think we should do, when our Ministers are not (...)
(...) it is a humbling thought, but do not wash your lands, and (...) you
mouths, as if you were clean in this point, (...) find the root and cause of
the affl^ct on in your selves; (...) you (...) God (...) good earnest for your
Ministers, and (...) as you ought to do, and (...) of God ^o give (...) out
heart, there would be a (...) among them.

2. In other things (...) a general Consent and Agreement among Gods Ministers,
but the people of God are divided in apprehension: and hence a check in many
(...) put to the comfortable carrying on of the Work of Reformation; some are
of one mind, some of another; some consent with, and other dissent from the
Messengers of God, and hence are ready to charge each other mutually as the
causes of our Calamity: and what is the reason of these divisions in Reuben, but
that we have enquired of God with an Idol in our hearts? We first take up
Conclusions that we are in the right, and all others out of the way that are
different from us; and then, with these Conclusions we go to God, and make as
if we enquired of him.

3. In other things all agree as to the Theory, viz. as to many Moral Causes
and Occasions, which are justly provoking to God to bring a Scourge upon us:
Who agrees not that Pride, Profaneness, Contention, etc. are things which
provoke Gods anger, and cause him to smoke against a people in the fire of his
displeasure? yea, who agrees not that these sins are prevailing and increasing
among us? and yet we little reform these things in our selves, neither are we
satisfied in our enquiry, but still remain queri^ts; and why? we still enquire
hypocritically: this may be matter of humiliation this day, among others let us
not forget to bewail this sin in the presence of God, and beg of him to give us
grace to seek him so as we may be heard by him, and he found by us.

Use II. for Exhortation: We come this day humbly to ask of God what his mind
is, why he is offended at his people, and seems to be unwilling to be pacified,
and to be angry at our requests; why if you will enquire, enquire: if you would
be satisfied, and receive an answer of peace at Gods hands, come in good
earnest, and God shall satisfy you this day: none ever asked counsel of him
with a true and sincere heart, but was satisfied. For your help herein by way
of Direction in this great business, if you would receive help and counsel
from God, then

1. Lay down your own judgments and wills at the foot of God, there are many
that bring a fore-stalled judgment, and will (as we heard) take up their rash
Conclusions, according to their own opinions, and resolve never to be moved
from them: this provokes God to leave us up to be seduced by our own delusions.
Empty your selves therefore of your own wisdom and will, that you may be ready
to entertain his.

2. Make the Word of God your Rule (...), make that your Light and Lamp to lead
you in your search (...) the Causes of Gods displeasure: go not by humane
policy, (...) carnal reason, or other men's judgments and apprehensions, which
are fallacious; no, (...) God be true, and every man a liar. Compare we our
selves by his Word exactly, by the Rule, and by Examples, and let Conscience be
an impartial Judge, and doubtless we shall discover more then a little.

3. Come with an humble heart, prepared to submit to whatsoever God shall
discover. Consider, many things have been told you, but they have met with, and
crossed your corruptions, and so you have rejected them: a proud heart is never
like to be so familiar with God as to be instructed by him, he sees such at a
distance: would you have God to teach you, submit humbly to his teaching.

1. If the sin ^all upon you in particular, be ready to take the shame of it:
if while thou art standing before God, asking him by whom. and for what he is
provoked? if he answer, Thou art the man, for these and those things he is
provoked and offended; why, now lay thy mo^th in the d^st, reply not against
him. While the sin is laid open others, and it touches not us, as we conceive,
or at least only our natural infirmities, etc. we are well pleased; but when
our (...) come to be opened, rubbed and chafed, why then we kick, and fling,
and rage, and grow mad. Avoid this frame, and bear patiently to be laid open
and reproved.

2. If the Command laid upon you be never so cross, be ready and willing to
obey it: it may be, that which God expects may be exceeding averse, an Opinion
which thou have been long rooted and rivetted in, and dwelt upon with great
confidence; a sin which has brought thee in a great deal of profit, credit, or
the like: the thing which God commands may seem to carnal Reason unreasonable,
etc. now a proud heart will fling away; but have a care thou bring not such an
heart before the great Searcher of hearts: Come, able in some measure sincerely
to say, Speak Lord, thy Servant hears; Command me what thou will. I am ready
to obey and follow thee.

4. Begin at home in your enquiry: be sure search your own hearts in the first
place, whether the Achan, the troubler of Israel be not lodged in your own
breast. We keep a great deal of do abroad, searching, enquiring, censuring as
if we were true men to God, and resolved to (...) but we are like some
treacherous Constable, that has a Warrant to search for a Malefactor, he is
very busy and strict in his Office, searches and ransacks every house in the
Town, pries into every corner, as very desirous to find him out, and bring him
forth, and yet mean while he lies had at home in his own house: Oh! this will
never do, if thou know any sin harbored in thy heart, lie not to God by
thus enquiring, nay if thou do but suspect it, let that be enough to cause a
search: and to that end examine all thy ways and actions, and see whether they
have not been provoking to Cod. examine them thoroughly.

1. In the matter of them, see whether thou have not fallen short in many
things of the letter of the Law, committed those very sins, neglected those
very duties, which the least light of Conscience might have convinced thee to
be thy duty to be done or avoided.

2. In the Circumstance of thy actions.

1. Of time, a thing beautiful in its season: unseasonable, is ugly and
deformed: have thou taken the seasons of Christian duties? have thou spoken
against thy neighbors sins plainly to his face; privately, or not rather
behind his back, slinderously reviling him, etc.?

2. Of place or persons: David would hold his tongue in presence of the wicked;
how many times have thou failed of due consideration, when, or before thou have
thus done, or thus said.

3. In the manner of the carriage of your selves: it may be you have for the
matter attended your duty, but have you for the manner too? have not you (...)
out of your duty, and run into sin upon this account? have you not under
pretext of zeal of Gods glory, and upholding his Name and Honor, given the
reins into the neck of unruly passions, and (...) Moses spoken unadvisedly; yea
worse then he, raged, re^iled, etc.? Examine every thing, and possibly God may
discover to you more of this mischief lodged in your own heart, then ever yet
you were aware of.

Obj. But general visitations, argue a general provocation, and therefore they
argue that we (...) look ahead.

Ans. The Object on has (...) in to impair the necessity of the duty urged in
the Direction, at such a time as this: for,

1. Sometimes a private person (...) be the occasion of a general and public
Calamity: Ach (...) Israel; Israel is charged with his sin, and fly before
their (...): ^e read of nothing else that the Lord charges upon them, but
only his sin.

2. General is made up of particularly (...) particulars, and therefore may
well (...) self upon the account of public and general visitations. (...) one
should so excuse themselves, where should the sin he sound? God faith In thee
are found such, etc. Ezekiel.22. he does not there lay every particular sin upon
all, yet all these went together to make up the provocation of Gods wrath, and
procure their public Calamity.

3. Thou it may be art a private person, and therefore can do but little upon
a public account but by thy prayers; labor therefore to do the more with
thine own heart. God has not set every man in such a place, wherein he is
called to busy himself in matters of public concernment, these belong to
persons in public employment, whom we can only, assist by our prayers, or a
detection and discovery of such particular enormities as we are privy to, that
they may receive their due reward, and sin may be taken out of Israel: but we
have the more scope and opportunity to be searching our own hearts, and if we
neglect that work, we do little or nothing.

4. Thou art not fitted to look abroad, till thou have first made a thorough
work at home, Mat. 7.1 -- Thou art like to make but poor work in public
matters, whiles thou harbourest sin in thin own heart; if therefore thou have a
desire to do God service upon that account, thou had need to be more then
ordinarily careful to clear thy own accounts with God, lest thou be found
guilty of hypocrisy. It will be found the ready way to bring thy self under
inexcusable Condemnation before God, to search after and condemn those sins in
others, which thou thy self live in the daily practice of, Romans 2.1. thou
must therefore prepare thy self to this work by a thorough search of thy own
heart.

5. Particular Repentance goes before general mercies, Zech. 11.9. if God
intend good to this poor Land he will bring us to this, he will make us get
alone, and every one lay his singer upon his own sore, and mourn over our sins
wherewithal we have been provoking his Majesty: and when he has once brought
us to that, the time of his gracious visitation is near at hand; yea, that
indeed is the first great mercy, for which let us this day seek his face.

5. Reform according to thy ability, and where thou can not reform, these
mourn.

First, Reform according to thy latitude.

1. Reform thy (...) by due discipline toward it, here then can not be too
strict (...); let the search be thorough, and the reformation universal:
mortify thy lusts and corruptions, ransack and cleanse every corner of thy
heart, let none of thy Idols remain, but put them all away; resolve with
Ephraim, that thou will have no more to do with them, Hos. 14.8. and beg of God
grace that thou may stand to thy resolutions.

2. Reform others that are under thy charge, as far as thou can do thy best;
say to thy Children, as Jacob to his sons, Put away every one from among you
his strange gods; Joshua, you know, could undertake not only for himself, but
for his too, I and my house will serve the Lord: be sure to reform them as to
the outward man; you can indeed do no more, but be sure do that. Content not
your selves to give them some slighty reproofs for their sins, that was Eli's
sin, which removed his family from the Priesthood, but make use of that
authority which God has put into your hands, as occasion may require, and then
commend the success to God.

3. Pray to God that he would

(1) Give and continue an endeavor after Reformation to the Magistracy and
Ministry, and give them an advantage, and encourage them in that Work Bless God
in as much as you see their hearts toward the Work, beg of him that he would
remove all obstacles and hindrances out of the way, that there may be a
thorough and glorious Work of it. Oh be earnest with God for this, without it
we have but little hopes to see any more good days.

(2) Give a spirit of Reformation to all his people, that such a work may be
universally consented to, that we may all set our hearts and shoulders to the
Work: doubtless there is no greater good we can beg for at the hands of God at
this time.

Secondly, Where thou can do no good, there mourn: beg of God to give thee a
spirit of mourning for all the sins of the Land. We find this spirit to have
been eminent in good David, Psalm. 1. 19. 136, 158. and it is that, which (if it
tend not to the prevention of public Calamity, yet) will bring a private
blessing^ along with it, such shall not be forgotten in the day of Calamity,
but be noted for mercy, Ezekiel. 9. 4.

6. Let thy further enquiry be accompanied with amendment of what is at the
present discovered, that is the way to know more; to be faithful (...) have
now my finger upon the right Sore. (...) say indeed this is New Englands great
disease; God has begun in his Judgments to visit us, and there is a great
deal of enquiry after the Cause: Gods Ministers endeavor faithfully to
discover it, and yet still we are querists, Divine Providence speaks, and
points at many things evidently, and still we are where we were; we acknowledge
many things, and grant them to be amiss, and yet still the cry is, What Is the
reason? God is pleased to hide the reason: and why? why, men cannot see wood
for trees: if we wait for immediate Revelations, we may wait long enough, there
is no expecting of one to come from the dead to tell us. Indeed we can hardly
look any where, but we may see causes apparent.

1. Let every private person look at home, take an account with his own heart,
and he shall see enough to mend there. Out of doubt, if we deal here
ingenuously, we shall find that which may teach us to justify God, and
declare him righteous in what concerns us.

2. Look into Families, and see what disorders there are, Children rising up
against Parents, and carrying themselves disobediently, which has a dreadful
Curse denounced against it: Parents neglecting the due care of their Children,
to nurture and bring them up in the admonition of the Lord, cockering, and
making them their equals, not keeping their due distances; and too many
families without the Worship of God in them, being more like Pagan, then
Christian houses.

3. Look into Towns, and there you shall see disorders, young men despising the
aged, and carrying themselves contemptuously toward them; vanity and
profaneness abounding; a selfish spirit growing upon the most, together with a
neglect of one another good, that love which is due one to another wholly in
many neglected; Town Societies rent in pieces with disorderly Contention.

4. Look into Congregations, and there you shall see confusions; some
contending with their Ministers, and others biting and catching atone another;
some not agreeing about the setting up of the Ordinances of God among them, and
others not contented when they have them, but pulling them down again with
(...) and main; great emulations, jealousies false surmises etc. Ministers
despised, their Office questioned, their Authority cast off, and trampled upon,
their persons undervalued and vilified, their comfortable Supply and
Maintenance neglected, Ordinances not frequented with care and constancy, etc.

5. Look into (...) or Civil State, and there you (...) see the Sinews of our
(...) Society wondrously loosened: the want of Power in the Supreme
Representative Body to strengthen them, by reason of the necessary (...)
incident to a declining Popular Government; and hence arise many misbehaviours,
which time forbids to mention.

6. Look into the Body Ecclesiastical, and there you shall see Churches; some
ready to exalt themselves above the Civil Magistrate, and disowning his Civil
Power in matters appertaining to Godliness; others ready to renounce
Consociation and Communion one with another, and many the like: and yet we
still enquire; What Is the reason? Why is God displeased? Why, is all this
nothing? yes sure: why, who knows not that these are our distempers?

Obj. But there is some particular thing which must be known, and this is
either in Magistrate, or Ministers, or both: when shall you finds in Scripture
that God ever brought public Judgments on his people, but the sins of
Princes, Priests and Prophets were the causes of it, and are so declared to
have been? and therefore we must enquire yet further.

Ans. 1. This Objection is strange and impertinent, it is as if a Physician
should come to a person all over full of mortal wounds, and yet neglects them
all, and strangely cries out, There is one singular wound which I must find
out: is not this to suffer the person wilfully to perish, by letting him bleed
out his life at the known wounds, while he goes upon the discovery of one
unknown? Is not this New-Englands case, such as was once Judahs, Isa. 1 5. and
shall we yet grope as in the dark after some singular thing: I therefore fear
that this is but a fond and hypocritical excuse, to put off the edge of the
conviction of present sins, and keep up our credit too, as if we would
willingly know the mind of God. But

2. Suppose there be some singular sin: yet

First, It does not need presently terminate upon the Magistracy and Ministry,
though wherein they may be wanting in their places, the Lord give them to see
and reform it, but it is not my work to scandalize those who cannot hear me
speak: yet I say the sin is not needfully theirs. But

1. It may be universal, a spreading and overrunning distemper. It is true
indeed, God sometimes speaks to these, For your sakes they shall go into
captivity; but if we be wise and compare Scripture, we shall elsewhere hear God
saying, My people would have it so; there is a concurrence, a delight in it.

2. (...) form, but we will not be reformed: our (...) Government both in
Church and Commonwealth, is partly (...) whose corruption and degeneracy being
Anarchy, the guilt of the errors of Administration fall upon the people,
especial it persons in Office and Place do their endeavor to rectify and
at^end them, but are overpowered; nay, though they attain an outward
Reformation, yet there may remain the guilt of that sin unrepented of upon a
Land, which God will not forget, but (though he may delay for a while) will
find out a time to call to reckoning. Josiah was the greatest Reformer in
Judah that ever was, yet though there were peace in his time. Read 2 Kings 22.
25: and 23. 25, 26.

3. Consider (though I speak not to excuse sin in any, where they may be guilty
before God) yet consider why has God lately taken away so many of his precious
Servants in the Ministry, it is not to their damage or wrong, they are gone to
their rest, have left a sinful and sorrowful world, to be invested with a Crown
of Glory, and to be with Christ, which is best: but we are bereaved, the Lights
are put out of our Candlesticks; they were despised here, and they are now
received to honor and glory: and this may call us to solemn consideration.
Consider Isa. 57. 1 --

Secondly, Be it a singular sin, and let it center where it will, it seems we
are to seek about it; It tell you, the way to know it, is to reform what we do
know. God reveals himself by degrees to a people according to their
improvement. God has told us of these and those things; why should he discover
any more, since we mend not, but make so ill use of what he has discovered.
Let me tell you, and I can assure you of it to be a truth, prove it, and you
shall have experience of it, If we repent from our hearts of our known sins,
God will either remove the stroke off from us, or further discover what is
provoking to him.

Return, come.] Verba festinantes. The words

1. Contain a general duty: this duty is a serious Repentance, implied in both
words put together. Return. Esau went out from the Church, desoised the
Privileges of it, his Posterity, here is called upon to come back again. Come;
i. e. Come to God, to him from whom you went away in that Apostasy: which two
are true Repentance; A turning away from sin, a going to God.

2. They (...) both wor^s (...); Forsake sin, and (...) God, this is a whole
work.

(...) Repentance, Return, come. God is at a word with them, if they (...) then
make haste. Hence, to sum up all in one, observe this

Doct. When God begins to visit a sinning people for their sins, be expects a
thorough and (...) Repentance.

1. God now expects Repentance: he promises himself such an effect, Isa. 26 9.
hence he calls for it, Jer. 26. 12, 13.

2. God expects a thorough Repentance, it is no halving of it with God, when
once he has taken the rod into his hand, Jer. 4. 1.

3. God expects a speedy Repentance, God is in haste, and so must we, ibid.

Reas. 1. Of the the first; From Gods merciful Nature, who had rather sinners
should repent and live, Ezekiel. 36. 11. he had rather spare then destroy, but it
must be so as his Honor may not be wronged, which is near and precious to him,
and therefore it must be by giving glory to him in a way of Repentance. Hence
God when he ha^^ begun, uses delays, and moves slowly in bringing his
Judgments.

Reas. 2. Of the second; Because partial Repentance is but a mockery: We owe
God all, and therefore in every thing wherein we have offended him, we ought to
repent and return, and seek to make it up. He that does not repent seriously of
every sin, does not repent truly of any sin; he that does not return unto God,
does not in truth turn away from his sin: a half repentance therefore is no
repentance at all.

Reas. 3. Of the third:

1. Because this is the last means, and therefore if this do it not, what hopes
are there remaining of such a peoples Reformation. God takes not the Rod in his
hand till he be enforced to it, Lam. 3. 37. he uses all other means first,
Convictions, Reproofs, Warnings, Threatenings, and waits to see if these will
not reach his ends, and work repentance; when all these fail then he begins to
afflict a people: now if this will not effect it, nothing will, such a people
are beyond hopes obstinate in rebellion, whom Judgments will not awaken to
repentance, and therefore, God has little encouragement to use any long
delays with such a people.

2. Because God delays till he be indeed provoked, and therefore there is need
to make haste. God in this exalts his Patience to wait a long time upon a
rebellious people, but if Patience be worn out, we had need have a care now to
our selves, Isa. 27. 4.

Use. Here we see what is our work to day: God has begun and made an entrance,
and has been bringing of us on to a stage of Judgments, I need not mention
the particulars wherein his hand has been out against us. Here you see what
God expects at our hands.

First, He must have Repentance, if you come not to this you do nothing; if you
only confess, it is but half a Fast, you must forsake too.

1. God will be owned to be just, in the most retired thoughts of your hearts,
he cannot bear it to be found fault withal, or be thought to do any (...), he
will have you to acknowledge, that in all (...) has done, he is righteous.

2. Hence you must see your sins, your many provocations, your
Covenant-breakings, and your particular enormities, you cannot else justify
God aright, for that is only done by a sight of sin in its being, its
hainousness and guilt.

3. God punishment for sin, hence therefore you must forsake them, you must
part with those sins which have parted between God and you: Gods holiness will
keep him at a distance from you, so long as you keep your sins, and do not
willingly part with them: he cannot love you, till you hate your sins.

Secondly, He must have a thorough Repentance.

1. You must repent of all your sins, that is, all universally, and all
particularly, as he comes to discover them to you, you must be sure hide none
under your tongue, spare none, but bring them all forth, and confess them
before God; the least sin reserved, will keep you at a distance from God.

2. You must amend your ways, you must live a new life, take cut a new lesson
and learn to practice it; you must live no longer after the old ^ort, you must
not now go out of Gods presence, and do as bad as ever you did, God will not
endure such halving with him.

3. You must cleave to God with your whole heart, and not fit loose (...) have
heretofore done, you must not have your (...) and on's. sometimes you are for
God and his service, and sometimes offended in him, God will have you take up
your firm resolution, to be for him, and for no other.

Thirdly, He must have a speedy Repentance, you have (...) with (...) him (...)
sent to you by his Messengers many a time (...) your (...) but now he (...) he
will not be played with (...) you intend to repent, set about (...) you go
(...) week, you have (...) and (...) broken all Convenants, now there (...)
must see it (...) and you must not (...) any delays. God (...) he has (...)
already. But if you will (...) God has mercy in (...) for you, and you shall
be (...) to take of it. If New-Englands sin, become New-Englands ruin, which
God in his rich mercy prevent, yet then shall you have a mark of (...): But if
you yet resolve to delay, and (...) God off expect swift and sudden ruin, you
have tasted of the (...), but God has (...) heavy plagues in store, expect to
go captive with the (...) captive, to be (...) with the first that are slain by
by the sword, to be (...) with the first that perish with hunger: But repent,
and God is merciful, the sword of his wrath shall return into its sheath, there
is yet hope in Israel concerning this thing, but you must make haste. Oh! come
with speed, left repentance come too late.

FINIS.

