EYE SALVE, Or A WATCHWORD From our Lord Jesus Christ unto his Church
Especially those within the Colony of the MASSACHUSETTS In NEW ENGLAND, To take
heed of Apostasy: OR.

A Treatise of Remembrance of what God has been to us, as also what we ought,
and what we ought not to be to him, as we desire the prolonging of our
Prosperous Days in the Land which the Lord our God has given us.

By Thomas Shepard, Teacher of the Church of Christ in Charlstown; Who was
appointed by the Magistrates, to Preach on the day of ELECTION at Boston, May
15. 1672..

Deuteronomy. 8 10, etc. When thou have Eaten, and art full, then thou shall Bless the
Lord thy God, for the good Land which he has given thee: Beware that thou
forget not the Lord thy God in not keeping his Commandments, etc. -- Lest when
thou have eaten and art full -- thine Heart be lifted up, and thou forget the
Lord thy God.

Chap 5.32, 33. Ye shall observe to do therefore as the Lord your God has
commanded you: you shall not turn aside to the right hand or to the left, you
shall walk in all the ways which the Lord your God has Commanded you, that ye
may live, and that it may be well with you, and that ye may Prolong your days
in the Land which ye shall possess.

Cambridge Printed by Samuel Green. 1673.

That Spirit of Zeal for Gods Glory, with a Compassionate Desire of, and Care
for the Recovery and Prosperity of Sick People, which visibly runs through
the whole of this Treatise; has encouraged us to Commend it to the Perusal and
Pious Improvement of all Sober-minded, and well-affected Christians, into whose
hands it may come: Heartily wishing it may prove as Profitable, as we judge it
Seasonable. We willingly add*

Imprimatur John Sherman.
Imprimatur Urian Oaks.

Christian Reader.
THe prosperity of the state and Church* (...) souls lies nearest the hearts of
all to whom (...) dear in the World: But especially those (...) men whom God
has set upon their walls. (...) is as Religion is, either flourishing or
dying. That a place is JE^^^VAH SHAMMAH, and a land IMMANUEL'S, speaks (...)
their privilege and duty. Their Obligation to walk with God, and the^e
salvation in so walking. This made Moses, Joshua, Samuel, David, and other
faithful Shepherds so solemnly charge Israel to abide with God when they could
no longer abide with Israel. Hence rose Peter's resolution as long as he abode
in his Tabernacle to put them always in remembrance, though they were
established in the present truth. The sacred Assemblies at our Elections
presents New-Englands representatives, as sometimes Isreal's before Joshuah,
yea, before the Lord: Hence stirs up from the same spirit in all the faithful
messengers of Christ to whom on such days the door of opportunity and utterance
is opened, an earnest desire to leave their solemn testimony for Gods Glory and
this peoples good; Such is this Sermon now in thine hand: Therefore the more
diligently to be attended by all that unfeignedly love our Lord Jesus, their
souls, families Churches, and this Colony. Though the Prophets dye, yet such
words will live to take hold of those that will not hear, as they did of
Israel. It Is an observation worth observing, Isreal's liberty from Egypt began
with the meeting and kissing of Moses and Aaron in the mount of God, and the
peoples obedience: Their bondage to Babylon entered by their attention to
prophets of their own and their non subjection to the prophets of God. 2 Chronicles.
36.12, 15, 16. Hence that pathetical exclamation, Oh that my people had
hearkened! Isa. 48.18, 19. Its not the least of our wilderness mercies, That
from the beginning we have seen this union. Our good God has neither suffered
our teachers to be driven into corners, nor left them to run altogether in vain
by shutting the door of faith where he has opened the door of utterance. This
short testimony given forth by this watchful shepherd in so solemn an assembly
from the Lord, there is another trial whether the same faith and faithfulness,
which dwelt in our fathers in the first times of these plantations dwell in us,
also their children. That God has continued us yet in the mount of Gospel
liberties, is through his grace out of Question. The spirit of Union, and the
spirit of subjection to Gods order is most to be enquired after. Well! this is
our present Test. This Sermon proceeded from the Urim and Thummim which our
Lord Jesus has put into the breast plate or heart of the speaker, that is
faith and love: may it me^t with the same spirit in the heart of the hearer, it
will certainly prosper, and evidence our due attention to the voice of Nehemiah
upon the walls; and our real acknowledgement of New-Englands true interest not
to ly, and so the continued firmness of the tenor whereby we hold our precious
and pleasant things. Do we therefore O generation, see the word of the Lord,
its preciousness, the glory of the New Testament Ministry? Do we see the
matchless splendor, beauty, brightness of the Sun of righteousness shining in
the heavenly glass of Gospel-ministrations and Divine Institutions? Has this
convinced us of the sinfulness of sin, especially of unbelief and the want of
love? Has this convinced us of the goodness of Gods ways, and our necessity to
sell all for the pearl? Have we by it seen an end of all wordly perfections, so
as to hate our very lives for Christ, yea, for his people, truth and ways? Does
it indeed make us to abhor all evil, and embrace in love all ways and means
appointed by God to keep us from it? Then, if these things be so in truth, this
Word will be precious to us. Oh N. E. Christians know your day, your trial, the
presence, the voice of the Lord: That the dreadful woe of Corazin and Bethsaida
fall not upon us for contempt, neglect, ^^oath, unprofitableness. Bethink we our
selves, Apost^cy comes not with observation: we slide back by degrees
insensible. Where is then thy first love, holiness, zeal that could not bear
with them that are evil? Is not the zeal of love abated to God, Christ,
brethren, truths, order, ordinance? Where is brotherly watch, tenderness,
kindness, bowels of mercies, forgiveness? Are these to be found as in the first
times? If not, Its high time to hear these Divine expostulations; to remember
whence we are fallen, to repent and do our first works. Behold Christ calls,
Its the voice of thy beloved that now stands at thy door and knocks, full of
yearnings of b^wels toward thee, He knows not how to give thee up and make
thee li^e former Examples of his fierce indignation, Oh let our souls open to
him that knocks. Be we not stiff-necked and rebellious, Be we not Lords that
will no more come unto him.

Make haste, return, come unto thy God who is thy strength and glory. Thou
shall be a happy people, O N. E. as long as thou art an obedient people, and
thine Enemies shall be found liars unto thee. That the Lord may effectually
work to establish what we have, and make up what is wanting to us, by hi^
blessing on this and all other such like Testimonies given to his truth among
us is the prayer of

Your Brother and Servant in the Lord, Thomas Thacher.

JEREMIAH. 2.31. O generation, see ye the Word of the Lord: have I been a
wilderness unto Israel? a land of darkness? wherefore say my people, We are
Lords, we will come no more unto thee.
FOr the time of Ieremiahs prophesying it is declared in Chap. 1.2, 3.
Commencing in a manner with the time of that happy reformation of Gods worship,
begun by good Josiah* from the Idolatry and abominations found then in the
Church of God: which will appear by comparing that key of the whole prophecy
with 2 Chronicles. 34.3. that holy and blessed King being (it is like) encouraged
thereunto in a degree, by this great prophet of the Lord. Thus is Religion ever
best established, and flourishes when there is a concurrence of the Magistracy
and Ministry together to promote the true worship of God, and to suppress what
is contrary thereunto.

These words contain the Lords solemn and affectionate expostulation with his
people, both as to the equity and goodness of his way toward them, and the
Iniquity and Perverseness of their ways toward himself; wherein the Lord
labors to recover the degenerating backsliding people, showing, (1) What he
had been to them, viz. not a Wilderness, nor a Land of darkness. (2) What
returns they had made unto the Lord, viz. Wherefore say my People, etc.
Particularly observe: 1. The Compellation which is used, i. e. [O Generation.]
2. The attention which the Lord calls for from them, to what he had to propound
to them, i. e. [Se(...)e the Word of the Lord] 3. Parts of Gods Expostulation,
or the thing which the Lord* would Expostulate with them about, viz. Have I
been a Wilderness, etc. and wherefore do my People say* etc. wherein we may
take notice of these two things:

1. The Lords Vindication and Acquittance of himself from all blame [ Have I
been a Wilderness, etc.] q. d. I have not been so unto them.

2. The Lords Crimination of Israel, or his Expostulatory Indictment and Charge
drawn up against this People by the Lord himself, propounded by way of Query,
i. e. wherefore say my People, etc.

Explication.
[ O Generation] This word is sometimes taken for some certain sort or company
of men whatsoever, Prove. 30.11, 12, 13. sometimes it has respect to a Nation
springing from such and such Ancestors, Judge. 2.10. and so in our Text; it
betokens the persons in such an age succeeding their Fathers, who were in
Jeremiahs time upon the stage of Action, Eccles. 1.4. One Generation passes
away and another Generation comes, but the Earth (the great stage of Action,
upon which all Generations are to act their part) abides for ever: and so
these in our Text were to endure and continue so long as until they had done
the work of their Generations: and it is here also a degenerating Generation
that is taxed (as Calvin notes) q. d. into what times are we fallen! what an
age is this we live in! well, be it what it will be, yet O Generation hear! it
was a strange generation that he is sent to speak unto, however he has
something to say to them.

See the Word of the Lord, [DO YOU SEE] Emphatically does the Lord (as it were)
point to them so and so circumstanced, as springing from such and such
Ancestors do you see? q. d. you your selves being Judges may consider this
matter: See ye the Word of the Lord, or this Matter (for so the Nown is
sometimes rendered) that which the Lord had to propound to them for their
Observation, and the word for [ Seeing] imports plain discerning, clearly,
curiously, and exactly to see and regard a thing: it is rendered to regard,
Psalm. 66.18. and to consider, Eccles. 7.14. so verba sensus, etc. and see the
Word of the Lord, as he had spoken by his Servants, viz. That if his People
would but cleave to him, O how he would bless them! thus see how the Lord has
made that good, fulfilling with his hand what he spoke with his mouth, 1 King.
8. and not one thing has failed says Joshua, Chap. 23.14. of all the good the
which the Lord your God spoke concerning you, see this Word of the Lord in our
Text, consider it, and remember what I say, do but open your eyes and you may
behold the truth of what I am now putting you in mind of: q. d. look over your
experiences; mark the many signal, undeniable demonstrations of my being to you
not a wilderness, nor etc.

[ Have I been a wilderness to Israel?] by Israel is meant the People of God in
Covenant with him, his peculiar people: and this Question is to be understood
in way of a strong Negation: the Lord had not been so to them, and the Lord so
speaks as putting it to them themselves to be judge in the case: have I been
so? do you consult your own experience, and let that make the answer, and the
true answer must be, that assuredly I have not been a Wilderness to Israel; yet
the expression does imply or import at least their tacit and practical
accusation of the Lord that he had been so to them; and if they speak not so in
Words, yet the Language of their hearts (which the Lord knew) and of their way
(which others might observe) did betoken as much, and therefore the Lord here
goes about to vindicate himself from such charge of any ungodly, unthankful
murmurers in the Congregation of Israel: the Words are Metaphorical; Have I
been a wilderness to Israel? i. e. have I been that to my People which a
Wilderness is unto men that are made to wilder therein, where they meet with
nothing but wants, and terror, and woe, etc. and it may seem to allude to the
state and condition of the Children of Israel in the Wilderness, of which there
is speech, Deuteronomy. 8.2, 15. where the Lord led them forty years to humble them
and to prove them, etc called the great and terrible wilderness, where were
fiery Serpents, and Scorpions, and Drought, etc. called moreover, a waste
howling wilderness. chap. 32.10* and Jer. 2.6. described to be, a Land of
Deserts, and Pits, a Land of Drought and of the Shadow of Death, a Land that no
man passed through, and where no man dwelt, and contradistinguished from the
Land spoken of, ver. 7. a pleasant and a fruitful Land: There are these five
things which we may consider of in a Wilderness,

1. A Wilderness notes a desolate, solitary place, without Inhabitant, and
where there is nothing but confusion and disorder, Ier. 12 10. they have made
my pleasant portion a desolate wilderness: there is no man passing through, no
man dwelling there, but it is deserted and forsaken of men, without that society
and communion there that might elsewhere be comfortably enjoyed: thus said the
Lord, have I been so to you? ^ave I left you alone without granting to you the
beauties of holiness, and that comely order of thy Tents O Israel, and of thy
Tabernacles O Jacob! have you not had my presence with you, and my company that
might be instead of all to you?

2. A Wilderness speaks a place uncultivated, a condition destitute of many
necessary comforts, as aforesaid, there^s suffering hunger and thirst, Psalm.
107.4, 5. the Wilderness is not only a solitary way where no City is to dwell
in, but they want meat and drink, and their soul faints within them, now have I
been so to you, said the Lord! have I suffered you to want? as to outward
bodily ^ood? have not I provided for you? the Lord fed his people in the
Wilderness with Manna, bread from Heaven; and so likewise as to spiritual
provision, and refreshing, have you found me streight-handed to you therein?
when Judah is removed away for their incorrigibleness in their sin to Babylon
from the Sanctuary of God, because of their Sanctuary sins, we find that
called a Wilderness, Ezekiel. 19.13 Now she is planted in the Wilderness, in a dry
and thirsty ground; so was Babylon to the People of Judah, without spiritual
food for their souls, and they otherwise in great straits: Have I then (said
the Lord) been as a barren Land to you, as an untill^d and a fruitless soil,
that brings fo^th nothing to those that come there for satisfaction or for
their refreshing? have I been such, and so as that you could not find a living
with me? or as though it were more profitable to have served other Gods?

3. In a Wilderness there is not a beaten path; whence it is that men there are
in danger to be lost, and are made to wander about for want of a way before
them wherein they might travail: context, v. 6. it is said to be a Land that no
man passed through, and so here was no beaten road or plain path before them;
have I been thus to you said the Lord? have I not made your way plain before
you at all times, and passable, so that you have had direction and conduct from
me? have not I led you in the right way? Psalm. 107.7. have you been at a loss
at any time, and I not near at hand to direct and counsel you? etc. have you
not heard a voice, as Ier. 30.21. saying, this is the way, when you have been
ready to turn aside to the right hand or to the left?

4. Again, in a wilderness there is not only want of many comforts, but there
is danger as to many positive evils which such are exposed unto: Hence in the
Scriptures before mentioned, the wilderness is said to be a land of pits and
fiery serpents; when Christ is in the wilderness he is among the wild beasts.
Mark 1.13. and there (...) of the wilderness, Judges 8.7. they that are in a
wilderness (...) may look to suffer much: and thus it becomes a place of
temptation* Christ is therefore led into the wilderness to be tempted: Math.
4.1. thus (may the Lord say) have I been as a wilderness, to sting and vex you?
to entrap you, to terrify you and tear you in pieces? Have not I rather freed
you from many temptations, and delivered you from the snares that many times
have been laid for you by others? have I been as a waste howling wilderness, or
as a devouring grave and pit of destruction to you?

5. A wilderness is not hedged in, nor fenced about; what is in the wilderness
has no defense, but lies open to the injury of those that will break in to
Bark the Trees thereof, and root up the same; the wilderness is no Enclosure,
have I then been so to you? have I left you without defense, without an hedge
of protection? have you not been as an enclosed garden to me, and I a wall of
fire round about you? have not I given you those walls, such Defenders,
Leaders, Instruments of safety, whereby you have been hedged about, walled in,
and secured?

In sum, have I been unto you as such a place of terrors, and sorrows, and
misery? a place which all men would fly from and deprecate? no, the Lord had
not been so to them: yea, per Meiosin, hereby is meant that the Lord had been
their glory by his presence, and a fountain of living waters to them* and their
salvation, however they had forsaken him:

A land of darkness] darkness betokens the privation of light: it is diverse
times in Scripture taken for trouble, ignorance, sorrow, and (in a word) all
woeful evil, Joel 2.2. a day of darkness and gloominess, which latter word is
of the same derivation with this in our text: so, Eccles. 11.8. and see Matthew.
4.16. the word in our text according to the notation of it is thought to
signify strictly such darkness as is in an immediate and extraordinary manner
sent from God, even most horrid darkness ( terra caliginis maximae, compositum
cum nomine divino [Jah] augendae significationis causa. Buxtorf. in nomen ipsum
[maph^ljah,] such darkness as was that plague of darkness to Egypt, Exodus
10.22. when as the children of Israel had light in their dwellings ver. 23.
where the noune of the same Original (and the same in a manner with this in our
text) is used [ there was thick darkness in the land of Egypt three daies]
strictly [ the darkness of darkness] which latter word there used is also of
the same original with that in Josh. 24.7. rendered [darkness] and being a
rehearsal of that other darkness which God did put between the Israelites, and
the Egyptians at the red Sea, on the night of their redemption from thence, the
story whereof we have set down in Exodus 14.20. the same pillar of providence is
a cloud of darkness to the Egyptians, but a beam of light unto Israel for their
direction, guidance, protection and refreshing, or the phrase [ a land of
darkness] in our text, may allude to places where the light of the Sun, and the
sweet influences thereof come not to warm, and cherish, and sweeten, and
fructify the soil, but it remains cold, and damp, and sour and barren, and
unfit for habitation for man: and so is the grave set forth, Job 10. ult. said
to be a land of darkn^ss as [ Darkness] it self, etc. and where the light is as
[darkness:] Thus here might the Lord say, have I been a land of darkness? i. e.
as such a land of darkness aforesaid would be to a people coming thereinto,
where there is nothing but terror, and sorrow and horror, and woe? no light of
comfort, and refreshing? without the shining influences of blessing and favor?
But therefore (on the other side) the Lord had been to them as a land of light,
as a Goshen to them; he gave them fruitful seasons filling their hearts with
food and gladness: granting them also spiritual light, and the means thereof in
one respect and in the other; prophets, and the schools of the prophets, etc.
and as darkness is used metaphorically (as above said) so is light put for joy,
and prosperity, Est. 8.16. the Jews had light, and gladness, and joy, and
honor. Psa. 97.11. light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the
upright in heart: the Lord had not locked up his beams the heavenly influences
of his bounty and goodwill to them: and it is as if the Lord had said; look
back, and observe the way you have been by me led in; it has not been my
delight to see you under any cloud of trouble and fear, etc. while you have
hearkened to me it has been well with you: and your troubles and darkness, etc.
have met you when you have gone out of the way, and left the good old paths,
etc So is the Lord to his people, and has been to us in this wilderness, he
has not been a wilderness to us, or a land of darkness, but has granted to us
light and salvation: there has been the light of the Gospel, the light of the
ministry of the word: the light of his countenance has been shining upon his
people, respecting Leaders in the Commonwealth that have been guides, and
eyes, and light to us in this good land: and there has been the light of
Schools set up for the instruction of the rising generation, Am. 2.10.11. etc.
and therefore in these respects we may say the Lord has not been a land of
darkness to us: the College (that School of the prophets) has been a means
under God to continue the lamps l^ghted among us, even the (...) for the
Sanctuary, and that not here only but also in other parts of the world.

[ Wherefore say my people we are Lords] here in these words the defection and
revolt of the people of God, from the Lord is described: the word in the Hebrew
for [ therefore] comes from a verb which signifies [ to know] and it is as if
the Lord should say, I would fain know what the reason is: let me know the
cause why my people say thus! [ we are Lords] in the Margent it is we have
Dominion; so is the word also rendered in Genesis 27.40. i. e. after thou have
dominion, thou will break his yoke from off thy neck: and truly thus was it
with this people, when they gat power, having dominion over these and those,
now they break off the Lord, yoke, and revolt from him, and therefore say (as
it follows) we will come no more at thee: [RUD] [ firmus fuit, innixut est
firmiter, vires acquisivit, firmatus est, dominatus est] Avenarius) they
thought they had strength, and were so firmly settled with a Rod or Scepter of
power and sovereignty, that they needed not the Lord any more: though indeed
they had received all from God: he had put upon them their ornaments, Ezekiel.
16.11, 12, 13. yet as if they had not received any such thing from the hand of
God, they now despise the Lord, and in the pride and height of their spirits
swell, and grow secure and lofty, and cast off the fear of God: We have Kings
and Princes, and Civil power and dignity, and therefore have no need of thee to
be our Lord any longer, to be under his command, and so as to observe his
order, and keep the old Rode; but as 1 Samuel 8.7. Ier. 6.16. And we have power,
and the Kingdom is settled in our hands: and we have things at command, we have
peace and liberty, and are full, and in prosperity; and thus through their
self-confidence and carnal Interests they are ready to look at themselves as
absolute Lords, and so Independent: and we are from under thy authority; and
are at our liberty: and we will have our liberty, are Lords of our own actions:
and who may call us to an account; and we have dominion, and power as to others
also our allies, in league and covenant with others, so that we are strong
enough, etc. And this question implies the unreasonableness of their Revolt
from the Lord: wherefore etc. q. d. there can be no reason rendered for it, why
they should thus forsake the Lord, and the good way which he has led them in,
and choose any other way; Context ver. 33. and 36.

[ We will come no more unto thee] they had made a defection from God, and now
would not return to him: q. d. we have such strength, and (...) Government so
well settled in our hand that their's no danger, and we need not any thing that
the Lord can do or say in (...) case: as though they might now choose what God
they would, a spirit of whoredom in them in revolting from the Lord: they
thought they could stand alone, and subsist of themselves; and they are
unwilling to return to the Lord, but keep their distance from him: so
unreasonably bent were they to fall off from the Lord, as the Question implies,
and this after trial had of the Lord who had not been a wilderness, or etc. but
the contrary; this greatly aggravates the sin, and so will increase the
judgment of such a people as that was.

Doct. That the undeniable experience which the Vovenant People of God have had
of the Lords being to them not a wilderness nor a land of Darkness, but the
contrary, should caution them never to incur the guilt of so unreasonable a
sin and dangerous folly, and provocation as to revolt from under the Lord, or
to be unwilling to return again in case they have begun to decline from him.
Mi. 6.3, 4. Isa. 1, 2, -- 5. Ier. 2.2, -- 13. a people once glad to enjoy God,
though in a Wilderness state, yet it is often seen that their affections toward
God alter with the change of their Wilderness into a fruitful Field, Deuteronomy.
32.10 -- 15. Jesurun waxing fat with the Wine, and the Milk, and Honey, etc.
kicketh against God, forsakes him, etc. and becomes a very froward Generation,
ver. 20. Jer. 8.4, 5, 6, 7 The Lords acquitting himself (therefore) in his
Expostulations with his Covenant people, and that according to their
unquestionable experience of his being unto them not a Wilderness, etc. should
caution them from revolting from under the Lord (from casting off their
subjection to the Government of God as their Lord and King) from declining unto
the affecting of a self-sufficiency, and a self-soveraignty,

R. 1. I might Argue by an Induction of Particulars, whereby the eminency of
the Lords being such an one as the Doctrine speaks him to be unto his People
will appear, whereby our minds may be induced to assent unto that general truth
propounded in the Doctrine: but, see Psalm. 68.78.81, 105, 106, etc. Deuteronomy. 8.2.
etc.

R. 2. From the nature of this experience, being a collection and improvement
of many Observations whereby the Lord has been sensibly discovering and
clearing up his alsufficiency unto his people in order to their happiness: he
has not left himself without witness, but given them many Examples, and such
instances of his being All in All to his people, as whence they must needs
(except they go (...) all sense and reason) cleave to him, and judge it a great
wickedness to depart from him; the Scripture is furnished with many Histories
of the observation of Gods People in their time this way, and the changes of
providence in our own Generation will supply us with more, so that now if
experience, which is wont to be the Mistress even of Fools, will not teach and
caution these we are speaking of, it argues wonderful sottishness indeed; and
for such a People to cast off the Lord, to say [ we are Lords and will come
no more at thee] after that they have tried him (and so which this experience
speaks, that they have found upon trial the Lord to be a most blessed God to
them: if now) they reject him, they do him double dishonor, and an unspeakable
vileness it is, which they should tremble at the thought of incurring the guilt
of.

R. 3 From the excellency of Israel's God above all other Gods of the Nations,
which gods yet these Nations will not ordinarily reject: so that thus to cast
off the Lord is that which is condemned by the very common Principles of such
Nations in their way, though erring in respect of the right object of their
devotion, Context ver. 10, 11. the Nations change not their Religion received
from their Fathers, they will not part with their Gods though they be such as
cannot save them in the day of their distress, they being Dunghill Gods; but the
God of Israel is the true God, and our Fathers God (as the Covenant Relation
speaks) and therefore we should never cast him off, Prove. 27.10. our Fathers
Friend, etc. Hence Micah 4, 5.

R. 4. From the Covenant Relation and Obligation of such a People unto God, to
cleave for ever unto him: as the Lord on his part by performing his promise,
fulfils his Covenant relation to them, and so gives them experience of his
being no Wilderness or Land of Darkness to his People, so the consideration of
the Covenant on their part super-added to that experience of the Lords
faithfulness and goodness to them, which they have had, should be such a
caution to them as the Doctrine intimates: Hence we are to put an Emphasis upon
those words in the Text [ My People] wherefore say my People, etc. q. d. this
will be contrary to those solemn engagements whereby they have bound themselves
to me for ever to fear me and love me, etc. therefore in context, ver. 2. the
Lord puts them in mind of their espousals to him: and hence also vide Calvinum
in ver. 20. and c.

R. 5. From the certainty and extremity of the woe of such a People Observe the
reading of the two next Pages, they being mis-placed.
as shall so east off the Lord: wrath comes on them to the uttermost: there is
no hiding their sin from God, Ier 2.22. nor any avoiding the Judgment of God,
whatever ca^nal confidences they have for their immunity therefrom, Ier. 2.
ult. the Lord will reject all such confidences: and v. 35, 36 so v. 14, 15. q.
d. you were not in such a slavish condition under my Government, but had
liberty, and honor, and prosperity, etc. but now, O, etc and whence is that?
see ver. 17 so Deuteronomy 28.15., and Levit: 26.13. etc.

R. 6. (And in special referring to the last branch of the Doctrine) Because of
the wonderful unparalel grace of God to re-entertain unto favor penitent ones
that do return to him, notwithstanding their greatest backslidings: this is
abundantly discovered in the third Chapter of this Prophecy, ver. 1, 4, 12,
14, 19.22. etc.

Use. 1. Hence the People of God should not suffer their Experiences of the
Lords being to them not a Wilderness or a Land of Darkness in this good Land
which he has given them to dye and perish with them, but ought to preserve and
improve them for this end, that they might be kept thereby from casting off
their subjection and obedience unto the Lord their God; Psalm 106.12, 13. they
did not so religiously retain the memorial of the Lords doings as they should:
and as Mat. 16.9. so are we apt to forget wonders of mercy. Hence the Lord
appointed those Stones and Pillars of memorial, Josh. 4.7. etc. consider we
then the Lords doings, respecting the way, and means, and instruments, and
method of Providence, etc. according to which the Lord has acquitted himself,
as in our Text, to have been unto us, even unto us not a Wilderness, nor, etc

And here I may improve those particulars mentioned in the Explication: 1. As
to the Lords establishing his People in a way of Order and Communion
Civil by Charter. Laws and Constitutions.
Ecclesiastical as to Churches singly in each congregation, jointly in Council

the Lord has herein molded and formed us to such a consistency therein, as
both friends and enemies have wondered at. The Lord has not left things to a
Wilderness confusion, but there has been that beauty of order which he has
stamped on this People respecting the Doctrine, and way of Worship here
professed, and in the due subordination of Superiors, and Inferiors, and
fellowship of the servants of God together in the Lord: That order and
fellowship in the Gospel, and communion, both with the Lord and one another; O
how sweet has that Communion of Saints been! the Lord has made his People to
be as a (...) that is compact together, as Psalm. 122.3, 4. and so have not been
left to be as a Wilderness wherein no man dwells, or as the Land of Darkness,
Job. 10. ult. where no order is; but here the Lord has set up his Tabernacle,
and that where the Devil has been sometime openly and publicly worshipped
etc, he has spirited his Servants here to associate together according to his
order, with a desire to observe all the Ordinances of the Lord Jesus, and to
reject the mixtures of humane inventions in the Worship of God, contrary to the
second Commandment: the Lord filled his Servants with a zeal for the House of
God (in all the forms and ordinances thereof, as Ezekiel. 43.10, 11, 12.) such a
zeal had Christ, Ioh. 2.17. the zeal whereof did even eat him up; and it was
Phineas his zeal which did quench the fire of Gods wrath that began to burn
against Israel, and so, on the contrary, our coldness, our luke-warmness, will
kindle the fire of his displeasure. Hence also was it the care which God put
into the hearts of the first Generation that planted this Wilderness (that so
this land might not be a land of darkness and wilderness, as aforesaid) to
p^ovide Nurseries for Church and Commonwealth, in their ordering Schools of
Learning, and in particular the College; whence it may be said of our
New England Cambridge also, as of old, Hinc lucem, and p^cula sacra! whereby
light and refreshing (as from a Fountain of Blessing) might be communicated to
the whole land, by a constant supply of a godly, learned Magistracy and
Ministry (persons fitted for public service both in Church and Commonwealth)
and we have had experience of the blessing of God upon that endeavor: and O
let no hand therefore be suffered to lay the Axe of destruction to the root of
that Tree, by any direct or indirect means, or to draw away those influences
from above or beneath, which tend to its flourishing and increasing!

2. As to the Provision which the Lord has made for his People of Food and
Comforts for Soul and Body; he has turned a Wilderness into a fruitful field,
which we have admirable experience of also: has he not liberally provided for
us, to encourage us in his service? the Lord has opened his good hand, and
given us bountifully as to outward blessings, in so much that we have been able
to relieve and support other Plantations of the English in other parts of the
World, and have had the blessings of peace, while others have been wasted with
War; and liberty to be holy without restraint from man, and as 2 Samuel 7.9, 10.
so may I turn it as to New England, God has given it a name like the name of
the great Nations of the Earth; and has planted his people in a place of their
own, and in the place which he has chosen for them, to set his name in: and
though some came hither but with their staff as Jacob, yet are they now become
many bands; and God has sown the land up and down abundantly with the seed of
man and beast: he has blessed the bread and water of his people, and has unto
wonderment diverse times cast in supplies of food and clothing, in the first
planting of this wilderness by his people, which things are not to be
forgotten; the Lord has not left himself without witness, but has given us
rain from Heaven, etc. as Acts 14.17.

3. As to Direction; making the way of his people plain before them: they have
not been left to such a wilderness state as wherein to find no path beaten out
for them, but the Lord himself has been leading them in a plain path when they
have had many observers; being to them for a glorious conduct, even as by a
Pillar of fire and cloud has he showed them the way: Hence it is that God also
has given to his people those that might be as eyes to them in the wilderness.
Numb. 10.31. persons eminently furnished with his spirit, to be instrumental of
the prosperity of this place respecting the civil and Church State: not only
Artificers mechannical (and it is well if their skill dye not with them, for
want of those that should have been instructed as apprentices under them) the
Lord sowed this land at first with such precious seed-corn, as was picked out of
our whole Nation: and not only so, but also men that have been accomplished to
move in an higher sphere, in whom much of the spirit of God has dwelt,
wise-hearted for the erecting of the Tabernacle of God. Exodus 31.3, 4, 5, 6.
filled with wisdom and heavenly skill for government, etc. such holy ones as
have had an excellent portion of that divine Vrim and Thummim; whereby this
land has been preserved from being turned again to a land of darkness: 'twas
part of Hezekiah's complaint in 2 Chronicles. 29.7. that in the time of Ahaz his
Father they had put out the Lamps of the Sanctuary (and what follows but
darkness in the Sanctuary when the lamps are put out) but the Lord has lighted
them and set them up here with us: the Lord has gloriously cleared up his will
and counsel to his people, respecting the doctrine and worship of the Gospel,
whereof they have given that Testimony in the Platform of Discipline, declaring
therein their hearty assent and attestation to the Confession of Faith agreed
upon by the Reverend Assembly of Divines at Westminster in matters of Doctrine;
only in some few points of controversy in Church Discipline referring
themselves to that Platform of Discipline aforesaid, which for the substance
thereof will be found to be a good confession: in this respect therefore have
we experienced the Lords being to us not a Wilderness, nor a Land of darkness.

4. As to the Lords delivering his people from snares laid for them, pits which
they have been in danger to fall into, and might have perished in, and wild
beastly men that would have devoured them; the Bear that would have rooted up
this Vineyard of the Lord, as Psalm 80.13. and from such that as ravening
Wolves, but in Sheeps clothing, would have wurried or scattered the Lords
flock, if himself had not wrought for us: some as Foxes which the Lord has
ordered to be taken that they might not eat up the Vine and the tender Grapes,
Cant. 2.15. when as his people have been tender and weak, and might have been
easily crushed, peeled, laid waste, etc. then did the Lord stir up a spirit of
courage, and wisdom, and zeal, and faithfulness in our godly Leaders to take
those Foxes so full of subtilty and mischief, that would else have destroyed
his Vineyard, and that by plucking off its buds and tender Grapes; the Lord
has not suffered that brood of the Serpent to increase here, as otherwise
would have been: we should have been filled with poysonful, fiery, stinging
Serpents, if the Lord had not seasonably prevented the same, by the effectual
crushing the same in the very Egg: has not the Lord blessed the coercive power
of the Civil Magistrate for that end? let our experience give in evidence: In
the case of the Heresy of the Familists, which brake out of old among us; aad
O to what a height they suddenly grew! working at length woeful disturbance in
the C^vil State as well as in the Churches, this is not to be forgotten; as
tame as Error for a time pretended to be, yet at length it could gird it self
with a Sword, but the Lord would not suffer it to be drawn. So likewise after
this, with reference to the Gortonists, etc. which things should be remembered
for ever, and the mercy of the Lord acknowledged, in that he preserved us from
those Hornets also, and that Ministerially by our Rulers spirited by himself
thereunto.

And it is to be hoped, that this coercive power of a godly Magistracy, which
we have experienced the benefit of so many ways, being duly managed, shall
not be abandoned (distinguishing alwayet notwithstanding between the
Magistrates Coersive power regularly put forth. Abuse of his Power one way or
other.
In matters of Religion; any other power among men may as much be denied as
that) nor therefore a Repealing of any wholesome Law about Religion for the
defense and maintaining the Gospel among us; or that liberty shall be
proclaimed to men of any Religion to come and set up Shops or Schools of
Seduction among us; or to those of such a persuasion, and way of false worship,
as in the general experience of the Churches of Christ since the reformation,
has proved, where ever their Opinions have prevailed, ruinous to the Churches
of Christ, and destructive to the Souls of men, to draw them from the
acknowledgement of the Covenant of God, and so of the truth and order of the
Gospel: Hence therefore, as when a man is overtaken with an Highway Robber, and
for a time holds some discourse with him, if he find him to be such an one as
has robbed others, he is very unwise that will throw away his Sword, though at
present he has no occasion to make use of it: there may be a connivance for a
time, in case of necessity (which yet I hope, is not our own case) when
notwithstanding there is no need of an open, public, professed Declaration,
that Error shall be tolerated: To tolerate all things, and to tolerate nothing
(it is an old and true Maxim) both are intolerable: but it is Satan's policy, to
plead for an indefinite and boundless toleration, as Chemnitius excellently
shows from those Words, Mark 1.24 [Let us alone] Harmon, chap. 37. page 388,
389 he calls it Diabolica Machinatio in conciliationibus Religionum, i. e.
Christ may have his Kingdom, if he will let Satan alone with his, and so both
of them live lovingly and quietly together.

5. As to Protection, that wall of defense that God has granted to his People;
God himself has been a Wall of fire to us, and has wrought wonderfully for us
in the years of the right hand of the most High that are past, our very Enemies
being Judges: the Lord has enclosed us, set an hedge about his people as about
Job, and all that he had, he has fenced us, Isai. 5.2. and walled us about, as
his peculiar garden of pleasure, wherein he has retired himself from the
noise, and tumults, and disturbance of the World, etc. And though this place
(as a Wilderness) has been a place at times, of some temptation as that
Wilderness, Mat. 4.1. to Christ, and that his People have tempted the Lord,
saying, Can the Lord provide Bread for us here? there have been the Massahs and
Meribahs: (O that they had never been heard of in this Wilderness! and that it
might not have been told in Gath, etc! and the Lord has proved and tried his
People above forty years together, yet (blessed be his Name!) they have had his
gracious presence as a Pillar of Protection with them; not only for a guide, but
a guard also to them: and as to Trials by Sea and Land, by Seducers, and
Underminers, and bold Demanders, etc. we may say as Paul, 2 Timothy 3.11. But out
of them all the Lord delivered us! the Lord has had pity on his peoples
weakness, and notwithstanding frowardness in his Children when they have been
sometimes under temptation, yet has he showed himself a patient and good God,
Act. 13.18. [(...)] vide Marginem, as a Nurse bears, or feeds her Child,
so the Lord has graciously born our manners, etc.

And so as to all that light, and glory, and distinguishing goodness, favor
and blessing which the Lord has vouchsafed unto his People, together with his
blessing those means of his appointment, wherewith he has crowned us, blessing
the Ministry of the Word, the Administration of the Keys and of the Seals of
the Kingdom of Heaven for the salvation of his People; blessing the order of
Councils, and Synods as there has been occasion: I say we have found the Lord
(experimentally) blessing his People in this way: has it not been so? will not
our experience witness for God? and give in abundant evidence of these things?
in the Time of the Opinions, so called? O call to remembrance those times, you
(...) the old Generation; how notably did the Lord, in the way of Council of
Churches, by that famous Synod then met at Cambridge, free this wilderness from
being a land of darkness by seasonably dispelling that hellish damp, and mist
of errors and heresy! Again, when these Churches lay under the reproach of
Schism, or rigid separation from the Churches in England, etc* as is to be
seen in the preface to the platform of Discipline: and when some great ones
there had said, fieri non posse ut Zelotes isti in unam eeclesiastica politias
formam (ne si optio quidem daretur) communi inter se consensu unquam conspirare
velint. etc: this ( as Reverend and worthy Mr. Cotton of blessed memory speaks
in his Epistle before Mr. Norton's answer to Apollonius) was presently removed
also by means of another Synod, which did from the word of God draw up the
platform of Discipline, Characteristicall of the way of these Churches, with
admirable consent and Harmony: other experiences I might instance of the
singular smiles of God upon that ordinance of Council; Honored, and beloved in
the Lord, let none baffle you out of your experiences had of these things: and
accordingly O that still we may, as thereis need, experience the like
benediction!

And should there not then be a Book of Records touching all these things? you
have your Court-Books of Record: should there not be something published as a
further Memorial this way? Ahashuerus has his Book of Records, Esther 6.1. and
so, as to David's acts first and last, they are written in the Book of Samuel
the Seer, and of Nathan the Prophet, etc. much of which had reference to the
Church of God, for which David's heart was full of care, 1* Chron. 29.29, 30.
and again, in Exodus 17.14. Write this says God for a Memorial in a Book: And
so the Decree of Esther, confirming the matters of Purim, are written in a
Book, Esther 9. vlt. and what is the Reason thereof? see ver. 28. that the
memorial thereof might not perish from their seed: thus Numb. 21.14. Written in
the Book of the wars of the Lord, Josh. 10.13. written in the book of Jasher.
Records of Gods dealings with his Church and People this way, should be kept;
The First Plantation of New England has begun with their printed Memorial; I
wish the Second Colonie thereof, ( i. e, this we are in) might be awakened
further to take their turn also: and O that it might be said concerning this
and that of the mercies, judgments, and great Acts of the Lord, never to be
forgotten by us, [ as it is written in the Book of the Chronicles of the
Governors of the MASSACHVSETS:]

Use 2. It Is matter of Lamentation and reproof for the too great proneness that
is to be found among too many among us, unto a revolt from under the Lord: that
are ready to say to God, we are Lords, and will come no more at thee: such as
are meditating a renunciation of the Lord from being their King; and are ready
to say as Psalm. 12.4. who is Lord ^ver ^^? to forget the Lords wonderful
working for us ^ud. 2.10. To go back from former acknowledgements of our
Fathers God, whom they should exalt, having been their Song as, Exodus 15.2. To
refuse further, and be weary of that divine Conduct which they have had such
notable experience of: To devise some other way than that which is by the
direction of the Pillar of fire, and cloud in the Wilderness: To reject the
government of the Lord by unruliness under their Governors ruling for God and
under God, in his stead: To set up a self sovereignty and as 1 Cor. 4 8. to be,
and reign as Lords and Kings without the Lord: men miscount themselves for more
then they are, they say in our Text [ we are Lords] but* alas) they are only
servants, and should be in subjection to the Lord. This is an horrible
absurdity for such so to do. Ier. 2.10. with 18.14. and see what the Lord
threatens to those that refused the waters of Shiloah, being weary thereof,
etc. Isa 8.6, 7. alas, alas! they that followed the Lord with a love of
espousals from a pleasant land into a land of scarcity, etc. will (if left to
themselves) forsake him, when the Lord has turned it into a land of plenty! To
prevent this, Consider*

1. It Is unreasonale wickedness, folly and madness so to do, Isai. 1.2, 3 it is
to cross our own experiences, and so Hos. 2.7, 8.

2. It will be a dangerous provocation of God against such: to revolt from the
Lord is greater injury done the Lord then is by those that were never brought
near the Lord; for it brings up an evil report upon the Lord, as that upon
experience, such had found him to be a Wilderness, and a Land of darkness to
them, a land that eats up the Inhabitants thereof, as they spoke, Numb.
13.32. but see their punishment, Chap. 14.36, 37. they dyed by the Plague
before the Lord: such do as it were, proclaim that they have (upon experience)
found the Lord false, and unfaithful, unrighteous, and ungracious, and ungodly:
Hence is the Lords Expostulation, Ier. 2.5. q. d. they that hear of your
departing from me, will think that there has been some iniquity that you have
found in me, and your way speaks as much: Hence we have for our admonition,
those Examples upon Record of the Lords wrath upon those that have forsaken
him, whom the Lord has therefore destroyed in the story of the Kings of
Israel, and other Ecclesiastical Histories: when they choose new Gods there was
war in the Gates, Judge. 5.8. etc. But have we any cause to complain against the
Lord? will not our experience witness against us, and for God, and that as to
the experienced way of his leading of us in this Wilderness? for instance, i e.
in way of improvement of what has been already hinted. Are there those that
say, that for the Magistrate to meddle in matters of Religion, or to punish men
if they do but plead conscience for their sin, good will never come of it, and
this is but persecution, and better let all alone, these things will dye of
themselves: etc. But let such consider, has not this Magistracy from the very
first, been directed by the Lord in such a way of witness-bearing for God, and
against ungodliness, as that through the blessing of God upon the same) his
people here hitherto have lived a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty? were there not wholesome Laws made by the Fathers of this Common wealth
( eminent for wisdom, faithfulness, piety, zeal for God, tender compassion, a
spirit of Government, etc. as true nursing Fathers to this people) to punish
the disturbers of Christ's order among us? The Antichristian state cast out a
flood of Heresy after the Woman when first fled into this Wilderness, but has
not the Leaders of this people appearing by Synods, and the power of the civil
Sword in conjunction therewith, been found upon experience the way whereby the
Lord has dispelled those clouds of the darkness of Hell, that threatened both
the Church and Civil state at once with confusion?

Thereby they prevented the further spreading of that spiritual infection: In
this way has the Lord saved these Churches, and curbed the spirit of error
and profaneness in Doctrine, and viciousness in life: and shall any now begin
to insinuate that all this has been but a delusion, and fancy? or that it has
been but by chance, that we have been in this way secured? or that that way of
our godly Leaders aforesaid was but a way of persecution? or shall any such be
suffered so to reproach the footsteps of the Lords anointed? will any among us
begin to meditate a Revolt from God, and his ways which we have found to be
ways of Truth, and ways of Faithfulness, and Blessing, and Salvation?

O Generation, See the Word of the Lord! is there any new way more eligible
then that good old way (for the substance of it I mean) which the Lords People
have already tried, and have experimentally found to be the way of blessing
from God? shall we seek and enquire after any newfound out way? as the Lord
speaks of new Gods as they are called, Deuteronomy. 32.17. Vpstart Gods, which our
Fathers knew not: should some of our Fathers that are now asleep in Jesus, and
that have with so many Prayers and Tears, hazards, and labors, and watchings,
and studies, night and day to lay a sound and sure, and happy Foundation of
prosperity for this people, arise out of their Graves, and hear the discourses
of some, and observe the endeavors of others, as Edomites against their
Brother Jacob, Psalm. 137.7. crying Raze it, raze it, even to the Foundation! by
plucking up if they could, that Hedge that has been here set to fence our All;
would they not even rent their garments, and weep over this Generation? And are
there any that think to mend themselves by going back to Leeks and Onions? yea
to that very vomit of the Dragon, to lick up that vomit which he has formerly
cast out of his mouth, whereby to cause this poor Woman in this Wilderness also
(if I may so far allude at least to that expression in Rev. 12.15.) to be
carried away therewith even as by a flood? I hope the good People of the Lord
in this Wilderness will not do it, for the generality of them: and I trust the
Lord will steel the hearts of our godly Leaders with courage and holy zeal
against all such abominations. And assuredly a fundamental change of the way of
Worship from the good ways of the Lord, will cause an alteration and change of
affection also in this People, that they will not stand so affected as formerly
to their civil Rulers, or their very civil state and constitution: 1 King
12.27. if this People go up to do Sacrifice in the House of the Lord at
Jerusalem, then shall the heart of this People turn again unto their Lord, even
to Rehoboam; Hence ver. 28. etc. And therefore beware of such changes, Prove.
24.21. My Son, fear thou the Lord, and the King, and meddle not with them that
are given to change. Corruption in Gods Worship, and corruption in manners are
wont to go together; as there are instances thereof abundant to be given in the
story of the Judges, and of the Reign of the superstious Kings of Israel or
Judah casting off the true Worship of God, O what profaneness there was in other
respects! profaneness in Judgment will be accompanied with profaneness in life;
for surely men will (if they are but able) practice at length their Judgment,
if they are but conscientious therein; and hence it is, that a conscientious
Papist use to be accounted more dangerous then a State Papist only: and if
corruption in the matters of Gods fear (I mean of his Worship) be not reformed,
no wonder if unrighteousness and iniquity of every kind abound; for he that
has once cast off the fear of God, will soon cast off the fear of man: and
hence the Commandments of the first Table are called the great Commandments
Mat. 22.37. and love to God, and fear of him is the true and best foundation of
all true love and fear, honor and reverence unto man; I say it is the Basis or
Foundation of all the other; and therefore the light of nature directed the
Heathen (that reverence might be had to their Rulers and Laws) to signify to
the People in some places, that they received their Laws from their gods: and
what ground is there of obedience to man in any Law of the second Table but
which has its foundation laid in the first Table of the Law by God himself?
and therefore it is and should be our great care to secure Religion, and to
prefer the interest of God and his worship, before, and above all our own
worldly concernments whatsoever; and while we so do, the Lord will not forsake
this People, though the whole Earth should be gathered against us, as is said
of Jerusalem, Zech. 12.3. Exhortations to this end have been inculcated upon
such days as this, in which respect I may say (and as to the concurrence of
the generality of the People of God therewith) as Joshua Chap. 24.27. Behold
this stone shall be a witn^ss for it has heard, etc. So let me say unto you
all, Behold this House, this Pulpit, these Seats, etc. are a witn^ss, for they
have heard all the Words which the Lord has upon such occasions spoken to us
by his faithful Servants; Lament then any tendency toward a revolt from God!

Quest. Who are those that so revolt? are there any so foolish or vile that
will so do? wherein does it appear?

Ans. It is threatened and appears, 1. When the Sovereignty of God in the
matters of Instituted worship according to the 2 d. Commandment is despised and
rejected, by setting up some false way of worship; Posts by God's posts: (Text)
[ we are Lords] arguing a self-sovereignty: and the Lord by this Prophet both
in our Context, and else where taxes them for their great sin in this, even
the Idolatry against (not the first, but) the second Commandment; herein
Christ's lordship is highly opposed. You need not (said Jeroboam, 1 Kin. 12.28,
31. It is too much for you) to go up to Jerusalem, etc. q. d. there is no such
necessary Institution Divine as that of the Ministry, and Ordinances: the
Priests do but deceive you; sacrifice may as well be done here as at Jerusalem,
it is but a Circumstantial difference (the circumstance of place only) and it
may be offered up by others as well as by them that are Priests, they take too
much upon them, and that is but a circumstance of the person, and so that the
thing be done it matters not by whom, and hence the lowest of the people will
serve the turn well enough; yea, but that Jeroboam is by the Lord branded for
it to all generations with that Character of being the man that made Israel to
sin, etc. and we read how Vzziah smarted for his boldness in vying wirh the
Lordship of God herein, though he were a King, yet the Lord would not bear with
him, 2 Chronicles. 26. when as he would rise up against Gods order to burn incense,
which pertained not to him but to the Priest, he is smitten with the leprousie:
and it is observed, ver. 16. (as the cause of his errors therein) that his
heart was lifted up, i. e. through pride; proud hearts will sometimes adventure
desperately this way, but it will finally prove a loosing cast to throw out
thus against the Lords appointment, and this was Corah's sin, All the Lords
People are Holy, and why may not all take their turns publicly to Preach and
rule? and why should there be such a distinction of persons, etc? O take heed
of this, for this is to say, as in our Text they did [ We are Lords.]

2. In not subjecting to the Lords Authority, and Government, and Order once
established, but where there is an affection of Belialism: O take heed of a
Belial like spirit, that would have no restraint! we ^ead of such in Deuteronomy.
13.13. They are for worship, but it is false worship, but the Magistrate we
there see, is not to suffer such Belialists, but is to remember that when such
arise, pleading perhaps liberty for any Religion, God does it to try him, even
to try Magistrates as well as People, to try the Master of restraint as well as
others, whether he love the Lord his God with all his heart, and with all his
soul, and with all his strength, yea or no? ver. 3, 4, 5. O there is a
dissolute spirit in many Christians, they cannot tell how to bear any Yoke!
dissolute Professors they would walk, and live as they list; and say, as Psalm.
12.4. with our tongues we will prevail (get the Government as the word [ Gabar]
signifies: not first try what the Sword, but what the tongue can do) Our
Tongues are our own, and who is Lord over us? i. e. (as in our Text) We are
Lords, etc. A loose Generation! that would be under no Lord, nor Bonds, etc.
the Psalmist describes such, Psalm. 2.2. Let us break their Bends, and cast away
their Cords from us; be it as to the Lords Rule and Government in the
Commonwealth, or in the Churches: They have not rejected thee (says the Lord
to Samuel, 1 Samuel 8.7.) but they have rejected me, that I should not Reign over
them: It was God that led his People [ thou ledst thy People as a flock, Psalm.
77. ult.] by the hand of Moses and Aaron: and hence when they murmured also
against Moses and Aaron, Numb. 16. and did so envy, and in the pride of their
hearts rise up against them as if they took too much upon them, it is
interpreted, to be against the Lord, ver. 11. compared with 26.9. they strive
against the Lord in striving against Moses and Aaron; and therefore to be weary
of, and rise up against those who Rule for, and according to God and are
Ministers of God to us for good, Romans 13.4. etc. this is to rise up against,
and to cast off the Lord himself; as he that refuses to obey the Constable in
his lawful charge, to assist him, etc. disobeyeth highest Authority therein; so
it is here, they will be no more so snib^d, and under the yoke as they have
been, etc. surely God has chains for such as will break and cast away Christ's
gracious Co^ds from them: Men's lusts are sweet to them, and they would not be
disturbed or disquieted in their sin. Hence there be so many, such as cry up
Tolleration boundless, and Libertinism, so as (if it were in their power) to
order a total and perpetual confinement of the Sword of the Civil Magistrate
unto it is Scabbard (a Notion that is evidently destructive to this People, and
to the public Liberty, Peace and Prosperity of any instituted Churches under
Heaven,) I cannot but heartily approve, notwithstanding of that advice of an
old Counselor, to one of the Kings of France, asking him, what way should be
taken for his own and his Peoples happiness in his Governing of them? he
thereupon presented him with a little Book, in the beginning, middle and end
whereof there was only written this Word [ Moderation! Moderation! Moderation!]
(v. Salem Philalethes p. 1.) We are in danger of extremes; and however some cry
up [ Toleration, Toleration, Toleration] at present, yet experience will evince
that that will quickly in conjunction with others, be changed to persecution:
But O that the good People of God would study to be quiet, and take heed of
shaking off the Yoke of Christ: if we think it not easy enough for us, it is
sure the fault is not in the Yoke, but in our Necks that will not bear it: O
there was not at first that Contempt of the Magistrates, or Ministers, or
Churches for their zeal for God herein, as begin's to grow up among us in these
days: But let our Moderation be still known, even in this thing also, unto
all, for the Lord is at hand, Phil 4. beginning.

3. In respect of a spirit of ill will against those that would keep a people
in subjection unto God, and keep them from revolt: God sends his servants to
call them back to the Lord, but they will not return [ we will come no more at
thee]: and thus they reject Samuel the great Prophet, and judge in his time. 1 Samuel 8.7. Hence arises those prejudices and groundless jealousies against many
of the Magistrates and Ministers in the Country: and a disposition in many to
crow over them in petty matters; to rate them Will and doom, etc. arising from
misunderstanding in some of those that we may believe are the Lords dear people
(and it is pity they should be so deceived) and from design in others, loading
them with reproaches: and that by lying and slanders would drive them if they
could, from any capacity of serviceableness to God, or the Country, though they
are such as have stood in the gap in the day of fear; and by whose wisdom,
faithfulness, grace, prayers, care for the public, courage, zeal for God, and
love to Christ's Interest in this Wilderness, the preservation of our All has
been in a great measure wrought: Shall they be accounted violaters of the
liberties of the Churches, or of the Common wealth, who plead for no other than
the ancient and primitive Interest of the people of God in the first and best
constitution and complexion of this Colony? must no less then an Ostracisme
serve for a requital of such? o let it not be* Again, if the Ministry stand for
the government of Christ in his Church, according to platform of Discipline,
Chap. 10. Sect 7. etc. pressing for attendance to that Scriptural distinction
there used of Governors Governed
must they be now Presbyterians, and I know not what? the Lord pity poor
ignorant ones that understand not the thing whereof they affirm! does the
obedience of the brethren to their Elders, Leaders, Rulers, as the Scripture
calls them, take away the liberty of the Brotherhood? Let Paul be judge, Heb.
13.17 etc. and if their frequent profession to adhere to the way truly
Congregational according to the printed doctrine thereof in the Books of our
famous Worthies, who have labored to clear up the mind of Christ therein, will
not be accepted, but their very hearts and inward secret intentions must be
judged and condemned, and that they are so deeply guilty of Apostasy, and
innovation threatening the ruin of our foundations, the Achans and troublers of
this Israel, yea, this without any proof or evidence produced against any one
particular person in the Ministry, but that they must in the general be
calumniated; All I would say is, Father forgive them, they know not what they
do; and he of his infinite mercy dislodge such Jealousies! and assuredly for
the Ministry in this respect to give up their account to God with grief, will
not be profitable to such prejudiced persons, who may hereafter when it is too
late, reflect with blame and shame enough upon their own uncharitableness; in
the mean time it must be left to the searcher of hearts; and he judge between
us, and such of our brethren*

4. When there is a spirit of sovereign, unsociable, rigid independency growing
upon a people; Text [ we are Lords] q. d. we have none above us, are not
(respecting Ecclesiastical causes or persons) under any power, and we need not
any other: we can stand alone by our own strength, can live of our selves, as
to that which respects a people under an Ecclesiastical consideration, we
assert the Coordination of Churches, but to affirm that Churches need not the
help, watch, and assistance either of the Civil Magistrate above them, or of
the neighbor Churches about them, as being out of the reach of both, and so as
that there can be no healing (for instance) of any Church-oppression in a
particular Congregation, doubtless as this has not been the doctrine, nor
practice of our first Leaders, so nor will the Scripture give countenance
thereunto, as may be seen in the writings of our Congregational Divines in both
Englands: It is known what the Authors of the Apologetical narration, page 21.
have written this way: and so blessed Mr. Burrough^ in that excellent treatise
of his viz. his Irenicum, Chap. 7. etc. Cottons way of Congregational Churches
cleared: page 11. etc. prima ^edes a nemine judicatur says the Papist: ibidem.

5. It appears in pride and unthankfulness, and the abuse of mercies against
the Lord: Text, are they Lords? and have they dominion? and (I pray) who gave
them it? alas they knew not says the Lord. Hos. 2.8. that I gave them co^n
and wine, and oil: but thus do many sacrifice to their own net, and will come
no more at the Lord to bless him for what he has done for them in order to
their advancement: and as Nebuchadnezzar, strutting in his palace, said, Is not
this great Babylon which I have built, etc. O the many rich blessings we are
crowned with! but our unthankfulness for them is great, and this arising from
pride, and that pride works security, and a Laodicean frame of spirit prevails
upon them: and they would have all according to their imperious wills; such as
these the Lord beholds a far off, and will abase: and O great is the
unthankfulness of too many of this people in the Land! there is much
forgetfulness of God, and undervaluing the precious Gospel of Jesus Christ in
the Ministry thereof, which has notwithstanding paid richly for its
entertainment: great unmindfulness of the Lord now that he has filled our
houses with good things, contrary to that caution. Deuteronomy. 8. and Oh! the sad
abuse of the plenty of outward blessings which he has conferred, as appears in
the intemperance and riot of many that may be placed [(...)] as the Apostle
speaks, Tit. 1.6. in the category or predicament of riot, luxury, profuseness,
and excess: and in regard of pride in Apparel, when persons lavish out that way
beyond their rank, and beyond what their estates will bear, etc. again, in
ways of self-seeking, and preferring the private before the public good; as
at Constantinople, Moneys could not be had to pay the charges of their
Watchmen upon the Walls, till that the Enemy found it, and divided it by Hats
full among themselves: and should it be so here, might we not justly fear, that
the Lord should send Emptiers, as they are called, Nahum. 2.2?

6. When there is a weariness, and loathing, and a renunciation of the Covenant
of God, respecting the continuance of the sure mercies thereof from Generation
to Generation: Text, O Generation see the Word of the Lord; as to the word of
his Covenant, and the care of his faithful Servants or Fathers, in their coming
over into these ends of the Earth, was it only for themselves? O no, they had
an eye to their poor Children also, that they might remove them far from the
temptations and snares of Superstition and Profaneness, that they might leave
them under the wings of the Covenant-mercy and grace of God: they took special
care for the continuance of the Kingdom of Christ here in after Generations,
by asserting their Covenant interest, as appears by the Printed Doctrine, and
constant practice of these Churches: And therefore, examine the experience of
former times, and Anabaptisme we shall find has ever been looked at by the
Godly Leaders of this people as a Scab, and not part of the Faith to be
contended for, but contended against; our Fathers, the leaders of this People,
never espoused it as any part of the interest of Christ, being so cruel, and
hardhearted an Opinion, an Engine Framed to cut the throat of the Infantry of
the Church. Men are eager and restless in contending about Earthly Inheritances
and Privileges for their Children, and are impatient in being denied that of
the World for them, which they think is their due, and shall the Inheritance of
Eternal life (instrumentally as to the ordinary way and means of the
dispensation thereof conveyed by the external Administration of the Covenant)
be thought not worth the contending for? God forbid: and shall the experience
of thousands respecting the Lords blessing their Baptism which they received
in Infancy, and the thoughts of their Covenant interest, sealed in Baptism,
preventing many a sin that else they would have run into, and recovering them
from backsliding, and quickening them eminently to answer that holy obligation
to God; I say, shall all this clear, sure, comfortable, blessed, glorious
experience of so many thousands of the Servants of Christ be now concluded to
be so many mistakes, fancies and delusions, and the interest of the Children of
the Covenant, to be but a matter of an indifferent nature, and so not to be any
ground of contending about? I say again, the Lord forbid: And shall those whom
experience has generally found disturbers to, and their Doctrine, where it
has prevailed, a pest and confusion to the Churches, be suffered to poison the
rising Generation, or dispossess them of their portion in God? read Judge.
11.24. Wilt not thou possess, etc. and shall not our Children possess what the
Lord our God has given us to possess? should there be a transgressing those
Laws, changing the Ordinance, breaking the everlasting Covenant spoken of,
Isai. 24.5, 6. what may we expect but that the Curse devour this Land; and when
under Babels yoke, there may be time to bewail those Calamities, but in vain.

Use 3. Of Exhortation, i. e. O Generation, see the Word of the Lord (I need
not vary from the Words of the Text for it) the Exhortation may be attended in
these three Branches: viz.

1. See that we revolt not from God: let us not say [ We are Lords:] and O that
there might never be found an inclination thereunto! And for our improvement of
this part of the Exhortation, take these considerations following.

1. Know that Gods own visible people have sometime proved, this way, a very
strange generation: [ O generation!] the Scripture speaks of them sometimes as
an untoward generation, Acts 2.40. a stubborn and rebellious generation, Psalm.
78.8, an adulterous generation, Mark 8. ult. A generation of vipers, Matthew.
3.7. a faithless and perverse generation, Matthew. 17.17. a generation of Gods
wrath, Jer. 7 29. and we have as bad natures as they, so as to become a
degenerate generation as these in our Text, or any, if the Lord prevent not.

2. Mind what the Lord has done for this people in Reference to their order,
provision, direction, deliverance, protection and prosperity in Church and
Commonwealth, under the UNITING conduct of those two great Ordinances of God
the Magistracy and Ministry, whereby it is (in special) that the Lord has
principally (as in the explication aforesaid) quitted himself to be not a
wilderness to us or a land of darkness: and for that end pray that the Lord
will please to maintain and uphold the same, even a godly and learned
Magistracy and Ministry among us, that the Lord will make our Leaders in both
orders instrumental to keep this people chaste and loyal to Christ Jesus, and
his interest in this wilderness: and that whatever others may be left to do,
yet as Hos. 11. ult. New England may rule with God, and be faithful with the
Saints.

Be much in the serious meditation of what the Lord has done this way, lay up,
and look over those experiences we have had of the Lords wonderful working for
us from the time of the laying of the Cornerstone of this plantation unto this
day: and O let there not be a removing of the Ancient Landmarks of this
Interest of Jesus Christ; not but that God reserv's to each generation their
work in the advances of Reformation, as Phil. 3.12. -- 16. and as hitherto we
have experienced the concurrence of both Magistracy and Ministry, as so choice
a means under God of our preservation in the enjoyment of our liberties civil
and sacred, so let it be the studious endeavor of those in whose hearts are
the ways of God, that that concurrence may still hold, and that the Governors
of this Judah, i. e Leaders, both civil and Ecclesiastical may say that the
people of God are their strength in the Lord their God, Zech. 12.5. and so that
threefold cord of Magistrates, Ministers and people shall not be easily
broken: and as Ne. 10 28, 29. with Ezra. 10.4. so that the good people of this
Land would say to those that are set over them in the Lord (and to whom their
hearts should be cleaving) by way of encourageing of them, arise, this and that
belongs unto you, and we will be with you! O that both Magistracy, Ministry
and the people might be persuaded unto that union and concurrence, especially
in the matters of God and his worship according to the exhortation which has
in former times been excellently given us from Haggi. 2.4. and truly when we
look upon the primitive constitution of this people, me-think's the Lord
represents himself as to the Prophet Amos, cha. 7.7. as standing upon a wall
made by a plumb-line, with a plumb-line in his hand, admirably and happily
squaring, disposing, cementing together the spiritual stones of this building:
as to the union and conspiration of the parts thereof, severally in their order
to strengthen and beautify the whole, O how excellent was it, as those of the
first generation yet remaining know, and many also of the rising generation can
Remember. Here let me say, O generation see the Word of the Lord in this matter
also: the Lord gave his servants in Church and Common wealth for the main body
of them an uniting spirit, and so a spirit of Communion for the carrying on
with one mind, with one lip, and with one shoulder the Kingdom of Christ, and
the work of their generation; in which respects he was to them not a wilderness
nor a land of darkness. Union of Reformers was their beauty and their strength.
Then might be seen,

1. Magistrates, and Magistrates upon the seat of justice cemented together for
the advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ in this wilderness; they looked
not upon themselves as unconcerned in matters of Religion; but accordingly also
have they thence-forward at all times as there was occasion put forth their
power that way; for they are called Gods, and therefore knew they were to have
a care of Godliness, that being set by God in highest place, they should not
set God and his Interest lowest; but as David, prefer Jerusalem above their
chief joy, Psalm. 137.6. that being Gods they are to love what God love's and
hate what God hates, even as is spoken to the commendation of the Church of
Ephesus. Rev. 2.6. Thou hate the deeds of the Nicolaitans which thing I also
hate: Hence see David's spirit, Psa. 139.21, 22. and 132.1, 2, 3. and this power
of the Magistrate in matters of Religion has been asserted by our first
Leaders, by those in the Commonwealth, as appears by their constant practice;
and also by those in the Churches, witness the writings of our famous Divines
now at rest with God Mr. Cotton bloody tenet washed. Mr. Hooker Survey pt. 2.
page 79.80. Mr. Norton Epistle Dedicatory before his Discussion, etc.) and
inevitable ruin will be the consequent of a breaking down of this Hedge; and
as Reverend Mr. Baxter speaks upon such an occasion ( Directions for s^iritual
peace, p. 261.) If once you take your selves to have nothing to do as Rulers
for Christ, you cannot promise your selves that Christ will have any thing to
do for you as Rulers in a way of mercy* and this (says he) Mr. Owen (so then
styled) has lately told you in his Sermon, October. 13. viz. The God of Heaven
forbid that ever all the Devils in hell, the Jesuits at Rome, or the seduced
souls in England should be able to persuade the Rulers of this Land, who are so
deeply bound to God by vows, mercies, professions, and high expenses of
treasure and blood, to reform his Church, and propagate his Gospel: that now
after all this it belongs not to them, but they must, As Rulers be no more
for Christ then for Mahomet: But if ever it should prove the sad case of
England to have such Rulers (which I strongly hope will never be) if my
prognostics fail not, this will be their fate, The Lord Jesus will forsake
them as they have forsaken him, and the prayers of his Saints will be fully
turned against them: and his elect shall cry to him night and day till he
avenge them speedily, by making these his enemies to lick the dust, and dashing
them in pieces like a potters vessel, because they would not that he should
reign over them: and then they shall know whether Christ be not King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords.

2. Then might be seen Magistrates and Ministers together in way of advice (I
exclude not here the honored Deputies of the general Court, but) I here intend
the agreement that there was between the civil and and Ecclesiastical Leaders
in matters of difficulty, or of weight, and that were of general and common
concernment to Churches or Common wealth* those at the helm of the civil state
were wont to make use of the Ministry; and the Ministry again of the
Magistrates, as there was like occasion in re communi: nor were they wont to go
contrary to each others advice, but had these candid arguings one with another,
if they did seem to differ in any thing at any time, as whereby a right
understanding mutually was obtained: and often have they found the blessing of
God upon them in this way, both in the first settling of this Colony and after
its constitution, both in the Legislative and Executive parts of government,
and therein in special providing against an Arbitrary government: and I hope it
will ever be the wisdom, faithfulness, and care of this civil Authority not to
leave behind them presidents of Arbitrary rule; for if it be left unto mere
judgment and conscience without prescript Law, then do but change the persons
that are to judge, and there will be tyranny and woe, and confusion enough
consequential thereunto: and that Land which before by wholesome Laws did, and
might have continued to shine most gloriously, will soon be turned into utter
darkness, where there will be nothing heard but weeping, and wailing, and
gnashing of teeth. And as formerly so still there should be communication of
advice, intentions, and endeavors mutually between those that are in these two
orders. Josiah does not disdain to take advice of Huldah the Prophetess. 2.
Chron. 34.20, 21, 22. Nathan the Prophet doubts not to say ( 1. Kin. 1.27.)
unto David [Is this thing done by my Lord the King, and thou have not showed it
unto thy servant, who should fit on the throne of my Lord the King after him?]
Moses and Aaron kiss one another in the mount of God; Exodus 4.27. Moses
(Isreal's Ruler) fare's the better for taking the advice of Iethro the Priest of
Midian, Exodus 18.1, 18, 24. and so did all Israel prosper under it. It went
well with Ioash and Israel while they hearkened to Iehoiada: and experience
has, and will discover it to be true that, in all states neither do well
asunder, or divided estrangedly in their counsels. Again, then might be seen;

3. Ministers, and Ministers cleaving together in way of communion; nothing
that was difficult, or questionable, or Weighty, or New, or that had an
influence upon the whole, but they were wont to consult with one another; as I
have heard from diverse of the ancient Ministers of Christ now with God, and
when I was a Child have observed in my Fathers house: if there happened to be
some misunderstanding at any time, it was reasoned out placidly, and still
Ministerial communion was maintained; and these things are known unto hundreds
yet living that may remember the Ministers meetings, in the several Towns by
course, as at Cambridge, Boston, Charlstown, Roxbury, etc. when, and where the
people did with great joy, and reverence acknowledge them and their labors
that way for the good of the Churches: respectively, and looked upon them as
Angels of God, and so received them when they came to Town: Paul's spirit was
then eminently breathing amongst them, viz. as to the care of all the Churches.
2. Cor. 11.28. and the Apostles word then remarkably observed, ^n 1. Cor.
14.32, 33, 37. notwithstanding some differences, yet rules of order being
attended those also may be well composed: and see Buroughs Irenicum, p. 84.
etc.

4. Then might be seen Ministers and their respective Congregations together;
their People trembling at the Word of God delivered by them, reverencing them
in the Lord, esteeming them highly for their work sake, subjecting to their
power and rule in the Lord: and so now also may we build upon that Word of God,
2 Chronicles. 20.20. (if it is not antiquated and now out of date) i. e. Hear me O!
Judah, and Ye Inhabitants of this Land, Believe in the Lord your God, so shall
you be established, believe his Prophets, so shall you prosper; as you love
your souls, and your Childrens also, I beseech you for the Lords sake, be not
apt to imbibe evil reports and scandals against them, to cause jealousy and
prejudice in your hearts, the rule in 1 Timothy 5.19. is known: had it been
attended, most of our troubles had been prevented:

Obj. The Prophets are divided?

Ans. 1. So they were of old. 2. This Rule in Timothy, and that word in 2 Chronicles. 20. aforesaid, hold good still. 3. Blessed are those notwithstanding
that are not offended in Christ, and the sheep of Christ do, and shall hear his
voice, in the great matters of Salvation, Joh. 10.

5. Then might be seen Churches, and Churches together in way of Communion, by
greater Synods, as has been before intimated, and also in lesser Synods or
Councills, as there has been occasion when any Church has wanted light or
peace etc. If help were not asked, it was sent them without asking: and it was
not then accounted an infringment of the Liberty of Churches so to do: I
apprehend it might do well and be of great use, if a Memorial thereof were
published for posterity; that there might be an History and Narrative of each
of them; and a signification of the blessing of God upon the advice of Elders,
and messengers of Churches met in Council, in the many Towns of the Country,
Melting hearts, and drawing tears both of joy and repentance from the eyes of
brethren in those days of their reconciliation, etc. and an evil spirit
therefore in any is that, who are laboring to keep breaches open by refusing
balm to be poured in for healing, when the Physician also is at hand in Gilead:
and oh how terrible is it to see the body of Jesus Christ (for so is the Church
called) torn in sunder by divisions! sure that is not the true Mother that
would have the Child divided: what are men doing when they thus divide but
incurring that guilt and penalty, Gal. 5 13. and are they not eating every one
the flesh of his own arm? for so they might be an arm of strength to one
another when united: and I hope our godly Leaders will not suffer it to be so,
that two or three men shall continue to disturb the peace of a whole
Congregation, and hinder the settlement of the Gospel, and Ordinances of Christ
from year to year! is there no redress for this? if you saw a company of men
set, and resolved to vex and starve one another bodily, should it be suffered?
let the liberty of Churches be preserved, but care continued for conversion of
those that are out of the Church visible, and therefore such as are able,
appointed, and encouraged to preach the Word there constantly, till they can
agree, either to choose him, or some other faithful Steward of the mysteries of
God among them. But let Sister-Churches in the mean time not be careless and
negligent respecting their duty of Communion also. Finally then might be seen,

6. Magistrates, Ministers, and their people together, strengthening the hands
of one another in God; even according to that exhortatory speech, Haggai 2.4.
And indeed it is Gods work to make his fear fall upon the hearts of men, so as
to stand in awe of, and reverence Authority ( 1 Samuel 11.7.) and so of the
wholesome Laws in a state that are made: and if God do not this, if he bow not
their hearts thereunto, all will be in vain: a notable spirit of self-denial,
love, courage, zeal for the interest of Christ in the public, was at first
breathing among this people and was crowned from heaven with glorious success
by the God of our mercy: and O let not these experienced ways of blessing be
forgotten, or despised, or departed from by this people!

3. Consider, that a revolt from God is usually graduated, having its more
imperceptible beginnings: by degree^ the souls of men slide back from God.
Satan has variety of artifices whereby to cast us down, and overthrow the true
Religion and Kingdom of Christ among us, if he could; he make's use of the
Divisions, and Scandals of Gods people to promote his hellish designs: he will
improve the spirit of fear and cowardice in some; the rashness of others: the
jealousies of others: the ambition of others: the covetousness of others: the
simplicity of others: the passions of others: the sheepishness of others: etc.
to advance his own cause in the Apostasy of professors: yea, and mischief
(perhaps) shall be laid in, in the very primmers for children whereby they may
even suck in poison in their tender years: and also in the pictures and images
of Christ, of the Virgin Mary, and other canonized popish Saints, etc. sold in
some shops, or brought over among us: things that will take with children, but
though they may seem minute, yet will surely prove of dangerous consequence at
length to those tender years, and may become an Introduction to Popery it self.
I wish such things might be crushed in the egg, and abandoned by every one
that professes the Christian name, for the Lord thy God, O New England is a
jealous God! he is a jealous Husband especially in the matters of the second
Commandment. But as to this, or any other way of back sliding from God, O! fear
all the graduations thereof, and the first steps thereunto: principiis ob^t^a:
watch against it.

1. Forgetting a wilderness condition* their's danger thereof, when turned to a
fruitful field. Deuteronomy. 8.11, 14* 18, 19. but therefore read Deuteronomy. 26.5. -- Isa.
51.1. -- etc.

2. Forgetting the works of God for our Fathers. Hence see, 1 Samuel 12.24 only
fear the Lord, and serve him in truth, for consider how great things he has
done for you.

3. Forgetting the first and great fundamental design of God and his people in
the first planting this Land.

4 Carnal and worldly Interest twisted in with the Interest of Christ, and his
Kingdom among us: sincere hearts will leave all worldly good for the Ordinances
of Christ in their purity, and the Lords Interest. 2. Chron. 11, 14. and will
forgo all their own, rather then his shall miscarry.

5* Glutting themselves with the things of the world, and hence loathing, or
weariness of Ordinances, and so dispensing with them, I say dispensing with
them; Dispensations with Gods commands are many times Antichristian, and very
dangerous: To dispense with Christ's commands practically (says that great and
worthy Divine Dr. Owen in his excellent treatise of worship, page 39.) is
unlawful, much more doctrinally, most of all authoritatively, as the Pope takes
on himself to do.

6. Decay and want of the spirit of faith and holiness, whence to get, and keep
an experimental savor of the sweetness of Jesus Christ, and his precious ways,
and hence fallows a falling away from any external profession of the true
Religion.

7. The backslidings of some few, and they (notwithstanding) countenanced by
too many, whereby they become hardened in their evil way, and infection also
spreads the more. Familiar fellowship with excommunicate persons was one of
those ulcera Ecclesiae which our famous Cotton sadly complains of under that
very term, as also Remiss silence in the sounder members against the offensive
expressions of the unsound, was another of them which he bewailed.

8. Mixtures in Religion cherished by a spirit of Libertinism, and spiritual
licentiousness: It is dangerous to Religion, and to Isreal's state (and Rulers
need watch against it betimes) when the Samaritan enemy (notwithstanding the
pretense of seeking and sacrificing to the same God with Israel) shall be
permitted to build in Temple-work together with Israel, Ezra 4.1, 2, 3. and the
Lord keep that Samaritanism from us, Recorded for our admonition in 2. Kings
17.28 -- ult.

9. The Lords delivering men up, now, in his righteous Judgment to the casting
off his fear, and name, and interest, etc. declaring openly in the hardness of
their hearts, the sovereignty of their self interests above the Lords: Text [
We are Lords and will not come at thee] and thus are they gone from God, and so
a gone People indeed, if the Lord pity not, nor heal their backslidings the
sooner.

4. Consider how much cause of fear there is of great wrath from God upon us
should there be a plain revolt from God, and from the acknowledgement of the
good way wherein the Lord has been leading us, Jer. 2.17. have thou not
procured this unto thy self (viz. slavery instead of liberty, and wasting, and
abuses, and woe, and desolation by Lyon-like Adversaries, spoiling, yelling,
wasting, burning, etc.) in that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God when he led
thee by the way: let not the ancient good Landmarks be removed, Deuteronomy. 27.17.
Profaneness, viz. Doctrinal, Practical,
greatly threateneth our welfare; and this begins both ways strangely, and
strongly to lift up it self by reason of the averseness that there is in so
many against faithful, plain, zealous and thorough condemning the sins of the
times we live in: The Ministry must not bear witness against sin, nor the
Magistrate; even as though men would thus stop the mouths of the Witnesses of
Jesus Christ, and slay them by such a political death: it is a great sin, and a
dangerous evil to make a man an offender for a word in the sense of Isai.
29.21. and to lay a snare for him that reproves in the Gate.

But if this People will be Lords in the sense of the Text, and shake off his
Government, and this after all (so many) experiences of light and life, and
blessing from him, after so many smiles, and so many peculiar tokens of his
being New-Englands God, and such a distinguishing line of mercy drawn by him
between our selves and others; after he has wrought so wonderfully for us,
being as darkness to our enemies, and bewildering them in their attempts
against us, so that all hitherto that would have devoured us have been an
offense to God, and evil has come upon them, Ier. 2.3. I say if after all this
we will now turn our back, and revolt from God, we may then expect that the
Lord turn this fruitful land into a wilderness again, Psalm. 107.34. that God
should be a wilderness, and a land of darkness to thee O New England! and cause
the Sun to go down at noon upon thy Prophets: and pick rods out of this very
wilderness, yea, briars and thorns of the wilderness whereby to scourge, and
tear, and teach such as will not otherways know the day of their visitation: he
can mingle our enemies, as Isa. 9.11. ( French and Indians etc. together) Make
thee groap for the wall, like the blind, Isa. 59, 9, 10, 11. take away the
spirit of Counsel, and Counsels of peace, and wisdom, and courage from thy
Rulers, and make babes to rule over thee, Isa. 3. beg. and bring the darkness
of Idolatry, Superstition, heathenisme, cruelty, vileness, profaneness,
heresy, horror, etc. to overspread the Land, and that through the wrath of the
Lord of Hosts the Land be horribly darkened, and people be as the fuel of the
fire, as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 9.19, 20, ult. no man sparing his Brother,
etc. And if Christians will break one from another, and Churches break one from
another, and others, in their communion; have we not cause to fear that God
will suffer some wild boar or beast of the Forest to enter in at the Breaches,
and lay waste this vineyard, and turn it into a wilderness again? So that when
it shall be asked in time to come, (as 1 King. 9.8, 9. with Deuteronomy. 29.24, etc.)
Why has the Lord done thus to this Land! and wherefore is all this great anger
of the Lord? why has the Lord done thus unto such a people? unto his people?
then the Answer should be, because they have forsaken the covenant of their
God: and they would be Lords, and would no more come back to the Lord their
God: they would not be under his government when he would have led them as a
flock, by the hand of such as were as Moses and Aaron among them: and because
of their many God-provoking sins; because they forgot the main end of their
coming into this Wilderness; because they forsook their first love to God, and
so to his Ordinances, and so to his people, their Brethren, witness their
strifes while alive, and witness the many tearless Funerals in many places, (a
sign they were not so beloved while alive) and because of their spiritual
wantonness under Ordinances: Their Church covenant grew to be with many but a
form; brotherly watch came to be neglected, the house of God despised, and
their own preferred before the same; because of their woeful unthankfulness for
the Gospel, and for that they grew a worldly people, and so neglect of
Communion with God in secret grew upon them; there was a form of Godliness, but
the power thereof denied: Hypocrisy, Divisions, carnal Mixtures, despising
Gods Sabbaths, Loose-walking, Temporizing, Sensuality, Pride and Idleness,
fullness of Bread, and not strengthening the hand of the poor and needy (those
Sodom sins, Ezekiel. 16.49) found in New England: Oppression of the poor, and
oppression of the rich* unmercifulness, self-seeking, growing heady, and
high-minded, and run^^^g deep upon the score of those sins of the last times,
which make those times perilous; and because the Sons and Daughters of God
became flesh, and accordingly savouring only the things of the flesh, and of
the world, and not of Christ: and the Daughters (and Sons too) of Sion Isai 3.
grown haughty, etc. though they were planted a noble Vine, yet they turned to
the degenerate Plant of a strange Vine unto the Lord, Jer 2.21. and an empty
Vine, Hos. 10.1. and they grew weary of the Lord, and would not bear the order
of his House: weary of, perhaps secretly loathing, strictness of conversation
in the way of holiness; but a laxe, merry, loose Religion pleased them better,
and suited most with their vain spirits, and carnal private interests: and so
they could be frolic, and vain, and harmonious with the company they came
amongst: and they grew spiritually proud, and conceited, and censorious, and
reviling, (not sparing therein their very Rulers in Church and Commonwealth)
and lukewarm in the things of God: and full of the sins of the tongue, in
respect of lying (loss of moral truth) dissimulation, equivocations, and such
sins as those which loosen all the Bonds of even humane society, that there
should be no trust or confidence put in one another: and though there is the
good which the Lord is willing to take notice of, yet may he not say as to the
Asian Churches, i. e. Nevertheless, I have somewhat against thee; and therefore
as, Rev. 2.5. Remember whence thou have fallen, repent, and do thy first (thy
first) works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy
candlestick out of his place, except thou repent. Not only extinguish the
lights, but remove the Candlesticks also: and he will then wash his hands in
innocence over us, and profess to all the world that he is free from the blood
of all men. And then truly should all the stars of the Firmament of the
political Heaven shine upon us, yet alas, if the Lord shine not, it will be
Midnight with us: and God can mingle a perverse spirit among a people whereby
to make them err in every work of their hands, and in all their Counsels, Isa.
19.14. when God has a purpose to destroy a people he is wont to give them a
vertiginous spirit: But therefore O generation see the Word of the Lord! Let
the found Christians of the first good old generation that do yet remain see
the Word of the Lord; viz. in order to thankfulness unto God for all
experiences that he has given them of his being not a wilderness or land of
darkness; and they should declare that they do so by showing to the generation
to come the praises of the Lord, and his strength, and his wonderful works that
he has done. Psalm. 78.4, 5, 6. they should leave behind them Registers of Gods
mighty acts, that their children after them might learn to set their hope in
God, and not forget his works. And let those of the second generation, that are
entered, or upon the point of entering upon the stage of action in the service of
their generation, see the Word of the Lord also; both in way of thankfulness
for what God has done for our fathers, and also in way of confidence, and
trust in the God of our Fathers, in the sincere discharge of the work of our
generation. Former Experiences should make us steadfast and unmovable in the
work of the Lord, and in the midst of all changes that may come. And let those
of the rising, but unfledged generation also, be put in mind hereof, and be
religiously seasoned with that nurture, and admonition of the Lord as whereby
they may do worthily, more worthily, most worthily in their generation, when
the heads of the present and passing generation shall be laid in the dust, and
must sleep with their Fathers: and that thus as Psalm. 145.4. One generation may
praise thy works O Lord unto another, and declare thy mighty acts! and that
thus (as Psalm. 45. ult.) his name may be remembered in all generations, and
therefore let the people praise him for ever and ever.

2. If there has been, or should happen any beginning to shake off the Lords
government, and to decline from his fear, O! let there be a willingness in this
part of the Lords Israel to return unto the Lord their God again, say not, as
in our Text [ we will come no more at thee:] And herein those two great
Ordinances of God, i. e. the Magistracy Ministry
(by the Lord's blessing whereof the Lord has hitherto approved himself unto
this people, as in our Text, to be not a wilderness or a land of darkness) are
to be improved; for very much depend's upon them, under God, for the return of
Israel to the Lord in case of backsliding in any degree. 2. Chron. 19.4.
Iehoshaphat, it is said, brought the people back unto the Lord God of their
Fathers: and Chap. 23. and 24. see again, Ezra 5.1, 2. and 10.4. and in this
way has God prospered his work here also: and though not the success is always
a certain mark of the Church or of the right way, as the Papists who make [
faelicitas temporalis] temporal prosperity to be one of theirs (I would be far
from thinking that any smile of providence will legitimate those actions which
the Word of God condemn's) and in Religion therefore to do nothing for God
wherein we shall run any hazard, but leave all to providence, and so judge of
the goodness or the sinfulness of our way according as providence favors
therein, or frowns upon us, is by some good Divines looked upon as the corrupt
reasoning of Gamaliel in Acts 5.38.39. But yet when we have had those who in
the fear of God have searched the Scriptures, who have been with God in the
Mount, their faces shining with much of his glory at their receiving from the
hand of the Lord a second edition of the Tables and pattern of his will: and
that we have found the Lord setting to his seal of Divine benediction
thereunto, O take we heed of Innovations now* and let the remembrance of what
the Lord has been to us and done for us recover from every degree of, and all
tendencies unto backsliding! and in special here.

1. Remember that a main design of Gods people's adventuring in to this
wilderness was for progress in the work of Reformation, and that in the way of
brotherly communion with the Reformed Churches of Christ in other parts of the
world. O forsake not, deny not, condemn not that fundamental design! and
otherwise indeed what needed they to have removed from England? (this cannot
justly be denied) they were then in the place from whence there came mixtures
in the worship of God, and the blessed Sabbath of God struck at, etc. which
there were grieved with, and vexed their righteous souls from day to day; but
here they hoped they might enjoy freedom from those pollutions, and freedom to
follow the Lord fully in all his Ordinances and appointments; I say to follow
the Lord (not by halves: not still in way of mixtures in Religion to have a
medly of all sorts of Religion, but) fully; with what purity the Lord would
give them light for, and power to enjoy without molestation: And therefore, as
not in a way of Separation from the Churches of Christ in Old-England, which
the printed Books of our New England Divines do abundantly show; ( v. Cottons
Answer to Mr. Williams. page 138.140, etc. Hookers Survey, pt. 1. page 48. Mr.
Philips in his Answer to Lamb. page 144. Mr. Allen of Dedham, with my Honored
Father (P. M.) in their defense of the nine positions both in the Preface, page
12, 13. and afterward in that Book, p. 40.43, 68, 70, 71, 150. etc.) And so to
hold communion with them in the Ordinances of Christ, and according to the
order and command of Christ, yet withal to depart from defiling mixtures
aforesaid; Surely then it follows by undeniable consequence, that if it was for
Reformation, then not for Toleration of all Religions: and awful are the words
that fell from the pen of our famous Cotton in his bloody tenet washed, (page
132. and 192) viz. It was Toleration that made the world Antichristian: and (
said he) the Church never took hurt by the punishment of Heretics. But in the
page last mentioned he has these words, i. e. The Lord keep us from being
bewitched with the whores cup, lest while we seem to detest and reject her with
open face of profession, we do not bring her in by a back door of Toleration
and so come at last to drink deeply in the Cup of the Lord's wrath, and be
filled with the Cup of her Plagues.

And shall any now plead for mixtures of men's superstitious Inventions in the
worship of God? and what else is the Spirit of that Toleration, which many cry
up; but that no thorough and effectual Testimony should be born against such
Idolatrous mixtures? The hearty love and union of a truly Religious people,
consists not in a boundless toleration of sin, but in the way of Reformation,
Ezekiel. 11.18, 19. And should this poor people be intoxicated with that heady
wine of the Doctrine of such a toleration, as to open that door [for instance]
unto superstitious and anti christian Ceremonies in the worship of God, as it
would be contrary to our professed Fundamental end of the settling of this
Plantation, so God would be extremely provoked at such a toleration: and who
sees not the event that would be? the like I might say as to any other such
mixtures brought in by toleration destructive to the established way of Worship
here, for the substance thereof: and shall this be the commendation of
New England, i. e. [I have something for thee, that thou can bear with them
that are evil?] and this for thee [ that thou suffer the woman Jezabel etc.]
Yea why do not men plead for Toleration of all non-fundamentals in Civil
matters? for there are the extra-fundamentalia there also.

Let the Magistrates Coercive Power in matters of Religion [therefore] be still
asserted, seeing he is one who is bound to God, more then any other men, to
cherish his true Religion; and as the good Kings of Judah, commended for it in
Scripture, Asa, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah etc. therefore are they to be
principal Instruments in furthering the Reformation aforesaid: and I would
leave it with any godly, sober Christian to consider and answer; Whether the
Interest of Religion has not as good a title, and plea for the Magistrates
Protection, as [not any irreligion which self conceit and humor has wedded any
unto; but] any worldly Interest whatsoever? and how woeful would the state of
things soon be among us, if men might have liberty without control, to profess
or preach or print, or publish what they list, tending to the Seduction of
others! and though the Enemy sows Tares, which cannot be many times plucked
up without danger to the wheat, and are therefore let alone, yet I would hope
none of the Lords husbandmen will be so foolish as to Sow Tares, or plead for
the Sowing of them, I mean in the way of the Toleration aforesaid, when as it
may be prevented: the light of Nature and right Reason would cry out against
such a thing.

Rulers are not to be a terror to the good, but to the evil, Romans 13. Now as
was said concerning Timothy 1 Cor. 16.10. see that he may be with you ( said
the Apostle) without fear: so let the dear Servants of God be cherrished, under
the wing of Magistracy without fear; they are afraid of Heresy, let the
Magistrate secure them from those Terrors: the prevailing of corrupt and
profane Doctrines and Practices (and what men's Judgments are, if they be
conscientious, they will practice the same, whether it be good or bad, best or
worst) are a terror to them, they dread what the consequent will be, if not
seasonably Crushed, and removed:

David's affection to the House of God should not be forgotten, and the
affliction of his soul about it, in Psalm. 132.1, 2, 3, 4. deserving to be
graven not upon the Session-house-door, but upon the heart of every Magistrate
that enters in thereat; that so the interest of Religion among us may never be
suffered to lacquy after any worldly interest whatsoever: Iehoshaphat is
prospered by God, because he walked in the FIRST ways of David his Father, i.
e. the ancient and good ways of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 17.1. Mind the first ways
of our godly Leaders, and follow them therein, according as they followed the
Lord, as the Apostle speaks of himself, 1 Cor. 11.1. because Jeroboam abused
his power, and made Israel to sin, 1 King. 17.21. shall it (therefore) not be
lawful for Josiah to make all in Israel by the regular use of his power to
serve the Lord their God? read 2 Chronicles. 34. ult. Nor is it for any to object,
that in the primitive times, the Magistrates meddled not with matters of
Religion: for it is not what was done, but what was their duty to have done,
that is to be exemplary to us: we read then that the Magistrate would not so
much as Countenance or Tolerate the true Religion; does it therefore follow,
that the Magistrate should not countenance or tolerate it now? neither will it
follow, that if the heathen Magistrates regarded not how it went with the
Christian Religion that therefore the Christian Magistrate should follow the
example of the Heathen therein: as a Pagan Master when converted has not more
power (as a Master) then he had before his conversion; but yet surely the grace
of God bestowed upon him, teaches him, that he is bound to improve his power
better (for the advancement of the interest of Religion in his family, and
curbing irreligion therein) even far beyond what he did before his conversion,
so it is here with the converted Magistrate.

Austin I find speaking to this objection, That in the primitive times, the
civil Magistrate did not make and execute such Laws, and put forth their
coercive power for Religion and the Christians; Answers it thus, viz. They
consider not that that was the time wherein (as in Psalm. 2.) it is predicted
that the Kings and Gentiles would rage, etc. and not then the time for what
follows there also foretold, to be afterward accomplished, that Kings should
serve the Lord in fear, etc. Nondum autem agebatur quod paulo post in eodem
Psalmo dicitur, i. e. and nunc Reg^s intelligite, etc. Quomodo ergo, r^ges,
Domino serviunt in timore, nisi ea quae contra jussa. Domini fiunt, religiosa
severitate prohibendo, atque plectendo; aliter enim servit quia homo est,
aliter quia etiam rex est, quia homo est ei servit vivendo fideliter, quia vero
etiam Rex est servit leges justa praecipientes, and contraria pr^hibentes,
convenienti vigore sanciendo, sicut servivit Ezechias lucos and templa
idolorum, and illa excelsa, quae contra Dei praecepta fuerunt extructa
destruendo: sicut servivit Josias talia and ipse faciendo; sicut servivit Rex
Ninivitarum universam civitatem ad placandum Dominum compellendo: sicut
servivit Darius, etc. in hoc ergo serviunt Domino Reges in quantum sunt Reges,
cum ea faciunt ad serviendum illi, quae non possunt facere nisi reges:

It Is not enough, says he, that Kings do serve the Lord as private men can do,
but as Kings, and that is when they do that in his service for him which none
but Kings (and so it holds as to other inferior Magistrates proportionably)
can do; as respecting the making and executing wholesome Laws, in order to the
advancement of the Kingdom of Christ) ( Augustinus Bonifacio comiti, de
correctione Donatistarum propter eos qui nolebantillos legibus imperialibus
corrigi, tomo, 2. page 74.) Moreover read in Re. 17. the promise concerning
the ten Kings hating the Whore, etc. and also what is Prophesied concerning
these New testament times, Isa. 49* 23. That Kings shall be nursing Fathers,
and Queens nursing Mothers to the Church: the countenance of the Magistrate,
and that as a Magistrate, in matters of Religion, is a mercy to be prayed for,
1 Timothy 2.1, 2. and therefore surely is no Antichristian thing, as some would
suggest; yea, says the Apostle in the same Epistle, Chap. 1.9, 10. Knowing
that the Law is not made for a righteous man, (i. e. that he should be
condemned and punished for his righteousness) but for the Lawless and
Disobedient [(...) etc.] i. e. that will not be subject to Order, as the word
notes; and for the ungodly and unholy and profane, and if there be any other
thing that is contrary to sound Doctrine, so that not only as to matters of
unrighteousness against the second Table, but ungodliness and unholiness
against the first Table, is the Law to be proportionably sharpened: so that
therefore if those that call themselves pious, will carry it impiously, and
lawlesly, treading upon the wholesome Laws of the Country, and so upon Authority
it self, and will refuse to subject unto Christ's order, and do what is
scandalous and criminal, let them smart for it as well as those that make not
such a profession of Religion: as on the other hand, such should be the
constitution of Civil Government, as that ungodly men also may have Justice
when their Cause is good, as sometimes it is: a bad man may have a good cause
which he is engaged in, and on the other side, a godly man may be found in a
cause that is exceeding vile, and the uprightness of the Civil Judge will carry
him impartially to mind the cause, and not (in that respect) the person:

Let all Profaneness (then) in Doctrine, and Life, that causes disturbance of
the Peace of Churches, or of the Commonwealth be curbed, the Rod of the
Magistrate is effectually to be improved for that end: And the Lord mo^^ and
more strengthen the hand and heart of our Magistracy to crush all Profaneness,
the Pride, and Drunkenness, and Whoredom, and Lying, and Stealing, the
Heresies, and Schisms, and Factions, and such works of the Flesh, and
scandalous Disorders that do so lamentably prevail among us; whether these
works of the flesh (as the Apostle calls them, Gal. 5.) he found in Church
members or Non-members.

Finally we may consider, that neutrality in Religion has a Scripture curse
cleaving to it, Judge. 5.23. They did not help against the Lord, but because
they did not help the Lord therefore, etc. yea sometimes when it is out of fear
and unbelief, see the danger such are in, Rev. 21.8. Do the followers of
Antichrist receive his mark in their Hand, and in their Forehead, and shall the
followers of the Lamb be ashamed of his, and his Fathers Name in their
Foreheads? read Rev. 14.1* He that is not with me (says Christ, Mat. 12.30.)
is against me: There is no neutrality here to be allowed of: Christ cannot
endure halting* or lukewarmness, but will spew such out of his mouth, Rev.
3.16. It is a sign of an evil and perilous time, when those are to be found the
swaying part among a professing People, who through fear, or spiritual sloth
and cowardice, or scepticisme, or wanting a Principle, and spirit of true
holiness and sincerity in them, or through carnal policies, or self-interests,
etc. are Enemies to, and haters of the work of Reformation, studying rather
such a Syncretisme in Religion as takes in all persuasions (without regard had
to that spiritual chastity and virgin-spirit, which according to Rev. 14.4.
ought to be in all the true followers of the Lamb: and which the Apostle puts
the Corinthians in mind of, 2 Cor. 11.2, 3. etc.) rather then be at the
trouble of Reforming-work in an Adulterous Generation, and of running hazards
for Christ therein; Let it not then be styled Persecution which (rightly
understood) is but the just punishment of sinners for their sin by the Civil
Magistrate, who bears not the sword in vain, Romans 13.

It Is true what Austin speaks (in the Epistle before cited, Bonifacio Comiti.
Tom. 2. Page 72.) Molestus est medicus furenti phrenetico, and pater
indisciplinato filio: ille ligando, iste coedendo; sed ambo diligendo: si autem
illos negligant, and perire permittant, ista potius ma^suetudo falsa crudelis
est; si enim Equus, and Mulus quibus non est intellectus, morsibus, and
calcibus resistunt hominibus, a quibus eorum curanda vulnera contrectantur, and
cum inter dentes eorum, and ungulas saepe homines perielitentur, and aliquando
vexentur, non tamen eos deserunt, donec per dolores, and molestias medicinales,
revocent ad salutem, quanto magis homo ab homine, and frater a fratre ne in
aeternum pereant, non est deserendus: qui correctus intelligere potest quantum
sibi praestabatur beneficium, quando se persecutionem perpeti querebatur, i. e.
The Physician (said he) is troublesome to the distracted person, and the Father
to the unruly Son, the former by his binding him, the latter by his beating
him, but to both of them by his love, etc.

And afterward (in the same Epistle, page 73.) says he, Magis illa (ancilla
scil. Agar) persequebatur Saram superbiendo, quam illam Sara coercendo: illa
enim Dominae faciebat injuriam, ista imponebat superbiae disciplinam; i. e. Not
Sarah but Hagar was the persecuter. Rulers are called gods in Scripture, surely
then such are to take care for the things of God. You are this day to choose
new gods, and that without incurring the danger of War in the gate; blessed be
God for it! The Lot I suppose is, by Prexie, already cast for this Election:
let it be the care of New England for ever, that they choose not Idols in stead
of Gods, and what they are, we shall see in Psalm. 115.5, 6, 7. so, nor such who
have mouths but they speak not for God, eyes but they see not, ears but they
hear not, etc. Let us beware of lodging this precious Interest of Jesus Christ
in the bosom and hand of any kind of profane Idol!

2. May it not be judged probable that our recovery from any degree of sliding
back from God, and our preventing what is on that hand to be feared, must be by
a more thorough, conscientious, religious, effectual care for the nurture of
the Rising Generation; the Lord speaks in our Text unto his people under the
appellation of a Generation [ O Generation, etc.] and O that that might be kept
free from the leaven, infection, poison of any thing tending to debauch them,
issuing from any of the passing generation, yet upon the stage of Action!
Ancestors are sometimes left to do that in their day, which the succeeding
generation pays the sad score of; so Manasseh's sin God would not pardon, but
wrath comes for the same upon Israel after his death, 2 Kings 23.26, 27. and
Chap. 24.3, 4. and O may it be the portion of the Rising Generation, that they
may not inherit any of the Mistakes or the Quarrels, etc. of any such as have
gone before them! Their education and disciplinating is to be carefully
attended, by all good means; Care, and diligence, and trouble, etc. must
necessarily be expected therein: the Lord forgive neglects hitherto, where they
may be found! and remove that which hinders so good a Work as is their
Institution; and grant that it may have its free passage in all those Societies
unto which they do belong!

1. In Families; that there be Family-instruction and discipline attended
there, both as to the things of God, and other matters; that there might be
nothing there to vitiate them, no evil Examples of pestiferous Servants and
Apprentices, much less of Parents giving any evil Example to them, whereby they
will become eminently hardened in, and edified and emboldned unto sin. It is
said of Cato, That he was religiously careful never to speak any unclean or
passionate word before his Son, ( Sage Senator, p. 27, etc.) And
Family-teaching and government is here necessary: what is spoiled in the first
Concoction, will never be good in the second or third; they must be restrained
from the sins of Childhood and Youth: Great is the idleness of many Children,
and the indulgence of many Parents is no less, in this Land: and with reference
in special to their subjection unto their Parents, it is a sad complaint in
some parts of the Country, That there are diverse Children who when grown up to
some years wherein they might be helpful to their Parents, and should labor to
requite them, etc. grow to that pride, and unnaturalness, and stubbornness,
that they will not serve their Parents except they be hired to it, looking at
themselves as free from being under Parental and Family-government, when as
neither the Law of God or man, or right Reason allows them therein; and perhaps
are ready to say as the Prodigal, Luke 15.12. Give me the portion of goods that
falls to me, etc. Manifold are the Inconveniences to the Family, and to the
Commonwealth, and to the Church, that come in at this door, and therefore I
wish there might be seasonable redress thereof.

2. In the Schools; that there be Instruction and Discipline also attended. O
that inferior Schools were every where so settled and encouraged, as that the
College (which the Lord has made to be a Spring of Blessing to the Land)
might not now languish for want of a sufficient supply of young ones from
thence! There is a great decay in Inferior Schools, it were well if that also
were examined, and the Cause thereof removed, and Foundations laid for
Free-Schools, where poor Scholars might be there educated by some Public Stock.

3. In Churches; that there also Ecclesiastical Discipline be attended, and
respecting all Church-watch (Instruction, Censures, and other Privileges)
which in the Church they have a Covenant-right unto. Remember they are the
Lords Children, Ezekiel. 16.22. And truly here, a sad thing it is, that where the
Lord has not been a Wilderness, etc. unto us, yet that there should be such
places to be found where no Ministry is set up, and whence, or where it may be
said of them, respecting the Ordinance of Baptism in particular, that they have
been as long (perhaps) as the children of Israel were in the Wilderness, and
yet without the Initiating Seal of the Covenant? the reproach of Uncircumcision
not being rolled from them unto this day: where the fault is, or who are the
obstructers of it blameably, I say not; may be the Lord will say as in Numb.
14.31. respecting many upon the account of the precious Ways of the House of
God, and that Discipline of the Lord Jesus which has been too much by many
neglected and despised, that such and such shall see his Glory therein
notwithstanding.

Thirdly, and lastly, Let it be the Prayer, and so the endeavor of All, that
this Wilderness may never come to be a land of darkness by our revolt from
under our God, and from the Ways and Means by which the Lord has manifested
himself to be unto his people neither a Wilderness, nor a land of darkness. O
that the Lord may still be to us as formerly in that respect! And therefore

1. Let the Schools flourish: This is one means whereby we have been, and may
be still preserved from a wild Wilderness-state, through Gods blessing upon
the same, and from becoming a land of darkness, and of the shadow of death.
Cherish them therefore, and the College in special: and accordingly that there
may be a seasonable (while affections are warm) and a faithful improvement of
the Contribution for the New Edifice there, and what else is needful for the
encouragement and advancement of L^^^ring in that precious Society; the fall
and sinking whereof (which the Lord forbid) I should look at as presaging the
Ruin o^ this Land also: Let it never want a benign Aspect for the flourishing
of that dear Nursery; lest otherwise there come to be either no Ministry, or an
Illiterate, and (and in that respect* in former times accounted) a Scandalous
and insufficient Ministry, neither burning, nor shining Lights. Keep the Good
Old Way here experienced of a godly Learned Ministry, wherein the people of God
have tried, and found so much of the Presence and Glory of the Lord crowning
the same with so choice a Blessing as he has done: and God has no need of a
NEW Cart, or of Vzzah's hand to save the shaken Ark; nor did a good intention
excuse him from death by Gods immediate hand and stroke from Heaven, when the
Lords institution is crossed in that matter.

2. Let the Liberties of the Churches also be preserved and maintained; for the
Church is as a Light upon an hill: the people of God are to shine as Lights in
the world; therefore thereby also the Land is instrumentally kept from being a
land of darkness. Let the Scripturally-unworthy be debarred the holy things in
the Sacrament, etc. which they have no right unto by Rule. Pulsent fores (said
Cyprian of old) etc. though they bounce at the door, yet let them not have it
opened to them, till duly qualified for the same. There is much, and may be
more danger of such bold-fac'd Hypocrites: and therefore, O that no such
Intruders may be suffered to disturb, and vex the dear people of the Lord in
any of their just Liberties! and that a Malignant Spirit of Profaneness (which
this poor people is in great hazard of feeling the woeful impression of) may
timously be crushed, and so not permitted to blow out Gospel Light, even the
Lights of the Sanctuary here. Nor let there be any Ludibria medicorum
Spiritualium, or what may be any standing Reproach to the Healing ways and
Instruments of Jesus Christ here, seeing there is sufficient Balm in Gilead
provided by Christ for every Spiritual Disease in his Church. Let not the way
of the Rigid Separatists, and the like, he acted over again here, till the
Churches be buried in Confusion. In case of the Divisions in Churches, has not
the Congregational-Way Balm for this Wound appointed by Christ, but Morellius
must be raked out of his grave to be the only Physician?

3. Let the Ministry (who also should be instrumental, in their Sphere, to keep
this Land from becoming a land of darkness) be duly Encouraged. There have
been, and are Complaints this way respecting their outward Subsistence in many
places (I bless the Lord I am not under any temptation therein, being
liberally, and abundantly well provided for by the good people I live among;
and therefore I may speak the more freely and boldly for others) I fear there
is too sad neglect in diverse Towns. It was a sign Nehemiah was away, when the
Levites were fain to go into the fields, Nehem. 13.6, 10, 11. when they are
forced to turn to the Meadow, to the Cart, and to the Plow, etc. or else they
cannot live, at least not live out of tormenting Debt. Is this the fruit of
Gods being no Wilderness to us? O generation, see the word of the Lord. Mind
the Example of good Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 31.4. he encouraged such; (O take heed
that there be not on the other side found among us a discouraged Ministry,
respecting such (I mean) as are able, and faithful Ministers of the New
Testament, who would gladly spend, and be spent for their people:) He commanded
the people (it is there said) and it was not therefore left as an arbitrary
thing, or as an Alms: and mind the fruit of it, i. e. ver. 10. Since the
people began to bring the offerings into the house of the Lord, we have had
enough to eat; for the Lord has blessed his people, and that which is left is
this great store. If particular Churches or Towns are really not able to supply
the necessity of him that labors in the Word among them, should not such a
poor people be relieved? might it not do well if some additional Provision were
made out of some Public Bank or Stock for an honorable relief of such? and
that thereby we help to bear one another burdens? and be we not deceived, God
is not mocked in this very matter, Gal. 6.6, 7. 1 Cor. 9.14. Ezra 7.24, etc.
Must they be Rated Will and Doom? Ah, when men's hearts die to the Word, no
wonder if they soon die to the Dispensers of it: and then, What means this
waste? and proud, covetous, disingenuous, unwise, captious, carping, bold,
selfish spirits and principles will be stirring; and, Let us take turns to
preach (and to govern the Church also as Moderators in it) rather then have
this costly Service? and, What a weariness is it? etc. If it must be so, should
we wonder if the Lord take them away that are such a Charge, and ease people of
such a burden? Oh, muzzle not the mouth of that Ox that treads out the
Spiritual Corn. And though Antichristian Begging Friars live by Alms, yet let
it not be said of a Protestant people, (...) of these Churches, that they are
so sordid in their spirits as to truckle under a Mendicant Ministry; and that
will be a flatter^ng and an unfaithful Ministry at length, that is made to bow
under the Temptations of Needing the Alms of the people: and remember, that a
person or people may become guilty of Sacrilege by withholding what is due
this way, as well as by robbing or taking away that which is already dedicated
or given in to God, Mal. 3.8. and that withholding, is there called Robbery;
though I am far from pleading here for the quota pars there spoken of in
particular, but only as to the sin in general, the Apostle ranks it with, yea
aggravates that sin of Sacrilege above Idolatry in the New Testament, Romans
2.22.

4. Let the Magistracy also be Encouraged: this is part also of the Light of
Israel, 2 Samuel 21.17. whereby under God we are instrumentally preserved from
being a Wilderness, and a land of darkness: and a despised Government is a
forerunner of Anarchy and Confusion; and such Rulers will be now oppressed
with the Burden of that Government, when Revilings and Knocks are their
Reward; and their hearts will come at length to be alienated from such a
people, each one saying, This Ruin shall not be under my hand, etc. Isa. 3.5,
6, 7. and Anarchy or Confusion in a State, exposes them either to ruin one
another by Divisions, or to be ruined by a Foreign Power, that will make a prey
of them. Let All Encouragement therefore be afforded to this Magistracy: There
is the bread of the Governor, Neh. 5.18. i. e. which is due to him from the
people justly; with Matthew. 22.21. and Romans 13.6, 7. and there are to be those
Vestments of State (as Reverend Mr. Nigh speaks) to distinguish them from, and
dignifie them above other men, which there is need of, and therefore that they
be enabled unto. Not my Lord Major, but his Horse rules the City, said a wise
man once. People are awed and swayed much with outward Ensigns, or Marks and
Characters of Dignity. Hence Nehemiah (as Judicious and Reverend Mr. Nigh on
Neh. 6.11. in his Sermon, page 17, 18. well observes) even in a time of outward
straits, keeps up his Table so as might suit with the State of the Governor,
though he had not the bread of the Governor, Neh. 5.14, 18. He might at such a
time have laid down his Table, having such an excuse, but Nehemiah knew such
Entertainments kept up the Dignity and Honor of Government; and that these
vulgar Encouragements do much sweeten the Severities of Magistracy, and will
therefore rather continue them at his own Charge, then be without them: And
their Attendants, and Entertainments, and other Pageantries, are not Ensigns of
Vainglory, but the necessary Vtensils by which the worth and excellency of
Magistracy is notified to the common people, it being a Language best
understood by the generality. As for that Self-denial there has been by this
Magistracy, (even as Neh. 5.19. so I pray) The Lord think upon them for good,
according to all that they have done, and ventured, and suffered for this
people. But as God blesses the Country, so I hope the good people of this Land
will be enlarged unto a more honorable, and proportionable Allowance unto
them, according as the Work, and Dignity of their Place calls for the same.

O Generation (therefore) see the Word of the Lord* and know, that here is
encouragement for Gods people in the worst times, for the Lord being our God,
he will not be a Wilderness or land of darkness to us if we sincerely rely
upon him: Can there be a Wilderness where the Glory of the God of Heaven
dwells? Can there be Darkness where there is the Sun? There are Influences of
light, and life, and refreshing, and fruitfulness, and blessedness from this
Sun of Righteousness to them that fear his Name. Christ has imbarqu'd himself
in this our State; and therefore as Caesar encouraged the Boat-man in time of
danger by a dark Tempest, i. e. Confide nauta Caesarem vehis; so here, your
Betrustment who are Israel's Rulers here, is no less then the Son of God
himself with so many of the sons and daughters of God in his arms; and if we
forsake not him, he will not forsake us, as Asa encouraged those in his time, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. and as Deuteronomy. 2.7. so, for a longer time now then that, has the
Lord known and blessed his people in this great Wilderness, etc. and O let him
never leave us, nor forsake us, but be with us as he was with our fathers, 1
Kin. 8 57. and that the shining brightness of the favor of the glorious God of
Israel, signified by that Representation as of the Body of Heaven in its
clearness, Exodus 24.10. may be still the Vision of the God of New England; not
dark and cloudy, but light and glorious. And as I have said, See the word of
the Lord to us, so I might say also, O generation, see the Way of Israel unto
God, and our own ways in special: Have there been no beginnings of Revolt from
under the Lordship of our God? May not the Lord expostulate with us, as with
those at Bochim, Judge 2.1 -- 4. and say, I have removed your shoulder from the
burden, and your hands from the pots, as Psalm. 81.6. I have taken off the yoke
from thy neck, and the Almighty has caused light as by Snow in Salmon, I have
given you Manna to the full, the Rock has followed you, and you have had the
Pillar of guidance and protection in all your Journeyings; but have you
followed me fully with the Spirit of Caleb and Joshua? Yea thou have called
upon me in trouble (in the time of Drought, a year never to be forgotten by us,
and our Children after us, Anno 1662. and at other times) and I delivered thee,
and answered thee, as Psalm. 81.7, etc. and I bid you make no league with
Canaanites, etc. (in respect of corrupt mixtures, and base compliances in
matters of Religion) but (as Judge. 2.2.) why have you not obeyed my voice? why
have you not come up fully to the practice of my Will held forth to you by my
Servants? Why are there these and those Images of Jealousy among you? What is
this noise that I hear in so many Churches? the noise of the Axes and Hammers
of those that would cut and beat down the carved work? Why is there such
neglect of your Church-work of the house of God? and (as Ezra 7.23.) has that
been diligently done, which is commanded by the God of Heaven? for why should
there be wrath against the Colony of the Massachusetts? and see Hag. 1. beg. And
why is Family Duties in many houses laid aside? that in multitudes of Families
there is (it may be) no Prayer from the one end of the week to the other? no
Family-catechising, no Repetition of the Word preached, nor calling Children
and Servants to an account of what they do or should hear? no reading of the
Scripture? may be no Bible, or only a torn Bible to be found? I mean, but a
part of the Bible to be found, so that the whole Scripture is never read
throughout in some Families? I wish this be not the condition of many Families,
that either there is no Bible, or but a piece of a Bible, and that they can
content themselves therewith. O that as to these, and such like things, we
might be this day before the Lord as those at Bochim, weeping for the same
before the Lord! And O what unthankfulness is it, that after the Lord has done
so much for us, in being to us not a wilderness nor a land of darkness, we
should now say, We are lords, and will come no more at him: But let us testify
our real thankfulness to God, by cleaving to the Lord in that good old way,
wherein he has been leading his people hitherunto. Stand fast in the liberty
wherewith Christ has made us free, and be we not entangled with any yoke of
bondage, of one kind or other. Stand (I say) for your Liberties; not liberty
to sin, but to be holy; liberty to run the ways of Gods Commandments. Change
not away your glory for that which will not profit: My son, fear thou the Lord,
and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change: (Prove. 24.21,
22.) For their calamity shall rise suddenly; and who knows the ruin of them
both? Gods people came hither for Liberty; i. e. Liberty in the way of
Holiness: and our Holiness lies in Separation, from Sin and Profaneness, not
from the Churches and Saints of Christ. Dedication, viz. of our Selves, our
Children, and our All to God for God's ends.
Hence the Leaders of this people have, from the first, born express witness
against Rigid Separation, Carnal Ceremonies, Profane unholy persons in Doctrine
and Life: Search the printed Records of these things in the Works of our
New England Divines, and it will be found so. Therefore stand for your
Liberties (Honored, and Beloved in the Lord) and let us not be guiled,
befooled, deluded, baffled, or beaten out of them. I would hope that the
Fundamental Interest of the Liberties and Privileges of the Churches of Christ
here, and of the Civil State, will never be transformed, alienated, and reduced
to such an Interest which no sober, godly, wise-hearted Christians will judge
worthy their contending for, or worth their standing up in the defense of, or
hazarding their Estates and Lives for in the day of trial.

To conclude: The Lord help our Leaders in the Commonwealth, and in the
Churches also, not to faint or be discouraged though they meet with opposition,
difficulties, and ill requitals from some: Been facere, and male audire regium
est, said Seneca. And a good speech was it of a person famous in his
generation, i. e. A man in Public Place needs two Handkerchiefs about him,
viz. the one for his Sweat, the other for the Dirt. They must be laborious, and
prepare themselves to pass through evil report, as well as good. And though
there be the murmuring and strife of the Congregation in some times of
temptation, yet Moses must remember he is a Nursing-father, Numb. 11.12. and
Paul as a Nurse must be gentle, [(...): respecting sweetness of wisdom, and
love, both as to speech and silence] 1 Thessalonians. 2.7. and the Child must not be
thrown away because it is unquiet. Though there be a Storm, yet betray not the
Ship; In naufragio (says Seneca) Rector laudandus quem obruit mare clavum
tenentem (cited by Reynolds of Passions, p. 232.) i. e. That Steersman or
Master of the Vessel is indeed to be commended, that will not shrink from duty
through fear or Self-interest, etc. though he be washed, and raked over and
over with the Sea, or whatever the event be. I beseech our Honored Leaders and
Steersmen not to desert us, or the Cause of God imbarqued in the Vessel of this
Commonwealth, and of these Churches. You are as David to serve [(...)] as
Rowers under Christ, your own generation by the will of God, Acts 13.36. Let it
never be said of you, That you did let go your hold by being false to your
Precious Betrustments this way. Yea, should a Wrack come, (which the Lord in
mercy prevent) yet also may you so manage your selves, as to be seen to the
last Clavum tenentes; serving Jesus Christ faithfully here, according to that
Command Psalm. 2.11. to all the Rulers of the World, and that without being
biased with a Spirit of Men-pleasing, Temporizing, Humourizing, Faction,
Popularity, etc. It is by Christ that you Rule, and as you are by him* so you
are to be for him: and if we All cleave to the Lord, we need not then fear but
God will be with us, so that we shall be able with Luther in greatest shakings
to sing the Forty sixth Psalm: and though all the Earth should be gathered
against this Jerusalem, yet the Lord our God can make it a burdensome stone,
and a Cup of trembling, Zech. 12.2, 3. So that when these and those of the
Nations shall enquire about the state of such a people, What shall one then
answer the Messengers of the Nations? Truly as Isai. 14.32. i. e. That the Lord
has founded this Sion, and the poor of his people shall trust in it.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN the Epistle to the Reader, page 1. lin. 32. blot out there. In the Sermon
it self, page 1. l. 21. read recover that. l. 23. r. The parts. p. 5. l. 1. r.
to be among. p. 8. l. 5. r. being in them. p. 15. l. 26. r. Zelotae. p* 17. l.
1. r. unreasonable. p. 19. l. 6. r. superstitious. p. 20. l. 31. affectation.
p. 24. l. 4. r. upon many. l. 27. Our fathers. p. 28. l. 25. r. those candid.
p. 29. l. 37. blot out if. ^. 32. l. 6. r. Interests twisted. p. 36. l. 32, 33.
r. but steer only by providence, and not by rule.

Besides diverse mispointings, which the candid Reader will remit.


