At the second SESSIONS of the GENERAL COURT HELD AT Boston in New England.
WHereas it has pleased his most excellent Majesty our Gracious King, by his
Letter bearing Date the twenty seventh of April, 1678. to signify his Royal
pleasure, That the Authority of this his Colony of Massachusetts in New England,
do give forth Orders that the Oath of Allegiance as it is by Law established
within his Kingdom of England, be administered and taken by all his Subjects
within this Colony, who are of years to take an Oath:

In Obedience whereunto, and as a demonstration of our Loyalty; It is Ordered
and Enacted by this Court and the Authority thereof, that as the Members of
this Court now sitting have readily taken the Oath of Allegiance, so by their
Example and Authority they do require and command that the same Oath be given
and taken by all his Majesty's Subjects within this Jurisdiction, that are of
sixteen years of Age and upwards. And to the end this Order be duly executed,
It is hereby Ordered, that a convenient number of printed Copies of the said
Oath of Allegiance, exactly agreeing with the written Copy Enclosed in his
Majesty's Letter, and signed by the Secretary of State, be sent forth unto
every Magistrate and Justice of Peace, and to the Constable of every Town
within this Jurisdiction.

And it is further Ordered that the Magistrates and Justices, or such as are
Commissioned with Magistratical Authority in every County of this Colony do
with all convenient speed repair to the several Towns and Villages within this
Jurisdiction, at such time, and in such order as they best may, and accomplish
the same; giving forth their warrant to the Constables of each Town to convene
all the inhabitants of the Age above said, and taking their names in writing,
administer the said Oath of Allegiance to each of them, and return their Names
to the Recorder of each (...) Court to be enrolled. And if any shall refuse to
take the said Oath, or absent themselves, unless in case of sickness, the Names
of such shall be returned to the Recorder of the County, who are to be
proceeded against by the County Courts respectively, for the first offense
whereof he is legally convicted, to pay such a Fine as the County Court shall
impose not exceeding five pounds, or three Months Imprisonment in the common
prison or house of Correction: And for the second offense whereof he shall be
lawfully convicted, what sum the County Court shall inflict, provided it
exceed not ten pounds, or six Months Imprisonment without Bail, or Main-prise.

Printed and published by Order of the General Court.

Edward Rawson Secr.


