Pray for the Rising Generation, OR A SERMON Wherein Godly Parents are
Encouraged, to Pray and Believe for their Children, Preached the third Day of
the fifth Month, 1678. which Day was set apart by the second Church in BOSTON
in NEW ENGLAND, humbly to seek unto God by Fasting and Prayer, for a Spirit of
Converting Grace, to be poured out upon the Children and Rising Generation in
New England.

By INCREASE MATHER, Teacher of that Church.

Deuteronomy. 30.6. The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart and the heart of thy
seed.

2 Samuel 7.27. Therefore has thy servant found in his heart to pray this Prayer
unto thee.

Isai. 32.15. Until the spirit be poured upon us from on high, and the
wilderness be a fruitful Land.

Fieri non potest ut filius istarum lachrimarum pereat.

August. Confess. Lib. 3. Chap. 12. Cambridge: Printed by Samuel Green, and
sold by Edmund Ranger in Boston. 1678.

To the Reader,
EMinent Blessings do not use to be poured down upon the World, except the
Church of God be first stirred up to pray for them. The Lord who is styled
(...) the Hearer of Prayer, delights to give mercy in this way* And it was
never known since the World began, that the Spirit of Prayer was awakened in
the hearts of those that can cry Abba Father but some great and blessed effect,
did in due time follow* He said not to the seed of Jacob seek ye me in vain. O
that God would bow the heart of New England, even of all his Saints in these
Churches, as one man, to cry mightily to Heaven, that his Spirit may be poured
on the now risen (a multitude of sinful men that are risen up in their Fathers
stead) and upon the after rising Generation. The Lords People have need of
something to comfo^t them, in this day, when there are so many doleful symptoms
of approaching wrath and ruin. Now if God say unto his praying ones amongst
us, seek ye my face for the rising Generation, and their hearts answer again,
Lord thy face we will seek for them, that will be no small encouragement unto
Faith, that the blessed design of our Fathers (now with Christ beholding his
glory) who transported themselves into this vast, and then wast Wilderness, in
sp^cial with respect unto Posterity, that so they might leave a seed that shall
serve him, and be accounted to the Lord for a generation, will not be wholly
frustrate When did any People by Fasting and Prayer, ask the Holy Spirit of the
Father, for themselves and theirs, and yet received no answer? shall we be the
first that God ever denied?

As for the ensuing Sermon, if the Publication of it, shall in the l^ast tend,
to set the wheel of Prayer a going, on the behalf of the Rising Generation, I
trust it will not be a grief to my self, or others, that I have granted a Copy
of what was delivered, unto such as have importuned me thereunto. Some years
ago, I mentioned another Discourse relating to the Rising Generation in New
England, then in my thoughts. I was not yea and nay in those purposes; but have
through the good hand of God upon me, finished (according to the measure of
Grace received) what I designed. Nor am I altogether without hope, but that God
who has chosen the weak things of the World to do his work by, that so the
excellency of the Power may appear to be of God, will own that poor endeavor
for the good of souls, when his providence shall bring it forth. In the mean
time, this being of the same nature with the former, let the candid Christian
Reader accept of it, and help me also by his Prayers, that I may serve the
Generation wherein I live* and whereof I am, according to the Will of God.

Boston August 22. 1678. Increase Mather.

Pray for the Rising Generation.
ISAIAH. 44.3. I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine
Off spring.


THe Prophet having in the conclusion of the preceding Chapter, in the Name of
God, denounced heavy Judgment to come upon the Apostate Church of Israel, he
does proceed in this Chapter to speak by way of Consolation to the godly
remnant amongst them; And for that end does put them in mind of a most gracious
and glorious promise; under which we have, 1. The persons concerned, or the
Subject of this promise, viz The Israel of God, ver. 1. Yet hear now O Jacob my
Servant, and Israel whom I have chosen, Who are described from their political
birth. ver^ 2 Thus says the Lord, that made and formed thee from the womb. The
Children of Israel considered as a Church and State, Gatak: in locum English
Annotations Josh: 3.^
were born in the day when the Lord brought them out of Egypt; they were then
formed to be a people for himself; The Lord molded them up into a
proportionable frame of Church and State; for which cause did the children of
Israel begin their Religious Account, (albeit their civil Account b^gan six
Months before that) from the time of the year when they came out of Egypt,
since that then they seemed to begin their life. And then they were a Ieshurun,
Thou I^shurun, h. e. a righteous People as to their consti^ution and
profession, according to the signification of the name Ieshurun; they were
wholly a right seed, under most righteous Laws. 2 We have the blessing promised
in the 3 d. verse: And it is first express^d, then explained. It is expressed
in the former part of the verse, I will pour water upon the thirsty, (so the
verse should be re^d) and floods upon the dry ground: alluding partly unto
plentiful showrs whereby the thirsty Earth is made fruitful, and partly unto
rivers such as Nilus in Egypt, the floods and seasonable overflowing whereof do
enrich the earth: the promise is explained in the latter part of the verse, the
words that are before us to insist on. will pour my spirit and my blessing, h.
e. that wonderful blessing of the Spirit: They are spiritual waters which are
here spoken of* No other showrs then those that come down from the third, and
highest heaven: and this promise is further illustrated from the blessed extent
of it, in that, not only Parents, but Children are concerned therein. On thy
Seed i. e. thy Children, and on thine Offspring, i. e. Posterity as some
render the word, Hebr. I will pour my blessing upon thy young spriggs. The
Children of Gods Servants, that spring from them, and must succeed when they
are dead and gone out of the world, are intended by this expression.

Concerning the fulfillment of this promise, this (as well as many other
Scriptures which are prophetical, and promissary) does admit of a Typical and
Partial, as also an Antitypical, and more plenary Accomplishment. The Lords
people whilst in Babylon were like unto dry and desolate ground; but the Lord
received them afterward, and brought them into a flourishing estate, and there
was a glorious work of the Spirit of God in that matter, Not by might, nor by
power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts. And there will be a more
glorious accomplishment of this Prophecy and Promise, when God shall pour out a
Spirit of converting Grace upon the body of the Israelitish Nation.

Moreover, the words being a special branch of the Covenant of Grace, which God
has established with his Servants and with their Children, Gentiles are
concerned therein as well as Jews; for upon them is come the blessing of
Abraham by Jesus Christ.

See Dr. Owen of the Spirit. p. 87
And indeed the words have special reference unto New-Testament-times, which is
also intimated by that expression of pouring the Spirit: God is said to g^ve
his Spirit, under the Old Testament, but it is very observable, that he is not
said to pour his Spirit on men, except in the New Testament, or in Scriptures
that do refer to the days of the Gospel.

The Doctrine which we may take up from the Words, is, Doct. That one of the
greatest blessings promised in the Covenant of Grace, is, That the Lord will
pour his Spirit upon the Children and Posterity of his Servants.

Now for the clearing of this Doctrine, four things may be enquired into? (1)
What is here meant by the Spirit? (2) What is employed in this pouring the
Spirit. (3) How it does appear that the pouring of the Spirit upon Children is
a great Blessing? (4) The reason why the Lord has made such a promise.

Q. 1. What is here meant by the Spirit?

Ans. The Spirit is not here taken in a personal sense; See Mr Cottons Answer
to Bailey p. 36, 37, 38. Dr. Owen of perseverance. chap. 8.
although it be a glorious Truth, that the Holy Ghost himself does dwell in the
hearts of Believers, yet he is not as to his person said to be poured on men;
for so he is equally in all the Saints: whereas this expression of Pouring the
Spirit intimates a larger communication of him to some then unto others.
Wherefore the Phrase is Metonymical, that being affirmed of the cause, which is
proper to the effect. In respect of his effects and operations the Holy Ghost
is poured forth upon his Servants.

1. Then by the Spirit here is meant, The gifts of the Spirit. All spiritual
gifts, especially Illumination in the mysteries of the Gospel is from the Holy
Ghost: Hence they that have such gifts are said to be made partakers of the
Holy Ghost, Heb. 6.4. He that has a gift of knowledge, or a gift of prayer,
has received it from the Holy Ghost, and the Spirit of the Lord is so far
poured upon him. And the gifts of the Spirit are compared unto water in the
Scripture, Ioh. 7.38, 39. He that believes on me, out of his belly, i. e. his
heart, shall flow rivers of living water; this spoke be of the Spirit, which
they that believe on him should receive. For as Waters do refresh the bodies of
men, so the gifts of the Holy Ghost do refresh their Souls: when the Lord did
shower down his Spirit in that plentiful measure on the Apostles, thousands of
Souls were refreshed and revived thereby. This then is partly meant here, when
it is said, I will pour my Spirit on your Seed, h. e. your Children shall have
gifts of the Holy Ghost bestowed upon them; they shall be taught to know the
Lord from the greatest to the least.

2. By the Spirit here converting, sanctifying Grace is meant: The Spirit is
put for the graces thereof: Conversion is the special work of the Holy Ghost:
The conversion of the house of David, h. e. the Elect of God, is intimated by
that of pouring a Spirit of Grace upon them, Zech. 12.10. Grace is wrought in
the Soul by no other hand then that of the Spirit. When God sends down his
Spirit to accompany his Word and Ordinances, then converting work goes on, but
if he withhold the efficacious influences of his holy Spirit, converting work
will be at a stand, all means and outward dispensations notwithstanding.
Wherefore Conversion, or Regeneration is called the Renewing of the Holy Ghost,
Tit. 3.5. These words then are a promise and gracious intimation unto the Lords
People, that a Spirit of Converting grace shall be poured upon their Children.

We come to the second enquiry, viz. What is employed in this Pouring of the
Spirit, which the Text speaks of?

Ans. 1. This expression does imply, that the graces of the Spirit are fitly
resembled unto water; so much is intimated by the Metaphor of pouring, which
alludeth unto the Clouds, pouring down Rain upon the Earth. Water is of a
purifying nature, so the waters of the Spirit, sanctifying grace does cleanse,
and purify the souls of men, Ezekiel. 36.25. I will sprinkle clean water upon
you, and you shall be clean from all your filthiness, and from all your Idols
will I cleanse you. The guilt of sin is washed away in the blood of Christ; the
filth of sin is purged by those blessed waters which do proceed from the Spirit
of Christ, even converting, sanctifying grace: For the same reason grace is
compared unto fire, Mat. 3.11. Metals, Gold and Silver, are purified by fire,
other things by water, therefore are the blessed operations of the Holy Ghost
compared both to the one, and to the other. Water is of a mollifying nature;
the Earth that is dry and hard is thereby softened, Psalm. 65 10. Thou visitest
the earth and waterest it, thou greatly enrichest it with the River of God,
which is full of water, thou make it soft with showers: So does converting
grace soften the dry and hard hearts of the children of men; that heart which
was as hard as a stone before, if once a spirit of converting grace be poured
thereon; it does become soft and pliable like water. Again, Water makes
fruitful; showers and floods do so: Thus when the Lord does rain the waters of
the Spirit, or cause them to flow over the Souls of men, they are made f^uitful
in the works of Righteousness, Isai 32.15 Until the Spirit he poured upon us
from on high, and the wilderness become a fruitful field. That Soul that was a
desolate, parched, barren Wilderness, when once the Spirit from on high is
poured upon it, does become like a fruitful field, Ezekiel. 34.26, 27. Fruits of
holiness and righteousness are the effect of being watered by the spirit of
God; only the converted man, that has Grace in his soul, is indeed fruitful,
others are barren and desolate ground. Once more, water is of an healing
nature; so are the waters of the spirit, sin is the souls sickness, grace is
the souls health; the wound received by original Corruption is in some measure
healed by converting grace. Ezekiel. 47.9. For they shall be healed, and every
thing shall live whither the River comes Those words are a prophecy,
concerning the conversion of the Gentiles, by means of that healing virtue
which does attend the blessed waters of the Gospel.

2. This expressi^n of pouring the spirit, does intimate, an abundant measure
of the spirit, i. e. of the gifts and graces thereof.

Pouring is something more then Sprinkling, as when their comes a plentiful
rain from Heaven, enough to satisfy dry Ground* it comes pouring down. As
Elihu speaks, Job 36.27, 28. He makes small the drops of water, they pour down
Rain according to the vapor thereof, which the Clouds do drop and distill upon
man abundantly. So this pouring of the spirit notes a great shower of grace,
Hence it is said in the Context, that Floods shall be poured on the dry ground,
now a Flood of Grace intimates a great measure thereof. There are many
Scripture expressions that confirm this, Prove. 1.23. I will pour out my spirit
upon you. The Hebrew word (...) Nabang which is there translated, Pour,
signifies to spring up, intimating that the spirit of grace in the souls of
Believers is like a Fountain, where is an abundance of water. Isai. 32.15.
Until the spirit be poured out upon us from on high. The Hebrew word (...)
Gnadah signifies to make bare; so that the meaning is, that there shall be a
manifest, conspicuous pouring forth of the spirit, that all the world should
take notice of it. And indeed, when a soul is converted there is an abundant
effusion of the spirit, to accomplish such a strange thing as that is, to
change such a cursed nature, to renew such a vile heart, must needs proceed
from a plentiful effusion of the spirit. Tit. 3* 5, 6. By the washing of
Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly
through Jesus Christ our Savior. Wherefore when it is said, I will pour my
spirit on thy seed, and my blessing on thine Offspring: the Lord does
graciously promise his servants that their Children shall attain unto an
eminency of spiritual gifts, and unto large measures of Grace and Holiness.

We come to the third Enquiry, viz. How it does appear that the pouring of the
spirit upon Children is a great blessing? Ans.

1. In that the gift of the Holy Ghost is mentioned in the Scripture as a great
and wonderful thing It is said, Act. 10.45. They were astonished, be^cause that
on the Gentiles was poured out the gift of the Holy Ghost. Yea, it is mentioned
as such a gift as is equivalent to all good things, Mat. 7.11. Your Father
which is in Heaven shall give good things to them that ask him: Now in Luke it
is expressed by saying, Your Heavenly Father shall give the Holy Spirit to them
that ask him, Chap 11.13. So then the gift of the Spirit is virtually all good
things: Truly if God pour his Spirit upon our Children, he does more for them
then if he bestowed all the good things in the World upon them. This is the
great promise of the Gospel: As the great promise of the Old Testament was
concerng the coming of the Messiah, so the great promise of the New Testament
does respect a more plentiful effusion of the Spirit of Grace. Hence the
pouring down of the spirit is noted by that expression of the promise of the
Father, Act. 1.4. And he is called the spirit of Promise, Ephesians 1.13. as being
the great gift which God has promised to bestow on his servants.

2. The Truth is evident in that the Blessing here spoken of, i^ an everlasting
Blessing. Eternal good things are the chief: so is this Blessing of the spirit,
upon whom he is poured, upon them, and in them he remains for evermore: The
Hebrew word (...) ^atzak which is here translated Pour, signifies to Fasten as
well as to Pour: I will fasten my spirit upon your Children. That indwelling of
the person of the Holy Ghost in Believers, which the New Testament speaks so
much of, is everlasting: He abides with them and in them for ever, John 14.16.
And the graces of the spirit, which he does pour on his People are everlasting:
common gifts may cease, but special grace abides to eternity. It is a seed of
God that is incorruptible, which lives and abides for ever, 1 Pet. ^ 23. As
the Holy Fir^ (which signified the Holy Ghost, his coming down from Heaven into
the hearts of his People) it never went out; no more shall grace dye, or be
totally ^^^^inguished in a Believing soul* Hence, true Grace is compared unto
living ( i. e. spring) water, which never runs dry; yea unto great Rivers in
respect of their perennity: great Rivers are always running from the beginning
of the World to the end thereof; so is true saving-grace of an everlasting
nature, Isai. 41.18.

3. A spirit of Converting Grace is such a Blessing as never goes alone: that
sets forth the greatness, and eminency of it: If (says the Apostle) God
give us his Son, shall he not with Him give us all things, Rom 8.32 So if the
Lord give his holy spirit to us, and to our Children, shall he not with him
give all things: Godliness has the promise of this life, and of that which is
to come, 1 Timothy 4.8 We should not trouble our selves about laying up great
portions or much of the things of this World for our Children; if we can but
prevail with God to pour his spirit on them, to give grace to them, they are
sure never to want as long as they live in this World. Is not pardon of sin a
rich and glorious blessing, which our poor Children, because they are our Off
spring stand in need of? Now if the Lord pour a spirit of converting grace on
them, their sins shall be forgiven, Mar. 4.12: Is not eternal life and glory a
great Blessing? the pouring of the spirit on the sou^ is a certain sign and
evidence of one that is designed unto eternal li^e in Heaven: Therefore the
Scrip^u^e speaks of the first fruit of the spirit, Rom 8.23 And of the
earnest of the spirit, Ephesians 1 14 If the Lord give grace to our Children, he will
give glory too, yea he will withhold from them no good thing, Psalm 84.11.

Q 4 But why has the Lord promised to do thus for the Children of his servants?

Reas: 1 From the exceeding riches of the grace of God: That the Lord most
High, who has an absolute dominion over the works of his hands, should at all
deal with man in a Covenant way, or make any promise to him, is from grace;
much more that he should deal thus with fallen man: And that he should ^xtend
his Covenant, not only to Parents, but to their Children also, that their
Offspring with them are under the wings of the Covenant; and moreover, that he
should promise so great ^ blessing as that of giving his spirit, and yet more,
that his Spirit should be poured upon them. We may well cry out, as they did,
Z^ch. 4.7. Grace! grace! None but a God of infinite grace would have done thus.

Reas. 2. Because the Children of Gods people do many of them belong to
Election, As it is expressed in the Context, Ieshurun whom I have chosen; That
Election of God is mentioned as the ground of this promise in the Text. The
Elect of God are the proper Subjects of this promise: The Lord in the Covenant
of Grace has not only promised that whoever does truly believe and repent
shall be saved, but as to the Elect, there is a promise of the first Grace,
even that converting grace shall be poured on them, they shall be made to
repent and believe. A new heart shall be given to the house of Israel, h. e.
the Elect, typified by the house of Israel, Gal. 6.16. Now God has seen good
to cast the line of Election so, as that it does (though not wholly, and only,
yet) for the most part, run through the loins of godly Parents. There are, it
is true, Elect Children, who are not born of Elect Parents, but there are few
(if any) Elect Parents without Elect Children* Sometimes all the Children
belong to Election, as we see in the many Sons of Jacob, However some of them,
that the Lord remembers, and establishes his Covenant with. The Scripture does
frequently hint this Truth, that Elect Children are for the most part cast upon
Elect Parents, see Psalm 103.17. Isai. 59 20* and 65.22, 23. 2 Timothy 1.5, 2 John
1. And observation does confirm it; In my Sermons on 1 Chronicles 28.9 where
Objections against this Position are answered
For we see that the Elect of God are not in all Nations alike, but in some the
Lord gathers his Elect to himself from Generation to Generation. And there are
some (...) that the Lord has chosen above others, and therefore pours his
spirit upon the offspring in such Families successively. But of this I have
spoken more ^^rgely elsewhere, and therefore shall not insist further upon it
now.

Reas. 3. That so godly Parents might be encouraged to Pray and believe for
their Children. It is mavelous pleasing unto God when his servants pray and
believe not only for themselves, but for their Children also. Now a promise is
an encouragement unto Prayer* David found in his heart to pray that God would
bless his family for ever; because the Lord had promised that it should be so,
2 Samuel* 7 3, ult. Men should not think with themselves (as some do) if their
Children do belong to God, then ^e will convert them, whether they pray for it
or no, but should therefore be stirred up to the more fervency in cries to
Heaven, for the blessing promised. I (says the Lord) will give a new heart to
you, and to your Children, yet you must pray for it. I will yet for this be
enquired of by the House of Israel to do it for them, Ez^k. 36.26, 37. And a
promise is an encouragement to Faith, as well as unto Prayer. As Paul said, I
believe God, tha^ it shall be even as it was told me, Act 27.25. So a Believer
may say, God has told me that he will bless me, and my family* (...) he will
pour his spirit upon my poor Children, and therefore I believe God, that it
shall be as he has told me.

Use Let it be for Exhortation and Encouragement unto that which is the special
ground of our being thus before the Lord this day, viz. To Pray that a Spirit
^f converting Grace may be poured down from Heaven upon our Children, and the
Rising Generation in New England:

I would direct this Exhortation, 1. To Parents. 2. To Children.

1. To Parents. Consider,

1. How needful a thing it is to be much in Prayer on this account* Converting
grace is of absolute necessity in order to Salvation* and that as to the
Child^^n of godly* Parents as well as others: For they are born in sin, as
David confesses, Psalm. 51.5 I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother
conceive me; Yet his M^ther was a precious, godly Woman; and for ought that
does appear to the contrary, his Father was a good man too: wherefore such
Children dying in a natural, unconverted state, are liable unto Wrath, and
Death, and Curse, and Hell, Ephesians. 2.3. We also, even we that are Jews, and not
the Gentiles only; we that are the Elect of God: yea, we that are chosen to be
Apostles and Ministers of Christ, were by nature the Children of W^ath even as
others. So that except the Lord send so^th his Spirit, and Renew the Souls,
change the Natures of our poor Children, they are never like to see Heaven.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, except a man be born aga^n he cannot see the
Kingdom of God, Joh 3 ^. You that are Parents, are you willing that the
Children of your own bowels should be miserable throughout the days of
Eternity? That they should ly burning in a fiery Ocean as long as God shall be
God? Yet so it must be, excep^ the Lord in mercy look upon them, so as to pour
down of his Spirit from on High upon them. Moreover Prayer is needful upon this
account, in that Conversions are become rare in this age of the World. They
that have their thoughts exercised in discerning things of this nature, have
sad apprehension with reference unto this matter: That the work of Conversion
has been at a great stand in the world: In the last age, in the days of our
Fathers, in other parts of the world, scarce a Sermon preached but some
evidently converted; ^n fulfilling of Scriptures p. 416
yea, sometimes hundreds in a Sermon: which of us can say we have seen the
like? Clear sound conversions are not frequent in some Congregations. The body
of the Rising Generation is a poor perishing, unconverted, and (except the Lord
pour down his Spirit) an undone Generation. Many that are profane, Drunkards,
Swearers, Lascivious, Scoffers at the power of Godliness, Despisers of those
that are good, Proud, Disobedient creatures, God from Heaven pity them! Others
that are only civil, and outwardly conformed to good order, by reason of their
Education, but never knew what the new birth means; pray for them that they may
not only come near, but enter into the Kingdom of God.

Consider 2. That Prayer is a notable means to obtain this mercy; Prayer opens
the Windows of Heaven: Elias p^ayed that it might rain, and Heaven gave showrs;
Prayer brings down the showers of blessing in a proper literal sense: but
especially these spiritual showrs, which the Text speaks of, wherein the Lord
promises to shower down his spirit upon our poor Children. Assuredly, if there
be Prayers, and Tears before the Lord on this account, they will come pouring
down again in showrs of grace at last. I have read of an eminent Minister of
Christ, that having prayed fervently with some Christian Friends, they in the
next room felt strange Elapses of the spirit upon the heart, so as that one
said, O (...), that can knock down the spirit of God into all (...)? who
knows but that we may pray down the spirit of God into the souls of our
Children, Luke 11.9. Knock and it shall be opened to you, ask, and it shall be
given you. What shall then be given? even the holy spirit to them that a^k him,
verse 13. O then let us knock hard at Heaven gates this day: certainly such
requests, are welcome to heaven, yea to God in Heaven: he has showed how
acceptable such requests are to him by gracious Answe^s: Christ said unto his
Disciples, Behold I send the promise of the Father, me^^ing the spirit of
promise, unto y^u, but ta^ry ye in the Ci^y Jerusalem, until ye be endued with
power from on high, Luke 24.49. And what were they to do at Jerusalem in the
mean time? No question but (as some have noted) they were much in Fasting and
Prayer that this promise of the Father might come upon them. And not long after
there was a most gracious and glorious effusion of the spirit. And of later
times, God has been entreated to send down his Spirit abundantly for the
conversion of souls. Not fifty years ago, in a place in Scotland, a great
number of praying Christians met together, Idem, codem libro p* 417.
when a Sermon was to be Preached the next day, and they spent the night before
in Prayer, that the Lord would own the word then to be spoken, for the
Conversion of souls, and Behold! the Lord went forth with his word, so as that
near upon five hundred Souls were wrought upon, and converted by that one
Sermon. I have been told of a Church in New England, that set apart a day for
this end, At Milford
that they might by Fasting and Prayer beg converting Grace for their Children,
and that since, the Gospel has been made successful in that Congregation, so
as that a day of public Thanksgiving has been attended, in that so many of
the younger; Rising Generation have been brought home to Christ. Now if the
Lord awaken a Spirit of Prayer concerning this thing in these Churches
generally, there will doubtless be some blessed effect of it, with respect to
the Rising Generation. And whereas God has put it into our hearts to set apart
this day, thus to seek unto him, I am persuaded it shall not be in vain, but
that there are a number of souls belonging to this Congregation, that must have
the spirit of the Lord pou^ed on them: Sheep that are not yet brought into the
Lords Fold, that must hear the voice of the Son of God and live: Since the time
that we agreed thus to set apart this day, God has sent down plentiful showrs,
whereby the dry and thirsty Ground is wonderfully Refreshed: And is not that a
token for good, that those blessed showers which we are Fasting and Praying for
this day, shall in d^e time come down upon the Souls of our poor Children?

Consider 3. What encouragement we have to be at this work. The success which
such Prayers have had (of which something has been mentioned, and much more
might be spok^n) should encourage us. As for some of us, our Fathers and
Mothers now in glory, did pray for us when they were in the World, and God
heard them, did they that we are sprung from, pray for us? and has God heard
them? and will he not hear us if we go and pray in like manner for our
Offspring? And have we not already seen some Answers? If we look into our
Families, do we not discern that as to some of our Children, the fear of God is
put into their hearts? And why should we not look upon that as a first fruits,
that all the rest of our Children shall be converted in due time? Moreover, the
consideration of the Covenant, and Promises of God respecting Children, are a
great encouragement to pray for them. This is his everlasting Covenant, I will
be a God to thee and to ^hy seed after thee, Genesis 17.7. This promise is
expressed indefinitely, and therefore does encourage godly Parents to plead
with the Lord for mercy and grace for all their Children: As an Holy man once
said, and it was a great word of Faith in him, If I had twenty Children I would
not bate God one of them. He has promised to be a God to my children
indefinitely, See Dr Winter of Infant Baptism p. 105, 107
and therefore I Will pray for them all, and believe for them all, and why should
it not be so, since the Lord himself has said, ALL thy Children shall be
taught of God, Isai. 54.13. And the Scripture does abound with particular
promises, respecting the Conversion and Salvation of the Children of godly
Parents: When thou do that which is good, and right in the sight of God, it
shall go well with thy Children after thee for ever, Deuteronomy. 12 28 There is
special mercy belonging to those that are the Seed of the blessed of the Lord,
and to their Offspring with them, Isai. 65.23. yea promises of converting
Grace to be poured upon them, Zech. 10.9. They shall live with their Children,
and turn again. The Children of the Lords People shall be ^urned from the power
of Satan unto God; that is implied in those words, and not only that the Jews
and their Children should be returned from their Captivity in Babylon, whereby
this turning again from sin unto God, h e. that Conversion which we are
speaking of was mysteriously signified as in a Type. And in the Book of Psalms,
we find gracious promises to the Children of such as fear God, Psalm. 102.28.
The Children of thy Servants shall continue, vid Mr Stockton of family
instruction. p 118.
and their Seed shall be established before thee. And again Psalm. 128 3. Thy
Children shall be like Olive-plant^ round about thy Table. The Expression may
import that they shall be comforts and ornaments to their Parents, yea, that
they shall be adorned with gifts and graces of the Spirit of God. And in
special, there is a promise of this blessing with respect to Children in the
times of the Gospel: Joel 2.28. It shall come to pass afterward, h. e. in the
last days, or times of the Gospel, as the Apostle does expound the words, I
will pour my Spirit upon your Children. Now these days wherein we live, come
under the last days, we therefore should plead that promise before the Lord,
and say, These are the last days, Lord, and thou have said, that in the last
days thou will pour thy Spirit upon the Children of thy Servants. And indeed
that fulfilling of the promise which our eyes have seen is ground of
encouragement to pray and plead, and believe for more. Some of New England
Children have been eminently blessed by the Lord; he has poured his spirit
upon them richly, Plants of Renown have sprung up here, that have been the
glory of the Land where they have had their Education: yea, some, that whole
Nations have fared the better for them: Rivers of Water have flow^d out of
their Souls, whereby thousands have been refreshed. And there is a blessed
sprinkling in most Churches; though not that general pouring down of the Spirit
that is to be desired, yet a sprinkling which we should take notice of, for the
encouragement of Faith and Prayer. I shall only mention that which I have most
reason to know; in this poor Congregation, within these few late years, there
have been of Children born in New England, near upon fourscore persons, that
have come before the Church, and declared what God has done for their souls,
and in that way subscribed their names to the God of Israel; besides many that
have come out of other Lands, and when they have been here, the Lord has
poured his Spirit upon them. I speak it that God may have the glory of his
grace, and that Ministers may be encouraged to Preach, and the Lords People to
pray for the conversion of souls. Moreover, the consideration of what Parents
the children of this Land are (many of them) sprung from, does afford matter of
encou^agement Pau^ was induced the rather to hope well concerning Timothy,
because he was descended of such a stock, he had a gracious Mother, and a
g^acious Grandmother also, 2 Timothy 1.5. So many Children with us are the Off
spring of such Parents, (Fathers and Grandfathers) as have been eminent for
God in their time, eminent for holiness, yea and for sufferings, on the accoun^
of bea^ing witness ^o the Name and Truth of Christ Now a special ^l^ssing is
wont to follow the Children of such as have been su^^erers for Christ* Our
Fathers were some of them eminent Confessors, and in a Degree, Martyrs of
Jesus, who left a pleasant Land, and Fathers houses to follow the Lord into a
wilderness, into a Land which was not sown. Yea and they came hither partly
with respect unto their Off spring, that they might leave their Children under
the special blessing of God in Christ Jesus. Has not the Lord peculiar
bl^ssings in store for such Children* let us pray them down from Heaven above.

Consider 4. What a blessed thing it will be, if we prevail in Heaven for this
mercy. Read Mr. Samuel Hooker Sermon on Hos. 10.12
We cannot pray for a more desirable thing then this blessing! It will help all
that is amiss among us. If the Lord pour his Spirit on the body of the present
rising Generation, so as to begin a work of Conversion in those that are as yet
strangers to the power of godliness, and to carry on that work by renewed
Conversions in the hearts of his People, that will save us from those
Judgments which otherwise there is no hope that we shall escape them. Ezekiel.
39.29. Neither will I hide my face any more from them: Why? For I have poured
out my Spirit, says the Lord God. And do we not desire the Eternal as well as
Temporal prosperity of our poor Children? If the Lord pour his Spirit on them,
it shall go well with them, and that for ever Deuteronomy. 5.29 you are thoughtful
what will become of your Children after you are gone out of the Wo^ld. If you
can but pray Grace into their Souls, they shall do well enough. As that Godly,
Learned Claviger would sometimes express, if (says he) I may see the fear of
God in my Children, ^ege Cl^^^i geri ^^tam
Sati^ mihi, satis filiis and fi^iabus prosp^xi, I have then portion enough for
my Sons, and for my Daughters: They are then sure never to want any good thing
as long as they shall live. If the Lord pour his Spirit upon our Children, then
shall we have joy in them indeed. No greater joy then that, 3 John 3, 4. Prove.
23.24, 25. The Father of the Righteous shall greatly rejoice, and he that
begets a wise (i. e. godly) Child shall have joy of him; thy Father and thy
Mother shall be glad, and she that bare thee shall rejoice. We shall bless God
to Eternity that ever we had such Children: For it will add to the Glory of
Parents at the great Day, when they shall behold not themselves alone, but
their Offspring with them partakers of Eternal life and happiness, and withal
see and know that their prayers have had an influence toward the obtaining of
all that mercy. We shall meet those Prayers again with exceeding joy in that
day. And in the mean time, our Children, if we can pray down the Spirit of the
Lord upon them, will continue to pray for us, whilst we are with them in the
World. O what a blessed thing is that, for a man to have the Children that came
out of his own bowels, praying for him continually? A worthy Minister of Christ
once said, I had rather have my house filled with my Childrens Prayers, then to
have my house filled with Gold.

A few things by way of Direction.

1. Let Parents b^ su^e that they be converted themselves, Deuteronomy. 30.6. I will
circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy Seed. If our own hearts be
circumcised, we may pray in Faith that the Lord will circumcise the hearts of
our Children, otherwise we cannot do it. Parents that have not grace themselves
are not fit to pray for Grace to be poured on their Chi^dren; nor indeed can
they do it: for the spirit of supplication is the Spirit of grace, Zech. 12 10.
Nor can they believe for them. An Hypocrite, or unconverted man cannot act
Faith for his Child's soul, who never yet did believe for his own Soul. Nor does
this promise in the Text belong to other Parents, Psalm 128.4. Behold that thus
shall the man be blessed that fears the Lord.

2. Parents, be exemplary. Walk before God in your Houses with a perfect heart.
Let us be careful in our Families, to walk so that our Children may see by our
examples how they ought to walk and to please God, that if they will but be and
do like unto their Parents, they shall certainly be blessed for ever. There are
many of the Elect of God, that the special means of their conversion has been
the holy example of their Parents. Many a chosen Vessel, that when he has
beheld his Fathers love to Christ, and faithfulness to the interest of God,
Zeal, Patience, Holiness, that has been a special means of Conviction and
Conversion. You know what Elijah said to Elisha, when he desired that he might
have ( h. e. comparatively to what the rest of the Sons of the Prophets had) a
double portion of Elijah^ Spirit, He said, Se my Brother sermon^ o^ 1 Kin 8.57.
p 22
Thou have ask^d an hard thing, nevertheless if thou see me when I am taken
from thee, it shall be so unto thee, but if not, it shall not be so, 2 Kin.
2.10. Even so if your Children see you holy and faithful to the interest of
God, and of Jesus Christ, and every way exemplary doubt not of it, but in Gods
time, they shall receive of your spirit. As on the other hand there is nothing
more fatally destructive and ruining to the Souls of Children then a bad
example in Parents, especially if they be such as pretend to Religion: when
Cham did but one time see his Father in d^ink, it brought a fearful curse upon
him, and upon his Posterity to this day. There are great complain^s (and too
great cause) concerning the Rising Generation in New England; whereas the fault
is very much in Parents, in that they are no more exemplary: Your Children take
notice of your Pride, your Sensuality, your Worldliness, your unmortified
passions, and that does woefully scandalize, and harden them against the blessed
ways of Christ. O be careful to walk so as that your Children may not see their
Fathers nakedness.

3. Let Parents be careful to instruct their Children in the fear of God:
Prayer should be followed with suitable endeavors. If Parents must pray that
their Children may have Grace, they must use the means whereby God is wont to
convey Grace into the Souls of his Elect. Psalm. 34 11. Come ye Children,
hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord. David did so, and
Solomon his Son found that those Paternal Instructions were blessed for saving
good to his Soul, Prove 4. 1.3, 4. Also the Instructions of his Mother were
(through the blessing of God) a means of much good unto him, Prove. 31.1, 2.
Fathers and Mothers should be instilling good Principles into the mind^ and
hearts of their Children betimes. Ephesians. 6.4. Bring them up in the nur^^r* and
admonition of the Lord, (...) Feed their Souls with spiritual Milk as soon as
they are capable of it. Tell them sadly, whilst yet they are Children of their
misery by nature, of the necessity of a new birth, Instruct them about Christ,
and H^aven, and Hell, and Eternity; charge them with the greatest solemnity to
know and serve the God of their Fathers, 1 Thessalonians. 2.11. We charged every one of
you, as a Father his Children. It becomes a Father to charge his Children: And
if Parents be faithful in discharging their duty this way, success will not be
altogether wanting: If you will command your Children they shall k^ep the way
o^ the Lord, Genesis 18.19. If Parents would spend more time, and take more pains
in instructing their Children, and following those Instructions, with fervent
Prayers to God, ^he would own them therein, and we should see more young
Converts, and a world of Sin and Sorrow would such children be prevented and
^^ved from.

4. Wait on the Lord; Though the answer do not come presently, yet continu^
praying and believing, and let nothing discourage you: say not, I have prayed
for my Childrens Souls, but no grace, no change wrought in them, and now I am
e'ne hopeless and faithles^. Remember the woman of Canaan; she cried to the
Lord Jesus for her poor child, and yet had repu^ses one after another, the
Lord not s^eming to regard her; this was to try her Faith: at last she had her
desire granted; who knows but the Lord may deal so with thee? you therefore
that fear God despair not concern^ng your Children, though at present they may
be stout hearted, and (...) from Righteousness. L^ge Austin* confessiones.
Austin was a long time a vain, lascivious, p^ophane young m^n, but his godly
Mothers Prayers and Tears did at last prevail in Heaven, that he became an
eminent Convert. O continue to pray hard, and believe strongly, and that Son
who at present is the grief of t^y mind, and makes thy Soul to b^ in (...),
God can make an Austin of him. And that (...) (as I^p^ta^ said) has brought
thee very low, (...) that tro^ble thee, the Lord can convert her (...) Heart
and thy Reins, even thine shall rejoice. I Remember I have somewhere read of
one that had been a very sinful creature, and desperately froward and
rebell^ous but her godly Parents continu^d praying, and entreated diverse
faithful M^nisters of God to p^ay for her, and God hea^d them, and in answer to
Prayer, rescued a forlorn Soul out of the Jaws of Satan and Hell: and when that
young Woman lay upon her Deathbed, she said to her godly Friends and
Relations, For my sake never despair of any one, let their case a^ present be
never so bad and desperate, for you know how it was with me, See (...) vol. 2.
p 360
and ^et see how God has answered your Prayers for me. Think of it you Fathers
and Mothers that have wept and prayed for the Conversion and Salvation of your
ch^ldr^n full many a time, and as yet you see it not. Though you should never
see i^, dye trusting in God, and believing that he will remember his Covenant
with your Children after you, Genesis 50.24. It was an excellent Spirit of Faith
that breathed in that dying Worthy of his time, who upon his deathbed could
say to his Children and Grandchildren, I know that you shall be blessed not
only with the blessings of earth, but with the blessings of Heaven. Phil^^
Morney
Know for your encouragement, that your Prayers will live after you are dead;
Prayers dipped in the blood of Christ, are of (...) Efficacy. When your Bodies
are in the Grave, and your Souls in Heaven, your Children may remember how you
instructed them, and prayed for them, and the remembrance of it may then be a
means of their conversion: You may hear of your Childrens conversion after you
are in Heaven; the Angels of God that see it, and that rejoice over a sinner
that repents will bring you the tidings of it; and then there will be joy all
Heaven over.

2. Let me exhort Children that are here before the Lord this day: O do you go
home, and pray earnestly for converting Grace. Beg as for your lives that the
God of your Fathers would pour his Spirit upon you: Young ones hearken! In the
Name of the Lord I speak to you; the Lord can pour his Spirit on you betimes,
then shall you be rich in Grace, let this promise encourage you to look up to
God through Jesus Christ. Go into secret corners, and plead it with God; say,
Lord thou have promised to pour thy Spirit upon the Offspring of thy Servants;
I am (through thy grace) among the Children of thy Servants; thou art the God
of my Father, the God of my Grandfather, oh! be my God also. If you seek God
in earnest, he will be found of you, but if you forsake him, and break his
Covenant sealed in your Baptism, woe unto you. If you die and be not first new
Creatures, better you had never been born: you will be left without excuse
before (...) Lord, terrible witnesses shall rise up against you at the last
day. Your godly Parents will testify against you before the Son of God at that
day: And the Ministers of Christ will also be called in as witnesses against
you for your condemnation, if you die in your sins. As for many of you, I have
treated with you privately and personally, I have told you, and I do tell you,
and make solemn Protestation before the Lord, that if you die in a Christless,
graceless estate, I will must certainly profess unto Jesus Christ at the day of
Judgment, Lord, these are the Children, whom I spoke often unto in thy Name,
publicly and privately, and I told them, that if they did not make to
themselves a new heart, and make sure of an interest in Christ, they should
become damned creatures for evermore; and yet they would not repent and believe
the Gospel. O why should I that can appeal to God, that I long for your
Conversion, be your accuser before the Lord Jesus at the last day?

And you that are grown up to years of more discretion, and understanding:
Young Men, and young Women, O be in earnest for Converting Grace, before it be
too late. It is high time for you to look about you, deceive not your selves
with false Conversions (as many young men do to their eternal ruin) or with
gifts instead of Grace; beware of out-standing your day of Grace, lest the
Spirit of God depart, and your Souls become desolate. Death waits for you.
There is now a Mortal and Contagious Disease in many Houses; the Sword of the
Lord is drawn, and young men fall down apace slain under it; do you not see the
Arrows of Death come flying over your heads? Why then, Awake, Awake, and turn
to God in Jesus Christ whilst it is called to day, and know for certain that if
you die in your sins, you will be the most miserable of any poor Creatures in
the bottom of Hell. Oh consider of it, to be prayed, wept, Preached, Fasted
down to Hell, what an amazing thing will it be! wherefore now hear, and turn,
and live; As yet Christ stands and knocks at the door of your hearts^ He does
so this day, and b^ this Sermon. O that you would hear the Lord Jesus callin^
(...) you from Heaven, and saying, Turn ye at my Reproof, and I will pour out
my Spirit upon you.

Tibi Domine.

