Several Laws and Orders Made at the second Sessions of the GENERAL COURT Held
at BOSTON October. 10th. 1677. And published by Order thereof. Edward Rawson
Secr'.
WHereas many secret attempts have been lately made by evil-minded persons to
set fire in the town of Boston, and other places, tending to the destruction
and devastation of the whole; this Court does account it their duty to use all
lawful means to discover such persons, and prevent the like for time to come:

Be it therefore Ordered and enacted by this COURT and the Authority thereof,
Oath of Allegiance and Fidelity for Inhabitants and Strangers.
that the Law, tit. Oaths and Subscriptions, Page 120. Sect. 2. requiring all
persons, as well inhabitants as strangers (that have not taken it) to take the
Oath of Fidelity to the Country, be revived and put in practice through this
Jurisdiction: And for the more effectual execution thereof; It is Ordered by
this Court that the Select-men, Constables and Tything men in every Town, do
once every quarter of a year so proportion and divide the precincts of each
town, and go from house to house, and take an exact list of the names, quality
and callings of every person, whether Inhabitant or Stranger, that have not
taken the said Oath, and cannot make due proof thereof; and the Officers
aforesaid are hereby required forthwith to return the names of such persons
unto the next Magistrate, or County Court, or chief Military Officer in the
Town where no Magistrate is, who are required to give such persons the said
Oath prescribed in the Law, wherein not only fidelity to the Country, but
Allegiance to our King is required: and all such as take the said Oath, shall
be recorded and enrouled in the County Records, by the Clark of each County
Court; and all such as refuse to take the said Oath, they shall be proceeded
against as the said law directs. And further, this Court does declare, that all
such Refusers to take the said Oath, shall not have the benefits of our Laws to
implead, sue or recover any debt in any Court or Courts within this
Jurisdiction, nor have protection from this Government whilst they continue in
such obstinate refusal.

And furthermore, It is Ordered that if any Officer entrusted with the
Execution of this order do neglect or omit his or their Duty therein, they
shall be fined according to their demerits, not exceeding five pounds for one
offense, being complained of, or presented to the County Courts, or Court of
Assistants and this Law to be forthwith printed and published, and effectually
executed from, and after the last of November next, and that all persons that
Administer the Oath above said, shall in like manner make return of the names
of such persons so sworn to the respective Clarks of the County Court.

ACTS OF TRADE to be observed.
THis Court being informed by Letters received this day from our Messengers of
his Majesty's expectation, that the acts of Trade and Navigation be exactly and
punctually observed by this his Majesty's Colony: His pleasure therein not
having been before now signified unto us, either by express from his Majesty,
or any of his Ministers of state.

It is therefore hereby Ordered, His Majesty's Acts of Navigation and Trade to
be observed on penalty, etc.
and by the Authority of this Court Enacted, that henceforth all Masters of
Ships, Ketches; of other Vessels of lesser or greater burden; arriving in, or
sailing from any of the Ports of this Jurisdiction, do without covin or fraud,
yield faithful and constant Obedience unto, and Observation of all the said
Acts of Navigation and Trade, on penalty of suffering such forfeitures, loss
and damage, as in the said Acts are particularly expressed; and the Governor
and Council, and all Officers commissionated and authorized by them, are hereby
Ordered and required to see to the strict Observation of the said Acts.

Addition to the Law concerning Profanation of the Sabbath.
AS an Addition to the late Law made in May last for the prevention of
profanation of the Sabbath, and strengthening of the hands of Tything men
appointed to inspect the same. Addition to the Law, tit. Sabbath. Tything men's
power, etc.


It is Ordered that those Tything men shall (...), and are hereby appointed and
empowered to inspect public licensed houses as well as private, and unlicensed
houses of enterteinment, as also ex officio to enter any such houses, and
discharge their duty according to Law, and the said Tything men are empowered to
Assist one another in their several precincts, and to act in one another
precincts, with as full power as in their own, and yet to retain their special
charges within their own bounds.

And it is Ordered that the whole Fine raised by the penalty of this Law upon
delinquents either in public or private houses shall be remitted to the County
Treasurer, and the Tything men's allowance made payable from him.

FINIS.

