AT A COUNCIL Held at Boston, March 28. 1678.
WHereas many Complaints have been made, that several Persons have been killed
by such as have pretended to have shot at Fowls, birds etc. and that in or near
High ways; and many take the boldness upon them, Youths and grown Persons, too
frequently to shoot within the Limits of Towns, Orchards, Gardens, etc. with
bullets, greater or smaller shot, on pretense of shooting at Marks, Birds,
Foul etc. whereby Persons are endangered to be killed in their Gardens,
Orchards, or adjacent Commons; To prevent such inconveniences and mischiefs for
the future,

It is hereby Declared and Ordered. That all or any Person or Persons of what
age or Condition soever, that shall from henceforth presume to shoot off any
Gun or Guns, charged with Bullet or Bullets, Swan, Goose, or other shot toward
any Mark or place that the Militia in such Town or Towns have not appointed; or
so near or into any House, Barn, Garden, Orchards or High-waye in any town or
towns of this Jurisdiction, whereby any person or persons shall or may be
killed, wounded or otherwise damaged, such person or persons so offending shall
be proceeded against either as Murderers, or such as have wounded or damaged
any person or persons in such place or places, shall be liable to answer it,
and to make full satisfaction in all respects to such person or persons both
for cure and damage; and be also liable to such further punishment as the
Authority of the place that has Cognizance of the offense shall appoint: And
where either they be Servants or Youths under their Parents or Masters and
shall not be able to make such satisfaction, such Parents or masters shall be
liable to make full and due satisfaction in all respects: And the Select men of
each town are hereby appointed to see that this be put in execution.

By the Council, Edward Rawson Secr'.


