At A COUNCIL, Held at Charlestown, June the 20th, 1676.
The holy God having by a long and Continued Series of his Afflictive
dispensations in and by the present War with the Heathen Natives of this Land,
written and brought to pass bitter things against his own Covenant people in
this wilderness, yet so that we evidently discern that in the midst of his
judgments he has remembered mercy, having remembered his Footstool in the day
of his sore displeasure against us for our sins, with many singular Intimations
of his Fatherly Compassion, and regard: reserving many of our Towns from
Desolation Threatened, and attempted by the Enemy, and giving us especially of
late with our Confederates many signal Advantages against them, without such
Disadvantage to our selves as formerly we have been sensible of, if it be of
the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, It certainly bespeaks our positive
Thankfulness, when our Enemies are in any measure disappointed or destroyed:
and fearing the Lord should take notice under so many Intimations of his
returning mercy, we should be found an Insensible people, as not standing
before him with Thanksgiving, as well as lading him with our Complaints in the
time of pressing Afflictions:

The COUNCIL have thought meet to appoint and set apart the 29 th. day of this
Instant lune, as a day of Solemn Thanksgiving and praise to God for such his
goodness and Favor, many Particulars of which mercy might be Instanced, but we
doubt not those who are sensible of Gods Afflictions, have been as diligent to
espy him returning to us; and that the Lord may behold us as a People offering
praise and thereby glorifying him; The Council does Commend it to the
Respective Ministers, Elders and people of this Jurisdiction; Solemnly and
seriously to keep the same. Beseeching that being persuaded by the mercies of
God we may all, even this whole people offer up our Bodies and Souls as a
living and Acceptable Service unto God by Jesus Christ.

By the Council, Edward Rawson Secr.


