A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE WAR With the INDIANS in NEW ENGLAND. (From June 14,
1675. when the first Englishman was murdered by the Indians, to August 12.
1676. when Philip alias Metacomet, the principal Author and Beginner of the
War, was slain.) Wherein the Grounds, Beginning, and Progress of the War, is
summarily expressed. TOGETHER WITH A SERIOUS EXHORTATION to the Inhabitants of
that Land,

By INCREASE MATHER, Teacher of a Church of Christ, in Boston in New England.

Levit. 26 25. I will bring a Sword upon you, that shall avenge the quarrel of
the Covenant. Psalm. 107.43. Whosoever is wise and will observe these things, ever
they shall understand the Loving Kindness of the Lord. Jer. 22.15. Did not thy
Father do Judgment and Justice and it was well with him? Segnius irritant
animos demissa per aures,
Quam quae sunt oculis commissa fidelibus:
Horat. Lege Historiam ne fias Historia. Cic. BOSTON, Printed and Sold by John
Foster over against the Sign of the Dove. 1676.

TO THE READER.
ALthough I was not altogether negligent, in noting down such occurrences,
respecting the present War with the Heathen in New England, as came to my
knowledge, in the time of them: yet what I did that way was merely for my own
private use, nor had I the least thought of publishing any of my Observations,
(...) ^uch time as I read a Narrative of this Ware, said to be written by a
Merchant in Boston, which it seems met with an Imprimatur at London in December
^ast: the abounding mistakes therein caused me to think it necessary, that a
true History of this affair should be published. Wherefore I resolved ((...))
to methodize such scattered Observations as I ^ad by me, so were the Hora
subseciva of a few days improved. Whilst I was doing this, there came to my
hands another Narrative of this War, written by a Quaker in Road-Island, who
pretends to know the Truth of things; but that Narrative being fraught with
worse things then mere Mistakes, I was thereby quickened to expedite what I had
in hand. I moved has some other might have done it, but none presenting, I
thought of his Saying. A^ ali^ (...) ho^ fieri mallem quam a me, ^ed a me tamen
(...) quam a (...). And I hope that in one thing, (though it may be in little
else) I have performed the part of an Historian, viz. in endeavoring to relate
things truly and impartially, and doing the best I could that I might not lead
the Reader into a Mistake. History is indeed in it self profitable Study.
Learned men know that Poly^ius, and the great Philosopher call it, (...). And
there is holy Scripture to encourage in a work of this nature; for what was the
Book of the Wars of the Lord. Number. 21.14.? And that Book of Father which we
read of in Jos^ua^ and in Samuel? Yea and the Book of the Cronicles, mentioned
in the Book of Kings (for we find not some of those things referred unto in the
Canonical Book of Cronicles) What were these Books, but the faithful Records
of the providentiall Dispensations of God, in the days of old? Yea and it is
proper for the Ministers of God to engage themselves in Services of this
nature; Witness the History, or Comm^ntary (...) of the Prophet I^do, 2. Cron.
13.32. Whether my defective manner of management in this History renders in
uprofitable, I know ^or, Considering the other employments that are always
upon me, together (...) personal inabilityes, I have cause to suspect it may be
so, in a great measure. If any one shall hereby be incited to do better, I hope
I shall rather thank then envy him. (...). And I earnestly with that some
effectu^l course may be taken (before it be too late) that a just History of
New England, be written and published to the world. That is a thing that has
been often spoken of, but was never done to this day; and yet the longer it is
deferred, the more difficulty will there be in effecting of it.

Moreover, the thing which I mainly designed, was the subsequent Exhortation
which is annexed herewith, wherein I have desi^ed to approve my self as in the
sight of God, speaking what I believe God would have me to speak, without
respect to any person in this world: And there is one thing insisted on
therein, concerning which I could wish that I had said more, I mean that which
does respect endeavors for the Conversion of the Heathen unto Christ. There
are some that make a wrong use of a Notion of Mr. Cottons touching this
matter, alleging that he taught that a general Conversion of Indians is not
to be expected before the seven Vials are poured forth upon the Antichristian
state, no^ before the conversion of the Jewish nation. It is far from my
purpose to Contradict that Great Author, unto whose dust (in respect of near
A^^inity as well as on the account of his eminency in Grace and spiritual
Gifts) I owe a sacred Reverence, and it is known that I have my self asserted
the same notion both in Sermons, and in a printed Discourse concerning the
Salvation of the tri^es of Israel. But it was never intended that that
Assertion should be improved, so as to discourage from the prosecution of that
which was the prosessed, pious, and a main design of the Fathers of this
Colony; viz. To propagate the Gospel and Kingdom of Christ among these
Indians, who in former Ages had not ^eard of his same and Glory. It is indeed
true, that although a Fullness of the Gentiles in respect of Apostasy, shall be
accomplished (so most they fulfill their Times) before the calling of the Jews,
yet the fullness of the Gentiles in respect of Conversion, will not come in
before that. Nevertheless a glorious Sprinkling, and great Success of the
Gospel, may be in particular places at present, even amongst Heathen. And the
Salvation of a few immortal Souls is worth the labor of many, all their lives.
And happy experience has confirmed this; for here in New England, six Churches
have been constituted amongst the Indians. And the labors of Robert Junius
forty years since amongst the East-Indians in Formosa, were wonderfully
succesfull, For ( as Caspar Si^^llius Pastor of the Church in Daventry in
Holland writing the History of that affair, does relate) there were no less
then five thousand and nine hundred Indians that became prosessedly subject to
the Gospel, and were all, together with their children, (...) Junius having
learned the Indian Language, and being a Man of exempla^y Piety in his
conversation, and one also that excelled in Wisdom and Spiritual Abilities,
God was with him, and made him an happy Instrument of winning Souls. He
translated some part of the Scripture, and wrote Catechismes, and other
profitable Books in their Language. He caused Schools to be erected among those
blind Bar^arians, so as that six hundred of them were able to read, and write,
and about fifty who excelled in knowledge, and were of approved godliness,
became Instructors of others in the Principles of the true Christian Religion:
yea in three and twenty Towns, there were Indian Christian Churches Planted.
And learned Men were sent out of Holland, in order to a further propagation of
the interest of the Gospel in those remote parts of the World. Also Justus
Heurnius, who was at first a Physician, being inflamed with a singular zeal
after Gods glory, and the Salvation of Souls of men, left his practicing in
Medecinal Cures, and betook himself wholly to the study of Divinity; after which
^e engaged in a Voyage toward the East-Indians, designing their Conversion,
and having learned the^ Language, spent fourteen years amongst them: and as the
great Vo^tius (in his Disputation, de vocatione Gentium) testifies, was
instrumental to the Conversion of many of those Indians, so as to erect
Churches of them in diverse places, yea, and took care for the learned Education
of diverse youngmen, even amongst the Indians themselves, so as that they were
able to instruct the several Churches, which by the blessing of God upon his
Labors had been lately formed. It is great pity then, that we in New England,
who do not come behind others in Profession, and Pretenses to Religion, should
fall short in real endeavors, for the promotion and propagation of Religion,
and Christianity amongst those that have been for ages that are past without
God, and without Christ, and Strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel. It
troubles me, when I read how the Papists glory in that they have converted so
many of the East and West Indians to the Christian Faith, and reproach
Protestants because they have been no more industrious in a work of that
nature. Though I know they have little cause to Glory, if the whole truth were
known. For as for many of their Converts, inasmuch as they are become Vassals,
not only to the Herefies, but to the Persons of those who have Proselyted them,
they are as Christ said concerning the proselytes of the Scribes and Pharisees,
twofold more the Children of Hell, then they were before; and many of them know
little of Christianity besides the Name. Witness the celebrated Story of that
Franciscan, who wrote a Letter to a Friend of his in Europe, wherein he
glories that having lived fix and twenty years amongst the Indians, he had
converted many thousands of them to the (...) there was such a Book in Europe
which might be of some use to him. Surely Francis himself did not excel this
Franciscan, in profound Ignorance. It is also true, that the Hollanders have
formerly (as was in part intimated but now) done something toward the
Conversion of those Indians where they have Plantations settled. For they have
caused some part of the Scripture to be translated into the Indian Language,
and have out of the (...) Treasuries maintained some learned and meet persons,
on purpose, that they might become Preachers to the Indians: Nevertheless,
Vo^tius in his dissertation de plantatori^us Ecclesiarum, greatly bewaileth it,
that no more care has been taken about that concern of the Gospel and kingdom
of Christ, and declares what were the unhappy obstructions, hindering the
Belgic Churches, from attaining a further progress in a work so desirable, but
(as ^e there speake^h) infanda illa nibil attinet hic refer. And I know not,
but that the Lords Holy design in (...) which he has brought upon us, may (in
part) be to punish us for our too great neglect in this matter. I would not
detract from what has been done that way, but rather with my Soul ^less God
for it. It is well known, that sundry of the Lords Servants in this Land, have
labored in that work: Especially Reverend Mr. Eliot has taken most
indefatigable pains, having Translated the whole Bible into the Indian
Language, in which respect New England (let Christ alone have the (...) of in)
has outdone all other places, so far as I have heard or read, ^ut it cannot
be long, before that faithful, and now aged Servant of the Lord ^eft from his
Labors: sad will it be for the succeeding Generation, if (...) shall suffer
the work of Christ amongst the Indians, to dye with him (...) began it. Sed
meljo^a speramess.

I shall add no more, but leave the success of this undertaking to him who one
can give it. And I earnestly desire the Prayers of every Godly Reader.

Increase Mather.

A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE WAR With the INDIANS in NEW ENGLAND
THAT the Heathen People amongst whom we live, (...) whose Land the Lord God of
our Fathers has given (...) for a rightful Possession, have at sundry times
been pl^ttin^ mischievous devices against that part of the English (...) which
is seated in these goings down of the Sun (...) man that is an Inhabitant of
any considerable standing, can be ignorance (...) that there have been ( nec in
jurid) jealousies concerning the (...) sets and Wompanoags, is notoriously
known to all men. And whereas they have been quiet until the last year, that
must be ascribed to the wonderful Providence of God, who did (as with Jacob of
old, and after that with (...) Children of Israel) lay the fear of the English,
and the dread of the (...) all the Indians. The terror of God was upon them
round about. (...) had they such advantages in former years as now they have,
in respect^^ Arms and Ammunition, their bows and arrows not being comparably
(...) weapons of death and destruction, as our guns and swords are, with (...)
they have been unhappily furnished. Nor were our sins ripe for so dreadful a
judgment, until the Body of the first Generation was removed, and another
Generation risen up which has not so pursued, as ought to have been, the
blessed design of their Fathers, in following the Lord into this Wilderness,
whil^t it was a land not ^own.

As for the Grounds, justness, and necessity of the present War with th^se
barbarous Creatures which have set upon us, my Read the Postscript at the end
of this History.
design^s not to inlargo upon that Argument, but to leave that to others whom
it mostly concerns, only in brief this. The irruption of this flame at this
time was occasioned as follows.

In the latter end of the year 1674. An Indian called John Sausaman, who had
submitted himself unto, and was taken under the protection of the English
perceiving that the profane Indians were hatching mischief against the English,
he faithfully acquained the Governor of Plymouth, with what he kn^w, and also
what his fears were together with the grounds thereof, withal, declaring, that
he doubted such and such Indians belonging to Philip the Sachem of Pokanoket or
Mount-hope, would murder him; which quickly happened accordingly: for soon after
this, John Sausaman was barbarously murdered by an Indian called Tobias (one
of Phillip 's chief Captains and Counselors) and by his son, and another
Indian, who knocked him on the head and then left him on the Ice on a great
Pond. Divine providence which u^eth to bring murder to light, so ordered as
that an Indian unseen by those three that killed Sausaman; beheld all that they
did to him, and spoke of it, so as that a Praying (and as there is cause to
hope) a godly Indian, William Nahauton by name, heard of it, and he forthwith
revealed what he knew to the English. Whereupon the three Indians who had
committed the murder were apprehended, and the other Indian testified to their
faces that he saw them killing Sausaman. They had a fair trial for their
lives, and that no apperance of wrong might be, Indians, as well as English
^ate upon the Jars and all agreed to the condemnation of those Murderers, who
were accordingly executed in the beginning of the 4 th. Month called June
Anno^^^^. They stoutly denied the fact, only at last Tobias 's son confessed
that his father and the other Indian killed Sausaman, but that himself had no
hand in it, only stood by and saw them do it.

No doubt but one reason why the Indians murdered John Sausaman, was (...) of
hatred against him for his Religion, for he was Christianized and (...) and was
a Preacher amongst the Indians, being of very excellent parts, he translated
some part of the bible into the Indian language, and was (...) to curb those
Indians that knew not God on the account of their debi^^^eryes; but the main
ground why they murdered him seems to be, because he discovered their subtle
and malicious designs, which they were complotting against the English. Philip
perceiving that the Court of Plymouth had condemned and executed one of his
Counselors, being (as i^ upon strong grounds supposed) conscious to the (...)
committed upon John Sansaman, must needs think that ere long they would do to
him (who had no less deserved it) as they had done to his Counselor:
wherefore (...) contrary to his Convenant and Faith engaged to Plymouth Colony,
yea and contrary to his promise unto some in this Colony (for about five years
ago^ Philip made a disturbance in Plymouth Colony, but was quieted by the
prudent interposition of some in our Colony, when he engaged, that if at any
time hereafter he should think the English among whom he lived did him wrongs,
he would not cause any disquietment before such time as he had acquainted the
English of Mattachusets, but contrary to these solemn engagements he) does call
his men together and Arm^ them, and refused to come when sent for by the
authority of Plymouth, unto whose government he had subjected himself.

Hereupon the English in Plymouth Jurisdiction sent a small Army to those towns
next Mount-Hope in order to reducing Philip to his obedience, and for the
security of those places which were in great danger and in no less fear by
reason of the insolency of the Heathen.

June. 24. (Midsummer-day) was appointed and attended as a day of solemn
Humiliation throughout that Colony, by fasting and prayer, to (...) the Lord to
give success to the present expedition respecting the Enemy (...) the
conclusion of that day of Humiliation, as soon as even the people in (...) were
come from the place where they had been praying together the Indians discharged
a volly of shot whereby they killed one man and with (...) others. Two men were
sent to call a Surgeon for the relief of the wounded, but the Indians killed
them by the way: and in another part of the town six men were killed, so that
there were nine English men murdered this day.

Thus did the War begin, this being the (...) English blood which was spilt by
the Indians in an hostile way. The Providence of God is deeply to be observed,
that the sword should be first drawn upon a day of Humiliation, the Lord
thereby declaring from heaven that he expects something else from his People
besides fasting and prayer.

Plymouth being thus suddenly involved in trouble, send to the other united
Colonyes for aid, and their desires were with all readiness com^ly^ed with.

Soldiers marched out of Boston toward Mount Hope, June. 26th and continued
marching that night, when there happened a great Eclipse of the Moon, which was
totally darkened above an hour. Only it must be remembered that some days before
any soldiers went out of Boston Commissioners were sent to treat with Philip,
that so if possible engaging in a War might be prevented. But when the
Commissioners came near to Mount-Hope, they found diverse english men on the
ground wel^^ing in their town blood, having been newly murdered by the
Indians, so that they could not proceed further. Yea the Indians killed a man
of this Colony as he was traveling in the road before such time as we took up
arms: in which respect no man can doubt of the justness of our cause, since the
enemy did shed the blood of some of ours who never did them (our enemies
themselves being judges) the least wrong before we did at all offend them, or
attempt any act of hostility toward them.

June 29th, was a day of public Humiliation in this Colony appointed by the
Council in respect of the war which is now begun.

This morning our army would have engaged with the enemy, The Indians shot the
Pilot who was directing our Soldiers in their way to Philips Country, and
wounded several of our men, and ran into Swamps, rainy weather hindered a
further pursuit of the Enemy. An awful Providence happened at this time: for a
soldier (a stout man) who was sent from (...), seeing the English Guide ^lain,
and hearing many profane oaths among some of our Soldiers (namely those
Priva^eers, who were also Volunt^^rs) and considering the unseasonableness of
the weather was such, as that (...) could be done against the Enemy, this man
was possessed with a (...) conceit that God was against the english, whereupon
he immediately can distracted, and so was returned home a lamentable Spectacle.

In the beginning of July there was another Skirmish with the Enemy, where^^
several of the Indians were killed, amongst whom were Philips ^hief Captain,
and one of his Counselors.

Now it appears that Squaw-Sachem of Pocasset her men were conjoined with the
Wompon^^gs (that is Philips men) in this Rebellion.

About this time they killed several English at Tannton, and burnt diverse
houses there. Also at Swanzy caused about half the Town to be (...) with
merciless Flames. Likewise Middlebury and Dartmouth in Plymouth Colony did they
burn with Fire, and barbarously murdered both men and women inthose places,
stripping the ^lain whether men or women, and leaving them in the open field as
naked as in the day wherein they were born. Such also is their inhumanity as
that they flay of the skin from their faces and heads of those they get into
their hands, and go away with the hairy Scalp of their enemies.

July 19. Out Army pursued Philip who (...) unto a dismal Swamp for refuge: the
English Soldiers followed him, and killed many of his Men, also about fifteen
of the English were then ^lain. The Swamp was so Boggy and thick of Bushes, as
that it was judged to proceed further therein would be but to throw away Men's
lives. It could not there be discerned who were English, and who the Indians.
Our Men when in that hideous place if they did but see a Bu^h ^tir would fire
presently, whereby it is verily feared, that they did sometimes unhapp^^y shoot
Englishmen instead of Indians. Wherefore a Retreat was Sounde^ and night
coming on, the Army withdrew from that place. This was because the desperate
Distress which the Enemy was in was unknown to us: for the Indians have since
said, that if the English had continued at the Swamp all night, nay, if they
had but followed them but one half hour longer, Philip had come and yielded up
himself. But God saw that we were not yet fit for Deliverance, nor could Health
be restored unto us except a great deal more Blood be first taken from us: and
other places as well as Plymouth stood in need of such a course to be taked
with them. It might rationally be conjectured, that the unsuccessfulness of
this Expedition against Philip would embolden the Heathen in other parts to do
as he had done, and so it came to pass. For July 14. the Nipnep (or Nipmack)
Indians began their mischief at a Town called Mendam (had we amended our ways
as we should have done, this Misery might have been prevented) where they
committed Barbarous Murders. This Day deserves to have a Remark set upon it,
considering that Blood was never shed in Massachusetts Colony in a way of
Hostility before this day. Moreover the Providence of God herein is the more
awful and tremendous, in that this very day the Church in Dorchester was before
the Lord, humbling themselves by Fasting and Prayer, on account of the Day of
trouble now begun amongst us.

The news of this Bloodshed came to us at Boston the next day in (...) time,
in the midst of the Sermon, the Scripture then improved being that Isai.42.24.
Who gave Jacob to the spoil, and Israel to the robbers? did not (...) Lord, He
against whom we have sinned?

As yet Philip kept in the Swamp at Pocassit, but August I. (being the Lords
day) he f^ed. The English hearing that Philip was upon flight, pursued him,
with a party of Mon^egins, i.e. Unkas (who approved himself faithful to the
English almost forty years ago in the time of the Pequod Wars, and now also in
this present War) his Indians, They overtook Philips Party and killed about
thirty of his men, none of ours being at that time cut off. Had the English
pursued the Enemy they might easily have overtaken the Women and Children that
were with Philip, yea and himself also, and so have put an end to these
tumults: but though Deliverance was according to all Humane probability near,
God saw it not good for (...) yet. Wherefore Philip escaped and went to the
Nipmack (...) (...) (as has been intimated) done Acts of Hostility against the
(...) mean while endeavors were used to keep those Indians from engaging in
this War, and that those persons who had committed the Murder at Mendam might
be delivered up to Justice. Captain Hutchinson with a small party was sent to
Quabaog where there was a great Rendezvouze of N^pn^p Indians. They appointed
time and place of Treaty to be attended, August. 2. accordingly Captain
Hutchinson rode to the Place fixed on to Treat in. But the Indians came not
thither according to their Agreement, whereupon Captain Hutchinson resolved to
go further to seek after them elsewhere, and as he was riding along, the
perfidious Indians lying in Ambuscado in a Swamp, shot at him and wounded him,
of which Wounds he after dyed, and eight men that were with him were struck
down dead upon the place. Captain Wheeler who was in that Company was shot
through the Arm, his dutiful Son alighting to relieve his Father, was himself
shot and sorely wounded, willingly hazarding his own life to save the life of
his Father. The English were not in a capacity to look after their dead, but
those dead bodies were left as meat for the Fowls of Heaven, and their Flesh
unto the Beasts of the Earth, and there was none to bury them

Captain Hutchinson and the rest that escaped with their lives, hastened to
Quabaog, and the Indians speedily followed, violently set upon the Town, killed
diverse, burning all the Houses, therein down to the ground, except only one
unto which the Inhabitants fled for succor, and now also (as since we have
understood) did Philip with this broken Party come to Quabaog. Hundreds of
Indians beset the House, and took possession of a Barn belonging thereunto,
from whence they often shot into the House, and also attempted to fire it six
times, but could not prevail, at last they took a Cart full of Flax and other
combustible matter, and brought it near the House, intending to set it on fire,
and then there was no appearing possibility, but all the English there, Men and
Women, and Children must have perished, either by unmerciful flames, or more
unmerciful hands of wicked Men whose tender Mercies are cruelties, so that all
hope that they should be s^ved was then taken away: but behold in this Mount of
Difficulty and Extremity ((...)) the Lord is seen.

For in the very nick of opportunity God sent that worthy Major Willard, who
with forty and eight men set upon the Indians and caused them to turn their
backs, so that poor people who were given up for dead, had their lives given
them for a prey. Surely this was a token for good, that however we may be
diminished and brought low through Oppression, (...), and Sorrow, yet our God
will have compassion on us, and this his People shall not utterly perish. And
this Salvation is the more remarkable, for that albeit the Indians had ordered
Scouts to lie in the way, and to give notice by firing three Guns, if any
English came to the relief of the Distressed; yet although the Scouts fired
when Major Willard and his Soldiers were past them, the Indians were so busy
and made such a noise about the House, that they heard not the report of those
Guns; which if they had heard, in all probability not only the People then
living at Quabaog, but those also that came to succor them had (...) cut off.

Things being brought to the state, the Tumult of those that are risen up
increases continually: For August 22. being the Lords Day, the Indians about
Lancaster killed a Man and his Wife, and two Children in the afternoon
exercise. And we hear that Philip and the Quabaog Indians are gone more
Westward, not far from North-hampton, Hadly, Doer-field, etc. whereupon Forces
are sent from hence, under the command of Captain Lo^h^op, Captain Beers, and
(after that) Captain Mostly to relieve those distressed Towns and pursue the
Enemy. Also our Brethren at Connecticut afforded their Assistance, Major Treat
being sent to Hadly with a party of English, and some of Unkas his Men. The
Indians inhabiting about Conecticut River pretended great fidelity to the
English, and that they would fight against Philip, who it seems had been
tampering with them in the Spring before the War brokeout, endeavoring by
money ( i.e. Wampampeag whis is the Indians Money) to engage them in His bloody
design against the English.

At first they were so far credited as to be Armed by the English, hoping they
might do good service as the Monhegins and Natick Indians had done. But within
a while their Treachery was justly suspected. Whereupon Soldiers were sent (on
or about August 25.) to demand their Arms. They were then gone out of their
Forts, our Men searching after them, they suddenly shot out of a Swamp, and
after that an hot dispute continued for some hours. How many Indians were slain
we know not, but nine English fell that Day, wherein this Providence is
observable, that those nine men which were killed at that time belonged to nine
several Towns, as if the Lord should say, that he has a controversy with
every Plantation, and therefore all had need to repent and reform their ways.

Now the English have a multitude of open Enemies more then when this trouble
began, so that greater desolations are now expected.

Wherefore September I. the Indians set upon Deer field, (alias (...)) and
killed one man, and laid most of the Houses in that new hopeful Plantation in
ruinous heaps. That which adds solemnity and awfulness to that Desolation,
is, that it happened on the very day when one of the Churches in Boston were
seeking the face of God by Fasting and Prayer before him. (...) Also that very
day the Church in Hadly was before the Lord in the same way, but were driven
from the Holy Service they were attending by a most sudden and violent Alarm,
which routed them the whole day after. So that we may humbly complain, as
sometimes the Church did how long have those smoaked (...) against the Prayers
of thy People. Not long (...) this, Captain Beers with a considerable part of
his men fell before the Enemy. Concerning the state of those parts at this time
until September 15. Received information from a good (...) whilst things were
fresh in memory, which I shall here insert, as containing a brief History of
the Transactions which happened within the time mentioned; those parts being
then the Seat of the War: the Letter which I intended is that which follows.

Reverend and dear Brother;
I received yours, wherein among other things you desire an account of the
passages of our War with the Indians: I shall in answer to your desire (...)
the most remarkable passages: the people here having many causes jealousy, of
the unfaithfulness of our Indians presented the same before the Committees of
the Militia, whereupon it was thought meet to desire of them the surrendry of
their Arms, and by perswa^^on obtained about nine and twenty: But about three
days after they being desirous to go forth with some Forces from Harford, both
Indians and English, and some from the Bay in pursuit of Philip, their Arms
were delivered to them again: but a while after their return, jealou^ies still
increasing, there was a general desire in the People of these three Towns, that
they should be again disarmed, and such things as these were presented to the
Council here, as inducing thereunto: 1. That when they heard of the Massacre at
Quabaog, they made in the Fort eleven Acclamations of joy, according to the
number of our men that were slain. 2. A Frenchman that was going to Boston
gave Testimony that he met three Indians that told him they were coming to
persuade North Hampton Indians to fight with Philip, and that at his return he
asked our Indians whether they would fight, they said they could not tell. 3.
One of their Sachims owned that there were several among them false to the
English, but would not tell who they were. 4. A Woman of ours was warned by a
Squaw to remove with her Children into the middle of the Town: told her
withthal she durst not tell News, for if she did the Indians would cut off her
head. 5. Some of theirs gave out very suspicious Expressions: one upbraided the
English, that Coy was dead already, and Eyer and Pritchet were dead already:
said further that the Indians went out to find Philip with the English, that
when Philip was fighting with them in the front, they might fall on them in the
rear: another said the reason why he went not out with the Army was that he
might help to destroy the English at home: another threatened maid of our town
to knock her on the head. 6. when they were out with our Army, they showed much
unwillingness to fight, all^adging they must not fight against their mothers
and brothers and coulins (for Quabaog Indians are related unto^^hem) 7. (...)
his, (...) who went out the same (...) complained that our Indians had almost
spoiled his, and that the English were blind and (...) not see the falsehood of
these Indians. 8. They shot bullets five several (...) at our men in diverse
places. Other things too, many to numerate were presented, and the Council saw
cause, to demand their arms Aug 24. They made some objections, but were fully
answered: The Sachem left the Council to try wh^^her be could penswade the
Indians, promising however to bring in (...) own. In the afternoon the
Council sent to the Fort for their, answer: they told the Messenger that some
Indians, were abroad in the Meadows, and they were not Willing to deliver up
their ^ms without (...) consent (...) in the morning they should have their
(...). The (...) was (...) to go again to them in the evening, to con^er^e with
them, to try (...) he could persuade them, and coming to the other side of the
Rive^ (...) some of them to come over, they bid him come over to them, (...)
him kiss -- Whereupon Captain Lothrop and B^ons, with whom (...) was left
intended to take their arms by force, and at midnight sent over to our
officers, to draw as nigh the Fort as they could without being perceived, and
they would do the like on Ha^field side, and so at break of day come upon them
but before they came the Indians were fled, having killed an old Sachem that
was not willing to go with them. The Captains resolved to follow them; and
pursued a great pace after them, with about an hundred men, having sent back a
part of ours for a Guard of the Town. A little before they overtook the
Indians, they heard two-strange claps of Thunder, like two volleys of shot; at
length they saw a single Indian, but shot not at him, though they might have
killed him, because they intended to parley with them, but on a sudden the
Indians let fly about forty gunns at them, and was soon answered by a volley
from our men; about forty ran down into the Swamp after them, poured in shot
upon them, made them throw down much of their luggage; and after a while our
men after the Indian manner got behind trees, and watched their opportunities to
make shotts at them; the Fight continued about three hours; we lost six men
upon the ground, though one was shot in the back by our own men, a seventh dyed
of (...) coming home, and two dyed the next might, nine in all of nine several
towns, every one of these towns lost a man.: Of the Indians as we heat since by
a Squaw that was taken, and by three Children that came to our town from them
the day after, there were slain twenty six: the same day there was an Indian
that lodged in our town he night before, taken by our men, and a Squaw that;
belonged to our Fort that was coming from Spring-field; they both own that our
Indians received Wompam from Philip in the Spring; to engage them in the War.
The fellow also owns that there were seven of our Indians that went to Quabaog,
where they heard that they intended to fight. After this fight we heard no more
of them till the first of September, when they shot down a Garrison Soldier of
Pacomptuck, that was looking after his horse, and ran violently up into the
town, many people having scarcely time enough to get into the Garrisons. That
day they burnt most of their houses and burns, the Garrisons not being strong
enough to sally out upon them, but killed two of their men from the Forts. The
next day they set upon several men that were gone out of the Fort at Squakheag,
they slew eight of our men, not above one of them being ^^ain that we know of,
but made no attempt upon the Fort. The next day (this Onset being unknown)
Capt, Beers set forth with about thirty six men and some ^^ seems Capt. Beers
and (...) (...) men that were with hi^, fought couragi^usly till their Powder
and shot was spen^, then the Indians prevailed over them so a^ to ^ill above to
of them only 13 escaped with their lives, at which ti^ed Cart with same
Ammunition fell in to the ^ands of the enemy.
Carts to fetch of the garrison at Squakheag, and coming within three miles of
the place, the next morning were set upon by a great number of Indians from the
side of a Swamp, where was an hot Dispute for some time: they having loft their
Captain and some others, resolved at last to fly, and going to take horse lost
several men more, I think about twelve: the most that escaped got to Hadly that
evening: next morning another came in, and at night another that had been taken
by the Indians, and loosed from his bonds by a Natick Indian, he tells the
Indians were all drunk that night, that they mourned much for the loss of a
great Captain, that the English had killed twenty five of their men. Six days
after another Soldier came in, who had been lost ever since the fight, and was
almost famished, and so lost his understanding, that he knew not what day the
fight was on.

On the 5th. of September Major Treat set forth for Squakheag with above an
hundred men; next day coming nigh Squakheag, his men were much daunted to see
the heads of Captain Beers Soldiers upon poles by the way side; but after they
were come to Squaukheag, some parties of them went into the Meadow, but hearing
some gunns about the Fort, they ran up to see what the matter was, but by the
way were fired upon by about fourteen Indians as they judge, out of the bushes:
one or two Indians were stain. Major Treat was struck upon on the thigh, the
bullet pierced clothes, but had lost its force, and did him no harm: coming to
the Fort he called his council together, and concluded forthwi^h to bring off
the garrison: so they came away the same night, leaving the Cattle there, and
the dead bodies unburied: since which seventeen of their Cattle came a great
part of the way themselves, and have since been fetched into Hadly.

Upon the 12th: of this month the Indians made an assault upon twenty two men
of Pocomptuck, that were going from one garrison to the other to Meeting in the
afternoon: made a great volley of shot at them, but killed not one man, they
escaped to the Garrison whither they were going, only one man running to the
other garrison was taken alive: The Indians took up their rendezvouze on an hill
in the meadow, burnt two more house killed many horses, carried away horse-loads
of beef and pork to the hill: they sent the same night for more aid, but partly
through the strictness of the Commission of our Garrison soldiers, or at least
their interpretation of it, and partly through the wetness of the weather,
there was nothing done that night: the next day we persuaded some of our
Inhabitants to go Volunteers, and sent to Hadly to do the like, who going up
with some of Captain Louthrops soldiers, joined themselves to the garrison at
Pocomptuck, and on Tuesday very early went out to assault the Indians, but they
were all fled. Last night Captain Mosely with his men came into Hadly, and this
night we expect more Forces from Hartford.

If the Lord give not some sudden Check to these Indians, it is to be feared
that most of the Indians in the Country will rise.

I desire you would speak to the Governor, that there may be some thorough
care for a Reformation, I am sensible there are many difficulties therein: many
sins 'are grown so in fashion, that it becomes a question whether they be sins
or no. I desire you would especially mention, Oppression, that intolerable
Pride in clothes and hair: the tolleraton of so many Taverns, especially in
Boston, and suffering home-dwellers to lie tippling in them. Let me hear soon
from you: the Lord bless you and your Labors; forget us not at the throne of
Grace: It would be a dreadful Token of the Displeasure of God, if these
afflictions pass away without much spiritual advantage: I thought to have
written somewhat more large with respect to Reformation, but I hope I need not,
you will I pre^^^ be forward of your self therein.


Not many days after this Letter was written, the English received a sadder
rebuke of Providence, then any thing that hitherto had been. For September 18.
Captain Lothrop (a godly and courageous Commander) with above seventy men were
sent to be as a Gua^d to some that were coming from Dee^-field with Carts
laden with Goods and Provision, to be removed to Hadly, for security: But as
they were coming, the Indians, whose cru^l Habitations are the dark (...) of
the Earth, lo^ked in the Swamps, and multitudes of them made a sudden and
frightful assault. They seized upon the Carts and Goods (many of the Soldiers
having been so foolish and secure, as to put their Arms in the Carts, and step
aside to gather Grapes, which proved dear and deadly Grapes to them) killed
Captain Lothr^p, and above threescore of his men, stripped them of their
clothes, and so left them to lie weltring in their own Blood. Captain Mosely
who was gone out to range the Woods, hearing the Guns, hasted to their help,
but before he could come, the other Captain and his men were ^^ain, as has
been expressed. Nevertheless he gave the Indians Battle: they were in such
numbers, as that he and his company were in extreme danger, the Indians
endeavoring (according to their mode of fighting) to encompass the English
round, and then to press in upon them with great numbers, so to knock them down
with their Hatchers. In the nick of time Major Treat, with above an hundred
men, and threescore of Unkas his Indians came in to succor those that were so
be s^t with the Enemy, whereupon the Enemy presently retreated, and (...)
coming on, there was no pursuing of them. In this fight, but few of Captain
Mosely's men were slain: How may Indians were killed is unknown, it being their
manner to draw away their dead men, as fast as they are killed, if possibly
they can do it; yea, they will venture their own lives for that end, which they
do out of policy, that so their Enemies may think, that few or none of them are
killed, when nevertheless they have lost many. I am informed that some of the
Indians have reported, that they lost ninety six men that day, and that they
had above forty wounded, many of which dyed afterward. However, this was a
black and fat^l day, wherein there were eight persons made Widows, and six and
twenty Children made Fatherless, all in one little Plantation, and in one day;
and above sixty Persons buried in one dreadful Grave. And this was the state of
the Western parts in respect of the War with the Heathen.

We must now take a step backwards, and a little consider the Eastern
Plantations. For in the Month of September, did the flame break out there. Some
who had their hearts exercised in discerning things of (...) were from the
beginning of the War, not without sad Apprehe^^ (...) terning the Inhabitants
in those parts of the Country, in that they scattered people, and such as had
many of them Scandalized the Heathen, and lived themselves too like unto the
Heathen, without any Instituted Ordinances, also the Indians thereabouts were
more numerous then in some other places. They began their Outrages, at the
House of one Mr. Purchase, who had been a great Trader with the Indians After
that they came to the House of an old Man in Casco-bay, whose name was Wakely.
Him with his Wife. Son and Daughter in law (who was great with Child) and two
Grandchildren, they cruelly Murdered, and took three Children alive, and led
them into Captivity.

This old Wakely was esteemed a godly Man. He would sometimes say with tears,
that he believed God was angry with him, because although he came into
New England for the Gospels sake, yet he had left another place in this
Country, where there was a Church of Christ, which he once was in Communion
with, and had lived many years in a Plantation where was no Church nor
Instituted Worship. If a Faithful Minister of Christ happened to Preach in
Casco, he would with much affection entertain him, saying, Blessed is he that
comes in the Name of the Lord. After this good man was murdered by the
Indians, they quickly did more mischief: so that in Falmouth there were five
Houses burnt, four Men, two Women, and two Children killed, and three Children
carried away Captive. After this they set upon Sacoe, where they ^ew thirteen
Men, and at last burnt the Town. A principle Actor in the destruction of Sacoe
was a strange Enthufiastical Sagamore, called Squando, who some years before
pretended that God appeared to him, in the form of a tall Man, in black
Clothes, declaring to him that he was God, and commanded him to leave his
Drinking of Strong Liquors, and to pray, and to keep Sabbaths, and to go to
hear the Word Preached, (...) which things the Indian did for some years, with
great seeming Devotion and Conscience observe. But the God which appeared to
him, said nothing to him about Jesus Christ; and therefore it is not to be
marvelled at, that at last he discovered himself to be no otherwise then a
Child of him, that was a Murderer and a Liar from the beginning. Also these
enraged Barbarians, being annimated with their success at Falmouth and Sacoe,
they went to BlackPoint, and there killed six Men and a Woman, and burnt two
and twenty dwelling Houses. In the mean time, the English at Ken^beck
endeavored that the Indians in those parts night be kept from joining in this
Insurrection, whereto they were tempted and solicited by their neighbors. The
prudent endeavors of the English proved happily successful, insomuch as the
Sachems there, brought Presents with great Pro^estations of Amity and Fidelity,
and desired that no more Liquors might be sold to the Indians, prosessing, that
that was a principle cause of the mischiefs that had been done, and that they
were not able to keep their men in subjection, when once they were become mad
with drink.

After these things, the Indians killed two men at Kittery, and stripped them.
Lieutenant Plaster with twenty two English went out to fetch off the dead
bodies, and to bury them; as they were putting one of them into the Cart,
suddenly a small party of Indians shot out of a Swamp. And the greatest part of
the English did unworthily for sake their Leader in that hazard, only seven
remained with him. He thinking his men had been near at hand, faced the Enemy,
killed and wounded many of them, but the Indians perceiving that all but seven
of the English were fled, took courage and killed Mr. Plaster (who was a good
and useful man) and one of his Sons, and another man: the other four seeing
that, ran for their lives, and so escaped until they came safe into a Garrison,
which was not far off.

Behold how great a matter a little free kindles. This fire which in June was
but a little spark, in three months time is become a great ^^me, that from East
to West the whole Country is involved in great trouble; and the Lord himself
seems to be against us, to cast us off, and to put us to shame, and and ^word
not forth with our Armies. Wherefore the Magistrates of this Jurisdiction,
earnestly called upon the Inhabitants thereof, to humble themselves before the
Lord, and to confess and turn from transgression. Inasmuch as the expressions
contained in that paper, which was at this time published by the Councils
order, for a day of public Humiliation, to be observed through this
Jurisdiction, are most serious; and gracious, and greatly expressive of the
sinful Degenerate Estate of the present Generation in New England, and that
Declaration will turn for a Testimony to our faithful Rulers, both now and
hereafter; considering also, that it is in but few hands, I shall therefore
here insert, and republish it. It Is that which follows.

sealAT A COUNCIL Held at Boston, Sept. 17. 1675.
I T having pleased the Holy God (all whose works are Truth, and his way^s
Judgment) for our sins whereby be has been provoked, in special by the
^^dervalnation of our pleasant things; great ant bankfullness for, and manifold
abuses of our wonder full peace, and the blessings of it in this good land
which the Lord has given us; ill entertainment of the Ministry of the precious
Gospel of peace; leaving our first love, dealing falsely in the ^ovenant of the
Lord our God^ the Apostasy of many from the Truth unto Herefies, and pernicio^s
Errors^ great Formality, inordinate Affection, and sinful Conformity to this
present evil vain World: and (beside many horrid and soandalons sins breaking
forth among us, for which we have cause to be greatly bumbled before the Lord)
our great unsen^^bleness of the Displeasure of the Lord, in suffering these
abominations to be perpe^uated; together with our sarnal Security, and
unquietness under the judgments of God upon us, our abiding very much
unreformed, notwithstanding all Warnings, Chastisements, whereby the Lord has
been, and is still debating with us, w^ having greatly incensed him to stir up
many Adversaries against us, was only abroad, but also at my own Deers (causing
the Heathen in this wilderness to be as Thorns in our sides, who have formerly
been, and might still be a wall unto as therein; and others also to (...) a
Scourge unto us) the Lord himself also more immediately afflicting us by
Diseases, (...) of so many Children in some of our Towns have died this Summer.
His not going forth with our Armies as informer times, but giving up many year
(...) the mouth of the devouring Sword, yea, showing himself angry with the
Prayers of his People: threatening us also with scarcity of Provision, and other
Calamities, especially if this present War, with the Barbarous Heathen should
continue; and that the Lord of Hosts withdraw not the Commission he has given
to the Sword, and other Judgments to prevail against us;

The Governor and Council of this Jurisdiction therefore (being under the
sense of these evils; and also of the distressed state of the rest of the
Colonies consederate with our selves, and of the Churches of Christ in other
parts of the Christian World, in this day (...) Rebukes, and Blasphe^^, and
fearing the sad issue thereof, (...) the Lord help us with our (...) heart, and
not feignedly, to turn unto himself) Do Appoint and (...) seventh day of the
next Month, to be a Day of public Humiliation, (...) Fasting and Prayer,
throughout this whole Colony; that we may set our selves sincerely to seek the
Lord, rending our hearts, and not our garments before him, and pursue the same
with a thorough Reformation of what ever has been or is an image of jealousy
before the Lord to offend the eyes of his Glory; if so be, the Lord may turn
from his fierce anger, that we perish not: we do therefore require all the
Inhabitants of this Jurisdiction to forbear service labor upon that day, and
that they apply themselves respectively to observe the same, as is appointed.

By the Council, Edward Ramson Secr't.

October the 7th. This day of Hamilition appointed by the Council, was solemnly
observed: yet acended with awful restemonyes of divine displeasure. The very
next day after this Fast was agreed upon by those in evil Authority, was that
dismul (...) fatal blow, when Captain Lothrop and his company (in all near upon
four score souls) were slaughtered, whereby the Heathen were wonderfully
animated, some of them triumphing and saying, that so great slaughter was never
known: and indeed in their Wars one with another, the like has (...) heard
of. And that (...) day when this fast was kept, (...) persons were killed by
the Indians near Doom, one of them going front (...) public Worship. Also that
very day at the close of it, the sad tidings of Springfields Calamity came to
us here is Boston. And inasmuch as this news came at the conclusion of a day of
Humiliation, surely the Solemn voice of God to New England is still as
formerly, Praying without Reforming will not do. And now is the day come where
in the Lord is fulfilling the word which himself has spoken, saying, I will
send wild Beans among you, which shall rob you of your Children, and destroy
your Cattle, and make you few in number, and if you will not be reformed by
these things, I will bring your Sactuaryes to Desolation, and I will not smell
the Sweet Saves of your Odours. The Providence of God is never to be forgotten,
in that Churches have been signally spared for so long a time. Although some
Plantations wherein Churches have been settled were in most eminent danger, and
the Enemy might easily have swallowed them up, yet God so ordered that they
received little or no detriment, when other places were laid utterly waste, the
Lord an (...) how loath he was to disgrace the Throne of his Glory, but now he
begins with the Sanctuary. As for Springfields misery it thus came to pass:
Whereas there was a body of Indians that lived in a Fort near to that Town of
Springfield, and professed nothing but Friendship toward the English; they
treacherously brake in upon the Town, when a party of our Soldiers who had
been there, were newly gone to Hadly. They killed several, amongst others their
Lieutenant Cooper was most (...) Murdered by them, without the least occasion
or Provocation given. They burnt down to the ground above thirty
dwelling-houses, and above twenty outhouses: amongst others Mr. Pelatiah
Glover Teacher of the Church there, is a great sufferer, his House, and Goods,
and Books, and Writings being all consumed in one hour. Nevertheless there was
a great mixture of mercy in this dark and dismal dispensation. For God so
ordered, as that an Indian who knew what was designed the next day, ran away in
the night, and acquainted the English therewith, whence they had time and
opportunity to escape to an house that was Fortified; other wise in probability
the Inhabitants had surely had their lives as well as their dwelling places cut
off.

October 13. The General Court fat in Boston, during this Session, a Committee
was with the concurrance of both Houses appointed in order to a Reformation of
those Evils which have provoked the Lord to bring the Sword upon us, and to
withdraw from our Armies from time to time. The Assistance of the Teaching
Elders in the Churches was desired, as in a case of that nature, it was proper
for them to advise and help according to God.

There was a gracious presence of God with them in their consultations, all
that were there with one voice agreeing in many particulars, in respect whereof
Reformation should be, and must be: e.g. That some effectual course should be
taken for the Suppression of those proud Excesses in Apparrrel hair, etc. which
many (yea and the poorer sort as well as others) are shamfully guilty of. That
a due testimony should be borne against such as are false Worshippers,
especially Idolatrous (...) who set up Altars against the Lords Altar, yea who
set up a Christ whom the Scriptures know not. That whereas excess in drinking
is become a common Sin, means should be used to prevent an unnecessary
multiplication of Ordinaries, and to keep Town dwellers from frequenting
Taverns: and that whereas Swearing has been frequently heard, they that hear
another Swear profanely and do not complain of it to Authority, shall be
punished for that concealment. Also that some further care should be taken,
that the fourth and fifth Commandments be better observed then formerly; and
that there may be no more such Oppression, either by Merchants or day-Labourers
as heretofore has been; and that the Indian Trading-houses, whereby the
Heathen have been debauched and scandalized against Religion, be suppressed;
and that more care should be taken respecting the Rising Generation, then
formerly has been, that they might be brought under the discipline of Christ
etc. These things were unanimously consented to.

October 19. The Conclusions of the Committee, respecting Reformation of
provoking evils were signed, and delivered in to the General Court, who voted
acceptance thereof, and appointed another Committer to draw up Laws in order to
the establishment of the things agreed on. Now as I remember that famous
Martyrologist Mr. Fox ( in Acts and Monuments vol. 2 page 669.) observes, with
respect to the Reformation in K. Edward the 6th his days, that that very day
and hour when the Act for Reformation was put in execution at London, God gave
the English signal victory against the Scots at Museleburrough; so it was
proportionably) with us. For that day when there was a vote passed for the
Suppression and Reformation of those manifest evils, whereby the eyes of Gods
Glory are provoked amongst us, the Lord gave success to our Forces, who that
day encountered with the Indians at Hatfield. The English lost but one man in
the fight (albeit some that were sent forth as Scouts were killed or
Captivated) the Enemy fled before them, and ran into the River, many of them
being seen to fall, but night coming on, it was in vain to follow them further.
And after that day, the Western Plantations had little or no disturbance by
them, but lived in quietness all the Winter. All this notwithstanding, we may
say as sometimes the Lords people of old, the Harvest is past, the Summer is
ended, and we are not saved. The Sword having marched Eastward, and Westward,
and Northward, now begins to face toward the South again. The Narragansets,
who were the greatest body of Indians in New England; there being no less then
six Sachims amongst them; having not as yet appeared in open Hostility.
Nevertheless Philips and Squaw-Sackims meet when routed by the English Forces,
were harbored amongst the Narragansets, when the Commissioners of the united
Colonies sat at Boston, in the (...) end of September, one of the Narraganset
Sachims, and Messengers from other Sachims there, made their appearance in
Boston; they pretended nothing but good will to the English, and promised that
those Enemies of ours, who had burnt so many houses, and committed so many
Murders, and had fled to them for refuge, should be delivered up by the latter
end of October. But when the time prefixed for the surrendry of the Wompanoags
and SquawSachems Indians was lapsed, they pretended they could not do as they
had engaged at present, but after winter they would do it. In the mean while,
when the English had any engagement with the Indians, wounded Indians came home
to the Narragansets, especially after the fight at Hatfield, October. 19th about
forty wounded men were seen crossing the woods toward the Narragansets: also
some (at least two Indians) from amongst themselves, came to the English, and
told them that the Narragansets were resolved (if they could) to destroy the
English: but they were loath to begin to fall upon them before winter, but in
the Spring when they should have the leaves of trees and Swamps to befriend
them, they would do it: wherefore it was judged necessary to send out Forces
against them, and preparations were made accordingly.

There was some agitation amongst those whom it did concern, where a person
suitable for so great a trust might be found as General; and that worthy
Gentleman Josiah Winflow Esquire, who succeeds his Father (of blessed memory) as
Governor of Plymouth; was pitched upon for this Service.

Under his conduct therefore, an Army consisting of at first a thousand, and at
last about fifteen hundred men, were sent forth to execute the vengeance of the
Lord upon the persidious and bloody Heathen. But before they set out, the
Churches were all upon their knees before the Lord, the God of Armies,
entreating his favor and gracious success in that undertaking, wherein the
welfare of his people was so greatly concerned. This day of Prayer and
Humiliation was observed December. 2d. when also something happened intimating as
if the Lord were still angry with our Prayers; for this day all the houses in
(...) were burnt by the Indians.

December. 8th. The Army set out from Boston. Whilst they were upon this march,
an Indian whose name was Peter, having received some disgust among his Country
men, came to the English, and discovered the plotts of the Indians, told where
they were, and promised to conduct the Army to them. They were no sooner
arrived in the Narraganset Country but they killed and took captive above
forty Indians. Being come to Mr. Smiths house, they waited some days for
Connecticut Forces. In the mean while party of the enemy did treacherously get
into the house of Jerem Bull(where was a Garrison.) burned the house, and flew
about fourteen persons.

December. 18. Connecticut Forces being come, a March toward the enemy was
resolved upon: Peter Indian having informed that the Body of Indians (only
Ninnigret being one of their old crafty Sachems, had with some of his men
withdrawn himself from the rest, professing that he would not engage in a War
with the English, therefore did he go into a place more remote) was in a Fort
about eighteen miles distant from the place where our Army now was. The next
day, although it were the Sabbath, yet, provisions being almost spent by our
Soldiers, waiting so long for Connecticut Forces, the Council of War resolved
to give Battle to the enemy. The English Soldiers played the men wonderfully;
the Indians also fought stoutly, but were at last beat out of their Fort, which
was taken by the English, There were hundreds of Wigwams (or Indian houses)
within the Fort, which our Soldiers set on fire, in the which men, women and
Children (no man knows how many hundreds of them) were burnt to death. Night
coming on, a Retreat was founded.

Concerning the number of Indians stain in this Battle, we are uncertain: only
some Indians which afterward were taken prisoners (as also a wretched English
man that apostatized to the Heathen, and fought with them against his own
Countrymen, but was at last taken and executed) confessed that the next day
they found three hundred of their fighting men dead in their Fort, and that
many men, women and children were burned in their Wigwams, but they neither
knew, nor could conjecture how many: it is supposed that not less then a
thousand Indians Souls perished at that time. Ninnigret whose men buried the
slain, affirms that they found twenty and two Indian Captains among the dead
bodies. Of the English there were killed and wounded about two hundred and
thirty, whereof only eighty and five persons are dead. But there was a solemn
rebuke of Providence at this time, in that six of our Captains were stain, viz,
Captain Johnson of Roxbuty, Captain Gardner of Salem, Captain Davenport of
Boston (son to that Captain Davenport who did great Service in the expedition
against the Indians in the Pequod war, Anno 1637.) Captain Gallop of
New London, Captain Marshal of Windsor, Captain Siely of Stratford, who dyed of
his wounds some days after the fight was over. The three Captains first
mentioned, belonged to Mattachusets Colony, the three last to Connecticut, of
Plymouth Colony Captain Bradford (one of their faithful Magistrates, and son
of him that was many years Governor there) was sorely wounded, but God had
mercy on him, and on his people in him, so as to spare his life and to restore
him to some measure of health, albeit the bullet shot into him is still in his
body. 'Also Captain Goram of Barnstable in Plymouth Colony ^el sick of a seaver
whereof he dyed.

Thus did the Lord take away seven Captains out of that Army. Also four
Leintenants were wounded in that Fort fight, so that although the English had
the better of it, yet not without solemn and humbling Rebukes of Providence. At
night as the army returned to their Quarters; a great Snow fell, also part of
the army missed their way, among whom was the General himself with his
Lifeguard. Had the enemy known their advantage, and pursued our Soldiers (and
we have since heard that some of the Indians did earnestly move, thatit might
be so, but others of them through the overruling hand of Providence would not
consent) when upon their retreat, they might easily have cut off the whole
Army: But God would be more gracious to us. Here then was not only a Victory,
but also a signal Preservation, for which let the Father of mercyes have
eternal Glory.

After this God seemed to withdraw from the English, and take part with the
enemy. The next day the Indians finding but few English men dead in the Fort
amongst their three hundred Indians that were slain, were much troubled and
amazed, supposing that no more of ours had been killed; this blow did greatly
astonish them, and had the English immediately pursued the Victory begun, in
all likelihood there had been an end of our troubles: but God saw that neither
yet were we sit for deliverance. Wherefore Conecticut Forces withdrew to
Stonington, and there being so many killed and wounded amongst those that
remained in the Narraganset Country, also bread for the Soldiers being
wanting, by reason the extremity of the weather was such, as that the Vessels
laden with provision could not reach them; therefore the army lay still some
weeks.

In this interval of time, the town of Mendam (Which before that had been for
saken of its Inhabitants) was burnt down by the Indians.

Now does the Lord Jesus begin solemnly to fulfilt his word, in removing
Candlesticks out of their places, because of Contentions, and loss of first
Love. Surely when those places are destroyed where Churches have been planted,
Candlesticks are removed out of their places. But to proceed, When the Army was
just upon the Resolve to return home, because provisions were spent, God so
ordered, as that a Vessel laden with Victuals arrived, whereupon it was
determined ((...)) to pursue the enemy. Only it was thoughter necessary to
desist from this pursuit until Connecticut Forces could return and join with
ours. In the interim, a strange sudden Thaw happened in the midst of January
(when in New England the season is wont to be extreme cold) that the snow
melted away in a little time: the like weather has rarely been known in this
Land at that time of they year, albeit some of the first Planters say it was so
above fifty years ago: However this made wonderfully for the Indians
advantage, for now they fled out of the Narraganset Country, and whereas they
had been sorely straightned and distressed for victuals, now the snow being
wasted, they lived upon Ground-nuts.

In fine, the Army pursued them several days, overtook some of them, killed
and took about seventy persons, were in sight of the main Body of them, and
could they have held out to have pursued them but one day longer probably, this
unhappy War had then been ended: but the Soldiers were tired with eight days
March, and (having spent much of their provision whilst waiting for our
Connecticut Brethren) their bread faild, so as that they were forced to kill
horses and feed upon them.

We have often carried it before the Lord as if we would Reform our ways, and
yet when it has come to, we have done nothing: So has the Lord carried toward
us, as if he would deliver us, and yet has deferred our Salvation, as we our
selves have delayed Reformation.

So then February 5. The Army returned to Boston, not having obtained the end
of their going forth. It was easy to conjucture that the Narraganset, and
Nipmuck, and Quabaog, and River Indians, being all come together, and the Army
returned, they would speedily fall upon the Frontier Towns. And some of the
Praying Indians who had been sent out as Spies, and had been with the Indians
beyond Quabaog, brought intelligence, that a French Man that came from Canady
had been amongst them, animating them against the English, promising a supply
of Ammunition, and that they would come next summer and assist them: also the
Indian Spies declared, that there was a design, within such a time to burn
Lancaster, which came to pass both as to the time and manner accordingly.

For upon the 10th. day of February some hundreds of the Indians fell upon
Lancaster, burnt many of the Houses, killed and took Cap^ive above forty
persons. Mr. Rowlandson (the faithful Pastor of the Church there) had his
House, Goods, Books, all burned, his Wife, and all his Children led away
Captive before the Enemy. Himself (as God would have it) was not at home,
whence his own person was delivered, which otherwise (without a Miracle) would
have been endangered. Eight man lost their lives, and were stripped naked by
the Indians, because they ventured their lives to save Mrs. Rowlandson.

As this good Man returned home (having been at Boston to intercede with the
Council that something might be done for the safety of that place) he saw his
Lancaster in flames, and his own house burnt down, not having heard of it till
his eyes beheld it, and knew not what was become of the Wife of his bosom, and
Children of his Bowels. This was a most (...) Providence, and has made me
often think on those words, though Noa^, Job and Daniel were in it, they should
deliver but their own Souls, they should deliver neither ^
Sons nor Daughters, they only shall be delivered, but the Land shall be
desolate. And this desolation is the more tremendous; in that this very day,
the Churthes Westward were numbling themselves before the ^. Within a few days
after this, certain Indians did some mischiefs at Malbery, Sudbery, Chelmsford.

February 21. The Indians assaulted Medfield, and although there were two or
three hundred Soldiers there, they burn^ half the Town, killed several Men,
Women, and Children (about eighteen in all) amongst others their Lieutenant
Adams was slain. And soon after the was killed, his Wife was casually slain by
an Englishman, whose Gun discharged before he was aware, and the Bullet
therein passed through the Boards over head, and mortally wounded Lieutenant
Adam's wife, It is a sign God is angry, when he turns our Weapons against our
selves.

February 23. A day of Humiliation was attended in the old Meeting House in
Boston, but not without much Distraction, because of an Alarm, by reason of
rumors, as if the Indians were doing mischief within ten miles of Boston.

February 25. This night the Indians fired seven Houses and Barns in W^ymouth

In the beginning of March, another small Army was sent out from Boston, under
the conduct of that expert Soldier and Commander Major Savage, to seek out the
Enemy, Connecticut Forces met with ours at Quabaog, and they marched together,
but not following the direction of the ( Natick) Praying Indians, who were sent
as Pilots, the Army missed their way, and was bewildred in the Woods. On a
sudden when they thought on no such thing, a party of Indians fired upon them,
and killed one man, and wounded Mr. Gershom Bulkly, who is Pastor of the Church
in Wethersfield; whereupon those Indians were immediately pursued, who hastened
toward North-Hampton. The Army following them thither, missed of the main Body
of Indians. Nevertheless, there was a singular providence of God ordering this
matter, for the relief of those Western Plantations, which otherwife, in
probability had been cut off.

For upon the fourteenth of March a multitude of Indians fell upon North
Hampton, broke through their Fortification in three places, burned five houses,
and five barns, and killed four Men, and one Woman: but the Town being full of
Soldiers the Enemy was quickly repulsed, with the loss of many of their lives.

March the (...) Mischief was done, and several lives cut off by the Indians
this day at Groton and at Sadbury^. An humbling Providence, inas much as many
Churches were this day Fasting and Praying.

March 12. This Sabbath eleven Indians assaulted Mr. William Clarks Mouse in
Plymouth, killed his Wife, who was the Daughter of a godly Father and Mother
that came to New England on the account of Religion, (See July 6.) and she her
self also a pious and prudent Woman; they also killed her sucking Child, and
knocked another Child (who was about eight years old) in the head, supposing
they had killed him, but afterward he came to himself again. And whereas there
was another Family besides his own, entertained in Mr. Clarks house, the
Indians destroyed them all, root and branch, the Father, and Mother, and all
the Children. So that eleven persons were murdered that day, under one roof,
after which they set the house on fire. The Leader of these Indians was one
Totoson, a fellow who was well acquainted with that house, and had received
many kindness there, it being the manner of those brutish men, who are only
skilful to destroy, to deal worst with those who have done most for them.

March 13. The Indians assaulted Groton, and left but few houses standing. So
that this day also another Candlestick was removed out of its place. One of the
first houses that the Enemy destroyed in this place, was the House of God, h.^.
which was built, and set apart for the celebration of the public Worship of
God.

When they had done that, they (...) and blasphemed, and came to Mr. Willard
(the worthy Pastor of the Church there) his house (which being Fortified, they
attempted not to destroy it) and tauntingly, said, What Will you do for a house
to pray in now we have burnt your Meeting House? Thus has the Enemy done
wickedly in the Sanctuary, they have burnt up the Synagogues of God in the
Land; they have cast fire into the Sanctuary; they have cast down the dwelling
place of his name to the Ground. O God, how long shall the Adversary reproach?
shall the Enemy Blaspheme thy Name for ever? Why withdrawest thou thine band,
even thy right band^ pluck it out of thy b^some.

March, 17. This day the Indians fell upon Warwick, and burnt it down to the
ground, all but one house.

March. 20. Some of them returned into the Narraganset Country, and burnt down
the remaining English houses there.

We are now come to the conclusion of the year 1675. which has been the most
troublesome year that ever poor New England saw. What ending the present year
shall have, is with God, but it has a most doleful beginning.

For March 26. 1676. being the Sabbath Day, the Indians assaulted Malbery, and
consumed a great part of the town: after which the inhabitants apprehended
themselves under a necessity of (...) that place which was done accordingly; so
that here is another Candlestick removed out of his place. This day also,
Captain Pierce of Situate with a party of about fifty English, and twenty
Indians, who were Friends to the English, pursued a small number of the Enemy,
who in desperate subtilty ran away from them, and they went limping to make the
English believe they were lame, till they had led them into a snare: for
suddenly a vast body of Indians did encompass them round; so that Captain
Pierce was slain, and forty and nice English with him, and eight (or more)
Indians who did assist the English, and fought bravely in that engagement.

How many of the Enemy fell we know not certainly, only we hear that some
Indians, which have since been taken by the English, confess that Captain
Pierce, and those with him killed an hundred and forty of them before they lost
their own lives.

Upon this Lords day another sad thing likewife happened; for near Springfield,
there were eighteen Englishmen riding to the Town, to attend the solemn
Worship of God on his Holy day. And although they were Armed, there were seven
or eight Indians, who lying in Ambuscado, were so bold as to shoot at them.
They killed a Man and a Maid that rode behind him, the English being surprised
with fear, rode away to save their lives: in the mean while the Indians seized
upon two women and Children, and took them away alive, so that here we have
cause to think of Joshuahs wards, who said, O Lord What shall I say When Israel
turns their backs before their Enemies? What shall be said when eighteen
Englishmen well armed, fly before seven Indians? This seems to argue something
of a divine for saking, and displeasure in heaven against us. The next day
those Indians were pursued, but when the English came in sight those barbarous
wretches hasted to run away, but before that they knocked the two Children on
the head, as they were sucking their mothers breasts, and then knocked their
Mothers on the head: Nevertheless one of them was alive when the soldiers came
to her, and able to give an account of what the Indians had told her. Amongst
other particulars, they did affirm to her that there was a Body of about three
thousand Indians (no doubt but in that they did hyperbolize) near to Deerfield,
and that they had newly received a great supply of powder from the Dutch at
Albany: men that worship Mammon, notwithstanding all prohibitions to the
contrary, will expose their own and and other men's lives unto danger, if they
may but gain a little of this worlds good.

March. 27. Some of the in habitants of Sudbury, being alarumed by what the
Indians did yesterday to their neighbors in Malbury, apprehending they might
come upon the enemy unawares, in case they should march after them in the night
time, they resolved to try what might be done and that not altogether without
success. For toward the morning whilst it was yet dark, they discerned where
the Indians lay by their Fires. And such was their boldness, as that about
three hundred of them lay all night within half a mile of one of the garrison
houses in that town where they had done such mischief the day before. (...) the
darkness was such as an English man could not be discerned from an Indian, yet
ours being forty in number discharged several times upon the enemy, and (as
Indians (...) firce that time ^o confess) God so disposed of the bullets that
were shot at that time, that no less then thirty Indians were wounded of whom
there were fourteen that dyed several of which had been principal actors in the
late bloody Tragedyes. The fired hard upon the English, but neither killed nor
wounded so much as one man in the (...).

March. 28. The Indians burnt about thirty Barns, and rear upon forty dwelling
Houses in Reboboth, so that thereby the d^ssipation and des^lation of that
Church is greatly threatened.

The next day they burnt about thirty houses at the town called Providence.

In the beginning of April they did some mischief at Chelmsford and Andovor,
where a small party of them put the town into a great fright, caused all the
people to fly into Garrison houses, killed one man, and burnt one house. And to
show what barbarous creatures they are, they exercised cruelty toward dumb
creatures. They took a Cow, knocked off one of her horns, cut out her tongue,
and so left the poor creature in great misery. They put an horse, ox etc. into
an hovil, and then set it on fire, only to show how they are delighted in
exercising cruelty.

April 9th, This day being the Lords day, there was an alaram at Charlestown,
cambridge, and other towns, by reason that sundry of the enemy were seen at
Billerica, and (it seems) had shot a man there. This week we hear from
Connecticut, that a party of their soldiers went with many of the pequods, and
Monbegins, and some of Ninnegrets Indians, to seek after the enemy, and they
killed and took captive forty and four Indians without the loss of any of ours:
amongst whom were several of their Chief Captains, and their great sachem
called Qudnonchet, who was a principal Ring leader in the Narraganset War, and
had as great an interest and influence, as can be said of any among the
Indians. This great Sachem was pursued into a River by one of Ninnegret his
men, and there taken. Being apprehended he was carried away to Stonington,
where the English caused the liquods and Monbegins, and Ninnegrets Indians, to
join together in Shooting Quanonthet and cutting off his head, which was sent
to Hartford. And herein the English dealt wisely, for by this means, those
three Indian Nations are become abominable to the other Indians, and it is now
their interest to be faithful to the English, since their own Countrymen will
never forgive them; on account of their taking and killing the Sachem
mentioned: So that there was a gracious smile of providence in this thing, yet
not without matter of humbling to us, in that the Sachem was apprehended not by
English but by Indian hands.

April, 19. The Indians killed a man at Wrymouth, and another at Hingham. And
they burnt down the remaining deserted houses at Malbery.

April 20th. A day of Humiliation was observed in Boston. The next day sad
tidings came to us. For the enemy set upon ^udbury, and burnt a great part of
the town. And whereas Capt. Wadsworth (a prudent and faithful man) was sent out
for their relief, with about seventy armed men, a great body of Indians
surrounded them, so as that above fifty of ours were slain that day, amongst
whom was Capt. Wadsworth and his Leiutenant Sharp. Also Captain Bra^tlebanck (a
godly and choice spirited mar) was killed at the same time. Also they took five
or six of the English and carried them away alive, but that night killed them
in such a manner as none but Salvages would have done. For they stripped them
naked, and caused them to run the G^untle^, whipping them after a cruel and
bloody manner, and then threw hot ashes upon them; cut out the flesh of their
legs, and put fire into their wounds, delighting to see the miserable torments
of wretched creatures. Thus are they the perfect children of the Devil. What
numbers the Indians lost in this fight, we know not, only a Captive since
escaped out of their hands, affirms that the Indians said one to another, that
they had an hundred and twenty fighting men killed this day.

The same day (as is judged fifty) Indians burnt nineteen houses and barns at
Scit^ate in Plymouth Colony, but were notably encountered and repelled from
doing further mischief by the valor of a few of the inhabitants.

Apr. 24th, Skulking Indians did some mischief in Braintry, but the inhabitants
received not any considerable damage by them;

April. 27. A small number of them near woodcocks who keeps the Ordinary in the
road to Re^oboth, watched their opportunity and killed his son, and another
man, and greatly wounded another of his sons, and shot himself through the arm,
and then burnt his sons house.

At Boston there is a press in order to sending forth another Army to pursue
the enemy; for we hear there is a great body of them near Malbury, (as his
apprehended) of many hundreds.

About this time, in Conecticut-Colony, Capt. Dennison with sixty Six
Volunteers, and an hundred and twelve Peqnoa-Indians, pursuing the common
enemy, took and flew seventy and six Indians. Amongst the slain was the Sachem
Pomham his Grandchild, who was also a Sachem, and another Sachem called
Chickon, and one great Counselor. They took and spoiled an hundred and sixty
bushels of the Indians corn. None of ours either English or Indians that did
engage with and for the English, were lost when this exploit was done.

In the month of April, many of the Eastern, Indians having been sorely
distressed, and sain to wander up and down for meat, so as that they lived for
some time upon no other food then the skins of wild creatures, which they
soaked in water till they became soft and eatable, notwithstanding the outrages
and murders (for they have shed the blood of about forty seven persons) by
them committed, they did in confidence of favor from the English come and
submit themselves, alleging that the injuryes done by them were grounded upon
a mistake. For when a party of English came in Warlike posture upon some of
their Webbs (as they call them) (...) Women as they were gathering corn, an
Indian seeing it, ran to the other Indians and told them that the English had
(though it were not all so) killed all those Indian women, and therefore they
took up arms to revenge that supposed injury. Also they plead for themselves,
that a Fisherman told one of them, that the English would destroy all the
Indians, and when inquiry was made of another English man (thought to be more
discrect then the former) he confirmed what the other had said, and that some
rude English did purposely over set a Canos wherein was an Indian Lad; and that
although a Squaw dived to the bottom of the River and fetched him up alive,
yet that the Lad never came to himself again. It is greatly to be lamented that
the heathen should have any ground for such allegations, or that they should be
scandalized by men that call themselves Christians.

May. 3d. Was the day of Election for Governor and Magistrates in the
Matachusets Colony. This day the Lord by a wonderful hand of providence,
wrought Salvation for Mrs. Bowlandson and returned to her to Boston, after she
had been eleven weeks in Captivity amongst the heathen. This is a Token for
good, being a great answer of Prayer. For by reason of her near relation to a
Man of God, much prayer had been particularly made before the Lord on her
behalf. Nevertheless did the Lord manifest his holy displeasure, in as much as
at Haveril and Bradford, a small company of Indians killed two men and carried
away a man and a woman, and five Children alive.

May. 6th. Our Forces which are abroad met with a party of Indians, and killed
about thirteen of them, and had probably destroyed many more of them, had not
an Englishman unhappily sounded a trumpet, whereby the enemy had notice to
escape. The Praying Indians did good Service at that (...), insomuch as many
who had hard thoughts of them all, begin to blame themselves, and to have a
good opinion of those Praying Indians who have been so universally decryed.

May 8. About seventeen Houses and Barns did the Indians fire and destroy at
Bridge-water. About this time they killed four men at Tannson, as they were at
work in the field, by whose death about thirty Children were made fatherless.
But the Lord in the nick of time, sent Thunder and Rain, which caused the Enemy
to turn back.

May 9. A day of Humiliation by Fasting and Prayer, was attended in the
Townhouse at Boston, by the Magistrates, and Deputies of the General Court,
with Assistance of so many teaching Elders as could be obtained. Al though many
such solemn occasions have at times been attended informer years, yet it has
been observed by some, that God did always signally own his Servants, upon
their being before him in such a way and manner: And so it was now; for the
very next day after this, a Letter came from Connecticut to Boston, informing,
that God had let loose the Mohawks upon our Enemies, and that they were sick of
Fluxes, and Fevers, which proved mortal to multitudes of them. And whereas a
special request lest before the Lord this day, was, that he would (as a token
for good) cause our poor Captives to be returned to us again, and particularly
those that were taken from Haverit the last week, God gave a gracious and
speedy Answer, bringing home those very Captives in particular, and many other,
yea at least sixteen of our poor sighing prisoners, who were appointed to
death, did the Lord loose and return unto us, within eight weeks after this
day, and diverse of them within three days after this solemn day of Prayer.
There are who have dated the turn of Providence toward us in this Colony, and
against the Enemy in (...) wonderful manner, from this day forward: yet some
lesser and more ^^^^siderable devastations happened soon after in Plymouth
Colony. For (...).

May 11. A company of Indians assaulted the Town of Plymouth eleven Houses and
five Barns therein: ten Englishmen were going to (...) after the Enemy, and
having an Indian with them, who was true to the English, he spied a party of
Indians lying in Ambush, who in probability had otherwise cut off many of them,
but the English having the opportunity of the first shot, struck down several
Indians, one of which had on a great (...) Belt. But he and the other that fell
were dragged away, and the Indians f^^d, when they saw themselves pursued,
though but by a few. Nevertheless two days after this, they burnt seven Houses
and two Burns more in Plymouth, and the remaining Houses in Namasket.

May. 18. This day that happened which is worthy to be remembered. For at
North-hampton, Hadly, and the Towns thereabouts, two English Captives escaping
from the Enemy, informed that a considerable body of Indians,(...) seated
themselves not far from Pacomptuck, and that they were very secure: so that
should Forces be sent forth against them, many of the Enemy would (in
probability) be cut off, without any difficulty. Hereupon the Spirits of Men in
those Towns were raised with an earnest desire to see and try what might be
done. They sent to their neighbors in Connecticut for a supply of Men, but
none coming, they raised about an hundred and four score out of their own
Towns, who arrived at the Indian Wigwams betimes in the morning, finding them
secure indeed, yea all asleep without having any Scouts abroad, so that out
Soldiers came and put their Guns into their Wigwams, before the Indians were
aware of them, and made a great and notable ^^aughter amongst them. Some of the
Soldiers affirm, that they numbered above one hundred that lay dead upon the
ground, and besides those, others told about an hundred and thirty, who were
driven into the River, and there perished, being carried down the Falls, The
River Kishon swept them away, that ancient River, the river Kishon, O my soul
thou have trodden down strength. And all this while but one Englishman killed,
and two wounded. But God saw that if things had ended thus; another and not
Christ would have had the Glory of this Victory, and therefore in his wise
providence, he so disposed, as that there was at last somewhat a tragical issue
of this Expedition. For an English Captive Lad, who was found in the Wigwams,
spoke as if Philip were coming with a thousand Indians: which false report
being famed ( Fama bella stant) among the Soldiers, a pannick terror fell upon
many of them, and they hasted homewards in a confused rout; (...) In the mean
while, a party of Indians from an Island (whose coming on shore might easily
have been prevented, and the Soldiers before they set out from Hadly were
earnestly admonished to take care about that matter) assaulted our men; yea, to
the great dishonor of the English, a few Indians pursued our Soldiers four or
five m^les, who were in number near twice as many as the Enemy. In this
Disorder, he that was at this time the chief Captain, whose name was Turner,
lost his life, he was pursued through a River; received his Fatal stroke as he
passed through that which is called the Green River, and as he came out of the
Water he fell into the hands of the Uncircumcised, who stripped him, (as some
who say they saw it affirm) and rode away upon his horse, and between thirty
and forty more were lost in this Retreat.

Within a few days after this, Capt. Turners dead Corpse was found a small
distance from the River it appeared that he had been shot through his thigh and
back, of which its judged he dyed speedily without any great torture from the
enemy. However it were, it is evident that the English ob^^^^ed a victory at
this time, yet if it be as some Indians have since related, the Victory was not
so great as at first was apprehended: For sundry of them who were at several
times taken after this slaughter, affirm that many of the Indians that were
driven down the Falls, got safe on shore again, and that they lost not above
threescore men in the fight: also that they killed thirty and eight English men
which indeed is just the number missing. There is not much heed to be given to
Indian Tellimony, yet when circumstances and Artificial arguments confirm what
they say, it becomes an impartial Historian to take notice thereof, nor is it
to be doubled but the loss of the enemy was greater then those Captives taken
by our Forces abroad did acknowledge. Some other Indians said that that they
lost several hundreds at this time, amongst whom there was one Sachem. I am
informed that diverse Indians who were in that battle, but since come in to
the English at Normich, say that there were three hundred killed at that time,
which is also confirmed by an Indian called pombam, who faith that of that
three hundred there were an hundred and seventy fighting men. Whatever the
victory or success of that engagement might be, it was the Lords doing, and let
him alone have all the Giory.

May, 23. Some of our Troopers fell upon a party of Indians (about fifty in
number) not far from Rehoboth, and flew ten or twelve of them, with the loss of
only one Englishman. The Indians betook themselves to a River, and had not
some Foot-Souldiers on the other side of the River, too suddenly discovered
themselves, probably there had been a greater slaughter of the enemy, who
hasted out of the river again, and fled into a Swamp where there was no
pursuing of them.

May 30th. The enemy appeared at Hatfield, fired about twelve houses and barns
without the Fortification, killed many of their Cattle, drove away almost all
their sheep, spread themselves in the meadow between Hatfield and Hadly. When
upon twenty five active and resolute men went from Hadly to relieve their
distressed Brethren. The Indians shot at them ere they could get out of the
Bout and wounded one of them. Ours nevertheless charged on the enemy, shut down
five of six at the first volley near the River. Then they made have toward the
town fighting with a great number of the enemy, many falling before them. And
though encompassed with a numerous swarm of Indians, who also lay in Ambush
behind almost every Tree, and place of advantage, yet the English lost not one
man, till within about an hundred Rod of the Town, when five of ours were
slain; among whom was a precious young man, whose name was Smith, that place
having lost many in losing that one man. It speaks sadly to the rising
Generation when such are taken away. After this the Enemy fled, having lost
five and twenty in this fight.

In these two last months of May and April, besides the Sword of War, in
respect of the Heathen, the Sword of the Lord has been drawn against this
Land, in respect of Epidemical Diseases, which sin has brought upon us; Sore
and (doubtless) Malignant Colds prevailing every where. I cannot hear of one
Family in New England that has wholly escaped the Distemper, but there have
been many Families wherein every one in the House was sick and ill-disposed. So
as that there have been many sick and weak, and some are fallen asleep, yea
some eminent and useful Instruments has the Lord removed, and made breaches
thereby upon diverse of the Colonies New England.

Connecticut is deprived of their Worthy and publick-spirited Governor
Winthrop. This Colony of Mattachusets has been bereaved of two ( viz. Major
Willard, and Mr. Russel) who for many years had approved themselves faithful in
the Magistracy. And the death of few such is as much as if thousands had
fallen: yet many other righteous and useful ones are gone, leaving us behind in
the storm. And amongst the common people, not a few have been carried to their
Graves in these two last months. We have heard of no less then eight in one
small Plantation, buried in one week, wherein also twenty persons died this
spring. And in another little Town nineteen persons have died within a few
weeks. We in Boston have seen (a sad and solemn spectacle) Coffins meeting one
another, and three or four put into their Graves in one day. In the month of
May about fifty persons are deceased in this Town. By which things, God from
Heaven speaks to us and would give us to understand, that if the Sword will not
reform us, be has other Judgments in store, whereby he can suddenly and
easily bring us down. The Lord help us to apply our hearts unto Wisdom, and
make us thankful, in that he has been entreated graciously and wonderfully to
restore Health unto us again.

In the latter end of May, and beginning of June, the Indians have been
less-active in the pursuit of their mischievous designs against the English.
Our reason whereof has been, in that it was now their Planting and Fishing
times for at this time of the year, they supply themselves with fish out of the
ponds and Rivers, wherewith this good Land does abound, and dry it against the
Sun so as that they can lay up in store, for to serve them the year about. But
it would have been no wisdom for the English to suffer them so to do.
Wherefore about four or five hundred soldiers were sent out of this Colony,
and as many ( English and Indians together) of Connecticut, to seek out and
disrest the Enemy.

June 7. Our Forces now abroad came upon a party of Indians not far from
Lancaster, and killed seven of them, and took nine and (...) of them Captive:
some of which not long lince had English Captives under them. Thus did they
that had led into Captivity, go into Captivity; and they that killed with the
Sword were themselves killed with the Sword.

Also Connecticut Forces, whilst upon their march, killed and took above fifty
Indians: and not long after that, a small party of Connecticut Soldiers with
the assistance of a few of those Indians who have been friends to the English,
^lew and took forty and four of the Enemy in the Narraganset Country; all these
exploits being performed without the loss of any of ours.

June 12. The Enemy assaulted Hadly, in the morning, Sun an hour high, three
Soldiers going out of the Town without their Arms, were dissuaded therefrom by
a Sergeant, who stood at the Gate, but they alleging that they intended not
to go far, were suffered to pass, within a while the Sergeant apprehended, that
he heard some men running; and looking over the For(...), he saw twenty Indians
pursuing those three men, who were so terrified that they could not cry out,
two of them were at last killed, and the other so (...) wounded, as that he
lived not above two or three days; wherefore (...) Sergeant gave the Alarm.
God in great mercy to those Western Plantations had so ordered by his
providence, as that Connecticut Army was come thither before this onset from
the enemy. Besides English, there were near upon two hundred Indians in Hadley,
who came to fight with and for the English, against the common enemy, who
quickly driven off at the South end of the Town; whilst our men were pursuing
of them here, on a sudden a great Swarm of Indians issued out of the bushes, ad
made their main assault at the North end of the Town, they fired a Barn which
was with out the Fortifications, and went into an house, where the inhabitants
discharged a great Gun upon them, whereupon about fifty Indians were seen
running out of the house in great haste, being terribly frighted with the
Report and slaughter made amongst them by the great Gun. Ours followed the
enemy (whom they judged to be about five hundred, and by Indian report since,
it seems they were seven hundred) near upon two miles, and would fain have
pursued them further, but they had no Order so to do. Some in those parts
think, that as great an opportunity and advantage as has been since the war
began, was lost at this time, the Lord having brought the enemy to them, had
there being English and Indians enough to pursue them: But others supposing
that then they should impede the design of coming upon them at the Falls,
nothing was done until it was too late, only the Towns in those places were
eminently saved, and but few of ours that lost their lives in this skirmish,
nor is it as yet known how many the enemy lost in this fight. The English could
find but three dead Indians: Yet some of them who have beentaken Captive,
confess that they had thirty men killed this day. And since we have been
informed by Indians, of that which is much to be observed. viz. that while the
Indian men were thus fighting against Hadly, the hand of the Lord so disposed,
as that the Mchawks came upon their Headquarters, and smore their women and
Children with a great Slaughtee, and then returned with much plunder. If indeed
it was so (and the Indians are under no temptation to report a falsehood of this
nature) it is a very memorable passage.

June 15. This day was seen at Plymouth the persect form of an Indian Bow
appearing in the air, watch the Inhabitants of that place (at least some of
them) look upon as a Prodigious Apparition. The like was taken notice of, a
little before the Fort Fight in the Narraganset Country. Who knows but that
it may be an Omen of ruin to the enemy, and that the Lord will break the bow
and spear asunder, and make wars to cease unto the ends of the earth? Nor is
this (may I here take occasion a little to digress, in order to the inserting
of somethings, hitherto not so much observed, as it may be they ought to be)
the first Prodigy that has been taken notice of in New England. It is a common
observation, verifyed by the experience of many Ages, that great and public
Calamityes seldom come upon any place without Frodigious Warnings to forerun
and signify what is to be expected. I am slow believe Rumors of this nature,
nevertheless some things I have had certain Information of.

It is certain, that before this War brake out; viz. on Sept. 10. 1674. In
Hadly, Northampton, and other Towns there bouts, was heard the report of a
great piece of Ordinance, with a thinking of the earth. and a considerable
Echo, whenas there was no ordinance really discharged at or ne^^ any of those
Towns at the time. Yea no less then seven years before this wa^r there were
plain prodigious Notices of it. For,

Anno 1667. There were fears on the spirits of many of the English, concerning
Philip and his Indians, and that year, N^ven^b 30 about 9 or 10 hr. A.M. being
a very clear, still, Sunshine morning the eve^e (...) Persons in Maldon, who
heard in the air on the South last of them, a great Gun go off, and as soon as
that was past, they heard the report of small Guns like musker shot,
discharging very thick, as if it had been at a general Training: but that which
did most of all amaze them, was the flying of the Bullets which came singing
over their heads, and seemed in be very near them, airer this they heard drams
pasting by them and going Westward. The same day, at Scitnatt, and in other
places in Plymouth Colony, they heard as it were the running of troops of
horses.

I would not have me (...) this relation had I not received it from (...)
faithful, and julicious hands, even of those whowere ear witnesses of the
things.

And now that I am upon this Digr^ssion, let me add, that the monstro^ births
which have at sundry times hap^ed, are speaking, solemn providence. Especially
that which was at W^burn, Febru. 23. 1670. When the wise of Joseph Wright was
delivered of Creature, the form whereof was as follows. The head, neck and
arms in true Form and shape of child, but it had no b^ea^^ bone nor any back
bone; the belly was of an extraordinary bigness, both the sides and back being
like a belly, the thighs were very small without any thigh bones; it had no
bu^rocks, the Membrum vir^^ was a mere bone; it had no passage for nature in
any part below; the feet turned directly outward, the heels turned up, and like
a bone, It being opened, there were found two great lumps of flesh on the sides
of the seeming belly; the bowels didly on the upper part of the breast by the
(...). This was testified before the Deputy Governor Mr. Willoughty on the 2nd
of March following, by Mrs. Johnson Midwife, Mary Kendal, R^th (...). Ly^ia
Kendall. Seen also by Capt. Edward Johnson, Leiut. John C^^^^, Henry Brook,
James Thomson, Isaac C^le.

There are judicious person, who upon the consideration of some relative
circumstances, in that mo^^trous birth, have concluded, that God did (...) the
Disorders or some in that place. As in the days of our Fathers, it was
apprehended that God did testify from heaven ag^^^^^ the monstrous Familitical
Opinions that were then stirring, by that (...) Monster which was brought forth
by the wife of William Dyer Octo. 17. 1637 a desc^^p^ion whereof may be seen in
Mr Welds his History of the R^se and R^ine of Antinomianisme. P. 43,44. and in
Mr. Clarks Examples vol.1.p. 249.

Certainly God would have such providence to be observed and recorded; He does
not send such things for nothing, or that no notice should be taken of them,
And therefore was I willing to give a true account thereof, hoping that thereby
mistakes and false Reports may be prevented.

To g^e on then with our History.

June. 16. Our Forces marched toward the Falls, ours on the East and
Connecticut on the W^st side of the river. When they were about three miles out
of the Towns, a vehement storm of rain, with thunder and lightening overtook
them, yet continuing but a while, they passed on ^il they came to the Falls,
but the enemy was then gone. The next day it rained again, and continued a cold
Eureclidon, or, North-East storm all that day and night, so that our Soldiers
received much damage in their arms, ammunition provision, and the next day
(being Lords day) returned to the Towns, weary and discouraged, the Lord having
seemed to fight against them by the storm mentioned. Thus does the Lord in
Wisdom and Faithfulness mix his Dispensations toward us.

June 19. A party of Indians set upon Swanzy and burnt down the remaining
houses there, except five houses whereof four were Garrisons.

June 20. Connecticut Forces returned home in order to a recruit, intending to
meet with ours the next week at Quabaog.

June. 21. was kept as a day of solemn Humiliation in one of the Churches in
Boston; so was the next day in all the Churches throughout the Colony of
Plymouth. After which we have not received such sad t^dings, as usually such
days have been attended with, ever since this War began (as the precedent
History does make to appear) but rather such Intelligence from diverse parts of
the Country as does administer ground of hope, and of rejoicing, the Lord
seeming to return with mercy to his people, and to bring the enemy into greater
distresses then formerly.

June. 28. About thirty of ours adventured to go up the River toward the Falls
at Dee^ field, to see what Indians they could espy thereabouts, but coming they
found none. They went to an Island where they found an hundred Wigwams, and
some English plundered Goods, which they took, and burnt the Wigwams. Also they
marched up to a Fort which the Indians had built there, and destroyed it.
Digging here and there they found several Indian B^rn^, where was an abundance
of Fish, which they took and spoiled, as also thirty of their Canoos; so that
it appears that the Heathen are distressed and scattered, being no more able to
continue together in such great Bodies as formerly.

June. 29. Was observed as a day of public Thanksgiving to celebrate the
praises of that God, who has begun to answer Prayer. And although there is
cause for Humiliation before the Lord, inasmuch as the Sword is full drawn
against us, nevertheless we are under deep engagement to make his praise
glorious; considering how wonderfully he has restrained and checked the
insolency of the Heathen. That Victory which God gave to our Army, December 19.
and again May 18. is never to be forgotten: also in that diverse Indian Sachims
(especially their great Sachim Quanonchet) have fallen before the Lord, and
before his Servants. And in that things have been no worse with us, since the
year of trouble has been upon us, that no more Indians have been let loose
upon us, but many of them have been our friends; that no more Plantations have
been made desolate, which nothing but the restraining gracious providence of
God has prevented, for the Enemy might easily have destroyed ten times as many
Towns as they have done, had not he that sets bounds to the raging of the Sea,
restrained them; yea, one whole Colony has been in a manner untouched, saving
that one small deserted Plantation therein was burnt by the Indians; also
sundry Towns that have been fiercely assaulted by the Enemy, having obtained
help from God, do continue to this day, as brands plucked out of the fire, and
as monuments of the sparing mercy of God, although they have been in the fire
they are not consumed. And God has returned many of our Captives, having given
them to find compassion before them who led them Captive, and caused the Enemy
to entreat them well, in the time of affliction, and in the time of evil, and
by strange ways at last delivered them. He has also sent in a supply of Corn
from beyond Sea, this Spring, and before winter; without which we could not
easily have sent out such Armies (however small and not worthy of the name of
Armies in other parts of the World; yet with us they are Armies) as have been
pursuing the Enemy. Its wonderful to consider, how that the Lord has visited
his People in giving them Bread, when a Famine was expected. And this Summer,
God has caused the shower to come down in its season, there have been showers
of Blessing when some beginnings of a Drought were upon the Land. And sore
Diseases has the Lord rebuked; whereas the small Pox and other Malignant and
Contagious Distempers have been amongst us since this War began, God has been
entreated to have compassion on us, and to restore health unto his people.
Moreover, we are still under the enjoyment of our Liberties; both Civil and
Spiritual: for such causes as these, the day mentioned was observed (by order
of the Council) as a day of public. Thanksgiving throughout this Colony: And
behold, when we began to sing and to praise the Lord whose^ercy endures for
ever, he has as it were set Ambushments against the Enemy, and they were
smitten, yea they have since that been ^initing and betraying one another.

There are two things here observable:

1. Whereas this very day of the Month ( viz. June 29.) was kept as a day of
public Hamiliation the last year, being the first Fast that was observed, in
this Colony on the account of the present War, God has so ordered, as that the
same day of the month was in the year af^^^ set apart to magnify his Name on
the account of mercies received, being the first public day of Thanksgiving,
which has been attended throughout this Colony since the War began.

2. The Lord from Heaven smiled upon us at this time; for the day before this
Thanksgiving, as also the day after, he gave us to hear of more of our
Captives returned: particularly Mr. R^wlanas^ns Children are now brought in as
answers of Prayer. It is not a small mercy, that the mother and children (only
one child was killed when the other were taken) should all of them be saved
alive, and carried through the Jaws of so many deaths, and at last brought home
in peace, that so they and all that even shall hear of (...) and know, that the
Lord Jehovah, it a God that hears prayer. Also the night after this
Thanksgiving, intelligence came to Boston, that a chief Narraganset Sachim, is
now ^uing to the English for peace, and that an Indian was come in to the
English near Reboboth, who informed that Philip was not far off, and that he
had but thirty men (besides Women and Children) with him; and promised to
conduct the English to the place where Philip was lu^king, and might probably
be taken; Moreover, the Indian affirmed, that those Indians who are known by
the name of Ma^quawogs (or Mohawas) i.e. Man eaters) had lately fallen upon
Philip, and killed fifty of his men. And if the variance between Philip and the
Mauquawags come to pass, as is commonly reported and apprehended, there was a
marvelous finger of God in it. For we hear that Philip being this winter
entertained in the Mohawks Country, Made it his design to breed a quarrel
between the English and them; to effect which diverse of our returned Captives
do report that he resolved to kill some scattering Mohawks, and then to say
that the English had done it: but one of those whom he thought to have killed,
was only wounded, and got away to his Country men giving them to understand,
that not the English but Philip had killed the Men that were Murdered, so that
instead of bringing the Mohawks, upon the English, he brought them upon
himself. Thus has he conceived mischief and brought forth falsehood, he made a
pit and dug it, and is fallen into the di^ch which he has made, his
mischief shall and return upon his own head, and his violent dealing shall come
down upon his own pate. The Heathen are sunk down into the pit that they made,
in the net which they had bid, is their own foot taken; the Lord is known by
the Judgment which he executes, the wicked is snared in the work of his own
hands. Higgaion. Selah.

June 30. This day Soldiers marched out of Boston toward the place, where
Philip was supposed to be. But when they come thither, they found that he was
newly gone. We hear that he is returned to Mount hop; and that a considerable
body of Indians are gathered to that place, where the War began, and where (it
may be) way must be made toward an end of these troubles. Yet who knows how
cruelty a dying B^ast ^^y b^re before his expiration? Also Plymouth Companies
being abroad under the conduct of Major Bradford, the Lord went forth with
them, this day causing the enemy to fall before them. They were in danger of
being cut off by party of Indians who lay in Ambush for that end, but some of
the Cape-Indians, who have been faithful to the English, discovered the
S^ratagems of the Adversary, whereby their intended mischief was happily
prevented. Diverse of them were killed and taken, without the loss of so much as
one of ours. And whereas, three Messengers from Squaw-Sachem of Sak^net, were
gone to the Governor of Plymouth offering to submit themselves, and engaging
Fidelity to the English for the future, if they might but have a promise of
life, and liberty; before the Messengers returned from their treaty, that
Squaw-Sachem with about ninety persons, hearing that Plymouth Forces were
approaching to them, came and tendered themselves to Major Bradford, wholly
submitting to mercy, so that this day were killed, taken and brought in no less
then an hundred and ten Indians. And the providence of God herein is the more
observable, in that the very day before this, the Lords People in Plymouth did
unanimously consent to renew their Covenant with God, and one another, and a
day of Humiliation was appointed for that end that so a work so sacred and
awful might be attended with the more solemnity: also in the week before these
signal smiles from Heaven upon that Colony, most of the Churches there, had
renewed their Covenant, viz. on the day of Humiliation which was last attended
throughout that Jurisdiction. God then faith unto us, that if we will indeed
hea^ken unto his voice, the haters of the Lord shall soon submit themselves.

July 8. Whereas the Council at Boston had lately emitted a Declaration,
signifying, that such Indians as did within fourteen days come into the
English, might hope for mercy, diverse of them did this day return from among
the Ni^mucks. Amongst others, James an Indian, who could not only read, and
write, but had learned the Art of Printing, notwithstanding his Apostafie, did
venture himself upon the mercy and truth of the English Declaration which he
had seen and read, promising for the future to venture his life against the
common Enemy. He and the other now come in, affirm that very many of the
Indians are dead since this War began; and that more have dyed by the hand of
God, in respect of Diseases, Fluxes, and Fevers, which have been amongst them,
then have been killed with the Sword.

July 2. This day Connecticut Forces being in the Narraganset Country met with
a party of Indians, pursued them into a Swamp, killed and took an hundred and
fourscore of them (amongst whom was the old Squaw Sachem of Narraganset)
without the loss of one Englishman. Only an Indian or two that fought for the
English, was killed in this engagement. The English would gladly have gone
further, and have joined with Boston and Plymouth Companies to pursue Philip at
Mount-hope, but the Connecticut Indians would by no means be persuaded
thereunto, until such time as they had returned home with the booty they had
taken. And as they were on their march homeward, they took and slaught^red
threescore more Indians. In the mean while the other Colonyes are sending out
soldiers toward Mount-Hope, where Philip with a multitude of Indians lately
flocked thither is reported to be, designing speedily to fall upon the
neighboring Towns.

July. 6. Five or six Indian Sachems did make peace with the English in the
Eastern parts of this Colony. They have brought in with them three hundred men
besides women and Children. One of the Sachims did earnestly define, that the
English would promise that no more liquors should be sold or given to the
Indians, that so they might not be in a Capacity of making themselves drunk,
having found by woeful experience, that that has been a ruining evil to many
of them. This week also about two hundred Indians more came and submitted
themselves to mercy, in Plymouth Colony, being partly necessitated thereunto by
the distresses which God in his holy providence has brought them into, and
partly encouraged by a promise from the Government there, that all such Indians;
as would come in, and lay down their arms should have life and liberty granted
to them, expecting only such as had been active in any of the murders which
have been committed. When these Indians were in the hands of the English, a
certain Squaw amongst them, preceiving that it would be pleasing to the
English, if the murderers were discovered, she presently told of one who had
had a bloody hand in the murders which were done in Mr. Clarks house March the
twelfth, the Indian immediately confessed the Fact, only said that there was
another who had as great an hand therein as he, which other Indian being
examined, confessed; the thing also; and he revealed a third Indian Murderer,
who upon Examination owned the thing, whereupon they were all three forthwith
executed, thus did God bring upon them the innocent blood which they had shed.
Also the Indians who had surrendered themselves, informed that a bloody Indian
called Tuckpoo (who the last summer murdered a Man of Boston at Namasket) with
about twenty Indians more, was at a place within 16 miles of Plymouth, and
manifested willingness to go and fetch him in, whereupon eight English with
fourteen Indians, marched out in the night, and seized upon them all, none of
ours receiving any hurt at this time. Justice was speedily executed upon the
Indian, who had been a Murderer; the other having their lives granted them.

July 7. A small party of our Indians having some English with them, took and
killed seven of the Enemy in the Woods beyond Ded^am, whereof one was a petty
Sachem. The two Indians which were then taken Prisoners, say that many of their
men who were sent to Albany for a supply of Powder, were set upon in the way by
the Mo^awks, and killed. It is certain, that about this time, some of those
Indians who are in Hostility against the English (amongst whom the Sachim of
Springfield Indians, was one) came to Albany, to buy powder, and that they
might effect their design, they lied and said, that now they had made peace
with the English, and desired Powder only to go an hunting in the Woods: we
hear, that the other Indians were is desirous to have slain them, but the
Governor of New York secured them, and gave notice to the Council at Hartford:
since that we have intelligence that many of our enemies, yea and such as have
been not^^^^s Murderers, are fed for refuge to those about Albany.

July 11. A Party of Indians (is conjectured that there were about two hundred
of them) assaulted Taunton. And in probability, that Town had at this time been
brought under the same desolation other places have experienced, had not the
Lord in his gracious providence so ordered, that a Captive Negro, the week
before escaped from Philip and informed of his purpose speedily to destroy
Taunton, whereupon Soldiers were forthwith sent thither, so that the enemy was
in a little time repulsed, and fled, after they had ^red two Houses: but not
one English Life was lost in this Engagement. What loss the enemy sustained is
as yet unknown to us. There were a special providence in that Negroes escape,
for he having lived many years near to the Indians, understood their Language,
and having heard them tell one another what their designs were, be acquainted
the English there with and now Philip had ordered his men to lie in Ambus^^do^^
i^ such and such places, to cut of the English, who by means of this
intelligence escaped that ^anger, which other wise had attended them.

About this, time we hear that there are three hundred M^^^^^s who have armed
themselves, as being desirous to be ^evenged upon those J^^^ is who have done
so much harm to New England (if they receive no discouragement as to their
designed Expedition) And that they purpose to color their heads and make them
yellow, that so they may not upon their approach to any of our Plantations, be
mistaken for Indians.

There is another thing which though it ^oe no^ concern the War, Yet happening
this week, it may not be a^^^s (...) take notice of the (...) in Plymouth
Colony, a female Child was bo^n with two heads, perfectly distinct each from
other, so that it had four eyes, and four ears, and two mouths and tongues,
etc.

July. 22. Some of our Companies returned from Mount-hope to (...) And albert
they have not attained that which was they main end (...) in their going forth
so the Apprehension of Philip, nevertheless God was in a gracious measure
present with them: for they killed and took about an hundred and fifty Indians
in this expedition, with the lots of but one Englishman. One night they lodged
very near unto Philip, but he kept himself private and still in a Swamp, ours
not imagining that (...) (...) near as afterward (by Indian Captives), they
p^^^^^ed he was after this an Indian that was taken Prisoner engaged that if
they would spare his life, he would forthwich being them to P^^^^ but our
Soldiers were not able to go the nearest way toward him, yet in about two
hours space, they came whither the Indian conducted them, and found that a
great many Indians were n^^ly fled, having for have left their Kettles boiling
over their fires, and their Belts, and Baskets of Wampampeag, yea and their
dead unburied. At that time did the English take and kill about seventy
persons: since an Indian that came into Rhode Island, informs, that Philip is
gone to a Swamp near D^rtmouth: and that when our Forces were pursuing of him,
he with a few hid himself in Squanakunk Swamp, till our Soldiers were past,
and then with one Indian in a Canoo crossed the river to Pocasset. It seems the
body of the Indians belonging to him, went over on two Rafts, in which pass^ge
they lost several Guns, and wet much of their Ammunition. The reason why Philip
fled to this place, was because if he went Northward, the Moha^ks would be upon
him, if Southward he was in danger of the Monhegins, and he dirst not hide
himself any longer about Metapoisit, because the Woods thereabouts were filled
with Soldiers. This week also, Captain Church of Plimo^th, with a small party
consisting of about eighteen English, and two and twenty Indians, had four
several engagements with the Enemy, and killed and took Captive seventy nine
Indians, without the loss of so much as one of ours; it having been his manner,
when he takes any Indians by a promise of favor to them, in case they acquit
themselves well, to set them an hu^^ing after more of these Wolves, whereby the
worst of them, sometimes do singular good service in finding out the rest of
their bloody fellows. In one of these sk^rmishes, Tiash^ Philips chief Captain
ran away leaving his Gun behind him, and his Squaw, who was taken. They came
within two miles of the place where Philip hides himself, and discerned at a
distance about fifty Indians with Guns, thought to be Philips Hunters for
Provision, and were desirous to have engaged with them, but being laden with
Captives and Plunder, they could not then attend it. Also a Sachem of Pocasset
has submitted himself with forty Indians more, to the Governor of Plymouth.
So that there is of late such a strange turn of providence (especially in
Plymouth Colony, since the Churches in that Colony (being thereunto provoked by
the godly advice and Recommendation of the civil Authority in that
Jurisdiction) did solemnly renew their Cov^^ant with G^d and (...) another) as
the like has rarely been he^^d of in any age. Whereas formerly almost every
week did conclude with sad tidings, now the Lord sends us good news weekly.
Without doubt, there are in the World who have been praying for us, and God
has heard them. If our poor prayers may be a means to obtain m^^cy for them
also, who have prayed for us, n^w shall we rejoice, when we meet together
before Jesus Christ at the last and great day?

July 25. Thirty and six English men who went out of Medfield and Dedbow,
having nine of the Praying Indians with them, pursued and overtook a party of
the Enemy, killed and took alive fifty of them, without the loss of any of
ours. The nine Indians stored themselves with plunder when this exploit was
done: For besides Kettles, there was about half a Bushel of Wampampeag, which
the Enemy lost, and twelve pound of Powder, which the Captives say they had
received from Albany, but two days before. At this time, another of the
Narraganset Sachims was killed, whose name was P^^^^^ and his Son was taken
alive, and brought Prisoner to B^ston. This Pomham after he was wounded so as
that he could not stand upon his legs, and was thought to have been dead, made
a shift (as the Soldiers were pursuing others) to crawl a little out of the
way, but was found again, and when an Englishman drew near to him, though he
could not stand, he did (like a dying Beast) in rage and revenge, get hold on
that Soldiers head, and had like to have killed him, had not another come in
to his help, and rescued him out of the enraged dying hands of that bloody
Barbarian, who had been a great promoter of the Narraganset War.

July 27. One of the Nipmuck Sachims (called Sagamore John) ca^^ to Boston, and
submitted himself to the mercy of the English, bringing in about an hundred and
fourscore Indians with him. And that so he might ingratiate himself with the
English, he apprehended Matoo^^s and his Son, and brought them with him to
Boston, which Matoo^^s was the beginner of the War in this Colony of
Massachnsets; for it was he that committed the murders which were done at
Mendam July 14. 1675. Being thus taken and examined before the Council, he had
little to plead for himself, and therefore was condemned to immediate death.
S^gamore John was desirous that he and his men might be the Executioners;
wherefore Matoonas was carried out into the Common ^t Boston, and there being
tied to a Tree, the Sachi^ who had no submitted himself, with several of his
men, shot him to death. Thus did the Lord (a year after) retaliate upon him the
Innocent blood which he had shed, as he had done so God has required him: And
inasmuch as Matoonas who began the War and Mischiefs which have followed
thereon, in this Colony of Massachusetts is taken, and Justice glorified upon
him, it seems to be a good Omen, that are long Philip who began the War in the
other Colony, shall likewise e delivered up unto Justice. In due time his foot
shall slide, and the things which shall come upon him seem to make haste.

July 31. A small party of Soldiers, whose hearts God had touched, marched out
of Bridgewater, in order to pursuing the Enemy. And (about 3 p.m.) not far from
Tetignot River, they unexpectedly to themselves, and undiscerned by the Enemy,
came upon a company of Indians, amongst whom Philip himself was, though his
being there was not known to our men, (...) the engagement was over. They shot'
down ten Indians, they were well ^^med, and at first snapped their Guns at the
English, but not one of them took fire, wherefore, the terror of God fill upon
the Indians, that fifteen of them threw down their Guns, and submitted
themselves to the English, the rest fled, Philip himself esc^ped very narrowly
with his life. He ^^^ew away his stock of Powder into the Bushes, that he might
(...) his escape, (...) some of his men the next day found it again. One
Soldiers took above twenty pound of Bullets, and Lead, and seven Guns, five of
which were laden and primed: yea they took the chief of Philips Treasure, not
being able to carry away all their Plunder that day, for they found much (...)
goods which Philip had stolen. Philip made his escape with these men, one of
which was killed. And although be himself got clear, yet, his Uncle whose name
was Uncompoen, being one of his chief Counselors was ^^^in, and Philips own
filter was taken Prisoner, not so much as one English man received any hurt at
this time. Thus did God own Bridgewater, (...) the People therein had
subscribed with their hands, and solemoly renewed their holy Conenant with God,
and one another, that they would reform those evils which were amongst them,
and endeavor for the future, to walk more according to the will of God in
Jesus Christ.

August 1. Captain Church with thirty Englishmen, and twenty Indians following
Philip and chose with him, by their track, took twenty and three Indians. The
^ex^ morning they came upon Philips head quarters, killed and took about an
hundred and thirty Indians, with the loss of but one Englishman. In
probability, many of the English Soldiers had been cut off at this time, but
that an Indian called Matibias, who fought for the English, when they were come
very near the Enemy, called to them in their own Language with much vehemence,
telling them they were all dead men if they did but fire a God, which did so
amuse and amaze the Indians that they lost a great advantage against the
English. Philips hardly escaped with his life this day also: He fled and left
his Peag behind him, also his Squaw and his Son were taken Capti^es, and are
now P^isoners in Plymouth. Thus has God brought that grand Enemy into great
misery before be quite des^roy him. It must needs be bitter as death to him, to
loose his Wife and only Son (for the Indians are mavelous fond and
affectionate toward their Children) besides other Relations, and almost all
his Subjects and Country (...).

August 3. This day the Lord smiled upon this Land by signal favor, in another
respect which concerns not the present War. For whereas in the month of July,
there had been a fore Drought, which did greatly threaten the Indian Harvest,
God opened the bottles of Heaven (...) (...) it to rain (...) this night, and
the day after, so as (...) the Indian (...), the English Harvest being already
gathered in and more (...) then in some former years, insomuch that this which
was expected to be (...) year of Famine, is turned to be a year of plenty as to
provision.

Whilst I am writing this, good information is brought to me, that in some
parts of Connecticut Colony, (...) and all his men continue (...) able Teacher
of the Church in Norwich) desiring that he would pray to God for rain. Mr.
Fitch replied to him, that it he should do so and God should hear him, as long
as their (...) were at work they would ascribe (...) to them, and think that
the Devil, whom the Indians worship, and not God had sent that rain, and
therefore he would not (...) till they had done with their (...) declared that
they had (...) despairing to obtain what they desi^ed. Mr. Fitch therefore
called his Church together, and they (...) the small rain, and to the great
rain of his Strength, be thou upon the earth, g^ve most Plen(...) Showers,
inasmuch as the Heathen were affected therewith, acknowledging that the God
whom we serve is a great God, and there is none like unto him.

August 6. An Indian that deserted his Fellows informed the inhabitaness of
Taunton that a party of Indians who might be easily surprised, were not very
far off and promised to conduct any that had a mind to apprehend those Indians,
in the right way toward them; whereupon about twenty Soldiers marched out of
Taunton, and they took all those Indians) being in number thirty and six only
the Squaw-Sachem of Pacasset, who was (...) unto Philip in respect of the
mischief that has been done, and the blood that has been shed in this War,
escaped alone; butnot long after some of Taunton finding an Indian Squaw in
Metapoiset newly dead, cut off her head, and it happened to be (...), i.e.
Squaw-Sachem her head. When it was set upon and pole in Taunton, the Indians
who were personers there, knew it presently, and made amongst (...) and
diabolical Lamentation, crying out; it was their Queens head. Now here it is to
be observed, that God himself by his own hand, brought this enemy to
destruction. For in that place, where the last year, she furnished Philip with
Canooes for his men. She her self could not meet with a Canoo, but venturing
over the River upon a Raft, that brake under her, so that she was drowned, just
before the English sound her. Surely Philips turn will be next.

August. 10. Whereas (...) a chief Counselor to the old Squaw-Sachem of
Narraganset, was by some of Road-Island brought into Boston, and found guilty
of promoting the War against the English, he was this day shot to death in the
Common at Boston. As he was going to his execution, some told him that now he
must die, he had as good speak the truth, and say how many Indians were killed
at the Fort-Fight last winter. He replied, that the English did that day kill
above seven hundred fighting men, and that three hundred who were wounded, dyed
quickly after, and that as to old men, women and Children, they had lost no
body could tell how many, and that there were above three thousand Indians in
the Fort, when our Forces assaulted them, and made that notable slaughter
amongst them.

August. 12. This is the memorable day wherein Philip, the perfidious and
bloody Author of the War and woeful miseryes that have thence ensued, was taken
and stain. And God brought it to pass, chiefly by Indians themselves. For one
of Philips men (being disgusted at him, for killing an Indian who had
p^^pounded an expedient for peace with the English) ran away from him, and
coming to Road-Island, informed that Philip was now returned again to
Mount-Hope, and undertook to bring them to the Swamp where he hid himself.
Divine Providence so disposed, as that Capt. Church of Plymouth was then in
Road-Island, in order to recruiting his Soldiers, who had been wearied with a
tedious march that week, But immediately upon this Intelligence, he set forth
again, with a small company of English and Indians. It seems that night
Philip (like the man, in the Host of Midian) dreamed that he was fallen into
the hands of the English; and just as he was saying to those that were with
him, that they must fly for their lives that day; left the Indian that was gone
from him should discover where he was; Our Soldiers came upon him, and
surrounded the Swamp (where he was seven of his men absconded) Thereupon he
betook himself to flight; but as he was coming out of the Swamp, an Englishman
and an Indian endeavored to fire at him, the Englishman missed of his aim,
but the Indian shot him through the heart, so as that he fell down dead. The
Indian who thus killed Philip, did formerly belong to Squaw-Sachim of Pocasset,
being known by the name of Alterman. In the beginning of the war, he came to
the Governor of Plymouth, manifesting his desire to be at peace with the
English, and immediately withdrew to an Island, (...) having engaged against
the English nor for them, before this time. Thus when Philip had made an end to
deal treacherously, his own Subjects dealt treacherously with him. This Woe was
brought upon him that spoiled when he was not spoiled. And in that very place
where he first contrived.(...) his mischief, was be taken and destroyed, and
there was he (the as (...) before the Lord) cut into four quarters, and is now
hanged up as a monument of revenging Justice, his (...) being cut off and
carried away to Plymouth, his Hands were brought to Boston. So lot all shine
Enemies perish, O Lord! When Philip was thus slain, five of his men were killed
with him, one of which was his chief Captains son, being (as the Indians (...))
(...) very Indian, who shot the first gun at the English when the War began. So
that we may hope that the War in those parts will dye with Philip.

A little before this, the Authority in that Colony had appointed the
seventeenth of this instant to be observed as a day of public, Thanksgiving
throughout that Jurisdiction, on the account of wonderful success against the
Enemy, which the Lord has blessed them with, (...) their Covenant with him;
and that so they might have hearts raised and enlarged in ascribing praises to
God, he delivered Philip into their hands a few days before their intended
Thanksgiving. Thus did God break the head of that Leviathan, and gave it to be
meat to the people inhabiting the wilderness, and brought it to the Town of
Plymouth the very day of their Solemn Festival: yet this also is to be added
and considered, that the Lord (so great is the divine faithfulness) to prevent
us from being hited up with our successes, and that we might not become secure,
so ordered as that not an Englishman but an Indian (though under (...)
influence) must have the honor of killing Philip. And the day before this, was
intended with a doleful Tragedy in the Eastern parts of this Country; viz. at
Falmouth in (...), where some of those treacherous and bloody Indians who had
lately submitted themselves, and promised Fidelity to the English, killed and
took Captive above thirty Souls. The chief Author of this mischief, was an
Indian called (...) who was once in the hands of the English, and then known to
have been active in former Murders, having bragged and boasted of the mischief
and murders done by him. we may fear, that God, who so awfully threatens Ahab,
when he had let go out of his hand a Blaspha mous, Murderous Heathen, whom the
Lord had devoted to destruction, was not well pleased with the English for
concluding this, and other bloody Murderers, in the (...) Eastern peace. What
the issue of this new flame thus breaking forth, shall be, or how far it shall
proceed; is with him whose wisdom is infinite; and who (...) all things well
inasmuch as is is too evident that a ^

Thus have two a brief plain, and true story of (...) with the Indians in
New England how is began, and how is has made its progress; and what present
hope (...) are of a comfortable closure and conclusion of this trouble, which
has been continued for a whole year and more. Designing only a (...) I have
not enlarged upon the circumstances of things them all have that too others,
who have advantages and (...) with (...) under taking.

^
^
^ Grace of Christ has always made exemplary in works of that nature) been
unwilling to consider their poor Brethren according to their Ability.

To Conclude this History, it is evident by the things which have been
expressed, that our deliverance is not as yet perfected for the Nipmuck Indians
are not yet wholly subdued: Moreover, it will be a difficult thing, either to
subdue, or to come at the River Indians, who have many of them withdrawn
themselves, and are gone far westward, and whilst they and others that have
been in hostility against us, remain unconquered, we cannot enjoy such perfect
peace as in the years which are past. And there seems to be a dark Cloud rising
from the East, in respect of Indians in those parts, yea^^ Cloud which
streameth forth blood. But that which is the saddest thought of all, is; that
of late some unhappy scandals have been, which are enough to stop the current
of mercy, which has been flowing in upon us, and to provoke the Lord to let
loose more Enemies upon us, so as that the second error shall be worse then the
first. Only God does deliver for his own Names sake: the Lord will not for sake
his people for his great Names sake; because it has pleased the Lord to make
us his people. And we have reason to conclude that Salvation is begun, and in a
gracious measure carried on toward us. For since last March there are two or
3000. Indians who have been either killed, or taken, or submitted themselves to
the English. And those, Indians which have been taken Captive; (and others
also, inform that the Narragansets are in a manner ruined, there being (as they
say) not above an hundred men left of them, who the last year were the greatest
body of Indians in New England, and the most formidable Enemy which has
appeared against us. But God has consumed them by the Sword, and by Famine and
by Sickness, it being no unusual thing for those that traverse the woods to
find dea^ Indians up and down, whom either Famine, or sickness, has caused to
die, and there has been none to bury them. And Philip who was the Sheba, that
began and headed the Rebellion, his head is thrown over the wall, therefore
have we good reason to hope that this Day of Trouble, is near to an end, if our
sins do not undo all that has been wrought for us. And indeed there is one
sad consideration, which may cause humble tremblings to think of it, namely in
that the Reformation which God expects from us it not so hearty and so perfect
as ought to be. Divines observe, that whereas upon Samuels Exhortations, the
people did make but imperfect work of it, as to the Reformation of provoking
evils, therefore God did only begin their deliverance by Samuel, but left
scattered Philistines unsubdued, who afterward made head and proved a sore
scourge to the Children of Israel; until David's time, in whose Reign there was
a full Reformation, and then (...) Lord give unto his peope full deliverance.
Nevertheless a sad (...) will attend those that shall magnify themselves
against the people of the Lord of Hosts. It has been observed by many, that
never any (whether Indians of others) did set themselves to do hurt to
New England, but they have come to lamentable ends at last. New England has
been a burdensome stone, all that have borthened themselves with it, have been
cut in pieces. The experience of the persent day, does greatly confirm that
observation, and give us ground to hope, that as for remaining enemies, they
shall fare as others that have gone before them, have done. Yet this further
must needs be acknowledged, that as to Victoryes obtained, we have no cause to
glory in any thing that we have done, but rather to be ashamed and confounded
for our own ways. The Lord has thus far been our Savior for his Names take,
that it might not be profaned among the Heathen whither he has brought us. And
God has let us sea that he could easily have destroyed us, by such a
contemptible enemy as the Indians have been in our eyes; yea he has convinced
us that we our selves could not subdue them. They have advantages that we have
not, knowing where to find us, but we know not where to find them, who
nevertheless are always at home, and have in a manner nothing but their lives
and souls (which they think not of) to loose; every Swamp is a Castle to them,
and they can live comfortably on that which would starve Englishmen. So that
we have no cause to glory, for it is God which has thus saved us, and not we
our selves. If we consider the time when the enemy has fallen, we must needs
own that the Lord has done it. For we expected (and could in reason expect no
other) that when the Summer was come on, and the bushes and leaves of trees
come forth, the enemy would do ten times more mischief then in the winter
season, whenas since that, the Lord has appeared against them, that they have
done but little hurt comparatively. Had there not been, (...) a divine hand
beyond all expect ation manifested, we had been in a state most miserable this
day. Aslo if we keep in mind the means and way wherely our deliverance has
thus been accomplished, we must needs own the Lord in all. For it has not been
brought to pass by our numbers, or skill, or vabour, we have not got the Lord
in Possession by our own Sword, neither did our own arm save ^^. But God has
wasted the Heathen. by sending he destroying Angel amongst them, since this
War began; and (which should always be an humbling consideration unto us) much
has been done toward the subduing of the enemy, by the Indians who have
fought for us, sometimes more then by the English. And no doubt but that a
great reason why many of them have, of late been desirous to submit themselves
to the English, has been, because they were afraid of the Mohawgs who have a
long time been a Terror to the other Indians. I have received it from one who
was returned out of Captivity this Summer, that the Indians where he was, would
not suffer any fires to be made in the might, for fear left the Mohawgs should
thereby discern where they were, and not them off.

Now, as the Lord, who does redeem Israel out of all his troubles, has
graciously and gloriously begun our Salvation, so let him perfect it, in such a
way, as that no honor at all may come unto us, but that great glory may be to
his own blessed Name for ever. Let him bring health and cure unto this
Jerusalem, and reveal the abundance of peace and truth: And it shall be unto
him a Name of joy, a Praise and an honor before all the Nations of the earth,
which shall hear all the good that he will do unto us, and they shall fear and
tremble for all the goodness, and for all the prosperity that he will procure.
If we hearken to his voice in these his solemn Dispensations, it surely shall
be so. Not unto us O Lord; not unto us, but unto thy Name give Glory for thy
mercy and for thy Truths sake, Amen!

(...)
POSTSCRIPT.
Since I wrote the preceding Narrative, I hear that there are who make a
scruple of using the word Army, when applied to such inconsiderable Forces, as
those which have been raised and sent forth by us, in the late War. I pretend
not to any skill or accuracy of speaking as to modern platforms of Military
Dissipline; but sure I am that of old, a few Cohorts being under the command of
a chief Captain, though in all there were not above four or five hundred
soldiers, this was called (...) an Army, Acts, 23,27. Yea tho^^ three hundred
Soldiers who were under Gideon as their General, are styled an Army, Judge. 8.
6. The Hebrew word there used comes from (...) which signifies turmatics
congrega^iad militandum, when Troops are assembled together, this did the
Hebrews call an Host or an Army. There are small Armies as well as great ones,
a cron. 24.24. (...) which is the word used in that place singnifies, Forces:
that Term have I commonly chosen, though the other being of most frequent use,
and aptly enough expressing what is meant by it, I have not wholly declined it.
For amongst us Sis voles uses
Quem penes Arbitrium est et jus es Norma loquendi.


And Reason faith, that those Forces may pass for Armies in one part of the
world, that will not do so In another. But my design in this Postscript is not
to Criticize or Apologize about the use of a Term. There is another matter of
greater importance, so. That which does concern the the Grounds of this War,
and the justness of it on our part: concerning which I shall here add a few
words. It is known to every one, that the War began not amongst us in
Mattachusets Colony; nor do the Indians (so far as I am informed) pretend that
we have done them wrong. And therefore the cause on our part is most clear, and
unquestionable: For if we should have (...) our Confederates, and those that
were ready to be slain, to be draws, to death, and not have endeavored to
deliver them, when they sent unto us for that end, the Lord would have been
disoleased; nor should we have acted like the Children of Abraham, Geo. 14. 14.
Yea, all the world would justly have condemned us. And as for our Brethren in
that Colony, where these tumults first happened,' (...) that the Indians did most
unrighteously begin a Quarrel, and take up the Sword against them.

I said at the beginning. I would not enlarge upon that Argument, which
concerns the Grounds of the War, neither will I, because that would make the
History too voluminous, contrary to my design. Nevertheless, inasmuch as some
are (...) thereabouts, so as to receive impressions and prejudices in their
minds, concerning our Brethren in Plymouth Colony (as it is natural for men in
trouble to lay blame upon every body but themselves) supposing that they have
without just cause, engaged themselves and all these united Colonies in an
unhappy War. Yea and that the Indians were provoked to do what they did, whenas
(whatever may be said of some private persons, of whose injurious dealings no
complaint was made and proved) it seems very manifest to impartial Judges, that
the Government in that Colony is innocent as to any Wrongs that have been done
to the Heathen, hy those where the War began. And therefore for their
vindication, and for the satisfaction of those amongst our selves, (or else
where) who are cordially desirous to have things cleared, respecting the
Grounds of the War, I shall here subjoyn a Letter, which I received from
General Winflow (whose integrity, and peculiar capacity, (as being Governor
of Plymouth Colony) to give information in this affair is well known) together
with a Narrative of the beginning of those Troubles as it was presented to the
Commissioners of the united Colonyes, in September last, for the satisfaction
of considerate Brethren.

Reverend Sir,
The many Testimonies you have given, not only of your good respects to my
unworthy self personally, but also to thus whose Colony, manifested in your
endeavors to vindicate us from undeserved aspersions, that some ignorant or
worse then uncharitable persons would lay upon us, respecting the Grounds of
these troubles, calls for a greater Retribution then a bare acknowledgment. But
Sir, my present design is only to give you further trouble, by enabling you to
say something more particularly on our behalf; to that end I have sent you the
enclosed Paper which is an exact Narrative given in by Mr. Hinkly and my self,
to the first Sessions of the Commissioners of the Consederate Colonyes,
September last; from which the Commissioners, and the Council of your Colony,
and afterward your General Court, took full satisfaction, as you see by their
subsequent acts and actions. Yet much more we can truly say in our Vindication,
( viz) that we have endeavored to carry in justly and faithfully toward them
at all times, and friendly beyond their deserts. I think I can clearly say,
that beforethese present troubles broke out, the English did not possess foot
of Land in this Colony, but what was fairly obtained by forest (...) the Indian
Proprietors; Nay, because some of our people are of a coverous disposition, and
the Indians are in their Streits easily prevailed with to part with their
Lands, we first made a Law that none should purchase or receive of gift any
Land of the Indians, without the knowledge and allowance of our Court, and
penalty of a fine, five pound per Acre, for all that should be so bought or
obtained. And lest yet they should be straightened, we ordered that Mount-Hope,
Pocasset and several other Necks of the best Land in the Colony, (because most
suitable and convenient for them) should never be bought out of their hands, or
else they would have sold them long since. And our neighbors at Reboboth and
Swanzy, although they bought their Lands fairly of this Philip, and his Father
and Brother, yet because of their vicinity, that they might not trespass upon
the Indians, did at their own cost set up a very substantial fence quite cross
that great Neck between the English and the Indians, and paid due damage if at
any time any unruly horse or other beasts broke in and trespassed. And for
diverse years last past (that all occasion of offense in that respect might be
prevented) the English agreed with Philip and his, for a certain Sum yearly to
maintain the said Fence, and secure themselves. And if at any time they have
brought complaints before us, they have had justice impartial and speedily, so
that our own people have frequently complained, that we erred on the other hand
in showing them overmuch favor. Much more I might mention, but I would not
burden your patience; yet we must own that God is just and has punished us far
less then our iniquityes have deserved, yea just in using as a Rod, whose
enlightening and Conversion we have not endeavored as we might and should have
done, but on the contrary have taught them new sins that they knew not. The
Lord Humble us and Reform us, that he may also save and deliver us, as in his
own time I trust he will. Sir, I have nothing of Intelligence worthy your
knowledge. The Colds are very general amongst us and some very afflictive. The
Lord rebuke the mortal Distemper that prevails so much in your Town, and (...)
all his Vistations to us.

Thus craving the benefit of your Prayers, in this day of Gods Visitation, I
rest

Your Obliged friend to serve you, Jos, Winslow.
Marshfield May 1. 1676,

A brief Narrative of the beginning and progress of the present Troubles
between us and the Indians, taking rise in the Colony of New Plymouth June
1675. Given by the Commissioners of that Colony, for the satisfaction of their
Consederate Brethren, and others.
Not to look back further then the Troubles that were between the Colony of New
Plymouth, and Philip, sachem of Mount-Hope, in the Year 1671. It may be
remembered, that the settlement, and issue of that controversy was obtained and
made (principally) by the mediation and interposed advice, and counsel of the
other two consederate colonies, who upon a careful enquiry and search into the
grounds of that trouble, found that the said Sachems Precences of wrongs and
injuries from that Colony were groundless and false, and that he (although
first in Arms) was the peccant offending party, and that Plymouth had just
cause to take up Arms against him: and it was then agreed that he should pay
that Colony a certain sum of Money, in part of their Damage and Charge by him
occasioned, and he then not only renewed his ancient Covenant, of Friendship
with them, but made himself and his People absolute subjects to our Sovereign
Lord King Charles the II. and to that his Colony of New Plymouth, since which
time, we know not that the English of that, or any other of the Colonies have
been injurious to him or his, that might justly provoke them to take up Arms
against us: But sometime last winter, the Governor of Plymouth was informed, by
Sansaman a faithful Indian, that the said Philip was undoubtedly endeavoring
to raise new troubles, and to engage all the Sachems round about in War against
us. Some of the English also that lived near the said Sachem, communicated
their fears and jealousies concurrent with what the Indian had informed: About
a week after John Sansaman had given his Information, he was barbarously
Murdered by some Indians, for his faithfulness (as we have cause to believe) to
the Interst of God, and of the English. Sometime after Sansamans death, Philip
having heard that the Governor of Plymouth had received some information
against him, and purposed to send to him to appear at the next Court, that they
might enquire into those Reports, came down of his own accord to Plymouth, a
little before the Court, in the beginning of March last, at which time the
Council of that Colony, upon a large debate with him, had great reason to
belive that the information against him might be in substance true: But not
having proof thereof, and hoping that very discovery of it so far would cause
him to (...), they dismissed him friendly, giving him only to understand, that if
they heard further concerning that matter, they might see reason to demand his
Arms to be delivered up for their security, (which was according to former
agreement between him and them) and he engaged on their demand they should be
surrendered to them or their order. At that Court we had many Indians in
Examination concerning the Murder of John Sansaman, but had not then tes^^mony
in the case, but not long after an Indian appearing to testify, we apprehended
three by him charged, to be the Murderers, and secured them, to a trial at our
next Court holden in June, at which time, and a little before the Court, Philip
began to keep his men in arms about him, and to gather Strangers to him, and to
march about in Arms toward the upper end of the Neck in which he lived; and
near to the English houses, who began thereby to be something disquieted, but
took as yet no further notice, but only to set a Military Watch, in the next
Towns of Swanzy and Rehoboth. Some hints we had that Indians were in Arms,
whilst our Court was sitting, but we hoped it might arise from a guilty fear in
Philip, that we would send for him, and bring him to trial with the other
Murderers, and that if he saw the Court b^^ke up, and he not sent for, the
cloud might blow over. And indeed our Innocence made us very secure, and
confident it would not have broke into a War. But no sooner was our Court
dissolved, but we had intelligence from Lieut. John Brown of Swanzy that Philip
and his men continued constantly in Arms, many strange Indians from several
places flocked in to him, that they sent away their Wives to Narraganset, and
were giving our People frequent Alarums by Drums, and Guns in the night, and
had guarded the passages toward Plymouth, and that their young Indians were
earnest for a War. On the seventh of June, Mr. Benjamin Church being on
RhodeIsland, Weesamoe (the Squaw-Sachim of Pocasset) and some of her chief men
told him, that Philip intended a War speedily with the English; some of them
saying that they would help him, and that he had already given them leave to
kill English men's Cattle, and rob their Houses. About the 14. and 15th of June,
Mr. James Brown went twice to Philip to persuade him to be quiet, but at both
times found his Men in Arms, and Philip very high and not perswadable to peace.
On the 14th of June, our Council writ an amicable, friendly Letter to him,
showing our dislike of his practices, and advising him to dismiss his strange
Indians, and command his own men to fall quietly to their business, that our
people might also be quiet, and not to suffer himself to be abused by reports
concerning us, who intended no hurt toward him; but Mr. Brown could not obtain
any Answer from him. On the 17th of June, Mr. Pain of Rehoboth, and several
English going unarmed to Mount-hope to seek their Horses, at Philips request;
the Indians came and presented their Guns at them, and carried it very
insolently, though no way provoked by them. On the 18 or 19th of June, Job
Winflow's House, was broke open at Swanzy, and rifled by Philips men. June 20.
being Sabbath day, the People of Swanzy were Alarmed by the Indians, two of our
Inhabitants turned out of their Houses, and their Houses rifled, and the
Indians were marching up (as they judged) to assault the Town, and therefore
entreated speedy help from us. We thereupon, the 21st of June, sent up some to
relieve that Town, and dispatched more with speed, On wednesday 23d. of June
twelve more of their Houses at Swanzy were rifled. On the 24th Layton was slain
at the F^ll River near Pocasset. On the 25th of June, diverse of our people at
Swanzy were slain, and many Houses burned: until which time, and for several
days after, though we had a considerable force there, both of our own, and of
the Massachusetts (to our grief and shame) they took no revenge on the Enemy.
Thus flow were we and unwilling to engage our selves and Neighbors in a War,
having many insolences, almost intolerable, from them, at whose hands we had
deserved better;

Josiah Winslow. Thomas Hinckley.




At a Meeting of the Commissioners of the United Colonies held at Boston
September 9th 1675.
WE having received from the Commissioners of Plymouth, a Narrative, showing
the rise and several steps of that Colony, as to the present War with the
Indians, which had its beginning there, and its progress into the Massachusetts,
by their insolences, and outrages, Murdering many persons, and burning their
Houses in sundry Plantations in both Colonies. And having duly considered the
same, do Declare, That the said War does appear to be both just and necessary,
and its first rise only a Defensive War. And therefore we do agree and
conclude, that it ought now to be jointly prosecuted by all the United
Colonies, and the charges thereof to be born and paid as is agreed in the
Articles of Consederation.

John Winthrop. James Richards. Thomas Danforth. William Stoughton. Josiah
Winslow. Thomas Hinckley.




The above expressed Letter and Narrative will (I hope) tend to remove
Prejudices out of the spirits of dissatisfyed persons, touching the grounds of
the present War. Some have thought that if Philip (the Ring leader of all the
mischief and misery which has happened by this War) his solemn engagement to the
English, above four years before these troubles began, were published, it would
farther clear the justice of the War on our part, and the more, in that he
does desire, that that Covenant might testify against him to the world, if
ever he should prove unfaithful therein. I shall therefore here subjoyn what
was by him together with his Council, subscribed, (in the presence of sundry
appertaining to this Jurisdiction) and does still remain with their Names set
to it, in the public Records of the Colonyes.

It is that which follows.

Taunton, Apr. 10.th. 1671
WHereas my Father, my Brother and my self have formerly submitted our selves
and our people unto the Kings Majesty of England, and to the Colony of
New-Plymouth, by Solemn Covenant under our Hand, but I having o^ late through
my indiscretion, and the naughtiness of my heart violated and broken his my
Covenant with my friends by taking up (...) with evil it tent against them,
and that groundlesly; I being now deeply sensible of my unfaithfulness and
folly, do desire at this time solemnly to renew my Covenant with my ancient
Friends, and my Fathers friends above mentioned, and do desire this may
restifie to the world against me, if ever I shall again fail in my
faithfullness toward them ( that I have now and at all times found so kind to
me) or any other of the English Colonyes; and as a real Pledge of my true
Intentions, for the future to be faithful and friendly, I do freely engage to
resign up unto the Government of New-Plymouth, all my English Arms to be kept
by them for their security, so long as they shall see reason. For true
performance of the Premises I have hereunto set my hand together with the rest
of my Council.

In the Presence of
William Davis. William Hudson. Thomas Brattle.
The Mark of P. Philip chief Sachem of Pocanoket The Mark V Tavoser. The Mark
of M Capt. Wisposke The Mark of T Won (...) The Mark of S Nimrod.


By all these things it is evident, that we may truly, say of Philip, and the
Indians, who have sought to disposses us, of the Land, which the Lord our God
has given to us, as sometimes Jephthe's, and the Children of Israel, said to
the King of Ammon, I have not sinned against thee, but thou do we wrong to
war against me; the Lord the Judge, be Judge this day between the Children of
Israel, and the Children of Ammon. And as Iehoshaphat said, when the Heathen in
those days, combined to destroy the Lords People; And now behold the Children
of Ammon, and Monb and Mount Stir, whom thou Would not let Israel invade
when they came out of the Land of Egypt, but they turned from them, and
destroyed them not, behold how they reward us, to come to cast us out of thy
Possession, which thou have given us to inherit, O our God milt thou not judge
them? Even so, when Philip was in the hands of the English in former years, and
disarmed by them, they could easily but would not destroy him and his men. The
Governors of that Colony have been as careful to prevent injuries to him as
unto any others; yea, they kept his Land not from him but for him, (...)
otherwise would have sold himself out of all, and the Gospel was freely offered
to him, and to his Subjects, but they despi^^d it: And now behold how they
reward us! will not our God Judge them? yea he has and will do so.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
P.8.1. s.t (...) p.13.1.22.r. principal. p.18.l.2.r. Committee, p.27.l.3.r
dele of. In p.29. That passage relating to the Thunder and Rain, happing on May
8. has respect to Bridgewater, whenas it is by an oversight printed, as though
it referred to what was done at Tannton.


