DAVID serving his Generation, OR A DISCOURSE Wherein is showed that the great
Care and Endeavor of every Christian ought to be, that he may be Serviceable
unto God and to the present GENERATION, Delivered in a SERMON Preached to the
GENERAL COURT of the COLONY of New Plymouth in New England on the 3d. Day of
June 1674. Being the Day of ELECTION there.

By SAMUEL ARNOLD Teacher of the Church of Christ at Marshfield in New England.

Joh. 17 4. I have Glorified thee on the Earth, I have finished the work which
thou gave me to do. 1 Cor. 12 7. The manifestation of the Spirit is given to
every man (...) profit withal. Phil. 1. 21. All seek their own, not the things
which are Jesus Christ's. Rev. 2. 19. I know thy Service. IMPRIMATUR
John Oxenbridge. Increase Mather.
Cambridge, Printed by Samuel Green. 1674.

To the Reader.
THat Men ought to be of a public Spirit is a Truth granted by all; for even
the light of Nature does evince it. Hence the Heathen Orator could say, That we
are not born for ourselves; and it was a great Speech in him when he professed,
Ne immortalitatem quidem contra Rempublicam acciperem. Right Reason teaches
that more common any good is, the better it is. Hence the first being is the
chief good, because he is the most Common, (...) universal good. Wherefore they
that are of the most public Spirit, and whose Practice is accordingly, must be
acknowledged to be most like the blessed God, who does good unto all, and most
like unto Jesus Christ who went about doing good. And as such are now likest
unto him in respect of grace; so in that blessed day which is coming (and which
the Lord hasten) when what ^ver Service has been d^ne in sincerity for God or
for his people, shall receive a full reward; they will be most like unto him in
respect of eternal Glory. It is Infi^I^e mercy to be an I^strument of the ^^ast
good; How great cause then have the^ to admire free grace, unto whom the Lord
has given to be useful unto many, since all such shall at that day shine as
the Stars for ever and ever* That Serviceableness which is treated on is the
following discourse is indeed the duty of every Christian, but more eminently
of some, viz. such as are providentially put in ^o any public Capacity. It was
a Title of Honor to the Kings of the G^ntiles to be called (...) yea, they
used to make them their Kings who had been Benefactors. A few men in public
place, in^lued with much of a public spirit, may preserve a whole Lan^^ from
(...), J^^ ^5 1. Ezekiel 22. 30. (...) becomes a David above others to serve his
Generation according to the (...) of God. Nehemias to seek the welfare of the
children of Israel. A (...) to s^^k the (...) of his people. A Paul not to seek
his own profit but the profit of many, that they might be saved, and to have
the Care of (...) Churches coming upon him daily; And a Timothy naturally (...)
for the state of God Church. So likewise a public Spirit is in some degreeth.
(...) of every one that has an heart after Gods own heart. All the Children of
Abraham are not only blessed, but made blessing to others. The godly wife of
Phineas, though one in a private Capacity only, yet had (...) to pre^er^e the
glory of God above her own greatest Comforts, and Concernments in this World.
But there are very few that attain (...) Spirit in that degree, and measure
which David had, and which is set before us upon whom the Ends of the World are
come, for our imitation. A blessed man lately amongst us, said well, that
Christians should be like unto that w^^thy Prince, who when (...) had but one
breath to draw spent half of it for the people, crying as he fell down slain in
the Lords Cause, O my God have compassion on my Soul, and on this Poor people.
But how rare are such Spirits? ^r such as Luther's (...) nothing could content
but to be a servant of the Church. His life was not (...) him comparatively to
the Churches prosperity. Mod^ me moriente floreat Ecclesia. Alas now if ever we
may take up the Apostles complaint, Phil. 2 21. For all seek their own, not the
things which are Jesus Christ's. We have cause to lament over it with tears of
blood (were that possible) that there is so much of a selfish private Spirit
prevailing, and so little of the contrary. One speaks (...) in saying -- Many
seek themselves so much while they live, that it is to be feared that they will
loose themselves for ever when they dye. Considering then we are fa^^en into a
self-seeking Generation, the ensuing discourse is a word (...) sp^ken; wherein
our Reverend and beloved Brother, has manifested his Faithfulness to the Lords
truth and Cause. And although his m^desty and humility would not suffer him to
be active in exp^^sing what he had preached on solemn Occasion, unto further
publication by the Press yet we doubt not b^t that he has by yielding to the
Importunity of others therein, done that which (...), Service for God, and to
many of the present yea and of succeeding Generations. That so it might be is
the hearty desire, and Prayer, of thy Servants for Jesus sake,

Thomas Walley. Thomas Thacher.


ACT. 13. 36. For David, after be had served his own Generation by the Will of
God fell on sleep, and was laid unto his Fathers, and saw Corruption.
IN these Words (which are the words of Paul) we are presented with these five
things.

1. The Life of David, a man after Gods own heart, and ^itted thereby to be a
pattern and Example to the Servants of God in after Ages and Generations.

2. The Death of David, under a comfortable Shadow and Similitude, he fell
asleep.

3. The Burial of David, he was laid to his Fathers

4. The Effect of his Death and Burial, he saw Corruption.

5. A convincing Argument hence to prove that those words in Psalm. 10. 10. were
spoken of Christ and properly to be applied unto him and not to David; ^or
David (...) Corruption, but Christ saw no Corruption here, ver. 37. Therefore
that Holy One to, or concerning whom that promise, ver. 35. was made, was
Christ.

In the first of these, (which may be the Subject of the present discourse) we
have, (1) a Metaphori^al Expression of David's Life, under the Term of Service,
David though a King yet he was a Servant, which requires Diligence and
Faithfulness, and is attended with many Exercises of Patience. (2) The Subject
of his Service, his own Generation, those that were his Contemporaries, that
lived in the same Age and Generation with himself. (3) The Rule whereby he
served his Generation, by the will of God, not by his own will, not by the will
of his Generation, not by his own will although he was a King, not by the will
of his Generation although he was a Servant, he was not such a King as to serve
them by his own will, not such a Servant as to Serve them by their will.

David in this serving his Generation may be considered and lo^^t upon, (1) As
a private Christian, as a godly man. (2) As a man in public place, (1) As a
Prophet, for so he was a man endowed with abundance of the Spirit, whereby he
was an Instrument of publishing the (...) God for the good of his Church, not
only in that Age but in after Ages of the World (2) As a King, the Political
head of Israel, now under all these Relations David served his Generation, and
served them by the will of God.

Doct. The life of a Christian, especially of such as are in public place
ought to be a Serving of their Generation, and to be ruled therein by the will
of God: Every Christian as he has a God to Serve, so he has a Generation to
Serve, in serving of (...) be Serves God, every Christian should so live as
that his Generation may be the better for him.

In the Doctrinal prosecution of this point, I shall show, (1) Wherein this
service of our Generation does consist? (2) Why a Christians life must be spent
in the service of his Generation? and (3) Why by the will of God?

Quest. 1. What is it for a Christian to serve his Generation according to the
will of God?

Answ. There is comprehended and employed in it, 1. That Christians should be
men of public Spirits, it is requisite that every Christian should be so,
especially public persons, they must not be of private Spirits, not cearer in
any private Interest, a private Spirit is an un-Christ-like un-Christian
Spirit, to look only on our own things, to be of a private Spirit is more Ca^^
like, Gen 4 9. then Christ-like, Phil 2. 4, 5. Let the same mind be in you that
was in Christ, that we be not such as Paul complains of ver. 21. that seek our
own things, David had this public Spirit, Psalm. 122. 9. I will seek thy good,
this also was Nehemiahs frame, Chap. 2 10. he sought the welfare of Israel, and
(...), Esther 10. 3. he sought the wealth of his people, and spoke peace to all
his Seed.

2. It (...) also a love of our Generation, our Generation must lie near our
Heart, there is a duty of love that we owe to our whole Generation, to every
man in it, a bond, a tie that every Christian has upon him to all the Members
of his Generation however Circumstanced, some with a love of compassion others
with a love of complacency, herein consi^s the Strength and S^^ews of our
Generation-Service, this does influence and anima^e all, Gal. ^. 1^ by love
serve one another, Psalm. 122 6. they prosper that love thee.

3. A (...) care to do what may be done for the good of our Generation, a
casting in our mind, what we may do whereby we may be most serviceable to our
Generation, by what means we may do the most and best good for our Generation,
what that Service is, our Generation stands in need of, by attendance whereunto
we may promote their good, Ca^. 8 8. what shall we do for our sister? a
solliciton^s question, so we must be saying, what shall we do for our
Generation?

4. A solemn and serious pondering and weighing the state of our Generation,
Christians must study their Generation, Heb. 10. 24. Let us consider one
another.

1. Study the evils of our Generation; there is a two fold evil that every
Generation of Professors is ordinarily tainted with, (1) Practical, as every
Generation of fallen mankind is under the prevailing power of sin, so there
are some sins that are the special prevailing sins of such a Generation; Israel
in the wilderness had special sins incident to that Generation, unbelief;
tempting of God, murmuring against him and his Servants, were the provoking
sins of that Generation, wherewith they grieved God forty years, Psalm 95. 10.
in Can^an there were other sins, when they had plenty and abundance of all
outward Comforts and blessings then they were lifted up, and kicked against God
and forgate him, Deuteronomy. 32. 15*18. So mind the evils of our Generation as to
withstand them. (2.) Doctrinal evils, the errors of our Generation, Doctrinal
evils as well as Practical have been from Generation to Generation in the
Church of Christ, and among a professing People, Rev. 2. 14,15. in the Church
of Pergamus were the Nicolaitan^, and in the Church of Corinth some denied the
Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. there must be an opposing and withstanding of these
evils, Contend for the Faith, Jude 3.

2. Study what is the work of our Generation; Every Generation has a common
work and something proper, some special Service to do for God; Moses was to
bring Israel out of egypt, joshua to possess them of the promised Land, some
are to lay the Foundation for God and others to build thereupon; David's work
was to settle the Ark in Zion under Curtains, and Solomon's to build a Temple
for it.

5. The faithful Improvement of all the Talents God has be^rusted us with for
the go^d of our generation, so did David; some have one Talent, some two, some
five, and they are all to be laid out for the good of our Generation.
Particularly, (1.) Our Interest in God, to plead with God for mercy for our
Generation, to divert and turn away the wrath of God, to stand in the gap, to
wrestle with God for them, Psalm. 122 6 Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem (2.) Our
Interest in men, which is a Talent, and ought to be improved faithfully for
their good, in laboring to reduce them from any evil way, etc. Esther 4. 14.
(3.) Our graces, by endeavoring to season our Generation therewith. (4.) Our
parts and gifts, either natural or acquired, wisdom, etc. (5.) Our Estates, by
being willing to expend them in promoting any public good either of Church or
Commonwealth, when God calls for them, Prove. 3. ^. (6.) Our places of
Authority that we are betrusted withal.

Quest. 2. Why must a Christians Life be the Service of his generation?

Reas. 1. Because such a Life is a Christ-like Life, Christ Jesus came into the
world to save and to serve the world, we shall herein write after the highest
and purest Copy, Math. 20. 28. no Servant of his Generation like him, no
Service like his, none ever served themselves less then Christ did, nor their
Generation more, he spent his Life and laid down his Life, (though not for that
Generation only, yet) in the Service of his Generation, Christ's Life was
Exemplary unto us.

Reas. 2. Because we are Debtors to our ^eneration. 1. Because God has
commanded us to serve one another, Gal. 5. 13. it is a general Canon; two debts
we owe to our Generation, the debt of love, and the debt of Service, by virtue
of Gods Command, Romans 1. 14.

2. Public persons are under a special Obligation and Bond of Service, the
Latin word, officium, signifies both office and duty, and they have more
Service from their Generation then others, and therefore owe more Service to
their Generation, E^cle. ^. 9.

3. We are all served by our generation, the great God of Heaven and Earth has
in his Infinite wisdom so disposed of things in the world, that as the whole
Universe has a dependence upon him, so also some depend^nce one upon another,
as we cannot live without God, so neither with out one another.

4. Our generation is our Masters Family, God is the Father and Master of the
great Family in Heaven and Earth, and in the faithful serving our Generation we
serve the God of our Generation, as the Steward of a great man in serving his
Masters Family according to his will, serves his Master.

5. We have many near Relations within the compass of our generation Psalm. 122.
8. For my Brethren and Companions sake, I will say, Peace be within thee.

Reas. 3. Our own good is wrapped up in the good of our Generation: the better
it fares with our Generation, the better will it fare with us, if our
Generation be happy, prosperous, holy, etc. it will be well with us, so with
Israel in Babylon, they must seek Bab^l^ peace and prosperity, for therein they
sought their own, Jer. 29 7.

Qu. 3. Why must Christians in serving their Generation be^uled by the will of
God, and not by the will of their generation, nor by their own will?

In Answer hereunto, I shall first speak something to the Negative in those two
things mentioned.

1. The will of our Generation must not be the Rule of our Service.

Reas. 1. Because sometimes our Generation is exceeding vile, very corrupt and
sinful, it is the portion of Saints to live in an evil Generation, Deuteronomy. 32, 5.
a perverse and crooked Generation. ver. 20. a froward and faithless Generation,
Judge. 2. 10. a Generation which know not the Lord, Psalm. 78. 8. ^a stubborn and
rebellious Generation that set not their Hears aright, Psalm 95. 10. A
Generation that err in their Hearts, Mat. 3. ^. a Generation of Vipers, Mark
8. 38. an Adulterous and Sinful Generation, Act. 2. 40 an untoward Generation.

Reas. 2. The best Generation is ordinarily a divided Generation, a mixed
Generation, like those in the confused Assembly at Ephesus, Act. 19. 32. some
cry one thing and some another, some are for God, and some are for Baal, whence
it is impossible to serve our Generation according to their will, it is more
possible to please God then to please our Generation.

Reas. 3. Because our Generation is changeable, they may cry Hosanna to day,
and crucify Christ soon after, as they change often in their Fashions, so In
Religion; luke 4 22. they admire his gracious words, ver. 28, 29. they are
fi^led with wrath and would kill him presently, Jer. 2. 36. why gadaest thou
about so much to change the ways ver. 11, My People have changed their glory,
etc. Isai. 24. 5. they have changed the Ordinance, etc.

2. Our ow^ will must not us the Rule of our service.

R. 1. Because we are all subordinate to God, even the greatest Monarch in the
(...) the highest rank of men is subordinate to a higher power; God (...) no
Man upon Earth to rule by his own Will, it is Gods peculiar prerogative who is
Lord of Lords and King of Kings, the (...) Potentate, the Prince of the Kings
of the Earth, Rev. 17. 14. 1 Timothy 6. 15 Rev. 1. 5. If Christ say, not my Will
but thy Will be done, Mat. 26. 39, much more we.

R. 2. Because the Will of Man is naturally very corrupt, and sinful, yea even
the best of men have a corrupt will within them, they have a will and a will.

But the Will of God must be the Rule;

R. 1. Because God is our Sovereign, our Supreme King, Lord and Master; Christ
teaches us to pray, that his Will may be done by us, Mat. 6 9 For thine is the
Kingdom, Power and Glory, ver. 13.

R. 2. Gods Will is a complete and perfect Rule of Righteousness.

R. 3. This way of Obedience to the Will of God is the way of the Blessing and
Prosperity of our generation.

Use 1. For Instruction: 1. Hence learn, that the life of a Christian is very
laborious and painful, especially of those in public place.

2. The highest place among men is a service, those in highest place are but
Servants to others, such as have the greatest Dignity have the greatest Duty.

3. Such whose life is a Service, a laborious Service, they may expect their
death to be a comfortable sleep, a quiet sleep after a hard service is very
comfortable, to sleep in Jesus is a sweet thing, 1 These. 4. 14.

Use II. For Reprehension, 1. Of suc^ as are altogether of a private Spirit,
mind themselves and their own Interests, but care not what becomes of their
Generation.

2. Such as are unprofitable, useless ones, meet Drones, idle persons by whom
their Generation has no benefit.

3. Such as pull down the displeasure and wrath of God by their Sins upon their
Generation.

Use III. For Exhortation, thus to serve our Generation according to the will
of God, mind this Duty, we have a Generation to Serve, and Service to do for
our Generation, let us therefore in Gods name be exhorted so to live that our
generation may fare the better for us; we have a set time of Service, and but a
short time to do Service in, and a great account to give to our Master and the
Master of our Generation; and consider we were served by our Generation before
we could serve ou^ Generation.

I shall direct this Exhortation, 1. To all in Gene^al, 2. To these that have
the po^er of Election in their hands. 3 To those that have the Legislative
power: 4 To the Ministry 5. To To those whom God and his people shall choose to
guide us this following year.

1. To all in general mind these following Directions.

1. Endeavor with all your might after godliness and holiness, and those that
are sanctified, and holy ones, labor to be more holy then you are, the more
holy and godly ones, the better it is for the generation, Psalm. 14. 5. God is
in the generation of the righteous, God blessed the Family of Pot^phar for
(...) sake, Gen 39. 5. and the house of Laban for Jacobs sake, and Chap. 3. 27,
39. (...) 14. 1^. Every wise woman builds her house but the foolish plucketh
it down wi^^ her hanas^, Eccles. 9. (...) one sinner destroys much good;
Numb. 32. 14. (...) are risen up in your Fathers stead an increase of sinful
men to augment the fierce anger of God, the more wickedness and wicked men in a
generation, the more wrath against that generation, so evil may a generation of
Prosessours be that Moses and Aaron, and Samuel, yea, Noah, Daniel, and Job,
cannot stay Gods anger from them; Jer 15 1. Ezekiel 14. 14,16,18,20. every sinner
contributes to the anger of God, oh then let all sinners be persuaded to turn
from the evil of your ways, else your generation will have cause to cry to
Heaven against you.

2. Labor to improve your Piety in servent Supplications for the good of your
generation, be prayer-ful for your generation, wrestle with the Lord for them,
prayer brings in rich blessings, it opens the stood-gates of mercy, to let in
mercy, and to keep it in, it shuts out wrath and keeps it out, we have had in
New England the great mercy of a praying people, a Generation of mighty
wrestlers with God, that have stood in the gap, that have kept out Judgments,
that have pulled in mercies, oh let not your praying hands fa^l, lift up the
feeble hand, Exodus 17. 11, 12. one praying Moses did Israel more Service then
all the fighting men of Israel; when Moses lift up his hands Israel prevailed,
when he let down his hands Amalek prevailed, by this Spirit of Prayer all may
help forward the work of God in their generation.

3. Be peaceable, 1 These. 5. 13. be at peace among your selves, peace and
prosperity come and go together, Psalm 122. 7. Peace be within ^hy Walls and
Prosperity within thy Palaces, Peace be with you, was the ordinary Salutation
of the Jews, be not Factious, not (...) of discord among Brethren, Prove 6. 16,
19. Blessed are the Peace makers, Math. 5. 9. where Peace is, God is, it is
therefore called the Peace of God. Col. 3. 15. and he is called the God of
Peace, 1 These. 5. 23. Heb 13 20. the God of Peace and love dwells with them and
in them that are at peace one with another, 2 Cor. 13 11. grace and peace go
together, 2 Pet. 1. 2. all blessings flow in hereupon, Psalm. 133. God rules in
union, Satan in Division.

4. Observe order, True Gospel Peace is the calmness of order, this (...)
glory, Strength and Safety of a generation, God is a God (...) Order, 1 Cor, 14
33 let us every one stand and move in our proper place; while Israel is in
order in their Tents, neither man nor Devil can hurt them, there is no
divination nor Enchantment against them, Numb. 24. 5. with Chap. 23. 22. Keep
your Ranks and Files that the Enemy break not in, and put you to the Rout; if
you be famous in the Congregation and men of Renown, Numb. 16. 2, 3. yet be not
Seditious and Rebellious against God, against Moses and Aaron, le^t God make
you famous or rather infamous by his Judgments upon you.

5. Do what you can to promote the Efficacy of the Gospel, if you be Enemies to
the Gospel, you will be found Enemies to your generation, and if so you be, we
shall be necessitated to pray against you, Can. 2. 15. Take us the Foxes, etc.
take us, or from us: Be our fellow laborers, hinder not the success of the
Gospel by throwing calumnies and Slanders on the dispensers thereof.

6. Bear up the heads, and strengthen the hands and hearts of those that are
godly, especially such whom God has called to special Service for their
generation, Zech. 12. 5. the Governors of Judah shall say in their heart, the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be my strength, etc. Ezra 10. 4. Arise, etc. we
also will be with thee.

7. Be (...) to build up the Churches of Christ, the house of God, it is certain
the work of our generation is to carry on Temple-work, our Fathers have laid
the Foundation, and left the carrying on of the Superstructure unto us, let not
the work of Gods house be neglected, Psalm 74. 5, 6. Ezra 5. 1. 2 and 6 14. they
prospered through the prophesying of Haggar and (...); do not (...) down the
house of God, be not a generation (...) your Mothers bowels.

2. To those that have power of Choice this Day, Serve your generation by the
will of God in it. It is a high favor, a rich mercy of God that we have free
Choice, that we have not such imported on (...) as might domineer and Tyrannize
over us, but that we may Annually elect our Rulers, and though we have cause to
mourn in the consideration of those choice and renowned Leaders whom God has
removed from us and are a sleep in Jesus, (and let them sleep quietly) yet
through the mercy of God we have a competent Choice, be thankful to God for
this mercy, and in Testimony of our thankfulness to God improve this privilege
for the good of our Generation; it is a great work we have to attend this day,
and will be a good serving of our Generation for the following year, if we be
careful to elect such as will serve their Generation by the will of God: (1.)
Some are careless and heedless, mind not what they do in it, but let not ^s be
slight and trivial in such a work: Consider the greatness of the work; we are
to choose Guardians to be second Fathers to us not because our first Father is
dead, but because he is in a far Country, let us not Act as mere Children,
but as those that have some understanding what a benefit or detriment such a
choice may be to us: We are this day to make a new choice of Rulers, whom the
Scripture sometime calls Gods, and therefore let us desire that God would
Rule us in our choice, and be careful to choose such as may be Gods
Representatives to us, in whom and with whom God may be: We are now to lay
Foundations and Foundations they will be either of public Weal or Woe, Psalm.
11. 3 Let us choose sound Timber, fit Stones to lay in the Foundation, a small
error in the Foundation will prove very destructive to the building. We are
this day putting a Sword into Men's hands, a Sword of Power, a Sword that will
cut, it will either be offensive or defensive, Romans 13. 3,4. let us be so wise
us to put this Sword into Wise Men's bands that may manage it aright for the
Glory of God and our good: We are now to choose Steers-men, Helms men to steer
the Course of the Basque of this Commonwealth, let us be careful therefore
into whose hands we put the Helm, although the Vessel be small yet the charge
is great and of great worth that is imbarqued in it; no less then our All lies
upon this choice, even all our choicest things. (2.) Some design, only design
right, and God be with you, design not the serving your own private ends and
Interests, act not out of desig^e any other ways then the Text ^ets before us;
eye in our choice those things which were in David our President, and are
commended to us Psalm. 78. ^lt. Integrity of hea^^ and skilfulness of hands.
(1.) Choose such as have sincere hearts, that have true piety, hearts for God,
real Christians; Integer quasi intactus, an untoucht man, a sound man, a sound
whole man; choose such as are sound in the Faith, such as singly, simply and
uncorruptly aim at the Glory of God and the Peoples good as their highest end,
men of true and approved Godliness and Integrity, Fideh^y to God and Religion,
the more faithful men are to God the more faithful we may expect them to be to
us: Mind (...) counsel to Moses, Exodus 18 21. such as fear God, etc. Hearts not
balanced with the fear of God will be biased by private ends that will cause
them to miscarry.

2. Choose such as have skilfulness and dexterity of hands; prudency of his
palms, they must be men of skill and understanding in the times, as many of
Issachar were, 1 Chronicles. 12. 32. such as may be able to work the Vessel in
Storms as well as in Calms; every Godly honest-hearted man is not fit to be a
Magistrate, though he mean well, yet for want of skill he may overthrow the
Vessel and sink all; and on the contrary, the more skilful any are, if not
Godly and upright also they will be the more able to pervert Justice, and turn
Judgment into Ga^^ and Wormwood, Amos 6 12. Choose also Men of courage, and
sweet Spirited men, let the Vine and the Fig Tree have the first choice, let us
never be put through their refusal to choose the Bramble to Rule over us.

3. To those that have the Legislative Power in their hands, you had need to be
very careful in making Laws, the Laws are this Sword, Laws are strong things
and so they ought to be, see that you serve you Generation according to Gods
will, not your own will, not the will of your Generation, differing from and
contrary to the will of God; make Laws consonant to the Scripture, make such
Laws as you need, neither be afraid nor ashamed to execute; Consult with the
Sacred Oracle, if you would be good Statesmen, be good Scripture-men; Produce
not the birth of your own Counsels, but of the Counsel of God, it is too much
for any man to walk in his own Counsel, but much more to make a Corporation and
Body of Men so to do, or else to suffer for not so doing; we are a subordinate
state, as to the King of England so to the King of Heaven, and we are bound not
to make any Laws repugnant to the Laws of England, much less must any Laws be
made contrary to the Laws of Heaven, we have the Statute-book of the King of
Heaven with us, let nothing be found in ours that is repugnant thereunto, Deuteronomy.
17. 18, 19 20 The King himself wart to write out a Copy of Gods Law, and act
according to it, that he might prosper, and so must all subordinate Rulers.

4. To my Reverend Brethren and Fathers in the Ministry, I am less then the
least of you, and unworthy to give Counsel to you, yet he whose Servant I am
and in whose Name I speak is worthy of your attention; our Title bespeaks us
Servants not only of God but of our Generation, and there is no service of
greater weight for the good of our Generation then ours, therefore let us be
very careful to do this service by the Will of God

1. Affect Piety more then Popularity, let us woo for Christ more then for our
selves, Christ is the Bridegroom, we are or ought to be the Bridegrooms
Friends, Joh. 3. 29. John was willing that his Disciples should be Christ's
Disciples and therefore he sends them to him to be confirmed that he was the
Christ, Mat. 11. 2,3. We shall do little service to Christ or to our Generation
by endeavoring to espouse them to any private apprehension of our own, they
will not be our Crown, and Glory, and Joy at the great Day; Paul warns the
Elders of Ephesus to ^ake heed of speaking perverse things to draw Disciples
after them, Act. 20. 30, (...) C^r. 11. 3. his desire is to espouse them as a
chaste Virgin to Christ, Deuteronomy. 25. 6. etc. the younger Brother was to raise Seed
to his Elder Brother, and if not to be unshod, and to have his Face spit upon;
our care must be to bring forth a Generation for Christ.

2. Study Unity and Harmony rather then Singularity, let the Prophets of the
Lord be singular from the Prophets of Baal, but let there be sweet Unity and
Harmony among our selves, let us see eye to eye, and lift up the voice
together, Isai 52. 8. let us with one mind and mouth glorify the (...) of our
Lord Jesus, Rom, 15. 5, 6. let us in all our Ministerial Dispensations be
Ha^monious as the four Evangelists were in writing the Life and Death (...)
Christ; and as the Apostles and Prophets that are under Christ the Foundation
of the Church: we are under rowers, 1 Cor. 4. 1. let us Row together that we
may Row our Generation to Heaven; let it be said of us as of Paul and ^^tus,
that we walk by the same Spirit, and tread in the same steps, 2 Cor. 12. 18. if
one (...) the rest ludge, and let the Spirit of the Prophets be subject to the
(...), 1 Cor. 14. 32.

3. Take heed of sod^ring in the least Degree with persons or Doctrines
contrary to the simplicity and purity of the Gospel; every Christian is to
contend, and to contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered to ^he Sword^,
Jude 3. but we much more; the Gospel is committed to us, Gospel truths are
committed to us, to preserve and keep them pure for God and for on^ Generation,
2 Cor. 5. 19. yea we are in a special manner (...) for the defense of the
Gospel, Psalm. 1. 17. we are Watchmen, Ezekiel 33. 7. (...) a Sentinel be surprised
the whole Camp is jeoparded; Deceivers are subtle, our Generation many of them
weak and unskilful in the Word of Righteousness; the Adversary does especially
aim at us.

4. Let us by all possible means cry down the evils and sins of our Generation,
spare none, Isa^. 58, 1. let us not lispe out a word willingly in favor of
those things that do undoubtedly expose both us and our Generation to the
displeasure of God, the crying sins of New England, Pride, Uncleanness,
Drunkenness, etc. let us cry them down with all our might, break down that
which will else break down our Generation, we cannot do our Generation better
Service, nor the God of our Generation then by bearing faithful witness against
whatsoever tends to the ruin of it.

5. Lastly, Let us not shrink from, nor in our work notwithstanding all the
hard measure we may meet with from our Generation, from whom we may have
expected better things, but let us go on in the Name and strength of God, and
eye his Glory in all we do, and he will be with us, times face sadly upon us,
the best times for the Ministry seem to be at an end in New England, there is a
Generation springing up that pretend to devotion, but a principal part of their
devotion lies in contradicting and blaspheming the truths and Servants of God,
like to the devout persons spoken of, Act. 13. 50. the Apostles of Christ
suffered more from these that were Superstitiously devout, then from the Pagan
Gentiles, but let us pray for those that prate against us, bless (...) that
curse us, speak truth to them that belie us, although we may be counted their
Enemies for so doing, however our Generation carry to us, yet let us do all
that in us lies to bring them to Heaven, let us seek their good that seek our
hurt, seek their Conversion, who seek our subversion; let us rejoice and be
exceeding glad, that we are not under that woe of all men, that is, of all
sorts of men (...) of us, Luke 6. 26. (which is not to be expected except we
are (...) such a temporizing Spirit as to speak well of them) but rather, that
they speak evil of us falsely for Christ*s Name and Gospels sake, for great
will be our reward in Heaven, so pers^^ut^d they the Prophets that went before
us. ver 22. 23.

5. To those whom God and his people shall choose to sit a^ the (...) to rule
this Jurisdiction for this following year, I shall humbly present you, 1. With
a few words of Counsel, and 2dly. Seal and bind them with an exciting
encouraging Sanction, and so conclude.

In General, Be exhorted, much Honored in the Lord, to look carefully to the
promoting of Religion and Justice, they are both your Charge; Religion and
Justice are like the two Pillars of Solomons-porch, Jac^^n and Boaz, 2 Chronicles 3.
17. Keep them up and they will keep up the building;

And 1. Let Religion be first, and as lach^^ be set on the right hand, let it
have the priority and preheminency upon your hearts, and in your
Administrations, it is the first and great Command, it is not unbecoming a
Christian Magistrate to mind matters of Religion, but to neglect it.

To provoke you hereunto, Consider,

1. Who it is that exalts you, who is your promoter? it is God and Christ, Psalm
75 6, 7. Electors are from the East and West, etc. but promotion is from God,
he sets you up, Prove 8. 15, 16. By me Kings reign, etc. Prove. 16. ult. the
whole disposing of the lot is of the Lord, shall God exalt you, is it not good
Reason then that you should exalt him!

2. God puts his Name upon you, Psalm. 82 6. I have said, ye are Gods, let not
him be called a God upon Earth that has no respect to the interest of the God
of Heaven.

3. God is present in all your Courts of Judicature, h^ stands to overlook you,
Psalm. 82. 1. to see what you say and do for him.

4. God has delivered the Custody of both Tables into your hands as
Magistrates, when God writ the two Tables of stone a first and a second time he
delivered them into the hands of Moses, he did not only deliver the Second, and
discharge him of the First, but gave both, Exodus 31. 18. and 34. 29. God did not
say to Moses, see thou to matters between man and man, and as for matters
respecting my Interest, let them alone to me, but equally charged him with both.

5. God has laid a charge in the fourth Commandment, as upon the Father and
Master so upon the Magistrate to see that the Sabbath be observed, Exodus 20.
10. the Stranger that is within thy gates, he must be looked to that he profane
not the Sabbath, there is not the like Sanction on any Command of the Second
Table.

6. It was the Spirit and practice of David and all the good Kings of Judah, to
look into and take care of matters of Religion, yea, this was the
distinguishing Character between good and evil Rulers; the good Magistrates
minded matters of Religion according to Gods Institution, yea, such Kings as
were not upright were said, to do that which was right in so doing, although
not with a perfect heart; yea, where any Kings are commended here comes in a
But in their Commendations, namely, that the High places were not removed, etc.
2 King. 12. 2,3. and 14. 3,4. and 15. 3, 4. and ver. 34, 35 But mind the
Example of good King Josiah, 2 Chronicles 34 31, 32, 33. and the King made a
Covenant before the Lord, to walk after the Lord, and to keep his Commandments,
etc. and he caused all that were present in Jerusulem and Benjamin to stand to
it, etc. and Josiah took away all the abominations, etc. and made all that were
present in Israel to serve, even to, serve the Lord their God, and all his
dates they departed not from following the Lord the God of their Fathers: does
Jeroboam the Son of Nebat make Israel to sin, and shall not Josiah make Israel
to serve God! Let nothing therefore he wanting on your parts that may make your
Israel to serve the Lord, neither good Laws, nor faithful Executions of them,
nor holy Examples, nor religious covenanting, etc.

Object. But some may say, this was in the old Testament, what have you in the
New Testament either as to Precept or President for it? To this I Answer,

1. As for a Precept, Consider two things.

1. What have you against it, or ^o Countermand it in the New Testament? who
durst have abolished the Ceremonial Law that was of force in the Old Testament,
if the New Testament had not done it?

2. What Precept have you in the New Testament for the Magistrate to meddle in
matters civil, to punish ^hee^s, Ly^rs, Unclean persons, Murderers? must you
not go to the Old Testament for it? then why not also for their dealing in the
matters of Religion? but if you look into Rom 13 3, 4. you will find the civil
Magistrate is to be a Terror to evil doers, if those that violate the first
Table be evil doers, then the Magistrate is to punish them for it.

2. As for Pr^s^dent, Consider also two things,

1. The Times wherein the New Testament was written were the Times prophesied
of, wherein the Heathen should rage, and the Kings and Rulers of the Earth set
themselves against the Lord, and against his Anointed, Psalm. 2 1,2,3. with Act.
4. 25, 26, 27. but they had better council given them in the Conclusion of the
same Psalm, ver. 10, etc.

2. If you can any of you find me a David, a Josiah, a Hezekiah, a Jehoshaphat,
a Nehemiah in those New Testament times, and I shall find that they did as much
for God as they in the Old, and I doubt not but had Nero and Gallio, and others
of that Temper lived in the Old Testament times, they would have done as little
for God, and as much against him, as when they lived in these latter Times.

By way of Direction,

1. Kiss the Son, kiss him heartily in respect of the disposition of your own
Souls, kiss his mouth, his hand, his foot, Kiss him with a kiss of dilection,
Kiss him with a Kiss of Subjection to all his Ordinances, Kiss him with a kiss
of Adoration, Psalm. 2. 10, 11, 12. it will be your wisdom and honor so to do.

2. Let the Churches of the Lord Jesus find protection and patronage under the
shadow of your wings, for the sake of the Church the world stands; the Princes
of Israel pitched their Standard at the Command of God, about the Tabernacle of
the Congregation to secure it, Numb. 2. 2. Churches do now grow low, you have
been brought forth and brought up in the Churches of Christ, take your Mother
by the hand, that it may not be said as Isai. 51. 18. not any takes her by the
hand of all the Sons she has brought up, Remember what is spoken of Kings,
Isai. 49. 2^.

3. Speak comfortably to those that teach the good knowledge of the Lord, as
Hezekiah did, 2 Chronicles. 30. 22. let us have your favorable and gracious aspect
(and let nothing be done by any of us to render us unworthy of it) a good
Correspondence between Magistracy and Ministry conduces much to! the good of
our Generation; Isreal's Redemption out of Egypt began when Moses and Aaron met
and kissed each other in the Mount of God, Exodus 4 17. Satan labors to make
breaches between us; our Adversaries put us together and make us their Butts to
shoot at, (Priests and Rulers) God puts us together, unites us in giving us the
same Titles, Ministers, Fathers, Nurses, Elders, Shepherds, God leads his
people like a f^ock to the promised Land by the hand of Moses and Aaron, Psalm.
77. 20.

4. Let all the Ordinances of the Lord Jesus Christ be precious to yon, own all
Christ's Institutions invisibly and visibly, let not any of you be found among
them that turn your backs upon any Ordinance of Christ Jesus, own and love them
heartily for God and your own souls sake, and visibly for your Generations
sake, you are Leaders, if a Leader turn his back others will be too ready to
follow you, let them be more dear to you then your dearest interest, they are
Gods All, Luke 15. 31. they have been New-Englands All, New-Plimouths All, let
them be your All.

5. Let Gods Sabbaths be of high and honorable account in your eyes,; remember
the fourth Commandment that does concern you; let Sabbaths be profaned farewell
all Religion, be careful that neither through Idleness, Sloathfulness or
Profaneness the Sabbaths of the Lord our God be polluted among us; they are
questioned by many, denied by others, profaned by others, Oh remember
Nehemiah, and his care upon this account, Chap. 13. 15 -- 22. God threatens
that a Land shall enjoy her Sabbaths if the Inhabitants thereof neglect and
profane them, Lev. 26. 34, 35 it would be a dreadful thing to suffer the
Sabbath to be profaned in New England.

6. Let no Plantation in this Jurisdiction (if it may with your care be
possibly prevented) be without a Teaching Ministry; such places will prove
Nurseries of Ignorance, Atheism, Heresy and Profaneness: we read of three great
wants in Israel that were causes of woe to them, Judge. 5. 8. Judge. ult. ult. 1 Samuel 13. 19, 22. there was no King, no Smi^h, no Sword nor Spear, and a fourth
as had or worse then any, no Ministry, 2 Cor. 15. 3. then they were without
God, Ephesians. 2. 12. the more careless Children are of themselves, the more care
their Parents should take for them.

7. Tolerate not things that are intolerable, a boundless Toleration will be
found at last an intolerable thing; such as differ only in Circumstantials,
Controversal points and are quiet, peaceable, moderate, and do not busy
themselves in learning others, we may and must bear with them, Phil. 3. 15, 16.
but when persons err in Fundamentals, d^ny Christ Jesus, the Word of God,
Eternal Election, etc. such Heresies and Heretics had need be suppressed.

2. Look to Justice and Judgment, this is a great Charge laid upon you by the
Lord; mind ^^hoshaphats charge, 2 Chronicles. 19 6, 7, 8. Zech. 8. 16. Execute the
Judgment of truth and peace in your gates.

1. In Criminals, be a terror to evil doers, Romans 13. 3. let every sin be
punished with condign punishment, let sinners tremble to stand before you, let
them be hold your face as the face of God, say to the Fools, d^al (...)
foolishly, and to the Wicked lift not up the Horn, Psalm. 75. 4, 5. so punish
offenders, as that Israel may hear and fear and do no more presumptuously,
Deuteronomy..13. 11. let not any sin or iniquity live, much less flourish under you,
and let not Crimes against the first and great Commandment be accounted little
Crimes.

2. ln Civils, between man an man.

1. Let Justice be faithfully distributed, your eye of favor and respect must
be upon the Faithful, Psalm. 101. 6. therefore you must be faithful in all your
Administrations, put on Righteousness (...) Robe and Justice as a Diadem, Job
29 14. take heed of showing favor or affection to any person in any Case more
then the Case deserves, (...) Father nor Mother, sister nor brother, high nor
low, friend nor foe, this was Levies blessing, Deuteronomy. 33. 9. you are Gods,
represent not an unjust God to the world.

2. Labor in searching out Cases that are difficult, God will be with you in
it Job. 29. 16. it is your work.

3. Be not too ready to hear complaints, give not ear to any one party that may
prepossess you, as God ha^th given you two ears, if you have one for the
Complainant, reserve the other for the Defendant, Judge no man's Case so much as
in your breast, before you hear him and his Accusers face to face, Act. 25. 16.
Joh. 7. 51. Remember in Ziba's Case, how deeply his Accusation did sink into
David's Spirit, that when honest M^pht^osheth came he could not have Justice, as
those words seem to import, 2 Samuel 16. 1- 4. and 19, 25 -- 29. mind what God
says concerning Sodom, Genesis 18. 20,21. I will go down, etc. which is for your
Example.

4. Look to Witnesses, many do ^ot understand the nature of an Oath, do not
fear an Oath, such should be solemnly warned; if Truth fall in the Streets
equity cannot enter, Isai. 59. 14. If Witnesbe contradicting, it is good in
such a Case that they stand together before the Lord and the Judges, and
diligent inquiry is to be made, Deuteronomy. 19. 16, etc.

5. Look to Attourneys, the stating of Atturneys that are approved for
Faithfulness, it may in some respect be inconvenient, but the suppressing of
such as will for their own ends espouse any Case right or wrong, and by their
wits put a fair Cloak upon a soul Case, and create needless Suits, and he
incendiaries in places, and maintain Contention that Contention may maintain
them, such as care not who looses, so they may gain, I say, to suppress such
will be of great use to the maintenance of Justice and Peace

6. Be eyes to the blind and feet to the lame, an honest and just cause that is
clearly so in your Consciences, let it not fall in Judgment if you can keep it
up, Job. 29 15. and ver. 12. defend the Fatherless and Widow, and such as have
no helper, Psalm. 82. 3, 4.

To Seal and bind up what has been spoken.

1. Consider that awful word, Psalm. 82 6, 7. you are Gods, but you shall dye
like men, you sit upon the Bench now, but you and we must stand at the Ba^re
before the Tribunal of Christ, you are our Judges, but you your selves must be
judged, Act. 24. 25. you are the Shields of the Earth, Psalm 4^. 9 but you
cannot Shield your selves from the assaults of Heaven.

2. To encourage you, mind these few things.

1. If you thus serve your Generation according to the will of God, you will
herein follow the Examples of your worthy Ancestors and Pre^ecessors that are
asleep in the Lord.

2. You will hereby prevent Gods Judgment against us, you will keep off wrath
from us, you will hinder his drawing forth the Sword of Justice, Jer. 5. 1. God
will not destroy us, nor make us desolate, nor throw us out of his ^ight, he
may chasten us but he will not destroy us.

3. You will be a blessing to us, we shall be ^blessed in you, Eccles. ^^. 17.
Jer. 31 2^. the Lord bless thee O habitation of Justice

4. we shall bless God for you, and bless you in the Name of the Lord, end
bless our selves in you, Psalm. 72. 17,18,19. and we shall make requests to God
for you with joy.

5. God and his people will delight to improve you from time to time.

6. You will lay down your heads Comfortably, go quietly to sleep, and you will
dye lamented, 1 Chronicles. 16. 14. we shall burn odours for you, your Names will be
embalmed and precious from Generation to Generation; God will say to you, well
done good and faithful Servants you have been faithful in a little, etc. Math.
25. 20 -- 23 Do worthily in our Ephra^ah, and be Famous in our Bethlehem, Ruth
4. 11. Be strong and deal very courageously, and the Lord shall be with the
good, 1 Chronicles, 19. ult.

FINIS.

