THE FIRST PRINCIPLES OF NEW ENGLAND, Concerning The Subject of Baptism and
Communion of Churches.

Collected partly out of the Printed Books, but chiefly out of the Original
Manuscripts of the First and chief Fathers in the New-English Churches; With
the Judgment of Sundry Learned Divines of the Congregational Way in England,
Concerning the said Questions.

Published for the Benefit of those who are of the Rising Generation in
New England.

By INCREASE MATHER, Teacher of a Church in Boston in New England

Deuteronomy. 32.7. Remember the days of old, -- Ask thy Father and he will show
thee, thy Elders and they will tell thee.

Psalm. 102.18. This sball be written for the Generation to come.

Nihil mihi Authoritatis assumo, sed quae ab alijs dispersa velut in ordinem
Epitomata, Conscribo.

Veget. L. 1. C. 8. CAMBRIDGE Printed by Samuel Green, 1675.

To the Reader.
COncerning the ensuing Collection of Testimonies, which are expressive of the
Judgment of the (...) and chief of the Fathers in the New English Churches (as
also of sundry others that are Pillars amongst those of the true Congregational
way) about the Subject of Baptism and the Communion of Churches, if any should
have Scruples about the truth thereof, they may easily in part satisfy then
s^lves, by having recourse ^o the printed Books out of which these passages are
faithfully excerped. And as for those things which are (as most of the
subsequent Collection is) taken from Manuscripts, I have by me the Original
Scripts, only some few of them are in other hands, who are ready, to show them
unto such (if any such there be) as shall hesitate touching the Fidelity of
this publication. As to that matter therefore no more shall, or needs to be
said. My design at present is only to Commend a few things to the serious and
Christian Consideration of the Antisynodalian Brethren. Brethren I was once of
your persuasion, and thence can with the more Love and Compassion speak unto
you. What the Arguments were which caused me to be of another mind, is not here
a place to relate, but it shall be done (if God permit) elsewhere. For the
present, let it su^fice to be said, that Study and Prayer, and much Affliction
has brought me to be of another belief, then once I was of touching the
Controverted Questions. And unto you that are still of the Antisynodalian
persuasion, I would in the bowels and love of Christ say these few things.

1. Consider that it is possible that you may be mistaken in your
Apprehensions. Many things might be mentioned to you, which ought to Cause an
humble jealousy in you, least so it should be. Were there that only
Consideration, that so many Learned and godly men are opposed, it ought to
Cause Trembling, and an holy fear in you, least your Notions should be
Erroneous. It is a Christian Speech and Spirit which blessed Buroughs has in
his Excellent Irenicum (page 89.) where he says, He that differs in his
Judgment from godly learned men, had need to spend much Time in Prayer and
Humiliation before the Lord. There is a notable Expression of Basil cited in an
Epistle of Luther to the Ministers of Nor^mberg, who were at varivariance one
from another, He who will separate from his Brethren, had need to Consider many
things even to anxiety, he had need break his sleep many nights, and seek of
God with many Tears the demonstration of the Truth. Thus, He.

Remember that those you differ from were under greater Advantages and
Prob^bilities to understand the Truth ^hen can be said concerning your selves,
For that many of the members of the late Synod called to Answer the Questions
conce^ning the Subject of Baptism and Consociation of Churches, (besides their
eminent Piet) and enlarged understanding and Capacity in those respects to
discern the Truth had bestowed much Time and pains in seeking and searching
after the mind of God ab^^t these Questions, cannot be denied. For the most
part, when godly learned men miss of the Truth, it is in points which eith^r
they have not at all, or not thoroughly and Impartially studied, when as the
Leaders in the Synod mentioned, had most industriously, and not without prayers
and Tears labored to know the will of the Lord, conce^ning these Affairs of
his house, and Kingdom. Nor is it to be fo^gotten, how the Lord did in his
Providence signally own that Assembly. For at the Time of their second Sessions
there was a sore and threatening d^ought on the Land, whereupon that Synod set a
day apart to seek the Lord by Fasting and Prayer, and Immediately upon those
Prayers did the Lord give Rain from Heaven, whereby he did from Heaven own both
hi^ Servants, and the work which they were about. And therein likewise we may
observe a divine Confutation of those Spirits, who impute our droughts,
blastings, etc. to that Assembly, or to the Doctrine by them asserted and
propugned. Remember also that there have been very worthy men ( amongst whom I
who am Conscious to my self, that I am the chief of Sinners, am no way worthy
to be mentioned) who were against such Enlargement of Baptism as the Synod
pleads for, yet upon second and wisest thoughts ((...)) have seen Cause to
change their opinion. This is true concerning some now at rest with Christ, and
sundry (amongst whom as I said I reckon not my self) yet surviving. Yea, it is
true concerning some Judicious of the Congregational way in England as well as
in New England. It is a good Observation which I remember Mr. Cotton has in
his Letter to Mr. Williams. (page 12.) where he argues, that the way of the
Rigid ^eparation is not of God, because those who in Simplicity and tenderness
of Conscience have been drawn into the error of that way, yet when they have
grown in grace, they have also grown to discern the error of the Separation.
The same thing we may say in this Case; some who did once Conscientiously and
humbly according to their present light dissent from the late Synod, yet as
they have grown in wisdom and grace, and ripeness for Heaven, the Lord ^ath
given them for to see, that their Rigidity in this particular was a fa^^i^g.
Moreover ii is a Rule as true as Ancient and Common, that whatever Opinion does
d^iv^ the m^inta^ner of it to any absurdities is to b^ suspected and rejected
as errone^us. It 's Everlasting^y Certain, that a false Conclusion can never be
drawn out of true (...), ^x vero ^il nisi verum. Now some that with the highest
Confi^en^e o^posed the Doctrine of the Synod con^erning the Subject of Baptism
to uphold their No^ions, have been forced to embrace such things as are very
Irrational. All these things being put together are enough ^o breed an humble,
and an holy Jealousy over your own Apprehensions. That then is the first word
I would seriously and affectionately Commend to your Consideration. The second
word is this, Consider that if you be mistaken your Error has, as things are
Circumstanced, no little evil and danger in it. For if you be m^staken, then
y^u oppose a Cause of Divine Grace, which to do is sad, since God looks upon
his Grace as his Glory, Ephesians. 1.14. As Gods holiness is dear to him, and thence
any way to oppose that is dangerous, the same is to be said concerning his
Grace. And if you be mistaken, you o^pose a Cause of Gods Covenant, now Gods
Covenant is mavelous dear unto him, and no man can dash himself against an
Interest of the Covenant without great hazard And if you be mistaken, you
oppose an Interest, yea, and a great Interest of Christ's Kingdom, now that
must needs displease the Lord, It is very observable, that Christ was never so
angry at his own dear Disciples, as the^, when they did rigidly withhold some
that were Children of the Kingdom, from being brought to him, (...)
Mark. 10.13, 14. why so? even because his own Interest was therein Concerned,
men are soon moved, when their own Interest is struck a^, so was the holy heart
of Christ much moved, because when Children were kept from him, his own
Interest was prejudiced. Brethren, if so it be, that the Doctrine of the Synod
be Truth, you that oppose it, do what in you (...) ^o prejudice an Interest of
Christ, and if so, Christ i^ not well pleas^d with you for this thing. There is
not a more awful Scripture in all the Book of God, then that where i^ i^ said
concerning Christ's Kingdom, that whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be
broken, Math. 21.44. Brethren, one word let me in the Bowels of the Lord say to
you, And I speak it not with a desire to grieve or ^ffend any of you, but if my
heart deceive me not, Love to Christ, and to you, and to the succeeding
Generation in New England causes me to speak it, it is only this, oh tremble,
lest this very Error of yours prove the breaking, and the ruin of your poor
Posterity. They are Solemn and weighty words, and I must Confess have always
had an aw^ful Impression upon my Conscience, which the Elders have in the
P^eface to the late Synod Book; ( page 12.) should ( say they) the Church
education of your Children be by the want of your hearty Concurrence rendered
either infeasable or ineffectual, should they live as Lambs in a large Pasture
for want of your Agreement to own them of the Flock; we beseech you Consider
how uncomfortable the Account hereof will be another day. Truly when I think,
(and I often think of it) seriously and sadly with my self, that in a
Plantation of Religion (for such New England was) the Generality of the
Inhabitants should be in the Condition of Infidels, that the Posterity of a
People professing Godliness, yea, of the most eminent Professors in the whole
World, should in our Age be as Infidels even not so much as within the Compass
of the visible Church, or have the Livery and Character belonging to Christians
upon them, whereby such are distinguished from the Infidel and Pagan World,
what it has to others I know not, but to me it has a most formidable
appearance, Remember also that the light has been forth, in which respect, Now
for you to oppose the Truth, after that Convincing Testimonies have been given
to it by the Lords Servants, will be far more dangerous and provoking to the
Lord, then in former Times amongst us, when these things had not been so fully
enquired into, as of late through the good hand of Divine Providence it has
been. A third word which I would say is, study well the point of Infant
Baptism. Acquaint your selves with the Scripture proofs for that Ordinance, I
must acknowledge that that has been no small Confirmation to me. This I find
that there is hardly an Argument produced against such Enlargement, as is by
the Synod asserted, but what the Antipaedo-Baptists make use of to serve their
turn. Also that ^he Arguments which do demonstrate Paedo-Baptisme in general,
do (for the most part) prove that Baptism ought to be Administered in the
Latitude which the Synod pleads for. The last word which I shall say is this,
use all means of Gods appointing, that you may come to understand the Truth in
this matter. There have been some to my knowledge (and because I know there
have been some, I am apt to think there may be many more then I know of) that
have exclaimed much against the Synod Book, as if it were an Apostasy and
Impurity, etc. That yet upon Examination have Confessed, that they never read
the Book, much less have they read other things written in defense thereof; and
how far then have they been from reading these things, with Prayers and Tears,
and Humiliations before the Lord, oh! if Brethren would prove all things, and
pray uncessantly over what they do, and add deep Hum^liations to their Prayers,
and depend upon Christ for light, we might hope that God would either discover
his Truth to them, in the very things they are searching after, or in some
other matters better for them to know, and in the mean Time help them to carry
it with that Christian moderation that becomes Saints, Prove. 23, ^, 5. Ezekiel.
43.11. Phil. 3.15, 16.

As for the Reasons which have induced me to this ensuing Collection, besides
those general motives mentioned in the Introduction, the special Considerations
which have prevailed with me were, First, that I might please God in obeying
the fifth Commandment by vindicating the honor of my Fathers. (2 dly.) in that
a special Advantage has been put into my hands for this undertaking, by Reason
of my Acquaintance with the Manuscripts of both my Fathers, (I mean my Father
Cotton, and my Father Mather) from whence these Testimonies are for the most
part produced. [3 dly.] My Father when he was leaving the world, did Commend it
as his dying Counsel to me, that I should endeavor the good of the Rising
Generation in this Country, and in special, that they might be brought under
the Government of Christ in his Church, and when grown up and qualified, as is
in the late Synod Book expressed, have Baptism for their Children. What
Impression those words, since they were the words of a Father, and of such a
Father, and dying words also, have had upon my heart, is known to the Father of
Spirits, who only searches hearts, and Converseth with the Souls of men, nor
am I able to utter it. [4 ly.] It is known unto those few in the world, that
have any knowledge of so obscure and inconsiderable a person as my self, that I
have of late been near unto Death, God having brought me back again, as it were
out of the G^ave, I must needs have had many thoughts with myself, what I
should do for God, and for his people? yea, for his People, whose Prayers have
sa^^d my Life. Now I would fain hope what is here done will be a S^rvice for
Christ, and for these his Churches, and for th^^ Generati^n ^^ereof I am, when
I shall sleep with my Fathers.

There is also published herewith, the Substance of a Letter written (...)
Mi^che^, late faithful and famous Pastor of the Church in (...) Although I
cannot say but that I was [albeit he knew (...) when that Letter was sent to
me, inclining to the same Appreh^nsion about the Subject of Baptism, which at
present I am of, yet the Arguments therein suggested, were I must Confess
weighty and powerful Considerations with me, and I believe will be so to others
that ^u^ly weigh matters in the Balance of the Sanctuary, for which Cause
principally, I have thus exposed it to public view. Also I have partly done it
honoris gratia, that I might testify my deep respect to that blessed man,
concerning whom I may say as sometimes Beza concerning Calvin, Now Mitchel is
dead, life is less sweet, and death will be less bitter unto me.

Once for all, let me desire the Reader to take notice that I do not by this
Collection, concern my self in the defense of every Notion or Argument, or
Principle, that is by any of those Worthies insisted on, but my only design
therein is, to show that such Inlargment of Baptism, and that Consociation of
Churches, which is in the Synod Book asserted is no Apostasy from the first
Principles of New England, nor yet any declension from the Congregational way.
Now the Lord Jesus who has promised that the Spirit of Truth shall come, and
shall guide into all Truth, fulfill his good word, even the Lord send out of his
Light and his Truth, and let them lead us. Let him grant that there may be
Peace and Truth in our days, and not only so, but that the Generation to come
may praise the Lord, that it may appear, that his Righteousness is for ever,
and his Salvation from Generation to Generation, Amen, and Amen! This is the
hearts desire and Prayer of him

From my Study in Boston N.E. 1. of 3 d Month. 1671. Who is less then the
least of all Gods mercies and Saints. Increase Mather.

Errata.
p. 2. l. 11. for hands r. hand.

p. 4. l 2^. for then r. there.

p. 16. l. 24. Add^ deus dicit.

p. 21. l. penult. r. parente.

p. 32. l. 32. for so 24. r. Hebr. 1^.^^

THE FIRST PRINCIPLES OF NEW ENGLAND, Concerning the Subject of BAPTISM AND
COMMUNION OF CHVRCHES.
THere having been some who have thought that the Doctrine of the late Synod
Book Concerning Baptism and the Communion or Consociation of Churches is an
Innovation and Apostasy from the first principles of New England. And inasmuch
as it may be* a special Service for these Churches, both in present and in
after times, that men should know what the first Principles touching these
Controversies were, Considering also, that the Lords Servants and Messengers
are much wronged when Apostasy is imputed to them, upon account of the Doctrine
aforesaid* and tha^ i^ will be a thing very acceptable unto God (who is
displea^ed and dishonored when ^is faithful ones are ^raduced) that his
Servants should be vindicated from such injurious Aspersions* upon the^e and
the like Considerations, we shall e^deavour (as in the Lords holy ^ear) to
e^qui^e what were the first Principles of New England concerning the Subject of
Baptism and Communion of Churches, and leave it to the Christi^^ world, and to
Posterity to judge who are the Apostates.

Now this may be done by showing, what was the judgment of the first Fathers
of this Country, touching the questions in Controversy. And in this ensuing
Collection of Testimonies we shall not mention any of those Reverend Elders
that are yet surviving, nor all amongst our deceased worthies, only some of the
Chief of the Fathers of this Country.

And first, concerning Baptism, we shall begin with the Judgment of that man
of God deservedly famous in both England, viz. Mr. John Cotton, late Teacher
of the first Church in Boston. And what the Apprehension of that Seer was, is
manifest from a Letter which is to be seen written with his own hands in the
name, and with the unanimous Consent of the whole Church, which then was in
this Boston to the Church in Dorchester. Because the Letter is of Ancient date,
and so gives a great light toward the clearing of the matter, which is before
us, we shall therefore here insert it, word for word as it is written with Mr.
Cottons own hand, It is that which follows.

To our Reverend and Beloved Brethren the Elders with the rest of the Church of
Dorchester. Grace and peace from God our Father and from the Lord Jesus Christ
our Savior.
The Case of Conscience which you propounded to our Consideration, [to wit,
whether a Grandfather being a member of a Christian Church, might claim
Baptism to his Grandchild, whose next Parents be not received into Church
Covenant] has been deliberately treated of in our Church Assembled together
publicly in the name of Christ. And upon due and serious discourse about the
point, it seemed good unto us all with one accord, and agreeable (as we
believe) to the word of the Lord, that the Grandfather may lawfully claim that
privilege to his Grandchild in such a Case, yet with these two Cautions.
First, that the Grandchild baptiz^d by right of the Grandfathers Covenant, be
Committed to the Grand fathers education; for as God in the Covenant of Grace
undertaketh to be a God unto the Believer and his seed, so by the Rule of
Relatives, the Tenor of the Covenant requires that the Believer, do undertake
that himself and his Seed do give up themselves to become the people of the
Lord, which he cannon undertake, in behalf of his Seed, unless they be
committed to his education* 2. This other Caution also we conceive to be
requisite, that the Parents of the Child, do not thereby take oc^asion to
neglect the due and seasonable preparation of themselves for entrance into
Covenant with God and his Church: these Cautions premised and observed, the
Baptism of the Grandchild by right of his Grandfathers Covenant, we believe
to be warranted from the nature and tenor of the Covenant of Grace by this
Reason, where there is a Stipulation of the Covenant on Gods part, and
restipulation of the Covenant on man's part, there may be an obsignation of the
Covenant on both parts, or in plainer words, where there is an offer of the
Covenant on Gods part, and a receiving and undertaking of the Covenant on man's
part, there may be a sealing of it on both parts? But here is an offer of the
Covenant on Gods part, Genesis 17.7. where God says, that he will be a God to
Abraham, that is, to the Believer and his Seed, and by Seed is not there meant
the next Seed only, but Seeds Seed also to many Generations, Isai. ^9.21. And
here is likewise a receiving and undertaking of the Covenant on man's part,
seeing the Grandfather receives the Covenant by his faith, and by the
profession of his faith, and by his desire of the Seal of the Covenant to
strengthen his faith, and he unde^^^keth also the keeping of the Covenant, in
bringing up his Grandchild as much as in him lies to live and walk as himself
does, as one of Gods people, according to the Tenor of the Covenant, from
whence the Conclusion evidently follows, that therefore Baptism may there be
Administered to Seal up the Covenant, where the Grandfather receives the
Covenant, and undertakes to bring up his Grandchild in the faith and obedience
of the Covenant.

Against this Argument it was objected by some what the Apostle writes, 1 Cor.
7.14. where if both the husband and the wife, who are the next Parents of the
Child be unbelieving, the Child is pronounced unclean, and therefore incapable
of the holy Covenant, and of the holy Seal of it, whereto it was answered that
the word in the Text translated unbelieving is in the Original Infidel. Now
there is a difference between an Infidel and a Carnal Christian, as then was
amongst the Jews a difference between an Heathen and a Carnal Israelite. Though
the Child be unclean where both the Parents are Pagans and Infidels, yet we may
not account such Parents for Pagans and Infidels, who are themselves baptized,
and profess their belief of the Fundamental Articles of the Christian Faith,
and live without notorious Scandalous Crime, though they give not clear
evidence of their regenerate estate, nor are convinced of the necessity of
Church Covenant. After this Answer given, there was no farther reply against
the point in hand, but on the contrary, some of the Brethren expressing their
Consents with Addition of other Reasons, and all of them by their silence, we
do therefore profess it to be the judgment of our Church, and as we believ
agreeable to the word of God (such Cautions being observed as has been
mentioned) that the Grandfather a member of the Church, may claim the
privilege of Baptism to his Grandchild, though his next Seed the Parents of
the Child be not received themselves into Church Covenant. Wherein nevertheless
we desire, so to be understood, not as presuming to judge others, who happily
may be of different opinion in this point, or to direct you, who are by the
grace of God given to you, able to direct your selves and us also in the Lord,
but as willing in meekness of wisdom to search out the truth of God with you,
and in brotherly Love to satisfy your request and demand touching this Question.

Now the God of truth and peace Lead you into all truth, and go on to build up
his holy Kingdom in the midst of you in the gracious Administration of all his
holy Ordinances amongst you in the Lord Jesus, In whom we rest.

Boston December. the 16 th. 1634. Your loving Brethren John Cotton Tho. Olliver.
Tho. Leveret


In the Name of the Church

Now this is a great Testimony, for if Anno 1634. which was amongst the
Primitive Times of these Churches, if then a Grand Father, such Cautions being
observed, as have been mentioned, being a member of a Church might claim the
Privilege of Baptism to his grand Child, though his next Seed the Immediate
Parents of the Child be not received themselves into full Communion, if then
also it were true, that there is a difference between an Infidel and a Carnal
Christian as then was amongst the Jews, a difference between an Heathen and a
Carnal Israelite, and that we may not account such Parents for Pagans and
Infidels, and so not their Children for unclean, who are themselves baptized,
and profess their belief of the Fundamental Articles of the Christian Faith,
and live without notorious scanda^^^s crime, though they give not clear
Evidence of their Regenerate Estate, if this were true doctrine, Anno 1634.
Posterity will see, who are the Apostates from the first Principles of
New England, whether they whose Principles are for an Enlargement of Baptism
unto some, whose next Parents are not fit for the Lords Supper, or they that do
oppose such a practice.

There is also to be seen anoth^r large and Judicious Letter of Mr. Cottons
written with his own han^ to a Friend of his in England touching accommodation
and Communion between those of the Presbyterian, and Congregational persw^sion,
The Letter bears date the 8.11. month 1648. and therein Mr. Cot^on delivers
his judgment in twelve propositions, which are too large here to be inserted,
only the eighth of these Propositions being directly to our purpose, we shall
here trans^ribe it, The words of it are these, If the godly members of a
Congregation formerly Subject to Episcopacy, repenting of their sinful
subordination thereto shall be studious of Reformation, and shall solemnly
Covenant to endeavor the same, and shall choose their former godly Ministers,
into the Pastors and Teachers office, it is not necessary they should take the
ignorant or Car^al members of the Parish into the fellowship of this renewed
Election of their Ministers, and yet it is not improbable, but the Ministers
may perform some Ministerial acts to them, as not only to preach the word to
them, but (happily) also to baptize their Children. For such members are like
the Church members, with us baptized in their Infancy, yet not received to the
Lords Supper, when they come to Age, nor admitted to fellowship of voting in
Admissions, Elections, Censures, till they come to profess their faith, and
repentance, and lay hold of the Covenant of their Parents before the Church.
And yet they being not cast out of the Church, nor the Covenant thereof, their
Children may be capable of the first Seal of the Covenant, so in this Case,
till the Parents themselves grow Scandalous, and thereby cast off, out of the
Covenant of the Church.

Also to a Reverend person yet surviving in this Country, who in a Letter
bearing date, 4.4 Month 1649 propounded this Question, A Father that was in
the Judgment of Charity one that feared the Lord, but no Church member, dies
and gives his Little Infant to a Church member and Brother of ours, which
brother having no Child of his own gladly accepts it, the quest^on is whether
such an adopted Child, may by the will of Christ be baptized or not. Mr.
Cottons. Answer was in these words, you^ Case of baptizing of the Child, of one
fearing God, and in his death giving his Child to a Church member, etc. I
propounded to some of our fellow Elders, Mr. Wilson. Mr. Elio^. and I think Mr.
Ma^her. and as I remember, they all inclined to the Affi^mative, their ground
was the Text in Genesis 17.12, 13. for mine own part I lean to the Affirmative; as
you put the Case, the Parent of this Child was not an Indian or Pagan, but a
Christian, and baptized himself, and so confederate with such a Church as we
renounce not, and I do not dissuade the ministering of the Seal of the Covenant,
where the Covenant it self is not wanting, etc.

Likevise in another Letter, which is extant, under Mr. Cottons own hand
writing, to one who thus objected, Carnal children are not fit to renew their
Covenant, whilst they are unfit to partake in the Seal of the Covenant, etc. He
replies in these words, Though they ^e not fit to make such profession of
visible faith, as to admit them to the Lords Table, yet they may make
profession full enough to receive them to Baptism, or to the same esta^e
Ishmael stood in after Circumcission.

And to one who complained of being in the dark about the truth asserted in Mr.
Cottons printed Book concerning the Baptism of Infants, and that amongst other
made this Objection, when (said that Scrupler) a child comes to know that his
Parents are no visible Saints, but appear to be contrary both in Life and
Doctrine, and the children had only words and water poured on them, how came
these persons to have right to it, the Parents having no visible faith to act
in that Ordinance, and their children likewise being incapable, to hold forth
the acts of faith before men. He thus Answers, Jeroboam and his wife were
neither of them visibl^ Saints, in your Sense, but appeared to be contrary both
in Life and Doctrine, yet the Circumcision of their Son was not in vain to him,
1 Kings 14.13. In this Case when the faith of the Parents is wanting, and yet
they still live within the Pale of the Church, though the Church be Corrupt,
and the Parents also, yet here the S^eech of the Apostle takes place, what
though some believed not, shall their unbelief make the faith of God of none
effect, God forbid, Romans 3. 3, 4. now the Faithfulness of God who keeps
Covenant and mercy to thousands, supplies the defect of the Faith of the next
Parents, and makes good his Covenant to the Children in respect of the Faith
of their former Ancestors in Elder Ages.

But against this some may object a passage in Mr. Cottons Book of the way of
the Churches, page 81. where it is said, where neither of the Parents can claim
right to the Lords Supper, their Infants cannot claim right to Baptism,
therefore it may seem, that Mr. Cottons Judgment was not as has been now
declared. Unto this, let the judicious Reader attentively hear the Answer,
which is, (1.) In that very Book of Mr. Cottons, there are sundry passages
which plead for an Enlargement of BapBaptisme, further then to the Immediate
Children of persons in full Communion, even to the Children of such Parents who
have such a faith a^* denominateth them Christian Believers in opposition to
Pagan Infidels, yea, if there be a Christian Sponsor for the Child of a
Stranger, or wicked man, it may be baptized, see the way, page 87.88.106, 115.

2 dly. That Book of the way was printed from an imperfect Copy, in which
respect it is not to be wondered at, if there be therein some passages
contradictory to Mr. Cottons known Judgment. (3.) Mr. Cotton himself was much
troubled when he saw that Book come forth, and was desirous that the Reader
should understand that his Judgment i^ such things, wherein the Book of the
way is discrepant from that of the Keys, should be sought for, not in the Book
of the way, but in that of the Keys. And that no one may think that these
things are Imaginary, or conjectural only, let us hear Mr. Cotton speaking in
his own words in his printed defense against the Imputations of Mr. Cawdrey
written not long before his death, and Published by Doctor Owen, In which Book
page 36.37, 38, 39. The truth is (says Mr. Cotton) that many years ago I was
seriously moved by some of our Brethren and Fellow Elders here to draw up an
Historical narration of our Church way, together with some familiar Grounds of
the same briefly. In short time as God helped, I dispatched it, which when our
Brethren had perused it; I saw they did not close with it, yet a Brother going
for England, got some where, a Copy of it, and presented it to some of the
Congregational way there, and I afterward heard, neither did they close with
it, and in particular not with that passage which is here recited -- which
since appears more openly, by the Asterisk put upon that passage, and upon
sundry other in the Book, but before I saw that, and had only heard, that they
did not fully accord, I hoped that it had met with a timely Suppression, rather
then an Impression, for I heard no more of it, for two or three years after,
mean while perceiving that one main point of dissatisfaction, was the Authority
gi^^n to the Fraternity, I consiered more se^iously and d^stinctly o^ the whole
power of the Keys, and expressed my apprehension^ in that treatise of the Ke^s
which our Brethren here did well accept, and so did the Brethren of like
Judgment in England, and some of them were pleased to attest it, with the
Preface that is now Extant before it* -- This was sundry years after the
Treatise of the way had been finished, and carried to England, and as I hoped
suppressed, but it seems some Brother there- caused his Copy, which was
indeed abrupt in the Entrance, and imperfect* otherwise to be published in
print, which when I saw, it troubled me not a little, as knowing that the
discrepant Expressions in the one, and in the other, might trouble Friends, and
give Advantages to Adversaries. I suffered both to stand as they did,
especially, seeing I could not help it, the Book of the way being published
without my Consent, and both the way and the Keys past my revoking, so that if
the Replier find some discrepancy in one of these Books from the other, Let him
know that the Doctrine of the way, in such few points, wherein it differs from
the Keys, was not mine, when the Keys was published, much less when the way was
published, which was many years after, though it had been penned many years
before.

Thus much may suffice for the clearing of Mr. Cottons Judgment, concerning
the Subject of Baptism. In the same year, and in the same Vessel, with Mr.
Cotton came into this Country that famous Mr. Thomas Hooker late Pastor of the
Church in Hartford upon Connecticot. Now that in Mr. Hookers Judgment, the
Children concerning whom the Question is, have a continued standing, and
membership in the visible Church (upon which hinge the Controversy about the
Enlargement of the Subject of Baptism turns) is evident from a passage in his
most Judicious and accurate Survey of Church Discipline, in which Book page 48.
are these words, in some Cases* (says Mr. Hooker) an Implicit Covenant, may be
fully Sufficient, as Suppose a whole Congregation should consist of such, who
were Children to the Parents now d^ceased, who were C^nfederate, their children
were true members, according to the R^^es of the Gospel by professing of their
Fathers Covenant, though they should not make any personal and vocal Expression
of their Engagement, as the Fathers did. Also he lays it down for a Maxim that
faederati sunt baptizandi proving by several Arguments that Confederates are
the proper Subject of Baptism, see in the same Book, part 3. page 11.12. Now
if they that are Confederate, and members of the visible Church, have a right
to Baptism, and if also the Children in Question are Confederate, and members
of the visible Church, both which are affirmed by Mr. Hooker, it must needs be
that in his Judgment, the Children in Question have right to Baptism.

At the same Time, and in the same Vessel with Mr. Cotton and Mr. H^oker, there
came the godly, learned, Mr. Samuel Stone, late Teacher of the Church in
Hartford, concerning whom, what his Judgment was, touching the now agitated
Controversies, is known from his practice in the last years of his Life. And
that his Judgment was ^uitable to that practice many years before his decease,
appears from a Letter of his written to the Reverend Mr. Mather of Dorchester,
and bearing date June 6. 1650. In which Letter he thus expresses himself. I
Conceive, (says Mr. Stone) that Children of Church members have right to
Church membership by virtue of their Fathers Covenant, it being granted that
they are in Abraham's Covenant, they have Membership by Birth, Gal. 2.15. (2
dly.) God is their God, Genesis 17.7. (3 dly.) They are Branches, Romans 11. (4.)
they are Subjects of Christ's visible Kingdom, Ezekiel. 37.25. Hence,

1. If they be presented to a Church, and Claim their Interest, they cannot be
denied, according to the Rules of the Gospel:

2. Hence there has been a sinful neglect in New England of such Children who
have either not been presented, or not Received, when they have claimed their
right. I spoke with Mr. Warham, and we question not the right of Children, but
we Conceive it would be Comfortable to have some Concurrence, which is that we
have waited for a Long Time. And I think unless there may be some Conference of
Elders this year in the Bay about it, that we may see some Reason to the
Contrary, our Churches will Adventure to practice according to their Judgment,
i. e. take in all such Children as members, I much desire that there may be
some meeting of the Elders this year, that these things may be Considered and
settled in the Churches, according to the mind of Christ, etc. These things do
sufficiently manifest what was the Judgment of Mr. Cotton, Mr. Hooker, and Mr.
Stone, who all three (as was Intimated) Came into New England in the same
Vessel, Anno 1633. And they may justly be reckoned amongst the first three of
New-Englands Worthies.

In the year 1635. God brought into this Country three more of our Worthies:
Another Tr^um^irate not unlike the former, viz. Mr. Mather, Mr. Norton and Mr.
Shepard, whose Judgment touching the Question before us, that it did Concur
with the Doctrine of the late Synod, will appear from the Sequel.

As for Mr. Mather late Teacher of the Church in Dorchester, what the
Apprehensions of that Reverend man of God were Concerning the present
Controversy in his Latter Time is well known. The Anci^nts had an opinion that
the (...) dying words of worthy men were Oraculous, because the Soul near its
transmigra^ion grows more Divine. Be that Notion as it is, yet the dying
Counsel of that blessed man to his Son, is of weighty Consideration. And that
Mr. Mather did not take up his persuasion concerning the Enlargement of
Baptism, in his last years only, but that he was of the same Judgment four
and twenty years and more, before his decease, is evident from some Manuscripts
of his left written with his own hand. For that Roverend Author did in the year
1645, prepare for the Press an elaborate discourse which he entituleth, A plea
for the Churches of Christ in New England, and in the second part of that
discourse, which contains positive grounds from Scripture and Reason for the
Justification of the way of the Churches of Christ in New England, there is
this Question propounded.

Quest. When those that were baptized in Infancy by the Covenant of their
Parents being come to Age, are not yet found fit to be received to the Lords
Table, although they be married and have Children, whether are those their
Children to be baptized or no. The Answer is in these words, I propound to
Consideration this Reason for the Affirmative, viz. That the Children of such
Parents ought to be baptized: the Reason is, the Parents as they were born in
the Covenant, so they still continue therein, being neither cast out, nor
deserving so to be, and if so, why should not their Children be baptized, for
if the Parents be in Covenant, are not the Children so likewis^? Is not the
Tenor of the Covenant, I will be a God to thee and to thy Seed? Is not the
Text plain? Act. 2.39. the promise is to you and to your Children. And if these
Children be in the Covenant, why should they no^ be admitted to the Seal of the
Covenant, Since they are partakers of that, which is one main ground, why other
Infants are admitted thereto? does it not seem unreasonable that these Infants
being partakers of the ground of Baptism as well as others, that nevertheless
others should be admitted and these be refused? If other Infants were admitted
to Baptism upon some ground, whereof these were not partakers, then there
might be Reason to make a difference between these Infants and others, but if
the ground and Reason of admitting others, be Common to these as well as to
others, it seems then to be Reasonable, that these as well as others should
share in the privilege. If their Parents were cast out of the Church by
Censures, or fall^ away from the same by wilful Apostasy and Schism, or
deserving to be Cast out by reason of Scandal, then there were more Reason that
their Infants should be excluded from the Seal: But since no such thing can be
said of the Parents of whom we speak, a good Reason should be given, why their
Infants are debarred? for if it be said the Parents are not Confirmed members,
nor have yet been found fit for the Lords Table, I conceive this needs not to
hinder their Infants from Baptism so long as they, I mean the Parents do
neither renounce the Covenant, nor does the Church see just Cause to Cast them
out from the same: for it is not the Parents fitness for the Lords Supper, that
is the ground of baptizing their Children, but the Parents and so their
Children being in the Covenant, this is that which is the main ground thereof;
and as long as this does Continue, not dissolved by any Church Censure against
them, nor by any Scandalous Sin of theirs, so long the Children may be
baptized.

These words are to be seen written with Mr. Mathers own hand, Anno 1645. Now
if six and twenty years ago in a Book written i^ defense of the Churches in New
England, When this Collection of Test^monies was first composed, it was but 26
years but now it is 29 years since that Book was written.
and in justification of the way of ^hese Churches, it were true Doctrine that
persons might have right to Baptism for their Children, and yet themselves not
be fit for the Lords Table: If six and twenty years ago, this was written in a
Book, whose whole design was to Justify the way of these Churches, how then
can it be said, that the present pleading for such Enlargement of Baptism is
any Apostasy from Primitive Principles? Also the same thing was Asserted and
urged by this Reverend Author in his Model of Church Government presented to
the Synod, Anno 1647. And in the years 1648. and 1649. he did frequently in his
public Ministry in Dorchester thus instruct his people as is to be seen in the
Sermon Notes left written propri^ manu. And in the year 16^3. this Question was
fully, largly, and Elaborately discussed by the same Author. Also in a Letter
to a Friend, bea^ing date 30 th. 5 Month 1651. He thus expresses himself, for
my part my thoughts have been this long Time, that our Churches in general do
fall short in their practice of that which the Rule requires in this
particular, which I think ought to be thus, viz. that the Children of Church
members submitting themselves to the Discipline of Christ in the Church, by an
act of their own, when they are grown up to men's and women's Estate, ought to be
watched over as other members, and to have their Infants baptized, but
themselves not to be received to the Lords Table, nor to voting in the Church,
till by the ma^^festation of Faith and Repentance, they shall approve
themselves to be fit for the same. But we have not yet thus practiced, but are
now Considering of the matter, and of sending to other Churches for advice.
Help us I pray you with your prayers that we may have grace to discern, and do
the Lords mind and will herein. So that in the year 1651. it bad for a long
Time been the Judgment of this S^er, that some have right to Baptism for
their Children, that yet have not right to the Lords Supper for themselves. But
against this Testimony some may object a passage in Mr. Mathers printed
Catechism, page ^1. This holy man was sensible that some did take Advantage
from an Expression therein, to impute unto him a change of Judgment, touching
this Question, which had it been so indeed, Ad meliora transire ^ullus pud^^,
it is no dishonor to any man to change for the better, but concerning this
Question, that Reverend man altered not, but was all along of the same
Apprehension, wherefore knowing in his own heart that he was of the very same
Judgment, when that Catechism was written, as in his last years he was of, he
therefore left a Manuscript in his Study to clear himself from such an
Imputation, which for his Vindication, we shall therefore here Insert and
publish* The words are as follow.

This Question who ought to be baptized being thus Answered in a Catechism,
viz. men of years when once they are converted to the Faith, and joined to the
Church, and such Infants whose Parents, both, or one of them are so Converted
and joined: The Question therefore now is, whether this Answer if sound and
true, do infer that the Children of Persons Converted and joined to the Church
being now Adult, and having Children, may not be so qualified, as to have these
their Children Baptized a^ore they who are now the Parents, be fit for the
Lords Supper, or if he that Answered the Question in the Catechism as above,
do think they may, does not this infer a change in that man's Apprehension, from
what it formerly was?

Answer. It seems not at all to infer any such change

1. Because these Apprehensions are no way contrary to one another, nor at all
Inconsistent: For if a man say, that the Children last mentioned may be
baptized, this does not at all infer, that men of years converted to the Faith,
and Joined to the Church, may not be baptized, nor that such Infants may not be
baptized, whose Parents, one, or both, are so Converted and joined, Nor if a
man Answer that such as the Catechism speaks of may be baptized, does this
infer, that those others may not, there is no Color sure, no just ground for
such Consequence, no more then if one should say, that such as are become
Believers by hearing the Word preached are to be baptized, (which is a very
Truth, Act. 2.41 and 8.12, 37. and 18 8.) it could thence be proved, that no
Infants are to be baptized, as not being become Believers, at least not by that
means of hearing, preaching, this would in no sort follow from the other, as if
one should say, that such as do the will of God upon Earth shall enter into
Heaven, and that such as feed Christ when hungry, cloth him being naked; shall
be saved in Heaven, which are very true, Matthew. 7.21. and 25 34, etc. does this
prove that Little Infants, and the Thief upon the Cross must not be saved,
because the one through Imbecility of Age, and the other through want of
opportunity, did not perform the things mentioned, it does not prove it at all,
but that Salvation in Heaven may be the Portion of these as well as of the
others; even so though such as the Catechism speaks of, are to be baptized, it
does not thence follow, but that the Ordinance may be dispensed, to the Infants
of such members Children as are mentioned, and though it be dispensed to such,
this is no denial but that such as the late Catechism speaks of, may be
baptized, so that here is no Contradiction between the things Alleged, but
that both may be true and consist together.

2 dly. If the words in the Catechism had any Exclusive particle in them,
there had been some more ground or Color for the Inference; as if the words
had been thus, only these, or none but these are to be baptized? but any such
Exclusive or Negative particle there is none, and therefore the Collection or
Inference from them which is made is groundless.

3 dly. The Author of the aforesaid Catechism which was printed in the year
1650. had sundry Times before in the years 1646. 1648. 1649. publicly
delivered his Judgment, both by word of mouth, and by writing that such
Children of Church members might have their Infants baptized, though themselves
were not yet received to the Lords Supper, and so diverse Times again in the
years following. And therefore it is not probable, that what is expressed in
the said Catechism should be intended by him to have such a meaning as is
quite Contrary to what himself had publicly Delivered both before, and after,
and that at sundry Times, and in several ways.

4 ly. Other Authors of much worth for holiness and Learning, who never meant
to deny Baptism to such Children of Church members as are spoken of, yet in
Answer to that Question, who ought to be baptiz^d? or to whom is Baptism to be
administered, have expressed themselves in Terms, not far unlike to those in the
aforesaid Catechism, Mr. Balls words are these, who ought to be baptized?
Answ. Infidels Converted to the Faith, and the Infants of one, or both
Christian Parents. Catechism. And the Assembly of Divines at Westminster,
speak thus.

Quest. Unto whom is Baptism to be admin^st^ed?

Answ. Baptism is not to be administered to any that are out of the Visible
Church, and so strangers from the Covenant of Promise, till they profess their
Faith in Christ, and obedience to him, But Infants descending from parents,
either both, or but one of them professing Faith in Christ, and obedience to
him, are in that respect within the Covenant, and to be baptized- Larger
Catechism. These words we see are not far unlike to those in the Catechism
before mentioned, and yet it were a Collection far from their meaning, to
gather from these words, that none should have Baptism for their Children,
except themselves were fit for the Lords Supper: Sure such an Apprehension was
never taught nor intended by them; why then should it be thought to be
Contained in the words of the aforesaid Catechism, or deducted from them,,
when as the words there, and in these Reverend Authors are so very like, even
so very like, that the Collection or deduction mentioned is either found and
just from both, or from neither.

5 ly. If the Parents spoken of may notwithstanding their unfitness for that
Ordinance of the Lords Supper, yet be truly said to be Converted to the Faith,
and joined to the Church, then the appearance of Contradiction is at an end.
Now for the one of these Qualifications, viz. That they be Converted to the
Faith, if Faith be taken as it often is for the Doctrine of Faith, as Act. 6.7.
Iud. 3. then it is evident that the Parents spoken of, are not destitute of
this Faith, because it is required of them, that they understand the Doctrine
of Faith, and publicly profess their Assent thereto; And if Faith be taken for
the grace of Faith in the heart, why may they not be said to have Faith in this
Sense also, seeing it is required of them, that besides their understanding the
Doctrine of Faith, and their professing their Assent thereto, that they must
also not be Scandalous in Life, but solemnly own the Covenant, and therein give
up themselves and their Children to the Lord. And does not this imply some
beginning of Faith? Can persons have all these Qualifications, and yet for all
this be utterly destitute of the grace of Faith? It seems not suitable to
Cha^ity to judge so. And in as much as men have neither Faith, nor any thing
that good is by Nature, therefore they that have it may be said to be converted
to it, and so the Parents, the baptizing of whose Children is in Question, are
not without the one of the Qualifications mentioned in the Catechism, viz. of
being Converted to the Faith. And for the other, viz. of being joined to the
Church, this cannot be denied touching these Parents, for as much, as by means
of the Covenant, which takes in Parents and Children, they have been either
born in the Church, or taken in, in their Infancy, and so they were joined to
the Church, If so, they continue still, being neither Cast out, nor deserving
so to be, and therefore their Infants are the Children of Parents joined to the
Church. And lest it should be said, that though they were in the Church in
their Infancy and minority, yet now being Adult, they fall out, or go out by
their own default, in neglecting the duty pertaining to the Adult, therefore
for the preventing of this, it is here said, that they solemnly owned the
Covenant before the Church, and therein give up themselves and their Children
to the Lord, etc. So that here is a personal and public act of their own, in
respect of the Covenant, and giving up themselves and their Children to the
Lord, by their own act, with a Subjection of themselves to the Government of
Christ in his Church, whereby it appears that as these Parents were in the
Church in their minority, and were never since Cast out, so neither are they
fallen out by their own neglect; But do manifest their Continuance in the
Church, and in the Covenant by their own personal act. And so the other
Qualification of Parents, whose Children are to be baptized, which the
Catechism mentioned, is found in the Parents spoken of, viz. that they are
persons joined to the Church, and therefore he that affirms tha^ these may have
their Children baptized, does not Contradict the forementioned Catechism at
all, nor is there any thing in the Catechism against the baptizing of these
Children.

This which has been expressed, may be suffieient for the vindication of that
Reverend and Honored person.

We proceed rherefore to Mr. Nortons Judgment concerning the present
Controversy, and that the Apprehensions of that Judicious and Eagle eyed Seer
did Concur with those Servants of the Lord, which have been mentioned, is
apparent, both from what himself did often publicly teach, not only in Boston,
but in Ipswich; and from a Script composed Anno 1654. by that learned hand,
which because it is acute, clear, and distinct, (according to the wonted manner
of that great Author) and because it was never yet published, we shall
therefore here Insert it: It is that which follows.

Quest. Whether the Children of Parents in Church Covenant are Church members
and ought to be baptized.

Answ. Children of Parents in Church Covenant are Church members, and ought to
be baptized. This Answer stands upon the proof of these five propositions.

1. Children are capable of Confederating in a public person.

2. Children by divine Institution have Confederated, and do still Confederate
in their Parents as public persons.

3. By virtue of this Confederation Children are made Church members.

4. The membership of Children Confederating in their Parents is a distinct
membership from the membership of their Parents

5. This distinct membership gives them a proper right unto Baptism, so as
they are baptized by their own right, and not by the right of their Parents.

Proposition. I.

1. Children are capable of Confederating in a public person:

A public person is when some one of a Society does by the Law in such an Act
stand for the whole Society. So he that is but one person Physically, is
Politically as many persons as the Law makes him, Since Religion and Reason
both allow and require human^ Laws to create such public persons for the good
of the Community, much more may we see Cause, why they may be constituted, by
the divine Law of him, whose Sole Prerogative it is, that he may do whatsoever
he pleases.

2. That Children though they are incapable of Confederating in their proper
Persons, yet are Capable of Confederating in a public person, appears.

1. From the nature of God, whose will is the Rule of Rules, and Reason of all
Reasons, Bradward. de Causa Dei l. 1 Corol. 32 Polan* Synt. l. 6.^.^.
nonne cuilibet Christiano imo and prophan^, pro demonstratione s^fficere debet.

Nam quod illius (sc. Adami) voluntas suit nostra and nos in illo voluimus,
verum est, sed ratio hujus veritatis, nulla est preterquam voluntas Creatoris;
nur quam aliter intelliges, justum fuisse ^os omnes nasci miseros p^opter ^mus
hominis peccatum.

2. From the Lordship of God, who may impose upon the reasonable Creature
whatsoever duty he pleaseth^

3. From the nature of a Creature, which ow^th unto God what duty he will call
for.

4. From the nature of Community, where the absent, yea, those that are unborn,
are obliged by the deed of their Plenipotentiary acting Legally, 2 Samuel 21 1.
Joshua 9.7, 15, 18. Ioshuahs Covenant with the Gibionites bound Saul.

Proposition II.

Children by divine Institution have Confederated, and do still Confederate in
their Parents as public Persons. 1. Mankind considered in Adam, Genesis 2.17.
Romans 5.12. 1 Cor. 15.22.

2. Abraham's Children born in his house, and also his Seed in their
Generations, Confed^rated in Abraham, Genesis 17.7, 25, 27.

3. The Posterity of Israel entered into Covenant in the Act of their
Progenitors, (...) Horeb soon after their coming out of Egypt, Ezekiel. 16 60. the
absent and Children yet unborn renewed Covenant in the Act of Israel in the
plains of Moab, Deuteronomy. 29.

4 Children under the Gospel Confederate in their Parents, because to the
Children of Parents in Covenant, that promise Genesis 17 7. does belong, Acts
2.39. because they are holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. which Holiness cannot be understood
to be any but external Holiness, nor can that external be reasonably
interpreted of any but Church holiness suitable to the like phrase, Romans 11.16.
-- Because Children are baptized, which Baptism is the Gospel Circumcision,
Col. 2.11, 12. therefore in Church Covenant, but Covenant they do not in their
proper persons, therefore in their public persons, viz* their Parents.

5. Either Children under the Gospel are Confederate in their Parents, or
Children may not be baptized or non-members may be baptized, but children are
to be b^ptiz^d, and non-members are not to be baptized. Therefore Children
under the Gospel are Confederate in their Parents. That Children are to be
baptized is with ^s granted, that non members are not to be baptized appears
thus. External Baptism is an external Seal of the external, not only of the
internal Covenant. Baptism as touching the substantial part thereof, succeeds
Circumcision in place and use. As therefore Circumcision was applied only to
such as were in Covenant, so should it be with Baptism.

2 dly. they who are not Subject to the Church Government, have no right to
Church privileges, of which Baptism is a principal one. but non members are
not Subject to Church Government, Therefore etc

3 dly. They with whom the Church have nothing to do, have no right to that
thing which can only be done in a Church as such. But with non-members the
Church have nothing to do, 1 Cor. 5.12. Therefore etc.

4 ly. If to baptize in ordinary dispensation is only a Shepardly office act,
then to be baptized is the privilege only of the Flock But to baptize is in
ordinary dispensation only a Shepardly Office act, Math^ 28.19. The Reason of
the Consequence is, Shepard and Flock are Relatives, and Relatorum mutuu^ est
ambitus. The walk of Relates is of equal extent.

5 ly. If Infant non-members have right to Baptism, then Adult non-members; if
so, then why may not non-members come to the Lords Supper.

Proposition III.

By virtue of this Confederation Children are made Church Members.

1. That in Children which gives that fo^m of membership makes Children
Church members, But Confederation gives the Form of Church membership.
Therefore Confederation makes Children Church members.

2 dly. That whereupon God declares Children to be in Covenant with him to be
holy, and to have right unto Church Privileges, makes Children to be Church
members. But upon Confederation God declares Children to be in Covenant with
him to be holy, and to have right to Church Privileges, Genesis 17. 1 Cor. 7.14.
Acts 2.39. therefore Confederation makes Children to be Church members.

3 dly. That which distinguishes between Children in Church Estate and Children
not in Church Estate, makes Children Church members. But Confederation
distinguishes between Children in Church Estate and Children not in Church
Estate, therefore Confederation, etc.

4 ly. Either Children are members by Confederation, or there may be given some
other way of their membership, or all Children are non-members. But neither can
there be given any other way of their membership, neither is it a true
Proposition, that all Children are non-members; therefore, etc.

Proposition IV.

This distinct membership gives them a proper right unto Baptism, so as they
are not baptized by the right of their Parents, but by their own right. (1.)
Such as their membership is, such is their right unto Baptism. But their
membership as has been already proved is distinct, therefore their right to
Baptism is distinct. (2 dly.) That Covenant which Contracteth upon the
delinquent, a proper guilt in order unto punishment conferreth upon the
obedient a proper right; and in order unto Privileges. But the Covenant of
Infants Contracteth upon them Delinquent a proper guilt in order unto
punishment, Ezekiel. 16.59. therefore it Conferreth upon the obedient a proper
right in order unto Privileges. (3 dly.) If the Children of the Jews in
Covenant had a proper right to Circumcision, then their Children of Believers
in Covenant, have a proper right to Baptism. But the Children of the Jews in
Covenant had a proper right to Circumcision: In case of the Parents Ceremonial
uncleanness, the Parents notwithstanding their membership were suspended from
Communion in the holy things, yet was the Child even then notwithstanding the
Parents Su^pension to be Circumcised the eighth day*

4 ly. If Confederate Children are to be baptized notwithstanding the Parents
be not members, then they are to be baptized, not by their Parents but by their
own membership. But Confederate Children are to be baptized, notwithstanding
their Parents be not members, as in Case of the Parents death or Censure
falling out after their Childrens being, and before the Time of their Baptism,
therefore Child^en are baptized by their own membership; Though the membership
of the Parent is by Divine Institution Instrumental to the membership of the
Child, for God institutes such only to be public persons) yet the membership
of the Child remains, though the membership of the Parent cease, Paul's
freedom by birth lives after his Fathers death, Acts 22.28. the effect
continues, though the Instrument be extinct.

1. Object. In case the Parents themselves be not admitted to ^ull Communion,
or that they lie under offense, it seems then their Children ought not to be
baptized.

Answ. We must carefully distinguish between the Parents standing as a public
person, and between the Parents standing as a single person, the Child is
contained in the Parent ^n^y when he stands as a public person, not when he
stands as a single person. Hence only the Confederation, not the condition of
convers^tion of the Parent is imputed to the Child. As Adam was a public
person, in the first transgression, therefore the first transgression was
imputed to his posterity, not only to ^im, R^m. 5 1^* (...) in his after
transg^^s^^ons he was in this respect but a single* (...) public person,
there^^re they are imputed only unto him, and not to h^s Posterity

2 Object. Members are complete or incomplete: Children are members incomplete,
not complete.

Answer 1. Did this distinction hold, yet that the incompleatness of Childrens
membership is not such why they should be hindered from being baptized, is clear
from Pedo-Baptisme.

2 dly. Members are to be considered either in respect of their Communion, or
in respect of their membership. In respect of their Communion they may be said
to be complete or incomplete; because Communion receives more or less, and may
be enjoyed either in whole or in part, But if members be considered, in respect
of membership which is the present Query, then they cannot be said to be
complete, or incomplete, because membership being a Relation does not receive
more or less, as a little member is as truly a member as the greatest, the hand
of a Child is truly a hand, and member of the whole as the hand of a man.

Object. ^. Membership is Immediate, viz when these that are Adult Confederate
in their own person^. Mediate, viz when Infants Confederate in a public person
as Mankind Confederated in Adam.


1 Answer. Though Adam Confederated in his own person. i. e. although it be the
person of Adam that Confederated, yet Adam himself Confederated not as a single
person, but as a public person, so as though Adam and the Parents of Children
Confederate Immediately, i. e. in their own persons, yet do they not
confederate as single persons. In this notion, Scil. of not confederating as
single persons, the Condition of both mediate, and Immediate members are alike.

2 dly. The validity of membership depends not upon the Instrument or medium to
wit, the Parents standing as a public person in the Act of Confederation, but
upon the Institution of God in Christ, the value and virtue of the effect here
cannot depend, upon the medium (which is it self also an Arbitrary Effect) but
upon the supreme and Independent Cause, The membership of a male Child
Confederating mediately, i. e. in the public person of the Mother, excels
the memb^rship of the Mother Confederating Immediately in her own person,
because the Mother though she be a Church member, yet is not capable of being a
member constituent of the Church (for only Brethren constitute a Church, in
that they alone be capable of being the Subject of the power of the Keys, 1
Cor. 14.34. 1 Timothy 2.12.) so as should the Brethren dye, the Sisters surviving
could not continue a Church, but would immediately cease to be Church members,
yet her male Child is not only a Church member, but is also capable of being a
member Constituent of the Church.

3 dly. The Cause why a member is not admitted to such and such Communion, is
not any defect in membership, but some defect concerning the qu^lification of
the member. The mother notwithstanding her membership is inferior to the
membership of her male Child, (she being as was said before a member of the
Church, but not a member Constituent of a Church) is admitted to the Supper,
yet the Child is not. A man or woman Adult* Confederating in their own persons
immediately upon some offense possibly falling out or discovered between their
Admission and intended Baptism, may not be baptized, where as a Child
Confederated in his public person is to be baptized.

Object. 4. Children in their Nonage are by their Parent^ only materially, and
not by themselves formally and actually member^.

Answ. Members potentially are such only in possibility, but as yet non-members
actually. Membership is had two waye^, either by Confederating in a public
person, or by Confederating in our own persons, Children are actually and
formally members by Confederation in their public person, not in their own
persons: they who have the matter and Form of membership, are actually members.
Children Confederate in their Parents have the matter and Form of membership,
viz. Holiness, Mal. 2.15. Romans 11 16. 1 Cor. 7.14. And Confederation in their
Parents as their public person, Genesis 17. Acts 2.39. therefore Infants
Confederate in their Parents were actually and formally, not potentially
Circumcised under the Law they are actually and formally, not poten^ially
baptized under the Gospel, therefore they are actually and formally, and not
only potentially members. If Mankind Confederated actually in Adam, their
public person, when they did not so much as exist in their proper persons,
then may children actually existing in their proper persons, actually
Confederate in their public person. But Mankind not yet existing in their
proper persons, Confederated in Adam their public person. Peccatum Adami non
fuit alienum sed^^iam nostrum peccatum A^a ni fuit voluntarium suo m^do
re^p^ctu nost^i quia ut fuimus in Adamo nostro Parents, ita volu^mus in ^^lo,
Ved^l^^s de De (...).
seu voluntas illa Adami fuit voluntas totius Ma^sa. That Speech of Thomas
though used by him to another purpose may aptly be applied here, peccatum Adami
fuit gravius nostris secundum circumstantio personae non autem secu^dum
speciem. ^om. 22. (...) 163.3.


If children so soon as they exist are actually guilty of a Cov^nant broken,
then children as soon as they exist are capable of actually Confederating,
breaking of a Covenant supposes the being of a Covenant that cannot be broken,
that never had a being. A^ ^st Tertii adjecti ad est secundi adjecti valet
Consequentia. But children so soon as they exist are guilty of a Covenant
broken, witness Original Sin actually inflicted upon children as the punishment
of their Sin in Adam. God does not punish actually such as are only Sinners
potentially, but as yet have not actually sinned. Neither does childrens
incapacity, to exert Church acts deny them to be actually Church members, for
then Brethren under offense before any Censure, brethren infirmed, by some
sinless Accident, yea, brethren when asleep should all of them be potentially
only, and not actually Church members. Nor does Childrens incapacity to Vote or
Constitute ^ Church, deny them to be actually Church members, for thence it
would follow, that the Sisters were only potentially, and not actually Church
members

More needs not to be said of Mr. Nortons Judgment concerning this Subject, we
come to Mr. She^ards, sometime Pastor of the Church in Cambridg in New England,
who besides his eminent abilities, was a man of much real and living Communion
with God, and therefore more like to know the mind of Christ, then many others*
Now in a Letter of his (Dated June 1649. which was not three monethe before his
decease) he does assert and prove, that Children are members of the visible
Church, and that their membership continues when Adult, and that the Children
of Believers are to be accounted of the Church until they positively reject the
Gospel, and that the membership of Children has no tendency in it, to pollute
the Church any more now, then under the Old Testament, and that children are
under Church discipline, and that some persons Adult may be admitted to
Baptism, and yet not to the Lords Supper, etc. The whole Letter being already
published, we shall not here insert it, or any thing further concerning it,
only assure the Reader that the Letter it self (even the (...)) is still to be
seen, as it was written by Mr. Shepards own hand. Al^o the same Author in his
printed defense of the nine positions, page 143. does maintain the Church
membe^ship of child^en and their Subjection to Discipline. In the year after
these mentioned, viz. Anno 1636. here arrived two other of New-Englands
Worthies. Namely, Mr. Ralph Partrich, and Mr. Nathaniel Rogers. As for Mr.
Partrich sometim^s faithful Pastor of the Church in Duxberry in Plymouth
Colony, what his Judgment was touching the present controversy, is to be seen
from that Model of Church Discipline, which was by him composed and presented
to the Synod at Cambridge, Anno 1648. and which is still ex^ant under the hand
writing of the Reverend Author, in which Manuscript are these words. The
persons unto whom the Sacrament of Baptism is dispensed (and as we conceive
ought to be) are such as being of years, and converted from their Sins to the
Faith of Jesus Christ, do join in Communion and Fellowship with a particular
visible Church, as also the children of such Parents or Parent, as having laid
hold of the Covenant of grace (in the judgment of Charity) are in a visible
Covenant, with his Church and all their Seed after them that cast not off the
Covenant of God by some Scandalous and obstinate going on in Sin, as may appear
by Math. 28.19. and 1 Cor. 7.14. with Genesis 17, etc. compared.

Thus for Mr. Partrich his Judgment. Concerning Mr. Nathaniel Rogers late
eminent Pastor of the Church of Ipswi^h in New England, that his Judgment did
concur with the Doctrine of the late Synod touching Baptism; is certain from
what himself did publicly teach some years before his Decease. Also from a
Letter of his written to the Reve, rend Mr. Richard Mather some years before
Mr. Rogers went to his Rest, which Letter still remains under the Authors own
hand writing, we shall therefore insert, the substance of it, which follows.

Reverend and dear Sir,
I Received a Letter with a Book from you, and do return you this Testimony of
my most thank^ul acceptance of your kindness and good will both in your Letter
an^ wor^hy Treatise of Justification, which (as yours are wont to be) is
nervou^, and this is c^mp (...) in a special manner, and yet persp^cu^us I see
my defect^^^ He^. De^^s matters supplied by your Diligence. To the Question
concerning the Children of Chuch members, I have nothing to oppo^e, and I
wonder any should deny them to be members. - They are members in Cens^
Ecclesiastico. God so calls them, the Church is so to acc^unt thew, and when
they are A^ul^ae a atis, though having done no p^^sonal act, yet are to be
judged membe^s still, until after due Calling upon, they shall refuse or
neglect to a knowledge and ^wn the Covenant of their Parents, and profess the^^
belief of, and Subjection to the Contents thereof, which if they shall deny,
the Church may Cashier or disown them, -- Now for practice I confess I account
it a great default, that we have made no more real distinction, between these
and others, that they have been no more attended as the Lambs of the flock of
Christ, and whether it be not the cause of the corruption and woeful defection
of our youth, disqui^i permittimus We are this week to meet in the Church about
it, and I know nothing but we must speedily fall to practice. If we in this
shall be Leaders, I pray beg wisdom from the Father of Lights, and him who is
our Wisdom as well as our Rig^^eousness, I commit you to the blessed Communion
of the Spirit of the Lord Jesus, and rest*

XI. 1^. 1652. Yours in him Cordially N. Rogers


These Testimonies are more then abundantly sufficient to evince that the first
Fathers of this Country were for that Enlargement of Baptism, which the late
Synod Book pleads for, And that therefore such a practice is no Apostasy from
our Primitive Principles: yet further Testimonies might be superadded unto
these, for Mr. Henry Sm^^h sometime^ Minister of the Word at Wethersfield on
Connecticot; In a Letter of his dated August 23. Anno 1647. (which Letter was
also written to Mr. Mather) thus expresses himself, we are at a Loss in our
parts about members Children, being received into Communion, because it is
undetermined, in the extent of it, at the Synod, our thoughts here are that the
promise made to the Seed of Confederates, Gen: 17. takes in all Children of
Confederating Parents, whether baptized here, or else where, whether younger or
Elder, if they do either expressly or otherwise may be Conceived in the
Judgment of Charity to Consent thereunto. Now because many have Children grown
up, which were born in England, who would gladly expres^ their Consent, and
desire to their Parents Covenant, only we are loath to walk alone, in the thing;
we could heartily wish we had the Concurrence of your Judgment, etc. Thus Mr.
Smith^

Likewise, Mr. Prudden late faithful Pastor of the Church in Milford in
New Haven Colony in New England in a Letter to the same Reverend person, which
the last mentioned was sent unto, does not only express his own thoughts, but
gives Reason for his belief, concerning the Question under Agitation, with
whose Testimony we shall conclude, And because his Letter is of Weighty and
worthy ConsideConsideration, albeit part of it (as of that of Mr. Rogers) is
already published in the Preface to the Synod Book yet) we shall here insert,
the substance of it, which now follows, Dear Brother.
I was glad at the receipt of your Letters, but I am sorry to hear of such
breaches in Churches, and no way nor means found out and applied for healing,
which I fear with you does strengthen the Presbyterian Objection against our
Congregational way, when the writings of some for our defense, and our practice
agree not in that particular. I think with you that man to be much blessed,
whom God should make helpful in those things; though as he has but little
encouragement to attempt it, so can he expect less thanks from man who possibly
may have erred, but loath to be judged so to have done. -- Touching your own
Exercises you are not alone in them, the power of the Elders in preparing
matters of offense and other things for the Church, has been much questioned by
some, But methinks that which Mr Hooker has written in the Case (Survey pt.
3d. page 33.) should satisfy those who are not of a Contentious Spirit, I had
Conference with him about this matter, in his life time. And the Sum of what
he has now written, he then expressed and told me withal, that if a Case
should be presented to the Church, in any other way by the Brethren he would
refuse to act in it, unless the Church would first dispute the point which he
would offer, but act against his Judgment he would not, It Is true that the
Rule requires to tell the Church in due order by the Officers, as he that
Commands one to go into his house, intends that he should go in by the door.

The Elders are Captains, and Leaders, and Rulers, Heb. 13.17. 1 Timothy, 5.18. And
therefore the Brethren must not go before them, A common Soldier must not
begin or make an Attempt without the Captain. And the Elders being Leaders and
Rulers, they are to order all the public occasions, and affairs of the Church,
in a comely manner which they cannot do, if the Brethren have Liberty at their
pleasure to publish what seems best to themselves. Touching the desire of such
members Children as desire to have their Children baptized, it is a thing that
I do not yet hea^ p^acticed, but for my own part I am inclined ^o think, that
it cannot justly be denied, because (...) Parents however not admitted to the
Lords Supper) stand as Complete members of the Church, within the Church
Covenant, and so acknowledged that they might have right to Baptism. Now they
being in Covenant and standing members, their Children also are members by
virtue of their Parents Covenant and Membershi^, as well as they themselves
were by virtue of their Covenant and membership, and they have not renounced
that Covenant, nor are justly Censured for the breach of that Covenant, but do
own and profess it, and by virtue of it claim the Privilege of it to their
Children Those Child^en who are within the Covenant, and so members of it
Bapti^me cannot be denied unto. But the Children in Question are within the
Covenant of the Church, and so members of it, Ergo, Baptism cannot be denied
to them. The assumption is proved thus, the Children of such Parents, as are
within the Covenant of the Church, are themselves within the Covenant of that
Church, and so members. But the Children in Q^estion are the Children of such
Parents, as are in Covenant, and so members of the Church, Ergo, they are so
themselves. The Proposition is clear, because the Parents Covenant for
themselves and for their Children, Deuteronomy. 29. from 10, to 16. Ezekiel. 16.8, 13.
And God accepts both, Genesis 17.12, 13. the whole Nation is faederally holy, they
are expressly said to be in Covenant with their Father, Deuteronomy. 29. not partly,
or partially in Covenant, Romans 9.3, 4. Acts 2.39. and God styles himself their
God, as well as their Father, Genesis 17.7, 8, 9. and to have God to be our God is
to be in Complete Church Covenant with him. The assumption is evident, because
else such their Parents had not had right to Baptism, the Seal of the
Covenant: but that they had right unto, and so received it, and the same right
they had, the Children have, who are included in their Covenant, as they were
in their Fathers, If it be said that their Fathers did expressly engage and
Covenant, but these not. I Answer, that the Covenant is the same, and of the
same force to bind, and of the same extent, in the one as well as the other:
Explicit and I^plicite, are but adjuncts of the Covenant, and therefore though
they are not come into Covenant, the same way that their Parents did, viz. by
^xplicite personal Covenanti^g, but are taken in by the Father Covenanting for
them and themselves, yet it seems to me, that they are not less truly, or less
Completely in Covenant. The God of Peace and Truth guide us in those ways. I
rest

Milford June 12. 1651. Your loving Brother Peter Prudden.




Unto these might have been added the Testimony of that Reverend and faithful
Servants of Christ Mr. John Wilson, the first Pastor of the first Church in
Boston. But his Judgment touching the question in hand is known to all that
knew him. And the Reader is referred to his dying Speeches, concerning this
matter which are inserted in the Book called New Englands memorial. (page
183.184.) which because they were amongst the last words of so holy a man,
cannot without great sin be despised or disregarded. Also we might have
mentioned the Judgment of Reverend Mr. Norris; which that it did Concur with
what has been expressed, is to be seen from the Records of the Church in
Salem, viz. in their Records of the 24 th. of the first Month: And of the 9th.
of the fifth Month and sixth Month, Anno 1654. Likewise we might have
produced the Judgment of Mr. Philips sometimes the faithful Pastor of the
Church in Watertown, but the Reader is for that referred to the Preface in the
Synod Book.

Also that some godly and Judicious of the Congregational way in England, are
for a greater Latitude in the point of Baptism, then our dissenting
Antisynodalian Brethren do acknowledge, is manifest from what sundry Learned
men of that way have long since published. For Doctor Owen in his review of
Schism, page 134 thus expresses himself, I am so far from confining Baptism
subjectively to a particular Congregation, that I do not believe that any
m^mber of a particular Church was ever regularly baptized; baptism precedes
Admission into Church membership as to a particular Church, the Subject of it
is professing Believers and their Seed, as such, they have right unto it,
whether they be joined to any particular Church, or no, suitable to this
Judgment has been my Constant and uninterrupted practice.

Likewise Doctor Nathaniel Homes in his defense of Infant Baptism against Mr.
Tombs, has these words, (page 193.) for baptizing of Believers Infants,
several Churches of us do hold, that we may baptize them, though neither of
their Parents be of our particular Churches. Baptism as we conceive being an
Admission into the universal visible Church, etc. And again, ( page 217.) Mr.
Tombs having made this Objection, that the baptizing of Infants has occasioned
an unnecessary dispute about baptizing the Infants of believing Parents, that
are not members of gathered Churches. I never (says Doctor Homes) perceived
the world troubled with this dispute, diverse Churches without dispute can
practice the baptizing of such, etc. Thus he. See also in the same Book, 207,
208, 215. with his Epistle to the Reader. And the Collector of these
Testimonies has lately received Letters from sundry eminent Divines of the
Congregational way in England, declaring that the Iu^gement of the Elders with
them is generally according to what has been now expressed. By these things
therefore, which have been thus far expressed, it is very manifest that the
doctrine of the late Synod concerning the Subject of Baptism is no Apostasy
from the first Principles of New England, nor yet any declension from the
Congregational way. It remains that we proceed to the other Question about
Communion and Consocia^ion of Churches. Now concerning that, it is less needful
to produce many Testimonies, that there in the Synod Introduces not any
Innovation. For some that dissented from the Answer to the first Question about
Baptism, yet in this last concurred yea, there was an unanimous and universal
Assent to the Answer given to this second Question, as the Author of the
Antisynodalia Americana does acknowledge, where ( page 12.) it is said in the
second Question we do fully agree with the rest of the Synod, in all the
Propositions said down about it together with the Proofs thereof, we shall
therefore amongst our New English Worthies, only mention the Judgment of Mr.
Cotton concerning this Question, which what it is may be seen largly expressed
in his Book of the Keys, page 54, etc. And there are those that will remember,
that when that eminent Minister of Christ Mr. Mitchel was ordained Pastor of
the Church in Cambridg, Mr. Cotton giving in the Name of the Messengers of
Churches, the right hand of Fellowship, seriously advised him to endeavor (And
that faithful man was ever mindful of that solemn Advice) that that Ordinance
of Consociation of Churches might be duly practiced, greatly bewailing the
defect of these Churches, as to that particular, yea, Mr. Cotton^ heart was
much upon this thing, in his latter time; foreseeing that without it, these
Churches and the Congregational way could not stand; He did therefore not long
before his decease, draw up some Propositions which are expressive of the way
and manner of this Consociation pleaded for, which because they are (as being
written by his hand, they cannot but be) of great weight and worth, we shall
therefore here insert and publish them.

Propositions Concerning Consociation and Communion of Churches, tendered to the
Elders and Brethren of the Church for their Consideration and acceptance
according to God.
Proposition I.
Every true Church of Christ, viz. a particular Congregation furnished with a
Presbytery and walking in the truth and peace of the Gospel, has received from
the Lord Jesus full Power Ecclesiastical within it self, both of Liberty to
receive her own members, to choose her own Officers and the like. And also of
Authority to Administer Sacraments, Censure her own offenders, and restore
penitents, Mat. 18* 18* 1 Cor. 5. Acts 6.2, etc. and 14 23. so as this
Consociation and Communion of Churches ought not to hinder the exercise of this
power, but only by Counsel from the word to direct and strengthen their hands,
in the right Administration thereof upon all just occasions.

Proposition II.
Although the Apostles of Christ were Independent on each other, and had
equally the highest Power Ecclesiastical under Christ, and were led with
Infallible Assistance of the Spirit in the exercise thereof, yet Paul with
Barnabas and Titus went up to Jerusalem, (and that by Revelation) not only to
Confer and Consult with the Apostles about his doctrine, (lest he had, or
should run in vain, Gal 2.1, 2.) but also Consociated or made Agreement with
them by mutual giving the right hand of Fellowship, to dispose the Course of
their Ministry and Provision for the poor, that so they might procure the more
free and effectual passage of the fruit of the Gospel, and the wo^k of their
Ministry, and therefore it may seem much rather, not only lawful, but also very
profitable and needful for ordinary Elders, (and Churches though equal in
Power) wanting that Infallible Assistance of the Spirit to Confer, and Consult,
and Consociate (...) agree together about all such weighty matters, in which
Counsel and Concurrence of Judgment may be requisite to prevent and heal errors
and offenses, to avoid Sus^ition of prejudice, and partiality, and so to
expedite the free passage of the Gospel in the hands of them all.

Proposition III.
If when Peter gave offense at Anti^ch, the Apostle Paul took Liberty to rebuke
him before them all, (though he was his equal in place and power) and that no
doubt out of that duty of love and faithfulness, which he owed unto him and to
the truth, Peter also submitting thereunto, then it may well stand with the
equality of Churches out of their duty of Love and Faithfulness to admonish
each other in case of public offense, and submit to such admonition from the
word in meekness of wisdom, as to the will and Authority of Christ, and to give
such Satisfaction as the Rule does require.

Proposition IV.
Out of Question, the Lord Jesus, the head, King and Compassionate high Priest
and Savior of his body the Church, has as great a Love and care of the
purity, Peace and Edif^cation of whole Churches, as of particular Saints as is
evident by those Epistles sent to the Churches of Corinth, Galatia, and the
seven Churches of Asia, to heal the public Errors, dissentions, and other
Corruptions found in them, and therefore certainly he has appointed and
sanctified some sufficient means to preserve their purity and peace, to heal
and help the evils and distempers of whole Churches, as well as of particular
Believers. Now then since Apostles and other extraordinary Officers are ceased,
(that had power in all Churches, and only Love remains) what other
Ecclesiastical help is there left without infringing the power of particular
Churches, but the Exercise of brotherly Love, mutual watchfulness, Brotherly
Care, and Counsel? which Elders and Churches ought therefore to practice
toward each other in this way of Brotherly Communion and Assistance on all
just occasions.

Proposition V.
Upon these and other Scripture grounds and Examples, and for the ends above
said, it is very meet and requisite, (according to our present practice) that
when any Company of Christians intend to unite themselves into the Fellowship
of a Church, or being in a Church state to elect and ordain any Elders over
them, that in due time they signify their intentions to the Neighboring
Churches, walking in the order of the Gospel, if such may be had, desiring
their presence, Assistance, and right hand of Fellowship, that as a Church is a
City set upon a Hill, so the Acts thereof may not be as a Light put under a
Bushel, but may so shine forth to all other Churches, beholding and approving
their orderly proceedings, as they may the more readily give them the right
hand of Fellowship, and walk with more freedom of Spirit in Brotherly Love and
Communion with them in the Lord.

Proposition VI.
In such matters of public Censure, wherein through the obscurity and
difficulty there^^, o^ otherwise, there does arise diff^rences tending to
dangerou^* Divisions and distractions in the Church, or offense to other
Churches, In all such Cases it is meet and requisite that the Church proceed
advisedly with the Counsel and Concurrence of the Elder, or Elders, with other
Judicious and impartial Brethren of other Churches, clearing up from the Word,
what is the mind and will of Christ to be done.

Proposition VII.
Not only in matters of Censure, but also in other Cases of Doctrine or
practice, wherein for want of Light or of the Spirit of meekness and Love,
there does grow dissension in any Church (as did in the Church of Antioch about
Circumcision) The Church so divided shall do wisely and safely, not to proceed
to determine the Case by a Major Vote, to the unsatisfaction and offense of a
Considerable part among themselves, or the offense of other Churches. But ought
rather to bring the matter to the hearing and Judgment of other Elders and
Brethren of other Churches: who being desired ought readily to meet together,
and seriously (as in the fear of God) to enquire into the Case, search out by
the word, what is the mind of Christ therein, by themselves, (if present) or
otherwise, by Letters and Messengers to declare to the Church, what they judge
to be the Rule of Christ which they should walk by, which Judgment ought to be
received with all due respect according to God, Acts 15.

Proposition VIII.
As there is a Brotherhood of members in the same Church, so there is a
Brotherhood of Churches, being all Fellow members of Christ Jesus, and so bound
to have a m^^tal Care one of another, Cant. 8 ^. It is therefore meet and
requ^si^e, that in Case any Church shall fall into any scandal^us error or
offense in doctrine or practice, then the Neighbor Church or Churches should
Advertize, Convince, and admonish such a Church thereof according to the Rule
of the Gospel And if after due Conviction by a Neighbor Church, and again by
more Churches, the offending Church as the nature of the ^ss^nce and (...)
respect due to a Church of Christ may require, may at length withdraw, the
Church with sufficient patience will not yet hearken to their Brethren; then
withdraw from that Church, or at least that part of it which refuse to be
healed, such Brotherly Communion and the fruits thereof, as otherwise Churches
usually do afford to each other.

Proposition IX.
In Case any member shall be laid under Censure in a Church by the Major part
with the offense of a Considerable part thereof, or when any whole Church shall
seem to have Consented corruptly to such a Censure, upon Complaint of the
grieved part attested by the d^fen^ing Brethren, or in the other Case, by other
credible persons, it (...), requ^site that other Church, or Churches, in the
Spirit of (...) to know the Reason of their Censure, which if the (...) c^e^r
up to be just, then the other Church or Churches ought to bear witness to their
proceedings, and to persuade the Cen^ur^d and ^^ssenting part of the Church to
submit and give satisfaction. But if the Church shall refuse to give an account
of the Reasons of their procceedings, or not finally clear up the Justice
thereof, nor ease the grieved party, it will then be equal for any other Church
to receive the Censured part to their Covenant or Communion.

For ^o Christ received the blind man, after he was unjustly Cast out of the
Synogogue, John 9. The unjust acts of any Church cannot appear to be (...)* in
the name of Christ; but rather in the abuse of his (...) and power, and
therefore do not bind in Heaven, Clavis (...) non Le^at

Propsition. X.
As it is the practice of Godly Christians in the Churches (without any
Scruple, and with much Ed^fication and increase of Love) to meet (...) her in
Convenient numbers o^ Families at Set times, house by ou^^, ^o exerci^e that
Christian Communion, which the moral Rules o^ the Gospel call for, 1 These.
5.11. Col. 3.16. H^b. 3.13. and so 24. so ^lso upon the same grounds, [besides
others] it would [by the ^l^ssing o^ God] con^^ce much to the increase of
brotherly Love and (...), the spiri^ual Edification of many, by mutual Faith of
each (...), to the strengthening ^f the hea^ts and hands of one another in the
work of the Lord, I^ the Elders and brethren of the Churches, did meet
together, Church by Church, in Convenient numbers, at set times, (not to
exercise any Jurisdiction over any,) but to enjoy and practice Church Communion
by prayer together, hearing the word preached, and Conference about such Cases
and Questions of Conscience, as shall be found useful or needful for the
edification and Comfort, and peace of every Church, or any of the Brethren
thereof, and this Course might tend much to satisfy the Spirits of diverse godly
Brethren, who have thought that we so much mind the distinction of particular
Churches, and the duties of fellow members in the same, that we loose much of
the Comfort of Love, and the Fellowship of the Spirit, which we might enjoy,
and that we fall short in some brotherly Love which we owe mutually to our dear
Brethren of several Churches.

For the better Improvement of such a Conference.
1. It is fit that the Number of Churches so to meet, be regulated according to
the nearness or distance of Churches, and as other Conveniences, or
Inconveniences shall require.

2. For the times of meeting, it may seem best to leave it to the wisdom of
each Society of Churches, to meet more frequently or seldom as they shall see
Cause.

3. Concerning their Exercises, it is meet that the Elders of each Church where
the Conference is to be h^ld, should choose with Consent of the Church some
other Elder as they see b^^, whom they may entreat to preach at their meeting,
and also to desire some ^o moderate in the Conference, and agree upon such
Questions as they see fit, three or four, and send them to the Elders of other
Churches, at least fourteen days before the time of their Assembly.

4. For the ordering of the Time, it may be fit that the sermon should end at
Eleven a Clock, and after it the Conference follow, and continue so long, as
shall be found meet and se^sonable.

Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself who is the (...) ^verlasting Father, and
Prince of Peace, grant unto all his Churches (...) and Peace always, and by
all means: and He (...) and guide the hearts of his people to disc^rn and
embrace all such (...) himself has sanctified, to those holy Ends. Amen.

Thus far Mr. Cotton. And that th^s is according to Congregational Principles,
is evident from other Testimonies; (...) the Messengers of an hundred and
twenty Congregational Churches, who (...) at the Savoy in London, Anno 1658. do
in their declaration of the order apappointed in the Churches of Christ (
Thesis 26.) thus declare. In Case of difficulties or differences either in
point of doctrine, or in Administrations, wherein either the Churches in
general are concerned, or any one Church in their Peace, Union, and
Edification, or any member, or members of any Church are injured in, or by any
proceeding in Censures not agreeable to Truth and Order: It is according to the
mind of Christ, that many Churches holding Communion together, do by their
Messengers meet in a Synod or Council to Consider and give their Advice in or
about the matter in difference, etc. And Doctor Owen (who was a great part of
that Assembly) in his Ca^echisme concerning Church discipline, (page 224, 226,
227.) thus expresses his Judgment. Churches being gathered and settled
according to the mind of Christ, ought to preserve a mutual holy Communion
amongst themselves, and to exercise it in the discharge of those duties,
whereby their mutual good and Edification may be promoted. In desiring or
making use of the Counsel and advice of one another in such Cases of doubt and
difficulty, whether Doctrinal or practical, as may arise in any of them, Act^
15.2, 6. And from hence it follows, that in Case any Church either by error in
Doctrine, or praecipitation, or mistake in other Administrations, do give
offense unto other Churches, those other Churches may require an account from
them, admonish them of their faults, and withhold Communion from them, in Case
they persist in the error of their way, and that because in their difficulties,
and before their miscarriages, they were bound to have desired the advice,
Counsel, and Assistance of those other Churches, which being neglected by them;
the other are to recover the end of it unto their utmost ability, Gal. 2.6, 11.
And hence also it follows, that those that are rightly and justly Censured in
any Church ought to be rejected by all Churches what ever, both because of
their mutual Communion, and because it is, and ought to be presumed, until the
contrary be made to appear, that in Case there had been any difficulty or doubt
in the proceedure of the Church, they would have taken the advice of those
Churches, with whom they were obliged to Consult. Thus far Doctor Owen.
Likewise Doctor Th^mas Goodwin. and Mr. Philip N^e in that worthy Epistle which
they have prefixed before Mr. Cotton^ book of the Keys, (in which Epistle the
Congregational way is truly stated and asserted, as it differs from both the
extremes, viz. from P^esbyterianisme on the one, and Bro^nis^ on the other
hand) do declare their Concurrence with him in acknowledging that an
Association or Communion o^ Churches sending their Elde^^ and Messengers into a
Synod, is an Ordinance of Christ, unto whom Christ has (in Relation to
rectifying male Administrations, and healing Dissentions in particular
Congregations, and the like Cases) committed a due and just measure of power
suited and proportioned to those ^nds, and furnished them not only with ability
to give Counsel and Advice, but further upon such like occasions, with
Ministerial power and Authority to determine, declare, and injoyne such things
as may tend to the reducing Congregations to right order and Peace, see page 4.
6, 7, 10.

Moreover, that the practice of Congregationals, has been according to this
Profession, may be seen in the Apologetical Narration published by Doctor
Goodwin. Mr. Philip Nigh, Mr. Sydrach Simpson. Mr. Buroughs and Mr. Bridge. In
as much as those famous Apologists (as Paul speaks concerning James, Cephas and
John amongst the Apostles) seem to b^ ^iliars, [and worthily are they so
accounted) amongst Congregationals. Since also that Apologet^cal Narration
(though printed) is in the hands of but few with us, we shall therefore here
transcribe and insert some pages of it. And therein they thus declare [see page
1^. to page 22.] And whereas [say they] the Common prejudice and exception said
into all men's thoughts against us, and our opinions is, tha^ in such
Congregational Government thus entire within it self, there is not allowed
sufficient remedy for miscarriages, though never so gross, no relief for
wrongful Sentences, or persons injured thereby, no room for Complaints, no
powerful or effectual means to reduce a Church, or Churches that fall into
Heresy, Schism, etc. but every one is left, and may take Liberty without
control, to do what is good in their own eyes, we have [through the good
Providence of God upon us] from the avowed declarations of our Judgments among
our Churches mutually during our (...), and that also confirmed by the most
sol^mn Instance of our practice, wherewith to vindicate our selves and way in
this particular, which upon no other occasion we should ever have made thus
public. God so ordered it, that a Scandal and ^ffence fell ^ut, between those
very Churches, whilst living in this Banishment, [whereof we ou^ selves that
write these things were then the Minis^^^s] one of our C^u^ches having
unhappily deposed one of their Ministers, the others judged it not only too
sudden an act, [having (...) a m^^ter of so great moment without consulting
their (...), as was publ^^k^y pro^^ssed, we should have d^ne in (...) Cases
(...)] but (...) in the proceedings thereof, as too ^evere, and not manag^d
according to the Rules laid down in the Word. In this Case our Churches did
mutually acknowledge and submit to this, as a Sacred and undoubted Principle,
and Supreme Law to be observed amongst all Churches, that as by virtue of the
Apostolical Command Churches as well as particular men, are bound to give no
offense, neither to Jew nor Gentile, nor the Churches of God they live amongst.
So, that in all Cases such offense or differences by the Obligation of the
Common Law of Communion of Churches, and for the Vindication of the glory of
Christ which in Common they hold forth, the Church or Churches challenged to
offend or differ, are to submit themselves (upon the Challenge of the offense
or Complaint of the person wronged) to the most full and open trial and
examination by other Neighbor Churches offended thereat, of what ever has
given the offense. And further, that by virtue of the same and like Law of not
partaking of other men's sins, the Church offended may, and ought upon the
Impenitency of those Churches persisting in their Errors and miscarriage to
pronounce that heavy Sentence against them of withdrawing and Renouncing all
Christian Communion with them, until they do repent, and further to declare and
protest this with the Causes thereof to all other Churches of Christ, that they
may do the like. And what further Authority or proceedings purely
Ecclesiastical of one or many Churches toward another whole Church, or
Churches offending; either the Scriptures do hold forth, or can rationally be
put in Execution (without the Magistra^^^ interposing a power of another
nature, unto which we upon his particular Cognizance and Examination of such
Causes, prosess ever to submit, and also to be most willing to have recourse
unto) for our parts we saw not then, nor do yet see. And likewise we did then
Suppose, (and do yet) that this Principle of Submission of Churches that
miscarry, unto other Churches offended, together with this other that it is a
Command from Christ enjoined to Churches that are finally offended to denounce
such a Sentence of non Communion and withdrawing from them whilst Impenitent,
as unworthy to hold forth the Name of Christ, (these Principles being received
and generally acknowledged by the Churches of Christ to be a mutual duty as
strictly enjoined them by Christ as any other) that these would be as effectual
means through the blessing of Christ to awe and preserve Churches and their
Elder^ in their duties, As that other of Claim to an Authoritative Power
Ecclesiastical to Excommunicate other Churches, or their Elders offending; for
if the one be compared with the other, in (...) mere Ecclesiastical Notion,
that of Excommunication pretended, has but this more in it, that it is a
Delivery of whole Churches and their Elders offending unto Satan, (for which we
know no warrant in the Scriptures that Churches should have such a power over
other Churches.) And then as for the binding Obligation, both of the one way
and the other, it can be supposed to lie but in these two things.

1. In a warrant and injunction given by Christ to his Churches, to put either
the one or the other into Execution. And 2. That men's Consciences be
accordingly taken therewith, so as to Subject themselves whether unto the one
way or the other. For suppose that other Principle of Authoritative Power in
the greater part of the Churches combined to Excommunicate other Churches, etc.
To be the Ordinance of God, yet unless it do take hold of men's Consciences, and
be received amongst all Churches, the offending Churches will slight all such
Excommunications, as much as they may be supposed to do our way of protestation
and Sentence of non Communion. On the other side, Let this way of ours be but
as strongly entertained, as that which is the way and Command of Christ, and
upon all occasions be heedfully put in Execution, it will awe men's Consciences
as much, and produce the same Effects. And if the Magistrates Power (to which
we give as much and (as we think) more, then the Principles of the Presbyterial
Government will suffer them to yield,) do but assist and back the Sentence of
other Churches denouncing this Non Communion against Churches miscarrying
according to the nature of the Crime as they judge meet, and as they would the
Sentence of Churches Excommunicating other Churches in such Cases upon their
own particular Judgment of the Cause, then without all Controversy, this our
way of Church proceeding, will be every way as effectual, as their other can be
supposed to be; and we are sure more brotherly and more suited to that Liberty
and equality Christ has endowed his Church with. But without the Magistrates
interposing their Authority, their way of proceeding will be as ineffectual as
ours, and more liable to Contempt by how much it is pretended to be more
Authoritative, and to inflict more dreadful punishment which carnal Spirits are
seldom sensible of. This for our Judgments And for a real evidence and
demonstration; both, that this was then our Judgments, as likewise for an
instance of the effectual Success of such a Course held by Churches in such
Cases, our own practic^ and the blessing of God thereon may plead and testify
for us to all the world. The m^^age of this Trans^ction in brief was this: That
Church which with others was most Scandaliz^d, did by Letters declare their
offense, requiring of the Church suposed to be offending, in the Name, and for
the vindication of the honor of Christ, and the relieving the party wronged,
to yield a full and public bearing before all the Churches of our Nation, or
any other whomsoever offended, of what they could give in Charge against their
proceedings, in that deposition of their Minister, and to submit themselves to
an open Trial and review of all those forepassed Carriages that concerned that
particular: which they most cheerfully and readily (according to the
forementioned Principles) submitted unto in a place and state, where no outward
violence or any other external Authority either Civil or Ecclesiastical would
have enforced them thereunto. And accordingly the Ministers of the Church
offended, with other two Gentlemen of much worth, wisdom and Piety, members
thereof, were sent as Messengers from that Church; and at the Introduction and
entrance into that Solemn Assembly, (the Solemnity of which has left as deep
an Impression upon our hearts of Christ^ dreadful presence, as ever any we have
been present at.) It was openly and publicly pro^essed in a Speech that was
the Preface to that discussion to this Effect, that it was the most to be
abhorred maxim, that any Religion has ever made profession of, and therefore
of all other the most contradictory and dishonorable unto that of
Christianity, that a single, and particular Society of men professing the Name
of Christ, and pretending to be endowed with a power from Christ to judge them
that are of the same body, and Society within themselves, should further
arrogate to themselves an exemption from giving account, or being Censurable of
any other either Christian Magistrate above them, or Neighbor Churches about
them. So far^ were our Judgments from that Independent Liberty that is imputed
to us, then, when we had least dependency on this Kingdom, or so much as hopes
ever to abide therein in peace.

And for the Issue and Success of this agitation after there had been for many
days as Judiciary and full a Charge, trial and deposition of witnesses openly
before all Comme^s of all Sorts as can be expected, in any Court where
Authority enjoins it, that Church which had offended did as publicly
acknowledge their sinful aberration in it, restored their Minister to his place
again, And ordered a Solemn day for fasting, to humble themselves before God
and men for their sinful Carriage in it, and the party also which had been
deposed, did acknowledge to that Church, wherein he had likewise sinned,

So that these Godly Learned Writers, were so far from making a Popedom of a
particular Church that they deemed it an abhorred maxmaxime to affirm that a
particular Church is unaccountable to, or not Censurable by Neighbor Churches
about them; They therefore that do reject the Consociation or Communion pleaded
for, want that which is one Specifical Character of a true Congregati^nal m^n,
whereby such are distinguished from Brownists and Morellians, whose Principles
have ever been disowned and disavowed by Congregationals, who have also thought
themselves not a little injured, when they have been represented as the same,
else how have Horneb^cks Summa Controversiarum de Brownis^is, and Bailies
disswasive, and other writings, e^^sdem commatis been so distastful and
dissatisfactory to all of that way, who understand what Principles they go upon.

Moreover that our Congregational Brethren are for such Communion of Churches
as is by the late Synod asserted, is yet far more evident from the Testimony
of blessed Bur^oughs in his Excellent Treatise about heart Divisions s^e page
84. and 163. And in page 43, 44. The^e are these words. (1) Those in the
Congregational way acknowledge that they are bound in Conscience to give
account of their ways to Churches about them, or to any other who shall
require it, this not in an Arbitrary way, but as a duty that they owe to God
and man.

2 dly. They acknowledge that Synods of other Ministers and Elders about them
are an Ordinance of Jesus Christ for the helping the Church against Errors,
Schisms, and S^andals.

3 dly. That these Synods may by the Power they have from Christ admonish men
or Churches in his Name, when they see evils Continuing in, or growing upon the
Church, and their Admonitions carry with them the Authority of Jesus Christ.

4 ly. As there shall be cause they may declare men or Churches, to be
Subverters of the Faith, or otherwise, according to the nature of the offense,
to shame them before all the Churches about them.

5 ly. They may by a Solemn act in the Name of Jesus Christ refuse any further
Communion with them till they repent.

6 ly. They may declare also in the Name of Christ that these erring people, or
Churches are not to be received into Fellowship with any of the Churches of
Christ, nor to have Communion with one another in the Ordinances of Christ. --
You will say, what if they care not for all this? Answ. That is, as if you
should say, what if they be not Conscientious, what if nothing can prevail with
Conscience? if you say, p^ivate Brethren may admonish and declare in the Name
of Christ. This is more then if any private Brethren should do the same thing;
For a Synod is a Solemn Ordinance of Christ, and the Elders are to be looked
upon as the Officers of Jesus Christ. And again, page 47. he has these words,
If it shall be said, But surely they do not agree so far, they do not come up
to these six things mentioned? To that I Answer, I do not in these deliver only
mine own Judgment, but by what I know of the Judgments of all those Brethren,
with whom I have occasion to Converse by Conference, both before, and since, I
stand Charged to make it good, to be their Judgments also, yea, it has been
theirs and mine, for diverse years, even then when we never thought to have
enjoyed our own Land again. And if it be so, then let the Lord be Judge between
us and our Brethren, for those loud and grievous Outcries, there has been
against us in this thing.

(...)
POSTSCRIPT
SInce the Composure of this Collection of Testimonies, it has pleased the
Lord to take unto himself another of our Ancient Stud^ viz. worthy and Reverend
Mr. Allin of Dedham, whose Apprehensions ^ouching the Controverted Questions is
sufficiently known Likewise not many weeks before his death, he read this
Script, and expr^ssed his judgment thereon in words following.

Reverend and dear Brother, I salute you in the Lord. I humbly bless God for
your fruitful Labors in this your Collection, (and in other matters performed
by you) concerning which in general, I think it is worthy serious Consultation
amongst your Friends, whether it be not a Season to publish me same. (1.) We
see the work of Christ touching the Church Seed is laid asleep, this might
awaken our drowsiness, we see also the great disorders in Churches for want of
seasonable help from Neighboring Churches, and by Reason of the rejection of
Counsel without convincing their Sentence of error.

2 dly. We see how our present doctrine is rejected as a Novel Innovation,
differing from first and primitive Principles. (3.) Who knows how far God
may bless this Treatise to the recovery of some if not many, from their
Erroneous Opinions about these Truths.

I Conceive also some serious Exhortation to cleave to these first ways of
Christ in New England, might be seasonably added, I Rest

Yours in our Lord, John Allin


A Letter concerning the Subject of Baptism, written by that eminent Minister
of Christ Mr. Jonathan Mitchel, late Pastor of the Church in Cambridg in New
England.
Reverend and dear Sir,
I have deliberately read over Mr. Ds. Essay and Epistle to the Reader, which I
now return to you with thanks for the Loan of it, If I should say, I see not
matter of Conviction in it, his Answer is already given me, ( page 35*) If men
shut their eyes, when the light is held out to them, they may truly say they
see not, or in page 6. they that Enquire of God with an Idol in their hearts,
shall be paenally answered by being left to their own Counsels, etc. we had
need Labor to approve our selves to God, when we meet with such sh^rp Censures
from men. But the R. A. can hardly expect, we should find Conviction here,
seeing he builds all upon this distinction of Immediate and medi^te membership,
which with the Consectaries He deduceth from it, is the pror^ and puppis of his
whole discourse: and for the proof of the distinction himself, in ( page 34,
35.) refers the Reader to his former Essays; neither have I observed much more
in this writing, toward the proof of it, then we have had before. And therefore
if we did not see it (as by him explained and Improved) to be evident before,
it is not strange, if we do not see it now. If it must be imputed to our
blindness (yea, wilful and paenal blindnes^) that we see it not, we must be
Content, to bear it as we may. Also when he affirms over and over ( page 75,
83, 92, 103, 131, 145, 152.) that we our selves Confess the Parents in Question
have not Faith, or are not visible Believers, the Contrary whereunto we have
plainly asserted. And how many times over does he say it, [we call them mere
members.] which we have disclaimed, and do not so call them but, [members not
in full Communion] yea, he says, ( in page 49.) we grant that the persons in
Question, are not to be accounted Church members, etc. How should we receive
Conviction from such discourses? If his meaning be by so often reflecting on
[our mere members as he calls them] to deny that distinction of members into
[such as are in full Communion, and such as are not in full Communion] that
would seem strange, for how can that be denied by any Paedobaptists, and he
seems to approve it in page 35. yea, he seems sometimes to grant, that some
when Adult d^ Continue in the Church and Covenant, who yet are not admitted to
full Communion, page 76.99, yet he calls for a Rule for two such sorts of Adult
members, page 73. But I shall not enenter into discourse of particulars, nor am
I fit to be an Answerer, it is easy to observe a greater sharpness in his
Expressions to me then else where in this Book. I hope I shall Consider as I am
able, what I find in this, or other discourses, about the matter in
Controversy, etc. and if I be convinced of Error, I shall not be ashamed to own
it, but if there be no way to Issue the Controversy but by such voluminous
writings, and if every passage be not spoken to, he counts himself neglected,
or unanswered; And that which he has before said stands still firm and good,
(as to that purpose he speaks in this Book above twenty times) I have little
hope to see an Issue of it, nor can I see any likely way for an Issue, unless
we can meet, (either in way of Synod or Colioquie) and with freedom and Candor
verbally and fully discourse the matter, and agree to some orderly Conc^usion.
As for the Substance of the Cause, wherein we have engaged, I am daily more and
more Confirmed, that it is the Cause of Truth, and of Christ, and that wherein
not a little of the Interest of Christ's Kingdom, and of the Souls of men is
laid up. I have heard you intimate, as if there were failings in the manner of
Calling, and the managing of the late Synod, and you speak of your expunging
some passages in what passed the Press, which would have discovered the
nakedness of the contrary minded, (though I suppose if they had been printed,
they would have discovered more the nakedness of the Author, or Authors, then
of the Subjects of those Expressions and Informations.) And I once had an
Intimation, as if some had gathered up a Narrative of matters that would shame
us much, if it should be published. To all which I would say, I do not know of
any such great matter, that can be objected, or of ought Considerable, that
would seem strange [if things be rightly represented] among men of Infirmity as
we all are. And some of us were not slow in the open Synod, and other ways to
own ou^ selves such, and to crave the Candor and forbearance that is needful
for such, which one would think Christian and ingenious Spirits should have
been satisfied with. But if there were more to be objected that way, then there
is, is that any Argument against the matter and Cause it sell? Luthers
Refo^ma^ion might be Condemned upon that ground, for all know that he wanted
not many failings, in the management thereof. God loves to humble Instruments,
and to leave matter of humbling upon them, even when they are carrying on his
own good work; but I should be sorry if there were to be found with us the
Tyths of Irregularities that abound among our Anti Synodalian people in the
Country, who stick not to despise, reproach, and distaste Synods, and Ministers,
and all upon the account of this matter, whereby I wish the Lord be not
provoked unto Anger. And how far those few in the Ministry that have appeared
in opposition may have been accessory thereunto, I had rather they would
seriously Consider between the Lord and their own Souls, then I go about to
determine. We have been reflected upon by some as seeking our selves, and
driving on I know not what design, and I cannot readily Imagine, what Self
Interest or Self End we here should be led by in this matter. Sure I am for my
own part, that I prejudice my self much, as to name, Interest, Ease, etc. For
my appearing in this Cause. Neither was I so insensible, as not to feel it from
the first. I know my self to be a poor, vile, sinful Creature, and can with
some feeling say, chief of Sinners, and least of Saints, but in this particular
matter I have often said, I wish my Brethren could see through me, for I know
not any design or desire I have in it, in all the world, but only that the will
of God might be done among us, his Kingdom be advanced, these Churches settled
on right Bases, and flourish in the ways of Truth, Purity and Peace, and that
the good of the Souls of men might be promoted both in this, and after
Generations.

I am sorry to s^hnd thus many Lines about the Circumstantials of the Cause;
the prejudices that are thence taken up against it, have drawn me thus far.
But touching the matter it self, tha^ has been in debate between us (which I
had rather be discoursing (...)) you may please to Consider at Leisure which of
these three Propositions you would deny.

1. The whole visible Church under the New Testament is to be baptized-

2. If a man be once in the Church (whether admitted at Age or in Infancy)
nothing less then Censurable evil can put him out.

3. If the Parent be in the visible Church his Infant Child is so also*

The first is proved by the Arguments for the Synods first Proposition, the
second is plain from the Current of Scripture, and Confirmed under the
New Testament, (besides other Reasons) from the Carriage of Christ and his
Apostles toward the Jews, who came into the Church by a memb^rship received
in Infancy. The third must be owned by all, but Antipaedo Baptists. The Frame
of the Covenant, Gen, 17. inferrs it, and Mr. D. imprinted Essay, page 23.
grants that the Promise of the Covenant (...) not stop at the Infant Child.
These three things are all of them the ^^ctrine of all our great Divines, as
well as of the Scriptures.

It is to me a Confirmation to observe de facto, that in the way of successive
baptizing the Children of all that had a standing in the visible Church (though
with too much Laxeness and Corruption for want of Discipline) the Lord has
continued Religion among Christian People from Age to Age, whereas the like
Continuance and Preservation of true Religion could not have been hoped for,
nor propable in the Contrary way.

It was never heard of in the world from Abraham to this day [since God
appointed an entering Sign, or such a Livery to be worn by his people to
distinguish them from the world] that a people did Continue for any length of
Time to be Religious, who were either all, or the greater part of them
uncircumcised or unbaptized.

The laying aside of Circumcision among the M^dianites, for that they did
betimes lay it aside, may be plainly gathered from Exodus 4. 24, 25, 26. was
quickly followed with the utter Loss of all true Religion among them, and other
of the Posterity of Abraham and Keturah.

I know the bare having of Baptism does not always keep true Religion but
sure it is, that the want of it will quickly lose Religion among a people To
say that a people may be Religious well enough without Baptism, would be to
reflect upon the wisdom of Christ, in appointing such an external Sign of
Christianity, which surely was no needless thing; It is easy to see that in
the way your self and some others go, the bigger half of the people in this
Country will in a little Time be unbaptized, Mr. D. says in his Essay, page
55. that our mere members as he calls them, will soon be a far greater number
then his Sheep and Lambs, i. e. then his Immediate and mediate members, both of
them, and all the Generations of these mere members [as he calls them] he would
have unbaptized, now I leave it to Consideration, how subversive to Religion
this will soon be, as also how absurd a thing that a Christian professing
people, yea, eminently professing, and of a more reformed temper then
ordinarily the world both known. [As through grace the body of people of this
Country, yea, and of our members not in full Communion yet are] should so soon
be the body of them unbaptized, as if they were not a Christian, but an Heathen
People. Let me add this farther Consideration, all Disciples or [Acts 11.26.]
Christians are by Christ enjoined to be baptized, Math. 28.19 Acts 11.26.
states it upon these people that are called [named or counted] Christians, I
know there are that arrogate to themselves the Name of Christians who are
manifest Anti-Christians, as Papists, Athiests, etc. these may be excluded, but
those who [ in regard both of their belief and practice] do justly and rightly
retain the Reputation of Christians, as they that are described in our fifth
Proposition, and the Generality of the People in this Country can* not be
denied to do, surely Christ's Injunction does include them.

We may observe that Congregational men in England are not without thoughts and
studies for enlargement of Baptism. Doctor Owen in his late Catechism, is
plainly with us in the main Substance of the Cause, viz. the baptizing of those
we plead for, though it seems he would have them baptized in another Notion.
For when as in Question 38 he makes the proper Subject of Baptism to be
professing Believers and their Infant Seed, it is p^ain he intends Baptism to
many, who (according to his Platform) are not in full Communion, or may not
come to the Lords Table, nay, are not (with him) so much as joined members of a
particular or instituted Church, but are only professors of the Faith, Compare
Question 19.39, 47* 49. And I suppose, there are Expressions to that purpose in
other writings of his, which I have not now by me. The same thing may be
Contained under the Expression at the meeting of the Savoy in their Confession
of Faith, Chap. 29. These. 4. [the Infants of one or both believing Parents are
to be baptized,] using therein the words of the Assemblies Confession, and we
know in how large a Sense they take the word [ believing] when as they say in
Chap 26. These 2. The whole body of men throughout the world, pro^essing the
Faith of the Gospel, and obedience unto God by Christ, according unto it, not
destroying their own Profession by any errors, everting the Foundation, or
unholiness of Conversation, are, and may be called the visible Catholic Church
of Christ.

How plain is it, that the persons whose Children we would have baptized are
professing Believers according to Doctor Owens Expressions, believing Parents
in the Assemblies Sense, and such Professors o^ the Faith of the Gospel, and of
obedience to God, as do not otherwise destroy that Profession, all which (say
the Savoy meeting) are of the visible Catholic Church of Christ. And I
suppose, they would not have any part of Christ's visible Church left
unbaptized. It Is true they say, this visible Catholic Church of Christ as
such, is not entrusted with the Administration of any Ordinance, but they may
mean, as many do expressly hold, that the person A^ministring Baptism must be
an Officer in a particular Chu^^h, though the Subjects baptiz^d may be of the
Catholic Church. How ever such Catholic Professors as they here describe, are
qualified for Baptism, If taking hold of the Covenant in a particular Church
be (in their mind) further needful, ours do that.

You may hereby perceive, that you stand almost alone, while you are (...) the
baptizing of such as are described in our fifth Proposition. Whether they
should be baptized as in a Catholic, or in a particular Church (...) is
another Question, And I Confes^ my self nor altogether so peremptory in this
Latter as I am in the thing it self, [ viz. that they ought to be baptized] yet
still I think that when all Stones are turned, it will come to this, that all
the baptized a^e, and ought to be under Discipline in particular Churches, your
self and those few in the Ministry here, that diss^nt, do bear a greater weight
then it may be you are aware of. For the People in the Country have in a manner
no Arguments to object but this, some of your selves some of the Ministers are
against i^: I have lately in Course of Exposition gone over Exodus 4.24. as
forme^ly over Genesis 17 9- 14. And the more I look into such T^x^s as those, the
more awful they are to me, to make me fear, lest we should be wanting to do the
will of God in this particular, and lest the Lord should be thereby displeased.
And I am afraid that we do not our duty while we let a matter of so great
moment, and of such public and Practical Concernment as this is, lie by from
year to year, without using more means to bring it to an Issue, and to come to
some settlement therein.

Thus you see with what Freedom I have opened somewhat of my heart to you about
this matter, had I not been Confident of your Candid Acceptance thereof, I
should not have done it.

I do affectionately thank you for your Remembronce of me before the Lord, and
desire a Continued Share therein, hoping that I am not, and shall not be [in my
poor measure] unmindful of you, whom I have a real respect for, and do hearti^y
love in the Lord.

I am not without hope, that we may be yet of one mind before we dye, [And I am
ready to think that we had been so e're this, if you had been pleased to attend
and pursue a free Candid and throu^h Debate of matters verbally, and happily if
so^e such Course were yet taken amongst us that live here about, it might
effect an accord] Bu^ ^^wever I hope we shall meet there, ubi Luth^^o cum (...)
con^enit. The Lord direct all (...) for us, tha^ we may be ^ound walking in the
ways of Truth, and Peace, to his Glory, ^he good of others, and rejoicing of
our own Souls in the day of Christ. In whom I am

Cambridg. December. 26. 1667. Yours unfainedly Jonathan Mitchel.


FINIS.

