SUNDRY LAWS Made by the General Court Wherein the Duty of Tything Men is
expressed, viz.
IT is Ordered; That all private unlicensed Houses of Entertainment be
diligently searched out, and the penalty in the Law strictly imposed; and that
all such Houses may be the better discovered, the Select-men of every Town
shall choose some sober and discreet persons, to be authorized from the County
Court, each of whom shall take the charge of ten or twelve Familyes of his
Neighborhood, and shall diligently inspect them and present the Names of such
persons so transgressing to the Magistrate, Commissioner, Tything-men to
inspect unlicensed Houses
or Select-men of the Town, who shall return the same to be proceeded with by
the next County Court, as the Law directs; and the persons so chosen and
authorized, and attending their duty faithfully therein, shall have one third
of the Fines allowed them; but if neglective of their duty, they shall incur
the same penalty provided against unlicensed Houses. Made October. 15. 1675^

WHereas the sin of Idleness (which is a sin of Sodom) does greatly increase,
notwithstanding the wholesome Laws in force against the same: As an Addition to
that Law.

This Court does Order; that the Constable with such other person or persons
whom the Select-men shall appoint, shall inspect particular Familyes, Idle
persons to be inspected, etc.
and present a List of the Names of all idle persons to the Select men, who are
hereby strictly required to proceed with them as already the Law directs, and
in case of obstinacy, by charging the Constable with them, who shall convey
them to some Magistrate by him to be committed to the house of Correction.

THis Court being desirous to prevent all occasions of Complaint referring to
the profanation of the Sabbath, and as an addition to former Laws;

Do Order and Enact; That the Select men do see to it that there be one man
appointed to inspect the ten Familyes of their Neighbors; To inspect
Sabbath Breakers.
which Tything-man or men shall, and hereby have power in the absence of the
Constable to apprehend all Sabbath Breakers, Disorderly-Tiplers, and such as
keep licensed Houses, or others that shall suffer any Disorders in their Houses
on the Sabbath day, or evening after, or at any other time, and to carry them
before a Magistrate or other Authority, or commit to prison (as any Constable
may do) to be proceeded with according to Law.

And for the better putting a restraint and securing Offenders that shall any
way transgress against the Laws Tit. Sabbath, either in the Meeting House by
any abusive carriage or misbehaviour, by making any noise, or otherwise, or
during the day time being laid hold on by any of the Inhabitants, shall by the
said person appointed to inspect this Law, be forthwith carried forth and put
into a Cage in Boston which is appointed to be forthwith by the Select-men set
up in the Market place, and in such other Towns as the County Courts shall
appoint, there to remain till Authority shall examine the person offending* and
give order for his punishment, as the matter may require, according to the Laws
relating to the Sabbath. Made May 23. 1667.

IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That the Law Tit.
Oaths and Subscriptions, page 120. Sect. 2. requiring all persons, as well
Inhabitants as Strangers (that have not taken it) to take the Oath of Fidelity
to the Country, be revived and put in practice through this Jurisdiction. And
for the more effectual execution thereof, It is Ordered by this Court; That the
Select men, To inspect the taking the Oath of Fidelity.
Constables, and Tything-men in every Town, do once every quarter of a year so
proportion and divide the precincts of each Town, and go from house to house,
and take an exact list of the Names, quality and callings of every person,
whether Inhabitant or Stranger, that have not taken the said Oath, and cannot
make due proof thereof; and the Officers aforesaid are hereby required
forthwith to return the names of such persons unto the next Magistrate or
County Court, or chief Military Officer in the Town where no Magistrate is who
are required to give such persons the said Oath prescribed in the Law, wherein
not only Fidelity to the Country, but Allegiance to our King is required. And
all such as take the said Oath shall be Recorded and Enrolled in the County
Records by the Clerk of each County Court. And all such as refuse to take the
said Oath they shall be proceeded against as the said Law directs. And further,
this Court does Declare; That all such refusers to take the said Oath, shall
not have the benefit of our Laws to Implead, Sue, or recover any Debt in any
Court or Courts within this Jurisdiction, nor have protection from this
Government whilst they continue in such obstinate refusal.

And furthermore, It is Ordered; That if any Officer entrusted with the
Execution of this Order, do neglect, or omit his or their duty therein, they
shall be fined according to their demerits, not exceeding five pounds for one
offense, being complained of, or presented to the County Courts or Court of
Assistants- And this Law to be forthwith Printed and Published, and effectually
executed from and after the last of November next. And that all persons that
administer the Oath abovesaid, shall in like manner make return of the Names of
such persons so sworn to the respective Clerks of the County Courts. Made
October 10. 1677.

AS an Addition to the late Law made in May last, for the prevention of the
Profanation of the Sabbath, and strengthening the hands of Tything-men
appointed to inspect the same:

It is Ordered that those Tything-men shall be, and are hereby appointed and
empowered to inspect public Licensed Houses as well as private, Further
direction and power about the Sabbath.
and unlicensed Houses of entertainment; as also [ Ex Officio] to enter any
such Houses, and discharge their duty according to Law: And the said
Tything-men are empowered to assist one another in their several Precincts, and
to act in one another precincts with as full power as in their own, and yet to
retain their special charges within their own bounds.

And it is Ordered; That the whole Fine raised by the penalty of this Law upon
Delinquents, either in public or private Houses, shall be remitted to the
County Treasurer, and the Tything-mens allowance made payable from him.

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that henceforth the
Select men of each Town take care that Tything-men be Annually chosen in their
several precincts of their most prudent and discreet Inhabitants, Tything-men
to be annually chosen.
and sworn to the faithful discharge of their trust (where no Magistrate or
Commissioners are) before the Select men of the place, and the said Tything-men
are required diligently to inspect all houses licensed, or unlicensed, where
they shall have notice, or have ground to suspect that any person or persons do
spend their time on Estates by night or by day; in Tippling, gaming, or
otherwise unprofitably, or do sell by retayle within doors or without, strong
drink, wine, ale, Cider, Rhum, Brandy, Perry, Metheglin, etc. without license,
and into said houses where such disorders shall by them be found, they may, and
are hereby required and empowered to enter into and make search in their
Cellars, or any other places within or about the same where they may suspect,
or have notice, that Wines, strong beer, Ale, Cider, Perry, Matheglin, Rhum,
Brandy, etc. are lodged; and in case they shall find any quantity of either,
whereof the Owners do not give said Tything-men a satisfactory account of their
having the same, any three of them agreeing, they shall by Warrant from any
Magistrate, or Commissioners invested with Magistratical power, or (where no
Magistrate is within five miles of the place) they shall without Warrant
requiring the aid of the Constable, seize, carry away, and secure all such
Wines, strong Beer, Ale, Cider, Perry, Matheglin, Rhum, Brandy, etc. and
present an account thereof with the names of the persons from whom they took it
to the next Magistrate, or Commissioner of the Town where any be that are
invested with Magistratical power, who may, and are hereby empowered to proceed
against said delinquent parties* and dispose of said Wines, strong Beer, etc.
as to them shall seem meet; and if for value more then ten pounds, they are
then to bind said parties over to the County Court, to be there proceeded
against as the Law directs. In all which Cases full recompense shall be made to
the Tything-men, and other Officers for all their care, trouble and expenses in
searching and securing said goods, and the remainder of the Goods seized, or
value thereof, where the Magistrate, County Court, or Commissioners Court, that
have orderly Cognizance thereof, shall not see reason to return the same to the
parties from whom it was taken, the same shall be put into the County Treasury.

Also the Tything men are required diligently to inspect the manner of all
disorderly persons, and whereby more private admonitions they will not be
reclaimed, they are from time to time to present their names to the next
Magistrate, or Commissioner invested with Magistratical power, who shall
proceed against them as the Law directs, as also they are in like manner to
present the names of all single persons that live from under Family Government
stubborn and disorderly Children and Servants, night-walkers, Typlers,
Sabbath Breakers, by night or by day, and such as absent themselves from the
public Worship of God on the Lords days, or whatever else course or practice
of any person or persons whatsoever tending to debauchery, Irreligion,
profaneness, and Atheism amongst us, whether by omission of Family Government,
nurture and religious duties and instruction of Children and Servants, or idle,
profligate, uncivil or rude practices of any sort, the names of all which
persons with the fact whereof they are accused, and witnesses thereof, they
shall present to the next Magsstrate, or Commissioner, where any are in the
said Town invested with Magistratical power, who shall proceed against and
punish all such misdemeanors by Fine, Imprisonment, or binding over to the
County Court as the Law directs.

WHereas you A. B. are chosen a Tything-man within the Town of D. for one year,
until others be chosen and sworn in your room and stead, you do here swear by
the living God that you will diligently endeavor, Tything-Mens Oath.
and to the utmost of your Ability perform and intend the duty of your place
according to the particulars specified in the Laws peculiar to your Office, So
help you God.

By the Court, Edward Rawson, Secr.

