AT A GENERAL COURT HELD AT Boston in New England The second Day of October
1678.
IT having been presented and recommended unto this Court by the Commissioners
of the united Colonies at their late Session at Hartford in September last,
that the said Colonies might agree together to prostrate themselves jointly
before God for the obteining of the Lords gracious expression of himself unto,
and continuance with us, as in the following Particulars by them is signified,
viz.

1. That we may be suitably affected with, and humbled under all the many
tokens of his great anger kindled against us.

2. That he will freely pardon all our manifold provocations, be reconciled to
us, and heal our Land.

3. That as he was present with the blessed Generation of his precious ones,
the Leaders of his people into, and in this Wilderness, and did hear them when
in their distresses they cried unto him: So he will still please to dwell in
the midst of us, and not forsake us.

4. That he will not take away his holy Gospel, and if it be his good will, yet
to continue our liberties Civil and Ecclesiastical to us, and to our Children
after us.

5. That a Spirit of Conversion may be poured out upon our Children, that they
may give up themselves and their Seed after them to be the Lords, willingly
subjecting themselves to all his holy Rules and Government in his house.

6. That in our now low Estate (in very many respects obvious to all serious
Spirits, whose eyes are open) his tender mercies may speedily prevent us.

This Court having a sense of the necessity of that duty of Humiliation and
that they may join with the Neighbor Churches of the several Colonies to pour
forth strong and unanimous cries unto God for the obteining of his Grace and
Favor, accordingly trusting in his mercy, that in the things which we are
agreed to (...) according to his will, he will graciously hear, and be
propitious to his Servants; Do accordingly appoint Thursday, the one and
twentieth day of November next, being the day agreed upon to be solemnly kept
as a day of Fasting and Prayer in all the Churches and Congregations throughout
this Jurisdiction, strictly Inhibiting all servile labor by any of the
Inhabitants of the Colony on that day.

By the General Court, Edward Rawson, Secr.

