A Seasonable VVATCH-VVORD UNTO CHRISTIANS Against the DREAMS and DREAMERS Of
this GENERATION: Delivered in a SERMON November 16th. 1665.

And being the last Lecture, which was Preached By that Reverend, Faithful and
Eminent Man of God Mr. JOHN WILSON.

Sometime Pastor of the Church of Christ in Boston in New England.

Act. 20 26, 27 Wherefore I take you to record this day, that I am pure from
the blood of all men: For I have not shunned to declare unto you all the
counsel of God.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by S. Green and S. Green. 1677.

Christian Reader,
THere being too too many filthy Dreamers crept in among us, who by their
filthy Dreams Blaspheme that worthy Name whereby we are called, renouncing that
One Holy, Blessed and Eternal God in three Persons, the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Spirit, into whose Name we are Baptized; and that one only Mediator
between God and Man, that Man Christ Jesus, and the whole Doctrine of divine
efficiency both in the decree, particularly Election and Rebrobation, and the
execution thereof in the fall and restitution in Redemption, and the
application thereof, and so denying the resurrection and the last judgment,
together with the authority of the holy Scriptures, yea, under the sacred
words, Repent, Repent, calling upon men to renounce and deny all their
Religion, and the profession and practice thereof, saying (as Edward Burrows in
his Preface to George Foxes Mystery) that they have sufficient cause to cry
against us, and to deny our ministry, our Church, our Worship, and our whole
Religion: And some of them (called and known by the name of Quakers) under the
pretense of the light within them, and of the Spirit as their only Rule, having
(even of their Women) been acted in a most beastly, shameful and horrid manner
among us, against the very light of nature, and the common dictates of modesty,
especially in that Sex, so as to go openly, and wholly naked, in the day time,
in some of our most frequented streets, and of our public Assemblies. Another
of them to transform her self into a deformed shape, as 'twere of the Devil,
unto not only the disturbance and affrighting of others in the solemn Assembly
for Worship, but to the hazarding thereby the lives of diverse Women with
Child, together with the fruit of the Womb, as happened on the Lords day in
Boston on the 8th. of this month, (beside other practical abominations which
their Principles lead them to.)

It was judged meet to set before you in Print that solemn, serious and
seasonable Testimony, which was given by that holy, prayerfull and prevailing
Man of God, that sometimes faithful, prudent, and watchful Pastor of that
eminent Church of Christ, which was the first in Boston, that now blessed John
Wilson by name, which was Preached by him in his last Lecture Sermon in the
said Church on the 16 of November 1665. and was taken from his mouth in
Characters by the pen of a ready and judicious writer, and has been compared
and found faithful by my self also who took it in Characters. It was judged
meet (I say) to Print it for our further Humiliation, who have caused such
Dreams to be dreamed, by not beleiving, embracing, cleaving to, and carefully
observing of the Doctrine of the Apostles so plentifully delivered unto us by
the faithful Stewards of the mysteries of God and Ministers of Christ, to build
us upon him in faith and love. To show also how inexcusable those among us are,
who against all such warnings are still flocking after such filthy dreamers,
who defile the flesh, desp^se dominion, and speak evil of Dignities, Jude 8. To
establish such as may be wavering, and are of a doubtful mind, and lastly to
encourage the Righteous to hold fast the faithful word, which they have
received, as the very sheep of Christ, of whom he has said Joh. 10.27. My
sheep hear my voice and they follow me, and v 5 A stranger they will not follow
but will flee from him, for they know not the voice of strangers. But if any
will be flocking after these ravening wolves in sheeps clothing, let such know
that God sends these strong delusions in the unsearchable depth of his
righteous judgment against those that believed not the truth but had pleasure
in unrighteousness, that they all might be damned in believing a ly, and that
the approved might be made manifest, And also let them know that the time shall
come wherein, whether they will hear or forbear to hear they shall know that
many faithful Prophets have been among them, and through his grace still are,
for neglect and contempt of whose seasonable warnings they shall perish, and
their blood shall be upon their own heads, according to Ezekiel. 33* beginning*
But the faithful watchmen that have seasonably sounded the Trumpet have thereby
delivered their own Souls, being pure from the blood of all men.

Now the God of peace that brought again from the (...) our Lord Jesus Christ,
that great Shepherd of the Sheep through the blood of the everlasting Covenant
make you perfect in every good work to do his will working in you that which is
well pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and
ever. Amen. His I am, and him I desire to fear, and for his sake I am in

Yours to serve you in the Gospel Thomas Thacher.
Boston 23. 5. 1677.
Jer. 29, 8. For thus says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, let not your
Prophets, and your Diviners, that be in the midst of you, deceive you, neither
hearken to your Dreams, which ye cause to be dreamed.
IT is a strange thing (my Brethren) that the Lord should speak in this manner
to his people, or that there should be such a thing found among them; for he
speaks to the Rulers, and to the old men, etc. and he says that they had
caused these things to be spoken, that are Dreams, and the Lord does give
warning to them, that they should not hearken to these Dreams: what the people
of God that profess his holy name? will they have an hand in this woker to have
Dreams spoken* and to have Dreamers come, that shall be instrumental of the
damnation of the souls of men? but it is so sometimes, that there are those
that will compel others to these things: as I remember there were those that
came to Aaron, and would have a Calf made, etc. and I remember there was one
that came to the Prophet Micaiah, and told him of these and those Prophets that
did declare good to the King with one mouth: and let thy word be like the word
of one of them, and speak that which is good: but they were a company of
Dreamers: and Ahab does not love Micaiah: and he does never speak a good word
to me, wherefore I hate him: and the messenger that goes to him tells him that
there were so many hundreds of them that do speak pleasing things to the King,
and I pray thee do thou speak such like things to him, that may be matter of
contentment to him; but that Prophet of the Lord would not turn to the right
hand, or to the left, for the King, or for any other; but what God did put into
his mouth, that he would speak: and so it is generally, that when the false
Prophet does arise among the People of God, it is because of Gods people that
are the cause of it: and it is they that do set them up, and maintain them, and
would have pillows laid under their elbows: and why is it so? why (my Brethren)
even since it was that Eve did hearken to the voice of the Serpent: And also
the children of God are much given to novelties; these are things that they
never heard of before: and if they may have these and those things spoken which
they never heard of before, this is all many care for, though they are such
things as came not out of the mouth of God: yet because they are new things,
and that please their humors, therefore they affect them: thus the Apostle
Paul, one would think an Apostle good enough; yet there were many that were
unsatisfied with him, as in the Epistle to the Galatians we read, and bewitched
with the false Teachers; these give us (say they) the Gospel in this and that
way, etc. however they did once look at the Apostle Paul as an Angel of God,
even as Christ Jesus: but now the case was altered: and now Paul was no body:
and come of him what would, he might starve for all them: they were carried
away after those that vented their new things.

Again the word of the Lord does come with marvelous great power, and might,
when it is dispensed as it should be and accompanied with the holy Spirit of
God: and men cannot go on so pleasingly and quietly in their sinful ways, etc.
but these Prophets of God are ready to be upon their backs, and sit upon their
sk^rts, and tell them their own etc. Again another reason is because the people
of God, that live under the word of God where God is stretching forth his hands
all the day long, are (through corruption in them) even weary of the things of
God, and that because diverse of them have not received the truth of God ^n the
love of it, for if they had received the truth in the love of it, then they
would abide still in that love of the truth, and would not account any thing
too good for the faithful Ministers of God: But there are Hypocrites that come
into the Church, and sit in the same Pews, and seem to be very attentive, and
sometimes speak such a word as this [ A brave Sermon] and [ a fine Sermon! a
gallant Sermon it was that we heard to day! etc.] but yet they never subjected
themselves indeed to the truth of God: and will not part with their lusts which
they foster in their own bosoms: and if they love not the truth, there is
something else which they love surely; and indeed it is lies: even as our Lord
and Savior Christ says in the 5 th of John, I am come in my Fathers Name, and
ye receive me not: if another shall come in his own name him ye will receive:
and him they shall receive, though it should be in the Devils name: and now it
is just for God himself to give them over to the believing of lies, and to
strong delusions, and if there be one delusion more strong then another, and
more abominable then another, yet it will go down with them; as they that would
have Barrabbas rather then Christ, so it is with these that would not have the
truth, nor did receive it in the love of it. The Devil himself of Hell cannot
propose to them a lie more abominable then other, but they will receive the
same, and God is just in this Judgment upon them for dallying with his truth:
and for their not receiving of it; Satan is an enemy to God, and an enemy to
the truth: and when the Corn was sown in the field, then that enemy comes, and
he sows his Tares: he has a great hand in stirring up such men as these, and
puts these Dreams into their heads, and he will set up his Kingdom to pull
down the blessed Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ thereby: and he will have
his Ministers, and he will have deceivers (transforming himself into an Angel
of light) and he will come in the Name of God, and in the name of Christ also
even as the vagabond Jews Act. 19. and the sons of Sceva are said to do so.
There is nothing that the true Prophets do, but he will by turning himself into
an Angel of light do the like. The Devil spoke that truth, as it may be
questioned whether there can be a better truth spoken concerning Jesus Christ,
i. e. thou art the holy One of God: and so the Damosel, we know, that said
these men are the Servants of the most high God, which show unto us the way of
salvation: could you have spoken better words than these? but that was only to
make way for the bringing forth other things, that are in the pack, etc. Now
says the Lord do not you hearken to these Dreamers: it is a very lamentable
thing to see that any such Dreamers should arise, as Quakers and Ranters, and
these and those that trouble the Churches of God: but whom may we thank for it?
even Gods People: in our Text God here says, you have caused these Dreamers
thus to speak their Dreams, i. e. by setting them up, or countenancing them:
and by not testifying against them: God would have us seek to the Prophets, but
it is to those that indeed come in his Name, and are sent by him: and if we do
despise his Servants, we despise him: but as when those that did adjure by
Jesus, whom Paul Preached; it was said to them, who are you? so may the Lord
say, these and those that are sent in my Name I know, but as for you (these or
those) who are you? But alas, if God leave People to themselves, what will they
not come unto! This is one reason of it also, namely, because People are ready
to follow a multitude: do you not see how (...) and like them very well: and
for your (...) what are they? and, as Corah and his (...) as well as you: and
we can offer Incense as (...) you: and Baptize as well as you, etc. yea, but
Christ (...), you shall know them by their fruits: but thus are they c^^^ng
down, and crying out against the faithful Ministers of God: and if we look into
this Chapter, see what they say: is there not Jeremiah that makes himself a
Prophet? whereas it was not Man, but God that made him a Prophet: alas poor
man! he would have been glad to have been out of the work, but that God did
call him to that work: but they had rather have some other than Jeremiah to be
the Prophet. These Ministers, what are these Ministers: but if you would go to
such a manner of Meeting, and hear what things are spoken there, you would like
others better then your Minister: and so are men ready to cry up these as the
great power of God, as was of him said, Act. 8. thus it is here; but I beseech
you (my Brethren) if men will cast off the Lord, and his Ordinances, and follow
their own humors, let them alone, as Mat. 15. they are blind leaders of the
blind; but yet notwithstanding the Lord has pity upon his poor people when he
sees them thus taken in the net, and the Lord comes in now to give them
warning: O do not hearken to these Dreamers, but hearken to the holy Word of
God, even as in the Psalm now sung, Psalm. 119. The Word, the Word, the Word
(and the Statutes, the Statutes, the Statutes of God, and the Ordinances of
God, etc. Oh these are the things which we are to observe: one word from the
Lord is to be preferred before all other matters. You may think it a strange
thing that thus they should speak against the faithful Ministers of God, but
thus it has been with the Prophets of old, yea, and with our Savior Jesus
Christ himself, who did not preach as the Scribes did, but with authority, and
it was spoken of him, that God would raise up a Prophet like to Moses, etc. but
yet when he comes into his Ministry, to draw all men to the faith and obedience
of his holy name: yet (He, O they would have made a King of him, when as he did
so wonderfully feed them: and never man spoke as he! etc. but) afterward what
was our Lord Jesus in their account? even a Wine-bibber and a Glutton, and a
man that did practice with the Devil himself, even with Beelzebub himself: thus
did they speak against our Savior Jesus Christ: and yet Christ did labor
among them, and gave them many warnings: Woe be to Corazin: and woe be to thee
Bethsaida: and woe be to these, and woe be to those: but at length they came to
that to cry up Barrabbas before him: yet Christ did not leave giving warning, O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, I would have gathered thee as an hen gathers her
Chickens under her wings: and he did weep over them; that they would not know
the things of their peace: and that though he came to them, yet they (even his
own) did not receive him; but were weary of his Ministry* and the Romans (say
they) will come and destroy us: they thought it would be their utter undoing,
whereas indeed that was the cause of their overthrow that they did reject him:
yet still our Savior Jesus Christ goes on to preach to them: and so it is in
our days: and there be those that go about, and give it out, as though they
were Christ: and how many are ready to hearken to such: but consider, what came
you into this Wilderness for? did you come to gaze upon one another? etc. no,
you came to see, and hear that great Prophet, even the Lord Jesus in his
Ministers, that you might have the Ordinances of God in his Churches rightly
gathered, and the holy Sacraments rightly administered: I trow you did not come
hither for the World, to scrape the World: much less to put your necks under
these and those that would overturn all order among you: but O foolish
Galatians, who has bewitched you? you come hither to hear the blessed voice of
Jesus Christ, and you did make account that when you came hither, O how holy
should you be; etc and we came not to separate from the Churches in Old England
(God forbid) but we did indeed only separate from the polutions there: but
alas, who has bewitched you? that there should be any found to leave the
blessed Ordinances of God, and to follow these and those: and if he be a new
one, and have new things to teach them, that is enough to many: but the word of
God will not spa^e any in their sin: nor let men sleep quietly in their sin:
will not let the Drunkard alone, nor the Swearer alone, etc. but these Dreamers
have their soft Pillows to place under men's Elbows, that they may not be hurt
by leaning thereon: but see here the mercy of God that would not have men let
alone, and run to hell in such way of their Dreams: O do not this abominable
thing that my soul hates! and did not the Lord give warning to Korah and his
company? and so to the People, that they might not follow them? but away, away,
save your souls, and come not near them if you love your lives, if you love
your souls come not near to those men, but hearken to the voice of God; so
here, etc. And therefore hearken not to the Dreamers, and Dreams which you have
caused them to Dream: but if you have been deluded come out from those
delusions; if by your connivances, or entertainments, and the like, we have
encouraged such Dreamers, O continue no longer so to do: And if these would not
(in our Text) be persuaded from hearkening to those Dreamers, yet I here come
in the name of the Lord Jesus to you to give you warning: O hearken not to
these and those Dreamers; God will tell you one day you had your Cotton and
your Norton, and your Hooker, and your Shepard, and your Rogers, and these and
those, you had my Ministers, and there is never a Minister that God has sent,
but the time will come, when as, if you have heard them, and obeyed them, O
what a sweet meeting will that be, and then may they say, Lord, here we are,
and the Children that thou have given us, etc. But otherwise God will say, why
did you not receive them? when they come to despise the Prophets of the Lord,
were it but the least of the holy Prophets and Messengers of the Lord, the
wrath of the Lord rose against his People, so that there was no remedy: hearken
not therefore to these or those Dreams or Dreamers, but stop your ears against
them: as the Adder that keeps her self from being charmed, she is said to stop
her ear with the ground on which she lies, and the other ear with some other
part of her body; so in this case stop your ears against them, and take heed in
this case: else Conscience will fly in your faces another day, and say I told
you of it, and I checked you for it, and you would not regard. But therefore
hearken to those that do in a right manner speak to you the word of God, that
are fitted for it, and are called of God to that work of the Ministry: hearken
to these; And have you not (many of you) been converted by the Ministers of
God? and have you not been comforted by them many a time? etc. and will you now
cast off the Lord, and his servants? O to day, while it is called to day,
hearken to the Lords voice; the Lord is yet willing to receive you, and to
protect you; but if you hearken to these Dreamers, God will turn to be your
Enemy: and will testify against such, as against Ahab, and Zedechiah spoken of
in the Chapter where our text is, that were left to commit villainy in Israel,
even to commit Adultery with their Neighbors Wives (and that is the fruit of
these and those Sects, and Errors, that such shall be left to commit such like
uncleanness) and the King roasted these Dreamers in the fire, as one would
roast an hog: and this did become a Proverb, The Lord make thee like Zedechiah
and like Ahab, etc. And so I say, mark what will come on such like Dreamers:
and so says the Apostle, mark those that do cause divisions, and offenses,
contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them: mark them so as
to avoid them, and mark the course that the Lord will take with them, and with
those that will follow after them. There are many Dreamers in these times, the
Quaker has his Dreams, and the Seeker has his Dreams, and I cannot reckon up
all of them: and one Dream does be get another, but the Lord does testify
against them all: and the Lord calls them bad Figs, none so bad as those Figs
were that did thus despise the Lords Prophets and Messengers, or Ministers: the
Dreamers would take you off from them, but I beseech you that you would not
hearken to those Dreamers, but hearken to the voice of the Lord by his
Ministers in their speeches, in their writings, I have known New England about
thirty six years, and I never knew such a time as this is that we live in: you
came hither for your Children, Sons and Daughters, and for your Grandchildren
to be under the Ordinances of God, that they might be as Plants in the Lords
house, was not this a great end in your coming hither? now if you love your
selves, your Families, your Children, if you love God, if you love Christ, if
you love Heaven, then hearken not to Dreamers, nor cause them to Dream that
would corrupt the People of God, and that would take them off from the holy and
blessed will of God in these things: you would not suffer any to come and rob
you of your Money, or your Jewels, etc. would you let them come into your
Houses, and take them away by force from you? no, you would thrust them away,
and what have you to do here? O much more so, when they come to rob you of the
Ordinances of God, and of his faithful Ministers; this is as much as in them
lies to take away our God from us, and communion with him: go serve other Gods,
said Saul, by his acting, in his thrusting poor David away from the Ordinances
of God: and so the two Tribes and a half were very careful about their
Children, that it might not be said to them, what have you to do with the Lord
God of Israel? and you have no part in the Lord, and so their Children should
be made to cease from fearing the Lord: and when they saw any thing that did
look like a new Religion, and like a superstition, now the people of God arm
themselves, and let us go every one, and suppress and destroy those that would
be the Authors thereof, unless they did repent: and what do they say? the Lord
God of Gods, he knows this and that: what! go and set up an Altar against
Gods Altar! O wretches that we were if so we should do, but we were afraid lest
in time to come your Children might speak unto our Children saying, what have
you to do with the Lord God of Israel? and therefore that Altar was only a
memorial that we and our Children are in the Covenant of God: so it should be;
we are to be zealous for God, and zealous for his Ordinances, that we our
selves may enjoy them, and also our Children after us, and that none might
thrust them from their part in the Lord, and from their enjoyment of the
Ordinances of God. We are afraid sometimes of Turk, or Pope, or these and
those: be you afraid of nothing, but as our Lord and Savior Christ says, I
will tell you whom you shall fear: do not fear men that kill the body, but fear
him that can kill the soul: and love the Lord, fear God, and honor the King,
that is the duty of every good Christian: above all fear and obey the Lord:
hearken to the good word of God, that is able to save your souls, and build you
up, and give you an inheritance among them that shall be saved: that when the
Lord Jesus shall come in flaming fire, he may have nothing to say against you,
but may say to you come ye blessed inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, and
here is life and death set before you: New England, here is life and death set
before thee; choose which you will: Let the Governor choose which he will, let
the Church of Boston choose which they will, let us all choose life, and choose
to serve the Lord, we and our Houses as Joshua, and then God will be with us:
and if God be with us, who is there that can be against us to hurt us? and so
be for God, as to live to God, and to be willing to die for him also if he call
us to it: O be willing to submit to his will, that we may be able to kiss the
stake, and the faggot if the Lord call us to it; There is no King in the World
that has such a Crown as that would be: we are to cast up our reckoning before
hand (as John Frith did) what it may cost us to be for, and to serve the Lord?
trust not in men, trust not in the Governor, trust not in the Magistrates:
trust not in your Captains, trust not in your Castle, or Ammunition, trust not
in your own righteousness; but trust in this, that if the Lord be your God, and
if you walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, that he will be with you: and
say as the holy Prophet David; Here we are Lord, and thou know that we came
hither to shroud our selves, and our Children under thy wings, and leave our
witness behind us when we are dead: but here we are, and do to us even as is
good in thine eyes: and yet as he said, who knows but we shall find mercy in
his sight; but then walk as David did: that though not afraid of the Lion or
Bear; or of ten thousand of his Enemies, yet he flies from his Son: and then
what did he? truly he went bare-headed by the ascent of Mount Olivet, weeping
as he went: and Kingdom or no Kingdom, he left that to God; but there prays
to God, and that was a Prayer against Ahitophel [Lord curse the counsel of
Ahitophel] and God did hear him, and restore him to his House, and Kingdom,
and Glory again: so let us all pray, and repent; Governor repent, Magistrates
repent, Ministers repent, People even all repent, young and old repent, and
then it shall go well with us.

FINIS.

