A BRIEF RECOGNITION OF NEW-ENGLANDS ERRAND INTO THE Wilderness;

Made in the Audience of the General Assembly of the Massachusetts Colony, at
Boston in N. E, on the 11th of the third Month, 1670. being the DAY of
ELECTION THERE.

By Samuel Danforth, Pastor of the Church of Christ in Roxbury in N. E.

Jer. 2. 2. Go, and cry in the ears of Jerusalem, saying, Thus says the Lord,
I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, when
thou wentest after me in the Wilderness, in a Land that was not sown. 3. Israel
was Holiness unto the Lord, and the first fruits of his increase -- 5. Thus
says the Lord, What iniquity have your fathers found in me, that they are gone
far from me, and have walked after vanity, and are become vain? CAMBRIDGE:
Printed by S. G. and M. J. 1671.

Christian Reader,
A Word spoken in due season ( says Solomon) how good is it? Prove. 15. 23. And
again, A word fitly spoken is like Apples of gold in pictures of silver, Chap.
25. 11. Such were the words of our Lord Jesus, who (accommodating himself to
the way of Doctrine used by those Eastern Nations) did by Parabolical
discourses delight to breathe forth the deep Mysteries of divine and heavenly
Wisdom: And how plain, but pungent, his Sermons were, how perspicuous, yet
unspeakably profound were those Oracles which flowed out of his lips of grace,
none are ignorant, who are not unacquainted with what the holy Evangelists do
harmoniously relate concerning him. No more excellent Pattern then the Lord
Jesus for the Ministry of the New Testament to imitate: And of all the words of
the Sacred Scripture (though all are of equal Authority, as being of the Canon,
yet) none seem to have a more eminent immediation of Heart-commanding virtue,
then those which proceeded directly out of the mouth of the Lord himself;
whereof this Text is one, upon which the following Sermon is spent. And how
much of the Spirit of our Savior appears therein, I need not say, and which
perhaps will not, at the first dash, be discerned by the ordinary or cursory
Reader; but Wisdom is justified of her children. The seasonableness, and
suitableness of this Work which is now in thine hand, unto our present
Wilderness-state, will commend it self unto the judicious Christian, whose
heart does indeed travel with the laboring Interest of the Kingdom of our
Lord Jesus in these Ends of the Earth: The Text carrying with it so much
heavenly argumentation, being so profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in righteousness, as though intended by our Lord
Jesus for such a Day as that, whereon this Sermon was Preached, (and also
before such an Auditory). Whosoever applands the former, will not disapprove the
latter; the Reverend Author thereof observing therein the Saying of that
Apostolic Man of God (and very judicious in his Advice to younger Ministers
about such matters) his most Reverend Father of blessed Memory, Mr. Wilson,
viz. That he delighted in such a Sermon wherein the Preacher kept close unto
his Text, and the proper scope thereof, and wandered not from it by needless
excursions, and impertinent enlargements.

The loss of first love, first to Christ, and so to the Subjects, and Order of
his Kingdom, being a Radical Disease too tremendously growing upon so great a
part of the Body of Professors in this Land, unto a Laodicean lukewarmness in
the matters of God, notwithstanding the signal, and unparallel Experiences of
the blessing of God upon this people, a people so often saved by the Lord in
the way of Moses and Aaron' s meeting, and kissing one another in the Mount of
God; and the observation of that Declension justly calling for so meet an
Antidote and faithful Caution, as is the ensuing Sermon (...) unto such, to
review, and consider in earnest their Errand into this Wilderness: and the
recovery of their affections to the Name of Christ, in the chastity, vigor,
and fervor thereof, by a thorough-Reformation of things in the Matters of his
Worship, being a special duty in this hour of Temptation incumbent, as on the
Magistracy in their Sphere, so on the Ministry in theirs, whereby they may
declare themselves loyal to Christ in their Generation-work, has no doubt
inclined the heart of this Servant of his, to yield unto the Persuasions of
diverse, that these his Meditations might be published, and so (through the
blessing of God) advance that desired Reformation. It is not a loose
Toleration, nor a rigid Independent-Separation, but an holy, and brotherly
Reformation which all should in such an hour be endeavoring. And how perilous
a Seeptical Indifferency, or a Reed like Vacillation, much more wilful
Opposition to the Doctrine and Way of the first Fathers and Founders of this
Colony in Matters of Religion, would be, were it only in those two Points
about the Magistrates Coercive Power in Matters of Religion, ( contrary to that
Toleration aforesaid) and about Communion of Churches in Synods, etc. described
also by them, from the Word, of God, in the Platform of Discipline ( contrary
to that Independent-Separation aforesaid) will be evident to those that
understand what these things mean; scil. 1. Quod liberi sunt Spirituales a jugo
potestatis secularis: and 2. Quod Ecclesia non potest errare. It is said I
remember (Josh. 24. 31.) that Israel served the Lord all the days of Joshua,
and all the days of the Elders that outlived Joshua, and which had known all
the works of the Lord that he had done for Israel: It is much to Isreal's
advantage in the service of God, when the Lord graciously continues those, who
are acquainted with the First Ways of such a people, as has been Holiness to
the Lord, and with the First Works of the Lord in his laying the Foundation of
that Glory which might dwell in their Land. And it is recorded (Exodus 1. 8.) as
an inlet to Isreal's calamitous state, in that place where the Lord had greatly
multiplied and blessed them, that there arose up a New King which knew not
Joseph. When Joseph, or Joshua are unknown, or forgotten, and the Work and Way
of God in leading his people by the hand of Moses and Aaron in their primitive
Glory not understood, or not minded by these or those, how fearfully ominous,
to Israel must it needs be! and how necessitating the affectionate repetition,
again, and again, of that expostulatory, sad Interrogation of our Savior, But
what went ye out into the Wilderness to see? And should there arise such
another Generation (as is mentioned Judge. 2. 11.) after our Fathers are removed
to rest from the warfare of the service of the Tabernacle of God in their
Generation, as should not know the Lord, nor regard the works which he has
done for our Israel, what may be expected, but that (as the following Context
shows) the anger of the Lord should wax hot against Israel, and that he deliver
us also into the hand of spoilers? etc. Strangers to the FIRST Intention of the
people of God in their planting in this Wilderness, and so to the Doctrine of
Faith and Order left in Print behind them (more sure and credible then some
Unwritten Traditions thereabout) may prove dangerous Instruments to OUR Ruin,
if the Lord in mercy prevent not.

It was the commendation of Timothy by Paul, 2 Timothy 3. 10,11. as also a
profitable instruction and encouragement to him, when he says, But thou have
fully known my doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, long-suffering,
charity, patience, persecutions, afflictions which came unto me at Antioch, at
Iconium, at Lystra, what persecutions I endured; but out of them all the Lord
delivered me: the like may be said of this Reverend Servant of the Lord, my
dear Brother in Christ, to whom it has seemed good (...) (according to that
word of Wisdom which is given to him by that same holy Spirit, from whom
proceed those diversities of gifts, which he divides to every man severally as
he will) to leave this ensuing Testimony of his solicitude for the poor Woman
fled also into this Wilderness, unto the consideration of all such as are
wise-hearted in Israel. His nearness to, and intimacy with my Ever-honoured
Father now with God (he being brought up with him as a Son with a Father)
commands from my Pen a glad apprehending the opportunity of performing this
service of waiting upon it to the Press; praying, that the Lord would make the
words thereof as Goads, and Nails fastened by the Masters of Assemblies, and
given by that one Shepherd the Lord Jesus: In whom I am

Thine, for the service of thy Faith, Thomas Shepard.

A BRIEF RECOGNITION OF New-Englands Errand into the WILDERNESS.
Matthew. 11. 7,8,9. -- What went ye out into the wilderness to see? A reed
shaken with the wind?

But what went ye out for to see? A man clothed in soft raiment? behold, they
that wear soft clothing, are in Kings houses.

But what went ye out for to see? A Prophet? yea, I say unto you, and more then
a Prophet.


THese words are our Savior's Proem to his illustrious Encomium of John the
Baptist. John began his Ministry, not in Jerusalem, nor in any famous City of
Judea, but in the Wilderness, i. e. in a woody, retired and solitary place,
thereby withdrawing himself from the envy and preposterous zeal of such as were
addicted to their old Traditions, and also taking the people aside from the
noise and tumult of their secular occasions and businesses, which might have
obstructed their ready and cheerful attendance unto his Doctrine. The Ministry
of John at first was entertained by all sorts with singular affection: There
went out to him Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the region round about Jordan,
Mat. 3. 5. but after awhile, the people's fervor abated, and John being kept
under restraint diverse months, his authority and esteem began to decay and
languish, John 5. 35. Wherefore our Savior, taking occasion from John's
Messengers coming to him, after their departure, gives an excellent Elogie and
Commendation of John, to the intent that He might tatifie and confirm his
Doctrine and Administration, and revive his Authority and Estimation in the
hearts and consciences of the people.

This Elogie our Savior begins with an elegant Dialogism, which the
Rhetorician calls Communication: gravely deliberating with his Hearers, and
seriously enquiring to what purpose they went out into the Wilderness, and what
expectation drew them thither. Wherein we have, 1. The general Question, and
main subject of his Inquisition. 2. The particular Enquiries. 3. The
Determination of the Question.

The general Question is, What went ye out into the Wilderness to see? He says
not, Whom went ye out to hear, but what went ye out to see? (...). The phrase
agrees to Shows and Stage Plays; plainly arguing that many of those, who
seemed well-affected to John, and flocked after him, were Theatrical Hearers,
Spectators, rather then Auditors; they went not to hear, but to see; they went
to gaze upon a new and strange Spectacle.

This general Question being propounded, the first particular Enquiry is,
whether they went to see A reed shaken with the wind? The expression is
Metaphorical and Proverbial. A reed when the season is calm, lifts up it self
and stands upright, but no sooner does the wind blow upon it, but it shakes and
trembles, bends and bows down, and then gets up again: and again it yields and
bows, and then lifts up it self again. A notable Emblem of light, empty and
inconstant persons, who in times of peace and tranquillity, give a fair and
plausible Testimony to the Truth; but no sooner do the winds of Temptation blow
upon them, and the waves of Troubles roll over them, but they incline and yield
to the prevailing Party: but when the Tempest is over, they recover themselves
and assert the Truth again. The meaning then of this first Enquiry is, Went ye
out into the Wilderness to see a light, vain and inconstant man, one that could
confess and deny, and deny and confess the same Truth? This Interrogation is to
be understood negatively and ironically; q. d. Surely ye went not into the
desert to behold such a ludicrous and ridiculous fight, A man like unto a reed
shaken with the wind. Under the negation of the contrary levity, our Savior
sets forth one of John' s excellencies, viz. his eminent Constancy in asserting
the Truth. The winds of various temptations both on the right hand and on the
left, blew upon him, yet he wavered not in his testimony concerning Christ, He
confessed and denied not, but confessed the truth.

Then the general Question is repeated, But what went ye out for to see? and a
second particular Enquiry made, Was it to see a man clothed in soft raiment?
This Interrogation has also the force of a negation, q. d. Surely ye went not
into the Wilderness to see a man clothed in silken and costly Apparel. The
reason of this is added, Behold, they that wear soft clothing, are in Kings
houses. Delicate and costly Apparel is to be expected in Princes Courts, and
not in wild Woods and Forests. Under the negation of John' s affectation of
Courtly delicacy, our Savior sets forth another of John' s excellencies, viz.
his singular gravity and sobriety, who wore rough garments, and lived on course
and mean fare, Mat. 3. 4. which austere kind of life was accommodated to the
place and work of his Ministry. John Preached in the Wilderness, which was no
fit place for silken and soft raiment. His work was to prepare a people for the
Lord, by calling them off from worldly pomp and vanities, unto repentance and
mourning for sin. His peculiar habit and diet was such as became a penitentiary
Preacher.

Thirdly, the general Question is reiterated, But what went ye out for to see?
and a third particular Enquiry made, Was it to see a Prophet? This
Interrogation is to be understood affirmatively, q. d. no doubt but it was to
see a Prophet. Had not John been a rare and excellent Minister of God, you
would never have gone out of your Cities into the desert to have seen him. Thus
our Savior sets forth another of John' s admirable excellencies, viz. his
Prophetical Office and Function. John was not an ordinary Interpreter of the
Law, much less a Teacher of Jewish Traditions, but a Prophet, one who by the
extraordinary Inspiration of the holy Ghost, made known the Mysteries of
Salvation, Luke 1. 76,77.

Lastly, our Savior determines and concludes the Question, He whom ye went out
to see was more then a 'Prophet, (...), much more, or abundantly more then a
Prophet. This he confirms by his wonted Asseveration, Yea, I say unto you, and
much more then a Prophet. How was John much more then a Prophet? John was
Christ's Herald sent immediately before his face, to proclaim his Coming and
Kingdom, and prepare the people for the reception of him by the Baptism of
Repentance, ver. 10. Hence it follows ver. 11. Among all that are born of
women, there has not risen a greater Prophet then John. John was greater then
any of the Prophets that were before him, not in respect of his personal graces
and virtues, (for who shall persuade us that he excelled Abraham in the grace
of Faith, who was the father of the faithful, or Moses in Meekness, who was the
meekest man on earth, or David in Faithfulness, who was a man after Gods own
heart, or Solomon in Wisdom, who was the wisest man that ever was or shall
be?) but in respect of the manner of his dispensation. All the Prophets
foretold Christ's Coming, his Sufferings and Glory, but the Baptist was his
Harbinger and Forerunner, that bare the Sword before him, Proclaimed his
Presence, and made room for him in the hearts of the people. All the Prophets
saw Christ afar off, but the Baptist saw him present, baptized him, and applied
the Types to him personally. Behold the Lamb of God. He saw and bare record
that this is the Son of God, Joh. 1. 29,34. But he that is least in the
Kingdom of Heaven, is greater then John. The least Prophet in the Kingdom of
Heaven, i. e. the least Minister of the Gospel since Christ's Ascension, is
greater then John; not in respect of the measure of his personal gifts, nor in
respect of the manner of his Calling, but in respect of the Object of his
Ministry, Christ on the Throne, having finished the work of our Redemption, and
in respect of the degree of the revelation of Christ, which is far more clear
and full. John showed Christ in the flesh, and pointed to him with his finger,
but the Ministers of the Gospel declare that he has done and suffered all
things necessary to our Salvation, and is risen again and set down at the right
hand of God.

Doct. Such as have sometime left their pleasant Cities and Habitations to
enjoy the pure Worship of God in a Wilderness, are apt in time to abate and
cool in their affection thereunto: but then the Lord calls upon them seriously
and thoroughly to examine themselves, what it was that drew them into the
Wilderness, and to consider that it was not the expectation of ludicrous
levity, nor of Courtly pomp and delicacy, but of the free and clear
dispensation of the Gospel and Kingdom of God.

This Doctrine consists of two distinct Branches; let me open them severally.

Branch 1. Such as have sometime left their pleasant Cities and Habitations, to
enjoy the pure Worship of God in a Wilderness, are apt in time to abate and
cool in their affection thereunto. To what purpose did the Children of Israel
leave their Cities and Houses in Egypt, and go forth into the Wilderness? was
it not to hold a Feast to the Lord, and to sacrifice to the God of their
fathers? That was the only reason, which they gave of their motion to Pharaoh,
Exodus 5. 1,3. but how soon did they forget their Errand into the Wilderness,
and corrupt themselves in their own Inventions? within a few months after
their coming out of Egypt, they make a Calf in Horeb, and worship the molten
Image, and change their glory into the similitude of an Ox that eats grass,
Psalm. 106. 19,20. Exodus 32. 7,8. yea for the space of forty years in the
Wilderness, while they pretended to Sacrifice to the Lord, they indeed
worshipped the Stars and the Host of Heaven, and together with the Lords
Tabernacle, carried about with them the Tabernacle of Moloch, Amos 5. 25,26.
Acts 7. 42,43. And how did they spend their time in the Wilderness, but in
tempting God, and in murmuring against their godly and faithful Teachers and
Rulers, Moses and Aaron? Psalm. 95. 8. To what purpose did the Children of the
Captivity upon Cyrus his Proclamation, leave their Houses which they had built,
and their Vineyards and Oliveyards which they had planted in the Province of
Babylon, and return to Judea and Jerusalem, which were now become a Wilderness?
was it not that they might build the House of God at Jerusalem, and set up the
Temple-worship? But how shamefully did they neglect that great and honorable
Work for the space of above forty years? They pretended that Gods time was not
come to build his House, because of the rubs and obstructions which they met
with; whereas all their difficulties and discouragements hindered not their
building of stately houses for themselves, Hag. 1. 2,3,4. To what purpose did
Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the region round about Jordan, leave their
several Cities and Habitations, and flock into the Wilderness of Judea? was it
not to see that burning and shining light, which God had raised up? To hear his
heavenly Doctrine, and partake of that new Sacrament, which he administered? O
how they were affected with his rare and excellent gifts! with his clear,
lively and powerful Ministry! The Kingdom of Heaven pressed in upon them with
a holy violence, and the violent, the zealous and affectionate hearers of the
Gospel, took it by force, Mat. 11. 12. Luke 16. 16. They leapt over all
discouragements and impediments, whether outward, as Legal Rites and
Ceremonies, or inward, the sense of their own sin and unworthiness, and pressed
into the Kingdom of God, as men rush into a Theater to see a pleasant Sight,
or as Soldiers run into a besieged City, to take the Spoil thereof: but their
hot fit is soon over, their affection lasted but for an hour, i. e. a short
season, Joh. 5. 35.

Reas. 1. Because the affection of many to the Ministry of the Gospel and the
pure Worship of God, is built upon temporary and transitory grounds, as the
novelty and strangeness of the matter, the rareness and excellency of
Ministerial Gifts, the voice of the people, the countenance of great men, and
hope of worldly advantage. The Jews had lien in ignorance and darkness a long
time, being trained up under the superstitious observances of their old
Traditions, which were vain, empty and unprofitable Customs, and the Church
wanted the gift of Prophecy about four hundred years, and therefore when John
the Baptist arose like a bright and burning light, shining amongst them with
admirable gifts of the Spirit, and extraordinary severity and gravity of
manners, proclaiming the Coming and Kingdom of the Messiah, (which had been
often promised and long expected) and pressing the people to Repentance and good
works; O how they admire and reverence him? especially, when grown popular and
countenanced by Herod the Tetrarch. What sweet affections are kindled! what
great expectations are raised! what ravishing joy is conceived! Hoping (as its
probable) to make use of his Authority to cast off the Roman yoke, and recover
their Civil Liberties, Riches and Honors. But after a little acquaintance with
John, (for he was a public Preacher but a year and half) his Doctrine,
Administrations and Prophetical Gifts, grew common and stale things, and of
little esteem with them; especially, when they saw their carnal hopes
frustrated, the Rulers disaffected, and Herod's countenance and carriage toward
him changed.

Reas. 2. Because Prejudices and Offenses are apt to arise in the hearts of
many against the faithful Dispensers of the Gospel. The Pharisees and Lawyers
came among others to the Baptism of John, but when they hear his sharp
reprehensions of their Viperous Opinions and Practices, they nauseate his
Doctrine, repudiate his Baptism, calumniate his Conversation, Luke 7. 30.
Herodias has an inward grudge and a quarrel against him, because he found
fault with her incestuous Marriage, Mar. 6. 19. Yea, that very Age and
Generation of the Jews, were like to a company of surly, sullen and froward
children, whom no Music can please, they neither dance after the Pipe, nor
make lamentation after the mourner. They inveigh against John's austerity,
saying that he was transported with diabolical fury, and was an enemy to humane
society: and they do as much distaste and abhor Christ's gentleness and
familiarity, traducing him, as being a sensual and voluptuous person, given to
intemperance and luxury, and a Patron and Abettor of looseness and profaneness,
Mat. 11. 16. -- 19. Thus does the frowardness and stubbornness of man, resist
and oppose the wisdom and goodness of God, who uses various ways and
instruments to compass poor sinners, but they through their folly and
perverseness frustrate, disanul and abrogate the counsel of God against
themselves. The evil spirit that troubled Saul, was quieted and allayed by the
sweet Melody of David' s Harp: but the mad and outrageous fury that transports
men against the Truth and the Ministry thereof, cannot be quieted and allayed
by the voice of the Charmers, charm they never so wisely.

Branch 11. When men abate and cool in their affection to the pure Worship of
God, which they went into the Wilderness to enjoy, the Lord calls upon them
seriously and thoroughly to examine themselves, what it was that drew them into
the Wilderness, and to consider that it was not the expectation of ludicrous
levity, nor of Courtly pomp and delicacy, but of the free and clear
dispensation of the Gospel and Kingdom of God. Our Savior knowing that the
people had lost their first love and singular affection to the revelation of
his grace by the Ministry of his Herald John, He is very intense in examining
them, what expectation drew them into the Wilderness: He does not once nor
twice, but thrice propound that Question, What went ye out into the Wilderness
to see? Yea, in particular he enquires whether it were to see a man that was
like to a Reed shaken with the wind? or whether it were to see a man clothed
like a Courtier, or whether it were to see a Prophet, and then determines the
Question concluding that it was to see a great and excellent Prophet, and that
had not they seen rare and admirable things in him, they would never have gone
out into the Wilderness unto him.

The Reason is, Because the serious consideration of the inestimable grace and
mercy of God in the free and clear dispensation of the Gospel and Kingdom of
God, is a special means to convince men of their folly and perverseness in
undervaluing the same, and sanctified remedy to recover their affections
thereunto. The Lord foreseeing the defection of Israel after Moses his death,
commands him to write that Prophetical Song, recorded in Deuteronomy. 32. as a
Testimony against them: wherein the chief remedy, which he prescribes for the
prevention and healing of their Apostasy, is their calling to remembrance Gods
great and signal love in manifesting himself to them in the Wilderness, in
conducting them safely and mercifully, and giving them possession of their
promised Inheritance, ver. 7 -- 14. And when Israel was apostatized and fallen,
the Lord to convince them of their ingratitude and folly, brings to their
remembrance his deliverance of them out of Egypt, his leading them through the
Wilderness for the space of forty years, and not only giving them possession
of their Enemies Land, but also raising up, even of their own Sons, Prophets,
faithful and eminent Ministers, and of their young men Nazarites, who being
separated from worldly delights and encumbrances, were Paterns of Purity and
Holiness: all which were great and obliging mercies. Yea, the Lord appeals to
their own Consciences, whether these his favors were not real and signal, Amos
2. 10,11. The Prophet Jeremiah, that he might reduce the people from their
backslidings, cries in the ears of Jerusalem, with earnestness and boldness
declaring unto them, that the Lord remembered how well they stood affected
toward him, when he first chose them to be his people and espoused them to
himself, how they followed him in the Wilderness, and kept close to him in
their long and wearisome passage through the uncultured Desert; how they were
then consecrated to God, and set apart for his Worship and Service; as the
first fruits are wont to be sequestered and devoted to God: and thereupon
expostulates with them for their forsaking the Lord, and following after their
Idols, Jer. 2. 2,3,5,6. Surely our Savior's Dialogism with his Hearers in my
Text, is not a mere Rhetorical Elegancy to adorn his Testimony concerning John,
but a clear and strong conviction of their folly in slighting and despising
that which they sometime so highly pretended unto, and a wholesome admonition
and direction how to recover their primitive affection to his Doctrine and
Administration.

USE 1. Of solemn and serious Enquiry to us all in this general Assembly,
Whether we have not in a great measure forgotten our Errand into the
Wilderness. You have solemnly professed before God, Angels and Men, that the
Cause of your leaving your Country, Kindred and Fathers houses, and
transporting your selves with your Wives, Little Ones and Substance over the
vast Ocean into this waste and howling Wilderness, was your Liberty to walk in
the Faith of the Gospel will all good Conscience according to the Order of the
Gospel, and your enjoyment of the pure Worship of God according to his
Institution, without humane Mixtures and Impositions. Now let us sadly consider
whether our ancient and primitive affections to the Lord Jesus, his glorious
Gospel, his pure and Spiritual Worship and the Order of his House, remain,
abide and continue firm, constant, entire and inviolate. Our Savior's
reiteration of this Question, What went ye out into the Wilderness to see? is
no idle repetition, but a sad conviction of our dullness and backwardness to
this great duty, and a clear demonstration of the weight and necessity thereof.
It may be a grief to us to be put upon such an Inquisition; as it is said of
Peter, Joh. 21. 17. Peter was grieved, because he said unto him the third time,
Love thou me? but the Lord knows that a strict and rigid examination of our
hearts in this point, is no more then necessary. Wherefore let us call to
remembrance the former days, and consider whether it was not then better with
us, then it is now.

In our first and best time the Kingdom of Heaven brake in upon us with a holy
violence, and every man pressed into it. What mighty efficacy and power had the
clear and faithful dispensation of the Gospel upon your hearts? how
affectionately and zealously did you entertain the Kingdom of God? How careful
were you, even all sorts, young and old, high and low, to take hold of the
opportunities of your Spiritual good and edification? ordering your secular
affairs (which were wreathed and twisted together with great variety) so as not
to interfere with your general Calling, but that you might attend upon the Lord
without distraction. How diligent and faithful in preparing your hearts for the
reception of the Word, laying apart all filthiness and superfluity of
naughtiness, that you might receive with meekness the engrossed word, which is
able to save your souls; and purging out all malice, guile, hypocrisies,
envies, and all evil speakings, and as newborn babes, desiring the sincere
milk of the Word, that ye might grow thereby? How attentive in hearing the
everlasting Gospel, watching daily at the gates of Wisdom, and waiting at the
posts of her doors, that ye might find eternal life, and obtain favor of the
Lord? Gleaning day by day in the field of Gods Ordinances, ever among the
Sheaves, and gathering up handfuls, which the Lord let fall of purpose for you,
and at night going home and beating out what you had gleaned, by Meditation,
Repetition, Conference, and therewith feeding your selves and your families.
How painful were you in recollecting, repeating and discoursing of what you
heard, whetting the Word of God upon the hearts of your Children, Servants and
Neighbors? How fervent in Prayer to Almighty God for his divine Blessing upon
the Seed sown, that it might takeroot and fructify? O what a reverent esteem
had you in those days of Christ's faithful Ambassadors, that declared unto you
the Word of Reconciliation! How beautiful were the feet of them, that preached
the Gospel of peace, and brought the glad tidings of Salvation! you esteemed
them highly in love for their works sake. Their Persons, Names and Comforts
were precious in your eyes; you counted your selves blessed in the enjoyment of
a Pious, Learned and Orthodox Ministry: and though you ate the bread of
adversity and drank the water of affliction, yet you rejoiced in this, that
your eyes saw your Teachers, they were not removed into corners, and your ears
heard a word behind you, saying, This is the way, walk ye in it, when you
turned to the right hand and when you turned to the left, Isa. 30. 20,21. What
earnest and ardent desires had you in those days after Communion with Christ
in the holy Sacraments? With desire you desired to partake of the Seals of the
Covenant. You thought your Evidences for Heaven not sure nor authentic, unless
the Broad-Seals of the Kingdom were annexed. What solicitude was there in
those days to seek the Lord after the right Order? What searching of the holy
Scriptures, what Collations among your Leaders, both in their private Meetings
and public Councils and synods, to find out the Order, which Christ has
constituted and established in his House? What fervent zeal was there then
against Sectaries and Heretics, and all manner of Heterodoxies? You could not
bear them that were evil, but tried them that pretended to New Light and
Revelations, and found them liars. What pious Care was there of
Sister-Churches, that those that wanted Breasts, might be supplied, and that
those that wanted Peace, their Dissentions might be healed? What readiness was
there in those days to call for the help of Neighbour-Elders and Brethren, in
case of any Difference or Division that could not be healed at home? What
reverence was there then of the Sentence of a Council, as being decisive and
issuing the Controversy? According to that ancient Proverbial Saying, They
shall surely ask counsel at Abel, and so they ended the matter, 2 Samuel 20. 18.
What holy Endeavors were there in those days to propagate Religion to your
Children and Posterity, training them up in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord, keeping them under the awe of government, restraining their enormities
and extravagancies; charging them to know the God of their fathers, and serve
him with a perfect heart and willing mind; and publicly asserting and
maintaining their interest in the Lord and in his holy Covenant, and zealously
opposing those that denied the same?

And then had the Churches rest throughout the several Colonies, and were
edified: and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the holy
Ghost, were multiplied. O how your Faith grew exceedingly! you proceeded from
faith to faith, from a less to a greater degree and measure, growing up in Him,
who is our Head, and receiving abundance of grace and of the gift of
righteousness, that you might reign in life by Jesus Christ. O how your Love
and Charity toward each other abounded! O what comfort of Love! what bowels
and mercies! what affectionate care was there one of another! what a holy
Sympathy in Crosses and Comforts, weeping with those that wept, and rejoicing
with those that rejoiced!

But who is there left among you, that saw these Churches in their first glory,
and how do you see them now? Are they not in your eyes in comparison thereof,
as nothing? How is the gold become dim! how is the most fine gold changed! Is
not the Temper, Complexion and Countenance of the Churches strangely altered?
Does not a careless, remiss, flat, dry, cold, dead frame of spirit, grow in
upon us secretly, strongly, prodigiously? They that have Ordinances, are as
though they had none; and they that hear the Word, as though they heard it not;
and they that pray, as though they prayed not; and they that receive
Sacraments, as though they received them not; and they that are exercised in
the holy things, using them by the by, as matters of custom and ceremony, so
as not to hinder their eager prosecution of other things which their hearts are
set upon. Yea and in some particular Congregations amongst us, is there not in
stead of a sweet smell, a stink? and in stead of a girdle, a rent? and in stead
of a stomacher, a girding with sackcloth? and burning in stead of beauty? yea
the Vincyard is all overgrown with thorns, and nettles cover the face thereof,
and the stone-wall thereof is broken down, Prove. 24 31. yea, and that which is
the most sad and certain sign of calamity approaching, Iniquity abounds, and
the love of many waxes cold, Mat. 24 12. Pride, Contention, Worldliness,
Covetousness, Luxury, Drunkenness and Uncleanness break in like a flood upon
us, and good men grow cold in their love to God and to one another. If a man be
cold in his bed, let them lay on the more clothes, that he may get heat: but we
are like to David in his old age, they covered him with clothes, but he gat no
heat, 2 Samuel 1. 1. The Lord heaps mercies, favors, blessings upon us, and
loads us daily with his benefits, but all his love and bounty cannot heat and
warm our hearts and affections. Well, the furnace is able to heat and melt the
coldest Iron: but how often has the Lord cast us into the hot furnace of
Affliction and Tribulation, and we have been scorched and burnt, yet not
melted, but hardened thereby, Isa. 63. 17. How long has God kept us in the
furnace day after day, month after month, year after year? but all our
Afflictions, Crosses, Trials have not been able to keep our hearts in a warm
temper.

Now let me freely deliberate with you, what may be the Causes and Grounds of
such decays and languishings in our affections to, and estimation of that
which we came into the Wilderness to enjoy? Is it because there is no bread,
neither is there any water, and our soul loatheth this light bread? Numb. 21.
5. Our soul is dried away, and there is nothing at all, besides this Manna,
before our eyes, Numb. 11. 6. What, is Manna no bread? Is this Angelical food,
light bread, which cannot satisfy, but starves the Soul? Does our Soul loath
the bread of Heaven? The Lord be merciful to us: The full soul loatheth the
honeycomb, Prove. 27. 7.

What then is the cause of our decays and languishings? Is it because the
Spirit of the Lord is straightened and limited in the dispensers of the Gospel,
and hence our joys and comforts are lessened and shortened? O thou that are
named the house of Jacob; is the Spirit of the Lord straightened? are those his
doings? Do not my words do good to him that walks uprightly? Mic. 2. 7.
Surely it is not for want of fullness in the Spirit of God, that he withholds
comforts and blessings from any; neither does he delight in threatenings and
judgments, but his words both promise and perform that which is good and
comfortable to them that walk uprightly. The Spirit is able to enlarge it self
unto the reviving and cheering of every man's heart; and that should we
experience, did not our iniquity put a bar. 2 Cor. 6. 11,12. O ye
Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you, our heart is enlarged: Ye are not
straightened in us, but ye are straightened in your own bowels. The Spirit of God
dilateth and enlarges the heart of the faithful Ministry for the good of the
people; but many times the people are straightened in their own bowels, and cannot
receive such a large portion, as the Lord has provided for them, What then is
the cause of our coolings, faintings and languishings? The ground and principal
cause is our Unbelief: We believe not the Grace and Power of God in Christ.
Where is that lively exercise of faith, which ought to be, in our attendance
upon the Lord in his holy Ordinances? Christ came to Nazareth with his heart
full of love and compassion, and his hands full of blessings to bestow upon his
old Acquaintance and Neighbors, among whom he had been brought up, but their
Unbelief restrained his tender mercies, and bound his Omnipotent hands, that he
could not do any great or illustrious Miracle amongst them. Mat. 13. 58. Mark 6
5, 6. He could do there no mighty work -- and he marvelled because of their
unbelief. Unbelief straitens the grace and power of Christ, and binders the
communication of divine favors and special mercies. The word preached profits
not, when it is not mixed with faith in them that hear it, Heb. 4. 2. We may
pray earnestly, but if we ask not is faith, how can we expect to receive any
thing of the Lord? Jam. 1. 6,7.

But though Unbelief be the principal, yet it is not the sole cause of our
decays and languishing: Inordinate worldly Cares, predominant Lusts, and
malignant Passions and Distempers stifle and choke the Word, and quench our
affection to the Kingdom of God. Luke 8. 14. The Manna was gathered early in
the morning, when the Sun waxed hot, it melted, Exodus 16. 21. It was a fearful
Judgment on Dathan and Abiram, that the earth opened its mouth and swallowed
them up. How many Professors of Religion, are swallowed up alive by earthly
affections? Such as escape the Lime-pit of Pharisaical Hypocrisy, fall into
the Coal-pit of. Sadducean Atheism and Epicurism. Pharisaism and Sadduceism do
almost divide the Professing World between them. Some split upon the Rock of
affected ostentation of singular Piety and Holiness, and others are drawn into
the Whirpool, and perish in the Gulf of Sensuality and Luxury.

If any question how seasonable such a Discourse may be upon such a Day, as
this; let him consider, Hag. 2. 10 -- 14. (...) the four and twentieth day of
the ninth month, in the second year of Darius, came the word of the Lord by
Haggai the Prophet, saying, Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Ask now the Priests
concerning the law, saying, If one bear holy flesh in the skirt of his garment,
and with his skirt do touch bread, or pottage, or wine, or oil, or any meat,
shall it be holy? And the Priests answered and said, No. Then said Haggai, If
one that is unclean by a dead body, touch any of these, shall it be unclean?
And the Priests answered and said, It shall be unclean. Then answered Haggai
and said, So is this people, and so is this nation before me, says the Lord;
and so is every work of their hands, and that which they offer there is
unclean. It was an high and great day, wherein the Prophet spoke these words,
and an holy and honorable Work, which the people were employed in. For this
day they laid the Foundation of the Lords Temple, ver. 18. Nevertheless, the
Lord saw it necessary this very day to represent and declare unto them, the
pollution and uncleanness both of their persons and of their holy Services,
that they might be deeply humbled before God, and carry on their present Work
more ho^ly and purely. What was their uncleanness? Their eager pursuit of their
private Interests, took off their hearts and affection from the affairs of the
House of God. It seems they pleased themselves with this, that the Altar stood
upon its Bases, and Sacrifices were daily offered thereon, and the building of
the Temple was only deferred until a fit opportunity were afforded, free from
disturbance and opposition: and having now gained such a season, they are ready
to build the Temple: but the Lord convinces them out of the Law, that their
former negligence was not expiated by their daily Sacrifices, but the guilt
thereof rendered both the Nation and this holy and honorable Work, which they
were about, vile and unclean in the sight of God. And having thus shown them
their spiritual uncleanness, he encourages them to go on with the work in
hand, the building of the Temple, promising them from this day to bless them.
ver. 18.

USE II. Of Exhortation, To excite and stir us all up to attend and prosecute
our Errand into the Wilderness. To what purpose came we into this place, and
what expectation drew us hither? Surely, not the expectation of ludicrous
Levity. We came not hither to see a Reed shaken with the wind. Then let not us
he Reeds, light, empty, vain hollow hearted Professors, shaken with every wind
of Temptation: but solid, serious and sober Christians, constant and steadfast
in the Profession and Practice of the Truth, Trees of Righteousness, the
planting of the Lord, that he may be glorified, holding fast the profession of
our Faith without wavering.

Alas, there is such variety and diversity of Opinions and Judgments, that we
know not what to believe.

Were there not as various and different Opinions touching the Person of
Christ, even in the days of his flesh? Some said that He was John the Baptist,
some Elias, others Jeremias, or one of the old Prophets. Some said he was a
gluttonous man, and a wine-bibber, a friend of publicans and sinners: others
said He was a Samaritan, and had a Devil; yet the Disciples knew what to
believe. Whom say ye that I am? Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God,
Mat. 16. 15,16. The various heterodox Opinions of the people, serve as a soil
or tinctured leaf to set off the luster and beauty of the Orthodox and
Apostolical Faith. This is truly commendable, when in such variety and
diversity of Apprehension, you are not biased by any sinister respects, but
discern, embrace and profess the Truth, as it is in Christ Jesus.

But to what purpose came we into the Wilderness, and what expectation drew us
hither? Not the expectation of Courtly Pomp and Delicacy. We came not hither to
see men clothed like Courtiers. The affectation of Courtly Pomp and Gallantry,
is very unsuitable in a Wilderness. Gorgeous Attire is comely in Princes
Courts, if it exceed not the limits of Christian Sobriety: but excess in Kings
houses, escapes not divine Vengeance. Zeph. 1. 8. -- I will punish the Princes
and the Kings children, and all such as are clothed with strange Apparel. The
pride and haughtiness of the Ladies of Zion in their superfluous Ornaments and
stately gestures, brought wrath upon themselves, upon their Husbands, and upon
their Children, yea and upon the whole Land, Isa. 3. 16. -- 26. How much more
intolerable and abominable is excess of this kind in a Wilderness, where we
are so far removed from the Riches and Honors of Princes Courts?

To what purpose then came we into the Wilderness, and what expectation drew us
hither? Was it not the expectation of the pure and faithful Dispensation of the
Gospel and Kingdom of God? The times were such that we could not enjoy it in
our own Land: and therefore having obtained Liberty and a gracious Patent from
our Sovereign, We left our Country, Kindred and Fathers houses, and came into
these wild Woods and Deserts; where the Lord has planted us, and made us
dwell in a place of our own, that we might more no more, and that the children
of wickedness might afflict not us any more, 2 Samuel 7. 10. What is it that
distinguishes New England from other Colonies and Plantations in America? Not
our transportation over the Atlantic Ocean, but the Ministry of Gods faithful
Prophets, and the fruition of his holy Ordinances. Did not the Lord bring the
Philistims from Caphtor, and the Assyrians from Kir, as well as Israel from the
land of Egypt? Amos 9. 7. But by a Prophet the Lord brought Israel out of
Egypt, and by a Prophet was he preserved, Hos. 12. 13. What, is the Price and
Esteem of Gods Prophets, and their faithful Dispensations, now fallen in our
hearts?

The hardships, difficulties and sufferings, which you have exposed your selves
unto, that you might dwell in the House of the Lord, and leave your Little Ones
under the shadow of the wings of the God of Israel, have not been few nor
small. And shall we now withdraw our selves and our Little Ones from under
those healing Wings, and lose that full Reward, which the Lord has in his
heart and hand to bestow upon us? Did we not with Mary choose this for our
Part, to sit at Christ's feet and hear his word? and do we now repent of our
choice, and prefer the Honors, Pleasures and Profits of the world before it?
You did run well: who does hinder you, that you should not obey the truth? Gal.
5. 7.

Has the Lord been wanting to us, or failed our expectation? Micah 6. 3. O my
people, what have I done unto thee, and wherein have I wearied thee? testify
against me. Jer. 2. 5. What iniquity have your fathers found in me, that they
are gone far from me?. and ver. 31. O generation, see ye the word of the Lord:
have I been a wilderness unto Israel? a land of darkness? May not the Lord say
unto us, as Pharaoh did to Hadad, 1 King. 11. 22. What have thou lacked with
me, that behold, thou seek to go to thine own Country? Nay, what could have
been done more, then what the Lord has done for us? Isa. 5. 4.

How sadly has the Lord testified against us, because of our loss of our first
love, and our remissness and negligence in his Work? Why has the Lord smitten
us with Blasting and Mildew now seven years together, superadding sometimes
severe Drought, sometimes great Tempests, Floods, and sweeping Rains, that
leave no food behind them? Is it not because the Lords House lies waste?
Temple-work in our Hearts, Families, Churches is shamefully neglected? What
should I make mention of Signs in the Heavens and in the Earth, Blazing-Stars,
Earthquakes, dreadful Thunders and Lightnings, fearful Burnings? What means
the heat of his great Anger, in calling home so many of his Ambassadors? In
plucking such burning and shining Lights out of the Candlesticks; the principal
Stakes out of our Hedges; the Cornerstones out of our Walls? In removing such
faithful Shepherds from their Flocks, and breaking down our defenced Cities,
Iron Pillars, and Brazen-Walls? Seems it a small thing unto us, that so many
of Gods Prophets (whose Ministry we came into the Wilderness to enjoy) are
taken from us in so short a time? Is it not a Sign that God is making a way for
his Wrath, when he removes his Chosen out of the Gap? Does he not threaten us
with a Famine of the Word, the Scattering of the Flock, the Breaking of the
Candlesticks, and the turning of the Songs of the Temple into howlings?

It is high time for us to remember whence we are fallen, and repent, and do
our first works. Wherefore let us lift up the hands that hang down, and
strengthen the feeble knees, and make straight paths for our feet, lest that
which is lame. be turned out of the way, but let it rather be healed, Heb. 12.
12,13. Labor we to redress our Faintings and Swervings, and address our selves
to the Work of the Lord. Let us arise and build, and the Lord will be with us,
and from this day will he bless us.

Alas, we are feeble and impotent; our hands are withered, and our strength
dried up.

Remember the man that had a withered hand: Christ faith unto him, Stretch
forth thy hand; and he stretched it forth; and it was restored whole, like as
the other, Mat. 12. 13. How could he stretch forth his hand, when it was
withered, the Blood and Spirits dried up, and the Nerves and Sinews shrunk up?
The Almighty Power of Christ accompanying his Command, enabled the man to
stretch forth his withered hand, and in stretching it forth, restored it whole,
like as the other. Where the Sovereignty of Christ's Command takes place in the
Conscience, there is effectual grace accompanying it to the healing of our
Spiritual Feebleness and Impotency, and the enabling of us to perform the duty
incumbent on us. Though we have no might, to strength, yet at Christ's Command,
make an essay. Where the word of a King is, there is power.

But alas, our Bruise is incurable and our Wound grievous, there is none to
repair the Breach, there is no healing Medicine.

The Lord Jesus, the great Physician of Israel, has undertaken the Cure. I
will restore health unto thee, and I will heal thee of thy wounds, says the
Lord, Jer. 30. 17. No case is to be accounted desperate or incurable, which
Christ takes in hand. If he undertake to heal Jairus his daughter, he will have
her death esteemed but a sleep, in reference to his power. She is not dead, but
sleeps, Mat. 9. 24. When Christ came to Lazarus his grave, and bade them take
away the stone, Martha says, Lord, by this time he stinketh; for he has been
dead four days: But Christ answers, Said I not unto thee, that if thou
would believe, thou should see the glory of God? Joh. 11. 40. Let us give
glory to God by believing his word, and we shall have real and experimental
manifestations of his glory for our good and comfort.

But alas, our hearts are sadly prejudiced against the Means and Instruments,
by which we might expect that Christ should cure and heal us.

Were not the hearts of John's Disciples leavened with carnal emulation and
prejudices against Christ himself? They would not own him to be the Messlas,
nor believe their Master's Testimony concerning him: insomuch that the Lord saw
it necessary that John should decrease and be abased, that Christ might
increase and be exalted: and therefore suffered Herod to shut up John in
Prison, and keep him in durance about twelve months, and at length to cut off
his head, that so these fondlings might be weaned from their Nurse; and when
John was dead, his Disciples resort to Jesus, acquaint him with the calamity
that befell them, and were perfectly reconciled to him, passing into his
School, and becoming his Disciples, Mat. 14. 12.

But alas, the Times are difficult and perilous; the wind is stormy, and the
Sea tempestuous; the Vessel heaves and sits, and tumbles up and down in the
rough and boisterous waters, and is in danger to be swallowed up.

Well, remember that the Lord sits upon the flood, yea the Lord sits King
for ever, Psalm. 29. 10. His way is in the sea, and his path in the great
waters, and his footsteps are not known, Psalm 77. 19. He stilleth the noise of
the seas, the noise of their waves, and the tumult of the people, Psalm. 65. 7.
He says to the raging Sea, Peace, be still: and the wind cease, and there is
a great calm, Mark 4. 39. Yea, he can enable his people to tread and walk upon
the waters. To sail and swim in the waters, is an easy matter; but to walk
upon the waters, as upon a pavement, is an act of wonder. Peter at Christ's
call came down out of the ship and walked on the water to go to Jesus, Matthew.
14. 29. and as long as his Faith held, it upheld him from sinking; when his
Faith failed, his body sunk: but he cried to the Lord, and he stretched forth
his hand and caught him, and said unto him, O thou of little faith, wherefore
did thou doubt?

But what shall we do for bread? The increase of the field and the labor of
the Husbandman fails.

Hear Christ's answer to his Disciples, when they were troubled, because there
was but one Loaf in the ship. O ye of little faith, why reason ye, because you
have no bread? perceive ye not yet, neither understand? have ye your heart yet
hardened? having eyes, see ye not? and having ears, hear ye not, and do ye not
remember? Mark 8. 17,18. Mat. 16. 8,9. Those which have had large and plentiful
experience of the grace and power of Christ in providing for their outward
Sustenance, and relieving of their Necessities, when ordinary and usual Means
have failed, are worthy to be severely reprehended, if afterward they grow
anxiously careful and solicitous, because of the defect of outward supplies. In
the whole Evangelicall History, I find not that ever the Lord Jesus did so
sharply rebuke his Disciples for any thing, as for that fit and pang of Worldly
care and solicitude about Bread. Attend we our Errand, upon which Christ sent
us into the Wilderness, and he will provide Bread for us. Matthew. 6. 33. Seek ye
first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and all these things shall be
added unto you.

But we have many Adversaries, and they have their subtle Machinations and
Contrivances, and how soon we may be surprised, we know not.

Our diligent Attention to the Ministry of the Gospel, is a special means, to
check and restrain the rage and fury of Adversaries. The people's assiduity in
attendance upon Christ's Ministry, was the great obstacle that hindered the
execution of the bloody Counsels of the Pharisees. Luke 19. 47,48. He taught
daily in the Temple, but the chief Priests and the Scribes, and the chief of
the people, sought to destroy him, and could not find what they might do: for
all the people were very attentive to hear him. If the people cleave to the
Lord, to his Prophets, and to his Ordinances, it will strike such a fear into
the hearts of enemies, that they will be at their wits ends, and not know what
to do. However, In this way we have the promise of divine Protection and
Preservation. Revel. 3. 10. Because thou have kept the word of my Patience, I
also will keep thee from the hour of Temptation, which shall come upon all the
world, to try them that dwell upon the earth. Let us with Mary choose this for
our Portion, To sit at Christ's feet and hear his word; and whosoever complain
against us, the Lord Jesus will plead for us, as he did for her, and say, They
have chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from them, Luke 10.
42. AMEN.

FINIS.
Page 14, line 28. for ground read grand.


