A RELATION of the Troubles which have happened in New England, By reason of the
Indians there. From the Year 1614. to the Year 1675.

Wherein the frequent Conspiracyes of the Indians to cut off the English, and
the wonderful providence of God, in disappointing their devices, is declared.

Together with an Historical Discourse concerning the Prevalency of PRAYER
showing that New Englands late deliverance from the Rage of the Heathen is an
eminent Answer of Prayer.

By INCREASE MATHER Teacher of a Church in Boston in New England.

Job. 8. 8. Enquire I pray thee of the former age, and prepare thyself to the
search of their Fathers. Psalm 111. 2. The works of the Lord are great, sought
out of all them that have pleasure therein Joel.1. 3. Tell ye your Children of
it, and let your Children tell their Children, and their Children another
Generation. Historia est testis temporum, nuntia vetustatis, lux veritatis,
vita memoriae, magistra vitae. Cic. de Orat Alius alio plura invenire potest,
nemo omnia. BOSTON; Printed and sold by John Foster. 1677.

To the Reader
The occasion of my undertaking what is here presented, was a letter which I
received from a worthy person, who upon the perusal of that brief historical
Account of the war with the Indians in New England, published the last summer,
importuned me to write the story of the Pequot War; Taking his motion into
consideration, it came into my thoughts, that it would be a service and benefit
for posterity, if all other general troubles which have happened by the
Heathenin this land, were recorded and made known; and the rather, in tha^ as
to those first motions and commotions there are very few that know any thing of
them. Wherefore I set my self to make enquiry into those matters, and shall for
the satisfaction of the Reader, give him an account where and from whence I
obtained, what light and information touching these Indian troubles, I have
been any ways able to arrive unto.

Such Books as I had by me, that relate any thing of these affairs I have been
willing to revolve. e.g. Johannes de Laet his Description of America, written
in Latin; Also several of Cpt. Smith his books; And a relation of the discovery
of New England, published by the President and Council of New England. Ann^
1622. And the Relation or journal of the first plan^ers in Plymouth together
with several letters which some of them wrote to England, soon after their
first coming into this country* and Mr. Winstow (then whom hardly any one that
has deserved more eminently from New England) his good news from New England,
published Anno 1624. which relations are in the hands of but few in this
country, and therefore I have been the larger in excerping things out of them.
They are epitomized in Purchase his Pilgrims lib. 10. who declares that he had
by him a description of the vo^age made by Capt. H^^h^m to Sag^dehoc, and the
written journals of Mr. Ral^igh Gilbert, and of Mr. Harly, and Cap^ Hobson, who
were in this land before any English plantation was settled therein. I doubt not
but in those scripts a more full and particular account is given, of the first
concerns with the Indians here. But I could not come by the fight of them, nor
do I know certainly whether those things are extant. I have also perused Sr.
Ferdinando Gorges narration of original undertakings here. Moreover I have read
a large Manuscript of Governor Bradfords (written with his own hand*) being
expressive of what the first planters in this country met with, whether from
the Heathen or otherwise, from the year 16^0* to the year 1647. As for the
Peq^ot troubles, the world is beholding to the industry of Mr. John Allyn of
Hartford (as is in the subsequent Relation acknowledged) for what is thus made
public, respecting the great Commotions which then happened. Only I have been
willing to add some particulars out of a manuscipt narrative of the Pequot war,
which I lately met with in Reverend Mr. Davenports library, as also what Mr.
Johnson, or Mr. Morton (out of Mr. Bradfords manuscript) has heretofore noted.
Touching the Narragansets* I have searched the public Records of the Colonyes,
and from thence exc^rped the substance of what as here related, as to former
troubles from them, or by their means procured. The Relation concerning
Alexander and his brother Philip, wherewith this Narrative is concluded, I
received from the present Honorable Governor of Plymouth (who succeeds his
blessed Father, as in place, so in spirit) and from the faithful Secretary of
that Colony. I am sensible that there is a reality in that which ^rasmus does
(after his manner) wittily express Adeo nunc in omnes et omnia grassatur commit
at a furiis 'n (...) ut non sit t^tum ullum ^mittere libr^m, nisi satelliti^
^un^t^m; wherefore I thought it necessary to give this particular account of
the Authors from whom I received my information, respecting passages insisted
on. No^ shall I seek for any other Guard against those, whose Genius is to
calum^iate endeavors of this kind.

I am not altogether ignorant of what is commonly and truly observed, viz. That
those Histories which are partly Chronological are the most profitable; and
that they that undertake a work of this nature, should go by the prescript of
that so much celebrated verse,

Quis, Quid, vbi, Quibus auxiliis, Cur, Quomodo, Quando. which I have
endeavored to remember. No^ has that maxim been wholly forgotten, Stylus
Historicus quo simplici^r ^o melior. And I may expect that Ing^nuous Readers
will act according to that which a Learned man in his Historica lays down as
a Theore^, Historici legantur cum moderatione et venia, h. e. cogitetur ^i^ri
non posse ut in omnibus circumstantiis si^t Ly^cei. I have done what I could to
come at the truth, and plainly to declare it, knowing that that is (as uses to
be said) the soul and sun of History, whose property is, (...).

As for what concerns the Story of the late war with the Indians, there are who
have propounded, that some meet persons might be improved in the several
Colonyes, to collect what of moment has happened in each Colony since this war
broke forth. When Cassiodorus compiled an History out of the Collections of
Socrates, Theodoret, Sozomen, it was of great use in after ages, bearing the
name of Historia Tripartita; if such a course as has been intimated should be
attended, and the design finished, a Complete History may ((...)) be composed
out of those collections, which I know not but that it may deserve the name of
Historia Tripartita, and be no le^^e beneficial to posterity, then some others
have been. In the mean time, the Reader must be satisfied with what is already
extant.

This following Relation was written near upon a year ago; since which a
Reverend Author has emitted a Narrative of the troubles which have happened by
the Indians in New England, whose pains and industry does (in my judgment)
deserve acknowledgment. Nevertheless it has been thought needful to publish
this; Considering that most of the things here insisted on, are not so much as
once taken notice of in that Narrative. And although the Pequot war be therein
described (and that, as to the substance of the story, truly and impartially)
it is not so fully done as is here to be seen. If this endeavor shall
contribute any light or help in writing an History of New England, I hope they
whose hearts are upon seeking out and declaring the works of God in the
Generation which he cast them into, will accept of my labor, however mean and
inconsiderable. I shall add no more, but pray that the blessing of heaven may
be upon undertakings of this nature.

Boston N. E. Sept, 14. 1677. Increase Mather.

ERRATA
P. 11. l. 30. dele How. p. 13. l. 2^. dele there. p.47.^. p^n^lt. dele All.
p.48. l. 35.^. disrested* ibid* ransacking. p. 63. l. 12. ad by. p.64 l. 18.
r.had never.

A RELATION OF THE FIRST TROUBLES IN New England By reason of the INDANS there
IT is now above seventy years, since that Part of this Continent which is
known by the name of NEW ENGLAND, was discovered, and possession thereof taken
by the English. No man that has made it his Concern to be acquainted with
things of this nature can be ignorant, that the Northern, (or to us Northeast)
parts of this Land were the first wherein were English Inhabitants; whence it
was for some years known by the name of the Northern Plantation, until such
time as King Charles the first (then Prince of Wales) gave it the name of
New England.

For in Anno 1602. and in the year following, some of our Countrymen made
notable discoveryes in that Land which lies North and by east of Virginia,
between the degrees of 43* and 45. Northern Latitude.

Four or five years after this that noble Lord, Sr. John Popham (then Lord
chief Justice) sent ou^ a ship into these parts to make further discovery, who
arriving at the place designed, quickly returned, and made such a report of
what they had seen, ^s did greatly animate the Adventurers to go on with their
begun undertaking; whereupon in Anno 1607. A Gentleman whose name was Popham
was sent into these Coasts, with two ships and an hundred Land-men, and
Ordnance, and other things necessary for their sustentation and defense, in
order to the making way for the settlement of a F^antation. But that noble Lord
being taken out of the world by sudden death, also the Planters here meeting
with ^ad disasters (for in the depth of winter, their lodgings and stores were
burnt, and Capt. Pophom dyed amongst them) when the next year a vessel arrived
bringing the news of the Lord Pophom's death, the whole company of the English
resolved upon a return home, which proved the death of the English Plantation,
at that time designed in these parts of the world. Only Sr. ^r. Popham (son to
the Lord chief Justice) sent diverse time* to those coasts for trade and
Fishing.

As yet there was not (so far as I can learn) any disturbance from the Indians,
then the only Natives of this Land. But not long after this, an unworthy
Ship-Master whose name was Hunt, being sent forth into these Coasts on the
account of the Fishing trade, after he had made his dispatch and was ready to
sail, (under pretense of trucking with them) enticed Indians into his vessel,
they in confidence of his honesty went aboard, to the number of twenty from
Patu^^^, since called Plymouth, and seven from Nosset (now known by the name of
Es^^am) these did this Hunt seize upon, stowed them under hatches, and carried
them to the streights of G^braltar, and there did he sell as many as he could
of them for 20 l. a man, until it was known whence they came; for then the
Friars in those parts took away the rest of them, that so they might nurture
them in the Popish Religion. The pernicious and avaritious ^elony of this
Ship-Master, in stealing and selling the Indians to the (...), as has been
expressed, laid the foundation to great troubles which did after that befall
the English, especially in the North-east parts of this Land. Yea that inhumane
and barbarous Fact was the unhappy occasion of the loss of many a man's estate
and life, which the Barbarians in those beginning times did from thence seek to
destroy.

For when the Gentlemen Adventurers did again dispatch a vessel hither
commanded by Capt. Hobson in order to erecting a Plantation and settling a Trade
with the Natives here, Hunt's forementioned scandal, had caused the Indians to
contract such a mortal hatred against all men of the English Nation, that it
was no small difficulty to settle any where within their Territoryes, And
whereas there were two Indians called Epenow and Manaw^^, who having been
carried out of these parts of the world into England. had learned to speak
English, that were returned in Hobsons vessel, as hoping they might be
serviceable toward the design on foot, it fell out otherwise, since being
exa^perated by what Hunt had done, they contrived with their Countrymen how to
be revenged upon the English. Mana^et dyed within a short time after the ships
arrival. Epenow secretly plotted to free himself out of the English hands,
which he effected though with great hazard to himself and other Salvages that
were his fellow Conspirators, which came to pa^s after this manner.

Upon the Ships arrival, many of the Indians (some of them being Epenows
kinsmen) came aboard and were kindly entertained by the Captain; at their
departure they promised to return the next day, and bring some Trade with them.
Epenow had not liberty granted him to go on shear, only much discourse (and
probably a contrivement for his escape) was between him and the other Indians
in the vessel, which no body but themselves could understand. The Indians
returned at the time appointed with twenty Canoos, but were shy of coming
aboard. Epenow cunningly called to them as if if he would have them come into
the vessel, to trade, and suddenly did himself leap overboard: He was no sooner
in the water, but me Indians sent a shower of arrows into the vessel, and came
desperately near to the ship, and (in despite of all the English Musketeers
aboard) went away with their Countryman Epenow.

Diverse of the Indians were then ^^a^n by the English, and the Master of the
English vessel, and several of the Company wounded by the Indians.

Hereupon the Captain and the whole company were discouraged, and returned to
England, bringing nothing back with them but the news of their ^ad success, and
that there was a War broke out between the English and the Indians. The time
when these troubles happened, is controverted more then the things themselves.
Johannes de Laet in his description India Occidentalis, writes that it was
between the years 1608 and 1615 So does Pur^hase. Sr. Ferdinando Gorges relates
that he sent Capt. Hobson into these parts in Anno 1614, and what Hunt did was
before that, as being the Grand procuring Cause of the Broyle between the
English and the Indians, which first began in that year.

After these things another vessel was sent into these Northern parts under the
Command of Capt. Rocraft, he designed to winter there, but some of his own
ships Company conspired against him, intending his death, he having secret
intelligence of this plot against his life, held his peace until the day was
come wherein the intended mischief was to be put in execution, then
unexpectedly apprehended the Conspirators; he was loath himself to put any to
death, though they were worthy of it. But therefore he resolved to leave them
in the Wilderness, not knowing but they might happily discover something which
might be advantageous.

Accordingly he furnished them with ammunition, and some victuals for their
present subsistence, and turned them ashore to Sacode^^ck,himself with the rest
of his Company departing to Virginia. Those English Mutineers got over to the
Island of Mo^heg^n,three leagues from the Main, where they kept themselves safe
from the Fury of exasperated Indians, until the next Spring, when a vessel that
came on the Coast on a Fishing voyage, ^ound them all (except one person that
died of sickness in this inter^m) alive, and carried them away back for England.

Not many years after this, viz. in Anno.1619 a Gentleman whose name was Darmer
was sent to prosecute the design of plan^ing and settling a Trade in
New England, and to endeavor that a right understanding of matters between the
Indians and the English might be accomplished.

He therefore brought with him an Indian called Squantum, who was one of those
that Hunt had treacherously carried away from Patuxet, but was bought by an
English Merchant, and lived some time with Mr. Slany a Gentleman in Cornhil,
until he could speak broken English, and after that at New found-land, where
Capt. M^^son was then Governor, who was willing that Mr. Da^m^r should take
Squantum with him to New England. Upon his arrival here, he told his
Countrymen very strange stories, giving them to understand what kind usage he
had met with among the English where he had been, and how much the wicked Fact
of that covetous Hunt was condemned, so that many of them began to converse
with, and become friendly toward the English, and Mr. Darmer conceited that he
and S^uantum had made a firm peace between the Nations. But, manet alta m^nte
repostum -- Indians are not wont to forget injuries, when once they have
sustained any: so did that Gentleman find it to his after sorrow: For being
near the place where Hunt had formerly betrayed the Indians abcard his vessel,
they treacherously set upon him, and gave him fourteen wounds, so that he had
much ado to escape with his life, And though he got to Virginia after this,
some write that he never recovered of those wounds which he received o^ the
Nausi^ Indians. And Epenow (before mentioned) was the cause o^ Capt. Dar^ers
being so assaulted, whom he happened to meet with at his first landing in that
place: The Indian being able to speak English, reported to Capt. D^^mer the
story of his escape out of Capt. Hobsons vessel, laughing heartily at the
conceit of it. The Captain told him that Sr. Ferdinando Gorges was much
troubled that he should meet with such ill usage as to put him upon a
temptation to steal away. This Salvage after some enquiries (...) Sr.
Ferdinando (and his Family) with whom he had sometimes lived in England, belike
suspecting that Captain Darmer had a purpose to surprise him, he conspi^ed with
some of his Follows to take the Captain, and said hands on him, who did with
his sword manfully defend himself against those barbarous and treacherous
Assa^lan^s. What other particular mischiefs were done by the Northern In^^^ns
(or others) about this time, I cannot lear^^ Only Capt. Smith writes that he
met with many of their silly Excounte^punc; (as he calls them) but without any
hurt. Also, a little before the first planters in Plymouth Colony arrived in
this land, three Englishmen belonging to Sr. Ferdinando Gorges, were killed by
these salvages, and two more narrowly escaped with their lives. And thus far
vice have a Cold account of the design respecting the advancement of a
plantation in the Northern parts of New England.

In Anno 1620. A company of Christians belonging to the Northern parts of
England, who proposed not so much worldly as spiritual ends in their
undertaking, aiming at the Conversion of the Indians, and the establishment of
the worship of God in purity, did therefore transport themselves and familyes
into this Howling wilderness. The first land they made was that of C^p^ Co^,
November. 9. where they came to an Anchor, and went on shore, November. 11.
Perceiving the In^^mmodiousness of that place for planting, they resolved to
seek out, for another that might be more accommodate. But their Shallop not
being in trimm to be sent out upon discovery, some were desirous to improve the
time, in making what searches they could upon the land thereabout.

November. 5. Sixteen men well armed were set on shore under the conduct of Capt.
Miles Standish. After they had gone about a mile near the shore, they descryed
five or six Indians, who like wild creatures ran away from them at the first
sight, they followed them by the trace of their footings, about ten miles, til
night came on, but could not come to any speech with them.

At last they met with a kettle, wherein was Indian corn, which after much
consultation they seized upon, resolving that if they could come to speak with
Indians, they would return them their Kettel, and give them full satisfaction
for their corn, which they intended for planting, not knowing how else to be
supplied. So did they return the next day, but lost themselves awhile in the
woods, and as they were wandering up and down, they hap^ed to espy a small tree
that was bowed down, and some Acorns strewed underneath, whilst they were
viewing of it, and wondering what it should mean, it gave a sudden jerk,
whereby one of the Company was caught up by the leg, it being an Indian
Deer-trap; the rest loosed him, and at last they found their way to the ship
again.

After this, their Shallop being fitted for the purpose, they went a coasting
upon discovery, but of some days could meet with no Indians. Albeit they found
old deserted Indian Forts, and more of their corn and baskets, and a bottle of
oil which doubtless some how was brought out of Europe.

About the tenth of December, they discerned the track of Indian feet upon the
sand, and followed it, till they perceived where it struck up into the woods,
at last they light upon an Indian path, which led them a great way up into the
woods, and saw where there had been corn planted, and found Indian gra^es etc.
but no man appeared.

So they returned to their Shallop, and some watching, others betook themselves
to their rest. But in the night they were alarmed by the Sentinels crying Arm,
Arm, supposing Indians to be near them. They heard a most hideous howling, but
one in the Company persuaded the rest, that it was the noise of wolves and
Foxes, which used (as he said) to make such a noise in New found^^ (...) where
he had been, two gunns were shot off, at which the noise ceased.

But betimes in the morning, on a sudden they heard the same voices again, and
one of the company cried Indians* (...), and immediately arrows came pouring
in upon them. This barbarous (...) was amazing to the English, but that which
did most of all terrine was the horrid cry of those Salvages, whose note was
after this manner, Woach woach ha ha ^och woach. A stout Indian who was thought
to be their Captain, standing behind a tree let fly his arrows apace, and stood
three shotts of a musket, until one took full aim at him, and (as it is supposed
sorely wounded him, upon which he gave an extraordinary shriek, and went away,
and all the other Indians fled with him. Providence so ordered, as that none of
the English received any hurt, though afterward they gathered up eighteen
arrows, (and many more were shot at them) some whereof were headed with brass,
others with Hartshorn, others with Eagles Claws, and sundry of the English had
their coats shot through and through.

December. 19. The English-landed and resolved to endeavor the settling of a
plantation, at that place which is now called Plymouth. No indians there as yet
appeared to give them any disturbance: Yea though some were sent out to seek
after them, they could find none.

There were not many days after this, two Englishmen who being by the side of
a pond, happened to see a Deer, and having Dogs with them, they pursued the Deer
until such time as they lost themselves in the woods, where they were forced to
lodge that night, and were terrified with the yelling (as it seemed to (...) of
two Lions, who roared exceedingly, and a third that they thought was very near
them: they betook themselves to a tree, purposing if the Lions should come, to
climb that for their security; but they saw none. The next day they perceived
that Indians had made fires thereabouts, but it was (...) they met not with any
until they came home, being than unarmed and not fit for encounter with such
Enemies.

Now it was that a special providence of another nature happened: For the English
having built an house in Plymouth, a spark of fire flying into the thatch, it
was instantly burnt down: Mr. Carver and Mr. Bradford were then sick, yet if
they had not risen with good speed, they had been blown up with powder. The
house was full of beds as they could lie one by another, and their muskets
charged, yet (through the good providence of God, no hurt done.

Febr. 16. An Englishman that was gone forth upon a fowling design, espied
twelve Indians marching toward the English plantation, and heard the noise of
many more not far off, he lay close until they were gone by, and then with all
speed returned home and gave the alarm, but no Indians followed, only they took
away the tools of those English, that had been at work in the woods.

The next day two Indians presented themselves on the top of an hill; two
English went out to parley with them, but they ran away, and the noise of a
multitude of them was heard on the other side of the hill.

In the beginning of March an Indian called Samoset came boldly along the
houses, which were newly built in Plymouth and to their great amazement, spoke
to them in English, saying, Welcome Englishmen; This Indian was a Sagamore
belonging to the Northern parts, about Monhiggen, where he had often conversed
with English Fishermen, and had learned to speak broken English; He was the
first Indian that they of Plymouth had opportunity to discourse with. He could
tell them of the Huggery (as he called it) i. e. Fight, which the English had
with the Nausset Indians; and that the name of that place was called Patuxe^*
where a multitude of Indians had formerly lived, but they were all dead of the
plague which had been there a few years before the English came. This Samoset
within a few days after his departure returned again, and brought Squantum
(whom that wicked Hunt had stolen away and sold for a slave) along with him;
which Squantum was born in that place. Sam^^^t and Squ^ntum made it their
business to bring the English into acquaintance with the next neighboring
Indians: wherefore they undertook to bring M^ssas^^ ((...) ^ to that (...) who
began the (...) with the English (...). 24. 1075) to ^eat with the English at
Plymouth.

Accordingly, March 22. Massasoit with his brother Quadeguina came accompanied
with about sixty of his men; and an agreement of peace between the English and
Indians was then concluded on. This peace was in more respects then one
singularly advantageous to the English, whilst they were thus but few in
number, and strangers in this land.

And as for the reasons inducing Massa^o^^ to this accord with the English,
there were several things that prevailed with him thereunto; For Squantum had
told him what a great Prince King James was, and how well he would take it if
his Subjects were kindly entertained, and how ill if otherwise, and how easy it
was for him to send over ships and men enough to destroy Massasoit and all his
people. At that time also there was enmity between Massasoit, and the
Narragansets, so that he hoped the English might be a defense to him against
them. Thus did the feud which was kindled amongst the Indians one against
another, advantage the poor Church in Plymouth. Sic Canes lingunt ulcera
Lazari. Moreover the consideration of the Guns, and other warlike Weapons,
which ours brought with them, was terrible to the Indians, yet they had more
formidable apprehensions thereof, then there was real cause for: They imagined
that the English could by their great Guns cause the trees to fall down and
kill the Indians. Furthermore Squantum did wickedly possess them with one
delusion about the English, which had dismal ^mpressions upon the minds of
these ignorant Barbarians; For whereas the plague (a disease which was never
known in this land either before or since) had newly been raging amongst them,
whereby many of their towns were totally depopulated, and desolated: he made
them believe that the English kept the pla^ue in a place under ground, and that
they could let it loose upon the Indians when they would. An Indian called
Hobbom^ck being one of Massaso^^s Counselors, observing in one of the English
houses a kind of a Cellar, where some barrels of powder were bestowed, enquired
of Squantum what that was, To whom he replied, that there the English kept the
plague that he told them of, which they could let loose upon Indians at
pleasure. When this Hobbomock became acquainted with the English, he seriously
asked them whether they had any such power, they answered him truly that they
had not, but withal added that the God whom they served had power to send that
or any other disease upon those that should do any wrong to his people. The
Consideration of that also, was* some terror to the Indians.

In the Month of June 10 (...). The English sent Messengers with a Present to
(...) at (...), By the way they were accos^^d with several of the Indians, who
having them at an Advantage as they passed through a River, were ready to shoot
at them: Only having Indian Guides and Interpreters in their Company, who gave
them to understand that they were friends, no hurt was done. Being come to
Massas^it, they presented him with a red Cotton Coat, whereon was some Lace,
this he accepted with great thankfulness, and having put it on (says my
Author) He was not a little proud to behold himself, and his men also to
behold their King so bravely attired. He then promised to continue in amity
with the English, and to take care that his men should not be Injurious.

About this time it was that an English lad (one John Billington) lost himself
in the woods, living five days upon Berries until he fell into the hands of the
Indians. Some were (upon Massasoits Information) sent to (...) to seek after
him, when they came thither the Indians flocked together, many not having seen
Englishmen before: Amongst others there was an old woman, judged to be an
hundred years old, who when she saw the English fell into an extreme passion of
bitter we ping, the reason whereof being demanded, answer was made, that she
had three sons once living in that place, but they were all stolen away by that
Hunt (before mentioned) and now she had no more left to releeve her in her old
age: The English were much grieved to see the poor Creature in such a passion,
but telling her that it was only one wicked man who did that Fact, and that
they abhorred it, and withal giving her some trifles, she was satisfied. In
fine the English lad was brought al bed^cked with Pea^, and the Sachim of that
place (called Aspinet) made peace with the English.

Now it was, that an Indian called Coubatant (who, though a petty Sachim under
Massasoit, secretly conspired with the Narragansets against his Master)
occasioned some disturbance, seeking to destroy those Indians that were friends
to the English, especially H^bbomock and Squantum, saying if these were dead
the English had lost their tongue, watching his advantage at a time when those
Indians were at Nanasket Co^^atant took Squa^tum prisoner, and held a knife at
Hobbom^c^s breast, who brake from him, and gave the English at Plymouth to
understand what had happened; whereupon 14. men were sent armed to Nama^ket, in
order to revenging Squantum's supposed death. They surprised the house where
Coubatant was thought to be, declaring the end of their coming, and that they
would hurt no man but him charging all others not to stir at their peril til
they had searched for their enemy; Consternation and trembling seyzed on the
Indians: yet some of them violently brake away, whence they were wounded (and
afterward healed) by the English. Coubatant was not there, but fled to another
place, but within a while Squaut^m was brought forth alive and set at liberty.
After this diverse other Sachim sent gratulations to the English; yea those of
the Isles of Capa^ack entreated their friendship. (...) used the mediation of
Massasoit to make his peace.

Things being brought to this peaceable state, so did they continue for a
little space, the Church in Plymo^th being preserved by a miracle of
providence, like a flock of sheep amidst a thousand wolve; much what as Luther
says the Church should be pictured. Their next neighbors amongst the Heathen
did as has been expressed^ of enemies become their friends, not showing any
acts of Hostility.

Only in the latter end of the next year, Canonicus the Narragans^t Sachim,
sent an Indian to them, who enquired for Squantum, at that time gone
somewhither else, whereupon the Indian left a bundle of Arrows, wrapped in a
rattle snakes skin, and departed. When Sq^antum was returned, He informed the
Governor, that the rattle snakes skin signified Enmity, and that the design
of this brutish salutation was to intimate a challenge, wherefore the
Governor filled the snakes skin with powder and shot, and sent it back again,
withal giving Canonicu^ to understand, that it ^e had shipping at hand, he
would endeavor to beat him out of his Country. The Indians durst not let the
powder and shot continue in their houses, but every one was afraid to meddle
with it, at last it came back again to plymouth. And there was an end of that
matter. Only they at Plymouth were by this Bruit awakened to Impale their Town,
and fortify, lest there should be an Onset from the enemy.

In the mean while Hobbomo^k (who resided with the English) informed that there
was reason to suspect that the Massachuset Indians were Consederate with the
Narragans^ts in their bloody designs; And Squantum in wicked ^^btilty,
labored to make the English believe that Massasoit was false to them. Capt.
Stan^ish with ten men was sent to Massachu^^^ts: they had no sooner turned the
point of the Harbor but th^^ came an Indian running to some of the English
that were from home, having his face wounded, and the blood fresh on the same (
Zopirus-like) calling to them to repair home, and often looking behind him, as if
he had been pursued by enemies, saying, that at Namesket there were many of the
Narragan^^^, and Coubatant, and that Massasoit was Confederate with them,
purposing to assault the town in the Captains absence, professing that he had
received that wound in his face, because he had spoken on the English ^^eir be
half. Whenas all this was a piece of artificial and mischievous dissimulation,
whereby the English were put into a sad fright, and the great Guns were
discharged to remand the Captain back again, who immediately returned.
Hobbomock was confident that that Indian dissembled, for he was assured* of
Massasoits fidelity; however that he would not engage in a thing of that
nature, without consulting him who was one of his Panies's i. e. Champions and
Counselors, and it was against the Indian custom for a Sachim to involve
himself in War without them. Wherefore, Hobbomock privately, upon the
Governors advice sent his Sq^^^ to Mass^soit at Pocan^ket, who seemed to be
much troubled that the English, and he himself should be so abused. And upon
enquiry, it was found to be Squa^tum's knavery, who sought his own end, and
played his own Game; for he would in a clandestine way, make the Indians
believe, that the English were resolved to cut them off, only he could prevent
it, and so would obtain gifts from his countrymen to prevent their destruction
by the English, insomuch that the blind salvages began to have him in greater
veneration then their Sachims, taking him for their Protector. And he would
deal with no less falsness toward the English then toward those of his own
nation.

When Massasoit understood these things, he repaired to the English plantation,
endeavoring to clear his innocence, desiring the Governor that Squantum, who
had thus abused both English and Indians, might be put to death for his
Treason. The Governor pacified him as much as he could for the present, and
though he deserved to die both in respect or English and Indians, yet desired he
might be spared, because else they should want an Interpreter.

But not long after this, Massasoit sent diverse Indians, who brought to the
Governor, their Sachim own knife (according to the Indian mode) that his
enemies head and hands might be cut* off therewith*

At that instant when he Governor was about to deliver Squantum into the head^
of his executioners, a boat was seen at sea, and there being even in those
daye^ Jealousies, that the French would join with the Indians to mischief the
English,and some supposing that it might be a French vessel, he told the
Indians, he would see what that was, before he delivered Squantum up to them.
So did they go away displeased.

But this wrought well for the English; For it made Squantum be honest whether
he would or no; inasmuch as his own countrymen sought his life; he saw how it
was his Interest to adhere to the English.

As for the boat mentioned, it proved to be one that belonged to a ship that
was fishing about (...).

These things happened in May, 1622. in which year it was that Mr. Weston (a
merchant of good note in London) attempted the advancing a plantation in this
Massachusetts Bay. He sent over two ships, and about sixty men to make a
beginning. The most of them were for the present refreshed at Plymouth, whilst
some few Coasters went out to seek a convenient place to sit down in. They
pitched upon a place within Massachusetts Bay, then called by the Indians (...),
at this day known by the name of We^mo^th.

Mr. Winslow (who was afterward Governor of Plymouth Colony) reports that the
Westonians instead of proving an help to the other English Colony, had like
within a few months to have brought ruin not only upon themselves, but upon
their friends also: For complaints were quickly brought to Plymouth, that the
English at Wessegusquaset, did abuse the Indians by stealing their corn from
them, yea and one of them was so brutish as to turn Indian.

Others of them were of such servile and slavish dispositions, as that they
became servants to the Indians, who would hire them to work with them in making
Canoos, which Canoos were intended for the surprizal of the English ship, in
the day when they would execute their ^^signed Massacre.

Some of the Thieves were stockt and whipped, yea one of them was at last put to
death, to satisfy the Indians, but it was then too late.

By the end of February, they had spent all their bread and corn, not leaving
any for seed, nor would the Indians be induced to lend or sell them any, upon
any terms, hoping they would be starved to death.

Wherefore, they purposed to take away the Indians store from them by violence,
and therefore made preparations accordingly. Only some of the Company (at
leastwise one of them who is yet alive) being more honestly minded then others
were, advised John Saunders their Overseer, to write to Plymouth before they
did actually attempt anything, which being done, they received letters from the
Governor there, signifying great disapprobation of their intended proceedings,
whereupon they desisted.

These motions must needs cause ill blood between the Nations: so that the
Indians grew very insolent in their carriage, and there were secret
conspiracyes to cut off the English. And inasmuch as they thought that if they
should destroy the Westonians, and leave he Plymoutheons (who had not wronged
them) alive, these would take an opportunity to be revenged for those;
wherefore they concluded to (...) all before them, as was afterward revealed
by Massasoit, and by another Sachim called W^ssapinawet, brother to Obtakiest,
the then Sachim of the Massachusetts.

The English of Plymouth as yet being Ignorant of the bloody mischief, which
the Treacherous hearts of the Indians had concluded against them, attended the^
occasions as formerly.

Upon a time Capt. (...) going with some men in a Shallop, to buy Corn of the
Indians at N^ss^^, one of them stole certain trifles out of the Shallop;
whereupon the Captain repaired to the Sachim, and told him, that if he did not
immediately restore those things, he would revenge it before his departure, and
so took leave for that night.

The next morning, the Sachim came accompanied with his train of salvages,
saluting the Captain in such a manner as was hugely ridiculous to the English;
For he put out his tongue, that one might see the root of it, and so licked the
Captains hands, al his men doing the like, and endeavoring (according to the
rude information they had received from Squantum) to make him a leg, he did
perform his Ceremony after such an odd manner, as the English were hard put to
it to refrain from open laughter.

Spectatum admissi^ri^um ten^atis Amici?

After these Complements were over, he restored the things that were lest;
withal declaring, that he had much beaten the Indian that did Commonten (i.e.
steal) the trifles mentioned.

But not long after this, the Captain was in no small hazard of his life in
another place; For going to Manomet (now called Sandwich) and being there
entertained in the house of Kuna^um, the Sachim there the Indians designed to
cut off him and his men.

There was with him at this time, a Cap-Indian called Paomlt, who pretended
friendship to the English, but was secretly joined in the bloody Confederacy.
That he might not be suspected, he professed special affection toward the
Captain, and would, as a gift, bestow some Corn upon him, and help him to carry
the Corn to his beat, and would lodge in the Wigwam with Capt. Standish, to
manifest what love and honor he did bear toward him, having in the mean time
promised the Indians to kill him that night, and when he was killed the rest
were to dispatch his men.

Also whilst he was entertained in the Sachims house, there came in two
Massachuset Indians, being desperate bloody villains. The name of the Chief of
them was (...), who took a dagger from about his neck, and presented it to the
Sachim, and made a speech to him(which the Captain could not understand)
boasting of his own valor, and how he had been the death of Christians both
French and English and what pitiful weak Creatures they were, that when they
were killing, they died crying, and made sower faces, more like children then
men, and that whereas they were determined to kill the English (who had injured
them) of Mr. Westons plantation, the best way for their own security was, to
kill them of Plymouth too, now their Captain being in their hands, having but
six men with him, two or three in the Wigwam, and no more in the shallop, it
was a good opportunity to begin.

The murderous Counsel of this Audacious Bloud-sucker, was highly applauded;
and the Indians waited when Capt. Stan^ish would fall asleep, that they might
attempt the bloody Tragedy. But God so ordered that he could not sleep that
night. Also, an Indian secretly stole some Beads from him; which when the
Captain perceived, he immediately called his six men together, and they beset
the Sachims house, professing to him that as they would not do wrong to him,
so neither would they receive any, and therefore as they valued their lives,
they should forth with restore the stolen goods. Hereupon the Sach^^ bestirred
himself to find out the Thief, and having done so, he comes to the Captain
desiring him to look into his boat, if the beads that he missed were not there,
who looking found them lying openly on the Cuddy, the Indians having ^lily
conveyed them ^hither. However this did so daunt the courage of the treacherous
and cowardly Indians, that they attempted not their designed mischief.

All this while, they of Plymouth Colony had no certain knowledge of the evil
that was intended against them, by (...) Heathen albeit the Conspiracy was very
strong, for the Indians at Nosset, Paomet, (...), Manomet, Mattachi^^t, Agara^,
were all in this Confederacy to cut off the English. But God who has a special
eye of providence over his people: did at that time so order, that Massasoit
fell sick, whereupon the Governor that then was, desired Mr. Wi^st^^, and
another Gentleman to give the sick Sachem a visit, and administer some Physic
to him. As they were upon their journey toward Pocanoke^, the place of
Massasoit^ residence, the Indians by the way told that he was dead and buried.
Which caused Hobbomock (their guide through the woods) to break form into
bitter Lamentations crying out N^en (...) ^agim^s! O my loving Sachim, O my
loving Sachim, thou wast no Liar, not cruel like other Indians, thy passion was
soon over, thou would heaven to reason from the meanest Subject thou did
love Englishm^n; among Indians I shall never know the like to thee.

So that it would have made the hardest heart to have relented to (...) him.
Yet they proceeded in their journey, being come so far as (...), they
understood that Massasoit was not quite dead, but (...) hopes of his life.

When they came to (...), they fo^^d the Indians Pow^wing (...) Massaso^^,
making such an hellish noise as was enough to make (...) man sick, and
therefore was very unlikely to make him that was ^wel.

H^bbomock told him that the Governor of Plymouth had sent some ^nds to visit
him in his sickness, and that they had brought some ^askiet i.e. Physic, for
him. Upon the re^eit of which, he suddenly (...) strangely revived, and before
their departure gave them great ^anks for their love, saying, that now he saw
that the English at plymouth were his real friends.

As they were ready to return home, he privately told Hobbomock of (...) plot
among the Massachusetts, and other Indians, to destroy the English, and how they
had solicited him to join with them, but he (...), that neither he, nor any of
his men were in their Combination. He advised, that the Governor of plymouth
would without delay, send and take off the Principal Actors in this wicked
design, and then the ^est would be afraid. And whereas the Governor had
sometimes said they would not begin with the Indians, until the Indians began
with them, he earnestly counseled him not to stay for that, left it should be
too late.

The first day whilst their journey back again, they were accompanied with
Co^batant the Sachim of Metapoy^et (before mentioned) who was a politic and
jocofe Indian, and still suspected to be false to the English; He asked Mr.
Winslow, how they, being but two, dared ^o trust themselves amongst so many
Indians. Answer was made that love was without fear, and they wished well to the
Indians, and therefore did not fear evil from them. But then, said the Indian,
what is the reason, that when we come to Patuxet, you hold the mouths of your
guns against us; he was told, that was the English manner of entertaining their
friends. At which the Sachim shaked his head, withal declaring, that he did not
like such salutations. The next day, Hobbonock acquainted the English, with
what Massasoit had revealed to him.

So then being returned to plymouth, It was on March 23. resolved, to hear^en
to Massaloits advice; many other things at that juncture appearing, which
confirmed the truth of what was by him discovered. And considering, that there
was no dealiug with Indians (as other nations do one with another) above board,
it was thought most expedient by policy, to catch them at unawares, as they are
wont to do by others Wherefore Capt. Stan^^^h made choice of eight men, to go
with him to Wesegusquaset, pretending to trade with them, and then to take his
opportunity to seyze upon the Ringleader* amongst the Conspirators.

Being arrived at the Massachusetts Bay, Two principal Conspirators behaved
themselves very insolently. One of them called P^cksu^t, who was a (...) or
Counselor, Jeered at Capt. Standish, because he was a man of little stature,
and yet a Captain. Another called Wittawamat (before mentioned) cast out bloody
expressions, showing a sharp knife, which had a woman's face pictured on the
handle, saying, that he had killed French men, and English too, with that
^nife, and that he had another knife, which had a man's face pictured on it, and
his two knives should marry shortly, and that by and by it should ^at, though
not speak. Likewise another Indian, and Wittawamat, brother, who in bloodiness
was like unto him, being present; Capt. Standish snatched Pick^ot^ knife from
about his neck, and killed him with his own knife. At the same time his men
fell upon Wittawa^at, and the other Indian, and slew them, and took Wittawamats
brother, and hanged him.

After this they set upon another company of Indians, and killed two or three
of them, seeing still after more. At length they espied a file of Indians making
toward them, but as the English came to the encounter, they (i.e. the Indians)
ran behind the trees, and shot at Capt. Standish, until one as he was shooting,
had his arm broke by a bullet, (...) one of Capt. Standish his soldiers,
whereupon he, and the rest fled into a Swamp. The Captain dared the Sachim to
come out, and fight like a man, but in vain.

At the time of these skirmi^hes, there was an Indian youth, who
notwithstanding the slaughter made amongst his countrymen, came running to the
English, desiring that he might be with them. He confessed that the Indians had
resolved to cut off Mr. W^st^ns men and that they only stayed for the finishing
of two Canoos more (which if Capt Standish had not so unexpectedly come upon
them had been finished) that were intended for the surprizal of the English
ship in the harbor.

Also an Indian S^ye, who was taken prisoner and detained at Plymouth, when he
saw Cap. Standish return with Wittawamats Head, looked on it with a guilty,
gastred countenance, and then confessed the Plot that was in hand to destroy
the English, and that Pick^u^ot and Wittawamat, together with three Powaws,
were the principal Conspirators. He was released, and sent to Oktakiest, the
Sachim of the Massachusetts, to signify what he must look for, in case he should
continue in hostility against the English. The Sachim being amazed, and
terrified with the English successes, humbly begged for peace, pretending that
he could not keep his men in order, and that it was against his will that evil
had been done to, or designed against the English.

Furthermore, the effect of these things was, that the rest of the Indians were
stricken with such terror, and dread of the English, that they left their
houses, and betook themselves to live in unhealthful Swamp^, whereby they
became subject to miserable diseases, that proved mortal to multitudes of them.
Particularly, Kunacum Sachim of Manomet, Aspinet Sachim of Nosser, janowgh
Sachim of Mattachiest, these all fell sick and died. This last Sachim said,
that the God of the English was offended at the Indians, and would destroy them
in his anger. And these signal appearances of God for his Church in Plymouth,
must needs be a great conviction to the Heathen. Howbeit these motions ended in
the subversion and ruin of Mr. Westons plantation; God who determines the
bounds of men's habitations, having appointed, that another people out of
England should come afterward, and possess that place, as at this day.

And thus far is Mr. Winslo^s Relation of these first Troubles by Indians in
these parts, which I take to be undoubted verity: For he was one that had
particular knowledge of those things, and a man of truth, and conscience, that
would not for the world willingly falsify in any particular.

There is an old Planter yet living in this country, being one of those that
were employed by Mr. Weston, who also has given some account of these matters.

He does relate, and affirm, that at his first coming into this country, the
English were in a very distressed condition, by reason of famine, and sickness
which was amongst them, whereof many were already dead; and that they buried
them in the night, that the Indians might not perceive how low they were
brought.

This Relator does moreover declare, that an Indian Panies, who secretly
purposed bloody destruction against the English, and made it his design to
learn the English tongue, to the end he might more readily accomplish his
hellish devices, told him, that there had been a French vessel cast away upon
these coasts, only they saved their lives and their goods, and that the Indians
took their goods from them, and made the Frenchmen their servants, and that
they wept very much, when Indians parted them from one another, that they made
them eat such meat as they gave their dogs. Only one of them having a good
Master, he provided a Wife for him, by whom he had a Son, and lived longer then
the rest of the French men did; and that one of them was wont to read much in a
Book (some say it was the New Testament) and that the Indians enquiring of him
what his Book said, he told them it did intimate, that there was a people like
French men that would come into the Country, and drive out the Indians, and
that they were now afraid that the English were the people of whole coming the
French man had foretold them. And that another ship from France came into the
Massachusetts Bay with Goods to Truck, and that Indian Panies propounded to the
Sachim, that if he would hearken to him, they would obtain all the French men's
Goods for nothing, namely, by coming a multitude of them aboard the vessel,
with great store of Beaver, making as if they would Truck, and that they should
come without Bows and arrows, only should have knives hid in the flappets which
the Indians wear about their loins, and when he should give the Watchword,
they* should run their knives into the French men's bellyes, which was
accordingly executed by the Indians, and all the French men killed, only
Mounsier ^inch the Master of the vessel being wounded, ran down into the Hold,
whereupon they promised him that if he would come up, they would not kill him,
notwithstanding which, they brake their word, and murdered him also, and at
last set the ship on Fire.

Some enquiring of him how long it was since the Indians first saw a ship, he
replied that he could not tell, but some old Indians reported, that the first
ship seemed to them to be a Floating Island, wrapped together with the roots of
trees, and broken off from the Land, which with their Canoos they went to see,
but when they found men there and heard gunns, they hasted to the shore again
not a little amazed. (Some write that they shot arrows at the first ship they
saw thinking to kill it)

This Relator does also affirm, that after ^eal^^sies began between the English
of Mr. Westons plantation and the Indians, they built diverse of their Wigwams
at the end of a great Swamp, near to the English, that they might the more
suddenly and effectually do what was secretly contrived in their hearts: and
an Indian Squaw said to them that ere long Aberkiest would bring many Indians
that would kill all the English there and at Ratuxet. After which the Sachim
with a company of his men came armed toward them, and bringing them within the
Pale of the English Plantation, he made a speech to the English with great
gravity saying, When you first came into this land, I was your friend, we gave
gifts to-one another. I set you have land as much as we agreed for, and now I
would know of you if I or my men have done you any wrong. Unto whom the English
replied, that they desired, that he would first declare whether they had
injured him.

The Sachim roundly* rejoyned, that either some or all of them had been abusive
to him; for they had stolen away his corn, and though he had given them notice
of it times without number, yet there was no satisfaction nor reformation
attained.

Hereupon, the English took the principal Thief and bound him and delivered him
to the Sachim, with all declaring, that he might do with him what he pleased.
Nay (said he) Sachim* do justice themselves upon their own men, and let their
neighbors do justice upon theirs, otherwise we conclude that they are all
agreed, and then fight.

Now the Indians some of them began to tremble, and beholding the Guns which
were mounted on the English Fort, they said one to another (in their Language)
that little guns would shoot through houses, and great guns would break down
trees, and make them fall and kill Indians round about. So did they depart at
that time dissatisfied and enraged.

The English now perceiving that the Indians were fully purposed to be revenged
on them, they resolved to fight it out to the last man.

As they were marching out of the Fort, seven or eight men stood still* saying,
this is the second time that the Salvages had demanded the life of him that had
wronged them, and therefore they would have him first put to death, and if that
would not satisfy, then to fight it out to the last, wherefore he was put to
death in the sight of the Heathen; after which the English marched out toward
them, but they dispersed themselves into the woods.

This Relator endeavored to give notice to them in Plymouth, how that the
Indians had contrived their ruin, but he missed his way between Weymouth and
Plymouth; and it was well he did so; for by that means, he escaped the savage
hands of those Indians, who immediately pursued him, with a murderous intention
Ere he could reach Plymouth, they were informed by Massaso^^ (as has been
declared) concerning what was plotted amongst the Indians.

Finally there were (as this Relator testifies) three several skirmishes with
the Indians. One at Wesegusquaset, before mentioned* another at a place where
the town of Dorchester is since planted; and lastly at the Bay of Agawam or
Ipswich; in all which engagements, the Indians were notably beaten, and the
English received no considerable damage, so that the Sachims entreated for
peace, nor were the English, (provided it might be upon terms safe and
honorable) averse thereunto, Pacem t^ poscimus omnes.

These dark clouds being thus comfortably dispelled, and blown over, the first
Planters in this Country received no considerable disturbance from the Indians
a long time. It is true, that soon upon these motions, ( viz. in August, Anno
1623.) a Gentleman arrived here out of England (namely Capt. Robert Gorges)
being attended with many servants, as purposing the settlement of an English
plantation in this Bay of Massachusetts; and although that plantation was*
quickly deserted and dissolved, other things, and not any anoyance from the
Natives here caused those designs to prove abortive.

The like is to be affirmed concerning Mr. Wollas^ons plantation. For whereas
he with several others, being persons of quality, did (in the year 1625) with a
multitude of servants come into this Massachus^t^ Bay, as intending to settle a
plantation therein, they met with such cross providence as did discourage
them, and at last dissipate them, yet nothing from the Indians.

I have been informed, that this Gentleman considering the unhappy
Catastrophe's attending Mr. Weston and Mr. Gorges, their plantings at
Wesegusquaset, conceited that the Indian Powaws had brought that place under
some fascination, and that Englishmen would never thrive upon Enchanted ground,
and therefore they would pitch down their stakes in a place nearer to Boston;
even where the town of Brantree has since flourished; but the difficultyes of
a Wilderness were* too hard for them, that Mr. Wollaston removed a great part
of his servants to Virginia, not having (so far as I can understand) received
any molestation from the Indians here.

In Anno 1628. Mr. Endecot (who deserves to be honorably mentioned, as having
been a Patriot in New England) arrived here (...) a Patent for the Government
of the Massachusetts. He and others with him sat down at a place called
Nahumkeik (as in a Parenthesis let me here observe, that that Indians word is
also Hebrew, (...) Nahum signifies Consolation, and (...) k^ik is hebrew for a
Boosome, or haven, and it so falls out, that the English have happened to call
that place by another name which is also Hebrew, viz. Salem) There did they
enjoy Peace. Howbeit there are Ancient Planters, who testify that the Indians
being possessed with some fears lest the English should in time take their
Country from them, were conspiring to destroy them. And the small handful of
Christians then in Salem, were alarmd with the report of no less then a
thousand Barbarous Natives, coming to cut them off, and that upon a Lords day,
whereupon they discharged several great guns, the small shot* wherein made such
a terrible rattling amongst the trees afar off, that the amazed Indians returned
not a little affrighted. And it was a wonderful providence of God, now to
restrain the Heathen, since it so happened that about this time there were some
Tumults about the English themselves. For whereas Mr. Wollaston. and his
Partners left some of their servants here; and gave order that a man whose name
was Filcher, should command and oversee them. There was another whose name was
Thomas Morton, he would needs take upon him to be Lord of Mis-rule, and having
gained much by trading with the Indians, this Morton and his drunken Companions
quickly wasted all in riotous living.

This was the man that taught the Indians in these parts the use of Guns, how
they should charge and discharge them, and employed them in Hunting for him:
And when they were instructed in the use of these instruments of death, they
would purchase them at any rates, whereby the safety of the English was not a
little hazzarded.

In conclusion, the English at Plymouth and Salem, agreed to seyze upon this
Morton, which was done Vi and armis, and he was sent over to England, there to
receive such punishment as by the honorable Council for New England should be
thought meet.

All these tumults notwithstanding, the overruling providence of God kept the
Indians quiet.*

It is to be wondered at, that the Church in Plymouth should be preserved when
other English Plantations could not subsist in this Country, but either the
Indians, or the Lords own hand brought them to a sudden end from time to time.
But God who saw that they designed something better then the world, in their
planting here, brought it to pass by such ways as these,

1. Massasoit (as was hinted before) was persuaded by Squantums information,
that if the English should be his friends, he need not fear any enemies in the
World, so did he become a wall to the English at Plymouth against other
Indians. The Earth helped the woman that was fled into the Wilderness, whom the
Dragon would have swallowed up.

2. The Lord made them very successful in their expeditions against those
enemies that first sought their destruction.

3. They prevailed with God by Fasting and Prayer to look upon them and bless
them with special mercy when it was a time of need, which did greatly affect
and astonish the Indians: some of them therefore conceiving high thoughts
concerning the English man's God, and his love to his people, that truly fear
and serve him. That which Mr Winslow (and since him another) does publicly
testify concerning this matter, deserves Commemoration, namely, that whereas
after the First Indian Troubles were over, there was a sore drought on the land
continuing for the space of six Weeks, insomuch that it was judged by some that
the corn was withered and dead, past recovery, the Church in Plymouth set
themselves by Fasting and Prayer, to seek mercy from the Lord in this thing.
And although in the morning when they assembled themselves, the heavens were
clear, and the drought as likely to continue as ever, yet before their solemn
Exercise was ended, the heavens grew black with clouds, and the next morning
these clouds distilled rain, and for the space of fourteen days together there
were moderate showers, so that the drooping corn was revived to admiration.

A friendly Indian, before mentioned, known by the name of Hobbomock, living in
the town of Plymouth, enquired why the English met together in that manner, it
being but three days after the Sabba^^; and being informed of the true cause
thereof, and observing the gracious effects that followed, he was greatly
affected, and told other Indians of it, who were also smitten with deep
conviction, and the more in that, albeit in times of Drought the Indians are
w^nt to Powaw and cry to their gods, sometimes for many days together, yet if
rain follow, it is wont to be accompanied with terrible Thundering and Lightning
and tempests, which often do more hurt then the rain does good: whenas it was
otherwise with respect to the showers which at this time came from Heaven, in
answer to the Prayers of the Church in Plymouth, So that the Heathen confessed
that the English man's God was better then theirs. And some amongst the Indians
became faithful to the English, though as yet but a very few,

Apparent rari Nantes in Gurgite vasto.

There having been (as was said) a Patent for the Massachusetts Government by
royal Grant obtained, many out of England flocked into this Country almost
every year. And for the most part, not so much on the account of Trade, or to
prosecute any worldly interest, as on the account of Religion. These did God
own, having wonderfully made way for their planting here by casting out the
Heathen before them, with mortal Diseases, especially by the Plague amongst the
Indians in Plymouth Colony, and the Small Pox among the Massachusetts.

In Anno, 1631. New jealousies arose concerning the treacherous Indians. Capt.
Walker one evening had two arrows* shot through his that, which caused an Alarm
at Lyn, then known by the name of Saw^^^: but no lives were lost, nor is there
any certainty to this day who (...) those arrows, whereby the Captains life was
so eminently endan^^^ed.

About the same time the Indians began to be quarrelsome touching (...) bounds
of the Land which they had sold to the English; but God (...) the controversy
by sending the small pox amongst the Indians at August, who were before that
time exceeding numerous; whole towns (...) them were swept away, in some of
them not so much as one Soul (...) the destruction. There are some old Planters
surviving to this (...), who helped to bury the dead Indians, even whole
fa^^^yes of them (...) dead at once. In one of the Wigwams they found a poor
infant sucking at the breast of the dead mother, all the other Indians being
dead also.

Not long after this, when the town of Ipswich was first planted, it (...)
vehemently suspected that the Tarratines (or eastern Indians) had a (...) ^ign
to cut off the English there. For a friendly Indian called Robin (...) me to an
Englishman whose name is Perkins, acquainting him that (...) a Thursday there
would come four Indians to draw him to the (...) side under pretense of
trucking with him, and that they had prepared forty Canooes which should ly out
of sight under the brow of an ^ll, full of armed Indians to cut off the
English. The four Indians (...) at the time, and to the person mentioned, He
instead of going to (...) water side to truck with them, spoke roughly to them,
and caused (...) Alarm, so they immediately returned, perceiving their Plot was
discovered, and presently forty such Canooes as the friendly Indian (...)
given warning of, were discovered.

Besides the Particulars which have been insisted on, I cannot understand that
there was any general disquietment raised by the Indians, un^^^ the year 1636.
It is true that some particular mischiefs and private Murders were committed
before that, after the forementioned troubles were allayed.* For Mr. Weston,
who himself, (under another name and the disguise of a Blacksmith) arrived
here not long after his plan^^tion* was ruined, suffering ship wrack near
Pascataqua hardly escaped with his life, in respect of the Indians, who took
his Goods from (...), and stripped him of his very clothes to the shirt on his
back.

About eleven years after that, Capt. Stone, and Capt. Norton, with all their
ships company, were barbarously murdered by the Pequ^t Indians (as is in the
sequel more fully related.)

And two years after that, Mr. John Oldham was massacred by the Indians of
Munisses, now called Block-Island; which things made way for the Pequot War,
whereby the whole English Interest (yea the Interest of Christ, who had ere
that taken possession of this land, and gloriou^^^ began to erect his own
kingdom here) was threatened and endangered.

Great pit^y it is, that although it be now forty years since those motions,
and albeit the works which God then wrought for his people were admirable, yet
that no Co^pleat Memorial thereof, has been published to this day. It is then
high time, that something more should be done therein, that so both we and our
Children after us, may see what great things, the Lord God of our fathers has
done for them, and for us.

And there is a Gentleman in this country (namely Mr. John Allyn, who is
Secretary to the Council at Hartford, and one of the worthy Magistrates of that
Colony) who has been Industrious in gathering up the truth of things, about
those troubles, being under peculiar advantages thereunto, by informations from
him, who was principally instrumental in fighting the Lords battles at that
time against the Heathen.

This Narrative of Mr. Allyns I shall here insert and publish, as I received
it, without making the least alteration as to the sense, and very little as to
the words. It is that which follows.

Some Grounds of the War against the Pequots.
In or about the year 1633. One Capt. Stone arrived in the Massachusetts, in a
ship from Virginia, who sometime after was bound for Virginia again, in a small
Bark, with one Capt. Norton, who sailing up Connecticut River, about two
leagues from the entrance, cast Anchor; there coming to them several Indians
belonging to that place, whom the Pequotts tyranized over, being a potent and a
warlike people they being accustomed so to deal with their neighboring
Indians. Capt. Stone having some occasion with the Dutch, who lived at a
Trading house, near twenty leagues up the River, procured some of those Indians
to go as Pilots with two of his men to the Dutch; but they being benighted,
before they could come to their desired port, put the Skiffe, in which they
went, ashore; where the two Englishmen falling asleep, were both murdered by
their Indian guides, there remaining with the Bark, about twelve of the
aforesaid Indians, who had in all probability, formerly plotted their bloody
design, and waiting an opportunity when some of the English were on shore, and
Capt. Stone asleep in his Cabin, set upon them and cruelly murdered every one
of them, and plundered what they pleased, and afterward sunk the Bark.

These Indians were not native Pequots, but had frequent recourse to them, to
whom they tendered some of those goods, which were accepted by the chief Sachem
of the Pequots: and some of the Goods were tendered to the Sachim of Niantick
who also received them.

The Honored Council of the Mass^chusets hearing of these proceedings of the
Pequots, sent to speak with them* and had some Treatyes, but no issue was made
to satisfaction.

After which, Capt. John Endicot was sent forth Commander in chief, with Capt.
Underhill, Capt. Turner and about an hundred and twenty men, who were firstly
designed against a people living on BlockIsland, who were subject to the
Narraganset Sachem, they having taken a Bark of Mr. John Oldam, murdering him
and his Company. They were also to call the Pequots to an account about the
murdering of Capt. Stone: who arriving at Pequod, had some Conference with
them, but little was effected, only one Indian slain, and some Wigwams burnt.

After which the Pequots grew enraged against the English who inhabited*
Connecticut, being but a small number, about two hundred and fifty who were
there newly arrived, as also about twenty men at SeyB^ook under the command of
Leiut. Lion. Gardner, who was there placed by several Lords and Gentlemen in
England.

The Pequots observing Lieut. Gardner going to fire the Meadows about half a
mile off the Fort, with ten men with him, was violently assaulted by the Pequod
Indians, so that some were slain, the rest were rescued by the Soldiers
issuing out of the Fort upon the said Pequots who fled. They also seized some
that were passing up Connecticut River, and tortured them in most cruel manner,
with most barbarous and inhumane crueltyes; roasting of them alive etc.

They also lay sculking about the Fort almost constantly, that the English
could not go out of the Fort, but they were assaulted by the Pequods, so that
Connecticut out of their small numbers, constrained themselves to send Capt.
John Mason with twenty men to secure the place. But after his coming, there did
not one Pequod appear in view for a months ^pace about the Fort, which was the
time he there remained.

In the interim, many of the Pequods went to a place now called Weth^rsfield on
Connecticut, and having confederated with the Indians of that place (as it was
generally thought) they lay in ambush for the English people of that place, and
diverse of them going to their labor in a large field adjoining to the town,
were set upon by the Indians, nine of the English were slain upon the place,
and some horses, and two young women were taken Captive.

The Pequo^s at their return from Wethersfield, came down to the River of
Connecticut, (Capt. Mason then being at Saybr^^k Fort) in three or more
Canooes, with about an hundred men, the English espying of them, concluded they
had been acting some mischief against us, and therefore prepared one of their
great Gunns, and made a shot at them, which shot struck off the head of one of
their Canooes wherein the two Captives were, although the shot was made at them
at a great distance, near three miles: but seeing* it was so placed, they
hastened to the shore, and drew their Canooes with what speed they could over a
narrow Beach and so got away.

The English of Connecticut being so alarmed by these insolen^yes of the
Pequods, saw meet to call a Court, which met in Hartford upon Connecticut the
first day of May 1637. who seriously considering their condition, which did
look very sad, since the Pequods were a great people, fortified; cruel,
warlike, munitioned etc. and the English but an handful in comparison of them.
But their outrageous violence against the English (having murdered about
thirty of them) their great pride and insolency, and their constant pursuit in
their malicious courses, with their endeavors to engage other Indians in their
Quarrel against the English, who had not offered them the least wrong,

These things being duly considered, with the eminent hazard and great peril
the people of Connecticut were in, it pleased God so to stir up the hearts of
all men in general, and the Court of Connecticut in special, that they
concluded it necessary that some Forces should be sent forth speedily* against
the Pequots, their grounds being just, and necessity enforcing them to engage
in an offensive and defensive War, the management of which War, with the good
success the Most High was pleased to crown his people withal, we are nextly to
relate.

A BRIEF HISTORY Of the War with the Pequot Indians in New England; Anno 1637.
IN the beginning of May, 1637. there were sent out by Connecticut Colony
ninety men, under the command of Capt. John Mason (afterward Major Mason, and
Deputy Governor of Connecticut Colony,) against the Pequots, with whom went
Un^as an Indian Sachem of M^heag, who was newly revolted from the Pequots.

This small Army was shipped in one Pink, one Pinnace and one Shallop, some of
which vessels in their passage down Connecticut River, fell on ground, by
reason of the lowness of the water, and the unskilfulness of the English in the
channel. The Indians not being wonted to such things with their small Canooes,
and also being impatient of all delays, desired they might* be set on shore,
promising they would meet our Army at Seybrook; which request of theirs was
granted: and they being set at liberty hastening to their Quarters at Saybrook,
met with about thirty or forty of the Pequots, near S^ybrook, and engaged
them, and slew seven of them upon the place, and had only one of their own
wounded, who was conveyed back to Connecticut in a Skiffe.

Capt. Underhill hearing of the approach of the Army, went and met them and
informed them what was performed by Unc^^ and his men, which news was welcome
to them, and looked upon as a special providence; for before they were somewhat
doubtful of the fidelity of their Indian Volunteers.

Capt. Underhill hearing of the design our Army was upon, very freely offered
his Service with nineteen men to go along with them, if Leiut. Gardner would
allow of it (who was chief Commander at Saybrook Fort) which motion was no
sooner propounded to Lieut. Gardner, but he readily approved of it, and our
Council of War accepted of it also; who in liew of those twenty, immediately
sent back twenty of theirs to Connecticut to help guard the women and children
etc.

Upon a wednesday our Army arrived at Saybrook, where they say wind-bound till
Friday, in which time the Council of War consulted how and in what manner they
should proceed in their Enterprise, which was accompanied* with much
difficulty; their Commission ordering them to land their men in the Pequit
River, against which were these difficultyes.

First. The Pequods kept a continual Guard upon the River, night 'and day in a
constant course.

Secondly. Their numbers far exceeded ours; they had also sixteen gunns with
powder and shot, besides their Indian Artilery, as our Council of War was
informed by the two captive maids (mentioned where we declared the Grounds of
this War) who were redeemed by the Dutch, and restored now to us at Seybrook,
which was a very friendly office, and not to be forgotten.

Thirdly. They were on Land, and being swift of foot, might much impede the
landing of our men, and dishearten them, they continually guarding that River,
and our men not knowing where to land nearer then Narraganset.

Fourthly. It was alleged that if our Army landed at Narraganset, they would
come upon their Backs, and possibly might surprise them unawares; at worst they
should be on firm Land as well as the enemy.

Notwithstanding these reasons, the Council of War, all of them except the
Captain, were at a stand, and could not judge it meet to fail to Narraganset.
Capt. Mason in this difficult case, went to the Reverend Mr. Samuel Stone, late
Teacher to the Church of Christ at Hartford, who was sent as Preacher to the
Army, and desired him that he would that night commend their case and
difficultyes before the Lord, and seek direction of him in the matter, how and
in what manner they should demean themselves. He retired himself from them
aboard the Pink the remaining part of that day, and the following night was not
wanting in spreading the case before the Lord, and seeking his direction, in
the morning he came on shore to the Captains chamber, and told him he had done
as he desired him, (and though formerly he had been against sailing to
Narraganset and landing there, yet now he was fully satisfied to attend it.

The Council being again called, and the matter debated, and reasons
considered, they agreed all with one accord to sail to Narraganset, which the
next morning they put in execution, which proved very succesfull, as the sequel
may evidently demonstrate. What shall I say? God led his people through
manifold Difficultyes and Turnings, yet by more then an ordinary hand of
Providence, He led them in a right way.

On Friday morning, they in pursuance of their design set sail for Narraganset
Bay, and on Saturday toward evening they arrived at their desired Port, where
they kept the Sabbath.

On Monday the wind blew so hard at Norwest that they could not go on shore, as
also on Tuesday till it was near Sunset, but the wind abating, they and their
design being commended to God by Mr. Stone, Capt. Mason and his Company landed,
and marched up to the place of the chief Sachims residence* and told him, that
they had not an opportunity before, to acquaint him with their coming armed
into his country, yet they hoped it would (...) accepted by him, there being
amity between us and them, and also that the Pequots and they were enemies, and
that he could not be unacquainted with those intolerable wrongs and injuries,
those Pequots had lately done unto the English* and that they were now come
(God assisting) to avenge ourselves upon them, and that they did only desire
free passage through his country.

The Sachim returned this Answer, that he did accept of their coming, and did
also approve of their design, only he thought our numbers were too weak to
deal with the enemy, who were(as he said) very great Captains, and men skilful
in war, thus he spoke somewhat slightingly of our men.

On Wednesday morning they marched from thence, to a place called Niantick, it
being about eighteen, or twenty miles, distant, where another of those
Narraganset Sachims lived in a Fort, it being a frontier to the Pequots. They
carried it very proudly to our men* not permitting any of them to come into
their fort.

Capt. Mason beholding their carriage, and knowing the falsehood of the Indians,
fearing left they might discover them to the enemy, especially the Indians
having many times some of their near relations amongst their greatest Foes, saw
cause to set a guard about their fort that no Indian might oass in or out, and
charged the Indians not to pass out upon the peril of their lives. And there
they Quartered that night, the Indians not offering to stir out all the while.

In the morning came to the Army several of Miantinomie his men* who told them
they were come to assist them in the expedition, which encouraged diverse
Indians of that place to engage also, who drawing into a (...), one by one,
made solemn protestation how gallantly they would demean themselves, and how
many men they would kill.

On Thursday, about eight of the Clock in the morning, they marched thence
toward P^q^ot, having about five hundred Indians with them. In which march,
through the heat of the weather, and want of provision, some o^ our men
fainted* but when they had marched about twelve miles, they came to Paw^^tuck
River to Foord, where the Indians said the Pequots did usually fish. There they
made a stand and stayed some small time; but the Narraganset Indians manifested
great fear, and many of them returned, although they had despised our men, an
said they dur^^ not look upon a P equot, and vaunted what great things they
themselves would do.

Capt. John Mason saw reason then to acquaint the Indians that they were come
on purpose, and were resolved (God assisting) to see the Pequots, and to fight
with them before they returned, although they perished; and then he enquired of
Uncas what he thought the Indians would do; who said the Narrigan^ets would all
leave them, but as for himself, he would never leave them, and so it proved.

After they had there refreshed themselves with their mean Commons, they
marched about three miles, and came to a field which had been planted with
Indian corn, where they made another (...): and suppos^* (...) that they drew
near to the enemy, who, as they were (...), (...) almost impregnable, which did
no way, discourage the (...), but rather animated them, insomuch that they
resolved to assault both the sorts at once; but the Council of War having (...)
the matter, understood that one of the forts; in which the bloodiest (...)
resided, was so remote that they could not possibly come up with it in season,
and seeing some of the soldiers spent in the (...) with extreme heat, and want
of necessaries, concluded and resolved to assault, and storm the nearest fort.

Then they marched on in a silent manner; The Indians that remained* who in the
march hitherto kept the Van, (being surprised with great fear felt all into the
Rear. They continued their March till about an hour in the night, and then
coming to a little Swamp between two hills, there they pitched their little
Camp, being much wearied with hard travel; supposing (by the Relations of the
Indians) they were near the Fort, which proved otherwise. The rocks were their
pillows, (...) rest was sweet and pleasant to them. The night proved
comfortable being clear and Moonlight. They appointed their Guards, and placed
them Sentine^s at some distance, who heard their enemies, singing in their Fort
until midnight, with great insulting and rejoicing (as they were afterward
informed by W^qrash a Pequot Captain, who was revolted from the Pequots, and
was one of their Guides in this march* For they seeing our pinhaces sail by
them a few days before concluded they were afraid of them, and durst not to
come near them.

Toward morning Captain Mason being awakened, and seeing it very light,
supposed it had been day, and so they might have lost their opportunity, having
determined to make their assault before day and therefore immediately roused up
his Soldiers, and briefly commended themselves and Design to the guidance and
Protection of the Lord, and went to the assault.

Their Indian Guide showing them a path said it led directly to the Fort; they
took the path, and marched on the best part of two miles, wondering that they
saw not the Fort; and fearing that their Indian Guide might delude them; but
coming to a place where corn was newly planted at the foot of a great hill,
supposed the Fort was not far off, a champion Country being round about them.
There the Captain caused his Company to make a stand; and gave order that the
Indians should come unto him; at length Un^^s and W^quash came up, of whom he
demanded where the Fort was; they answered, on the top of that Hill: He also
enquired where the rest of the Indians were; they answered behind exceedingly
afraid; he then desired them to tell the rest of their fellows that they should
by no means fly, but stand at what distance they pleased, and see whether
English men would now fight or not. Then Capt. Underhill came up into the
Front, and after Capt. Mason had commended their case to God (their being two
entrances into the Fort, they divided their men; and Capt. Mason lead up to
that entrance on the North-east side, who approaching within a rod of the
entrance a dog barked, and an Indian cried Wanux wanux. He commanded his
Soldiers to close up to the Fort, and fire upon them through the palizadoes,
which they did, the Indians being in a dead and indeed in their last sleep. The
Soldiers having fired wheeled off and came to the main entrance, which was
blocked up with bushes about breast high, over which Capt. Mason very
courageously leaped* and stood to make good the entrance, and commanded his
Soldiers to follow him, one of which endeavoring, was entangled in the bushes,
but getting back, pulled out the bushes and so the Soldiers followed their
Captain into the Fort with their Swords (...) for they had concluded to destroy
them with the sword, and so to save the plunder.

The Indians as yet kept their Wigwams; Capt. Mason entered a Wigwam, and his
Guard not seeing him, passed away from him, where he was strongly assaulted by
many Indians, but he bravely defended himself, and slew several of his
opposers; at last William Heyden perceiving the place where the Captain went
in, essayed to go in himself, but in his entrance stumbled upon a dead man, but
soon recovering himself, he fell upon the Indians. The Indians some were slain,
some fled, others crept under their beds, where they slept their last; the
Captain going out of the Wigwams met with many of them and put them to the
sword; In which time of fight several English were wounded. Capt. Mason
perceiving his men wounded, and the enemy not yet routed, saw cause himself to
go into a wigwam, and fetch out a firebrand, and putting it in one of the mats
with which the wigwams were covered, commanded one of his soldiers to throw
some powder upon it, which set the mat on fire, which the wind taking; it was
quickly thoroughly kindled, which made the Indians run as men most dreadfully
amazed.

And Indeed such a dreadful terror did the Almighty let fall upon their
spirits, that they would fly from the sword, and cast themselves into the very
flames, where many of them perished.

The fort being fired, the Captain commanded that all should march out of the
fort, and surround it; which was readily attended by all, only one Arthur Smith
was so wounded that he could not move out of the place, who was happily espied
by Leiut. Tho. Bull, and by him rescued from the flames, which otherwise had
consumed him.

The fire was kindled on the Northeast side to windward, which did swiftly over
run the whole Fort, to the extreme amazement of the enemy, and great rejoicing
of our soldiers; some of the enemy climbed to the tops of the pallizadoes,
where they were shot down, others gathered to the windward side of the Fort,
and lay pelting at our men with their arrows, who repaied them with their small
shot, others of the stoutest issued forth of the Fort, about forty of them who
fell by the sword.

Capt. Underhil and those with him acted their parts in this tragedy,
especially one Mr. H^dge, who was the first that entered that gate to which
Capt. Underhil led up; the fire was no sooner kindled but the smoke and flames
were so violent, that they were constrained to desert the Fort and keep them in.

Thus were they now at their wits end, who not many hours before exalted
themselves in their great pride, threatening and resolving the utter ruin and
destruction of all the English, exulting and rejoicing with songs and dances;
but God was above them, who laughed his enemies and the enemies of his people
to scorn, making them as a fiery oven; thus were the stout hearted spoiled,
having slept their last sleep, and none of their men could find their hands;
thus did the Lord judge among the heathen, filling the place with dead bodies.

And here we may take notice of Gods judgment upon this bloody Generation, in
sending the very night before the assault an hundred and fifty men from their
other fort to join with this fort, who were designing (as some of themselves
have related) to go forth against the English at that very instant when this
stroke came upon them, where the most of them perished with their fellows, so
that the mischief they intended against us came upon themselves; they were
taken in their own s^ate and we through the mercy of God escaped. And thus in
little more then one hours space was their Impregnable fort, with themselves
utterly destroyed, to the number of five or six hundred, as has been confessed
by the Pequots who escaped. There were seven taken captive, and about eight
escaped; and of the English there were two slain outright, and above twenty
wounded. Some of our soldiers ^ainted for want of such comforts and necessaryes
as were needful in such a case. The Chyrurgion was much wanted* who was left
with the Barks in Narraganset Bay, with order there to remain until the night
before they intended the assault.

And thereupon grew many difficultyes amongst the Army, their provision and
ammunition being near spent, and they in the enemies country, who did far
exceed them in numbers, being much enraged, and most of our Indian friends
having left them, and our pinnaces at a great distance from them, and their
coming uncertain.

But as they were consulting what course to take, it pleased God to discover
our vessels to them under a fair Gale of wind failing into the Pequot Harbor,
to their great rejoicing.

They had no sooner discovered our vessels, but immediately came up the enemy
from the other fort about three hundred of them. Capt. Mason led forth a file
or two of men to skirmish with them, which stopped their Carrier, and put them to
a stand, and then they prepared to march toward our vessels, but four or five
of our men were so wounded that they were fain to be carried, with the Arms of
about twenty more which took up so many of the soldiers, that there was not
above forty men free, but at length they hired several Indians to carry the
wounded men, who cased them of that burden, and carried their wounded men for
them.

And when the soldiers had marched about a quarter of a mile, the enemy came
to the place where the fort had stood, and when they beheld the ruins thereof,
and the carcases of their friends lie some upon the earth, others scorched, and
some almost consumed, with the fire, they stamped and tore the hair from their
heads, and ran mouting down the hill in their full Carreer, and the loss they
met withal made them wary not to come near.

The soldiers then meeting with a small brook at the foot of the hill being
very dry, sat down and refreshed themselves, the enemy being grown by this time
so wary they durst not come too near, to disturb them.

Then they marched on toward Pequot Harbor, and meeting with*several Wigwams
in the way they burnt them; the enemy followed them, and some lay in ambush
behind rocks and trees, often shooting at them, yet God so covered them, that
not one of them was hurt, and when they came to any swamp or thicket, they made
some shot, and cleared a passage, and some of the enemy fell, which our Indians
seeing, would give a great shout, and then venture to fetch their heads, and
thus they continued, till they came within two miles of Pequot Harbor, where
the enemy gathered themselves together, and left our army, they marched on to
the top of an hill adjoining to the harbor, with their colors flying, (as for
their Drum, it was lost, or at least left by their Drummer at the place where
they kept their randezvouze the night before) where they saw our vessels riding
at Anchor to their great rejoicing, and when they had marched to the water
side, there they sat down in quiet.

Capt. Patrick being there arrived (with our vessels) with forty men sent by
the Massachusetts Colony upon some service against the block-Islanders or
Pequots, came to the shore in a shallop, with some of his men, as he said, to
rescue our Army, supposing they had been pursued, although there did appear no
sign of any such thing.

But Capt. Patrick could not be prevailed with by any means to venture himself
on shore while our wounded men were carried on board, which was troublesome,
not only to our soldiers, but to his own men also, who manifested their
dislike of his carriage; at length our men were fetched aboard our vessels, to
the great rejoicing of their friends, where they did with one heart bless the
Lord, for his mercy and good^ess unto them.

I might here relate ^ contest that (...) between Capt. Underhill and Capt.
Patrick, about Capt. Underhil's claiming an Interest in the Bark in which Capt.
Patrick sailed, which by the mediation of Capt. Mason was issued, and that
being the place of Randezvouze, where vessels were expected from the
Massachusetts, it was agreed that Capt. Patrick should there ride in that Bark,
and secure the Narraganset Indians until our vessel could carry our wounded
men to Seybrook, and our Pink return to carry home the Narraganset Indians.

After this agreement, Capt. Underhill set sail for Sey brook in our Bark, but
before he was out of sight, Capt. Patrick signified by writing to Capt. Mason
that he could not attend that Service he had engaged for he must with his
company wait at Seybrook, for some vessels he expected from the Bay; advising
Capt. Mason seeing he had obtained the honor of that Service, he would
complete it in securing the Narraganset Indians, etc. Which indeed was a hard
task and difficult; for the Pink could not entertain them, and to march by land
was dangerous, it being near twenty miles, and in the enemies country, and
their numbers being small; for they had sent home about twenty men to help
strengthen the Plantations on Connecticut, for fear of the Pequods invading of
them, but at last, seeing they were necessitated to march to Seybrook by land,
they went ashore with the Indians, and began their march; Capt. Patrick seeing
what they were about, came ashore also with his men; and although Capt. Mason
told him he did not delight in his company, yet he would and did march along
with them.

In their march, about the midway between that and S^ybrook, they fell upon a
people called Nianticks, belonging to the Pequots, who fled to a swamp for
refuge; but when they heard or saw this small troop they fled, who pursued them
awhile by their track as long as they kept together; but the day being much
spent, Sabbath drawing on, and themselves much spent with their former travel,
and service, they left their pursuit, and marched on toward Seybrook, and
about sunset they arrived by Connecticut River side; where they were welcomed
by Lieut. Gardner, with many great Gunns, but were forced there to take up
their Quarters that night. On the morrow morning they were all fetched over,
where they kept the Sabbath, and were nobly entertained by Lievt. Gardner, from
whom they received many Courtesies.

And when they had taken order for the safe conduct of the Narraganset Indians
to their Country, Capt. Mason with his men returned to Connecticut the place of
their abode, where they were entertained with great triumph, and rejoicing and
praising of God, for his goodness to us in succeeding our endeavors, in
crowning them with success, and in restoring our small Army with so little loss.

Thus was God seen in the mount, crushing his proud enemies, and the enemies of
his people, so that they who were ere while a terror to all that were round
about them, who resolved to destroy all the English, and to root their very
name out of this Country, were by weak means thus vanquished and destroyed,
and the mischief they plotted, and the violence they offered, was brought upon
their own heads in a moment; for the Lord burnt them up in the fire of his
wrath, and dunged the ground with their flesh, it was the Lords doing, and it
is marvelous in our eyes. It is He that has made His work wonderful, and
therefore ought to be remembered.

Suddenly after this, the whole Body of the remaining Pequots repaired to that
Fort where S^ss^^ous the chief Sachim did reside, and charged him that he was
the only cause of all their troubles that befell them, and therefore they would
destroy both him and his; yet by the entreaty of his Counselors, they spared
his life; and consulting what course to take, concluded there was no abiding
any longer in their Country, and so resolved to fly into several parts. The
greatest body of them went toward, Manadus, and in their passage over
Connecticut River, they met with three English men in a shallop going for
Seybrook, and sought them, who resisted them stoutly, and killed and wounded
many of them, but their shallop falling on ground, they were all three slain.

About a fortnight after our soldiers were returned home from Mistick Fight,
we heard of the arrival of several (...) he Massachusetts Colony in Pequot
River; Capt. (...) (...) being Commander in chief, and with him about 120 men,
(...) were sent by that Colony to prosecute the War against the peq^ots; and
although the main Body of the Pequots were fled, yet some straglers remained in
that Country, some of whom were discovered by the (...), and by them discovered
to the Massachusetts Forces, by whom they were both surprised and taken, and
several of which, to the number of about twenty three, were put to death; the
rest were sent to the Bay.

The Colony of Connecticut hereupon sent forth Capt. Mason again with forty
men, as also several Gentlemen, (as the Honored John Haines and R^ger Lud^ow
Esqrs.) to meet with those of the Massachusetts to consult and determine what
was further necessary to be attended* who meeting with those of the
Massachusetts in the Pequot harbor, after consultation, concluded to pursue the
Pequots (who as you heard before were fled toward the Menados) and so began
their march after them, and discovered several places where they had rendevowed
and lodged not far distant one from the other, for they could make but little
have, by reason of their ancient people and children, and their want of
provision, being forced to gather clams, and such other things as the
wilderness afforded for their relief. The vessels sailed along by the shore. In
the march, some were gleaned, but within the space of three days, or
thereabouts, they arrived at a place then called Quinipiag (now New Haven) and
there espying a great smoke in the woods, not far distant, supposing the
Pequots might be there, they went to discover them; but they quickly discovered
them to be Connecticut Indians. From thence they sent a Pequot captive (whom
they named Luz) upon discovery, who brought them tidings of the enemy which
proved real. The Pequots were so terrified in their flight, that a Moheag
Indian (named Jack Eaton) meeting in this pursuit with three ^equots, took two
of them and brought them to the English.

But to return, they having tidings where the Pequots were, hastened toward the
place where they heard they were, and at last coming into a corn field, several
of the English espied some Indians, who fled from them. They pursued them* and
coming to the top of an hill, saw several wigwams just opposite, only a swamp
intervening, which was almost divided in two parts. One Sergeant Palmor
hastening with about twelve men (who were then under his command) to surround
the smaller part of the swamp that so he might prevent the Indians flying. But
Lievt. Davenport, Sergeant Jefferyes etc. going up to the (...) were there
assaulted by the Indians. In this Skirmish the (...) few, two or three of
themselves were wounded, the (...) Army coming up, the swamp was surrounded.

(...) being called, the question was propounded how they (...) proceed? Capt.
Patrick advised that they should cut down the swamp, (they having taken many
Indian hatchets) Others propounded to hedge in the swamp, which others judged
would be to no purpose, and therefore strongly opposed it, Some other advised
to force the swamp, having time enough (it being about three a clock in the
afternoon) but that being opposed, it was then propounded that the men should
be drawn up close to the swamp, which would have le^ned the circumference, and
then to fill up the open passages with bushes, that so they might secure them
till the morning, and then consider farther about it. But neither of those
would pass, so different were their apprehensions, which was very grievous to
some, who concluded the Indians would make an escape in the night, as easily
they might, and did, the swamp being large and their numbers so small that they
were forced to stand at a great distance one from another, which made their
escape more easy.

Capt. Mason took order that the narrow passage in the swamp should be cut
through, which would much shorten the leaguer, which was accordingly attended
and resolutely performed by Sergeant Davis and some others with him.

Mr. Thomas Stanton a man well acquainted with the Indians language and
manners, perceiving the Counsel of War loath to destroy Women and children, (as
also the Indians of that place) freely offered his service to go into the swamp
and treat with them, which the Council were somewhat backward to, by ^eason of
some hazard he might be exposed to, but his importunity prevailed, who going to
them did in a short time come to the Council with near 200. old men, women and
Children, who delivered themselves to the mercy of the English, most of which
brought their small present with them, and laid it down before the Council.
Now night drawing on, they did beleaguer the swamp as strongly as they could.

But above hal^e an hour before day the Indians that were in the swamp,
attempted to *break through Capt. Patricks Quarters, But were beaten back
several times; they made a great noise, as their manner is at such times, which
sounded round about the leaguer; Capt. Mason sent Sergeant Stares to assist
those against whom the Pequots pressed to come out by, at which time also Capt.
Track came in to their assistance, but the tumult increasing, the siege was
raised, and they marching up to a place at a turning of the swamp, the Indians
were forcing out upon them, but they fired upon them, and sent them back by
their small shot; Then they waited a little for their second attempt, but the
Indians facing about, and pressing violently upon Capt. Patricks Quarters,
brake through, and so escaped about seventy of them, as the Indians informed;
the swamp was searched; there were but ^ew found slain. The Captives that were
taken were about an hundred and eighty, which were divided between the two
Colonyes, and they intended to keep them as servants, but they could not endure
that yoke, for few of them continued any considerable time with their masters.

'Thus did the Lord scatter his enemies with his strong arm.

The Pequots now became a prey to all Indians; happy were they that could bring
in their heads to the English, of which there came almost daily to Windsor, or
Hartford; But the Pequots growing weary hereof, sent some of the chief that
survived to mediate with the English, offering that if they might but enjoy
their lives, they would become the English vassals, to dispose of them as they
pleased.

Whereupon Uncas and Miantonimo were sent for, who with the Pequots met at
Hartford* The Pequot^ being demanded, how many of them were then living, They
answered, about an hundred and eighty or two hundred; Then were there granted
to Uncas Sachim of Moheag eighty, and to Miantonimo Sachim of Narraganset
eighty, and to Ninnicraft twenty men, when he should satisfy for a mare of
Eltwood Pomeryes, killed by some of his men; The Pequots likewise were by
covenant bound, that they should no more inhabit their native country; nor
should any of them be called Pequots but Moheags and Narragansets for ever;
Shortly after about forty of them went to Moheag, others went to Long Island,
others settled at Pawcatuck, a place in the Pequot country, contrary to their
covenant and agreement with the English so lately made, which Connecticut
taking into consideration, and well weighing the inconveniences that might
ensue; for the prevention whereof, they sent forth forty men under the command
of Capt. Mason, to supplant them* by burning their wigwams, and bringing away
their corn, except they would desert the place: Uncas with about one hundred of
his men in twenty cannoes also went to assist them in the service; as they
sailed into Pawcatuck Bay, they met with three of those Indians whom they sent
to inform the rest with the end of their coming, and also to tell them that
they desired to speak with them or some of them, they promised to do the
message, and speedily to return; but they forgot to keep their word, for they
came not.

Then they went up into the River in their vessel, but by reason of f^ats were
forced to land on the Westside of the River, their Wigwams being on the
East Side, just opposite* where they saw the Indians running up and down,
^eering at them.

Then they landed, and went up into a narrow place in the River between two
rocks, where they drew up the Indian Cannooes, and got suddenly over the River,
sooner then they were expected, and marched up to the Wigwams, where the
Indians were all fled, except some old people that could not

They were so suddenly upon them, that they had not time to convey away their
goods; There was plenty of corn, it being the time of harvest; and when they
had viewed it, they were passing to the water side to the pinnace, half of
U^cas his men being with them, the rest were plundering the Wigwams; and as
they were marching they looked behind them, and saw about sixty Indians running
toward them, until they came within forty paces of the Indians, then they run
and met them, and fell on pell mell, striking and cutting with bows and
hatchets and knives etc. after their feeble manner, Indeed it did not deserve
the name of fighting. They then endeavored to get between the Indians and the
woods, that so they might prevent their flying, which the Indians perceived,
and endeavored speedily to get away under the beach, but our men made no shot
at them, but they laid hold on about seven of them, who were Ninnicrafts men,
who grew very outrageous; the Captain told them if they were not quiet they
should be made shorter by the head; and when they were going to put it into
execution, Otash Sachim of Narraganset; and brother to Miantonim^, stepped
forth to Capt. Mason, and told him, those men whom he was going to execute,
were his brothers men, who was a friend to the English, and if their lives
might be spared, he would engage to deliver so many murderers heads in lieu of
them to the English; The Captain granted his desire, and the men were delivered
to Uncas to be secured till Otash his engagement was performed.

Then they drew up their Bark into a Creek the better to defend her, there
being some hundreds of Indians within five miles, waiting their motions.

But there they quartered that night. In the morning as soon as it was light,
there appeared in arms at least three hundred Indians on the other side the
Creek, upon which the Captain commanded his men to stand to their Arms, which
the Indians percieving* some of them fled, others crept behind the rocks and
trees, not one of them were to be seen.

They then called to them, saying, they desired to speak with them, and that
they would lay down their arms for that end, whereupon they stood up: The
Captain told them that the Pequots had violated their promise and Covenant*
with the English, in that they were not there to inhabit, and that he was sent
to supplant them; The Indians answered, the Pequots were good men, their
friends, and they would fight for them and protect them; which words moved the
Captain, who told them it was not far to the head of the creek* where he would
meet them, and then they might try what they could do; The Indians replied,
they would not fight with 'Englishmen, for they were spirits; but they would
fight with Uncas. The Captain told them he thought it was too early for them to
fight; but they might take their opportunity and fight when they saw cause, for
they should be burning their Wigwams, and carrying their corn aboard all that
day, and presently caused the Drum to be beat up, and fired their Wigwams in
their view* But as they* marched along, there stood two Indians upon an hill
jeering and reviling of them; Mr. Sta^ton the interpreter marching at liberty,
desired leave of the Captain to make a shot at them; the Captain demanded of
the Indians, who they were; they answered that they were murderers; The
Captain then gave Mr, Stanton leave to make a shot at them, who did so, and
shot one of them through both his thighs, which was to the wonderment both of
English and Indians, it being at such a vast distance.

They then proceeded and loaded their Bark with Indian Corn, and their Cannoes,
about thirty of them* with Indian Trayes, Kettles, Mats, and other luggage, and
then went on board, and made homeward, and it pleased God to prosper them, so
that in a short time they all arrived in safety at the place of their abode;
Though they were in hazard by the vessels striking upon a rock, and sticking
thereon a while in their return, yet the Lord bore them in his own arms, and
preserved them from danger.

Thus we may see how the face of God is set against them that do evil, to cut
off their remembrance from the earth.

Our tongues therefore shall talk of his righteousness all the day long, for
they are confounded, they are brought to shame that sought our hurt. Blessed be
the Lord God of Israel, who only does wondrous things,and blessed be his holy
name forever, Let the whole earth be filled with his glory; for the Lord was
pleased to smite our enemies in the hinder parts, and to give us their land for
an inheritance, who remembered us in our low estate, and redeemed us out of our
enemies hands; Let us therefore praise the Lord for his goodness and his
wonderful works to the Children of men.

Upon the whole it may not be amiss to gather out some specialtyes of
providence, that so the goodness of God may be taken notice of, and our hearts
enlarged in the praise and service of that God who has wrought so wonderfully
for our fathers and for us.

Those who were employed in this service were not many, their Commons were very
short, there being then a general scarcity through out this Colony of all sorts
of provision, it being upon our very beginnings on the place, they had but
little refreshment with them in their long march from Narraganset to Pequot;
but one pint of liquor which was moderately dealt out to such as fainted in the
way, by reason of the extremity of the heat and sore travel: after the liquor
was spent, the very smelling to the bottle was effectual for the reviving of
the fainting soldiers. They walked in an unknown path, yet God guided them in
the way they should got, though they knew not where the Forts were, nor how far
it was to them, nor the way that lead to them otherwise then what they had from
their Indian Guides, in whom they durst not confide, and that in their so long
a march among a treacherous people, who had several relations amongst our
enemies, and that in their march, and allodgment in the enemies country, which
was very populous, they should not be discovered, but brought to their enemies
in the fittest season, when more of them then usually were together, and that
they should be so succeeded in their design, (as you have heard) is matter of
wonderment.

What shall I say? God was pleased to hide them in the hollow of his hand. It
was a Saying of Mr. Hooker, that man of God, in his encouragements to the
Soldiers, as they were going forth to those engagements, that the Pequots
should be bread for them; and the Lord made good his Sayings.

It may not be amiss here also to remember Mr. Stone (the famous Teacher of the
Church of Hartford) who was sent to preach and pray with those that went out in
these engagements against the Pequots; He lent his best assistance and counsel
in the management of those designs* and the night in which the engagement was,
(in the morning of it) I say that night he was with the Lord alone, wrestling
with Him by Faith and Prayer; and surely his Prayers prevailed for a blessing;
and in the very time when our Israel were engaging with the bloodthirsty
Pequots, he was in the top of the mount, and so held up his hand, that Israel
prevailed.

In those engagements some men had special deliverances. There were two men,
being one man's servants, who were both shot in the knotts of their
neck-cloathes about their necks, and received no hurt. Also Li^ut, Si^ly, was
shot in the eyebrow with a flat headed arrow, the point turning downward, the
Captain himself pulled the arrow our. Lieut. Bull was also shot on the back
with an arrow, which met with an hard piece of cheese and went no further,
which may verify the old Saying a little armor would serve if a man kn^w where
to place it.

Thus the Lord did great things for his people among the Heathen whereof we are
glad, Praise ye the Lord.

The year following, the Colony of Connecticut being in great want of
provision, Indian corn being at twelve shillings the bushel: The Court of
Connecticut employed Capt. Mason andMr. William Wadsworth, and Deacon Edward
Stebbing, to make a trial what providence would afford for their relief, in
this great straight; who notwithstanding some discouragements they met with
from some English, went to a place called P^comptuck, where they procured so
much corn at reasonable rates, that the Indians brought down to Hartford and
Windsor fifty cannoes laden with corn at one time, never was the like known to
this day, so that although the Lord was pleased to show his people hard things
in their beginnings, yet did he execute judgment for the oppressed, and gave
food to the Hungry, affording them his continued protection and and blessing,
in the bountiful supply of the good things of this life, with the continuance
of his gospel and ordinances, and a plentiful Increase of their number, from
four Plantations which was then the alone number of the Colony of Connecticut;
to twenty four towns, which is the present number of towns in this Colony; and
from three Churches to nineteen, which is the number now settled in this Colony.

Thus far is Mr. John Allyn his Narrative of the Pequot troubles, which I take
to be the most perfect account thereof that is extant, or that probably will be
now attained, since few of those who were personally concerned in that war, and
who are fit to give a Relation thereof, are at this day in the land of the
living.

Nevertheless I have met with a Manuscript, in the Library of a learned and
worthy person deceased, wherein the passages of the Pequot war, are described.
The Author of the script* I know not, nor can conjecture, saving that it was
one who had a particular and personal acquaintance with those affairs. It does
in substance agree with that of Mr. John Allyns: only in some particulars, a
more full account of proceedings, is expressed. For, this Manuscript Anonimus
does Relate as follows, viz. That (...) Anno 1634. a Bark wherein was Capt.
Stone, and Capt. Norton, with six men besides going up Connecticut River, were
all killed by the Pequot Indians, and the Bark sunk near a steep Rock, which to
this day bears the name of Capt. Stones Rock. In the year following a Bark
going from the Bay, bound to Virginia, was by a Tempest c^^t away at
Long Island, certain Pequots there killed two Englishmen, the rest escaping.

In Anno 1636. A Vessel going from Connecticut toward the Bay, putting in at
Block Island, the Indians coming aboard to trade, killed the Master. Another
vessel coming from Connecticut, taken with a cross wind, intended to put in at
Narraganset, but could not; being therefore forced upon Block-Island, they saw
a bark with her sayls up, driving too and fro, they hailed her, but no Answer
was given; perceiving her full of Indians they suspected the English belonging
to the Vessel were murdered, whereupon they discharged their guns, shooting
bullets amongst the Indians, who, many of them immediately leaped overboard.
The Master entered the Vessel, and lifting up a Cloth saw an Englishman dead,
and discerning that many Indians were still in the hold, he returned to his own
Vessel again, from thence pouring in small shot upon the Indians, for a while,
until the wind coming fair; he failed away to Boston, informing the Governor
and Council there, concerning what he had seen, whence about an hundred
Soldiers were forthwith sent to Block-Island. As they were landing, the
Indians came down and shot violently at them, wounding* one man, but as soon as
one Englishmen was landed, they ran away. The English pursued them two days,
burning their Corn and Wigwams, but the Indians betook themselves to Swamps,
thereby escaping with their lives. After this they resolved for the Pequot
Country, having received some Intelligence of the Insolency and outrage of
those Indians. As they were sailing up the River, many of the Pequots on both
sides of the River called to them, desirous to know what was their end in
coming thither, they were told that they desired to speak with (...), one of
their Sachems; the Indians said he was gone to Long Island; then it was
demanded that Momanottuck another of their Sachems should appear. It was
pretended that he was not at home neither. The English went a shore, and
required the Indians to deliver up those that had murdered Capt. Stone, It was
Answered, that they were also gone from home, but they would send after them,
and deliver them to Justice, and that they might the better keep the English in
parley, they said that their Sachem would presently come and treat with them.
In the mean time they transported their goods, women and Children to another
place.

At last one of the Indians declared plainly, that Momanottuck would not come.
Immediately a Skirmish followed, wherein one Indian was killed, and an English
man was wounded. The Indians fled, the English pursuing, set fire to their
Wigwams, and destroyed their Corn, so did they return to their Vessel. A few
days after this, going on shore again, as they were loading themselves with
Corn, the Indians violently assaulted them, so that they were forced to leave
their Corn, and stand to their Arms, At this time an Indian was killed, and two
English men sorely wounded. The Indians attempted the Vessels, but were
entertained with such Volleys of small shot, as made them afraid to board any,
so the Barks arrived safe at Say-br^ok Fort. The next day some of the Fort
going up the River to fetch Hay, the Pequots privily came upon them took one
man and afterward roasted him alive, another shot with five Arrows lived
fourteen weeks and dyed, the rest escaped with much danger. After this the
Pequots came near the Fort and destroyed many of the English Cattle. About two
miles distant from the Fort there was an English house wherein were Soldiers.
Their Commander charged them not to go out of doors, yet three of them would
venture, and as they were a musket shot from the house, the Indians encompassed
them, and took two of them alive, the third being wounded did with his naked
Sword escape through them to the house, relating to the Company the sad Event,
and that one of those English that were taken did first kill two Indians. The
next day all the English deserted that house, and repaired to the Fort. The
Indians then quickly burned that, and two other houses. They made toward the
Fort as if they would have done some great matter; but a great Gun being
discharged at them, they went quite away, and were no more seen at Say-brook
for the greatest part of that winter. Only three miles up the River two men
going in a Canoo to shoot Geese, the Indians hearing the Report of their Guns,
came upon them. Those two English sought to save their lives by padling, but
the Indians pursued them with another Canoo shot at them and wounded one in his
head, who fell overboard, the other shot stoutly at the Indians, but at last
being wounded and wearied, the Indians overtook him, he with his paddle cleft
one of the Indians heads, but the rest took him, and tortured him to death.

Feb. 22. The Lieut. with nine Soldiers well armed, went out of the Fort to
burn the woods thereabouts, being gone half a mile from home they were besett
with about seventy Indians, who let fly their Arrows very fiercely; the English
retreated, one man presently was shot in the neck and then did they lay hands
on him, he drew his Sword, but that was taken from him; Then would he (as the
Indians afterward testified) have killed himself with his own knife, but that
also did the Indians deprive him of, and cut off his nose and hands, and put
him to a cruel death; They shot down another English man with three Arrows, and
a third had one of his ribs cleft with an Arrow, so that he died immediately. A
fourth was mortally wounded, and though he got home alive, he died within
fourteen hours, a fifth was sorely wounded, but afterward recovered, and lived
(the next year) to behead that very Indian who had shot an arrow into him. Yea,
the Lieut. himself was wounded in this Skirmish. After this the Indians kept
Leaguer before Say-brook Fort.

March.9. A body of Indians consisting (as was conjectured) of two or three
hundred came within musket shot of the Fort, challenging the English to come
out and fight, mocking and upbraiding them with such words as the English used
when by them tortured to death, and bragged that they could kill English men
all one flies: But two great Gunns laden with Carthages of musket bullets
being fired at them, away they went, and hearing that the Narragansets were
invading their country, they visited Seybrook no more.

After these things, a shallop coming down from Connecticut, with three men
rowing, was set upon by several canoes of Indians, the English sought stoutly
so long as they could, but one of them being shot through the nose, so as the
arrow went out at the crown of his head, fell overboard and dyed: The other two
were taken* by the Indians, who ripped them up from the bottom of the belly to
the throat, and cleft them down the back throughout, and afterward ^ung them
up by the neck on a tree by the River side, that the English might see them as
they passed by; the shallop they drew ashore and set on fire.

May. 15. 1637. Some of Uncas his men being then at Saybrook, in order to
assisting the English against the Pequots, espied seven Indians, and slily
encompassing them, slew five of them, and took one Prisoner, and brought him to
the English Fort, which was great satisfaction and encouragement to the
English, who before that exploit had many fears touching the fidelity of the
Moheag Indians. He whom they took Prisoner, was a perfideous Villain, one that
could speak English well, having in times past lived in the fort, and knowing
all the English there, had been at the slaughtering of all the English that
were slaughtered thereabouts; He was a continual spy about the fort, informing
Sassacus of what he saw or could learn. When this bloody traitor was executed,
his limbs were by violence pulled from one another, and burned to ashes; some
of the Indian executioners barbarously taking his flesh, they gave it to one
another, and did eat it, withal singing about the fire.

It is also reported that before the Mistick fight, a friendly Indian that was
sent thither as a secret spy, brought word that the Pequots were singing, and
dancing, and be^^ing their God, in that they supposed the English were gone
from them; and that in the ^ight the English came upon them, they were fallen
into a deep sleep, by reason of their long dancing the night before, and their
s^ntinel was gone out of his place to light a (...) of Tobacco, just as the
English surprised them, and when our soldiers gave fire there was not one that
missed; the Pequots so alarumed, in horror and amazement, crying Wannocks
Wannocks, i.e. Englishmen, Englishmen; some of the old men taking hold of
others that were willing to run away, and saying, as we have lived together, so
let us die together, the Wigwam which was first set on fire, being to the
windward side carried all before it, (as is in the Narrative intimated) At that
time there were two English men slain, (one of which was thought to be shot by
an English man) and twenty four wounded, whereof one dyed within few days.
Also forty Indians that were friends to the English were hurt in that
engagement. It was supposed that no less then five or six hundred Pequot souls
were brought down to Hell that day. Moreover, (...) therein added, that as the
English marched toward their vessels in the River, still as they came near any
swamp, they sent in a volley of shot* lest the enemy should happily he in ambush
in those dark places of the earth, and some Indians have related that the
English did by that means kill more men of war in their marching away, then in
the fight at the Fort, whereby also Sassacus his plot to cut off the English as
they passed by swamp*ambushments was utterly and happily frustrated.

It is further said* that an Indian called Wequosh did direct the English to
the Fort at Mistick, which Wequosh was by birth a Sachim of that place but upon
some disgust received he went from the Pequots to the Narragansets* and became
a chief Captain under Miantonim^; and that there were with those eighty English
Soldiers, who engaged in this expedition against the Pequots, at first four
hundred Indians, whereof three hundred were Narragansets. The day before the
fight there was some agitation which Fort should be first assaulted, whether
that of Mistick, or another eight miles further, where Sass^acus himself
resided. The English were an end to be upon Sassacus, but the Indians were
afraid saying, that Sassacus was all one God, and no body could kill him; this
made the English yet more desirous to try what power was in this imaginary
Deity, and that was the conclusion, whereupon many of the Narragansets*
withdrew, and returned all home, reporting that the English were cut off by the
Indians; the same of which was quickly at Boston; to the great affliction of
the English until such time as the truth of things was certainly known. In this
Interim one of Capt. Underhils Soldiers fell lame, not being able to go so far
as the place where Sassac^^ was supposed to be; whence the Captain changed his
purpose, and determined for Mistick; and Capt. Mason was not willing they
should part asunder, so did they agree to make their Assault there; few or none
of the Indians which were in the Fort escaped, whole companyes of them gathered
together and were burnt to death; those that escaped the Fire, the English
without the Fort slew them with the sword, so that round about the Fort, dead
men lay, hideous to behold.

The Indians Go^^ah, even their only Champion, being a man of huge stature was
then slain, he brake through the soldiers, and although one Sergeant stroke
him on the neck with his Cutlash, he got by him, and by five soldiers more,
but the sixth killed him.

And those that escaped the sword, the friendly Indians that encompassed the
English took as Captives to the number of eighteen.

This was done upon Friday, May, 26. Anno 1637. A Memorable Day.

Upon this notable victory Sassac^s his heart failed him, his men of war being
many of them cut off, so that he fled his Country, breaking down his Forts, and
burning his Wigwams himself, he marched away by land, with some men, women and
Children, their goods being sent away in Cannoo's. The English at Say-brook had
notice of the Cannoos, and an advantage to stop their passage, but Capt.
Kilpatrick delayed until the opportunity was gone, so that Sassacus with his
routed train coming up to the Cannoos six miles from Say-brook Fort, was
transported over the River, and fled toward Quinipiack. Being now enraged he
solicited his men of War, that they might go, and fall upon the English at
Connecticut, but some of them not consenting, that design of his was not put in
execution; he therefore fled to the Mohawks, who (being as is supposed excited
thereto by the revengfull Narragansets) cut off his head.

Many of the Pequots before Sassacus his death returned to their Country again;
but soldiers being sent from the Massachusetts the returned Pequots were
presently distressed, ours ran sacking their country, and ^^tling a garrison
therein, quickly came back to Seybrook, with one of the Pequot Sachims, and
other Indian Captives. After which a supply of men from Connecticut coming to
the Massachuset Soldiers, they sailed westward in pursuit of the Pequots who
were fled that way, sailing along to the westward of Mononowuttuck, the wind
not answering their desires, they cast Anchor, where two Sachems from
Long Island came to them, desiring peace and promising to deliver up whatever
Pequots should fly to them for shelter, some scattering Pequots were then taken
and s^ain, as also the Pequot Sachem, before expressed, had his head cut off,
whence that place did bear the name of Sachems head. Being come near to
Quinipiack observing a smoke, it was conjectured that the Enemy might be
thereabouts, whereupon Indians were set on shore to hunt after them, but they
could find no more then two, one of which was the Sachems son of that place,
supposed to be Confederate with the Pequots. They promised to conduct the
English to the Enemy, but failed in performance. After that they took another
Indian Captive, who likewise engaged to lead the English upon the Pequots, but
he directed them into a quite contrary way, for which his life was deservedly
taken from him. But an Indian called Luz, who was before taken Captive by our
Soldiers in the Pequot Country, with two other Indians that were his kinsmen,
promised if the English would give him, and his kinsmen their lives, He would
conduct them to the Enemies they sought after. He did so, the Pequots with
other Indians belonging to those parts, were found near a Swamp, into which
they did betake themselves for safety, upon the approach of the English
Soldiers. After a while, an Indian came out of the Swamp unarmed, with a
present of Wampam, The English declared to him that they came not to take away
the lives of the Indians nor their goods, if they would deliver up the
murderers that were amongst them. After which ninety nine came forth with
their Sachim, who offered as a present all the Estate he had to dispose of, and
that was nothing but the Coat on his back, being a Bears Skin. He was sent into
the Swamp again to signify to the Pequots there lurking, that if they would
bring forth the murderers it should be better for them, which they would not
do, but at last professed they had lived together, and they would die together

There were about seventy or eighty Indians in the Swamp, amongst whom there
were twelve murderers. So then the English besett the Swamp; and shot in upon
them, and the Indians at them, some of which were furnished with Guns. One in
special that was climbing up a Tree to shoot at the English, was espied by a
Soldier, who sent a Bullet into him before the other could make his shot. In
the night time the Indians brake away. Diligent search was the next day made in
the Swamp for dead Indians, Not many, (as some have made Narration) but seven,
and no more could be found. As for the Captives a Guard was appointed to look
after them, they were charged upon peril of their lives not to attempt running
away; yet one of them betook himself to his heels, but a Soldier shot after
him, and killed him, which struck a Terror into the rest of the Captives, that
no man durst make an offer to escape. These things do I find related by
A^onymus, There is not much more additional to what is expressed in Mr. Allyns
Narrative, some of these particulars insisted on confirming the truth of that.
Only one thing more is contained therein which I have not elsewhere (...) with,
which therefore it may not be amiss here to take notice of. It is this, Whereas
on April 23. 1637. The Indians coming upon the English at Wethersfield killed
nine persons, and took two young women alive, and carried them away Captives,
means were used to effect their deliverance, but at first, in vain.

On May 8. A Dutch Sloop came by Saybrook Fort, having on Board an Indian
Captive, who said she was Momonottocks Squaw. The English there desired the
Dutchmen to let them have the Squaw in order to redeeming the English
Captives, offering to give them to the value of two hundred pound, provided
that those Captives might be set at liberty. The Dutchmen hoping to gain much
by such an Indian were some of them lo^h to part with her. In Conclusion Capt.
Underhil (who then commanded the Fort) having obtained the Consent of the
Master of the Vessel, did Vi and armis take the Squaw out of the Sloop.
Afterward when the Moheags came to Saybrook that Squaw appeared to be one
belonging to them, whom the Pequots had Captivated, and she made the Dutch
believe she was Momonottocks Squaw, hoping that thereby she should obtein the
more courteous usage amongst those into whose hands she was fallen, so that the
contest between the English and Dutch about her was needless. In the Interim
the Dutch Governor sent another Sloop, with order to redeem the English
Captives if possible, and those Dutch did in Conclusion wilily accomplish their
design. For being arrived in the Pequot Country, certain Indians coming aboard
to trade with them after they had been trafficking they were clapped under
Hatches, and told they should not be set at liberty, except they would deliver
the English* maids that were Captivated, and presently hoysted Sail, as if
they would be gone. The Pequots on shore called to them, declaring that if they
would come to an Anchor, the English Captives should be brought to them, which
was done, and the men whom the Dutchmen had secured in their Sloop given in
Exchange for the English Captives, who were also brought safe to Saybrook, May,
10. where our Soldiers waited for a wind to carry them to engage with the
Pequots, and that Wind which for a few days kept the English from going upon
their expedition, brought that Dutch Sloop to redeem those Captives, concerning
whom there was no other hope (and that was a trouble to some) but that the
English would be necessitated to destroy them amongst the Indians, in the day
when their Fort should be attacqued.

Some have thought tha^ in these Narratives, there is not due notice taken of
what was done by the Massachuset Forces. The Truth is, the Conquest obtained
over the ^equot^ was wonderfully the Lords doing, nor may we ascribe much to
man therein, yet must it be acknowledged (and the Narratives deny it not) that
Capt. Underhil (and those under his Command) who was sent from the Massachusetts
did acquit himself worthily, when the Indians at Mistick Fort were cut off. It
must also be owned that the Massachuset Soldiers did glean the Pequots after
that, (and we know who to pa^ify those that were unreasonably dissatisfied, was
ready to say, Is not the gleaning of Ephraim better then the Uintage of
Abiener;) Likewise they had an equal hand with others in the Service done at
the Swamp, where such a multitude of Indians were either slain or taken as
Captives.

And besides these things insisted on there are who have taken notice of some
other specialtyes of Divine providence, relating to those Commotions which have
been of momentous consideration, to the people inhabiting this wilderness,
which it may not be amiss here to remark. It is then worthy our observation,
that the guilty bloody Pequots after they had treacherously murdered Capt.
Stone and his Company, brought presents of Wampam and Bever to the English at
Boston, desiring their Friendship, pleading that Stone had (who was like enough
to do it) offered some abuse to them, in surprising diverse Indians, and binding
them, and forcing them to show him the way up the River, etc. -- wherefore a
peace was concluded upon condition they would suffer the English who desired to
inhabit Connecticut, there quietly to live, and also deliver up those men who
had been guilty of Stones death. These things were not performed by the
Pequots. The Reason why they were the more willing to have peace with the
English was, in that they were fallen out with the Dutch at Monhatus, as also
with the Narrhagansets who were then potent and numerous; and at first they
thought scorn to make Overtures of peace to them, proudly designing the
subjugation of all their neighbor Indians, which wrought well for the English.
Howbeit not unlike him that said, -- Flectere ^inequeo superos Ach^ronta
movebo. When they saw they could not attain their Ends with the English, except
they would ^et Justice have a free passage, and having Contracted fresh
bleeding guilt upon themselves, by new and outrageous murders, and crueltyes,
they earnestly solicited the Narragansets to join with them in their wicked
Confederacy against the English, Satan suggesting to them such Arguments as did
almost prevail. For they told the Narragansets that if they joined with the
English, they did but make way for their own Ruin, since after the Pequots
were conquered, they would find an occasion to fall upon the Narragansets, and
that they should not need to come to open battle with the English, only fire
their Houses, and kill their Cattle, and lie in ambush to shoot them as they
went about their occasions, so would they quickly be forced to leave this
Country, and the Indians in the mean while not exposed to any great hazard. Had
the Narragansets been overcome by these Arguments, it would have occasioned far
greater Trouble and hazard to all the English Colonyes, newly settled in this
Land; But therefore God in mercy to his people prevented it. Commissioners were
then sent from Boston into the Narragansett Country, to endeavor that those
Indians might be kept from Compliance with the enemy. There is one who having a
little enquired into these things, does Relate that the old Kanonicus did
dissuade the Pequots from war, advising rather to deliver up the murderers.
They made believe as if they would do so, and when a Band of Soldiers was sent
into the Pequot Country for that end, they bid them stay a while, and the
murderers should be brought to them, and certain Indians conversing with our
Soldiers, did very much observe the Armor which was upon them* and would point
where they should hit them with their Arrows, notwithstanding. In fine, when a
great Body of Indians appeared on an Hill not far off, those that were with the
Soldiers went over to them, when they all came together they gave a scornful
shout, and so ran all away, making their boast to others, how they had delu^ed
the English; So that Canonicus his advise to the Pequots took no effect. After
which the Narragansett, were not only prevailed with to decline joining with
the enemy, but (as is intimated in the above written Narrative) they pretended
they would fight for the English; albeit when it came to in good earnest, they
proved themselves Cowards doing little against the enemies, except by unmanly
insultations when they saw them in misery: For whereas it was customary with
the Pequots, when they had overcome their enemies insultingly to triumph,
saying, O brave Pequots! The Narragansets seeing them wounded or consuming to
death in their burning wigwams, would taunt at them and vaunt over them*
saying, O brave Pequots! O brave Pequots! The more of a divine hand is there to
be taken notice of in overcoming the Pequots by a small number of English and
Indians. Also the Pequots were more furnished with Arms then before times they
had been; since the Dutchmen had sold some Guns to them; and besides their
bows and arrows they had an abundance of small hatchets, and Mohawgs* hammers
made of stone, yet God would not suffer them to find their hands.

What special acts of valor were manifested by any of our Commanders or
soldiers in this expedition, beyond what is expressed in the forementioned
Narrattve, I am not able to Relate; Nor am I (though willing that men's virtues
should be duly acknowledged*) disposed to say much on those accounts,
respecting such as are yet alive, as knowing that however it may please some by
nourishing a proud humor, it would be nauseous to others, and deemed adulatory
by wise and impartial Readers.

Only I remember Capt. Davenport (that good man, who was afterward Commander
of the Castle at Boston, and there slain by lightening) once told me, that
himself, with two or three more, engaged with no less then thirty Indians, and
that there were seventeen arrows hot into his Coat, but having on a Coat of
Male, none of those arrows hurt him, only one that happened to strike where he
was not defended by his Coat.

Also he rescued a poor soldier, that was in extreme danger of being devoured
by those Wolves; For two Mastive-Indians that lay in ambush, as a party of
soldiers passed by, supposing they had been all past, snatched hold of him
whom they thought to be the last man, and were running away with him upon their
shoulders* Capt. Davenport followed them with his drawn Cutlash, but still as
he lifted up his hand to strike at them these Gigantine Salvages held up the
poor man they were running away with, whereby for a while they secured their
own bodies from the blow, until at last missing the Englishman, Capt. Davenport
smote one of the Indians, whereupon they threw down their prey, and ran for
their lives.

He that gives account of this last passage, does also Relate another
particular no less pleasant; namely, that whereas the Pequots observed, that
the English, being willing to show as much mercy as would stand with justice,
did only captivate and not kill the Squaws, some great Indian Boys would cry,
I Squaw, I Squaw, thereby thinking to escape with their lives.

But to be serious. That which Governor Winthrop writes in his Letter,
published by Mr. Morton, is very memorable, viz. that in one fight, though the
Indians coming up close to our men, shot their Arrows thick upon them, so as to
pierce their hat brims, and their Sleeves, and Stockings, and other parts of
their Clothes, yet so miraculously did the Lord preserve them, as that
(excepting three that rashly ventured into a Swamp after them) not one of them
was wounded. And truly to set aside carnal Considerations, there are two
Reasons obvious, that may be assigned as causes of that glorious and speedy
success, which God gave to the English against the Pequot Indians.

1. The blasphemy of those Enemies. For some of them said, that English man's
God was one Fly, which execrable blasphemy the blessed God would not bear from
those his Enemies. Also when some English were cruelly tortured to death by
them* they would in a way of derision bid them call upon God now, and
blasphemously mock at them when they did so. Therefore did the Lord bring those
bloody blasphemers in a moment down to Hell, yea, and damned them above ground,
when they lay frying in the Fire that was kindled upon their houses, and making
horrible Outcries.

2. There was a mighty Spirit of Prayer and Faith then stirring, both in those
that staid at home, and in some what ventured their lives in the high places of
the Field. That Reverend man of God Mr. Wilson (who excelled in those graces of
Faith and Love) went forth with the Soldiers that were sent from this Colony.
I think I have my self heard him say, (or if I have not, others have) that he
was before he went out, as certain that God would give the English the Victory
over those Enemies, as if he had seen the Victory already obtained. Such great
Faith did the Lord stir up in the Heart of that Holy man, and of other his
Servants, and by Faith did they turn to Fight the Armies of the Aliens. So
then, these Enemies being subdued, in such ways and by such means as has been
expressed, the Terror of God fell upon all the Heathen round about, and the
English were dreadful to them: when they heard that the English had slain, and
taken Captive seven hundred Indians, and killed Thirteen Sachims, (who are
their Kings) there was no more Spirit left in them. The Pequots best friends
were afraid to receive such as fled to them for Refuge. But happy was he
counted that could make friendship with the English, so that two of the Sachims
in Long Island came to that worthy Gentleman Captain (afterward Lieut.
Colonel) Stoughton, entreating that they might be under our protection. Also
two of the Napannet Sachims, addressed themselves to Governor Winthrop,
seeking to be in favor with the English. These things deserve to be mentioned
amongst the Magnalia Dei, which he has wrought for his New-England-People.

Matters being again reduced to this peaceable state, that Land rested from
war, and that for the space of almost forty years together. Howbeit Jealousies
amongst the English grounded upon Treacheries and Conspiracies amongst the
Indians, (and some particular acts of Hostility and Outrages by them committed)
there have been, more than once or twice, since the Pequot-Troubles were ended.

For in Anno 1638. the public peace was endangered by occasion of a murder
committed by an English man upon an Indian. Thus it was. One Arthur Peach a
young Desperado, who had been a Soldier in the Pequot war, and done notable
Service, being bold and forward in any desperate Attempt* after he was returned
home he was loath to go to work, wherefore he resolved to go to the Dutch
Plantation, and enticed three persons, that were other men's servants, to run
away with him. As they were travailing through the woods, they met a
Narraganset Indian, and desired him to take a pipe of Tobacco, which the Indian
was willing to do, Peach told his Comrades, be would kill him; they were afraid
to do that, but let him alone to do as he would. When he saw his Time, He ran
the Indian through with his Rapier, and took away his Wampam from him,
supposing he had left him dead, but after they were gone, the Indian made a
shift to get home, where he dyed of his wound within few days; But told other
Indians that such and such Englishmen had mortally wounded him; The Sachims
therefore presently found out these men (only one of them escaped) who had done
the murder, and carried them away to the English at Aquidnet Island, where they
were examined and committed. In the mean time the Narragansets were about to
rise in Arms, some of them conceiving that they should find the Pequots words
true, that the English would fall upon them, now the other were vanquished. To
be short, the murder being confessed by the parties guilty, the Court in
Plymouth did by advice from Magistrates and elders in the Bay, condemn and see
execution done upon those three English men for murdering that one Indian,
whereupon the other Indians magnifyed the Justice which they saw amongst the
English, and peace was continued. Yet after this new fears and troubles did
arise upon other accounts. For although the Narragansets, and the Mo^eags did
Anno 1638. come under solemn promise that they would not engage in a war,
either amongst themselves or with other Indians, until they had advised with,
and obt^ined approbation from the English, Nevertheless M^antonimo, the chief
Narraganset Sachim, was continually picking quarrels with the Moheags,
designing to make them become his Vassals. Some ( viz. Mr. Gorges and Mr.
Johnson) have related that Miantonimo was set on by certain vagabond English,
known by the Name of Gortonians, who being deep Apostates from, and bitter
enemies unto the ways of Christ, professed by our Fathers, might easily be
induced to animate motions of that nature, However Miantonimo chose rather to
accomplish his ends upon the Moheags by Treachery, than by open war; and hired
a Pequot Indian who was subjected to Uncas (the Moheags Sachim) to assassinate
him that was become his Lord, which the Indian attempted accordingly; insomuch
as on a certain evening as Uncas was passing from one Wigwam to another, he was
shot into the arm by an arrow, but recovered the house he intended, without
receiving further hurt.

The Indian who was suspected about this matter, being called to an account
about a great sum of Wampam-peag, by him possessed, could not give any
tolerable account, how he came by his money, which augmented jealousies of his
being hired by Miantonimo to kill Uncas. Uncas then made his complaint to the
English; the issue was, that Miantonimo and the suspected Indian came to
Boston, where he was examined, at first in the presence of Miantonimo, by whose
help he had framed an Artificial Lie, saying, that one night as he came out of
a thick swamp, Uncas desired him to say that he was hired by Miantonimo to kill
Uncas, and that therefore he cut his arm with the flint of his Gun, that men
might think he had been shot with an arrow. This pitiful story made the
English suspect Miantonimo more vehemently then ever, and upon a further
private examination (much against Miantonimo's mind) they saw cause to believe
that he was secretly designing mischief against the English, as well as against
Uncas. Nevertheless, it was thought best to dismiss him for the present, only
with an engagement to remit the suspected Pequot to his Master Uncas: He
contrary to his promise, as he was returning home cut off the poor Pequots
head, whereby he was made incapable of discovering any thing further about
matters between Miantonimo, and him.

Being come home, he forthwith resolves to be revenged upon Uncas, and with a
thousand Narragansets gave him battle, but the Moheags, (though not half their
number) worsted the Narragansets, and took Miantonimo, their chief Sachem,
prisoner, and brought him to the Town of Hartford, desiring advise from the
English concerning the disposal of him. The Commissioners of the united
Colonies, considering that Miantonimo had shed blood by raising an unjust war
against the Moheags their friends, to whom they had engaged protection, and
that he was treacherous to the English, and peace not like to be settled among
the Indians, nor continued with the English except he were dispatched (together
with some other reasons, more fully expressed on the Declaration published by
the Commissioners, Anno 1645.) they counseled Uncas to put him to death,
withal prohibiting him to use any Crueltyes in the manner of his execution, it
being customary with barbarous Indians (who like their Father the Devil are
delighted in Crueltyes) to put their enemies to the greatest Tortures they can
devise, when they kill them. The advice was followed. Vncas led away Miantonimo
as if he would carry him to another place, for custody and safety, and by the
way very fairly cut off his head, as he not a year before had served one of
Uncas his men. These things happened Ann^ 1643.

In the next year the peace of two of these Colonies, viz, those of Connecticut
and New Haven was disturbed by the Indians.

For, first an English man running away from his Master, out of the
Massachusetts was murdered in the woods near Connecticut by an Indian; and about
six weeks after was discovered by another Indian, a Sagamore in those parts
promised to deliver the murderer bound to the English; and having brought him
to Uncaway a Connecticut Sachim, he was there unbound, it seems by their joint
consent, and left to shift for himself, whereupon ten English men, who were
forthwith sent by Mr. Ludlow to the place, seeing the murderer was escaped,
laid hold on eight Indians there present, amongst whom there was a Sagamore or
two, and kept them in hold two days, until four Sagamores engaged themselves
within one Month to deliver the Malefactor unto Justice; About a week after
which agreement an Indian came presumptuously, and in the day time murderously
assaulted an English woman, in an house in Stamford, and by three wounds
(supposed mortal) left her for dead, and robbed the house. The Indians
generally in those parts demeaned themselves after an hostile manner refused to
come to the English, or to attend Treaties of peace, departed from their
Wigwams, left their Corn unweeded, and shot off Guns near some English
Plantations in a Tumultuary way, and some Indians informed that there was a
purpose to fall upon the English; so that there was watching and warding day
and night, New Haven and Hartford were sent unto, that relief might be afforded
to the weaker Towns, also application was made to the other Colonyes for
Assistance. At last the Indians were persuaded to deliver the murderers up to
Justice. So did these dark Clouds blow over. Nevertheless, in this year ( viz.
in Anno 1644.) the Rage of the Narragansets against the Moheags did break out
again in greater violence than ever before, insomuch that Unc^s was forced to
betake himself to a Fort, and was there surrounded with multitudes of those
Indians. The English thought it their concern, not to suffer him, to be
swallowed up by those Adversaryes, since he had (though for his own ends)
approved himself faithful to the English from time to time. The Narragansets
perceiving that the English did (as they had Reason to) favor Uncas, began to
be high and Insolent in their expressions and actions, threatening to destroy
the English (only as to the English at Providence and Rhode Island the
Narraganset Sachims concluded a neutrality) as well as the Mo^eags.

Before these things, there being four Colonyes of English Inhabitants settled
in this Country, viz. Massachusetts, Plymouth, Connecticut and New Haven, (which
is since become a part of Connecticut Colony) who were sensible of the common
danger they were exposed unto, by reason of Indians throughout this Land, as
also* in that Dutch and Swedes, and French had seated themselves not far off,
who might some of them probably prove evil Neighbors, and withal considering
that, as he in the famous Poet expresses.

(...)

(...)

Vis unita fortior, if they were all consederate it would tend to the safety of
the whole: Articles of confederation were agreed upon, whence these were called
the United Colonyes: And now was there an opportunity for them to act as became
such; wherefore each of the Colonies did proportionably first send out
Soldiers to keep Garrison with Un^as, and after that ra^sed an Army in order
to war with the Narragansets.

When a war was with good advice concluded on, forty men were immediately sent
out of the Massachusetts to relieve Uncas, who upon the departure of Connecticut
Soldiers (their time appointed them to keep Garrison with Unc^^ being expired)
was presently set upon by the Narragansets; but further attempts upon him were
prevented, by the coming of these from the Massachusetts. Also before the other
Colonies could expedite what concerned the whole design, Forces were sent out
of Plymouth, under the command of Capt. Standish, and marched as far as
Re^oboth, that being near the borders of the enemy.

That worthy Commander, Major Edward Gibbons, was appointed as General. Mr.
Thompson Pastor of the Church in Braintree, being in diverse re^^ects eminently
fitted for such a Service, was to sound the silver Trumpet along with this
Army. They did solemnly take their leave of their friends, and were solemnly
commended to the Blessing of the God of Armies: But as they were just marching
out of Boston, (their bagg^ge being sent before toward the enemies quarters)
many of the principal Narraganset Indians, viz Pessi^^s, Mexano, and Witawash
Sagamores, and Awasequin deputy for the Ni^^sticks, these with a large Train
came to Boston suing for peace, being willing to submit to what Terms the
English should see cause to impose upon them.

It was demanded of them that they should defray the charges that they had put
the English to and that the Sachims should send their sons to be kept as
Hostages in the hands of the English until such time as the money should be
paid. All this did the Narragansets yield unto,

Mel in ore, verbalactis, Fell in cord frans in factis.

Notwithstanding the Narragansets have dissembled friendship with the English,
yet venom has been in their hearts ever since these motions: Nor was there
any other then Fides Gr^^^ observed by them, in the performance of their
engagements.

In the first place they endeavored to play Legerdemain in their sending
Hostages* For instead of Sachems Children* they thought to send some other, and
to make the English believe that those base pap^oses, were of a royal progeny,
but they had those to deal with, who were too wise to be so eluded. After the
expected Hostages, were in the hands of the English, the Narragansets
notwithstanding that, were flow in the performance of what they stood engaged
for. And when upon a partial discharge of the debt, their Hostages were
restored to them, they become more backward than formerly, until they were by
hostile preparations again and again terrified into better obedience. At last
Major Atherton, (then Capt. Atherton) of Dorchester was sent with a small party
of English Soldiers to demand what was due. He at first entered into the
Wigwam, where old Ninnigret (the Nyantick Sachim) resided, with only two or
three Soldiers, appointing the rest by degrees to follow him, two or three
dropping in at once, when his small Company were come about him that Indians in
the mean time supposing that there had been many more behind, he caught the
Sachim by the hair of his head, and set a pistol to his breast, protesting who
ever escaped, he should surely die, if he did not forthwith comply with what was
required. Hereupon a great trembling and Consternation surprised the Indians,
alb^it multitudes of them were then present, with spiked arrows at their
Bow-strings ready to lot fly. The event was, the Indians submitted, and not one
drop of blood was shed. Nor was there (so far as I am informed) after this any
open discovery of enmity in the Narragansets against the English until such
time as Philip began his his great Rebellion. Yet it is evident that there has
been treachery, and secret Treason against the English, amongst them.

Astutum vapido servant sub pectore Vulpem.

I have been told that a man of God ( viz. Mr. Street, who formerly lived not
far from those parts) observing the perfidiousness of those Narragansets, and
their enmity against the Gospel, publicly declared that he foresaw the
destruction of the Narraganset Nation, solemnly confirming his speech in
saying, If God do not destroy that people, then say that his spirit has not
spoken by me.

Surely that holy man was a Prophet, (...) Qui been conjiciet, ^uno Vatem. And
this is a Summary account of what has in former years happened between us and
the Narragansets.

Considering, that the Narraganset Troubles have been of no small concernment,
it would be worth the while a little more fully to relate the Truth about those
motions. Only it is already done in good part by that Declaration which was
published by the Commissioners of these united Colonies Anno. 1645. (together
with the Articles then consented unto, and subscribed by the Narraganset
Sachims) Whosoever pleases to consult those things will receive satisfaction
concerning the War which was at that time fully intended, but not actually
prosecuted by reason of the Indians Compliance as has been specified.

In Anno. 1646. They failed in the performance of their Covenant, above
expressed, as to every particular therein contained.

It is also evident that they had by presents of Wampam been practicing with
the Mohawks, and other Indians to engage them against Uncas, unto whom they
knew the English had promised protection. So that the English according to the
Rules of Righteousness, might have righted themselves by the justice of War,
yet being desirous rather to manifest Long-suffering toward these Barbarians,
the Commissioners of the united Colonies contented themselves with sending a
Declaration to the Narraganset and Niantick Indians, signifying that they
should no longer delay the performance of what they had bound themselves unto,
as ever they would not be looked upon as a trracherous and perfidious people,
no more to be treated with.

This Year also there was Trouble and fears raised in the Country, by reason of
the River-Indians, at Waranoke, and Norwoottuck, who it seems were ^ecred*
(...) the Death of those famous Worthyes, Mr. Hopkins, Mr. Hains, Mr. Whiting
Magistrates in Connecticut Colony. For I find upon public Record, that
complaints and informations about that matter (in September, 1646) were brought
before the Commissioners then assembled at New Haven, where an Indian testified
that Sequasson the Sachim of Waranoke, had given him a sum of money on
condition that he would murder the Gentlemen mentioned.

Before the Commissioners convened, Mr. Haines had twice sent to Sequasson; but
he neglected to make his appearance: Wherefore Jonathan Gilbert was sent to him
again, to signify from the Commissioners that they expected Sequassons
appearance before them, and to answer what he was accused with, and they
promised him free passage both to and from Newhaven, withal intimating that
his withdrawing himself would greatly augment the suspicion of his guilt.

The Messenger quickly returned, bringing word, that he could not speak with
Sequasson, who he supposed had received notice of his coming by other Indians,
and was thereupon ^led.

But a few days after, Nipnisoit and Naimetayhu two Sagamores, came with some
other Indians to Newhaven, declaring that they were friends to Sequasson, and
pretended great respect to the English, and that they had brought Sequasson to
clear himself, and that although one of them had him by one arm, another by the
other, when he was come near the town, he brake from them and was escaped.

The Commissioners told them they intended Sequasson no hurt; but desired to
bring him and his accusers face to face, that he should have a just hearing in
their presence.

Some other Indians informed that Sequasson was within a mile of Newhaven, and
it was conceived that he would gladly make his peace by some other means,
rather then by a due examination and Trial. The two Sagamores said he was much
afraid, and durst not come, though they confessed it was just he should come
and clear himself, if innocent; all which being considered, the Commissioners
conceived that Sequasson whether guilty or afraid of the English, would still
be plotting against them and so prove dangerous; wherefore they thought fit,
and ordered that all just and prudent means should be used (his life being
preserved) to bring him to a trial, that the matter might be some way issued.
In the mean time they thought good to examine Wotchiborow a Pocatuck Indian
Sequassons accuser, who waited to give in evidence against him. He being warned
by Thomas Stanton the Interpreter, to speak nothing but truth) affirmed, that
being this last Spring at Waranoke, in a wigwam with Sequasson, and ready to
depart, Sequasson persuaded him to stay three days, thence he drew him to the
Falls above Mr. Pinchous; when they had been there four days, W^t^hiborow
would have been gone to Moheag, to see some friends; Sequasson told him it was
dangerous traveling that way, he would be killed, walked along with him to a
Spring, and there told him, that if ever he would do the said Sequasson a
kindness, now was a time, he was almost ruined, and the English at Hartford,
the cause of it: He should therefore go to Hartford and kill Mr. Hopkins, Mr.
Hains, and Mr. Whiting and he would give him a reward, and thereupon plucked out
of his bag three girdles of Wampam, and gave them to him, with a piece of a
girdle of wampam to play, and promised him much more. Wotchiborow said it was
dangerous to kill an English Sachim, they would find out the murderer and
pursue him to death; what could then wampam do him good? Sequasson said he had
store of wampam, when the thing was done they would fly to the Mohawkes, but in
the way, when they came to the Wampeag-Indians, he should give it out that
Unc^s had hired him for so much wampam, and that would set the English against
Unc^s, and then he the said Sequasson should rise again.

He further told this Examinate, that Naymetayhu, one of the forementioned
Sagamores that came on the behalf of Sequasson, and his father, knew and
approved of the said murder.

Wotchiborow further says that having taken the aforesaid wampam, he remembered
that himself had formerly taken Busheag, and brought him to the English, who
for a murderous attempt at Sta^ford was put to death at Newhaven, that if he
should kill any English Sachim, he should go in fear of death all the days of
his life, and that for bringing in Busheag, he had a Gratuity from the English,
and for the discovery of this plot he should have their favor* and he thought
the favor of the English with security, would be better to him then Sequassons
Wampam with fear and danger; he therefore came first to Tunks^^ and the next
day to Hartford, and discovered Sequasions pra, ctice.

He said further, that Sequasson hearing of the discovery, spoke to Romanoke an
Indian, and he sent another Indian called Sixpence to this Examinate, desiring
him to hide and conceal as much of the Plot as he could* and not to lay all
open, but he in anger bad the said Sixpence hold his peace, he had discovered
it, and would hide nothing.

Thus much do I find upon Record, relating to Sequassons plot. What afterward
came of this business, or how it issued, I cannot say. There was also another
trouble about the Indians this year.

For whilst the Commissioners were sitting at Newhaven, petitions were
presented from Edward Elmere and some others, complaining that Indians had
wilfully and maliciously burned some quantity of pitch, and Tarr of theirs,
together with some bedding, and a Cart with its furniture, and tools etc. in
value above an hundred pounds. And particularly they complained of one
Wasemose, a Waranoke Indian as guilty therein, as by sufficient evidence they
thought they could prove; and that he has since avoided all the English
Plantations; and that he being sent for by a warrant from one of the
Magistrates of Connecticut, fled; but being overtaken and seized by some of the
English, he was rescued by the Indians, and the English by them jeered and
abused, and particularly Chickwallop Sachim of Norwootuck: Whereupon Jonathan
Gilbert and John Grissin, were sent to Chickwallop and Manasanes.

At their return, they informed that they could not meet either with
Chickwallop or Manasanes, but the Sagamores and Indians at Waranoke carried it
insolently toward the English, vaunting themselves in their Arms, bows and
Arrows, hatchets and Swords, some with their Guns ready charged, before and in
the presence of the English Messengers, they primed and cockt them ready to
give fire, and told them, that if they should offer to carry away any men
thence, the Indians were resolved to sight, yet the next morning the Sachim
with some others offered the English Messengers eight Fathom of Wampam toward
satisfaction, and promised to provide more. The Messengers not having any thing
to that purpose in their Commission, advised the Sachim to send to the
Commissioners, but he refused. Hereupon, Naymetayhu one of the Sagamores of
Waranoke, who, as before, came on Sequasson* behalf, was questioned by the
Commissioners about these proud Affronts to the English; At first he denied
what was charged, and excused some part, but one of the English Messengers
being present, and he hearing the rest should be sent for, he fell under most
of the charge, professing that he intended no harm to the English, Thus
concerning disturbance by the Indians in the yerr, 1646.

In Anno, 1647. New fears and troubles arose by reason of the Narraganset
Indians, there being credible Informations that they were plotting, and by
presents of Wampam engaging the Indians round about to combine with them
against the English Colonyes, insomuch that a meeting of the Commissioners was
called before the ordinary time; Being therefore convened at Boston, July 26. A
Messenger was sent to Narraganset, signifying to Pesicut and other Sachims
there, that the English Commissioners expected their appearance at Boston, and
that if they did refuse or delay, they should no more be sent unto, withal
promising them safe conduct, inCase they duly attended. The Messenger being
returned informed that Pesicus excused his not meeting the Commissioners at New
Haven the last year, from his ignorance of the time. when he should attend,
though that was falsely pretended by him. He also desired excuse for his not
appearing at this time, because he said he was sick, and not able to come, (but
the Messengers could not perceive that he was subject to any such sickness or
disablement) Nevertheless, he had given full power to Ninnigret to act on his
behalf. Moreover, he excused his not performing the Articles he had subscribed
at Boston, two years before, by pretending that he was frighted into that
Engagement, with the sight of the English Army, which was then ready to invade
the Narraganset Country, and he thought they would follow him home, and there
kill him if he did not promise to do as the English would have him.

August ^. Ninnigret with some Niant^ck Indians, and two of Pessi^^s his men
came to Boston. At first he (though against his Conscience) made as if he were
ignorant, and never been informed of the Covenant which the Indians had made to
the English, and seemed to wonder that the English should ask such a Sum of
Wampam, saying that he knew not that the Indians were in the Englishmens Debt.
He was then put in mind, how that formerly satisfaction had been demanded of
the Indians for the breach of Articles; and how the English Messengers had been
ill entreated by them, and particularly by himself, who had used threatening and
insolent, language, saying to the Messengers, that he knew the Commissioners
would endeavor to keep them from warring upon Uncas, but they were resolved
they would do it for all that, and nothing but Uncas his head should satisfy
them; and that if the English did not withdraw their Garrisons from the Defense
of Uncas, they would heap up their Cattle as high as their wigwams, and that he
was the man that had given out that an Englishman should not step out of doors
to piss but they would kill him. Ninigre^ not being able to deny these charges,
and somewhat appalled thereat, began to comply with the reasonable demands of
the English. A days time was allowed to him for Consideration and advice with
the rest of the Indian Deputyes that were then in Boston.

The next day he declared that he was resolved to give the English Colonies due
Satisfaction in all things, and that he would forthwith send some of his men to
gather up the wampam which was yet behind hoping that within ten days it might
be obtained, and that himself would stay with the English as security, until
the money was paid. Accordingly, he dispatched his Messengers home for that
end, who not many days after, came back to Boston, bringing with them two
hundred fathom of Wampam, toward satisfaction of what they owed to the
English. This falling very much short of what was expected, Ninigree pleaded
that his personal absence from home was the cause of that defect, and therefore
desired liberty to go home, withal adding, that if the whole were not paid by
next spring, the English should take his head, and seize his Country. The
Commissioners let him depart, and since he pretended so fair, did deliver to
him the Children which were kept as Hostages, expecting from him, the more care
to see engagements performed; and if they did find him real, that then former
neglects should be charged upon Pesic^^, and that they should expect his
assistance, when it should be required, in recovering the whole remainder from
Pesicus, all which things were cheerfully accepted by Ninnigret.

This year other Troubles happened by some of Vncas his Indians, who committed
several Outrages upon the English in the Pequot Country. Mr. John Winthrop, and
some with him, complained that Wowequay ( Uncas his brother) with about forty
Moheags, behaved themselves insolently hovering against the English Plantation
in a suspicious manner, to the afrightment of the Inhabitants there; Also,
although Uncas at first seemed gladly to entertain the English plantation at
Pequot, yet his carriage since was such as if he designed by Alarums to disturb
and break that plantation. In fine, Uncas was censured, and required to
acknowledge his fault to the English plantation, (which he did) and pay an
hundred Fathom of Wampam to make amends for wrongs sustained.

In September 1648. New complaints were brought before the Commissioners of the
united Colonyes, (then sitting at Plymouth) against the Narraganset Indians
Henry Bull of Rhode Island petitioned for relief, informing that those Indians
had beaten him, and other ways been injurious to him. Also Messengers from the
Town of Wa^wick came with complaints in behalf of the whole Town, alleging
that their neighbor Indians did kill their Cattle, abuse their servants when
they took them alone,and sometimes would make forcible entry into their houses,
yea* and strike the masters thereof, and steal, and purloyne their goods at
pleasure. At the same time, informations were brought before the Commissioners,
that the Narragansit Indians, instead of paying the Wampam, that was due to the
Colonyes, had improved their Wampam^ o hire Indians to invade Uncas, and in
case the English should defend him, to fight with them also. Particularly, tha^
Ninnigret had given out, that if the English did protect Uncas, he would
quickly burn the houses at Connecticut. The Narragansets were withdrawing their
old men, women, and children into swamps, hiding their corn etc. The mercenary
Mohawks were said to be about four hundred in number, all armed with guns, and
three pound of powder for every man.

These Counsils were so far ripened and prepared for execution, as that Thomas
Stanton and other messengers from Connecticut, goeing to the Indians to enquire
into* and (if it might be) stop proceedings, found them met at Pacomptuck their
Randeavouze, who acknowledged that they had received Wampam from the
Narragansets to invade Uncas, and that they were met together to that purpose,
expecting Mohawks and other Indians to make up their full numbers: But hearing
that two Mohawk Sachims, were lately killed by the Eastern Indians, and that
the English, who they thought were a just and warlike people, would defend
Uncas, they did therefore stop their intended proceedings at this time.

But these things made it yet more evident, that the Narragansetts were a false
and treacherous people, not to be trusted, nor worthy to be treated with.

An^^. 1649. Newhaven Colony was in apparent danger of being involved in
trouble by reason of the Indians there: For at Stamford (...) going forth to
seek his cattle returned not home as was expected, nor could be found by the
English that sought for him; but quickly after the Son of a Sagamore who lived
near Stamford, came into the Town, and told the English that John Whitmore was
murdered by an Indian called Toquattos, and to prove it, told them that
Toquattos had some of his clothes; and particularly his shirt made of
Cotton-linnen. Hereupon the English and some Indians went into the woods to
seek the murdered body for burial, but though they bestowed much time and
labor, they could not find it. Diverse of the English at Stamford suspected
the Sagamores son to be either the Author or accessory to the Murder, but had
not satisfiing grounds to seize and charge him.

About two or three months after, Uncas coming to Stamford, calling the Indians
thither, and enquiring after the murdered body, the fore mentioned Sagam^res
Son, and another suspected Indian called Kehoron fell a trembling, and hereby
confirmed the suspicion of the English, and wrought a suspicion in some of the
Mohegin Indians, so that they said these two Indians were Match^t, meaning they
were guilty. Notwithstanding the Indians thereabouts excused the Sagamores Son,
and accused Toq^attos, and intimated that if the Sagamores Son should upon
sus^ition be seized on by the English, the Indians would do the like by ^^me
English, until he should be set at liberty.

Likewise as South-ham^ton in Long Island, the English were exposed (...) great
difficulties and dangers by reason of a murder committed in ^^at Town, so that
they were necessitated to Ar^ themselves, and stand upon their own defense for
many days; the Indians being gathered together in an hostile posture. This
year also Uncas renewed his complaints against the Narraganset Indians, that
notwithstanding all former ^ngagements, they are still undermining his peace,
and seeking his ^uine, and in particular that to their late endeavor to bring
the Mo^awks upon him, when that failed, they sought by witchcraft to take away
his life. A Narraganset Indian (called Cuitaquin) in an English Vessel in
Mohegin River, ran a Sword into Uncas his breast, whereby (...) received to all
appearance a mortal wound, which murderous act, ^he Assailant then confessed,
he was for a considerable sum of Wampam, ^y the Narraganset and Niantick
Sachims hired to attempt, Ninnigret when examined utterly denied his having an
hand in that fact but affirmed that Cuttaquin, who accused himself, and the
other Sachims, was drawn thereunto, by Torture from the Moheags,

About four years after this ( viz. in Anno 1653.) there were great Troubles,
and Commotions raised in the Spirits of men with reference to the Indians, it
being generally believed that there was an horrid Conspiracy amongst the
Indians throughout this Land to cut off all the English, and that they were
animated thereto by the Dutch, there being at that time war between England and
Holland. An Indian Squaw was sent by other Indians (that professed love and
friendship) to one in Wethersfield on Connecticut, informing that there was a
Confederacy between the Dutch and indians, to destroy the English Colonyes, and
that the day of Election of Magistrates in the several Jurisdictions was
intended for execution, because then the Towns would be left naked and less
able to defend themselves. This Squaw moreover desired the English to remember,
how dear their slighting of her former information of the Pequots coming had
cost them.

Also. Uncas addressed himself to the Governor of Connecticut Colony declaring
that N^nnigr^t had that winter been at Man^atos, and that he had given the
Dutch Governor a great present of Wampam, and received from him twenty Gunns,
with powder and shot answerable; and that during his stay in those parts he
went over Hudsons River, gathered as many Sachims together as he could, made
ample Declaration against the English, desiring their aid and assistance
against them.

Yea moreover, there were no less then nine Indian Sagamores, who lived near
Manhatos, did voluntarily without any notice or reward from the English, send
their Messengers to Stamford, declaring and affirming (even after they were
urged by the English to testify nothing but the truth) that the Dutch had
solicited them by promising them Gunns, Swords, Powder, Wampam, Wast-coats and
Coats to cut off the English. The Messengers added that they would not lie, and
were as the mouth of the nine Sagamores, who All speak they no lie, they would
affirm it to the Dutch Governors face, and if the Dutch were angry, and should
fight with them* No force etc. The next day, one of those Sagamores, with the
Son and Brother of another of them came themselves to Stamford, and confirmed
what their Messengers in their names had before reported.

This Spring also, the Indians in the Northern and Eastern parts generally grew
insolent, and their carriage very suspicious, and they gave out threatening
words, so that many Alarms were made, the peace of the English through the
whole Country disturbed, they wearied with extraordinary Watchings and
Wardings, hindered in their Plowing, Sowing preparations for Planting and other
Occasions, to their exceeding great Damage. These things caused many sad
thoughts of hearts, and some warlike Preparations; but when the Parties accused
were enquired of about these matters they would own nothing; as for Ninigret he
pretended that his wintering amongst the Dutch was on the account of his
health, and not at all out of design against the English. The rest of the
Narraganset Sachims made themselves very ignorant of any Plot; the Dutch
Governor likewise professed great abhorrency of so vile a thing as that would
be, to hire barbarous Indians to murder Christians; withal adding, that if the
Colonies fell upon him on that account, the righteous Judge would be his
Defense, and that, -- Hic murus aheneus esto
Nil conscire sibi nulla pallescere culpa.
Also glad tidings of peace between the Nations at home arrived here so did
these troubles vanish.

Albeit not many years after these things, the Indians in those parts made an
horrible slaughter, not of Englishmen but of Dutchmen, who were treacherously
massacred by them.

In the latter end of this year it was, that the Mo^taukes or LongIsland
Indians who were friends and Tributaryes to the English, complained that
Ninnigret and the Nianticks had assaulted them, killing and taking Captive
diverse of them. They were so far hearkened unto, as that the Commissioners of
the united Colonies did apprehend themselves called of God to wage War against
Ninigret, and such Indians as should adhere to him in his bloody proceedings,
and accordingly did by vote conclude and determine the same, and that two
hundred and fifty Soldiers should be forthwith raised, and sent forth by the
several Colonies. But the Council at Boston not concurring in those
Conclusions, the intended expedition failed at that time. Nevertheless the next
year, it being known that Ninnigret persisted in his Warring upon the Long
Islanders, and that he brake his Covenant, refusing to pay tribute for those
Pequots that were by the English formerly placed under him, and that the lenity
of the Colonies was abused to heighten his pride and insolency; upon these
Considerations it was agreed by the Commissioners that there should be two
hundred and seventy Foot Soldiers, and forty Horse, raised out of the several
Cololonyes, in order to reducing Ninnigret to subjection and better obedience.
Accordingly Forces were forthwith levied, and a small Army sent forth under the
Christian and courageous Major Willard as Commander in chief.

Upon the approach of the English Army Ninnigret fled from the place of his
usual Residence, and got into a Swamp, where it was not casie to pursue him.
Most of the Pequots under his Jurisdiction then deserted him, and came to the
English. Messengers were sent to demand a Treaty with him, but he was afraid to
appear.

In fine, two Gentlemen, viz. Capt. Davis and Capt. Siely went to him requiring
the delivery of the rest of the Pequots; to whom he replied that they were gone
on hunting, but engaged that within seven days they should be delivered to Mr.
Winthrop. He was moreover charged to forbear all acts of Hostility against the
Long-Islanders, or any other Indians that were in amity with the English; and
plainly told, that if he did not hearken to the advice and charge laid upon
him, he must expect that ere long his head would be set upon an English pole.

So did the Messengers return and the Army also. These things happened in October
Anno 1654.

After the English forces were withdrawn, Ninnigret did according to his usual
manner, observe Fidem punicam in keeping the promises which at that time he had
made and set his hand unto.

Not many years after this the Indians in the Southern and Western parts of
this Land were involved in broils amongst themselves, raging with implacable
feuds and wars one against another. The Nianticks, Maunta^kets, Mohegins,
Norwootucks, all engaged in cruel and bloody quarrels. And the peace of these
Colonyes was not a little disturbed and endangered thereby, inasmuch as the
Indians would pursue one another to the English plantations, and sometimes into
the English houses, and there kill one another. Some English at Wethersfield,
and some inhabiting in the Moheag Country were by means here of put into sad
frights. In special, in Anno 1658, sundry English in diverse places were
disquieted by the insolence and outrage of the Pacumptick Indians. But when the
Sachims were called to an account about it, they pretended that they were
ignorant of what disorders were committed by their men, nor allowed of by them
who desired to live in amity with the English, and were willing to give
satisfaction for past injuryes, and to prevent the like abuses for the Future.
So did those Troubles pass over. Not very long before this, at South-Hampton in
Long Island some houses had been burned by a wicked Indian (and a Negro woman)
who it seems after he had done this wickedness, desperately killed himself, to
prevent just execution. It was at first thought that more of the Indians there
had had an hand in that burning, whence they were condemned to pay seven
hundred pound in seven years, but afterward that penalty was taken off, since
it was judged unreasonable that those Indians who were not proved to act in, or
consent to the mischief that was done, should be made to suffer as guilty.

In Anno 1662, Plymouth Colony was in some danger of being involved in Trouble
by the Wam^anoag Indians. After Massasoit was dead, his two sons, called
Wamsutta, and Metacomet, came to the court at Plymouth pretending high respect
for the English* and therefore desired English names might be imposed on them,
whereupon the Court there named Wamsutta (the elder brother) Alexander, and
Metacomet (the younger brother) Philip; this Alexander ( Philips immediate
predecessor) was not so faithful and friendly to the English as his Father had
been. For some of Boston having been occasionally at Narraganset, wrote to Mr.
Prince who was then Governor of Plymouth, that Alexander was contriving
mischief against the English, and that he had solicited the Narragangansets to
engage with him in his designed rebellion. Hereupon, Capt. Willet (who lived
near to Mount-Hope, the place where Alexander did reside) was appointed to
speak with him and to desire him to attend the next Court in Plymouth, for
their satisfaction, and his own vindication, he seemed to take the message in
good part, professing that the Narragansets, who (he said) were his enemies,
had put an abuse upon him* and he readily promised to attend at the next Court.
But when the day for his appearance was come, instead of that, he at that very
time went over to the Narragansets his pretended enemies, which compared with
other Circumstances, caused the Gentlemen at Plymouth to suspect there was more
of Truth in the Information given, than at first they were aware of. Wherefore
the Governor and Magistrates there, ordered Major Winslow (who is since and at
this day the Governor of that Colony) to take a party of men, and fetch down
Alexander. The Major considering that semper nocuit differ parat is, he took
but ten armed men with him from Marshfield, intending to have taken more at the
Towns that lay nearer Mount-Hope. But divine providence so ordered, as that
when they were about the midway between Plymouth and Briagwater, observing an
hunting house, they rode up to it, and there did they find Alexander and many
of his men well armed, but their Guns standing together without the house, the
Major with his small party, possessed themselves of the Indians Arms, and beset
the house; then did he go in amongst them, acquainting the Sachim with the
reason of his coming in such a way, desiring Alexander with his Interpreter to
walk out with him, who did so a little distance from the house, and then
understood what Commission the Major had received concerning him. The proud
Sachim fell into a raging passion at this surprise, saying that the Governor
had no reason to credit Rumors, or to send for him in such a way* nor would he
go to Plymouth but when he saw cause. It was replied to him, that his breach of
word touching appearance at Plymouth Court, and instead thereof going at the
same time to his pretended enemies, augmented jealousies concerning him. I^
fine, the Major told him, that his order was to bring him to Plymouth, and that
(by the help of God) he would do it, or else he would die on the place; Also
declaring to him that if he would submit, he might expect respective usage, but
if he once more denied to go, he should never stir from the ground whereon he
stood, and with a Pistol at the Sachims breast, required that his next words
should be a positive and clear Answer to what was demanded. Hereupon his
Interpreter (a discreet Indian, brother to John Sausaman) being sensible of
Alexanders passionate disposition, entreated that he might speak a few words to
the Sachim, before he gave his Answer. The prudent discourse of this Indian
prevailed so far as that Alexander yielded to go, only requesting that he might
go like a Sachim, with his men attending him, which (although there was some
hazard in it, they being many, and the English but a few) was granted to him.
The weather being hot, the Major offered him and horse to ride on, but his
squaw and diverse Indian women being in company, he refused, saying he could go
on foot as well as they, entreating only that there might be a complying with
their place, which was done, and resting several times by the way, Alexander
and his Indians were refreshed by the English; no other discourse happening while
they were upon their march, but what was pleasant and amicable. The Major sent
a man before, to entreat that as many of the Magistrates of that Colony as
could; would meet at Duxbury; wherefore having there had some treaty with
Alexander, not willing to commit him to prison, they entreated Major Winslow to
receive him to his house, until the Governor (who then lived at Eastham) could
come up. Accordingly he and his Train were courteously entertained by the
Major. And albeit not so much as an angry word passed between them whilst at
Marshfield, yet proud Alexander vexing and fretting in his spirit, that such a
check was given him, he sudeenly fell sick of a fever. He was then nursed as a
choice friend. Mr. Fuller (the Physician) coming providentially thither at that
time, the Sachim and his men earnestly desired that he would administer to him,
which he was unwilling to do, but by their importunity was prevailed with to
do the best he could to help him, and therefore gave him a potion of working
Physic, which the Indians thought did him good; but his distemper afterward
prevailing, they entreated to dismiss him, in order to a return home, which
upon engagement of appearance at the next Court was granted to him, soon after
his being returned home, he dyed.

And this is the truth and substance of what concerns Transactions with
Alexander, concerning which so many fabulous stories have been spread abroad.

Alexander being dead, his Brother Philip (of late cursed memory) rose up in
his stead, and he was no sooner styled Sachim, but immediately in the year
1662. there were vehement suspicions of his bloody treachery against the
English: Yet he professed otherwise, and making his personal appearance at a
Court holden at Plymouth, renewed that Covenant which his father and Brother
had confirmed with the English there. This Covenant he per^idiously brake: For
in Anno 1671. it was evident that he with other his Confederates had been
conspiring against the Colony, under whose protection and Jurisdiction he had
submitted himself. He then armed himself and acted like a Rebel that intended a
speedy rising, yea he ordered (as some Indians have since confessed) that if
the English did send messengers to Treat with him, if above four came in
company together they should be shot down, and appointed some to ly in ambush
for that end; and behaved himself after a surly and provoking manner toward
messengers that desired Treaty with him, and refused to appear, and give answer
for his Insolencyes, his Covenant notwithstanding. Nevertheless, he at last
conceded to meet the Governor and Magistrates of Plymouth, at Taunton; where
sundry Commissioners of Boston were desired to be, and to hear the matters of
difference between the English of Plymouth, and this Philip Sachim. -- This
meeting was attended in April, 1671. when Philip confessed his breach of
Covenant, and that he had groundlesly taken up Arms against them, whom he had
always found friendly to him; And surrendered some of his Arms, engaging for
the delivery of the rest in due time. The English being tender of shedding
blood, let him go upon promise of better behavior for the future. Soon after
this, Philip (with some of his Counselors) repaired to Boston, endeavoring to
possess the English there, with lying Informations, about Injuryes done to him
by those of Plymouth. Wherefore the Council of that Colony entreated that
Commissioners from Boston, and from Connecticut also might be sent to Plymouth,
that so a fair hearing of differences before all the world might be attended.
So then in September following the Governor of Connecticut, and several
Magistrates from the Massachusetts, and some other Gentlemen met at Plymouth,
where Philip appeared, and all his allegations were heard to the Conviction of
Philip himself, and great satisfaction of all that Audience. The conclusion
was, Philip acknowledged his offense, and was appointed to give a sum of money
to defray the charges which his Insolent Clamours had put that Colony unto. The
particulars which Philip then consented to were these.

1. That he would for the future be subject to the Government of Plymouth, and
to their Laws.

2. He engaged to pay the Colony an hundred pound toward reparation of such
wrong as they had sustained by his misdemeanors.

3. He was under obligation to send five wolves heads every year to the
Governor of Plymouth in Token of his f^alty.

4. That he would not make war with any without the approbation of that
Government.

5. In case any future difference should arise between him and the English, he
would repair to the Government there to rectify matters, before engaging in any
hostile attempts.

6. That he would not dispose of any of his Lands but with the approbation of
the English government there* So was he dismis^ed. Some of these Covenants were
in part observed by him, and some particulars not at all -- Thus did things
rest between the English and him, until the year 1674. when in January an
Indian Preacher, known by the name of John Sausaman, addressed himself to the
present Governor of Plymouth, informing him that the Indians were compl^tting
the destruction of the English, and that not only the Wompanoags, but the
Narragansets, yea and the Mohegins were involving themselves in this
Conspiracy. This Sansaman was by birth a Massachuset, his Father and Mother
living in Dorchester, and they both died Christians. This their Son did for
some time apostatize from his Christian profession, and lived like an Heathen,
being Philips Secretary (for he could write a very legible hand) and one of his
Counselors, until at last God convinced him of his misery, and he manifested
such evident signs of repentance as that he was, after his return from pagan
Philip, reconciled to the praying Indians and baptized, and received as a
member in one of the Indian Churches, yea and employed as an Instructor amongst
them every Lords Day. Nevertheless, his information (because it had an Indian
original, and one can hardly believe them when they speak truth) was not at
first much regarded, until by relation of Circumstance^, he made it too
apparent, that Philip was really hatching mischief. The effect was, the
Governor of Plymouth advising with his Council, resolved once more to send
for Philip, and to enquire into the truth of things: But before that could be
accomplished, an Indian called Tobias, with his Son, and another Indian named
Matta^hinnamy, meeting with John Sausaman at a pond, cruelly murdered him; and
that their villainy might not be discovered, they cut an hole through the Ice,
and put in the dead murdered Body, leaving his hat and Gun upon the Ice, that
so others might think that he had drowned himself. It being rumor'd that
Sausaman was lost, the dead body was sought after, and found in the pond, and
taken up and buried.

Jealousies being on the spirits of men that the other Indians had murdered
him, on the account of revealing their Conspiracyes to the English: The
Governor of Plymouth ordered the Constable of Miaa^^bury (that being the
nearest town to the Place where the murder was committed) to cause John
Sausamans body to be taken up again, and to empanel a Jury as a Coroners
Inquest, to make enquiry how he came by his death: And they found that he had
been murdered, for his neck was broken by twisting of his head round; which is
the way that the Indians some times use when they practice murders, also, his
head was extremely swollen, and his Body was wounded in several parts of it,
and when it was first taken out of the pond, no water issued out of it, which
argued that the Body was not drowned, but dead before it came into the water.

Moreover, when Tobias (the suspected Murderer) came near the dead body, it
fell a bleeding on fresh as if it had been newly slain albeit it was buried a
considerable time before that.

Afterward an Indian called Patuckson, came and testified to their faces that
he saw Tobias and the other Indians murdering Sausaman: He also himself before
his death had declared, that he was afraid those very Indians would at last
prove his Murderers.

They were therefore apprehended and kept in Dura^ce until Plymouth Court,
which was held in June, 1675. and being found guilty of Sausaman's Death, they
were (one of them before his execution confessing the murder) condemned and
executed. And then did philip, being (as was verily supposed) privy to what
Tobias (his Counselor) and those with him had perpetrated upon John Sausaman,
fall to open Rebellion and bloodshedding amongst the English at Swanzy, who
were his next Neighbors.

But of the special Occurrences attending the late (and not yet ended) War
between the English and the Indians, I have elsewhere given a brief account,
and therefore shall not here add anything, that not comporting with my present
design.

The Particulars which have been mentioned, are the chief (if not the only)
Troubles which have happened by the Indians in New England, from the first
planting thereof by the English till the late Commotions. Some few private
Murders there have been, which are not insisted on in this Narrative, as
namely those at Nantucket, and that by Matoonas his Son; and that at Woburn,
but the public peace was not so endangered by those clandestine Revenges, as
by the Conspiracyes, the ^elation whereof has been described.

It is easy to observe; from the History of these Troubles, that whereas there
have been two sorts of men designing settlement in this part of America, some
that came hither on the account of Trade, and worldly Interests, by whom the
Indians have been scandalized, others that came hither on a Religious and
conscientious account, having in their Eye, the (...) of the Heathen unto
Christ; the former have been attended with blasting ruining providence, these
latter have been signally owned by the Lord Jesus; for the like has been
rarely known in the world, that a plantation should be raised out of nothing,
and brought to such considerableness in so short a time, whereas in the close
of the last Century, there was not so much as one Christian in this Land, there
are now above Fourscore English, and Six Indian Churches therein, besides many
other Congregations calling upon the Name of the True God in Jesus Christ,
although as yet not brought into Church estate, according to the order of the
Gospel.

This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

FINIS.
An HISTORICAL DISCOURSE Concerning the PREVALENCY OF PRAYER Wherein is showed
that New-Englands late Deliverance from the Rage of the Heathen, is an eminent
Answer of Prayer.

By INCREASE MATHER Teacher of a Church in Boston in New England.

Psalm. 102. 18. This shall be written for the Generation to come.

Jam. 5. 17, 18. Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are, and he
prayed earnestly that it might not rain, and it rained not on the Earth by the
space of three years and six months; and he prayed again, and the heaven gave
rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit.

Preces et Lachrimae sunt Arma Ecclesiae. Ambrosius. Oration est vis Deo grata.
Tertul. BOSTON; Printed and sold by John Foster. 1677.

To the Reader.
M y Design in the subsequent Discourse, is not to enumerate all the
Particulars which might be mentioned, that do (...) New-Englands late
Deliverance to be a great answer of Prayer: only to take notice of some more
eminent Passages of Divine Providence, whereby it does appear that the God of
our salvation has answered as by terrible things in righteousness, against our
Heathen Adversaryes. There is now cause for (...) holy Solicitude left
security should be the effect of these Dispensations, lest we should now say,
our Mountain is made strong, and we shall never be moved. Howbeit there is
little reason for such imaginations, if things be duly laid to heart: we cannot
but remember, how near this Tree was to cutting down a year or two ago; but
the Lord of the Vineyard has at the earnest intercession of his Servants let
it alone this year also. But who can say, how far the Lord may cut and lop and
man our Vine branches before many years be expired? To this day we see not the
end of our late bleeding distresses, and when this day of Trouble shall be
over, I for my part, must needs solemnly profess and declare, that I look for
another seven times greater, though what it shall be, or how it shall come to
pass I cannot tell; for I pretend not to any Revelation, beyond what they that
diligently compare the Word and Works of God together, may attain unto It
^^iveth me not a little that I should so frequently write and speak in ^^ch a
Strain, but I cannot forbear, the Lord has spoken, who can but prophesy? There
are many Considerations, which are enough to cause sad expectations of some
more fatal changes of Providence not far off, but especially these two,

1. There is not a general Reformation in New England so much (...) in any one
Particular, notwithstanding the Lord has tried us by all manner of ^ayes that
may be thought of, even by lesser and greater Judgments, and by signal mercyes
and Deliverances: and that which aggravateth our unreformedness, is that in the
time of our Trouble we have said, arise, and save us,

2. There are evils prevailing amongst us, which if they be not reformed, the
Lords Controversy will not be ended, such as notorious Self-seeking, reigning
Pride, shameful Drunkenness, with the occasions leading thereunto; woeful
Apostasy, the blessed Design of our Fathers in coming into this wilderness not
being minded and attended as ought to be: and as things are circumstanced,
there is no hope that these and other evils should be reformed, until God
arise and shake terribly the Earth. So that nil nisi vota supersunt. On these
accounts, it concerns us, to be crying unto the Lord day and night. If we look
abroad upon the face of the earth, in other parts of the world, the Children
are come to the birth, and there is not strength to bring forth. We behold
(...) the beginning of travailing sorrows, even such things as evidence that
some great Birth is at hand. And in our Horizon dark Clouds gather apa^^, and
the Heavens are covered over with blackness. Surely in these respects, we may
truly say as sometimes that martyr did, Pray Pray, Pray, never ^ore need then
now. And considering the bless Encouragement God has given us, whatever come
on us, let us be (...) so doing.

Increase Mather.
BOSTON, N. E. August. 16* 1677.
An HISTORICAL DISCOURSE Concerning the Prevalency of PRAYER
IT was a great word (and if rightly understood, a true word) which Luther
spoke, when he said, Est quaeaam precum Omnipotentia, there is a kind of
Omnipotency in Prayer; And the reason is obvious, viz. In that the Almighty
does suffer himself to be prevailed upon and overcome by prayer. Had not Jacob
in this respect power with God? yea when he made his supplication, he had
power, and prevailed over the Angel, even that Angel who is the Lord of Hosts,
the Lord is his memorial. Where do we find in all the Book of God a more
wonderful expression, then that of the Lord to praying Moses, Now let me
alone? That ever the eternal God should become thus a petitioner to a poor
mortal man! See Mr Hall, Psalm. 82 p. 183 184.
Feriendi licentiam petit a Mose qui fecit Mosen. Prayer then is like the sword
of Saul, or the bow of Jonathan, which never returned empty from the battle.
Prayer is stronger then iron gates. At the prayers of the Church the Iron gates
fly open, and the Apostles fetters fall off. Sometimes the prayers of one man
that has an eminent interest in God, are a means to preserve a whole town, yea
a whole land from destruction; well might the Ancient say, Chrysostom.
Homine probo orante nihil potentius. How far did Abraham's prayers prevail for
Sodom? Did not Elijah's prayers open and shut the windows of Heaven? Did they
not bring down showers when the gasping earth was ready to die for thirst? When
a fiery drought had like to have devoured the land of Israel, and the Prophet
Amos prayed and cried to the Lord, saying, O Lord God, Cease I beseech thee, ^y
whom shall Jacob arise? for he is small; the Lord repented f^r this, and said
this shall not be.

Wars, when justly undertaken, have been successful through the prevalency of
prayer. Moses in the mount praying, is too strong for all the Armies in the
valley fighting. When the Philistines went up against the Children of Israel,
Samuel ceased not to cry to the Lord for Israel, and the Lord thundered with a
great thunder that day upon the Philistines, and discomfited them, that they
were smitten before Israel. Jehoshaphat, when surrounded by a multitude of
heathen enemies, by prayer overcame them, When Zerah the Ethiopian, came
against the Lords people with an host of a thousand thousand men, Asa by prayer
and faith over came them all. Hezekiah and Isaiah by their prayers brought an
Angel down from heaven, who slew an hundred and fourscore and five thousand
Assyrians, in the host of Sennacherib, in one night.

And besides these, and many other Scriptural examples, in ecclesiastical story
Instances to this purpose are frequently observed. ^
The history of the thundering legion is famously known. Thus it was.

The Emperor Marcus Aureliu^, going to war against the Quads, Vandals,
Sarmats, and Germans, who were nine hundred seventy and five thousand fighting
men; The Imperialists were so cooped up by their numerous enemies, in strait,
dry, and hot places, that the soldiers having been destitute of water for five
days together, they were all like to have perished for thirst. In this
extremity, a Legion of Christian soldiers being in the Army, withdrew
themselves apart from the rest, and falling prostrate on the earth, by ardent
prayers prevailed with God, that he immediately sent a most plentiful rain,
whereby the Army that otherwise had perished, was refreshed, and dreadful
lightenings flashed in the faces of their enemies so as that they were
discomfited and put to flight. The effect of which was, that the persecution
which before that the Emperor designed against the Christians, was diverted;
and that praying Legion did afterward bear the name of (...) the lightening
Legion.

Constantine the Great, ^
being to join battle with the Heathen Tyrant, Licinius, singled out a number
of godly Ministers of Christ, and with them betook himself to earnest prayer
and supplication, after which God gave him a notable and glorious victory over
his enemies. But Licinius himself escaped at that time, and raised another
Army, which was pursued by Constantine, who before he would engage with the
enemy, caused a tent to be erected, wherein he did spend some time in fasting
and prayer, being attended with a company of holy praying men round about him,
after which marching against his enemies, he fought them, and obtained a more
glorious victory then the former, and the Grand Rebel Licinius, was then taken
Prisoner.

Theodosius being in no small danger by reason of the potent Army of
Adversaryes he had to do with, Lege Theod^^^i v^^am.
in his distress cried unto heaven for help, and behold! the Lord sent such a
terrible Tempest, as the like was not known, whereby the Darts of the enemy
were driven back upon themselves, to their own confusion, August De Ctvitate
D^i. Lib* 5. C. 26.
which caused Claudian the Poet (though no great friend to the Christian name)
to say concerning Theodosius, O nimium Dil^cte Deo cui milit at Ether,
Et conjur ati veniunt ad Classica Venti.


It is storied concerning the City of Nisibis that being straightly besieged by
Sapor^s King of Persia, S^mpso^s Ecclesiastical Hist
the distressed Citizens desired a devout and holy man amongst them (whose name
was Jame^) to be earnest with the Lord in their behalf. He was so; and the
effect was, God sent an Army of Gnats and Flies amongst the Persians which so
vexed and tormented them, as that they were forced to raise their Siege a^n
depart.

Amongst the Waldenses sometimes an inconsiderable number have prevailed over
multitudes of their popish Adversaryes. Morland Hist. Walden^es.
At one time five hundred of those poor praying Saints overthrew two thousand
and five hundred of their enemies, who scoffed at them because they would fall
upon their knees and pray before they would fight.

In the land of our Fathers Sepulchers, when Oswald (who succeeded his father
Ethel^ride in the Northern Kingdom) was assaulted by Cedwalla and Penda, two
Heathen Kings, that raised a great Army, designing the ruin of Oswald, and his
people, be humbly and earnestly addressed himself to the Lord of Hosts, the
great giver of victory, entreating him to show his power in saving and
protecting his own people from the rage of Heathen Adversaryes: S^^ Clarks
Examp Vol. 1. ^.
after which, joining (...) with his enemies, albeit their Army was far greater
then his, Idem (...) Lib.
he obtained a wonderful victory, wherein Cedwalla himself was slain.

When England was invaded by the Dancs under the conduct of their King Osrick,
who e^^amped at (...), King E^helred betook himself to Prayer, and marching
against the Danish Army, put them to ^^ight, and slew the greatest part of them.

Gustav^^ Aaolphu: the King of Sweden, no sooner landed in his enemies
Territoryes, but he addressed himself to heaven for Victory, and encouraged his
Counselors and Commanders by saying, The greater the Army of Prayers is, the
greater and more assured shall be our Victory. ^ea it was his manner when the
Armies were set in Battle array, to lift up his eyes to heaven, and say, Lord
prosper the Battle of this Day, according as thou see my ^ear^ does aim at
thy Glory, and the good of thy Church. And how successful did God make that
excellent Prince to be?

But what need we go far to find examples confirming the truth of this
assertion, that Prayer is of wonderful Prevalency* since our own eyes have
seen it? New England may now say, if the Lord (even the Prayer-hearing God) had
not been on our side when men rose up against us, they had swallowed us up;
then the proud waters had gone over our Soul. And thus has it been more then
once or twice, especially since the late insurrection and Rebellion of the
Heathen Nations round about us. We cannot but acknowledge, and Posterity must
know, that we were in appearance a gone and ruined People, and had been so ere
this day, if the Lord had not been a God that hears Prayer.

And there are especially two Considerations that do evince, that New-Englands
Deliverance from the rage of the Heathen is an eminent answer of Prayer, 1. In
that God has graciously answered us as to the very Petitions that have bin
mostly insisted on, as will appear to admiration by instancing in some
Particulars.

1. Then, How often have we prayed that the Lord would divide infatuate and
frustrate the Counsils of the Heathen that sought our ruin, As sometimes David
when pursued by Absalom prayed saying, O Lord divide their tongues. Psalm. 55.
9. Again David said, O Lord I pray thee turn the Counsel of Ac^itophel into
foolishness. 2. Sam. 15. 31. Those requests of David were heard, and therefore
Absaloms Counselors were divided, one giving this, and another that advice;
and the subtle Counsel of Achitophe^ (which had it been hearkened unto, David
and those with him had perished) must not be followed. In like manner has the
Lord done for us; we have heard how that after the Fort fight, December. 19.
1675. some of the Indian Counselors advised that they might pursue our Army
when upon their retreat, which if they had so done, how (...) would the
Consequence have proved. But therefore God divided their Counsels, that others
were of another mind.

Moreover, we have received informations, concerning a great Consultation
amongst the Indians, soon after their mischief done at Su^bury in April. 1676.
Had they then continued to molest the English, our case had been sad; but they
supposed they had time enough before them, and therefore resolved to be quiet a
month or two, in order to attendance upon their own planting and fishing.

We have also heard that the old cra^ty Serpents amongst the Indians advised
that they might (...) all encounters with the English Forces, and rather
disperse themselves into small Parties, and so fall upon the English Towns,
burning their houses, destroying their cattle etc. but that the young men
thought it best to cut off our soldiers, and then they supposed they might do
what they pleased with our towns. Thus were their tongues divided, and Counsils
turned into foolishness.

2. How often have we prayed that God would do for us as in the day of Mi^^an,
by causing the heathen to destroy one another, and that the Egyptians might be
set against the Egyptians. The Lord has answered that Request also. For the
Indians have been wasting and killing one another, yea not only such Indians as
do pretend friendship to the English, (e.g. the Natick and (...) Indians, and
the Mohawks and the Moheags under Uncas; albeit it is too evident that he was
secretly conspiring with Philip in his designed mischief, a little before the
War brake forth, but God turned him about, and made him a friend to the
English, and an enemy to Philip) but also some of those that were once in
hostility against us, did at last help to destroy their own nation, friends and
kindred, that so they might do service for us. So have they that sought to
destroy us, gone into the lower parts of the earth, they are fallen by the
sword.

3. How often have we prayed that the Lord would take those his Enemies into
his own avenging hand, pleading that though we know not how to come at them,
they had such advantages in respect of woods and swamps and dark corners of the
earth, to lurk in; yet the hand of our God could reach them, and that therefore
he would scatter them by his power and bring them down* and let them wander up
and down for meat, and send the destroying Angel amongst them. This Prayer has
been heard* For it is known that the Indians were distressed with famine
multitudes of them perishing for want of breadpunc; and the Lord sent
sicknesses amongst them, that Travelers have seen many dead Indians up and
down in the woods that were by famine or sickness brought unto that untimely
end. Yea the Indians themselves have testified, that more amongst them have
been cut off by the sword of the Lord in those respects, then by the sword of
the English.

4. How often have we prayed that the Lord would remember the Cruelty,
Treachery, and above all the Blasphemy of these Heathen? This Prayer has been
heard in heaven. As for their cruelty, God has remembered that many of them
falling into the hands of the Mohawks or other Indians, who fought in our
quarrel, used their enemies, after their own kind* And (...) has been
observed, that vengeance from the Lord did pursue them presently upon the
perpetration of some horrid acts of barbarous cruelty toward such as fell into
their murderous hands. And as for their Teeachery, God has retalliated that
upon them; as for the perfidious Narragansets, Peter Indian was false and
per^idious to them, upon a disgust received amongst them, and directed our Army
where to find them. Treacherous Philip, one of his own men ran away from* him,
and told Capt. Church where that Grand enemy had hid himself, the issue of
which was, another Indian shot a bullet into the treacherous heart of that
Covenant Breaking In^idel. Yea many of those bloody and deceitful Indians who
were taken by Capt. Church* would frequently destroy and betray their bloody
and falshearted Comrades. Matoonas who was the first Indian that treacherously
shed innocent English blood in Massachusetts Colony, he some years before
pretended to something of Religion, being a professor in general (though never
baptized, nor of the inchurched Indians) that so he might the more covertly
manage the hellish design of revenge that was harbored in his divelish heart;
but at last Sagamore John with some of his Indians unexpectedly surprised him,
and delivered him to Justice. That abominable Indian Peter Jethro betrayed his
own father, and other Indians of his special acquaintance, unto death. Many of
the Nipmuck Indians, who were wont to lay snares for others, were at last
themselves taken by a Stratagem, and brought to deserved execution.

And as for their Blasphemy, God has remembered it, the most notorious
Blasphemers amongst them have been made examples of divine revenging Justice,
Quanonthet, Po^ha^^, Monoce, all of them cursed Blasphemers; the vengeance of
heaven has not suffered them to live. It is also reported that an Englishman,
belonging to one of the western Plantations, being mortally wounded by an
Indian, the Indian upbraided him with his prayers, saying to him, You were wont
to pray to Jesus Christ, now pray to him, He cannot help you, and with all
added a most hideous Blasphemy. (not fit to be named) against our blessed Lord
Jesus Christ, immediately upon which a bullet took him in the head, and dashed
out his brains, sending his cursed soul in a moment amongst the Devils, and
Blasphemers in Hell for ever.

5. How often have we prayed that the Lord would take away spirit and courage
from those that have been in hostility against us, and cause those haters of
the Lord to submit themselves. In this thing also the Lord has had respect to
our requests. For hundreds of Indians the last summer came and surrendered
themselves to the English, e.g. in Plymouth Colony the Squa^-S^chim of Saconet,
with above an hundred Indians submitted themselves to mercy, June, 30, 1676.
Not long after that two hundred Indians more surrendered themselves. And in the
eastern parts of this Colony, (July. 6. there were six Sachims addressed
themselves to the English in order to the obtaining peace, bringing in with
them three hundred men besides women and Children. Likewise in the same month
Sagamore John submitted himself with about an hundred and eighty Indians; and
hundreds of them came and submitted themselves to the English in Connecticut
Colony. These things came not to pass without the finger of God, so manifest as
that the enemy himself could not but take notice of it. For a stout Indian
Captain who was afterward executed at Boston, professed to some of our
Soldiers, that they could never have subdued the Indians, But (said he
striking upon his breast) Englishmans God makes us afraid here.

6. How often have we prayed that God would in special look after those places,
which were in most eminent danger, as being above others exposed to the fury of
the enemy? And we have had the petitions we desired of him in that respect.
What a black appearance of death and ruin was before the poor people at
Quaboag, when they were all cooped up in one unfortified house, and surrounded
by a barbarous multitude of cruel Indians, who thirsted after their blood?
(...) God by a strange providence, sent Major Willard, who with a small party of
soldiers, came a few hours or minutes before it was too late, by which means
the remaining Inhabitants of that place had their lives given them for a prey.
After that, the western plantations, North Hampton, Hadly, Hatf^^ld etc. were
in the eminentest danger, by reason of the enemy taking up their Rendezvouze in
those parts; but God preserved and delivered them, in answer unto prayer. That
memorable providence ought not to be forgotten, how that in the beginning of
March, 1676. Our Army missed their way (designing to surprise the Indians about
Wachuset Hills) and were providentially led to North Hampton; Also Major Treat
with soldiers under his Command, did then take up his Quarters in that town,
coming thither a day sooner then was intended; The next day a great body of
Indians brake in upon the town, and in probability had laid it wast, had there
not been such a supply of soldiers as has been mentioned, which the good
providence of God brought thither, in answer to the prayers of his people.
Moreover, the whole Colony of Plymouth was in most apparent danger of being
overrun and overwhelmed with the enemy; especially in the spring of the year
1676. when (as we have been informed) the Indians were designing, with fifteen
hundred men to fall upon all the scattered towns throughout that Jurisdiction.
But God gave men, yea a great Sachim, for the life of his dear people in that
Colony. We have heard that Quanonch^ts surprizal and death, struck an amazement
into the heathen, and diverted their purposed mischief. May 8. 1676. when
Bridgwater was assaulted. and in danger of being laid wast, God sent thunder
and rain from heaven, which caused the Indians to turn back. And when they
attempted to make Taunton a desolation, July 11. how wonderfully did the Lord
save (...) town? so ordering by his providence, as that a captive Negro
escaping from the Indians, informed of their purpose to fall upon that place,
whereupon the Inhabitants stood upon their guard, and soldiers were timously
sent in to them for their relief and defense.

7. How often have we prayed for our poor Captives, that God would preserve
them and return them? When some of ours not many years since, were in Captivity
under Mahomet, what prayer was made for them continually? Especially it was so
in respect of Mr. Foster, and his son, the Church in Charlstown setting (...)
day apart to seek unto the Lord by fasting and prayer, that the persons
mentioned might be set at liberty, and although at that time there was no
likelihood that ever it should be, the infidel King, under whose power they
were, not being willing to accept of money for their redemption, yet God
brought it about wonderfully, and rather then his people prayers should not be
answered, that Tyrant must die by a strange and unexpected providence. But I
speak now concerning those that have been Captives amongst the heathen in this
land. And God has heard us for them. Whereas upon the 9th of May, 1676. the
Magistrates, and Ministers of this Colony, and the Deputyes of the General
Court, sought the Lord together by fasting and prayer, and did in special
manner beg that Captives might ^e returned, as a token for good, and pledge of
further answers of prayer; within a few weeks after this, near upon twenty of
our Captives were set at liberty. For some, prayer has been more abundantly
poured forth; so for Mr. Rowlandson his wife and two children, and we have seen
the Lord returning them all again. And whereas in October 1676. Amongst others,
the son of that man of God, and man of prayer, Reverend Mr. Cobbet (the
faithful Pastor of the Church in Ipswich) was surprised in a vessel by the
Northern Indians, and led away into Captivity; doubtless God did it, that so
glory might be to his holy name, and that the world might see how prayer can
prevail with him. Mr. Cobbet no sooner heard what was befallen his son, but he
called together about thirty of his Christian neighbors (that being as many as
could on the sudden convene) and they set some time apart to pray for him that
was now a Captive, after this his Fathers heart was sweetly quieted, believing
that God had heard them: Some others also that attended that Service, were as
confidently persuaded that God would return (and that in comfortable plight)
Mr. Cobbets son to him again, as if he were already come; Prayer also was made
in public Congregations in particular for that young man; and in December
following, those prayers were fully answered, the Lord bringing it about in
strange ways, the particulars and circumstances whereof are too large here to
be insisted on.

Let me further take notice here, that whereas no longer then three weeks
since, ( viz. July 25. 1677.) the Church in Salem set a day apart to seek the
Lord in special on behalf of those belonging to that Town lately fallen* into
the hands of the Indians; whilst they were praying, God brought home one of the
vessels that the Indians had surprised, and two persons (who were Masters of
Vessels) that had been particularly prayed for in the morning, returned solemn
thanks to God in the after part of the day, in that he had in answer of the
Prayers of his people, brought them out of their Captivity.

8. How often have we prayed that God would cut off the Ringleaders, and
principal blondy promoters of the late troubles? That the Lord would do unto
them as unto Sisera, as to Jabin at the brook of Kison (which perished at
Endor, they became as dung* for the earth) and make their Nobles like Oreb and
like Zeeb, yea all their Princes like Zeba and Zalmunna.

New in these Cries to heaven our God has heard us even to admiration* Philip
the Gr^nd enemy and beginner of the War, is gone to his own place. It was
observed that a little before the destruction of that bloody Foe, the Lord
stirred up the hearts of some of his Servants, to be instant in prayer against
that enemy in particular, yea and caused them firmly to believe that it should
be so. Nor could they cease crying to the Lord against him, until they had
prayed the bullet into Philips heart. And concerning what prayers have been in
closets about that thing, we shall hear more at the day of judgment when the
Lord Jesus will reveal it and reward it openly. Are not all the Chieftains
amongst the Heathen who have been in Hostility against us cut off for ever?
and their memorial is perished with them. O thou most High, Though have rebuked
the Heathen, thou have put out their name for ever and ever!

We have heard of two and twenty Indian Captains, slain all of them, and
brought down to Hell in one day, viz. December. 19. 1675. And some of the Indians
have confessed that at the Fallfight, May 18. 1676. they lost no less then
three and thirty of their Counselors, which put them into an absolute
Confusion. that they were like men amazed ever after.

Where are the six Narraganset Sachims, with all their Captains and
Counselors? Where are the Nipmuck Sachims, with all their Captains and
Counselors? Where is Philip and Squaw-Sachim of Pocass^t with all their
Captains and Counselors? God do so to all the implacable enemies of Christ
and of his People in New England!

2. If we consider the TIME when God has appeared for us, it It is manifest
that our Salvation is an Answer of Prayer. It was a fatal happy blow which the
Indians received at the Fort-Fight in the Narraganset Country; and a little
before that, all these Churches were solemnly by Fasting and prayer seeking to
the Lord, that the Heathen might be rebuked at that time. When Quanonchet was
taken and slain, it was an amazing stroke to the enemy. And but a few days
before that, many Churches in England kept a day of Fasting and prayer for poor
New England. In the latter end of June. 1676. (and ever after that) successes
against the enemy were wonderful; especially in Plymouth Colony. Now on the
22. of June, all the Churches in that Colony set apart a day of solemn
Humiliation, and renewed their Covenant. And on the 29. of that month, was a
day of Thanksgiving throughout this Colony, the prayers and praises of which
day were signally owned by the Lord, who did then set ambushments against the
enemy and they were smitten. Also in this very Month, the Churches in Dublin
in Ireland were solemnly seeking to the Lord on our behalf. Why should not
these things be written and recorded for the Generation to come? why should
they not be made known to our Children, that they might set their hope in God,
and not forget the works of God, but keep his Commandments.

Some one perhaps will say, did not God in the time of your late War seem to be
angry with your Prayers? Had you not the saddest ^idings on your solemn days
of Humiliation?

Answ. This is true, and the thoughts of it should for ever humble us; yet we
know, sometimes the Lord seems to be displeased with the Prayers of his people
only to try their Faith (as with the woman of Canaan) when as indeed they are
his delight. Moreover (alas!) it cannot be denied or doubted of, but that the
Lord saw formality and hypocrisy in the prayers of many amongst us, which he
was offended at; howbeit there are some living Christians, that walk closely
with God;a few Names that have not defiled their garments with the sins, and
generally prevailing temptations of these times; unto them and to their Prayers
has the Lord had respect. It must also be confessed, that the prayers of the
Churches in Europe have had no small influence into our mercyes. I can assure
the Reader, that the Churches in London, in Suffolk. in Dorset, in Devon in
Somer^et, in Lancashire, have by Fasting and Prayer, sought the Lord for
New England, in the time of our late troubles. And I doubt not but that the
Lords praying people in other Countyes, where I have no acquaintance or
correspondence, have done the like. We are infinitely indebted to that God, who
having a purpose to glorify himself by hearing prayers, put into their (...) be
earnest with the Lord on our behalf.

Who knows, but that we may be again involved in trouble by the remainders of
the heathen, or otherwise. Let us then be encouraged to take in hand our old
tried weapons, even preces et lacryme the Ancient Arms of the Church. If
enemies arise, let us pray them down again. And that is the special improvement
which should be made of what has been discoursed; since we have seen what
prayer can do, The consideration of these things should stir up an holy
resolution in every one, to be sincere, frequent, and constant, in this so
great and powerful a duty. It is reported of Joachim (the father of the Virgin
Mary, that prayer was his meat and drink. And we know what was David's
profession, Psalm. 116. 1, 2. I love the Lord, because he has heard my voice,
and my supplication, because he has inclined his ear to me, therefore I will
call upon him as long as I shall live.

Wherefore to the particulars already mentioned, I shall (for how should a man
when writing upon such a subject, easily break off) add a few more. It would
indeed fill a volume, should all the Instances this way be produced, which
stand upon record in approved Authors; nor have I present leisure to revolve
many books that touch upon this subject; only such particulars as do presently
occur to mind I shall relate, hoping it will not be unprofitable to the reader*
who possibly has not had the knowledge of them, or not of all of them. To
proceed then,

There have been, whom prayer has brought back from the gates of the grave,
whenas to all outward appearance, they have been otherwise past recovery; not
to insist upon Scriptural examples here neither; It is a memorable passage
which a great Historian has noted concerning that Learned and Religious, Sr.
John Cheek, who was Tutor to our English Josiah, King Edward 6th.

Sr. John being sick nigh unto death, the King did carefully enquire after his
welfare every day; Fullers History of the Church p. 424.
at last the Physicians told him, that there was no hopes of life; Nay (said
the King) he will not dye at this time, for I have this morning begged his life
of God in my prayers, and obtained it; which accordingly came to pass; and
soon after Sr. John wonderfully recovered beyond all expectation.

Melancthon was taken desperately sick at Vinaria, Melchior Adam in (...)
M^la^cthonis
as he was in a journey toward Hagenaw, in order to a Conference with some of
the reformed Divines in Germany about matters of religion; Luther hearing of
it, hastened to visit him, and with tears saying, Alas! how precious and
profitable an Instrument of the Church, is miserably weakened, and ready to
perish! and falling upon his knees, he did most earnestly wrestle with the Lord
for his recovery, and prevailed, so as that Melancthon would afterward
confess, that if it had not been for Luthers prayers, Idem in vita Myconii
he had died by that sickness.

At another time, Myconius being fallen into a deep consumption, Luther was
earnest in prayer to God for his recovery; and he wrote a letter to him,
wherein he thus expresses himself, I pray Christ our Lord, our salvation, our
health, that I may not live to see thee, and some others of our Colleagues to
dye, and go to heaven, and to leave me here amongst the Devils alone. Farewell
and God forbid that I should hear of thy death whilst I live, sed te
superstitem faciat mihi Deus, hoc peto et volo, et fiat voluntas mea, Amen!
quia hac voluntas gloriam nominis Dei, certe non meam voluptatem. nec copiam
quarit. A while after Myconius recovered, and outlived Luther, ever
acknowledging that he was beholding to God for putting it into the heart of
Luther; so to pray for him, and instrumentally to lengthen out his life seven
years beyond his own, and friends expectation.

Yea more, Devils and powers of darkness have fallen before the power of
prayer. Idem in vita Luther^
A desperate young man in Germany, who in an hellish pang of temptation had
sold himself to, and made an explicit covenant with the Devil; having revealed
his miserable codition to Luther, he called the Church together, and the young
man being with them, they fasted and prayed, so that the Devil threw the
writing, which he had received of the young man, in at the window, and a
forlorn soul was rescued out of the hands of that devouring Lion. R^fertur in
vita Angustini
How often have poor creatures under bodily possessions been delivered from
that thraldom by earnest prayer? Austin by his prayers cast out Devils. The
History of those seven possessed in Lancashire, in whose dispossession Mr.
Darrel and others were by fasting and prayer instrumental, is well known.

There was a man that lived not far from Nottingham, Read Mr. Rothwels life
written by (...).
whose name was John Fox. This man was possessed by the Devil, who would
violently throw him down, and take away the use of every member of his body,
and was sometimes heard speaking when his lips moved not at all; yea (albeit
the man could speak no other language besides his mother tongue)the evil spirit
in him would frequently quote scriptures out of the Originals, Hebrew and
Greek, and play the Critic, and back his allegations with saying out of, the
Fathers (...) Poets. Among others that came to pray with this poor miserable
man, Mr. Rothwel (a minister that was famous in those parts in those days) was
one. As he was coming, the Devil told them in the house with the possessed man,
yonder is Rothwel a coming; and upon his entering into the house, raged and
blasphemed, saying also will thou go to prayer, I Will make such a noise as shall
distract thee, and do thou think that God will hear distracted prayers? Mr.
Rothwel replied, God hears the prayers of the upright, and has promised to
give his spirit to help infirmityes in prayer; therefore in Confidence of his
promise, and powerful assistance of his spirit, and in the name of his son
Jesus Christ, we will go to prayer. So he did. The Devil for above a quarter of
an hour made an horrid noise, and roared at Mr. Rothwell's face, but at last
was forced to be silent, and departed out of the man, who before the Prayer was
ended, did to the amazement and joy of all the Auditors present say Amen to the
Petitions that were presented before the Lord on his behalf. After Mr. Rothwel
left him, he was stricken dumb for three years together; at length by prayer
also, God opened his mouth, and restored his speech to him; One using this
Petition, Lord open his mouth, and his lips shall show forth thy praise; he
answered in the Congregation, Amen, and so continued to speak, and spoke
graciously to his dying day.

I remember I have met with another example not unlike unto this but now
mentioned. In the town of Barwick upon Tweed, there was a man (Steward to the
Lord of Granson) reputed Godly, who was very much afflicted in his mind. Set
Mr. B^^^om his (...) Clark.
Mr. Balsom (an eminent preacher, by whose Ministry in that one town, sixty
persons were (as was judged) savingly wrought upon) did several times visit
him, and sought to apply words of comfort to him, but nothing of that nature
taking place, he whispered the Steward in the ear to this purpose, I doubt
there is something within which you would do well to discover; whereupon,
immediately the man's tongue swelled out of his mouth that he was not able to
speak, and to the astonishment of those in the room, a shrill voice was heard,
as it were speaking out of his thr^at, saying, what do thou talking to him of
free grace and promises? he is mine. Mr. Balsom perceiving that it was the
Devil that spoke, told him, he did not know that men were his as long as they
were alive in this world. To whom the Devil replied, If God would let me loose,
I would find enough in the best of you all to make you mine, and as for this
man he has given himself to me. I will not (said Mr. Balsom) believe the
father of lies; but I will go home and pray for this poor man, and get all the
force in the town I can to join with me, and I do believe that thou Satan
shall loose thy hold before tomorrow morning. Mr. Balsom upon his return home
that night, found diverse Christians in his house, who waited to speak with
him, unto whom he declared that he could not but admiringly take notice of the
providence of God in bringing them to his house, whom otherwise he had purposed
to send for; and desired them to spend part of the night with him, in seeking
to the Lord in the behalf of such a distressed possessed man: which they did,
and the next morning Satan had lost his possession: and when Mr. Balsom
enquired of the poor man how it was with him, He answered; through the goodness
of God, I have overcome, and am now as full of Comfort, as before I was full of
Trouble.

I have also heard a worthy Divine in Dublin, speak of a man, that being under
bodily possession by an evil spirit, a Company of praying Christians met
together, Dr. (...).
to seek the Lord on his behalf; amongst them there was a precious holy woman,
who kneeled behind the door in the room where they were praying together, and
there were strong actings of Faith in her soul; at last the Devil was forced to
depart; only as he was going out of the possessed party, he cried out, O the
Woman, the Woman behind the door!

Some very learned and judicious Writers conceive, that Epil^ptick and Lunatic
persons are those Demoniacks whom we read so much of in the New Testament. Mr.
Medes (...) in (...). 6.
There is a Deliration that proceeds ex vi morbi, being from or with a Fever,
and another kind of deliration which is fine Febre, B^za in Mat. 8. 16. and 17.
15.
when a man having no other disease is crazed or distracted. Not they that are
subjected to the former, but to this latter have been accounted (...) possessed
persons. The Jews of old had such an opinion concerning mad men. Joh. 10. 20.
Consider also, Math. 17. 14, 15, -- 18. with Luke 9. 39. Whatever of solidity
may be in that notion, is not a place here to dispute; but this is certain,
that distracted persons have been restored to the use of their understanding
again by Fasting and Prayer. That Moses of his time, Mr. Dod (concerning whom
Mr. Buroughs gives this Testimony, that he was the meekest man upon the face
of the earth) had a godly son, whom it pleased the Most High to leave unto sore
distraction in his mind, Mr. Buroughs on (...) 11 2^. 2 d. part. p. ^^8.
whereupon Mr. Dod called some of his godly praying Friends together, who set a
day apart solemnly to seek the Lord about that matter, and whilst they were yet
speaking in prayer, God heard them, so as that the distracted person was not
only restored to his right mind again, but did himself conclude that day of
prayer with solemn Thanks giving unto God. This Information I received from a
Reverend Minister, who was present in Mr Dods house, when that day of fasting
and prayer was there observed, upon the occasion mentioned.

It is reported concerning that excellent man, see Mr Levist^^ of fulfilling
the Scriptures ^ 431
and famous Minister in Edenbourgh, Mr. Bruce (concerning whom the Learned
Didoclavius has given a most honorable testimony) that diverse persons that
were distracted, and some who were Epileptical, past hopes of recovery, were
nevertheless restored to perfect health in answer to Mr. Bruces prayers.

But I have not met with any instance to this purpose more affecting then that
which is (by an Author worthy of credit) published concerning Mr. Patrick
Simpson a learned and very holy Minister, sometimes of Sterling in Scotland.
F^lfilling of the Scriptures p 437
The story in brief is this.

Mr Simpsons wife (a gracious woman) falling sick, was sorely assaulted by
Satan, who told her that she should be given over into his hand; The temptation
and affrightment prevailed so far as to resolve in a visible distraction, that
the good woman, most unlike her former way whilst she was her self, would break
forth sometimes with dreadful and horrid expressions; This was (and could not
be otherwise) a most bitter affliction to her precious husband, who told those
about her, that he was assured, that Satan's mali^e should at last receive a
shameful foil; wherefore he retired himself into his garden, and shutting the
door, betook* himself to fasting and prayer. One Helen Garner (a godly woman)
being sollicitous for Mr. Simpson, as fearing that his labors, grief, fasting
might be too hard for him, used some means to get over into the garden, where
Mr. Simpson was alone wrestling with God; being come near the place where he
was, she was terrified with an extraordinary noise which caused her to fall
upon the ground; It was like the noise of a great rushing of multitudes
together, and therewithal such a melodious ^ound as did make her know it was
something more then humane; so that she fell to prayer, entreating the Lord to
pardon her rashness in so coming thither, considering it was respect to his
servant, who had been an Instrument of good to her soul, that did induce her.
After going forward, she found Mr. Simpson lying upon the ground; nor would he
reveal what he had met with, until promise was made not to speak of it whilst
he was alive in this world. Upon this he said, O what am I being dust and
ashes, that the holy Ministering spirits should be sent by the Lord to deliver a
message to me, and showed that Angels from heaven had by an audible voice given
him answer concerning that which he had been praying about. [This was a thing
extraordinary, and in no wise to be expected by Christians ordinarily] and
returning into his house, he bid those that were in the room with his wife, be
of good comfort; for he was assured that within ten hours she should be
delivered from that distraction. After this he went to prayer by the bed side,
and as he was in prayer mentioning Jacobs wrestling with God, his wife sat up
in the bed, and casting aside the curtain said, Thou art this day Jacob, thou
have wrestled, and have prevailed, and now God has made good his word which he
spoke to you this morning, for I am plucked out of the hands of Satan, and he
shall no more have power over me. This interruption made him silent for a
while, but after in great meltings of heart he proceeded in prayer, magnifiing
the riches of divine grace and love, and from that hour his wife continued to
discourse christianly and comfortably even to her dying hour.

And as for those spiritual (which are worse then bodily possessions) that
Satan holds in the Souls of men, how often has prayer been a means to out him,
and cause him (full sore against his will) to quit his strong hold for ever.
Clark, ^bi ^upra.
Prayer has (i.e. instrumentally) converted many a Soul, Peter Martyr was wont
to pray much for the conversion of Bernard Gilpin, and the Lord answered his
prayers, and that Gilpin proved an eminent instrument of Gods Glory, and of
good unto his Church.

I have read of one who having a Brother that spent his time in Hawking,
drinking and other profane vanities, upon a saturday, when his ungodly Brother
was gone upon an hawking match; he set that very day apart by Fasting and
prayer to beg of God, that his Brother might be converted. And the Lord
answered his prayers wonderfully; Mr. White his Relation.
For within a week after his brother was strangely changed, and did himself
(instead of spending his time in hawking and drinking) observe many days of
secret humiliation between the Lord and his own soul, on the account of the
sins he had been guilty of, in the days of vanity, and made a very godly end at
last.

That precious and famous Minister of Christ, Mr. Welsh, being in a journey,
his entertainment came to more then he expected, so that the next morning he
had not wherewith to pay for his horse meat^ the Hostler swear and railed
exceedingly for his money: Mr. Welsh shut his chamber door and went to prayer,
and the hostler standing at the door over heard him, and was converted by that
prayer; ever after that time highly respecting Mr. Welsh, and refusing to
accept of any thing for his entertainment, either then or at any other times
afterward, when occasion was offered.

I knew one, the son of an holy, and eminently faithful Minister, who in some
of the days of his youth had been wild and vain, but was (through the Grace of
Christ) converted in his young years, and after his Fathers death, perusing his
private papers, he perceived, that not many days before he was in the pangs of
the new birth, his Father had been by secret Fasting and prayer seeking unto
the Lord that converting sanctif^ing Grace might be bestowed upon that son of
his.

That notable Israelite, Mr. Hugh Kennedy, Provost of Air in Scotland, (...) i^
lib. supra (...). p. 411 412.
one day being long alone in prayer, while some of his intimate friends stayed
a great while to speak with him, upon their enquiry into the reason why he made
them wait so long; he told them it was no wonder, for (said he) I have this day
obt^ined mercy for me, and all mine. And so indeed it came to pass; for not so
much as one of his children, but evident signs of conversion and true
godliness were observed in them. This was that Kennedy, who when he was a dying
could say, If the walls of this house could speak, they could tell how many
sweet days I have had in secret fellowship with God, and how familiar he has
been with my soul. This is he, concerning whom Mr. Welsh once said, Happy is
that City, yea happy is that nation that has an Hugh Kenne^y in it; I may self
have certainly found the answers of his prayers to the Lord on my behalf. There
is one passage recorded concerning him which is exceeding strange. It is this.

One of his sons being absent at sea, On a certain night he rose early, before
break of day, and came to his familiar friend John Steward, and desired him to
rise, and go with him into a room to pray, for (said he) my son with the rest
of our Christian friends now at sea, are at the very nick of perishing. After
he had spent some time in pouring out his soul before the Lord, he rose up
cheerfully, saying, now are they safe. John Steward being amazed thereat, writ
this down, with the day and hour, and at the return of the ship made enquiry,
and found that in that very hour of that night, they then were in a most
dangerous place, so that all hope that they should be saved was taken away,
only they were by an extraordinary unexpected providence then delivered.

To draw to a Conclusion, let the world beware, of doing any wrong to a
praying people. Such blasting strokes from God were upon those that set
themselves against the reformed Churches and Professors (who were called
Piccardines) in Bohemia of old that it became a proverbial speech, If any man
be weary of his life, let him become an enemy to the Piccaraines. So I say, If
any man be weary of his life, let him become an enemy to a Praying People, such
as (through grace) many in New England have been, and are to this day. And woe
to that man, whoever he be, upon whom the Prayers of New England shall fall, it
were better for that man that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he
thrown there with into the midst of the Sea. It is said concerning the
Witnesses, Rev. 11. 5. if any man hurt them, fire proceeds out of their
mouth, and devoureth their enemies, and if any man will hurt them, he must on
this manner be killed. Is not the spirit of prayer that fire? That Scottish
Queen once professed, that she was more afaaid of Mr. Knox his prayers, then of
an army of ten thousand men.

And it is noted concerning Leolin Prince of Wales, Re^ert Dr. Po^ell
that being persuaded by some to take up arms against a Prince that was famous
for Religion; he replied that he was afraid of that man's prayers more then of
Armies.

Wherefore I shall finish this Discourse with the solemn expression of one Mr
blessed Brother and Predecessor in this place, in his Sermons on 2 King. 18. 4.
p. 7^.
(whom I have peculiar reason to love) that was well known in this place seven
and twenty years ago. I had rather (says he) be environed with Armies of
armed men, and compassed round with drawn swords and instruments of death, then
that the least praying Saint should bend the edge of his prayers against me;
for there is no standing before the prayers of Saints, especially if they unite
their forces, and join together in the same requests. Rise up, O Lord and let
thine enemies be scattered, and let them that hate thee, flee before thee.

(...)


