THE UNCONQUERABLE ALL-CONQUERING, and more-then-CONQUERING SOLDIER: Or, The
successful WAR which a Believer Wageth with the Enemies of his Soul: As also
the Absolute and Unparalleld VICTORY that he obtains finally over them through
the love of God in Jesus Christ. As it was Discoursed in a SERMON Preached at
Boston in New England, on the Day of the ARTILLERY-ELECTION there, June 3 d.
1672.

By Urian Oaks Pastor of the Church of Christ in Cambridge.

1 Cor. 9. 26. I so run, not (...) certainly: so fight I, not as one that
be^^eth the Air. Ephesians. 6. 13 Take unto you (...) whole Armor of God, that ye
may (...) able to withstand in the evil day, and having done (or, overcome)
all, to sta^ Rev 13 7. And it was given unto Him to make war with the Sa^^^
and to overcome them. Rev 12. 11. And they overcame Him by the Blood of the
Lamb, a^^ the word of their Testimony; and they (...) not their Lives unto the
(...) Psalm. 108. 13. Through God we shall do valiantly: for He it (...) shall
tread down our Enemies. CAMBRIDGE: Printed by Samuel Green. 167^

Christian Reader,
T Hat Title of the Book of the Wars of the Lord, Numb. 21. 14 may truly be
^^ribed to that best of Books, the holy Scripture, wherein accordingly after a
short account (...) be first leaf thereof, of the finishing of the Heavens, and
the Earth, and all the Host of them, the Lord of Hosts does presently acquaint
us with the enmity put between the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the
Serpent, Genesis 3. 15. whereby bat^el is hid, and which Word of the Lord, has,
in a sense, given being unto (...) Battles that have been fought (...) the
World, for more then 5000 years, (...) from the beginning thereof unto this
day; and whence it is (...), that this Earth shall be the continued (...) and
Stage of War in the last day; witness the (...) of this bloody Scene, in the
Scriptures last prediction of the great* Pi^che, Fatal and Final Battle between
the same Serpent, the Dragon and his Seed, in the Book of the Revelation; The
upshot whereof will be the last and amazing opening, and so the eternal
shutting of H^aven and Hell, (...) with the Combatants (...) for the receiving
their (...) therein* The day of Judgment, (...), will be the day of (...) (and
by sound of the last Trumpet,) the (...) History of the wh^le (...) from first
to (...) in the interim the Lord General has his many Heralds at Arms, to do
ounce his War^, and (...) also his Peace to the World both by word of (...) by
sound of Trumpet, Isai. 58. 1. (...) by (...) also, of some of whom especially
it may be said, as sometime of (...) videaturn on (...), and tona^e Classic^m,
(...); ardore (...), they have not (...) to (...) the whole Co^nsel of God, and
that in the demonstration of the Spirit, and with (...)* And (...) be the Lord
for all the Alarms, Lectures of War, Instructions and Hortamry Speeches given
from the Captain of our Salvation by any of his Commission Officers, for the
doubling and (...) our spiritual Watch. Israel under the Law needed the Priests
of the Lord in order to (...) the silver Trumpets, Numb. 10. 2, 9. ^^at so
(...) Camp might be remembered before the Lord their God, and saved from their
Enemies: and the whole life of every Christian, being that of a Man of War,
hence what may tend to accomplish him in his Heavenly Military skill, and
encourage him in his spiritual conflict wherein that Cry is ^tithheard (as
Exodus 32. 26.) Who is on the Lords side? (...), wherein the Exigent is such,
that ^e must either Fight or Dye, and that the consequence is for no less then
Eternity, must needs be welcome to him, and so, without question, will be this
following Watchword and Exhortation, delivered to the principal Artillery
Company of this Land, at whose request it was first published to the Ear and
Heart of the Hearer, and is now (after not a little importunity) to the Eye
also of the Reader, from one of our Leaders (Heb. 13. 17. (...)) under the
Chief Leader ((...) Heb. 2. 10.) Jesus Christ who is given for (...) Leader and
Commander to the People, Isai. 55. 4. this discourse being to animate each one
thereof, as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ to endure hardness; giving us sure
intelligence of the happy success of this Divine Militia, the blessedness of
every faithful Warrier, in being more then a Conqueror: and though he may seem
to be worsted in this or that Battle, yet as to the whole war, that he shall
be, yea, in the language of Truth, that he is an Overcomer, and above an
Overcomer. A Christians victory is indeed like to that of his chief Commander
Jesus Christ, Col. 2. 14, 15. and through that Blood, and infinite Grace, very
strange and my sterious; he is overcoming, when in appearance overcome, and
triumphing, when to the view of others he is a crucified Captive: as dying and
behold we live! 2 Cor. 6. 9. A Paradox, and incredible in other Combats; and
yet the wonder seems not so great that he should gain such a Victory over all
his Enemies of this World, when we consider him as one that has (with
Reverence be it spoken) conquered the Lord himself, as is said of Jacob, whom
the Lord Dubbed with the Name of Israel. Genesis 32. 20. because as a Prince he
had power with God, and had prevailed, whence also that strange word from the
Lord himself, Cant. 6. 5. turn away thine eyes from me, for they have overcome
me; thus do they sometimes come forth, ^^^arend, from the dust, Isai. 52. 2.
and from their wrestling places of Prayer, as Luther did with those (...) of
Faith, vicimus! vicimus! and surely ^uch an one may glory in the Lord, and
through him humbly boast even as soon as he has put on his spiritual Harness,
because he is here well assured, by the promise, of the victory, before he
sometimes strikes a stroke; and for which cause partly he may be said to be
more then a Conqueror.

Every Victory was not celebrated with a Triumph; to be triumphant is more then
to be victorious. There were, and are the Battles, wherein even the victor has
no cause so much as to rejoice; of which sort we may (...) those, of them (who
being not only visibly listed under the (...) of Jesus Christ, but have Christ
in them, the hope of Glory, yet) by whose Divisions and sidings, and warrings
one against the other, through the hour and power of darkness, and temptation
prevailing, the truth and peace it lo^^: th^se are Bella ^ullos habitura
triumphs: and O that a most serious and wife consideration of their common
danger from the Gates of Hell, and the necessity of that Brotherly union to
which the Lord has entailed the blessing, by way of command, even life for
evermore, might cause a retreat to be, in all quarters of the spiritual Camp
sounded, from those hazardous and w^ful pursuits! shall the Sword devour for
ever? will i^ not be bitterness in the latter end? how will the uncircumcised
rejoice?

The most Warlike Christian Soldier will see, one day, that he had not any
Military skill, strength, courage or weapon to spare, wherewith to fight
against Christ, in waging any unbrotherly War against any of the called, chosen
and faithful followers of that Lamb. As for those of Christ's Enemies, sinful
self, the Devil, and this evil World (all Antichristianism) fight against them
we should, and not spare them; the se^erest encounters cannot be too sharp; no
quarter must either be given or taken here for ever. The Enemy is discovered,
and those Stratagems of Faith in the Blood of Christ proposed by the Reverend
Author of the following Sermon (whose praise is in the Gates) as that, by our
right taking the Word, not only victory may be gained, but what is far
transcendent. Thou have here (by one of the Lords Auxiliaries, expert in
warring the warfare of the service of the Congregation (for such will the
service of the Ministry be found, Numb. 8. 24, 25.) sent also from afar, upon
the relief to us, and in such a day) graphically represented to thy view the
Church even Triumphant here on Earth, more then conquering while it is in its
state Militant. And though their ancient Triumphs were appointed for the
General of the Army, not for the common Soldiers, yet in this Spiritual War,
the meanest of Christ's followers shall Triumph with him, and divide the Spoils;
an earnest and sp^^imen whereof they that are sincere are not seldom
acquainted with in this life; whence there are erected in heart and life,
Trophies of the lesser victories gained, and all to the Glory of him, in whom
when they are weak they are strong, through the power of his might, and may
conclude before hand that they are more then Conquerers, and shall abide so
superlatively for ever; receiving those dona militaria which are to be
distributed to all such as are faithful unto death* I will give thee (says the
Lord Rev. 2. 10) the Crown of life: There is the corona triumphalis, not for
Paul only, a primipilar Champion, but a Tim. 4. 7, 8. which shall be given by
the righte^^^ Judge, unto them also (even to all them that fight the good
fight, faith their course, and keep the faith: and) that love his appearing;
and that be would so come quickly (O come quickly) is the Prayer of

The least of thy Fellow So^ldiers, desirous to serve under the Royal Standard
of the Lord Jesus, Thomas Shepard.

ROMANS 8. 37. Nay, in all these Things we are more then Conquerors, through him
that loved us.
IN these Words we have the Apostle Paul's not Ovation, but Triumph, not Triumph
only, but Something, (I know not how to word it) Exhibited in the Name and on
the Behalf of Himself and all true Believers, Indigitating and Importing a more
then ordinary Triumph over all those Enemies that oppose themselves against the
Progress and Advance of a Christian in his way to the Fruition of the sweet
Fruits of the Everlasting Love of God in Jesus Christ. Having perspicuously,
copiously, and demonstratively assorted and vindicated the illustrious Doctrine
of Justification in a way of Free Grace by Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, in
the beginning of this excellent Epistle, which is ingeniously styled by the
great M^lancthon, the Confession of the Reformed Churches: he proceeds in the
sixth Chapter to Discourse of the Fruits and Consequents thereof* namely,
Sanctification and Obedience; the Mortification of indwelling sin in Believers,
and the renovation, or rather infusion of a new Principle of Spiritual Life and
Holiness. Now because this work is but inchoate and imperfect, and in part only
transacted in this World; and there are remainders of sin in this (...) in the
best of Saints; and because Grace and Corruption are vigorous, active,
operative Principles, dwelling so near together, under the same Roof, in the
same Soul, yea in the very same Faculties: there must needs arise a sharp and
severe War in the Soul between these two Neighboring and Opposite Natures, the
particular events and successes whereof are various and uncertain; but the
Victory is infallibly determined in the issue on the side of Grace. Grace
indeed is greatly beset, hardly bestead, much encumbered and almost overthrown
at some seasons: but it will certainly (...), wrestle and recover it self out
of all the dangers that threaten it. Now there is a double War which is
commenced and waged by Believers in this ^^fe. A War with the evil of sin, and
a War with the evil of sufferings or affections so far as they would impede or
do oppose them in their Ma^ch to Heaven. Of the War with sin, indwelling sin:
(th^^ inbred, home bred Enemy, that Mother of all the A^ominations that are
brought forth in the lives of Men, that Adversary that is ever molesting the
peace, disturbing the quset, and endangering the condition of the People of ^
of this Epistle: where he finally adjudges the victory to Grace, in the last
verse of that, and in the beginning of the eight Chapter also. Of the War with
Affliction* or the evil of suffering: from Satan, or the World, from what hand,
of what kind* and howsoever conditioned and circumstanced; he Discourses
Admirably, at the seventeenth verse of this Chapter and so forwards, and he
comes in the procedure of his Discourse to give unquestionable Assurance to the
good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, of the full and final decision of this grand
Controversy, and the happy issuing of all these hazardous conflicts, whether
with sin or sufferings, in a glorious and absolute victory: Insomuch as having
made sure of God on the side of himself and Believers, he does in his own and
their Name make an open Challenge, and bid defiance to all opposite and adverse
powers, ver. ^^. If God before us who then can be against us? He ^ids Sin,
Satan, and an evil World do their worst against Believers that are thus
entrenched in, and walled about with the Love of God; thus fortified and
defended, aided and assisted by the Almighty one, the Lord of Hosts. And having
laid his foundation in Gods Predestination, and Christ's Mediation, he
superstructs upon it, and plainly asserts the invincibleness of every sound
Believer, notwithstanding the Relics of sin that incumber him, the Temptations
of Satan that molest him, and the afflictions and evils of the World that set
themselves in Battle array against Him. He represents to us the Christian as a
person that may be opposed, combated and contended withal: but never routed,
run down, totally defeated or overthrown in any Engagement. Now this
invincibleness of the Christian Combatant, the Believing Champion (that in the
Name of the Lord defies all the Hosts and Armies of Earth and Hell that come
against him) notwithstanding the Remainders of sin, the greatness and
unavoidableness of his Afflictions and Sufferings, is expressed,

1. Negatively, (...). 35. Who shall separate us from the Love of Christ? The
Argument stands thus* if nothing can separate a Christian from the Love of God
in Christ, then nothing can conquer him, but he is invincible. But nothing can
make that woeful destructive separation: which he proves by an enumeration or
induction of particulars; shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, etc.
therefore he is invincible. This negation is clearly imported in the
interrogation. For though it may be a stale, yet it is a true and useful
observation, that interrogations affirmatively expres^ in Scripture are wont to
carry in them the force and signification of vehement negations. The meaning of
the Apostle in plain terms is, that neither Tribulation, nor (...), nor
Persecution, nor F amine, nor Nakedness, nor Peril, nor Sword, nor any thing
else of an (...) nature can possibly separate a true Believer from the dear
love of Jesus Christ.

2. (...), in the Words of the Text; Nay in all these things we are more then
Conquerours through him that loved us. As if he should say: we are so far
from being worsted and prevailed over by the Enemies of our Salvation that
war against us, from succumbing under the Load they are laying upon us, and
losing our Interest in the Fruits of the Everlasting Love of God in Christ, by
Reason of the opposition that is made against us in our way, that we carry the
Day, and are sure of a very glorious victory:

In this Verse we may remark these two things.

1. A singular Privilege: And that is Victory and Conquest, which is
illustrated and amplified, (1.) From the Extent and (...) of it. (...) ^n all
these things: such as he had mentioned before, or what else can be men^ioned
and imagined by (...) (2.) (...) the transcendent incomparable Excellency of
it. (...) we are more then Conquerours, or do more then overcome. It is a
Victory, with Surplusage and Advantage, a Victory, and somewhat more then a
Victory: a Superlative and incomparable Conquest and Victory that is obtained.
(3.) From the Foundation of this glorious Victory, or the great and only means
of acquiring and obtaining it. And that is, The Lord Jesus Christ. Through him
that loved us, says the Apostle: meaning Christ, or God in Christ Jesus. (4.)
From the first, grand, impulsive cause of^ it, the (...) Cause of this glorious
Victory which is infallibly obtained, and that is, the Love of God in Christ.
The special love of God in his Son Jesus Christ is the first Cause of these
victorious Atchievments. More then Conquerours through Him that loved us.

2. The Persons that are thus Privileged, or invested in this great
privilege* that have Victory and Triumph ascertained to them. We are more then
Conquerours. Not only the great Apostle Pa^l himself, that renowned Warrior,
and brave Champion of the Lord Jesus Christ: But all true Believers also
universally. He ranks Himself with, and discourses of Believers in general,
that walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; Believing, Justified and
Sanctified men and women. They are not exempted or Secured from violent Onsets,
furious Assaults, hazardous and desperate Conflicts with their mortal Enemies
that war against their (...): But they have this admirable Advantage above
all other men, that they are (...) of a glorious Victory. The Intendment of the
(...) in the words is Obvious, and may be drawn into this Observation.

Doct. That all true Believers have a (...), and incomparably glorious Conquest
and Victory in all their severe (...) with the Enemies of their Peace and
Happiness, through the Love of God in Christ Jesus. Believing, Justified
persons through the Love of God in Christ have the better by many Degrees of
the Enemies of their Salvation, and are (...) hard for them in all their sharp
Disputes and (...) with (...) All that have believed through Grace, and are
admitted into a state of Justification and Acceptance with the Lord are more
then Conquerours, successful and victorious beyond Expression or Comparison, in
their Combats and Conflicts with their Enemies (those adverse powers that
war against them) through Divine Love in Jesus Christ. (...) his Proposition
which we have laid down, as the Subject of our present Exercise, and which is
evidently founded and comprised in the words of the Text, has a large Compass
and a very great Circum^erence, as you will readily apprehend. We are now
entering into a very large Field, and might traverse a great deal of Ground, if
Time and strength would allow us to pace it over. We have many Things before us
to be discoursed for the due Explication and Confirmation of this observation.
The way of quickest dispatch, and greatest Expedition, as well as Clearness,
and Demonstration, will be to cast all we have to say to the Doctrinal part
into Six or Seven grand Conclusions.

Concl. 1. Every true Believer is a Soldier, and engaged in a Warfare. I would
it were reciprocally true, that every Soldier amongst us is a true Believer. I
am sure every Soldier ought to be a Believer: and of all men Military men,
when they are commanded out upon real Service, to look Death and Danger in the
Face, and carry their Lives in their Hands, had need of Faith and Grace, and
Interest in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thereby the Condition of their Souls
well secured for Eternity But it is Infallibly and Universally true, that every
Believer is a Soldier in a spiritual Consideration. The whole Body of
Christians that walk by Faith in this lower World, the place of Sin, and
Sorrow, and Temptation, and Absence from the Lord, is aptly and truly called
the Church Militant in Contra-Distinction from that which is Triumphant in the
highest Heavens. Those that are arrived at a state of Glory have fought their
fight, and finished the Course of their Warfare, and are (...) out of push of
Pike or Gunshot, far enough removed out of the Reach of their Adversaries.
They are marched out of the Field, and discharged from any further Service, and
enjoying their Reward. But the people of God in this world are in a warfaring
state and Condition. The first moment that any man is effectually called and
converted, and savingly wrought upon, He is engaged on Christ's side against the
world, the Flesh, and the Devil, taken into Christ's pay, puts on his Armor,
and is prepared for the Battle. For the Graces of Gods Spirit, which are
infused at a Christians Conversion, are a Believers spiritual Armor, Ephesians 6 13,
14, etc. Every Christian when he is new Born is born a Soldier. It is said of
(...), the Philistine Champion, that he was a Man of war from his youth, 1 Samuel 17 33. But it may be truly said of the Christian Champion, that He is a
Man of war from his Birth Neither is (...) a p^or^aked Creature, as it i^
with the Children of the first (...): but He comes into the new world in his
Suit of Armor, armed (...) with complete Armor of Proof, being vested with
the Graces of the Spirit of Christ. He has his excellent and invincible
General, the Lord Jesus Christ; and has taken his Sacrament^^^ ^ilitare, his
Oath of Fidelity and Obedience to his great Lord General. He has also (if
there be opportunity, and he walk orderly) his Company that he is listed into,
the Church, I mean, He walks in Fellowship with: or at least He is enrolled
among the Members of the Church-Militant in general. He has his Banner to
fight under: even the love of Christ displayed for a Defense to his Soldiers
and Followers, and a Flag of Defiance to their Adversaries, Ca^. ^. 4. He has
his Arms and Weapons, offensive and defensive to fight withal. He has his
Souldierly Qualifications, and military Accomplishments; Courage, Skill,
Patience, Hope of victory, Faithfulness to, and Confidence in his General,
Orderliness, Disposition to endure Hardship, or whatever else may be mentioned.
Every wicked man indeed is a Soldier, but he fights against God, strengthens
himself, and stretches out his hand against the Almighty, and runs on his
Neck, and upon the thick bosses of his Bucklers, Job. 15 25, 26. He fights
against himself and his own Soul, keeping those Lusts in pay that war against
the Soul, 1 Pet. 2. 11. He puts on the whole Armor of the Devil, that He may
be able to stand against all the Shocks of Conscience, or encounters of the
Word and Spirit of God, and fight it out to the last with the Infinite Majesty,
to the everlasting Ruin of his Immortal Soul. But he is neither engaged in,
nor provided and accomplished for the Holy War we are discoursing of. He that
is not a Believer is a conquered, disarmed slave, that must drudge in the
Service of the Enemies of his Soul, and is in no Condition of fighting with
them. It He begin to bestir himself (through the Convictions, awakenings and
Alarms of Conscience) and to hold up his Hand, or make any Resistance, He is
knocked down and overcome presently, and made more them a Captive (as the
Believer is said to be more then a Conqueror) ten times more a Vassal and
Drudge to his Lusts, and other Enemies then before. But a Believer is a man of
War, a Soldier well appointed, in a good Capacity and Condition to dispute
it our with any of his Adversaries.

Concl. 2. Every true Believer has constant fighting work before him. There is
no End of his war in this world, nor any time wherein He may give over
fighting.

N^ quam Bella piis, nunquam Certamina desunt:
Et quocum c^rtet men's piasemper habet.
It is not so with other Soldiers. There is a Time when Kings go forth to
Battle, 2 Samuel 11. 1. And there is a Time when they disband their Armies, or
draw them into their winter Quarters, or make a Cessation of all Acts of
Hostility by Leag^es or Truces. There is a Time of War (^aith Solomon (...).
3. 8.) and a Time of peace. Other Soldiers are not always fighting: but a
Christians Duty and Employment is to fight continually. He cannot assure
himself of any Respite or Intermission in the Course of his warfare. This may
be convincingly made out in three or four Particulars.

1. Every Believer reaches after, march^^h toward the perfect enjoyment of
the blessed Fruits of the everlasting, Love of God. This is the prize He runs
for, the Crown he fights for, the Recompeace of reward He ^ath respect unto,
the End and Arm of his Race and wrestling. He is in his Journey or upon his
March toward that City which has Foundations (Heb. 11. 10.) that better
Country, where He may enjoy the glorious Fruits of the peculiar L ove of God in
perfection. Every Christian is in a way^aring state, and declares plainly (by
the course he shapes and steers) that he is a Stranger her^, and seeking a
Country, Heb. 11. 14, traveling toward the Heavenly Canaan, and the face of
his soul is set toward that Jerusalem whichis above. He has Grace and Glory
in his Eye, and is engaged in a close and eager pursuit of Happiness. The end
of his Faith and Holy Conversation is the Salvation of his Soul, and the
perfect and perpetual Fruition of the Love of God in the brightest discoveries
and richest effusions of it.

2. Every Believer meets with great opposition in his March and way to the ^od
aforesaid from Enemies that make Head against Him, and do what they can to
separate Him from the Love of God in Christ Jesus. He meets with numerous
Adversaries that design and drive at this to hinder Himself and the Rest of
Gods people in their Travels to Canaan, to divert and turn them out of the Road
of Holiness and Obedience, which leads to Happiness, to pluck them (if it were
possible) out of Gods Hand, to tear them out of his loving Embraces, to cut
them short of the blessed Fruition of the Love of God in Christ. God leads
every Believer, as it were, through the Land of the Philistines where they must
see Wa^re, and brings Him to the Heavenly Canaan that way. And he meets with
this Opposition*

3. From Himself, and that sin that dwells in Him. From his own Heart and
Nature, as it is depraved and vitiated: from his natural corruption, or that
sin that is inlaid and radicated in his Nature. This is the principal, the
Capital, the Grand Enemy, that is bred in his Bowels, raising (...) civil
Wars, without which his foreign Enemies, the Rest of his Adversaries could do
Him no Heart, nor make any considerable Head against Him. It was the great
Advantage of the Captain of our Salvation (as our Savior is called, Heb. 2.
10.) in all his Engagements with Satan and his Instruments, that He was Holy,
Harmless, undefiled, and separate from Sinners, Heb. 7. 26. that He know no
sin, 2 Cor. 5 21. that He had no sin in Him. Hence it was that just before his
last and greatest Encounter with Satan, He tells his Disciples, The Prince of
this world comes and (...) nothing in me, Joh. 14* 30. There was nothing in
our Lord Jesus that complied with, or was suitable to the temptations of the
God of this World: nothing to close with his suggestions, or entertain his
Terrors: the Enemy without had no correspondents within him, Satan could not
lay hands, or fas^en a Temptation upon him. Christ threw him off with ease in
this respect. Hence he was tempted indeed in all points, like as we are,) ^t
without sin, Heb. 4. 15. Temptation to Christ was like throwing a But upon a
Crystal Glass, which will not stick, but glides off. But alas (...) the sin
of our Natures is Satan's strength and ad^antage. He finds enough in the best of
Believers, that found nothing in our Savior. Satan's sparks easily inflame us,
because he ^inds so much Tinder in us. The Lusts within us are ready to take
fire at every injection. There is a Traitor in our own Bowels that is ready to
open our Ports, and let in the Adversary. Now of the War which a Christian
wages with this homebred, intestine Enemy, the seventh Chapter of this Epistle
to the Romans gives ^s a clear account: where the Apostle raises an Outcry,
and makes Doleful Complaints of the remainders of sin, the Law in the Members,
the body of Sin and Death, and Discourses of the Nature, Power and Prevalency
of in-dwelling sin, as to some engagements. The Apostle James speaks of the
Lusts that War in our Members, Jam. 4. 1. And Peter of fleshly Lusts that war
against the Soul, 1 Pet. 2. 11. these make up that opposite party within a
Christian that would intercept and stop him in his way to Glory: a secret,
subtle, treacherous, designing party that creates him a world of trouble and
danger in his journey toward Heaven.

2. From the World, which is another Enemy that would obviate and intercept the
People of God in their Travels. Hence the World was a part of Christ his
glorious Conquest. Be of good cheer, I have overcome the World, Joh. 16. 33.
And the Believer that is born of God by Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ
overcomes it too, 1 John 5. 4. which plainly implies that the World is an
Enemy. Considerable are the Expressions of the Apostle to this purpose, lam. 4.
4. know ye not that the friendship of the World is enmity with God? whosoever
therefore will be a Friend of the World, is the Enemy of God. And does it not
follow hence, that he that is a Friend of God is an Enemy to the World, as it
lies in opposition to God, and the World (in that respect) an Enemy to him? The
World is one of the Associates of that false party within a Christian, and
under the conduct of Satan militates against a Believer. Particularly:

1. The Snares and Allurements of the World which would toll away and seduce a
Christian from following after God. These make war upon a Child of God, and are
dangerous Enemies. As they say, (...) Fight with Silver or Gold weapons, and
never doubt of Victory. Some Enemies have bought great Victories, which they
(...) never have won otherwise. All these things will I give thee, this profit,
pleasure, Honor, (says the flattering World to a Believer) if then walt fall
down, or surrender to me. These ensnaring and alluring Objects, which the world
presents the Sons of Men with, have such a close and intimate correspondence
with the Lusts in their Hearts, and what is carnal in them, that they fight
against their Souls with great Advantage and Success. The Apostle having
dehorted from the love of the World, and the things that are in the World, sums
up all that is in the World in those three particulars, the lust of the Flesh,
the lust of the Eyes, and the pride of Life. 1 John 2* 15, 16. The Apostle
speaks as if there were nothing else in the world but Lusting: because there is
such a curse come upon all Creature-enjoyments with reference to man, that so
far as He is of the world, they are Objects of Lust to Him, exciting, drawing
forth, invigorating and in proving that Lust and Corruption that is in him. By
these Lusts the Apostle means the several respective Objects, and puts the Lust
which is in us for the things themselves lusted after, Carnal pleasures,
Profits and Preferments. He says not sensual Pleasures, Riches, Honor (though
he speaks of them) but the Lusts of the Flesh and Eye, and pride of Life;
because our Lusts render them evil to us (how lawful soever in themselves the
Objects are) and make them Objects of Temptation and Seduction from the Lord,
putting a painted Whorish Beauty and tempting Luster upon them, varnishing them
over and making false representations of them. Yea, it is evident (as the
Judicious Dr. Owen observes Treatise of Temptat. page 68. That all these things
(the Lust of the Flesh, etc.) are principally in the Subject, not in the
Object; in the Heart not in the World: But they are said to be in the World,
because the World gets into them, mixes it self with them, unites,
incorporates. As Faith and the promises are said to be mixed, Heb. 4 2. So are
Lust and Temptation (from worldly Objects) mixed; they twine together, receive
mutual improvement one from another, grow each of them higher and higher by the
mutual strength they administer to one another from this mixture, Union, and
Incorporation of the Objects in the World with the Lusts in the Hearts of Men,
and the^ firm and close combination together, it comes to pass that the
enticing, tempting World is a very patent and prevailing Adversary to the Son's
of Men* And that Believers themselves (in whom the Lusts mentioned are out in
part mortified and (...)) have hard work sometimes to stand their Ground
against the snares and allurements and bewitching insinuations of and (...)
World. To this Head I reduce sinful Examples in the World, Counsels of Carnal
Friends, the Friendship of the World, which is Enmity to God and good men, Jam
4 4 False Doctrines which are spoken out of the World (...) 1 John (...) 5.
calculated to the corrupt Humors, Inclinations and Interests of the men of the
World, and therefore of a very grateful resentment with them. In a word, all
Worldly Lusts (a s the Apostle calls them, Tit. 2. 12) that are so many baits
and snares to entangle and entice the People of God to desert the Holy and good
ways of the Lord: those Golden Apples that are thrown down before a Christian
to invite him to gaze upon them, and stoop to take them up, that so he may be
retarded and stopped in his course, and lose the prize he runs for.

2. The Troubles and Affrightments of the World. The (...) the formidable,
frightful Afflictions and persecutions that would impede, or retard and hinder
the people of God in their Travels toward that Heavenly Country, where the
sweet Fruits of Divine Love are to be enjoyed in the greatest maturity and
perfection of them. That Tribulation in the World against which the Lord Jesus
lays in great encouragement from the consideration of his own Conquest of the
World, Joh. 16. 33. Of this ill Usage and Entertainment in the world, the
Afflictions that the Children of God must expect to contest withal, the Apostle
discourses here, Romans 8. 35, 36, 37. Tribulation, Distress, Persecution,
Famine, Nakedness, Peril, Sword, and such like formidable things to Nature,
oppose the Faithful in their way, and make war upon them* A Christian lies
open to many sharp and fiery Trials, 1 Pet. 4. 12. and must look to endure
(...) a great fight or Concertation of Afflictions, Heb. 10. 32. The World can
put on two Faces, and change its Countenance as occasion servs. If feigned
flattering smiles will not do, then killing Frowns shall, if it be possible.
The World has Terrors to affright, as well as Allurements to entice Believers
out of the way of Happiness. The men of the world are usually pricks in the
eyes, and Thorns or Scourges in the sides of Believers. Briers and Thorns are
with them in the world (as the Lord tells the Prophet, Ezekiel. 2. 6.) that will
scratch the Face of their Reputation, wound them in their outward Concernments
(...) their Flesh: yea, they dwell among Scorpions, that will (...) to great
torment, and sting them to Death. AElian reports concerning the (...) do more
(...) that they were wont to sleep with their Boots on, lest the Scorpions,
their Country was infested with, should sting them. I am sure a Christian had
need walk Booted, and have his Feet (...) with the preparation of the Gospel of
peace, yea, to be defended and aimed in all respects, or He will be in much
danger of the many scorpio^s in his way vid. Green^il on Ezekiel. 2. 6. As
beleivers have bodies of flesh and mortality, that keep open House for
sicknesses, pains, Diseases, and give Entertainment to them: So they are
exposed to the Rage and Violence of unreasonable men. They pass through an
Enemies Country, where they have many Affronts and Indignities offered them. If
lies and Calumnies, Scoffs and Scorns, angry looks and cruel threatenings,
opprobrious and injurious dealings, or any kind of Cruelty may be likely to
scare a Believer out of his way, or force Him to a dishonorable Retreat, or to
run from his Colors by quitting his profession; the malignant angry world will
be sure (if the Lord permit) to prove Him in that kind. In both the respects
mentioned the world is an Enemy, and makes Opposition to Believers in their way
to Glory. Furthermore a Believer meets with Opposition,

3. From Satan, the Prince and God of the World, Ephesians. 6. 11, 12. If a Christian
were to try Masteries, and contest only with Flesh and blond (whether we
understand thereby his own Corruptions, or Opposition from men, like Himself)
He would have hot and hard service of it. But this is his Case and Lot, to meet
with Opposition from Principalities and Powers, the Rulers of the Darkness of
this World, and spiritual wickedness in High places. He ^ights at great
Disadvantage with Enemies, that have the Hill and upper-Ground. He combats
hand to Hand with the God of the World; as well as his Creatures, the men of
the world. Satan is one of the Allies of In-dwelling sin, and of Confederacy
with our own Hearts, which are ready every moment, if there be not a strict
watch kept upon them, to betray us into his Hands, and deliver us up to Him. A
Christian had need look to Himself, considering that Satan goes about daily
seeking to devour, 1 Pet. 5. 8. A Believer will be sure to meet with this Lion
in his way. And our Flesh and Hearts (as was intimated before) are Satan's
Correspondents and Considerates against the Spiritual Life, and Comfort, and
Happiness of our Souls ready to open to Him, make a Surrender of all, and
comport with him in all his dangerous and destructive Applications of Himself
unto us. This Spiritual Levia^han is a piercing Serpent and a crocked Serpent,
Isai. 27. 1. Sometimes, he opposes the People of God by Force, and then he is a
piercing Serpent. Sometimes he circumvents them by craft, and then He is a
crooked Serpent. V^l rectus v^nit, v^l tortuosus. Satan opposes the people of
God in a way of Fraud, (He plays the Dragon and deceives them: He is a Serpent;
yea, an old Serpent, Rev. 12. 9. and has his Wiles, Ephesians. 6. 11. and
advantageous Devices, 1 Cor. 2. 11. his methods of Deceit, and his Depths or
deep Contrivances, Rev 2. 24.) and in a way of force and violence. He acts the
part of a Lion and rages: and he has his venomous Arrows, his fiery Darts,
Ephesians. 6. 16. and makes many violent On-sets upon the Children of God. The Church
of God, or the Body of Saints and Called Ones in the world, have the Gates of
Hell (Math 16. 18.) that is (as it is commonly expounded) the Power and Policy
of the Devil, and his Instruments, and Under-(...), to oppose them in their way
to Heaven, though they shall not prevail in that Opposition. Lastly,

4. From Death it self, which is the last Enemy. 1 Cor. 15. 26. When all the
rest are beaten out of the field, and a Christian is ma^ching off and just
ready to make his Triumphant Entrance into Heaven, Death encounters him. This
comes in by the Curse: and the natural or direct tendency of it is ^o separate
a Son of Adam from God for ever. It is the great and grim (...) of the
vindictive justice of God. Here men enjoy some Fruits of (at least) the general
and common goodness of God: but when Death comes, it pushes them away from God,
makes an everlasting separation between them, and all the fruits of the
goodness of God, turns them into Hell, where they must feed upon the bitter
Fruit o^ their own ways for ever. When Death has done its Execution upon the
Condemned Sons and Daughters of Adam, God will then carry away all his goodness
from them, and never afford them so much as one drop of Water to cool their
Tongues to Eternity. That which makes Death ^o terrible is, that in the
ordinary course of it, it makes a perfect and perpetual separation between the
Sons and Daughters of men, and all the Fruits of the Love, and Goodness, and
Patience of the blessed God. Death passed upon all men, for that all have
sinned, Rom 5. 12. And where it Reigns and Triumphs, and is Victorious over any
man, and fastens its Sting in him* (as I may allude to 1 Cor. 15 55.) it
destroys him utterly by putting him into a condition of everlasting separation
from God. Now this is the last Adversary that the Believing Christian Soldier
contends withal; though upon more advantageous Terms then other men. Thus much
for the second Particular under the second Conclusion. Every Believer meets
with great opposition in his way.

3. A Believer cannot possibly make his way through all these Enemies, and bear
down all this opposition without fighting. He skirmishes with these Enemies,
yea, fights many a pitched Battle against them. He must put on the whole Armor
of God, Ephesians 6. 11. and keep it on, and make use of the weapons of his Christian
Warfare, and his Faith and other Graces will be soundly put to it. It costs him
many a Bickering. He runs, and Wrestles, and labors, and strives, and fights
the good fight of Faith: as we might demonstrate by many Scripture Instances.
By Fighting, I mean a vigorous contending and conflicting with the Enemies of
his Soul, which is expressed variously by the Holy Ghost in Scripture. He must
strive hard that will enter in at the strait Gate, Luke 13. 24. ordinary
seeking will not do it. If the Believer put off his Armor, lay by his weapons,
suffer the Sword of Faith to ru^^ in the Scabberd, and draw it not forth as
there is occasion; if He hang down his Hands in Prayer, sins in his Hopes, cool
in his Courage, and stand still in a secure careless manner; it will be
impossible that he should break through those Legions of Devils, those Armies
of Temptations, and make his way through those Adverse Powers* that oppose
themselves in his way*

4. (...) Opposition from, at least, some of his Enemies is perpetual in (...):
So the Believer has no rest, but has ^ork enough every day to contest with
them. A Believer has a restless Enemy to contend withal, as Ha^nibal said of
Marcellus the Roman Consul (...) Plutarch, Marcel. Let him conquer or be
conquered, he would never be quiet nor give over, neither (...) to his Enemy,
no^ take it himself, he would be at it still, and never have done. So may we
say much more of the Believers Enemies. Satan never draws his Forces* out of
the Field. Corruptions one way or other will be stirring, and the Christian
shall be exercised still with some Thorn in the Flesh, and Buffetings of Satan's
Messenger. The People in Nehemiah's time, when they were Alarmd and afraid of
their malicious and malignant Neighbors, wrought with one hand and held a
weapon in the other, Nehem. 4. 17. But such is the case of a Christian, that he
must not only work, with a Weapon in the other hand, but he must actually use
his Weapon whilst he is working; fighting with one hand, and building or
laboring with the other. If his Enemies conquer, they will be sure to
prosecute their victory to the utmost, and lose no Advantage: if they be
worsted and routed in any particular Engagement, they will not fail to rally
their Forces, recruit and reinforce themselves presently and fall on again. So
that a Christian had need eat and drink and sleep in his Arms. He has no time
to put off his Armor, to lay by his Weapons. He will be hotly engaged till the
(...) Act. 3. 19. the times of refreshing and cooling shall come. He can never
be said in this world to be miles emeritus, or stipen^^a confecisse: which were
the Roman Phrases for them that were discharged from the Wars. If a Christian
live to threescore ^ears of age or more, he is not thereby superannuated, nor
can he plead Age or any thing else to excuse himself from the duty of a
Soldier. Verily there is no discharge in this Warfare on this side of the
Grave. There is no bringing of these Enemies to a composition, no cessation to
be made, no League or Truce to be admitted in this Warfare. A Christian must be
constantly fighting and contending against the Enemies of his peace and
happiness. Thus much for the second Conclusion.

Concl. 3. A true Believer is never totally and absolutely conquered in any
Engagements with the Enemies that War against him. To be Conquered (in the
sense I take it here) is to be separated from the Love of God, and utterly
deprived of the special fruits of it. Who shall separate us (says the Apostle
Romans 8. 35) from the love of Christ? that is, who shall conquer us? I am
persuaded that neither Death nor Life, nor Angel, etc. shall be able to
separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8.
38, 39. Importing thus much, that a Christian can never be totally conquered,
notwithstanding all the opposition that is made against him. Let Enemies do
what they can against him, yet if he be not separated from the love of God, he
is not absolutely Conquered, or defeated of his Happiness. In this respect a
Believer is never Conquered. For,

1. Nothing befalls him in his Warfare, notwithstanding what his Enemies attempt
against him, that turns away the Heart of God utterly from him. Though Sin and
Satan may prevail very far in some conflicts, yet never to such a degree as to
provoke the Lord to reject him, and cast him out of his favor. God may be
provoked by the compliances of a Believer at some turns with Sin and Satan and
the World to take away the manifestations of his Love, to deny him some
expressions of his Favor, to visit his transgressions with a Rod, and his
iniquity with Stripes; but never to take his lo^ingkindness utterly from him,
Psalm. 8. 9. 30 -- 33. A Believer may be so foiled and worsted by his Enemies,
through the neglect of his watch, or otherwise, that God may be displeased with
him; that there may be a discontinuance of the sensible expressions of the love
of God to him, and an interruption of it as to manifestations: and yet there is
no intercision of ^the love of God to him, as to the being of it. His love to
him is unchangeable and ^verlasting.

2. Nothing fa^s out in his progress or march that absolutely stops him in, or
diverts him from his course of proceeding, or moving toward the enjoyment of
the sweet fruits of Divine Love* A Believer may be wounded, I amed, and
retarded; but not totally checked in his way, and (...) aside from it. He may
receive many a blow that staggers him; that make him ^eel (...) complain, that
wounds him in his Graces and comforts. David had his Bones broken, received
deep and dangerous wounds that (...) long healing, that: stank and were
corrupt, Psalm: 3 8. 5. 7, 8. Because he did not apply a timely Remedy unto
them; they were not presently searched and looked after. He was knocked down
and lay in a swoon for a great while, that those about him might be ready to
fear he would never come to himself again but he revived and recovered at last.
Satan prevailed with him to commit Folly with Bath sheba, to murder and imbrue
his hands in the Blood of (...) to ^ent his pride and vain glorious humor in
the numbering of the People, and to incur the displeasure of God thereby: but
all this did not (...) and expel the Love of God out of his heart, o^ divert
him totally from prosecuting the enjoyment of it. Take a Believer in his lowest
condition, when he is most worsted and prevailed upon by his Enemies: yet at*
that time there is the Seed of God, (...) (1 John 3. ^.) that inclines and
carries him God^ and. There is a power of Grace, and a work of the Spirit: upon
his Heart that gives him an inclination, (...), and tendency God ward
continually; and though temptations may turn him out of the way for a time, and
he may meet with many Rubs and Impediments in his Christian ra^e; yet there is
the strong Byes of Grace, the (...) and impression of Gods spirit upon his
heart that inclines and carries him Godward, so that he will come in again,
though he may be turned off for a while. That general Bent and Inclination of
his heart toward God, as his lost end and greatest good, and toward his
Commandments, as the only best Rules of living and walking, is ever preserved
in the Believer by the mighty power of God (according to his
Covenant-engagement) even then when his Enemies have gotten him down and said
him at their Feet. So that if the Lord never take away his loving kindness
utterly from the Believer, nor the Believer totally lose his love to God: what
follows? but that there can be no separation of a true Believer from the love
of God in Christ Jesus, and by consequence that he cannot be absolutely
conquered in any, though he may be worsted in some Engagements.

Conel. 4. Every true Believer manageth a successful War, and is sure of
Conquest. My meaning is not that every Christian has a certainty of persuasion
that he shall prevail, or overcome; for many an one is ready to say sometimes
that he shall one day fall by the ba^d of this or that Saul: but there is a
certainty of the thing in it self. I speak of the certainty of the object, or
the truth of this Proposition [Every Believer shall certainly conquer the
Enemies of his Soul] not of the certainty of the Subject, the certioration of
the Believer, or his persuasion and assurance that he shall be victorious at
last. A Believer shall certainly win the day and conquer all Opposers, whatever
his unbelieving heart may at any time suggest to the contrary. Hence Paul
speaks of it as a thing done: we do more then overcome. This may be made out
thus:

1. A Believer in this life gets many signal Victories. He is not able indeed
utterly to drive out the Canaanites, they will abide in his Land (Heart, ^^me
an) and be rebelling and vexing him frequently: but the Lord gives him many
remarkable victories over them. There are some memorable days and happy times
wherein the People of God come out of the Field victorious, and triumph over
their spiritual Enemies. They set their feet in the neck of their Lusts, and
lay their Corruptions bleeding at their feet, and do so resist* Satan as to
rout him and put him to flight.

2. If he be for a time overcome, yet he recovers himself at last and gets the
Day. He may be overcome, and carried Captive (as the Apostle intimates Romans 7.
23.) he may be remarkably worsted in some particular conflicts, and taken
Prisoner: but he cannot be detained always a Prisoner, all the power and
policy of his Adversaries cannot hold him, he will make an escape from them
sooner or later, and obtain rescue and deliverance. If he be foiled, and laid
on his back for a time; yet it is not long before he recovers himself, and gets
up again by godly sorrow, Humiliation and Repentance, and renews the Combat,
and is too hard for his Enemies. If he be routed, he rallies again and (...) go
out of the Field a Conqueror.

3. His Enemies lose Ground by all their partial Conquests of Him. A Child of
God gets Good by his Foils and Falls, yea, gets Ground insensibly of his
Corruptions and other Enemies thereby. His Enemies by winning the Day, lose it;
and by Conquering, are conquered. Every victory that Sin and Satan obtain,
makes a gracious Heart more humble, more sensible of his own weakness, and
absolute need of the strength of Christ, more watchful against Sin and
Temptation, more Cautious for time to come of admitting Parlyes and Compliances
with his Adversares, and so turns (through the overruling Hand of Grace) to
the singular Advantage of a Christian in many respects. Lay these things
together, and it will be manifest that a Believer manages a very successful
war, and is sure at last of an absolute Conquest.

Concl. 5. A Believers Victory and Conquest is incomparably Glorious* His
Conquest is most exceeding Glorious. Thence Paul says, we are more then
Conquerours. We do not only Conquer* but triumph; we have a triumphant Victory:
we are much too hard for our Enemies, we do more then overcome, (...)
super^incimus, we do over-overcome. It is* Grotius his Observation, Amat Paulus
componere verba cum (...) Paul loves the Composition of words with the
Preposition (...) and He gives many other Instances (besides this in the Text)
of such Compositions in Paul's Epistles. When He speaks of the Rich Grace of
God, or of the great and glorious privileges of his Children, He thinks He
cannot over-speak. They are such things, that, as Luther said of God and
Heaven, non patiu^tur Hyperb^len, do not admit, are not capable of an
Hyperbole. No Expression is so high, on Superlative, as to transcend and exceed
the measure of the Excellency of such Things. Now the Greatness and
Gloriousness of a Believers Victory appears in many Things, which we shall but
glance at, as we pass along. Glorious it is, in that the Believer conquers in
Suffering, when He is in appearance conquered, overcome and destroyed. When He
is s^ain with the Sword, devoured by Lions, burnt to Ashes at a Stake, sawn
asunder, or any way violently put to death; yet in all these things he
conquers, as the Martyrs have done. They overcome by the Blood of the Lamb, the
word of their Testimony, and not loving their lives unto the Death. ^ualther
takes this to be the sense of the Apostle. In all these Things we are more then
Conquerours. He does not say we overcome all these things, so as that they
shall be no more, or cease to oppose us; But in all these things we Conquer.
For afflictions remain, and will remain as long as the World la^s, nor will
Persecutions ever cease, which bege^^ Banishment, Famine, Nakedness and the
Sword to the Godly: bu^ in these things, and among all these perils and evil
(...) Suffering, the Faithful do more then overcome. And this is admirable
that they overcome, when succub uisse, and omnino Victi a^t Oppressiesse
videntur; when they are slain, or burnt, or destroyed any other-way. They are
killed al l the day long, accounted (and used) as s^eep for the slaughter; as
in the verse before the Text: And yet more then Conquerours. Humane, Carnal
Reason cannot comprehend this. It is indeed Mysterious and glorious. Again,
Glorious it is, in that he conquers such Enemies as conquer all but Himself,
and such as He is. The great Conquerours of the World have been slaves to their
own Pride, Ambition, vainglory, Covetousness, and other base Lusts, which a
Christian subdues and Conquers. Many of them have been Satan's Slaves, when they
have been Masters of the world. But the Believer resists the Devil and puts Him
to flight. He overcomes Himself (which is a nobler Exploit then to overcome and
Conquer Nations,) sets his Foot upon Satan, tramples and crushes that Serpent,
( Romans 16. ^^.) treads the World under his Feet, as the Church of God, the
Woman mentioned Rev. 12. 1. is said to have the Moon (that is, all these
changeable Earthly things) under her feet. Nay, he overcomes Death it self,
which tramples upon and prevails over other Conquerours. Death stings, kills,
ruins other men, but cannot hurt a Christian, because it cannot separate him
from God. Oh Death! where is thy sting? Oh Gra^e, where is thy Victory? (...)
Cor. 15 55. Those words which are commonly translated the Gates of Hell, (...)
Mat. 16. 18. and are thought to import the Power and-Policy of the Devil, are
rendered by Learned Camer^, the Gates of the grave, or Death, alleging that the
word (...) does never but once in Scripture signify Hell, but either the
Grave, or the state and condition of a deceased person: And he conceives the
mind of our Savior in that expression to be, that though the Faithful lie
dead for a time as well as other men, Death exercises a Dominion over them, the
worm feeds sweetly upon them, they are imprisoned in the Grave, and lie bound
hand and foot with the Cords of death. (...) Fu^es vel acerbissi^i Cruciatus
Mortis. Psalm. 18. 3.) yet that the Power of Death and the Grave shall not
finally prevail over them. Siquis (says that Learned man) (...) Locutions
significatum velit, perituram (...) Mortis and (...), is demum profecto a
Spir^us sancti ment^ (...). The Abolition of the destructive Dominion of Death
is intended by the Lord Jesus, according to this Exposition. Christian^ (says
Cyprian (...), vinci non poss^nt. Christians may dye, but cannot be overcome.
Death may kill them, but cannot conquer them. The victory of Believers over
their Enemies is very glorious (...) this respect. Glorious also it is in that
a Believer conquers his Enemies by conquering himself, (...) himself (the Flesh
with the Affections and Lusts, Gal 5. ^4.) subduing his own Spirit, beating
down his own Body and bringing is into subjection (1 Cor. 9. 27) plucking out
an offending right Eye, cutting off an offending right Hand (Mat. 5. 29. 30.)
Doing strange Execution upon himself in a way of Mortification, which is both a
noble and a strange way of Conquering. He overcomes himself and thereby
overcome (...) his Enemies. Moreover glorious it is in that he is so far from
being separated from the love of God by the opposition which his Enemies make
against him, that he is thereby greatly furthered in the way to the perfect
enjoyment of the Fruits of it. His Enemies, whether they will or no, help him
to a most Glorious Conquest. For all things (how adverse and opposite soever)
work for his good, Romans 8. 28. that is, for his most Glorious, Everlasting
Triumph in the highest Heavens. As the Afflictions and Troubles which happened
to Paul in the course of his Ministerial Warfare fell out to the furtherance of
the Gospel, Phil. 1. 12. so the Opposition which a Believer meets with from all
his Adversaries, falls out to the furtherance of his victorious proceedings in
the course of his Christian Warfare, and of his After-Triumph and Glory. Nay
this Victory is Glorious, in that he gives his Enemies a total Defeat and
Overthrow at last. He has a perfect and absoute Victory and Conquest over
them, so as never to be molested with them more. He passes to Heaven through
the midst of his Enemies, and gets out of the reach of their opposition, or
molestation, and there Triumphs Gloriously to Eternity.

Concl. 6. Every Believer obtains this Glorious Victory and Conquest through
the Lord Jesus Christ. We are more then Conquerours through him that loved us,
that is, through Jesus Christ, or God in Christ which is the same thing. The
Apostle having discoursed excellently of this Spiritual War with one of the
greatest Enemies that a Christian has to do with, namely, In-dwelling sin,
issues all triumphantly in thanks to God through Christ for Deliverance and
Victory, Romans 7. (...). And having spoken of Death and the Grave, very
formidable Adversaries, and triumphed over them, Thanks God who gives Victory
through Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57. And there is the like Reason as to all
the Enemies of a Christian. A Believer obtains this incomparable Victory and
Glorious Conquest over all through Christ. For,

1. The Lord Jesus Christ has procured and purchased this Victory and Conquest
for Believers. Therefore he has Suffered and Dyed, Satisfied and M^^ted, that
his People might obtain a Glorious Victory over Sin, Satan, World, Death, and
all their Enemies. The Foundation of this Victory has been (...) by an high
hand of Grace in the Death and Mediation of the Lord Jesus. Man having revolted
from under the Government and Dominion of Gods revealed Will and Law, and
thrown off his, Obedience, and made Election of Sin and Satan for his Lords and
Sovereigns; The Holy God in Justice and Righteous Severity, delivers him up to
the Authority and Sovereignty of Sin and Satan, and his Spiritual Enemies, even
Death it self: and they put in their Claim to a Sovereignty, yea, and actually
exercise a Dominion over Him; So that man in this Condition is a Captive,
Prisoner, Slave, and cannot get his Liberty. If He struggle sometimes, and rise
up to war against them; All his Contendings are vain, He is overcome
presently, and held in bondage. The Reason is, because his Enemies are (in a
Sense) as strong as the Law and Justice of God. The strength of Sin (and by
parity of Reason, of other Enemies) is the Law, 1 Cor. 15. 56. that is, the Law
broken, and the Justice of God offended. But the Lord Jesus having satisfied
and merited, when there is an Application of that Redemption which is in Christ
to any man; Now S in, Satan, World, have no Right to exercise this Dominion;
they lose their Claim and Title to such Dominion, and this is the Foundation of
any man's Conquest of them. Hence though ^in may Tyrannise sometimes, yet it
shall not reign over them; not have any of their Enemies any Right to Conquer
or prevail, as before. Nay, Christ has p^id (...) great price, and bought the
Victory for them of Him in whose Hand it is to adjudge it unto them. They
overcome by the Blood of the Lamb, Rev. 12. ^1.

2. He has actually in his own person conquered their enemies for them, Be of
good Comfort (faith our Savior) I have overcome the World, Joh. 16. 3^. That
is, the Lusts of the world, the men of the world, the prince of the world, the
snares, temptations, terrors and evils of the World. He has bru^sed the
Serpents bead, Genesis 3. 15. destroyed the works of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8. Now
(faith the Lord Jesus with reference to the time of his sufferings) is the
judgment of this World, n^w shall the Prince of this World be cast out, Joh.
12. 31. The Dethroning of Satan, and destruction of his Dominion by Jesus
Christ is that which is intended in that expression. Hence the Apostle says,
that ^e spoiled Principalities and Powers, and and made a show of them openly
triumphing over them in it (that is, his Cross) or in himself, Col. 2. 15. The
Lord Jesus took away the Prey or Booty of Souls, which Satan had gotten, and
led away the Devil and his Angels, as Prisoners of War: He divested
Principalities and Powers, that is, the Apostate Angels, of all that Title they
had got to the World by the sin of man, yea he triumphed over them as lawful
Captives to be disposed of at his pleasure. He has bound the strong man armed
and spoiled his Goods. Thas Christ is said to wound the Head (for so it is in
the Original, not Heads) over many Countries, Psalm. 110. 6. By the Head over
the large Earth, Some understand Satan that rules as Head over all the
Children of disobedience every where: though I judge it better to expound it to
the most comprehensive sense, and then the meaning is, that Christ breaks in
pieces the Head, that is, the counsel and power of Satan and all his
Instruments, crushing and conquering all the Enemies of his People. He has
conquered Death it self, and having grapled and fought with that Serpent, he
has pulled out the Sting, and he has disarmed that King of Terrors, that it
may be in no condition to hurt and ruin his People. Death can be no longer a
Curse to them, but a Blessing: An Out let as to Misery^ and an Inlet to all
Happiness. He has Conquered and triumphed over all the Enemies of Believers,
vertually on his Cross, but actually and effectually in his Exaltation: when
he ascended up on high, he led Captivity Captive, Ephesians. 4. 8. Psalm. 68. 18. And
he has Conquered and Triumphed over all our Enemies, not for himself, but on
our behalf, and for our behoof and advantage. Victoria Domini est Servorum
Triumphus. Hieron. The Victory of the Lord is the Triumph of the Servants. Well
may tho Army of Believers be assured of Victory and Triumph, when as they fight
with a conquered Enemy, and their General alone in his own person has routed
their Adversaries.

3. He puts them into a Conquering-capacity. He sends his Spirit to make the
Application of his Redemption to all his Redeemed ones by working Faith in
their Hearts, drawing them to himself, giving them an actual Interest in
himself, and his Benefits, and putting them into a State of Justification,
which is a State of Victory and Triumph. A justified person is in a
Conquering-capacity and condition. He is under Grace, and not under the Law,
therefore neither Sin, nor any other Enemy shall have dominion over him, Rom 6.
14. Take an Elect person, that was given to Christ by the Father from Eternity,
and Redeemed by Christ in the fullness of time, yet before his effectual
vocation, he is under the feet of his Enemies, in no better condition to fight
it out with them then other men; Sin, and Satan, and World are much too hard
for him. But when once the Spirit of Christ has wrought an effectual work of
Grace in his Soul, and by uniting him to the Lord Jesus has brought him into a
state of Justification: now he is in a condition to dispute it out to the last
with all his Enemies, and to get the day also. A Justified person is
invincible, be cannot be Conquered; and he is victorious, ^one of his Enemies
can stand before him. Victory and Triumph are adjudged ^^y the Lord to a state
of Justification, and are infallible consequents thereof. Hence Paul's
comfortable persuasion, and Triumphant Expressions, Romans 8. 38, 39. Now all the
People of God are admitted into this state of Justification, and vested in the
Glorious Privileges of it, through the Lord Jesus Christ.

4. He furnishes Believers with skill, and Strength, and Courage, and Weapons,
and all Warlike Furniture, and Military Qualifications, and Accomplishments.
They are in all respects well appointed for the War: and it is the Lord Jesus
that sets them forth, and furnishes them with Arms and Weapons for the Battle.
The Lord Jesus Christ is the Christians Magazin. All those Arms and Weapons
which a Believer uses in his spiritual conflicts (of which you have an
enumeration, Eph^s. 6. 13, 14, etc.) are such as come out of Christ's Armory. As
he puts the Believer into a conquering state, in his Justification; so he gives
him conquering Abilities in his Sanctification. He gives them Skill and Valor,
and Resolution, and all other Qualifications and Endowments that a Militant
condition calls for.

5. He Administers seasonable supplies and recruits of Grace and Strength unto
them. He sends them Auxiliary Forces, and gives them such Assistance as they
need for every Conflict. He gives Power to them when they are faint, and when
they have no might, increases their strength, Isai. 40. 29. He gives them a
sufficiency of Grace, and his Power rests on them. Hence when they are we^k,
yet then they are strong, 2 Cor. 12. 9, 1^. Because habitual inherent Grace
will not carry them through their difficult Engagements, therefore he affords
actual, and occasional Assistance as their necessities require. All that (...)
that seasonable help which is Admininistred to Believers from the Throne of
Grace ( Heb. 4. 16.) comes from the Lord Jesus Christ. They have the immutable
Assistance of the Spirit of Christ that dwells in them. They must needs
overcome in this respect, because greater is be that is in them, then he that
is in the World, ^sword^ Joh. 4. 4. Hence the Apostle, that had low thoughts of
himself, and was as much nothing in his own eyes as any man, yet attributes a
kind of Omnipotency to himself. I can do all things through Christ which
strengthens me, Phil. 4 13. He strengthens them with all might, Col. 1. 11.

Concl. 7. The Love of God in Christ is the absolute first cause of these
victorious proceedings, and this infallible conquest of Believers. For,

1. The Everlasting love of God determines, that the Victory shall fall on the
side of Believers. The will of God is that all Believers shall conquer. Hence
the Apostle lays the Foundation of this Triumph in Divine Predestination, and
in Gods being for us, Romans 8 30, 31. Those that are appointed to obtain
Salvation by Jesus Christ (as it may be concluded of all Believers; saving
Faith being a special fruit of Election) may meet with many Enemies in their
way, but shall infallibly break through all opposition, and get to Heaven at
last. The Love of God has Decreed them Victory.

2. The everlasting Love of God lays in suitable provision of means for an
infallible conquest. Divine Love concluded upon the mission of Christ into the
World, to purchase it for his People, and obtain the victory in his own person,
as a common person representing all Believers. This Love gives them a Leader
and General (the Lord Jesus Christ) that is invincible, the Captain of the Host
of the Lord, that appeared to Joshu^, Josh. 5. 13, 14. It arms them with
invincible Graces, offensive and defensive; and orders them the insuperable and
invincible Assistance of the Spirit of Christ, and the needful supplies and
recruits of Assisting Grace. The Love of God in Christ furnishes the Christian
Soldier completely every way with all that he needs in order to the Conquest
of his Enemies; so that he is better provided for the Combat, and has more
Assistance in the Combat, and more assurance (consequently) of success, then
any other Conquerours have. The Christian Soldier is well appointed and set
forth for the War, Recruited and Assisted in it at the cost and charges of the
Love of God in Jesus Christ.

3. The Everlasting Love of God adjudges them Triumph at last, and Crowns them
with it. Divine Love sets the Glorious Crown upon the Head of the persevering,
victorious, all-conquering Believer. There is a Glorious Day coming, wherein
the Believer shall receive the reward of all his Labors and Travels and
Combatings with the Flesh, the World, and the Devil: And this reward will be
adjudged to him that overcomes, and actually conferred upon him by the Grace
and Love of God in Jesus Christ. Not his Merit, but Gods Mercy and Love will
then Crown him. His present sufferings in the time of his Warfare are not
worthy to be compared with the Glory that shall be revealed in him, Romans 8. 18.
When Paul had fought his good fight, and finished the course of his warfare, he
expected his Triumphal Crown from the Lord, the Righteous judge, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8
A Crown of Mercy and Grace it is, and also a Crown of Righteousness: there
being a sweet concurrence of the Remunerative Justice of God with his Infinite
Merry, Grace, and Love in that Glorious work of Crowning a persevering
Christian Soldier with everlasting Triumph and Glory. Divine Love adjudges and
bestows upon Believers at last the Heavenly Prize they run for, and the
incorruptible Crown they fight for in this World. That they Triumph Eternally
is from the Love of God in Christ. Thus much for the Doctrinal Part.

Use 1. We might improve this Observation, To crush that Erroneous conceit of
the Arminians, concerning the possibility of a Regenerate man's total and final
Apostasy. For to assert this, is to say, that a Believer may be totally
defeated and overcome, and Sin, Satan and World may prevail over him to his
utter Ruin. The Truth we have discoursed, is ready pressed to militate against
the men of that Heterodox pers^asion: and is alone (without the Levy of any
other forces) of strength sufficient to fight that Enemy and beat him out of
the field. This Text of the Apostle, and the Observation we have deduced from
it, smites those Adversaries of the Doctrine of Perseverance under the fifth
Rib, or rather stabs their fifth Article concerning the Apostasy of Saints to
the Heart. This one Weapon, if it be well managed and weilded will do real and
through Execution. For if there may be a total and final defection of
Believers, or falling from Grace, and out of the favor of God, then there is a
possibility that a Believer may be totally and finally separated from the love
of God: and so totally conquered; which is diame^rally opposite to the Strain
and Genius, and Intendment of the Apostles Discourse and what we have been
regularly superstructing upon it. But let it be enough to have thus Face^ that
Grand Enemy the Armin^an, without engaging further on this occasion in any
pitched confutation of him.

Use 2. This makes it appear who are the bravest Soldiers, the most Renowned
Warriors, Persons of the greatest Bravery and Gallantry in the World. They are
Believing Men and Women. A Christian Man or Woman is by many degrees a better
Soldier then C^sat or A^xander. Sincere Believers, of all degrees and
conditions, are persons of eminency this way. Among the victorious Worthies,
whose Famous Exploits and Achievements are Recorded, Hib. 11. The Apostle does
not leave Believing Women out of the Catalogue. We read of great Exploits that
have been performed, even by those of the weaker S^x, both in Sacred and Common
History: but none to be compared with those which Believing Women, through
Faith, have enterprized and accomplished O Woman, great is thy Faith, says our
Savior, Mat. 15 28. Why then it might be said also, O Woman, great is thy
Victory: For this is the Victory that overcomes the World, even our Faith, 1 John 5 4. True Faith, though it be but as a Grain of Mustard S^^d, will
overcome and bear down all that opposition the World can make against it. As to
this Christian Warfare, Victory and Triumph, Believers of all sorts share in
it: there is no difference in this matter, but Jew and Greek, Bond and Free,
Male and Female are all one in this respect through Jesus Christ. The weakest
Believer will be too hard for the strongest Adversary. This is a clear
Consequence from what we have discoursed, that a Believer is the bravest, and
most victorious Soldier in the World.

Use 3. A word of singular Encouragement and Comfort unto all that mourn for
the sorrowful state and Condition of Jerusalem. Know it, and Believe it, that
the Church of God, however afflicted and oppressed in the world, shall
certainly prevail and get the Day at last. The Victories and Triumphs that God
has decreed and determined shall certainly be awarded and given to the
conflicting Militant-Church in the Season thereof. How might we expostulate the
Case with the mightiest of the Churches Adversaries? with the High and Low,
Great and Small ones of the Earth in this respect? why do the Nations rage and
People imagine a vain Thing? vain it is, and will be found so in the Issue, to
oppose the Lord Jesus, to fight against his Members, to plot and project,
design and endeavor the Ruin of the Interest of Christ in the World. For the
Lord Jesus, and his called, and Faithful and Chosen, shall certainly more then
overcome at last. The Lamb and his Followers shall be Illustrious Conquerours.
The Beast may arise out of the Bottomless pit, and raise the Posse I nferni, or
I nferorum, come with Legions of Devils, and their Instruments, and set their
Hellish Armies in Array, and make war upon the Witnesses and overcome them for
a while: but they shall overcome at last in a glorious manner. Verily, no
Weapon that is formed against the Church shall prosper. Christ laughs at all
the Confederacies and Complotments, and mad Rage of the world against his
Interest and Members: Psalm. 2. 4. And his People (that are at present in a sad
and sorrowful Condition in the Heat of the Engagement) shall laugh too, and
Triumph over all. Excellent were the Expressions of that man of Faith, Martin
Luther to this purpose. That the Kings and Princes and People do sorage against
the Lord and his Christ, I account (faith he) an Happy Omen, and much better
then if they fawned and flattered: For it follows (in the second Psalm) He that
fitteth in the Heavens shall laugh at them. Hoc autem principe nostro illos
ridente, non video cur nobis flendum sit a facie illorum. As long as our King
laughs at them, I see no Reason why we should cry for them. They that make
Christ laugh by their ridiculous Opposition, should not make his People cry.
Verily every Believer has that in his Heart (I mean the Victorious
all-conquering Grace of Faith) whose Prerogative it is to laugh to scorn all
the foolish plots, and ill contrived Designs, and feeble Attempts of men
against Christ and his Church. For indeed their wisest Contrivances are
Foolishness, and their strongest Endeavors against the impregnable and
invincible Interest of Christ and his Church, are weakness it self, and will
appear so at last. And if Christ laughs at them, why should not his Friends and
Followers also? For he laughs (as Luther goes on) not for his own, but for our
sake, that we also through Faith may laugh at the vain Counsels of Men: So much
need there it of Faith, that the Cause of Faith may not be managed without
Faith, Ne Causa Fidei sit fine Fide. He that is sure of Victory may well laugh
in the Face of his Enemies. Now though wicked men are plowing and making long
Furrows on the Backs of the Righteous, yet the Lord will certainly cut their
Traces. The blessed Lord Jesus leads and assists his People* and the Shout of a
King and General is among them, Numb: 23 21 And that is assurance enough of
Victory. What an invincible Army must the Body Saints and Believers needs be,
whereof not only the General, but every private Soldier is Invincible? They
shall say at last, Lo this is our God, we have waited for him, And he has
saved us,: this is the Lord, we have waited for him, and now we will be glad
and rejoice in his Salvation, when all Moabs shall be trodden down as Stra^ for
the Dunghill, Isai. 25 9, 10. O Beloved! Lift up your Heads and Hands and be
encouraged. Though it is a day of Trouble and perplexity and of doubtful
Expectations in many respects, yet in the eye of Faith it is an hopeful Time
and a promising Season, when the world this blind and mad world is in a Tumult
and Uproar against the Church of Christ. The great and glorious Things that are
to be fulfilled, the faithful and true sayings of God cannot be accomplished by
the Quietness and sitting still of the Nations. When the world rages against
the Church, and is up in Arms to make havoc of it; then Christ Jesus, and
those Veteran Legions, the glorious Angels; the Lord Jesus, the Man upon the
^^d Horse among the Myrtle Trees, attended with R^d, speckled and white Horses,
Angels deputed to several Offices and Administrations, (Zech. 1. 8.) are in a
posture of readiness to charge the Enemy, and bring off the people of God with
Safety and Honor, that are hotly engaged in the Conflict with their
Adversaries. The Witnesses may be overcome and killed, but they shall live
again. They that mourn for Jerusalem, shall have a Time to rejoice for Her, and
with Her, Isai. 66. 10. men that wage war against Heaven, and bid open
defiance to the great Interest of the Lord Jesus (who is Faithful and True, and
in Righteousness does judge and make war; who is King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, Rev. 19. 11, etc.) shall be confounded; and Jerusalem shall be a
Burdensome Stone and a Cup of trembling to the Adversaries thereof. Indeed we
must wait Christ's Time for the exerting of his Power, and the Lighting down of
his Omnipotent Arm, the Day of his power and wrath, when He shall gird his
Sword on his Thigh, and his Arrows shall be sharp in the Heart of his Enemies,
and he shall Smite through the Loins of them that rise up against him, and of
them that hate Him, that they rise not again. There is a Day coming when the
Right Hand of Christ shall teach Him terrible Things, Psalm 45. 4. In the mean
while our work is to wait and pray, and exercise Faith and Patience (For here,
or in this matter is the Faith and Patience of the Saints proved and exercised)
and when the Day comes which God has determined, your very General alone can
win the Field, and turn the Battle to the Gate, and give you a signal Victory:
and will do it right-early for his Suffering Servants, that shall need to do
nothing then, but stand still, and see the Salvation of the Lord, and what
Destructions He will make among their Adversaries. If one Saint be thus
Victorious (as you have heard) never question but the whole Body of them shall
(in Gods Time and way) prevail and Conquer in a glorious manner.

Use 4. Of Exhortation, to such as have Believed through Grace; in several
Branches.

1. Be Encouraged then to fight this good Fight, where there is so much Hope,
may such Assurance to Believers of a Glorious victory. They must needs Conquer,
that fight on such Terms as we have mentioned, and have such Provision laid in
for Victory and Triumph. They must needs Conquer, whose very General alone, is
able to Conquer all their Enemies. Well may the Christian Soldier be hardy,
daring, venturous, courageous, resolute in has way to (...) upon his Enemies,
that has such Assurance of being Triumphantly successful in all his
Engagements. Here is encouragement enough, one would think, to make any Coward
valiant in fight. Never despair nor give in then, but fight this good fight of
Faith. Therefore for Direction;

1. Let all Believers know and consider well that they are Soldiers, and have
fighting work before them. That they have many Foes to deal withal, and that
they are in the Field deeply engaged in a sharp contest about the things of
their Peace: And that there is no retreating, or drawing off, or looking back
without shame and misery. That they are waging a War, that is of greatest
importance, of everlasting Consequence, and of infinite concernment to them. Do
not rest in slight Apprehensions, transient and overly Thoughts of your State
and Condition in this respect; lest you fall into a Laish like frame, (Judge.
18. 27.) and dwell secu^ely and carelessly in the World, and expose your selves
to the inrodes and incursions of your Enemies. Know that you do not dwell far
from evil Neighbors: you have Mortal Enemies bordering upon you, that will
make all Advantage of your Security. You have a Troublesome, Quarrelsome
In-mate, one that was bred and born with you, and has grown up with you, and
is a constant Lodger in your House, and Companion at home and abroad.
Indwelling sin (I mean) with its Confederates, that hold exact intelligence one
with another, and watch all Advantages against you.

2. Labor to get accurate Intelligence of the Policies and Designs of your
Adversaries. Acquaint your selves with the deceitfulness of sin, the Frauds and
Impostures of the World, the Wiles, Methods, Depths and Advantages of the
Devil, the desperate wickedness of the Heart, and the deep waters of evil
Counsel there. Find out the Cabinet Counsels and Politic design of your
Enemies against you: what they design, what Stratagems they use, what
advantageous seasons they choose to fight you in, what fals^ Colors they put
out, that they may surprise you in the Disguise of Friends, what politic
Retreats they make, what Ambushments they lay, what Reserves of fresh Forces
they have in readiness, what gradual and secret Approaches they make, where
they plant their Artillery, and are designing to make a Breach in your Graces
or Comforts, that they may Storm your Souls, and make themselves Masters of
all. Do what you can to inform your selves what it is they drive at, how and
where, and which way they are like to Assault you. In waging of War there is
(as One speaks) the greatest improvement of Humane Wisdom and Inaustry.
Discover as much as may be the Subtleties and Policies, and Forces and
Advantages of your Enemies, that you may be provided to obviate them.

3. Get Skill and Dexterity in using the Arms and Weapons of your Spiritual
Warfare. How to put on the Girdle of Truth, and Breast Plate of Righteousness:
how to use the Shield of Faith, and Helmet of Hope, and to wield the Sword of
the Spirit, (the Word of God) and to improve all the pieces of your Spiritual
Armor, and all the Weapons that your General puts into your Hands. A Christian
is completely armed and appointed, but many times knows not how to use his
Weapons. Have your Arms in readiness, and learn to make a ready and dexterous
use of them. That you should not only have Grace, but be well Skilled in the
vigorous, lively, seasonable Acting and Exercising of all the Grace you have,
is the meaning of this Direction.

4. List your selves into some particular Company that is engaged in the same
Warfare. It is a great Disadvantage to a Christian to stand and fight alone,
and not to have a particular and peculiar Interest in the Help of other
Christians: which is the Case of those that live out of Church Fellowship, and
do not put themselves under the Watch and Discipline, and Conduct of particular
Churches. Woe (says Solomon, declaring the Inconveniency of Solitariness) to
Him that is Alone, when he falls, for he has not another to help Him up: And
if one prevail against him (that has a Companion and Helper) two shall
withstand him, Eccles. 4. 10, 12. It is as true in Spiritual as in Civil and
Common Cases. It is a great Advantage in our Spiritual Conflicts to have good
Company, whose Help and Assistance it engaged to us. It is the Lords
Appointment that Mankind should live together in Societies, as in Families,
Commonwealths, Churches, in order to common Help-fulness. It is the singular
privilege of Church members to have a peculiar engaged interest in the
Prayers, and Counsels, and Help of their Fellow-Brethren, which is a very
desirable Thing, and a considerable Advantage, 1 Cor. 12. 25, 26. Do not
therefore Combat alone, but get into some particular Body of Saints Militant.

5. Keep Order. Fight every one in your own places where you are set. Be sure
you keep Rank and File. Order is the Beauty of the World, and of an Army in
Special (In Allusion whereunto the Stars are frequently called the Host of
Heaven, because of the exactness of their Order and Regularness of their
Motion) and of the Christian Army (the Church of Christ in its Mil^^an^
Condition) most of all. Of the Spouse of Christ it is said, Thy cheeks are
comely with Rows of Jewels, Cant. 1. 10. that is, the outward Face and
Countenance of the Church is Comely, beautiful and Glorious with keeping their
right place and order, as well as the manner of Gods own Ordinances, a some
Expound it. A Church well ordered is Beautiful as Tirzab, comely as (...); and
terrible to her Adversaries as an Army with Banners, (...) and Ordered under
their Banners and Ensigns Cant 6 4. This of Order is one respect wherein
Churches are well compared to Armies that (...) ordered and disciplined. This
is the Glory and strength of such Christian Societies, and no small Advantage
to every Christian. Those are the best Soldiers that are best exercised to
keep their own Place and Order. So Material a Thing it is, that it is the
Character and Description of good Soldiers, that they were such as could keep
Rank, (...) Chron. 12. 33, 36, 38. The private Soldier must not straggle, or
leave his place, or thrust Himself into the place and Command of the Officer,
but every one keep the place assigned Him. A Soldier that is commanded to
stand such a Ground, must not stir from it, though He is sure to dye upon the
place: If He leave it, he dies for it by Marital Law. No personal danger will
excuse him for such breach of order. There is no dispensing with it. A
Christian Soldier must not be (...), One that keeps not his place if I may so
render it. Nor (...) One that breaks orders, and behaves himself disorderly.
Rules of Order must be carefully attended. Many of you see the Beauty, and
acknowledge the benefit of Order in other Societies, and observe it with much
exactness at your Trainings and Artillery Exercises, and must do so in real
Engagements. And why should not Christians apprehend the like necessity of
attending Order ( Christ's Order I mean) in every Christian Army, every
Ecclesiastical Society, and the like inconveniences of the contrary.

6. Maintain Peace and Union with your Fellow Soldiers, or with those of the
same Company, or Regiment, or Army, as much as in you lies: Communion I mean
with the Members of the Church wherein you stand, and with the rest of the
Churches of Christ. There are some cases wherein peace with men cannot be kept;
nay, wherein it is a duty to contend against them earnestly for the Faith, for
the Truth, for the Glory of God, and for the good of the Public: But if it be
possible, as much as lies in you (as far as it is possible, lawful and
expedient) live peaceably with all men, Romans 12. 18. especially seek and follow
peace with your Fellow Soldiers, your Brethren and Companions in Tribulation,
and in the Kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ. Peace among, and mutual
Communion of Churches and Church Members is as necessary a thing, as peace and
union in an Army. I wish with all my Soul that this might be attended in this
great Town of Boston. That these three Churches might be as a three^old Cord,
so twisted together, that they might not be easily broken. Mutinies in an Army
between one Company, or Regiment, and another, are hazardous to the safety and
good of the whole, and therefore severely punished. A wise General will take
the least (...) of any Overture that way, because it is a thing of dangerous
Consequence to the Army. Christ, your General, is as apprehensive and jealous
of such things among his People. Wo^ul was the case of Jerusalem, when (...) by
the Romans on this account of divided (...) and (...) which hastened their
mine, and facilitated the Roman Conquest. And (...) you think that Divisions in
and among Churches are not of threatening Consequence to such societies? The
Lord be merciful to us in this respect. Must (...) Do you not know that it will
be bitterness in (...) hope you do not wage here (...) An irreconcilable
(...). It the (...) should be implacable, yet one would think the (...), God
should (...) on (as the Elect of God, Holy and Beloved) (...) Kindness,
Humbleness of (...) Meekness, LongSuffering, For be (...) one another, and
Forgiving, if any Man have a Quarter against any, as they expect Forgiveness
from the Lord Jesus, p^^ting on (...) perfectness, Col. 3. 12 13, 14. Shall
that of the Apostle, speaking of the worst of the Heathen, ( Romans 1. 31.) be
verified in any of the Professors among us, that they are (...) Implacable God
forbid. They are your Enemies, yea, common Enemies to the Interest of Christ,
and his people that will go about to ^oment these Divisions, or advise to the
perpetuating of these Differences. If I were not well assured that Christ's
Name, and Interest, and your own Souls suffer unspeakably hereby, I should not
have opened my Mouth in this manner. However I hope none here are so much in
love with Contention as to be angry with Counsels of Peace. It is a matter of
great Consequence. O let us not turn our Swords into one another^ Bowels, as
the Midianites (Judge. 7. 22.) Philistines (1 Samuel 14 15, 20.) Moabites,
Ammonites and the Inhabitants of Mount Seir (2 Chronicles. 20. 23.) as well as
others, have done to their own Destruction. I believe really that it is with
these Churches, or Companies of Christian Soldiers in this place, so far as
there is any Contention among them, as it is with Soldiers now and then in the
Heat of Battle. Sometimes through mistake in the Hurry and Confusion of Battle,
one Regiment or Company charge another of the same Army, slaughtering and
destroying their own dear Friends, engaged on the same side, and for the same
cause, instead of their Enemies. This has occasioned great Mischief. So
through Darkness, Confusions, Mis-understandings, and Mis-representations of
Persons and Actions in an Hour of Temptation, it comes to pass that Brethren
contend and quarrel, and wound one another with the wound of an Enemy, and of a
cruel One. Mistakes and Mis-apprehensions are the usual, sad occasions of great
Divisions. We had need watch and Pray, that we (...) not into Temptation in
this respect, and to exercise Charity toward such as differ from us in
Circumstantials, or in matters of Doubtful Disputation only; left we blindly
and precipitately run over and ruin, hack and hew down our Friends and (...)
Under the notion of Enemies. Oh make and M^^ntain Peace among your selves, you
Soldiers and Military Companies of Jesus Christ A Cessation of Arms for the
Present is not enough. It is a League of Ami^^ and Friendship, and Brotherly
Communion that I contend for. O that it might be speedily effected! left a
Common Enemy prove the only effectual Mediator between the Brethren at
variance, and a pacification be made at last by such Instruments and Means as
neither Party will have any joy or pleasure in. And the Blessing of the
Peacemaker be upon the heads of those persons that shall be graciously
instrumental in Gods way to settle a good and lasting Peace and Correspondence
among these Churches, or sincerely and vigorously endeavor it.

7. Make it your chief care and business all the time of your Warfare to please
your Great General the Lord of Hosts, the Lord Jesus Christ in all things. That
is the property of a good Soldier, 2 Timothy 2 4. He designs to please his
Commander in chief, by a ready Obedience. This was the singular commendation of
the Centurions Soldiers, Mat. 8. 9. Luke 7. 8. No Men are under more absolute
Command then Soldiers, that must not dispute, but obey the Orders of their
General. In like manner do you observe all the Orders of the Lord Jesus, obey
all his Words of Command, adventure upon the hottest and hardest pieces of
Service, when he requires it; hold no Intelligence, or Treacherous, close
Correspondence with his Enemies; In every Motion or Action consider with your
selves whether this or that course, and carriage and Posture will please
Christ. And in particular please him by a ready and cheerful Obedience to
Inferior, Commissioned Officers for his sake. Obey them that have the Ruleover
you is one great word of Command which our Lord and Savior gives, Heb. 13. 7,
17. Though I am as truly and heartily opposite to the Presbyterian Persuasion
(with due respect to the Piety and Learning, and Orthodoxy and Excellent
Abilities and Accomplishments of those our Fellow-Brethren, and Soldiers that
match on that side of the way, be it spoken) wherein it lies in direct
Opposition to the Substantials of the Congregational-way, as any of you: and
though I am remote enough from the intention of improving the Text but now
mentioned, to the establishing of such an Absolute and Arbitrary Rule (...) the
Presbytery, as is really inconsistent, and incomportable with the due
privilege and liberty of the People: yet I am sure that all are not Guider,
Ove^^eers, and Rulers, but that there are Rulers and Ruled, the Governors and
the Governed in all particular Churches according the Sovereign Institution of
Jesus Christ; there are Officers and Private Soldiers according to the
appointment of our Lord General: And I must say freely, that that way of
Church Government that allows not the Rule and Government truly and properly
so called, to Church Officers, is not the way of Christ's Institution. Obey
therefore such as the Lord Jesus has set over you in the Lord; if you mean to
please him. Otherwise you may be (...) that (...) General will severely punish
the undue contempt of the (...) the Christian (...)

8. Be willing to endu^e Hardship. This is another Qualification of a Soldier,
2 Timothy, 2 3. Church Officers are called to this in a special manner: but it is
duty also of every Christian Soulders, that must expect to wrestle with many
Difficulties. A man must never think to be a Soldier that is nice and
delicate, and loves to favor himself and indulgeth to pleasure and ^ase. Ni^is
delicatus es Christians, qui volu^tatem hoc seculo concupiscis. Tertull. Every
Soldier must resolve upon enduring Hunger, and Thirst, and Cold, and Wet, and
Weariness, and lying upon the Ground, many Hardships and Inconveniences in the
course of his Military Employment. As A^eas the Scythian said to Philip of
Macedon: You Command Macedonians that can fight with men; But I Command
Scythians that are able to fight with Hunger and Thirst. A Course of Warfare is
usually a Course of Hardship, as well as Hazards. Christians must look for many
hardships in their way, ill Usage, and course Entertainment, and sore
Inconveniences, and hard Duty in their Warfare. It is their great Wisdom and
Duty to expect them, and learn to comport ^^ght with them.

9. Do not encumber your selves with other Occasions, or with anything that may
take you off, or hinder you in your Warfare. No man that Warreth entangleth
himself with the Affairs of this life, 2 Timothy 2 4 Soldiers are greatly taken
off from other employments; they cannot follow Merchandising or Husbandry, or
this or that Trade to any great purpose. They have enough to do to attend their
Watchings and Wardings, Marchings and Motions, the Orders and Commands of their
Leaders. True it is that a particular Calling is very well consistent with the
General Calling of a Christian Soldier, and should be so attended and managed,
that it may be a furtherance and no hindrance thereunto. But may we not fear
that there is a fault among Christian Soldiers in this respect? and that they
are generally too much engaged in other matters, and entangled with the World
and the Affairs thereof, and thereby rendered less disposed to the service of
Christ in their Christian Warfare? Certainly inordinate Affection to the thing
of his World, and over eager pursuit of them does in no wise become a good
Soldier of Christ.

10. Be content with your Wages. That is the good Quality of a Soldier, as
John the Baptist intimates, Luke 3. 14. A Christian properly has no wages,
because all he enjoyes is of mere Grace and Courtesy. When he has done all,
He is an unprofitable Servant, Luke 17. 10. But my meaning is, be contented
with what the Lord Jesus Christ affords you at present for your sustentation
and encouragement. Yea, though he keep you at short Allowance, as to comforts
and spiritual suavities, and such a sufficiency of Grace to prevail, and
conquer, and tread down all your Enemies, as you could desire; yet be quiet and
contented with your present portion; do not Mutiny or Murmr, but be Humbly
Thankful for, and well sufficed with such things as you have, Heb. 13 5. And be
assured that the Lord Jesus, though he owe you nothing, and keep you short at
present, will pay you well atlast. The time is coming, when you shall be drawn
out of the Field, and discharged from this Warfare, and then he will pay you
all your Arrears, over and over, and gratify you for all your Service (such is
his Grace) with that which you may comfortably subsist on to Eternity.

This is the first Branch of the Exhortation. Let all true Believers be greatly
encouraged to fight against their Spiritual Enemies; and that both in their
private and public Capacities. For every Believer must engage in a Warfare,
not only General and Common to all Christians, but also proper and peculiar to
himself in his place and Condition. This Sermon was Preached when the General
Court was sitting, and in the Audience of the much Honored Members of it.
Therefore I would crave leave to Address my self here with a word or two of
Encouragement to our Pious, Faithful, Honorable Rulers in their Warfare, not
as they are Christians only, but as they are Christian Magistrates also, and
the Nursing Fathers of our Commonwealth and Churches. It would indeed be a
most importune and intolerable Thing, notorious Boldness and Rudeness in me
this Day, and on such an Occasion, to stand here and dictate to our Honorable
Patriots and Worthies, or to direct and advise them about the particular
management of their Civil Affairs. As every man should be wise^^ in his own
Calling and Concerns: So it is the great Happiness of New England that we have
Persons of great worth and Wisdom, Integrity and Experience, ruling over us,
and guiding us by the Skilfulness of their Hands; and such as have no need of
the Instructions of such a piece of weakness and unworthiness as stands before
you. They know their own Business, and are taught of God to manage the great
Affairs under their Hands. I remember well, that I am an unworthy Minister of
the Gospel; not a Statesman, or projector. And therefore I am very far from
the Design of obtruding upon you ( much Honored my raw and indigested
Apprehensions about the Condition of your Affairs, and what may seem
Counsellable in that respect. But I would with all Humility, Respect and
Affection, administer to you a word of Encouragement, in a particular
Application of what has been discoursed of the Christians Warfare in General
to your Warfare in Special. You must Combat with Profaneness, with turbulent
Heresies, with Blasphemies, with Injustice, with Disorders of many Kinds: and
in so doing will be exposed to (...) and hard-Speeches, yea, to many
Difficulties and Discouragements. And if you should be ready sometimes to faint
in this public Engagement, and complain that you are not able to bear this
heavy Burden that is laid upon you: it would be no more then what we read of
Moses, the meekest man, and one of the best accomplished Leaders and Governour^
that ever was upon Earth, Numb 11. 1^. 12, 14. The Eminency of your place and
work makes you the more (...), that you will be the fatter Mark for Satan, and
his Instruments. Qu^^regit Signumest in quod Satanas omnia ^acula dirigit.
Satan and his Followers, that fight under his Banner, will be casting all their
Darts at you. Magis^^atus indicat v^^um. Magistrates places are as Furnaces to
try them in. Place of Government (...) the Spirit of a man, whether he be just
or corrupt, liberal or covetous, valiant or fearful, for God or for Man; as Mr.
Cotton observes on Eccles. 3. 18 -- 22. Every Calling has its Temptation: and
yours (as High and Honorable as it is) is not privileged in that respect. You
are Gods indeed in the Scripture Dialect (Psalm. 82 1, 6.) but you are Men too,
subject to the like passions, (...), Conflicts and Temptations, that other men
are: nay, more exposed thereunto on some Accounts. Your Places are High, and
you dwell in the u^^er Region; but you are wiser then to look for nothing but
Stilness and Serenity there, where you are not out of the way and walk of the
Prince of the Power of the Air, who will be sure (if he can) to raise many a
Storm and Tempest upon you. I am not much acquainted with the State of your
Affairs* but if I should improve my Observations, and conjecture from what I
have noted elsewhere, I might well conclude, that you have Difficulties more
then enough before you in your way. You are continually traveling in Birth
with the public good, and there may be some that (as (...) said of the Dragon,
that he stood before the Woman that was ready to be delivered, to devour her
Child as soon as it was born, Rev. 12. 4. So) will be ready to stifle the
Issues of your Counsels in the Birth, or to overlay them, and devour them as
soon as they are born. Now the word of the Lord to you is (as sometimes to
Joshua, Josh. 1. 9 Be strong and of a good Courage, be not afraid, neither b^
you dismayed: For the Lord your God is with you. O take Courage and acquit your
selves as the good Soldiers of Christ, and valiant Worthies in your Warfare.
You have growing Sins in a growing Commonwealth to grapple withal. O be
Courageous, and fight your Fight against such Enormities. Do not draw your
Sword mere ^to flourish and beat the Air; but strike home: And if you have not
Swords that are sharp enough, or long enough to reach, to do thorough (...)
upon the Enemies of our peace, the God-provoking and State disturbing (...) and
evils among us; Be sure you get such as may do it; I mean such Laws as may be
keen and comprehensive enough to reach them. And the Lord bless you, (with the
Honored Deputies) at your great Council of War, as I would take Liberty,
this Day, to style your General Assembly, where you are considering what to do
de^hellare, to conquer and beat down the Sins and Disorders that life up the
Head amongst us, and are the great Enemies of the Prosperity of (...) Common
wealth and Churches. I might also particularly apply this word of Encouragement
to the pious and (...) the work of the Ministry. O my Brethren and Fathers! you
are the good Soldiers of Jesus Christ in a peculiar manner, 2 Timothy 2. 3. Paul
calis Epaphroditus the Pastor of the Church of the Philippians, his
Fellow-Souldier, Phil 2. 25. Both ^^^raordinary and ordinary Church Officers
are Soldiers. Your Life is a Warfare in a way of (...). Besides the Enemies
you have to Engage with as you are Christians, you have Enemies also to
conflict with (...) you are Ministers I speak not of the persons of men which
are to be (...) and tendered: but of their Vices, which must be opposed and
combated withal. You have Unruliness, Disorderly Behavior, Prejudices,
Reproaches, base Nicknames, hard Usage, and injurious dealings among men; the
Pride, Ignorance, Obstinacy, Unfruitfulness, and Ingratitude of some you have
to do with, besides your particular Temptations from Satan (who maligns the
Ministers of Christ more then other men) to conflict and combat withal. Some
of you may be in Paul's Case, Fears within, and Fightings without, and Trouble
on (...) side, 2 Cor. 7 ^. You are Soldiers and must expect Knocks and Blows
in your Warfare: but you may be assured of a most Glorious Victory. We live in
^imes of great Degeneracy, and in special o^ great Disaffection to the
Ministers of Christ: Times wherein Satan industriously instills and infuses
endless Jealousies and prejudices into the Heads and Hearts of People
concerning the Faithful Ministers of the Gospel. As the King of Syria said to
his Captains, Fight neither with small nor Great, save only with the King of
Israel, 1 King. 22. 31. So does Satan seem to say to his Followers at this Day;
Do you fight neither with one or other, so much as with the Ministers of
Christ. This is the Ball that Satan has as his Foot, the great Game that He is
playing, up and down; to asperse, and vilify, and bring down the price and
esteem of Christ's Messengers: as well knowing then how to destroy the Souls of
Men and Women, Heaps upon Heaps, as it were. Well, you are Soldiers, and must
not be discouraged. You are well appointed; you have Arms to sight withal.
Prayers and Tears and Ministerial Authoritative Dispensation of the word and
Ordinances of Christ, with Courage And undaunted Resolution, are the Weapon^ of
your Warfare, which are not Carnal, but Spiritual and mighty throng God
assisting, 2 Cor. 10 4. And if it would not sound too much like the Word of a
Commander; if it were not too much Boldness and Arrogance, I would say to my
Reverend Fathers and Brethren, Fellow Soldiers Stand to you (...). The Day is
your own, and the Victory will be finally determined on your side. You Sigh^,
and Groans, and Prayers, and Tears, and M^n^^^erial Conflict shall not be in
vain; but the Lord will shortly give you the Victory. Take head ^f
Short-spiritedness, of Impatience, of Fainting in the Contest, though it may be
sharp and severe for a time. The (...) Spirit the Antiministerial Spirit, the
Heretical evil Spirit, the Levelling and Disorderly, Spirit, or whatever else
it is that you combat withal shall be routed, run down, put to flight; And the
folly of such Things and persons will be made manifest to all men. Nothing will
abide, but what is built, not on the variable and uncertain Fancies and
Affections of men, but on the Everlasting Foundations of Scripture and Reason.
Reason and Truth will stand their Ground, and keep the Field when all that is
opposite thereunto will be put to flight and totally discomfited. I shall say
no more to you but in the words of the Lord to the Prophet, Jer. 1. 18, 19. The
Lord has made you Defenced Cities, Iron Pillars, and Brazen Walls; and though
men fight against you they shall not prevail; For the Lord is with you. Nay,
further, If I could but get into the Hearts of any of the People of God in this
Assembly, and make discovery of the particular Corruptions and Temptations that
this or that Believing Man or Woman is Conflicting and Combating with; I would
say to them, Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. As the
Priests were ordered by the Lord to give a Word of Encouragement to the People
of Israel, when they were approaching to Battle against their Enemies, Deuteronomy. 20
3, 4. So give me leave at the Head of this Christian Camp here Assembled before
the Lord, to bespeak the Israel of God, and to say, Let not your Hearts Faint,
Fear not, and do not tremble, neither be ye terrified, because of your Enemies:
For the Lord your God (even your great Lord General, the Lord Jesus Christ) i^
he that goes with you to sight for you against your Enemies, and to save you.
What should I do but say to them that are of a fearful Heart, Be strong, fear
not: strengthen ye the weak Hands, and confirm the feeble Knees, Isai 35. 3, 4.
You are it may be Buffered with Satan's Messenger, pained with the Thorn in the
Flesh, Molested and Tortured (as persons held upon the Rack) with Temptations
to Atheism, and Unbelief, with Blasphemous Injections, and Amazing Suggestions,
Tormented with the poisonous fiery Darts and Arrows of that evil one, Combated
with Fleshly, Worldly Lusts and Corruptions that give you no rest. Oh Courage,
Courage, Dear Hearts, Fight it out to the last. And if you are Foiled, get up
again by Repentance, and renew the C^mba in the strength of Christ, and never
ask Quarter, or make a Surrender of your selves to the Will of your Enemies;
for you shall obtain a Glorious Victory. Possibly ( O Believer) thou have been
sleeping in the Lap of some Dalilah, and have lost thy strength, and art fallen
into the Hands of the Philistines, that have bound thee with (...) made thee to
Grind (which is the sad condition which some (...) Soldiers through Security
reduce themselves unto) yet let me tell thee (...) Encouragement, that though
thy Locks are shaven off, yet (...) Grace) the Lo^ks of thy Strength will grow
again, and thou shall (...) of those Philistines. Let all the Followers of
Christ be warne^ by the Falls and Surprises of themselves and others to stand
upon their Guard, and continue in a vigilant fighting Posture, that they may
not give up themselves to the Will of their Adversaries, that ly in Ambush, and
watch all Advantages against them. Watch ye, stand fest in the Faith, quit you
like men, be strong, 1 Cor. 16. 13. Yet a little while, and you shall triumph
over all your Enemies. The Lord will shortly deliver you from Sin and Sorrow,
and the Snares of an evil World, and bruise Satan under your Feet, Romans 16. 20.
The God of peace shall do it for you, when the time of your Warfare shall be
accomplished.

Thus much for the first Branch of the Exhortation. The second is.

2. Learn and Labor to improve the Lord Jesus Christ in all your Spiritual
Conflicts and Engagements. For want of this Holy skill Men do but beat the Air,
and make a vain flourish, and contend to no purpose at all with the Enemies
that War against their Souls. Here all the false Religions in the World, and
that of the Papists in special, fail Exceedingly. They are wholly unacquainted
with the Mystery of the Gospel, the Efficacy of the Performances of Jesus
Christ, the orderly way of improving the Satisfaction, Merit and Intercession,
or the Humiliation and Exaltation of the Mediator: and what course do they fix
upon? Truly they think to Vanquish their Corruptions in the strength of their
Vo^s, and Fastings and Pennances, and self-devised, self-macerating
Austerities; which may possibly kill the Natural Man, but will never destroy
the Corrupt Old Man: and to fright away Satan (the same and timorous Devil)
with their Crossings and HolyWater, and such like Fopperies. That which lies at
the bottom of all their Miscarriages in this business is, that they know not
how to improve the Lord Jesus in order to the Defeat and Overthrow of their
Spiritual Adversaries: without which Divine skill Men may Scuffle and Skirmish
with their Foes, raise much Dust, and make a great noise and bustle, as if they
would do great Exploits; and yet all end in Shame and Disappointment. For you
see that all the Victories and Conquests which Believers obtain are through him
that loved them, even the Lord Jesus Christ. O therefore learn that Spiritual
Art of improving the Lord Jesus in all your Combats, or you do nothing. Much
should have been said here about that fullness of Provision that is laid up in
Jesus Christ for the support, Relief and Assistance of Believers in their
Conflicts, and their Enablement to make a Conquest of their Enemies: and about
the ^ctings of Faith upon the Lord Jesus, and ^et^hing in all suitable and
seasonable supplies of Strength and Grace from his store. Time and Strength
would fail me, If I should enter upon so large and spacious a Subject; and I
had rather say nothing, then speak generally, superficiarily, and flightily to
a matter of such importance; therefore I shall thus pass it with a brief
mention of it. The third Branch is;

3. Acknowledge the Love of God in Christ, and bless the God and Father of our
Lord (...) Christ for all your partial and present Victories and Conquests in
any of your Engagements with the Enemies of your Souls. Does the Lord help you
to acquit your selves like Men ((...)) or like Christians rather, and the
Soldiers of Jesus Christ in any Conflicts with your own Corruptions, or Satan's
Temptations? Oh remember that it is through the Love of God in Christ that you
Prevail and Conquer: And therefore bless God (...) be thankful to him for all
your Victorious Achievements, and offer him the Sacrifice of Praise and Thank
giving. When Iehosaphat and his People went forth against that great Multitude
of Moabites, Ammonites, and the Inhabitants of Mount S^ir with full assurance
from the Lord of Victory; Singers to the Lord were appointed, that should
praise the Beauty of Holiness, as they went out before the Army, and say,
Praise the Lord, for his mercy endures for ever, 2 Chronicles. 20 21. They met the
Enemy with Thanksgiving in their Mouths for promised and assured Victory. And
when their Enemies were overthrown in a wonderful manner, they Assembled in the
Valley of Berachah, so called, because they blessed the Lord there: and they
returned to Jerusalem with Psalteries, and Harpss and Trumpets unto the House
of the Lord, ver. 26, 28. In like manner Believers have Assurance from the Lord
of the utter Defeat and Overthrow, and of the absolute Conquest of their Foes
through the love of God in Christ; and may well go forth against their Enemies
in the strength of the Lord, with the High praises of God in their Mouth, and a
two edged Sword in their hand, even the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God,
that is sharper then a two edged Sword, and will not fail, if it be rightly
managed, to do notable Execution. And when they obtained any signal Victory in
this or that particular Engagement with their Spiritual Enemies, what should
they do but give the name of Berachah to their Closets and Places of
Retirement, and bless the Lord and his Holy Name (in which they are to set up
their Banners (Psalm. 20 5.) and through which they have done valiantly, and
trodden down all their Enemies, Psalm. 108. 13.) with their Souls and all that
is within them. Though you cannot in this Life hope for the total Defeat and
overthrow of the Enemies of your Souls: yet be sure to erect a Trophy, and rear
up a Monumental Pillar of thankful Acknowledgement and Remembrance to the Power
and Grace and Love of God in Christ, upon every partial and particular Victory
you obtain in the Field against them.

4. Lastly, Wait, and Pray, and Look, and Long for that Glorious Day, when your
Warfare shall be ended, and you shall go out of the Field Victorious, and
Triumphant, yea, absolute Conquerours. I persuade not to any Impatience during
the heat of your present Engagements. Take heed of tiring and (...) in your
Conflicts, and in the laborious course of your Warfare: Though your General put
you upon hard Duty and Service. He that striveth for Masteries is not Crowned,
except he strive lawfully, 2 Timothy 2. 5. L^gitime cer^are (faith Judicious
Calvin) est prol qui certamen quantum vel quoad Lex prescribit: ^cquis sibi
modum ante tempus definiat. To strive lawfully is to hold on the Contest, or
continue and persevere in the Conflict, as long as the Law prescribes: and no
men is to give over before the Time appointed. He that is tired with a first or
second Conflict, and withdraws himself out of the Field before his Time; will
lose his Crown. Perseverance in a Course of Running and Wrestling, and
Combating, with Patience, and Submission to the good will of God, is the Duty
of every Christian. But withal, it is the Duty, as well as Allowance, of the
Followers of Christ, to have respect to the Recompense of Reward, and the joy
that is set before them: and to wait (with Hope and Desire) all the Days of
their Appointed time or of their Warfare (as the Original has it) till their
change come, Job. 14. 14. that happy great Change, when their present Warfare
shall be changed into everlasting peace and rest from trouble, and their
Helmets shall be changed into Croans of everlasting Joy upon their Heads, and
their Swords and Spears (not beaten into Plow shares and Pruning-^ooks, as
Isai. 2. 4 but) changed into Palms in their hands in token of assured Victory
and Triumph. O therefore let all Christian Soldiers love and long for the
Glorious Appearance of Christ: And when you are beset and encumbred, and
engaged in any hot dispute with your Enemies, Lock upwards, and Sigh to Heaven,
as for present Assistance and Enablement, so also for after perfect
Deliverance, Victory and Triumph, which shall be brought to you at the
Appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ.

With this word I should have concluded and issued the whole Discourse, and put
an End to the present Engagement; but that I conceive it may be ^ationally
expected that I should address my self in the close (in a word or two at least)
to the Military men the worthy and much Honored Gentlemen, that have pressed
and called me forth to the Service of this Day. I need not tell you that I am
no Soldier. Possibly mine inept Usage of some Military and Martial phrases in
the past Discourse may but too plainly tell you, that I am but little
acquainted with the Military Science or Faculty. I am no Friend to war, ^^at
an unfeigned lover of Peace. I long for an End of the wars and Bloud-sheds,
the Destructions and Desolations that the poor world is filled withal. O when
will this I ron-Age expire, and that glorious Morn appear, that Lightsome Day
dawn, wherein the Nations shall beat their Swords into plough-Shears, and their
Spears into Pruning Hooks, neither shall Nation left up Sword against Nation,
nor the Sons of men learn war any more? The God of Peace will certainly put
an end unto these miserable (...). In the mean time it is the wisdom and duty
of the people of God to improve all Advantages that are providentially put into
their Hands, to secure their peace and precious Enjoyments, and to put
themselves into a Posture and Condition of disputing it with those that may
invade or assault them, Military Skill is necessary in Military times and
Martial Days; and these Military exercises are not only Lawful and Allowable,
but laudable, yea, and necessary also: and the persons by whom they are
supported and carried on deserve singular Commendation and Encouragement.
David's Mart al mighty men are Catalogui^ed in holy writ, as men of Renown and
worthy to be had in Honorable Remembrance: And surely the Gentlemen among us
that are men of Skill and Conduct, and expertness in Military affairs should
not be slighted or discouraged. We live in times of great Commotions and
doubtful Expectations. How long we may si^ under our Vines and Fig Trees and
have none to make us afraid, The God of our Peace, our great Protector, only
knows. The Day may come upon us, when we may wish there were many more worthy
men of Martial Spirits and Military Accompleshments, then yet appear among us.
True it is, that I have not directed my Discourse to the Soldiers this Day:
Considering that I was not (unless I mistook my Summons) to make a Military
Oration (which is more proper for some Gentleman of that Profession) but to
preach a Sermon, on a Military occasion, that might be of Use (if the Lord
please) to the whole Assembly. I have weakly, but designedly endeavored to
imitate and tread in the steps of our Blessed Savior (the Captain of our
Salvation, Heb. 2 10. with whom it was usual and Customary in the Days of his
Commoration and Conversa upon Earth, to take the least Hint to make a Spiritual
U^e and Advantage of Common Things, and to improve obvious Occasions and
Occurrences in a Pa^ab^lical, Allegorical, and Spiritual way. In like manner I
have taken Rise and Advantage from the Military occasions of this Day to
discourse (as the Lord has enabled) of the Spiritual and Christian Warfare.
Soldiers love to hear of Battles at Land or Sea, of Victories and Triumphs,
and the Consequents thereof, the Spoils, the Plunder, the Booty, the Rewards of
Gallantry and good Behavior in such Engagements: And I have been acquainting
you with such Things in a Spiritual way. And I hope none of you will judge this
wholly impertinent, unless you have so far put on the Artillery man this
morning, that you have also put off the Christian Soldier. I shall say further
(by way of Defense and Apology) that what I have discoursed may be of great Use
unto the Gentlemen I am speaking to in their Military Capacity. That which
conduces to the making of men good Christians has a general Influence into the
due deportment of men in all Capacities and Relations. That man that has
Conquered and Subdued Himself will know how to command, how to obey, much
better then One that is a slave to Himself, and his own perverse will, and in
Bondage to his own Lusts and Corruptions. Such a man will give serious and
conscionable Attendance to the Improvement of all means affoarded him, that may
accomplish Him in a Military way, and furnish Him with Skill and Dexterity,
whereby He may be enabled to fight the Lords Battles against Injurious and
malignant Adversaries; He will depend on that God that teaches his Hands to
war, and his Fingers to sight, (Psalm. 144. 1.) and umpires or determines the
successes and Events of all Military Engagements according to the Counsel of
his own will, sometimes contrary to the Law and Common Rule of second Causes:
So that the Battle is not always to the strong, but Time and Chance (some
intervening providential Occurrences) happen to this, as well as other Affairs,
Eccles. 9. 11. He will go forth, when God calls to the Defense of Civil and
Religious Liberties in the strength of the Lord, and not in his own might or
Sufficiency, having had such sensible and instructing Experience, that all his
Spiritual and greater Conquests are acquired through him that loved Him. He
will be one of the Legio Fulminate, the thundering Legion, that by their
powerful and princely Prayers will obtain signal Victories over their Enemies.
He will be one of the Called, and Faithful, and Chosen, that will follow the
Lamb (...) tha^so^ver he leads them. He that (through the Grace and strength
(...)) has conquered Sin, and Self, and Satan, and an evil World, and is (...)
conquer his last Enemy Death (which is the happy Condition of a Christian
Soldier) will not fear the Face of any man in a Righteous Cause, but have the
Spirit, and Courage, and undaunted Resolution of a Soldier indeed. He will
say, as Nehemiah in his Case, Neham. 6. 11. Should such a man as I flee? well
may He be above Fear and Frights, and Coward^se, and acquit Himself in all
respects as a Magnanimous Person, who has Deliverance from the fear of Death,
to the Bondage whereof all men are naturally Subject, Heb. 2. 15. He that
expects to gain by dying (as that Champion Paul did, Phil. 1. 21.) and
therefore Hopes rather then Fears to die, will not (...) afraid of the point of
the Sword, or mouth of the Canon, or any other Instruments of Death, when God
calls Him to adventure Himself. If Alexander, Julius Coesar, and others
accomplished such great Things by their natural Courage and Valor; what will
not that man do that has the Spirit and Valor of a Christian (...). He will
not be acted by the pride, and Ambition, and vain glorious (...) mercenary
Spirit that other Soldiers are carried with, but will bear up in the Greatness
of his God, and the Goodness of his (...), and so (...) Himself in the High
places of the Field. These and the like Things considered, my Discourse may not
seem to be wholly Foreign, or unaccommodable to the affairs of this day.
Whether it has been pertinent and proper to the Design and Business of the Day
is left to the judgment of my Auditors. But sure I am that I have discoursed
of the Best and most Important Warfare, and the most desirable and glorious
Victory and Triumph. And though I cannot but approve and commend and wish the
prosperous Continuance of your Trainings and Artillery-Exercises: Yet behold
(as Paul speaks in another Case, 1 Cor. 12. 31.) I have been showing you a more
excellent way. Of all Soldiers, the Christian Soldier is the best: No War,
nor Victory, nor Triumph can be comparable to His. He is more then a Soldier;
more then a Conqueror. And happy will that man be that at the end of his Race,
and when he is matching out of the Field, shall be able to say (as that great
Apostle and Renowned Soldier of Jesus Christ, a Tim. 4. 7, 8.) I have fought a
good fight, I have finished the Course of my Warfare: and henceforth there is
laid up for me a Crown of Righteo^sness, which the Lord, the Righteous ludge,
shall give me at the Blessed Day of his Glorious Appearing.

FINIS.

