AN EARNEST EXHORTATION To the Inhabitants of New England, To hearken to the
voice of God in his late and present DISPENSATIONS As ever they desire to
escape another Judgment, seven times greater then any thing which as yet has
been.

By INCREASE MATHER; Teacher of a Church in Boston in New England.

Lev. 26. 23, 24. And if you will not be Reformed by these things, but will
walk contrary unto me, then will I walk contrary unto you, I will punish you,
yet seven times for your sins.

Jer. 13. 17. But if you will not hear it, my soul shall weep in secret places.

1 Cor. 10. 11. Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples, and they
are written for our Admonition, upon whom the ends of the World are come.

BOSTON Printed by John Foster: And are to be Sold over against the Dove. 1676.

TO THE READER.
THis following Exhortation was written two or three months ago, since which
time the Lord has given us to see a wonderful Turn of Providence, in a way of
signal mercy toward his poor New-England-People. Nevertheless I have for
weighty Reasons, been willing to let it pass, as it is, the main design of it
being to quicken sedulous endeavors toward the Reformation of provoking
Evils; and there is still cause for urgency in that matter. God forbid that we
should act as if we were delivered to do abominations, for then it is certain
that the continuance of this affliction would have been afar greater mercy,
then deliverance out of it. And I will freely confess, that I am not altogether
without fears, that there is yet another Storm hastening upon this Land, if
Repentance avert it not. For as yet men are not convinced of that which I
believe is the Lords special Controversy with this Land. Though some do, yet
the generality of the people do not see and own these iniquityes, which the
righteous God has been contending for. Nor is there to this day so much done
respecting a General Reformation of evils amongst us, as the Lord expects.
Nay, there have been such trespasses committed, in the time of our distress, as
I am persuaded God will yet visit for. It has often been so, that if much sin
has been committed, eminent deliverances have been attended with sad
after-claps. When the children of Israel were saved from the Midianites, the
Inhabitants of Succoth and Penuel did perish after that. And in J^phthahs
days, he had no sooner subdued the common enemy, but intestine troubles arose,
so that there fell of the Ephraimites at that time forty and two thousand. Let
us not then be high-minded but fear: especially considering that of late time,
the Lord in his providence has been giving us very solemn warnings, The deaths
of so many righteous and useful ones, both of the first generation, and also a
great number of precious ones of the second generation, as have bin taken away
this year by Gods own hand, seems to be portentous of more evil to come. And
the sudden awful deaths of some, whom the Lord has overthrown, as God
overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, look like ominous warnings. And that Epidemical
Disease that prevailed this Spring, is a very solemn voice from Heaven unto us.
We have heard also how terrible the Lord has been in his doings toward our
Country men and Brethren in other parts of the World. Not to speak of the
present state of bleeding Virginia, what an awful providence was that which
happened in Barbados in August last, when a Plantation there, was visited with
thunder, and with great noise, and with a storm and tempest, and flame of
devouring fire, so that in a few hours a considerable town was brought into
ruinous heaps, The Lord give unto that Island Grace, duly to consider of it,
and to sin no more lest a worse thing come unto them. And how awful was the
hand of God in September last, when a fire brake forth in a famous town in the
heart of England (North-Hampton by name) and in about the space of eight hours,
consumed the whole Town, that very few houses were left standing, and the
Inhabitants many of them, saved nothing but the clothes on their backs. Now if
we that hear of these things, fear God and receive instruction, our dwellings
shall not be cut off, but if we be secure and unaffected with the divine
Dispensations, how can we think that the worst is past? The Lord can easily
punish us by the same Instruments again, if we go on to provoke him. Yea if the
power and good providence of God prevent it not, it will be so. Many of these
Heathen that have of late submitted themselves, are treacherous and blouay. And
the Indians that have been helpful in this War, will be apt to grow insolent
upon conceiting, that we could not have subdued our enemies if it had not been
for them; and it will be a great mercy if rude ungoverned English do not ere
long scandalize and exasperate them. Or if none of these things should be, God
has a thousand ways to punish us, which we cannot think of. Why then should
carnal security grow upon us? When some said unto the holy Prophet, Watchman
what of the night? Watchman what of the night? He replied, The morning comes
and also night. Even so, albeit at present, a comfortable Morning is dawned
upon us, it concerns us to improve it well, otherwise we shall have cause to
think on the other words also the night. Only it must be remembered that things
of this nature, (all promises and threatenings respecting temporal mercies or
Judgments are so) are to be understood conditionally, according to that which
the Lord expresses, Jer. 18 7, 8, 9, 10. At what instant I shall speak
concerning a nation, and concerning a Kingdom to pluck up, to pull down, and to
destroy it, if that nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their
evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them. And at what
instant I shall speak concerning a nation and concerning a Kingdom to build and
to plant it: if it do evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice, then I will
repent of the good wherewith I said I would benefit them. We had need then to
pray earnesly, that past and present dispensations may be sanctified to us. If
we be indeed bettered thereby, we are like to see happy days again in
New England, but if otherwise, New England has not yet seen its worst days.
Now the Lord Jesus help us to consider it. O that there were such an heart in
us, that we would fear him and keep all his Commandments, always, that it may
be well with us and with our children for ever, Which is the prayer of him who
accounts himself happy, if he may do any faithful Service, for God and for his
People.

Increase Mather.
Boston N. E. 26. of 5 m. 1676.
AN EXHORTATION To the inhabitants of NEW ENGLAND.
GOD who sometimes said unto Jerusalem, be instructed lest my Soul depart from
thee, and thou become desolate, a Land not inhabited, does by his solemn
Judgments in like manner (...) from Heaven upon New England, saying, be thou
instruct^^ (...) I depart from thee, and thou become desolate without an
English Inhabitant, (...) Wherefore we are to be exhorted (and Oh that we might
be (...) since we have been brought into such a bleeding state, to make a right
improvement of this dreadful Dispensation. O let not the Lord complain of
New England, as sometimes of Israel, My People know not the Judgment of the
Lord. But to speak a little more fully and plainly:

1. Let us be duly and deeply affected with the awful hand of the most High.

Our Friends in other parts of the World, that wish us well, are greatly
affected with our miseryes. It was said of old, concerning Egypt and Tire, at
the report concerning Egypt, and at the report of Tire, they shall be sortly
payned, even so the report of Gods dealing thus with his New-England-People:
the report of poor New-Englands Calamity; has caused those that are in Lands
afar off to be amazed and troubled; and shall not we our selves be affected
with our own doleful state? (...) shall it be said of thee? O New England,
shall it be said of thee, the Lord has poured on thee the fury of his Anger,
and the strength of Battle, and he has set thee on fire round about, yet thou
knew not, (...) thee, yet thou laydst it not to heart. A Sword, a Sword is
sharpened, and also fourbished, it is sharpened to make a sore slaughter, it is
fourbished that it may glitter, should we then make mirth (...) Dismal things
we see are come upon us, It is mentioned in the Scripture as a sad thing,
Ephraim shall bring forth children for the Murderer. And again the Lord
threatens his people saying, thou shall beget sons and daughters but shall not
enjoy them, for they shall go into captivity. And in another place the Lord
says, your young men have I slain with the sword, and have taken away your
horses, and I have made the stink of your camps to come into your nostrills.
Also God has denounced it as an heavy Judgment which should come to punish
that sin of men's unfaithfulness in respect of promises and engagements one to
another (which has been very much the sin of many in N. E.) I will give them
into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of them that seek their life,
and their dead bodies shall be for meat to the fowls of heaven, and to the
beasts of the earth. Now all these things have been verified upon us. Is it
nothing that so many have been cut off by a bloody and barbarous Sword? Is it
nothing that Widows and Fatherless have been multiplied among us? that in a
small Plantation we have heard of eight widows, and six and twenty fatherless
children in one day? And in another of the Villages of our Judah, of seven
Widows and about thirty fatherless children, all at once: How can we speak of
such things without bleeding Lamentation! Shall not (...) solemn strokes at
last awaken us? The Inhabitants of the world would not have believed that the
enemy should have prevailed so far, and done such (...) in New England; that so
many Plantations should have been brought (...)! That so many Candlesticks
should be removed out of their places! How are we spoiled? we are greatly
confounded because our dwelling places have cast us out. Alas that New England
should be brought so low in so short a time (for she is come down wonderfully)
and that by such vile enemies, by the Heathen, yea the worst of the Heathen:
that should be an affecting humbling Consideration to us, that our heavenly
Father should be provoked to set vile Indians upon the backs of his Children to
scourge them so severely, because of the provoking of his sons and his
daughters, the Lord has moved us to anger with a foolish Nation, and moved us
to jealousy with those which are not a people. As the Lord begins to deliver
us, we are apt to forget the fears and sorrows which have been upon us, but
that is the ready way to greater Calamity.

Verily if we lay not these things to heart, there is cause to fear that those
other Judgments (which nothing but wonderful mercy has saved us from) even
Famine and Pestilence are not far off. We have seen the Lord come riding
amongst us upon his Red horse, if this awaken us not, how can we expect other,
but that ere long we shall behold a Black Horse, yea and a Pale Horse, and his
name that shall sit thereon is Death.

2. Let due enquiry be made into the cause of the Lords controversy with us,
We know in general, it is for sin, Mich. 1. 5. For the transgression of Jacob
is all this, and for the sins of the house of Israel. God is never wont to
forsake his People except they do first forsake him, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2, The Lord
is with you whilst you be with him, but if you forsake him he will forsake you.
Inasmuch then as God has seemed to cast us off, and put us to shame, and has
refused to go forth with our Armies, he does by his Providence testify against
us to our faces, that we have forsaken him. He would not have given us to the
Spoil, and to the Robbers, if we had not sinned against him. But some one will
say, how shall we know What sin it is that the Lord now contends with us for?
Answer. Although that be a most needful Question to be enquired into, yet I
shall not say (...) to it, besides what I have at sundry times expressed, when
speaking in the Name of the Lord.

1. Take we heed how we embrace such notions as will lead us into mistakes
about the causes of our misery, e. g. that imagination which some have, that
all this is come upon us, only for trial, and not for Correction on the account
of sins, without doubt it is for both. Why should we suppose that God is not
offended with us, when his displeasure is written, in such visible and bloody
Characters? and truly before the present Judgment came upon us, it was evident
that the glorious Lord was provoked against us: those general and continued
Blastings, which were upon the fruits of the Earth, spoke no less, when the
like hand of God was upon the Land of Israel, though but for three years, David
enquired of the Lord about the cause of (...) displeasure. Interpreters
observe, that the first and second year David made no inquiry, because he might
possibly think it was nothing, but what according to the ordinary Course of
Nature might well be expected, but when he saw that drought was upon the land
for three years together, he concluded that it was for some sin that had
provoked the Most High. So with us, God by a continued Series of Providence for
more then three times three years, one after another, has been blasting the
fruits of the earth in a great measure; therefore we may know that God is angry
for something.

Again, that notion, that God is provoked for one sin only, or for some secret
unknown sin only, tends to lead into mistakes concerning the true cause of our
miseries. Not but that there may be Secret sins which the Lord does set in the
light of his countenance, and which we ought diligently to search after: but
when there are so many evils visible and manifest, it is the subtilty of Satan
to persuade men that this judgment comes for some one secret sin, that so he
may keep them from taking notice of that which is indeed the Lords
controversy, and from repenting of those evils, which if they be truly
repented of, the Judgments which have been upon us will certainly be removed:
Also that principle, that whoever suffers in this common Calamity is the cause
of it, will surely lead into misapprehensions concerning it.

In the Primitive times, when Plagues and Wars arose, because the Heathen
Nations in those times persecuted the Church, some Christians perished (as to
their Estates, Bodies, Lives) in the common calamity, albeit it was not for the
sake of their sins, but for the sake of unworthy dealings toward them, that
those desolating Plagues came upon the World: look as wicked men do sometimes
escape temporal Judgments, for the sake of the Righteous amongst whom they
dwell, so do the Righteous many times suffer great outward Calamity, because of
the Wickedness of those they live among: once more, they that suppose this
Judgment comes on account of adherence to any principle always avowed by the
chief of the Fathers in these Churches, will (I doubt not) mistake in their
conclusions. Those Principles which concern the Purity of Churches, the
Authority of Elders, the Liberty of Brethren, a due extent of the Grace of the
Covenant zeal for God in matters of the first as well as of the second Table,
were always asserted and pleaded for by the chief of the Fathers of
New England, when God did wonderfully own this People, and suffered no Weapon
that was formed against them to prosper: but all that did attempt to devour
them offended, and evil came upon them, wherefore it will be in vain to Impute
our Calamities, unto any of the Principles (or practices according thereunto)
which have been mentioned.

2. Search the Scriptures. The ways of God are everlasting; wherefore (...)
brings the same Judgments upon his People now as in the days of old, in case
there be the same transgressions: If then we would know why Droughts,
Blastings, etc. have been upon our Land, let us search the Scriptures, and see
for what sins those Judgments have befallen Gods Israel of old. Was it not
because the good Creatures of God were abused, to nourish pride and sensuality?
and because Temple work was neglected, and because men were guilty of robbing
God? are the same sins found amongst us? then we may safely conclude, that
those Judgments have come in special for those sins: and let us look into the
Scripture, and there see what sins have in former ages brought the punishment
of the Sword upon a professing People: and if those very sins are prevailing
amongst us, write upon it, then it is for them, that this Judgment is come upon
us.

3. Hearken to the voice of God in the Ministry of his word, mind what the
Messengers of God speak in his name, for surely the Lord will do nothing, but
he reveals his secrets to his Servants the Prophets, Amos. 3. 7. If I were to
give Counsel to N. E. for my life, it should be the same that Jehosaphat gave
to the people of God in his time, when circumstanced in respect of a
Combination of heathen Enemies, against them, as we are this day: 2 Chronicles. 20.
20. Believe in the Lord your God, so shall you be established, believe his
Prophets so shall you prosper. What though in these days Ministers are not
infallible? yet they are in respect of Office Watchmen and Seers, and therefore
you may expect that God will communicate Light to you by them, yea they told
you of these days before they came. Do not say that the Ministers of God
cannot tell you why this Judgment is come, how then could they give you
faithful warning thereof long enough before it came? I pray you consider this
one thing, What were the sins which the Messengers of God declared would
certainly bring A day of Trouble upon this Land? And has the Lord confirmed
the word of his Servants? then you may without danger conclude, it is for those
sins that the Lord is now contending: And truly if we refuse to hearken to the
voice of God not only in the former Prophets, but also by those who are still
speaking in his name, why should we marvel that the Lord does not incline his
ear to our voice when we pray and humble our Souls before him? God cries to us
by his Messengers, and we will, not hear; therefore it is that though we cry to
God he will not hear. Isai. 65. 12. with Zacha. 7. 11, 12, 13.

4. Consider how this Judgment is circumstanced, If we mind where it began and
by what Instruments, we may well think that God is greatly offended with the
Heathenisme of the English People. How many that (...) they are Christians in
name, are no better then Heathens in heart, (...) Conversation? How many
Families that live like profane Indians without any Family prayer? Yea there
have been whole Plantations that have lived from year to year, without any
public Invocation of the Name of God, and without his Word. And in most places
Instituted Worship (whereby Christians are distinguished from Heathen) has
been too much neglected. Now there is no place under heaven where the neglect
of Divine Institutions will so highly provoke and incense the displeasure of
God as in New England, because (as after shall be said) Religion is our
Interest and that which our Fathers came into this Land for.

3. Let there be a sincere Reformation of those evils which have provoked the
eyes of Gods Glory. Deliverance will never come in mercy, except we turn to him
that smites us. It is true that this Judgment may possibly be removed, though
there be not Repentance, but then another Judgment will come ere long that will
be seven times greater then this. Woeful experience may convince us of the
truth of this, for the Providence of God is very observable, in that the
Blasting that has been without Intermission for these many years, has not
been this last year as formerly, but behold another judgment seven times
greater is come in the room of it. Yea moreover, either Reformation must be,
or else (as long as the 26 th. chapter of Leviticus is Scripture) at the last
Desolation shall be, I will make you desolate because of your Sins, Micah 6. 13.

I remember it is storied concerning Tamerlain the great, that when he laid
Seige against his enemies, the first day he would set out a white Flag, to
signify mercy in case they did submit, and the next day a red Flag, to
intimate they must now look for the Sword, and the third day a black Flag, to
signify utter destruction and desolation. Truly the Lord has been displaying
the white Flagg, for many years before us, but it has been despised, and now
he comes with his red Flag, if this do us not good, we have cause to fear
that the Black Flag will come ere long. How easily can the Lord destory us?
there is not the most contemptible Creature, but he can arm it so as there
shall be no standing before it. I have read of a great City that was destroyed
by Ants; and of another that was destroyed by Rats, and of whole Countries that
have been depopulated by Frogs, yea by Fleas. Though the Indians are a
Despicable Enemy, yet the Lord is able to cut us down by a small Indian (...).
But though I thus speak, I believe that God will reform his people by this
Judgment, by this shall the Iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this shall be all
the fruit to take away his sin.

Qu But what shall be done that so there may be such a Reformation as God will
accept of?

Ans. 1. These Evils which have been confessed before the Lord, and which are
manifest let them be reformed. In that Order before mentioned respecting a day
of public Humiliation appointed by Authority there are many Evils instanced
in as matter of Confession and Humiliation before the Lord, let those sins be
repented of, and turned from. We shall here take notice of some of them.

1. Manyfold abuses of Peace and the Blessings of God in this good land. Alas
when we have had peace from enemies, we would not be at peace among our selves.
And as the Calamity which is come upon us is General, so Contention is a sin
which all sorts of men have been too guilty of: and now we see the bitter fruit
of it, whilst the Sheep (yea the Shepherds too some of them) have been
contending one with another, God has let loose Wolves upon us all. And how
have the Blessings of God been abused to serve Baal? The Plenty, which our
Peace has been attended with, has been abused unto great Sensuality, and many
Professors and Church Members have been shamefully guilty in that respect. How
common has it been with them to haunt Taverns, and squander away precious
hours, nay days in public houses, which if but half that time had been spent
in Meditation, Secret Prayer and Self Examination, it had been happy for them,
and it may be for others for their sakes. When as our Fathers were Patterns of
Sobriety, they would not drink a cup of wine nor strong drink, more then should
suffice nature, and conduce to their health, mea of latter time could transact
no business, nor hardly engage in any discourses, but it must be over a pint of
wine or a pot of beer, yea so as that Drunkenness in the sight of man is become
a common Sin, but how much more that which is Drunkenness in the sight of God.
And how have the Blessings of God been abused to nourish pride? There has been
no small Provocation before the Lord in that thing, yea as to Pride in respect
of Apparel. People in this Land have not carried it, as it becomes those that
are in a Wilderness, especially when it is such an humbling time as of late
years has been. And none more guilty then the poorer fort of people, who will
needs go in their Silks and Bravery as if they were the best in the Land.
Though it be also too true that the rich and honorable have many of them
greatly offended by strange Apparel, especially here in Boston. A proud Fashion
no sooner comes into the Country, but the haughty Daughters of Zion in this
place are taking it up, and thereby the whole land is at last infected. What
shall we say when men are seen in the Streets with monstrous and horrid
Perriwigs, and Women with their Borders and False Locks and such like whorish
Fashions, whereby the anger of the Lord is kindled against this sinful Land!
And now behold how dreadfully is God fulfilling the third chapter of Isaiah.
Moreover the Lord says, (if the Lord say it who dare slight what is said)
because the Daughters of Zion are haughty, therefore he will discover their
Nakedness. Has not the Lord fulfilled this threatening, when the Indians have
taken so many and stripped them naked as in the day that they were born. And
instead of a sweet smell there shall be a Stink, Is not this verified when poor
Creatures are carried away Captive into the Indians filt by and stinking
Wigwams, yea when so many English are faign to crowd together, till it becomes
loathsome and unsavory? And burning instead of Beauty, is it not so when poor
creatures are exposed to the burning heat of the sun, and burnt and turned
thereby till they become of an hue like unto these Indians! Thy men shall fall
by the Sword, and thy Mighty by the War. Has not that word been fulfilled upon
us when so many have fallen by the Sword, yea so many Captains in this War, and
this is because of the pride of the Daughters of Zion. Oh then let that sin be
reformed and repented of.

2. Another sin mentioned by the Council in that Order for a day of public
Humiliation, before hinted at, is, Ill entertainment of the Ministry of the
Gospel of Peace. It cannot be denied but that the Ministers of God in this have
for the generality of them, had miserable encouragement from men in the work of
Christ. Through the undeserved mercy of God, and love of a dear People amongst
whom I live, I am not at present under such personal temptation to speak in
this matter as many better then my self are, but therefore I may the more
freely speak in the behalf of my Brethren whose sorrows I greatly condole. How
many of the Servants of Christ have there been, that though they have preached
the Gospel, have not (as the Scripture says it should be) lived on the Gospel?
but when their whole time and studyes should have been taken up in attending
Services for Christ and for his people, they have been constrained (as the
Levites in Nehemiah) even to flee every one into his Field, and the house of
God has been forsaken. I doubt it will one day appear, that the coals which
have been stolen from Gods Altar, have burnt down many of those Plantations
which are now desolate. Worthy Mr. Davenport in a Letter which he wrote to me
bearing Date. 12 th. of 4 mo. 1666. thus expresses himself, I have (says he)
long been of that mind that N.E. is guilty of great unthankfulness for the
Gospel, and strait-heartedness, and close handedness toward the Ministers. Your
blessed Father in law Mr. Cotton, was sensible of it, as I can show in his
letters to me in answer of mine to him, his conclusion after some other
expressions was, that the Ministry of the Gospel is the cheapest Commodity in
this Land: when I consider these things I see cause of Admiration that the
Gospel is yet continued in N, E. and that our Candlesticks are not removed: but
it is from Gods pity to some sucking Children that the Breasts are not yet
dried up. Thus Mr. Davenport.

And verily I cannot believe, that God would have taken away so many of his
Ministers out of New England in so short a time, if the People had carried
toward God and them, as-ought to have been. Through the wrath of the Lord of
Hosts is the Land darkened. He that holds the Stars in his right hand has
removed many of them, and great darkness has followed. In about thirteen years
space there have been (to my observation) no less then five and thirty Stars
that have set in this Horizon, I mean five and thirty Ministers (and some of
them Stars of the first magnitude) that have in so short a time dyed in
New England: why did we not behold the War a coming when we saw the Lord
calling home the Ambassadors of peace! I am not without fears lest that most
awful passage which blessed Mr. Shepard has (in his Sound Believer P. 250.) be
prophetical, Verily I am afraid (says he) such a dismal Night is toward, such
sore afflictions of Famine, Wars, Blood, Mortality, Death of Gods precious
Servants especially, that the Lord will fill the hearts of all Churches,
Families, Christians that shall live in those days, with such rendings,
tearings, shakings, anguish of Spirit as scarce any were, in the worst days of
our Forefathers, and that this shall continue, until the remnant that escape,
shall say, blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord, Blessed be the
face and feet of that Minister that shall come unto us in Christ's Name. O then
let this sin of ill entertainment of the Ministry be repented of and reformed.

3. Another sin which has been confessed is, that of Formality in Religion.
These are perilous times which we now live in, when men are getting their
Bread with the peril of their lives, because of the Sword of the Wilderness,
when they can scarce look out of doors, but they are in danger of being seized
upon by ravening Wolves, who lie in wait to shed blood, when men go not forth
into the field, nor walk by the way side, but the Sword of the Enemy, and fear
is on every side: surely the times are perilous; and that which brings such
times is, the taking up a form of godliness without the power of it: and is it
not so with us, the first Generation which was in this Land, had much of the
power of Godliness, but the present Generation has the form, and as to the
body of the Generation, but little of the power of Religion. Alas in our
Churches, we have a form of Discipline, but little of the power of it, and how
it is in Families, and in Closets God knows, yea and as to our public and most
solemn approaches before the Lord, how slight and formal are the most of men?
little or no preparation for them, no brokenness of heart in them, in which
respect we have no cause to wonder that sad tidings has come to us so often on
days of Fasting and Prays. Historians observe that Pompey seized upon the
Temple, when it was the Jews solemn Fastingday: and after that Sosius took
Jerusalem upon a day of solemn Humiliation, the Jews were then exceedingly
degenerated, having the form of these duties, but little of the power of them:
has it not been so with us in a sad degree (...) us then no more content our
selves, with having a name to live, and yet be Dead.

4. Another Evil, which we have confessed before the Lord is, that of
inordinate Affection to the World. Idolatry brings the Sword, and Covetousness
is Idolatry. Land! Land! has been the Idol of many in New England: whereas the
first Planters here that they might keep themselves together were satisfied
with one Acre for each person, as his propriety, and after that with twenty
Acres for a Family, how have Men since coveted after the earth, that many
hundreds, nay thousands of Acres, have been engrossed by one man, and they that
profess themselves Christians, have forsaken Churches, and Ordinances, and all
for land and elbow-room enough in the World. Lot would forsake the Land of
Canaan, and the Church, which was in Abraham's Family, that he might have better
worldly accommodations in Sodom, and we see what came of it, God fired him out
of all; his house and goods were burnt, and he forced to leave his goodly
Pastures, which his heart (though otherwise a good man) was too much set upon.
Is the interest of New England indeed changed from a Religious to a Worldly
interest? that is a strange God, and if it be so, no wonder that there is War in
our Gates: do men prefer their Farms and Merchandise above the Gospel? here is
the reason why Armies are sent forth against us, and our Cities are burnt up.
Inordinate love to this present evil World, has been the Fountain of all that
misery, that we are bleeding under at this day; Those unhappy
Indian-tradinghouses, whereby the Heathen have been so woefully scandalized,
has not covetousness built them, and continued them for so long a time? and
was it not from the same root of all evil, that the Indians have been furnished
with Arms, and Ammunition? would ever men have sold Guns, and Powder, and Shot,
to such faithless and bloody creatures, if a lust of Covetousness had not too
far prevailed with them? now then since these evils which have been mentioned
(not to insist upon other particulars) have bin confessed, let us be sure to
reform them, otherwise in our Confessions we have but dallied with the
Almighty, who will never suffer himself to be mocked by any of the Sons of men.

And besides these Iniquities which have been acknowledged, as has been
expressed, there are other evils manifest, in respect whereof Reformation is
necessary, as ever we desire to see good times and happy days in this Land.
For alas it may be said, that because of Swearing the Land mourns; not only
in that Swearing is become a common sin, which even Children in the streets are
guilty of, but in other respects which few take notice of. It is well if the
Freemans Oath be not violated by too many, who are acted (...) by faction, then
by Conscience. Solemn Oaths upon trivial differences are too frequent. The body
of the present Generation is guilty of Sacramental perjury in the sight of God,
by breaking their Baptismal vow, and not observing all things whatsoever the
Lord Jesus has commanded them. Also wrath is come upon New England, because
the Sabbath has been profaned. Persons under pretense of difference in
Judgment about the beginning of the Sabbath (some being for the evening and
others for the morning) keep no night at all holy unto the Lord. And it is to
be feared that even since this War began servile works have been attended upon
the Lords day, more then any necessity has called for. And if we look into
Families, Churches, or Commonwealth, we shall see such rebellious breaches of
the fifth Commandment, as may cause horror when we think of it. That Spirit of
Koraisme which blessed Mr. Wilson, when dying did so sadly bewail, and
testify against, how has it prevailed? and men will not be convinced of this
evil, except God open their eyes by strange Plagues, which are yet behind, and
it may be not far off.

The breach of the fifth Commandment is one of the great and National sins,
which the Indians are guilty of: their Children have no regard nor reverence
toward their Fathers. If we learn the way of the Heathen, and become like
them, God will punish us by them. And it is to me a sad and solemn thought,
that this miserable War, has been raised and fomented by proud and vain young
men. The old Indians were very unwilling to engage in a War with the English,
but the young men would do it, whether their Fathers would or no, and did at
last precipitate you also into it, to the ruin of both Fathers and Children. I
pray the Lord, that ungoverned young men in Families and Societies may not
prove the ruin of New England. If Fathers, if Abners will say, let the young
men now arise and play before us, it may be it will be bitterness in the latter
end.

Moreover, what shall be said concerning that sin of Oppression, which is a
general sin, and yet no man is guilty of it: since Day-labourers and Mechanics
are so unreasonable in their demands, and Merchants (some of them) so excessive
in the prizes which they set upon their Goods, it is enough to bring the
Oppressing Sword. And what a shame is it that ever that odious sin of Usury
should be pleaded for, or practiced in New England, especially by such as
should give a better example? Now for the Lords sake let such evils as these
are be reformed, and no more heard of amongst us.

And there is another evil, which although it has not been confessed so much
as should have been, yet it is a manifest provocation, and although I touched
upon it before, yet I can hardly for bear enlarging upon that particular, I
mean those woeful Contentions which have made such a noise as is enough to
provoke the Lord to turn us out of his house. This is a (...) which does escape
altogether unpunished as to men, but therefore God will punish it, and the
rather because his own Children and Servants have been found faulty in respect
of a divided heart. No doubt but the Wars and Fightings which we have had one
with another, have brought the Judgments of War upon us, from the Lord. O that
God would help those whose hands have been chief in this trespass, sadly to
consider of it, lest another evil greater then this overtake us in our security
ere long. If we will be pecking at one another, it may be the God of Heaven
will send a great Kite, ready to devour us all.

2. In order to Reformation: Let there be a due execution of wholesome Laws
which are founded upon the Word of God. If there be any Laws amongst us which
cannot be warranted from the Word, change them and establish other in their
room (I speak of Laws which respect the punishment of transgressors) but if the
Scripture will justify this or that testimony against Transgressors; either of
first or second Table, let that and only that be done which shall please God: I
have read, that it is a Rule in Politics, that a bad Executioner of Laws is
worse then a violator of them. Our defect is not so much in respect of the want
of good Laws, as in the non-execution of those Laws that are good. It were
better never to make Laws for the suppressing of Evils that are provoking in
the sight of God, then not to see them faithfully executed when they are made.

3. Solemn Renewal of Covenant with God in Jesus Christ, is a great Scripture
expedient in order to Reformation: we find that the second Generation, of them
who came out of Egypt whilst yet in the Wilderness having also a difficult
undertaking before them, being to engage with their Heathen Enemies, and in
other respects their state and case to be parallel with ours, they did most
solemnly renew their Covenant with God. It seems to be of weighty
consideration, that although the Lords People of old did frequeutly renew their
Covenant with him, yet it was never done but a blessed effect followed
thereupon, not so much as one Instance to be given in all the Book of God, when
his People did explicitly renew the Covenant but a wonderful blessing did
ensue. There is the nature of a Vow in this matter, Now Divines are wont to
observe, that no instance can be mentioned out of the Scripture, when the
Servants of God have vowed as well as prayed, but God has heard them, we read
that when the Canaanites fought against Israel, and took some of them Prisoners
(just as it is with us) and Israel vowed a vow unto the Lord, and the Lord
hearkened to the voice of Israel, and delivered up the Canaanites, Numb. 21. 2,
2, 3. And in Hezekiahs time (to omit other Examples) he considering that there
was wrath upon Jerusalem, and those that fell by the Sword, and whose Sons, and
Daughters, and Wives were in Captivity (all which things may be said of us) It
was in his heart to make a Covenant with the Lord God of Israel, that his
fierce wrath may turn away from us, 2 Cron. 29. 8, 9, 10. If the Lord help
these Churches to attend this thing with such seriousness and sincerity, as
ought to be, without doubt we shall see good days in New England.

And that it may be done the more effectually, it is much to be desired that
the Civil Authority would (though not impose yet) recommend this matter to the
Churches, otherwise it will meet with insuperable obstructions in some places;
also that not some only, but all the Churches engage herein: and that the
special evils prevailing in this or that place, be particularly bewailed, and
Reformation of them inserted, and (by the help of Christ) promised, in this
renewed Covenant. Verily I do believe, the neglect of our duty in this matter
has retarded our deliverance for so long a time, why then should we not make
haste, and not delay to keep the Lords Commandments?

4. One thing more I shall add, which if it be hearkened unto, to be sure
Reformation acceptable to the Lord will be, It is this, Let every man strive to
amend one. And who amongst us but have cause to think of Reforming? There are
none of us so good but we may be better, we may (and should) grow in Grace and
make progress in the work of Mortification. And God by the Judgment which is
upon us, does evidently point at, and call upon all sorts of men to the work of
Reformation. As for our faithful Magistrates (whom we have great cause to
bless the Lord for) it shall be far from me to go about to discover the
Nakedness of Fathers, or to say that which may tend to weaken their Authority
amongst the people, nevertheless I will be bold to say, that if the Lord help
them by this affliction to be more forward in the work of Reformation, more
zealous in looking after the execution of wholesome, good and righteous Laws,
more careful to sanctify God before the people, that in open Courts they may
not (since God was angry with Moses upon that account) discover unseemly
Passions, and more careful to restrain their children that they may not (as
Josias were, for which God at last punished them Zeph. 1. 8) either in their
attire (or however) be evil examples, and thereby hinder the Reformation of
others in that particular; we shall then have cause to magnify the faithfulness
of that God, who has brought such an affliction upon us and sanctified it to
us.

And as for us who are Ministers in the house of God (and some of us amongst
the deepest Sufferers in the present Calamity) are there not with us even with
us also sins against the Lord our God? Have all of us in every respect been
ensamples to the Flock? Have we given our selves to Reading and Meditation, and
have we been very much in prayer for our selves and for the dear people of God?
Have we been wholly in these things, without concerning our selves in affairs
not proper for us to engage in? when we have been unworthily reflected upon by
these or those, have we not been more moved at it, then has become us to be in
our own case, considering that we should show our selves examples in Patience,
and Long-Suffering? Have we abstained from all appearance of evil? Is there no
one that has brought reproach upon the Ministry? Have none of us affected
worldly Gallantry more then becomes the Ministers of God to due, who should
approve themselves Patterns of Mortification to all the world about them? Have
we ruled our own houses aright? As for some of us, have not people seen our
Relations, our Wives, our Children fl^nting of (...), and gaudy and
Fashionable, whereby others have been scandalized: let us then be humbled and
Reform, yea let us never leave Fasting and Praying, until the promise of the
Father come upon us, and the Lord Jesus pour of his Spirit from on high upon
us, in that measure as is needful for men in that relation which we stand in
before the Lord and before his people. And as it is noted of the great
Athanasim, that by his Prayers and tears, and sweating labors in writing and
Preaching, (like the bleeding of a chaste vine) he cured much of the Leprosy of
that tainted age wherein he lived, so let us endeavor to do the like. It may
be, that God intends by the present fiery Dispensation, to purify the Sons of
Levi, then shall the offerings of Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in
the days of old, and as in former years. And let not people think to free
themselves by charging their Leaders with miscarriages. Through the abundant
Grace of Christ toward his Servants there is no such cause of complaint, as
some have made, whether against Moses, or against Aaron. It was most truly and
solemnly affirmed by our famous, and now blessed Mr. Norton, in his last
Election-Sermon speaking concerning the Ministry in New England, I may (said
he) say thus much, and pardon my speech, a more yielding Ministry to the
people, I believe is not in the world. Yea they have many of them stood in the
Gap, and have turned away the wrath of God from this people. This Judgment had
come sooner if they had not improved their interest in heaven to divert it, and
if their counsels and earnest Exhortations had been hearkened to, the present
misery had never been. And therefore let all the People of the Land turn unto
the Lord, and hear this Rod and him that has appointed it, so will he soon
subdue our enemies and turn his hand (a Turn of Gods hand will save us) against
our Adversaryes, and the haters of the Lord shall submit themselves, then God
will restore New England to its former state, yea it shall be better with us
then at our beginning.

4. Let us beware of adding new sins to the old score. When the host goes
forth against their enemies, keep thee from every evil thing. There were
provocations enough before this Calamity came upon us, from which we are not
cleansed until this day: But alas! How have we lengthned out our sorrows by
fresh bleeding guilt in the sight of God? A Judgment may come upon a people for
one sin and be continued for another, it may begin on the account of former
Iniquityes, and be continued because of later transgressions, It is possible
that those evils which have provoked the Lord to whet his glittering Sword,
and his hand to take hold on Judgment, may be seen and acknowledged, and yet he
may go on to smite us because of some evils which the eyes of his glory have
been provoked by, since this War began.

I will (by the help of Christ) speak faithfully as I shall answer it before
him that has set me a Watchman, another day. No man in the world could have
persuaded me, that such a spirit would have been discovered amongst Professors
in New England, as has lately been manifest. What unquietness has there been
under the hand of God, (...) Bull in (...) full of the fury of the Lord, of the
rebuke of God? what murmurings have have there been against Moses and against
Aaron, albeit thousands of the Children of Israel lost their lives, because
they said, you Moses and Aaron have killed the Lords People, yea God was so
angry for that sin, that he threatened to consume them in a moment. Nevertheless
how many with us have cause to charge themselves, and cry guilty before the
Lord in this respect? I remember it is Pare^^ his Observation, that whereas the
Children of Israel were guilty of murmuring eight times whilst in the
wilderness, the merciful God passed it by diverse times, nevertheless when
their Murmurings were attended with a malignant mutinous Spirit (as with us it
has been) some signal Judgment or other did always follow. And has there not
been great Ingratitude amongst us? Have not men that have deserved well, been
recompensed evil for their good Services? Have they not been slanderously
reported? Have not some evil spirits fomented false Reports and others too
ready to take them up? The Lord lay it not to the Charge of New England. More
over since this War begun, the Indians have been scandalized by the English: It
is well if some English have not the guilt of Indian blood upon their souls,
yea if in their skirts he not found the blood of the souls of poor innocents.
And what could have been done more than has been done by too many, to
prejudice the Indians against the English interest, yea against the interest of
Christ in this Land? what madness and rage has there been against all Indians
whatsoever? Yea what willingness to destroy those that (like the Gibeonites of
old) are Proselyted to the Faith, and have put themselves under the Protection
of the English Israel in this land, though they never did us hurt, but they
have jeoparded their lives, and some of them lost their lives in the high
placed of the Field that so they might save ours. Judicious Authors conceive
that the reason why the Lord did so plague his people Israel, when Saul had
slain the Gibeonites, was because though Saul did it, yet the body of the
People approved of it and rejoiced in that bloody fact when it was done. As
also that so the world might see how much the Lord is delighted in the
Conversion of Heathen. Surely then we have many of us cause to tremble. How sad
is it to consider, that an Indian should write a Letter to an Englishman and
thus express himself, When any hurt is done, you say that we have done it
though we never did wrong to Englishmen and hope we never shall. You have
driven us from our houses and lands, but that which most of all troubles us,
is, that whereas we began to knew Jesus Christ, you have driven us away from
serving God. Truly when I think of what things have happened at Chelmsford my
heart does ache and bleed within me. Be merciful O Lord unto thy people Israel
whom thou have redeemed, and lay not innocent blood unto People Isreal's charge
(...) how has the Indian work, I mean the work of Christ among them (which
indeed has been one of the Gloryes of New England) been ^ighted, scorned,
vilified? Albeit it is a sure principle grounded upon Scripture, that God never
sends his Gospel to be constantly dispensed to any people, except he has some
elect amongst them, if the waters of the Sanctuary come, though it be into the
dead Sea, there is some Fish (...) be healed and made alive there: yet how many
with us have condemned all Praying Indians, crying out, they are all naught,
there is not one good amongst them? And what though some of them may be
Hypocrites? are not some Praying English as perfidious, as hypocritical, in
heart as profane as some 'Praying Indians? Shall we therefore condemn all? Is
there such a spirit in this Generation, as that they are ready to destroy? (and
has it been an hard matter to keep their hands from shedding blood?) the
righteous with the wicked? cease then to wonder that Desolation is come upon
Sanctuaryes, and that the Lord has been cutting off from us the righteous and
the wicked. The Lord Jesus did intimate to the Jews that they should see many
from the East and from the West sitting with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in the
Kingdom of God, when they should see themselves shut out, So I do believe,
that many English men that look with a disdainful eye upon these poor Praying
Indians, shall see a number of them sitting down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob
in the Kingdom of God, when I pray God they may not see themselves shut out.
And truly, if it were only the profane world, that had been guilty of this
Sin, it may be I should not have spoken so much as I have, but Professors and
Church Members have many of them (...) to lament before the Lord for this
evil. Now from the Lord I Exhort and beseech you, whoever you be that have
been guilty of murmurings in any respect, or of casting a Stumbling Block
before the Indians, go to God in secret places, confess your sin before him,
pray that it may not be imputed to you or to your Families, or to the Land for
your sakes. In the Love of Christ have I thus spoken to you.

5. Remember the Errand that our Fathers came into this Wilderness for, and
pursue that Interest. In general, it was on the account of Religion, that our
Fathers followed the Lord into this Wilderness, whilst it was a Land which was
not sown. There are other outgoings of our Nation, besides these Colonies in
New England, but they were not built upon a Foundation or Interest purely
Religious, as is to be affirmed of these Plantations. It was with respect to
some worldly accommodation, that other Plantations were erected, but Religion
and not the World was that which our Fathers came hither for? why did the
Children of Israel of old go into the wilderness? was it not that they might
serve God? for the very same reason did our Fathers come into this Wilderness,
even that so they might worship God according to his Will, and that all things
which concern the house of God might be according to the pattern showed in the
Mount Pure Worship and Ordinances without the mixture of humane Inventions, was
that which the first Fathers of this Colony designed in their coming hither. We
are the Children of the good old Non-Conformists: and therefore are we under
the deepest engagement, not only to reject Inventions Humane in the things of
God, but to come up to the practice of Institutions Divine. As to our
Ecclesiastical constitution, the Congregational way, as it is distinguished from
the rigid extremes of Presbyterianisme, and Brownisme, is that which we
profess. And as to our Civil Polity, our Profession has been, that they that
are Rulers should be men that Fear God, and that they that choose them should
be such also, and that Laws in the Commonwealth should be regulated by the
Word of God, that so the Lord Jesus may reign there.

It was worthily spoken by blessed Mr. Mitchel in a Lecture Sermon, that there
is much of the Kingdom of Christ in our Civil Constitution: and it will be sad
for those who that put their hands to alter it, Such dash themselves against
that stone, that whosoever falls upon it shall be broken to shivers. Therefore that
Man of God solemnly protested, saying, Woe to that man, be he old or young,
Churchmember or non-member, Freeman or non-freeman, that shall go about to
destroy, or basely betray the liberties of this People; it were better for him,
that a Millstone were hanged about his neck, and he thrown with it into the
midst of the Sea.

Moreover, it was in a special manner with respect to posterity, that our
Fathers came into this Land, that so their Children might not see evil
examples, and be in danger of being corrupted thereby, as it is in other parts
of the world, but that they might be left under the Government and Discipline of
Christ in his Church, and be sure to have the great advantage of a Religious
Education. And therefore that woeful neglect of the Rising Generation which has
bin amongst us, is a sad sign that we have in great part forgotten our Errand
into this Wilderness: and then why should we marvail that God takes no
pleasure in our young men, but they are numbered for the Sword, the present
judgment lighting chiefly upon the Rising Generation. Yet more, our Fathers
came hither to this end, that they might Propagate the Gospel, and be
instrumental to set up the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus amongst the Heathen. And
although some of the Lords Servants here have been sent forth (not without
gracious success) to labor in that work, yet it is great pity, and I doubt one
of the great sins which the English have been guilty of, that no more has been
done in order to the conversion of the Heathen: how great then is their sin,
who do wholly despise and decry that work, and those beginnings of the Kingdom
of the Lord Jesus, which is to be seen amongst them, our Fathers were of
another Spirit. There is a Letter Printed which was written by my honored
Father ((...)) in the year 1652, wherein be declares what himself (being one
of those Elders who was sent to Natick formerly, to enquire into that affair)
knew concerning the blessed success which the Gospel then had amongst the
Indians: and he thus writes;

There is so much of Gods work amongst them, as that I cannot but count it a
great evil, yea a great injury to God and his goodness, for any to make light
or nothing of it, to see and to hear Indians opening their months and lifting
up their hands and their eyes in a solemn Prayer to the living God, calling on
him by his Name Jehovah, in the mediation of Jesus Christ, to hear and see
them, exhorting one another from the Word of God, confessing the Name of Jesus
Christ, and their own sinfulness; this is more then usual, we saw them, and we
heard them perform the duties mentioned, with such plenty of Tears trickling
down the cheeks of some of them, as did argue to us that they spoke with much
good Affection and holy Fear of God; that it much affected our hearts.

He that wrote these lines has been in Heaven now above seven years, how would
he mourn if* he were here at this day, to behold the strange degeneracy that is
in the spirit of the present Generation, who will neither believe that there is
any good work begun amongst the Indians, nor yet desire and pray that it might
be so? Believe it, if that holy design of using means for the Conversion of
the Indians be not duly prosecuted* the Prayers of our blessed Fathers will
rise up in Judgment against us, yea the Patent it self will be produced as a
Witness against this Generation at the last day, if that work be neglected. For
it is pretended (and those Worthies who were the Patentees would not have made
such a Profession if they had not been real in it) in the Patent, that one
special ground and end of this Plantation was, that so the Heathen in these
parts might be brought to the knowledge of Jesus Christ: The words in the
Patent, concerning this matter are,

That to win and incite the Natives of the Country, to the knowledge and
obedience of the only true God and Savior of Mankind, and the Christian Faith,
in the Adventurers free profession is the principal end of this Plantation.

Yea more, the public Seal of the Country will be a witness against this and
succeeding Generations, if that design be not prosecuted: for we know the
public Seal of this Colony represents an Indian with these words Come and help
us (as is to be seen in the preceding History, P. 15.) alluding to that Vision
which appeared to the Apostle Paul, when there stood a man of Macedonia, and
prayed him, saying Come over into Macedonia and help us, whereby the Apostles
gathered, that the Lord had called them to Preach the Gospel to the
Macedonians: So did the Fathers of this Country conclude, that the Lord had
called them to take an effectual course, that the Gospel might be Preached to
the Indians, and therefore it is not to be wondered at, that the Lord has
afflicted us by the Indians since the body of the present Generation has no
more of an heart to endeavor their Conversion and Salvation. The Histories of
our own Nation Declare, that whereas there were famous Christian Churches
amongst the ancient Britains, yet when in process of time, they scandalized
the Heathen Saxons, who lived amongst them, and neglected to use means for
their Conversion unto Christ. God was displeased with those Churches, so as to
dissipate and drive them out of their Land by those very Heathen Nations, whose
conversion they should have but did not endeavor, let us consider of it in the
fear of God. And if we mind and seek the things of Christ as we ought to do,
though our Enemies were more and greater then they are, and we fewer then we
are, nevertheless we shall be victorious over them: As it was with the
Waldenses, whilst they made Religion their business, and kept in with God, they
prevailed wonderfully against those that waged War upon them.

At one time eleven of them put to flight three hundred of their Enemies, and
at another time five hundred of them destroyed five and twenty hundred of their
Adversaries; and this is but according to what the Lord has promised to his
People as long as they are faithful unto that which is his and their interest.

6. Give not way to desperate unbelieving thoughts: say not there is no hope,
the case is desperate. At first we too much despised the chastning of the Lord,
let us not now faint when we are rebuked of him, we are apt to run into
extremes. Are there not some that once thought this Calamity would be over-past
in few days, who now are ready to say it will never be? well, do not think
that God will utterly destroy New England as yet. It was said of the Children
of Israel of old, when they were in as degenerate a condition as we are in, yea
and far worse, the Lord was gracious to them, and had compassion on them, and
had respect unto them, and would not destroy them, neither cast them from his
presence as yet, 2 King. 13. 23. what may come on this sinful Land at last I
know not, nevertheless I am verily persuaded that utter destruction will not
come as yet For Jesus Christ has by a wonderful hand of providence
dispossessed Satan who reigned in these dark corners of the Earth, in ages
that are past, and has taken possession of this Land for himself. Now, shall
we think that Christ will suffer the Devil to drive him out of his possession
again presently? The Lord has a great Interest in this Land which he will not
easily part with: There are many Churches of Christ here. In this Colony of
Mattachusets, that are (or at least were when this War began) seven and forty
Churches, and in Plymouth Colony there are twelve or thirteen Churches: and in
Connecticut Colony there are nineteen Churches, besides the three Churches in
Long Island: so that there are above fourscore, Churches in New England. Surely
the Lord will not bring utter ruin upon them all as yet: And there are some of
the first Generation (alas that there are so few of them) as yet surviving, now
we may hope that God will not utterly consume all things in their days.

As a man that lived in Luthers time was wont to say, that he did not fear the
ruin of Germany so long as Luther was alive, So neither do I fear the utter
ruin of N-England, so long as and of the first Generation who for the Gospels
sake came into this Wilderness, are alive. Moreover though the body of the
Second Generation (...) degenerate, nevertheless there are some of them (and
through Grace many) that are eminently faithful to the Lord Jesus and his
interest, being of the same Principles and Spirit, that their blessed Fathers
were of before them: we need not fear utter ruin in their days neither.
Certainly I God intend to bring speedy destruction and (...) upon this whole
land, he will find some way or other to remove such of his Servants as stand in
the Gap to turn away his wrath from (...) people. Besides all this, the
Children which have been born in New England, are many of them the posterity of
those who have had an eminent Interest in God, yea the posterity of those who
have been great sufferers for his name and Truth. Divines observe, that whereas
in the eight Beatitude they that are persecuted, are pronounced blessed twice
over, it may intimate, that such shall be blessed not only in themselves, but
in their Posterity. And if a due enquiry be made into that matter, I doubt not
but that it will appear, that a special blessing has attended the Children of
those who have been Martyrs of Jesus: now the Children of New England are many
of them the posterity of such as have been eminent Confessors, and so in a
degree Martyrs: If it should be said to a gracious Prince, behold here are
Children, whose Fathers lost their Houses and Estates, and ventured their lives
for your sake would he not show peculiar favor unto them? Truly we may plead
it as an Argument with the blessed God, and say before him, Lord as for the
Children who have been born in New England, their Fathers many of them ventured
their lives into a wilderness for thy sake, they left their Fathers Houses and
possessions in this world, out of respect to thy Kingdom, and therefore, have
thou compassion on them, God will have compassion on them for his Covenant
sake: And indeed the mercy which the Lord has showed in the midst of wrath,
since the Sword has been drawn amongst us, argues that he has no mind to
destroy us: what a favor of God was it that the Army was not cut off at the
Fort fight? and that they perished not with cold when they were abroad day and
night in the Snow, in the depth of Winter, and that God preserved them from
mortal Contagious Diseases, albeit a Soldier fell sick of the Small Pox as he
was going to the Army, yet none else took the Infection of that Disease. And
whereas that terrible Disease, was in an Ordinary here in the midst of Boston,
at the same time, yet only one therein was sick and dyed, and then the Lord was
entreated to stay his hand; these are signs that God has yet a favor for us.
It is also a wonder of mercy that the Indians have done no more mischief, how
easily might they have swallowed up Plymouth Colony long ago, and most of the
Towns in the other Colonies, had not our God restrained them? Moreover, the
Providence of God is to be admired, in that no more lives have been cut off. In
some of those Towns which are desolated, not many lives have perished, I cannot
learn that at the writing hereof, there are many above six hundred among the
English who have been slain by the Enemy since this War began, whereas we might
have expected that above so many thousand should have (...) lives, though the
War had not continued so long as it has. The (...) that his design, in
bringing this Calamity on us, is not (...) destroy us, but (...) us, and reform
us, and to do us good in the (...) end. Where (...) although I am not without
sad apprehensions, that (...) will come upon the body of the present Generation
in New England, if not by this, then by some other Judgment ere long (if
Repentance prevent it not) nevertheless a Remnant shall escape: That Scripture
is like to be verified in New England, even that Zeph. 3. 12, 13. I will also
leave in the midst of (...) an afflicted and poor people: and they shall trust
in the Name of the Lord. The remains of Israel shall not do inquity nor speak
lies, neither shall (...) tongue be found in their mouth, for they shall feed,
and lie (...), and none shall make them afraid. And as for the Enemy which is
risen up against us, fear them not, the Lord our God will bring them down, who
can do it, though we know not how to do it. It may be the Lord slays them not
wholly and at once, but gradually lest his People should forget his mercy
toward them, Psalm. 59. 11. yet I do believe, that if the Lord had not had a
righteous design utterly to destroy those of the Heathen Nations who have
refused and horribly contemned the Gospel, they had not been permitted to do
what they have done, that so they might bring swift destruction upon
themselves, God may bring us Low, but he will not make a full end of us; as he
will with our Adversaries, who are implacably set against his name and interest
witness that Scripture, Jer. 46. 28. Fear thou not O my servant Jacob, and he
not (...) O Israel, for behold I will save thee from afar off, and thy seed,
for I am with thee, and I will make a full end of all the Nations whether I
have driven thee, but I will not make a full end of thee, but correct thee
(...) measure, yet will I not leave thee wholly unpunished. And that Scripture,
Psalm. 79. 6, 7. Pour out thy wrath upon the Heathen that have not known (...)
and upon the Kingdoms that have not called upon thy Name, for they have
devoured Jacob, and laid waste his dwelling place, yea and that Scripture,
Isai. 41. 12. They that War against thee shall be as nothing, and as a thing of
naught. Let us not then be faithless but believing. There has been much prayer
made before the Lord on our behalf, and now we hear that the Churches in Europe
join with us in earnest cries to Heaven, certainly those Prayers and tears will
come pouring down at last in streams of blood, and fire, and vengeance upon the
Heathen: the vengeance of the Lord, the vengeance of his Temple is not far off.
The Lord has a controversy with the Heathen, and therefore he has suffered
them (in a degree) to pull down his Temple, that so they might pull down
vengeance upon themselves for ever, God has ways to bring them down that we
cannot think of: he can soon mingle a perverse Spirit amongst them, and cause
them to destroy one another, he that did sometimes set the Egyptians against
the Egyptians can set the Indians against the Indians, and who knows but that
the Lord may do as in the day of Midian? And it may be God will send the
destroying Angel amongst them, it is noted in the Memorials of New England (p.
23, 27.) that a little before the English came hither, the Indians were greatly
wasted by Wars one with another, also the Plague was amongst them, and after
that the small Pox, so as that the twentieth person was scarce left alive when
the English arrived here, and they saw multitudes of skulls lying above ground,
whereby they perceived that the living of them were not able to bury the dead.
God is the same still, and will do for us as as he did for our Fathers, only he
waits to be gracious, he waits to see when we shall be fit for such mercy. It
was said to the Church in Thyatira, he that over comes shall have power over
the Nations, and as the vessels of a Potter shall they be broken to shivers,
Rev. 2. 26. If the Lord Jesus help us to overcome the special corruptions and
temptations whereby we have been carried away from God, those Nations who have
risen up against us, shall be broken into shivers like a Potters Vessel, which
all the World can never make whole again. I have been credibly informed, that a
little before the beginning of this War, an Indian Squaw at Noss^^, being with
Child, the Child was heard crying three weeks before it was born into the
World, whether dismal things to come upon them, might not be intimated by that
Prodigy, I know not. And of late the Lord has appeared more for us, and more
against our Adversaries, then at the beginning of this War, so as that there
seems to be a beginning of revenges upon the Enemy.

7. When God has perfected our deliverance, let us endeavor to be and (...)
better then ever heretofore. If the Lord speak peace unto us, let us no more
return unto folly. Let us sin no more lest a worse thing come unto us. It is an
awful word which Ezra spoke, when the Lords people of old were delivered from
their heathen enemies, should we again break thy Commandments, would not thou
be angry with us till thou had consumed us, so that there should be no
remnant (...) escaping? So if people in New England should again forsake God
and his Ordinances out of respect to the world, what may we think would be the
effect thereof at last? If the Lord restore peace unto this Land, and with all
give us to possess the Lands of our enemies, it is to be feared that people
will be apt to do as formerly, even to seek great things for themselves, with
the neglect of the Kingdom of God, or with only a secondary respect thereto.
That great Light of New England, then whom no man was more instrumental in
laying the foundation both of our civil and (...) constitution, blessed Mr.
Cotton, did in his time observe and testify against such a spirit of
worldliness and Apostasy, even in those days prevailing in this Country,
wherefore in his Sermon on the third Vial, page (...) he thus expresses
himself. Sit down no where without good Ministers, if it be possible, and sure
possible it is, else Christians may resolve to carry where they are, as Ezra
tarried by the river Ahava, in the 8 th. of Ezra. 15. till he had got some
Levites to go with them, that they might go and make a comfortable work of it
that they might not leave the ordinances behind them, and yet there were some
there before, whither they went. It is true some may go and make a beginning,
but yet never make a beginning but where you may come and partake of the waters
of Gods house every Lords day, and let them that cannot so travel, let them
continue where they are, and drink of the waters of eternal life, rather then
run such hazards. You have seen when some have made a beginning without
Ministers, they have staid three or four years before they have got any help,
and when they have got them, they have had much ado to settle, they have been
suddenly unsettled, though they have not gone rashly about it, but with good
advice: but for want of this, their not taking these Rivers and Fountains with
them, they have been at a loss, and therefore in such a case let it be the
wisdom of sincere hearted Christians, that come from old England for liberty
and purity of the Ordinances, not to leave them now for fresh Meadows and
Fountains, and for want of planting-ground and the like, it will not be
suitable to those ends for which you left your native Country. Thus Mr. Cotton.
Let there then be no more Plantations erected in New England, where people
professing Christianity shall live like Indians, without any solemn invocation
on the name of God, and altogether without instituted Worship. What a sad thing
is it to consider, that there are many Children, born in New England, who
although they are (...) to (...), never heard of the Lord's Supper, nor did ever
see a child baptized in their lives? I am persuaded that one reason why the
faithful, holy God has let loose the heathen upon us, is that so this disease
might be cured. And (...) to this land if it be not so. Yea and when the Lord
shall have accomplished our Salvation, we ought to do some singular thing
tending to the honor of his name, as (...) testimony of our gratitude toward
him who has by his own arm saved us. I have read concerning the States of
Holland, that when they were miraculously delivered from the Spaniaras great
Army, to show their thankfullness, they erected a Coll^age at Leyaen, and
endowed it with goodly privileges, and many famous lights have there been
there, for whom the would has had cause to bless God; Poliander, (...),
Scal^ger, Heinsius did sometime belong to that University. And what can be
thought of amongst us, which will have a greater tendency to the Glory of God,
and good of the Souls of men then to take effectual care about that matter?
That Academical Learning, (and with it Religion) may not fail in succeeding
Generations. We find in Scripture, that whilst the first Generation of the
children of Israel, who came out of Egypt lived, religion was upheld. Yea and
whilst the (...) of the second Generation continued* But when Joshuah and
Eleazer (the leaders of that Generation) slept with their Fathers, sad
degeneracy and misery soon overwhelmed the rising Generation. The Lord awaken
us to do our utmost to prevent the like in New England, but there will be no
preventing of it, if due care be not taken, that there may be meet and able
Instruments by whom the truth and Religion may be maintained and propagated.
The Centuriators and other Hist^oi^ns have noted that the Apostles and
primitive Christians were greatly sollicitous in that thing. And so we see our
Fathers of the first Generation in New England have been therefore did they
erect a College at Cambridge, which in their days was signally owned and
blessed by the Lord and what a dark miserable Land had New England been before
this day, had it not been for the Blessing of God upon that Society? most of
the Churches being supplied with Teachers who have there been educated. Should
Academical Learning fall in this land, it would be one of the saddest Omens
that could be, Ignorance and Barbarism would overspread the face of succeeding
Generations; darkness shall then cover the earth, and gross darkness the people
Papists are wont to reflect upon Protestants, as if they were nor duly careful
in erecting and encouraging Seminaries of Learning and Religion. The most
learned Voetius, was able to reply, that whereas there are no less then ten
Provinces in Popish Belgium, there are but two Universityes therein, whenas
although there are but seven Provinces in reformed Belgium, there are less then
five Universityes, and one Academical School, besides other illustrious
Schools. It will be a great mercy and happiness to Posterity, and we shall have
where with to answer Adversaryes, if after this War more encouragement be given
respecting the College and other Schools of Learning and if ever God shall
give us the lands of our enemies, I cannot think how they can be disposed of
better, or more to Gods Glory, and public advantage, then in such a way and
toward such an end, as has been expressed. And what a wonderful providence
will it be, if Barbarians should occasion the promotion of good Literature.?

8. In the last place let me assume the boldness to speak to any in other parts
of the world, into whose hands this may come. Let not those that bear us
ill will say in their hearts Aha so would we have it. Will not the Lord
remember the children of Edom, who in the day of Jerusalems Calamity said raze
it, raze it to the foundation thereof? Psalm. ^37. 7. And say unto the Ammonites
hear the word of the Lord God, thus says the Lord God, because thou said Aha
against my Sanctuary when it was profaned, and against the land of Israel when
it was desolate, and against the house of Judah when they went into Captivity,
behold therefore I will stretch forth my hand upon thee, and will cause thee to
perish. Ezekiel. 25. 3. 7. Neither let the world be offended at these things that
have happened to New England, as though neither we nor our Fathers were built
upon right Foundations of Truth, because of this misery which our sins (and
back slidings which are many) have brought upon us. It is famously known, that
those ancient and orthodox Christians, the Albigenses and Waldenses, no less
then ten hundred thousand were (...) by barbarous and bloody Enemies, even
Heathenish Idolatrous (...) and when the Bishop of Tolosse endeavored thereupon
to persuade them that they had not a righteous cause before them, they replied,
it is written in the Book of Revelation, concerning the Beast, that unto him
was given Power to make War against the Saints, and to overcome them; and
therefore, not withstanding the success which you have had you may be the
Beast, and we may be the Saints of Christ. Nor is it any sign that these poor
New-English Churches do not profess the Truth and way of Christ because such a
Judgment has overtaken us, therefore let no one make that use of it; but
rather be awakened to take warning thereby to prepare for Troubles, for if this
be done to Immanuels Land, what may other Lands expect ere long? Are not the
things that have happened to New England a Sign that the wine-cup of divine fury
shall be given to all the Nations? and they shall drink, and be moved, and be
mad, because of the sword which the Lord will send amongst them. In which
respect I pity and marvel at the folly of those who are removing out (...) the
Country, lest they should meet with trouble. To what end is it for you? It is
as if a man did flee from a Lion, and a Bear met him, or went into the house
and leaned his hand on the wall, and a Serpent bit him. Shall not the day of
the Lord be darkness and not light? even very dark, and no brightness in it The
time is come that Judgment must begin at the House of God, and if it first
begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel of God?
verily I am persuaded, that the Calamity which is come upon New England, is a
solemn warning from Heaven, that dismal things are hastening upon the English
Nation, and not only so, but indeed upon the whole World, that it will not be
long before that Scripture be fulfilled, Zeph. 3. 8. where the Lord speaks,
saying. My determination is to gather the Nations, that I may assemble the
Kingdoms to pour upon them mine Indignation, even all my fierce anger, for all
the Earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy. However, certain it
is, that the most terrible changes are coming upon the Earth that ever were
known since the world began. There are indeed glorious times not far off,
glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou City of God. After the destruction
of Rome the Conversion of the Jews; and the fullness of the Gentiles shall come
in (which things I know and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that they are
nearer then some imagine for) peace and prosperity shall run down like a River,
and like a mighty Stream, the whole World throughout, the Nations shall learn
War no more, but a little before that, there shall be distress of Nations with
great perplexity, men's hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after
those things. The powers of Heaven shall be shaken, the Sun shall be turned
into darkness, the Moon into blood, and the Stars of Heaven shall loose their
shining, Alas who shall live when God does these things? There shall be such a
time of trouble as never was since there was a Nation even to that same time,
Dan. 12. 1.

And as for those who in this or that place do in sincerity call upon the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ, their Lord and ours, be entreated to remember
New England, in an your solemn addresses before the Throne of Grace, pity and
pray for us, who knows but the Lord may be gracious to the remnant of Joseph,
through the help of your Prayers, yea, we know that God has begun to answer
your Prayers for us already: And therefore you who as yet have escaped the
Sword, go away, stand not still, remember the Lord afar off, and let Jerusalem
come into your minds, yea let New England come into your minds, who spreads
forth her hands, and shall there be none to comfort her, at this time when the
Lord has afflicted her in the day of his fierce anger? poor New England cries
unto you (as sometimes sorrowful Job unto his Friends) have pity on me, O ye
my Friends, have pity upon me, for the hand of the Lord has touched me.

FINIS.

