NEHEMIAH ON THE WALL IN TROUBLESOME TIMES; OR, A Serious and Seasonable
Improvement of that great Example of Magistratical Piety and Prudence,
Self-denial and Tenderness, Fearlesness and Fidelity, unto Instruction and
Encouragement of present and succeeding Rulers in our Israel.

As it was delivered in a SERMON Preached at Boston in N. E. May 15. 1667.
being the DAY of ELECTION THERE.

By that faithful Servant of Christ, Mr. JONATHAN MITCHEL, late Pastor of the
Church of Christ at Cambridge.

Psalm. 78.70 -- 72. He chose David his servant -- He brought him to feed Jacob
his people, and Israel his inheritance. So he fed them according to the
integrity of his heart, and guided them by the skilfulness of his hands.

Josh. 7 10. And the Lord said to Joshua, Get thee up: wherefore lie thou
thus upon thy face?

Isa. 32 1.2. -- Princes shall rule in judgment And a man shall be as an
hiding place from the wind, and a cover from the tempest, as rivers of water in
a dry place, as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by S. G. and M. J. 1671.

Christian Reader,
THe still-out-stretched hand of Gods powerful wrath over this poor Country, in
smiting down our Pillars, plucking up our Stakes, and taking from us the breath
of our Nostrils, is a matter so doleful and solemnly awful and tremendous, that
we may well sigh out our sorrows, in the words of the lamenting Church, Lam.
5.16, 17. The crown is fallen from our head: woe unto us that we have sinned.
For this our heart is faint, for these things our eyes are dim. How often have we
seen Aaron called up to Mount Hor, and Moses to Mount Nebo, and there stripped
out of the Rags of Mortality, to be clothed with the Glory of a better World? O
how much of our glory have we sinned down into the dust! Abraham is now
ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledges us not; yet let our Father and
Redeemer whose Name is from everlasting, vouchsafe to return, for his servants
sake, the Tribes of his Inheritance: Let him not suffer us to err from his
ways, nor harden our heart from his fear; but so awaken, affect and teach us
to profit, that being deeply and duly humbled under his mighty hand, he may
please to lift us up in due time. Let those dreadful Thunderclaps which of
late have broken over our heads, awaken and call us up from the bed of Sloth,
to wrestle in Prayer with the God of Salvations, whose mercy endures for ever,
that he may be prevailed with to raise the Tabernacle of David which is fallen,
and repair all our breaches, to give (as Eleazar after deceased Aaron, so)
Joshua to succeed Moses, furnished with a double portion of his Spirit, to
encounter and overcome all emergent difficulties he may meet with, in the race
he is set to run. That growing spirit of wantonness under, and weariness of
Gods Rule in Commonwealth and Church, cannot but add weight to that load,
which lies on the Shoulders of such as are called to bear the burden and heat
of such a day. To encourage the hearts and strengthen the hands of the Builders
of our Jerusalems Wall, was the pious design, and prudent scope of that worthy
Servant of Christ, who is now at rest, in Preaching this following Sermon to a
great and honorable Auditory. What is here presented, was taken out of the
Copy written by the Authors own hand: Had he lived to review and prepare it for
the Press, it had probably come forth with greater luster and vigor. That his
praiseworthy pains taken in Studying, Writing, Praying and Preaching, and of
others in Publishing a Discourse so seasonable and useful, may not be lost;
that the Living God may yet delight to appear for us in Mounts of Difficulty,
to settle our Shakings, heal all our Backslidings and Breaches, and to give us
such skilful State-Physicians, as may by apt means prudently used, recover us
to a better condition of Health; that the Beauty of the Lord our God may be
upon us, and his Glory on our Children, let be the travail of thy Soul, in
prayer to Him in whose favor if life. To whose blessing I commend thee, in
perusing what is here put into thy hands; and rest*

Thine in the Lord Jesus, J. S.

At the ELECTION at Boston, May 15. 1667.
Nehemiah 2.10. -- There was come a man to seek the welfare of the children of
Israel.


THe Occasion of these words, and frame of the Context, is known and obvious to
every Reader, we need not take up time in that.

The words are a short, but notable Character or description of good Nehemiah,
when appointed to be Governor or Ruler in Judah, and that in a time of trouble
(of great Affliction and Reproach, as ver. 3. of Chap. 1. and the whole frame
of the Story tells us) then he willingly undertakes the Charge, and comes with
this design, this was his aim and spirit, (as it was afterward his practice) to
seek the Welfare of the Children of Israel. If you ask who or what Nehemiah
was, that was now come to be Ruler in Judah, (for so he was, Chap. 5.14.) or
what his business or design was? You are answered in this Periphrasis, There
was come a man to seek the welfare of the children of Israel. It is brought in
here as that that was the grief of the back-friends of Judah, (Sanballat and
Tobiah* when they heard of it, it grieved them exceedingly, says the Text) but
it was a truth in it self; (that is it that ^aim at) this was the News that was
then to be heard at Jerusalem: and it was no small joy to them, that there was
come a man ( viz. Nehemiah) whose aim, business and spirit was to seek the
welfare, (or the good, (...) the word is) of, or that that was good far, the
children of Israel.

But without further Preface, the words plainly afford us this Truth.

Doct. It is the Work and Spirit of faithful Rulers, to seek the welfare of the
People, especially when as they are the People of the God of Israel. Or,

It is the Duty and the Spirit of faithful Rulers, even in difficult and
troublesome Times, ( you may add that, for that was the case of the Text) to
seek the good ( or welfare) of the People, especially when as they are the
People of God.

Thus Nehemiah did, this was his Spirit and Character, and he made it his
business all the time he was Ruler in Judah, as the whole after-story shows,
which is a large Comment on the Text; and his commended Example is here set
forth in the Book of God, for others Instruction and Imitation. Rulers (I say)
are to seek the welfare, the good of the People: Romans 13.4. He is the Minister
of God to thee for good; speaking of the Civil Magistrate: he is so by his
Place, and he ought to be so in his Practice; Esth. 10.3. Wealth-good (the word
is) or welfare: the same word is there in the Hebrew, with this in the Text.
Luke 22.25. Civil Rulers are called Benefactors, (says Christ) and such they
ought to be, as they may justly and truly be so called; Benefactors, (...),
doers of good, to and for the people they rule over, especially when they are
the people of God; so we know Israel (the children of Israel) were Gods
Covenant people, 2 Samuel 7.24. and to seek the welfare of such a people (the
children and people of Israel) that has an Emphasis in the Text, was
emphatically the design and desire of good Nehemiah; that consideration moved
his heart when he was in the Court of Persia, both to pray for them, and to
endeavor their help, Chap. 1.10. The safety of Jerusalem, the holy City, by
his building up the Wall thereof, was his main design, Nehem. 2.13, 17. So Psalm
78.71.72. great is the Trust and Obligation upon David, when set to feed (to
Rule) Jacob, that are the people of God, and Israel his inheritance: Psalm.
122.9. so speaks David, a Ruler, to Jerusalem. For the Religious Interests
thereof (Because of the House of God that is in it) he is eminently affected to
seek its good.

For a little Explication. The Object, [the Peoples welfare] and the Act,
[Seek] are here considerable.

Quest. 1. What is that good, or welfare of the people, which Rulers ought to
seek? or wherein does it consist?

Answ. Take it in the Example of Nehemiah, the improvement whereof the Text
leads us unto.

1. They are to seek the Maintenance and furtherance of true Religion amongst a
people. Nehemiah did not think himself unconcerned in that; or that he being a
Civil Ruler, had nothing to do in matters of Religion: He encouraged and
assisted Ezra in the Reformation of Religion, Chap. 8. and 10. He put forth his
Authority to restrain and redress sundry abuses therein; as Nehem. 13. The
defiling of the Temple, ver. 7, 8, 9. Neglect of the Levites, ver. 10 -- 13.
Profanation of the Sabbath, ver. 15 -- 22. Religion is the chief and principal
thing, wherein the welfare of a people stands; it is impossible they should be
well and do well without this, whereby they may come to serve God and glorify
him, and attain Salvation for their own Souls. The weal, the excellency, end
and happiness of Mankind, lies in true Religion: and therefore if Rulers seek
the weal of a people, they must needs seek the advancement and establishment of
this. Hence Religio est summus politicae finis; Religion is the chief and last
end of Civil Policy. Alsted. Encyclop. p. 1389. Gods Commandments are the Rule
of man's good, Deuteronomy. 6.24. and 5.29. so is the first Table as well as the
second: hence they must be keepers of both Tables.

2. In subordination to Religion, they are to seek also the external, temporal
welfare of the people:

1. Consisting in their Safety; that Nehemiah takes care for in the first
place; (the preservation and safety of their persons and enjoyments, both
Public and Personal, Religious and Civil) To that end he builds the Wall of
Jerusalem, for their safety, that they might not be a prey unto, or reproach
amongst their Adversaries, Nehem. 2.17. This is fundamentally necessary to the
welfare, or well-being of a people, they cannot possibly have well being,
without the preservation of their Being, both Personal and Political. When
Nehemiah came to seek the welfare of the children of Israel, his great business
was to build the Wall of Jerusalem, in which place their principal
Concernments, both of Religion and Government, were laid up, Psalm. 122.3, 4, 5.
That Jerusalem have a Wall for the safety and preservation of it, (and of what
is contained in it) is requisite to the welfare of Israel.

2. Their Honesty: Rulers are to seek to maintain, cherish and preserve Civil
Honesty amongst a people, by restraining and redressing Injuries between man
and man, and other Crimes and Misdemeanors, by the Administration and
Execution of Justice; by the free passage of Righteousness, which assigns to
every one his own; and of Equity also, abating the rigor and extremity of
strict Justice, where need is. Nehemiah left an eminent Example of this, Neh.
5.7 -- 13. causing them to deal honestly, yea mercifully with their poor
brethren, according as the distress of the time required, suppressing the
biting Usury that was among them; he frees the oppressed from their
oppressions, and takes care that Righteousness and Equity may obtain amongst
the people; this also is a part of his care for the good of Israel. That people
may live together in all honesty as well as godliness, is the care and the
benefit of good Rulers, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. and so that Judgment and Justice may be
faithfully administered, which is a main Basis of the welfare of a people, and a
main part of the work of Rulers, 1 Kings 10.9. Jer. 22.3, 15, 16. Amos 5.24. 1
Pet. 2.14.

3. Their Prosperity, in matters of outward Estate and Livelihood, by such help
as the care of Government may contribute to that end. That that we commonly
call ( Wealth) is a part of the wealth or welfare of a people, though not the
greatest part, as the world is apt to esteem it. Good Rulers will gladly be a
furtherance thereunto, what in them lies, that the Commonwealth may flourish
and prosper in that respect, but especially in reference to necessary
livelihood, when it is a time of distress and poverty, or special scarcity in
this or that, of food or clothing: when the people are in a low condition (or
many of them at least) wrestling with many and great difficulties, or in a
dearth, Chap. 5.3. how careful is tenderhearted Nehemiah of the people at such
a time, Nehem. 5. he took great care that things might be so carried on, that
poor people might be provided of necessaries, and be able to sustain their
Families, that they might not perish in a time of dearth and scarcity, verse. 2,
3, etc. this was part of the good he did for the people, ver. 19. So Genesis 41.33
-- 36.

4. Their Tranquillity, Quietness (or Peace) in the enjoyment of all those,
(both Religious and Civil good things.) That was the scope of Nehemiahs care
and endeavors in many of his actings. That the people might enjoy Peace and
Tranquillity, he does endeavor to prevent and hinder both Disturbances from
without, (hence he built the Wall of Jerusalem) and also to establish Unity,
Love and Peace among themselves; to that end he took care to quiet Complaints
and Contentions, and to heal dissatisfactions that arose among them, Neh. 5.1,
2 -- 6, 7. It is the great fruit and benefit of good Government, that the
people may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in the ways both of true Religion,
and civil Honesty, (or in respect both of their Religious and Civil
Concernments) 1 Timothy 2.2. That of Tertullus was a great commendation of Felix
his government, had it been true, and spoken without flattery, Acts 24.2. the
enjoyment of Quietness (Peace and Tranquillity) is an excellent fruit of good
Government. Thus of what the welfare of a People is. Now

2. To [Seek] a peoples welfare, is to put forth utmost and best Endeavors to
procure, promote and maintain it; to study it, and to speak for it; to act for
it, as occasion is. It is not an empty wishing and woulding, (I could be glad,
says a man, to see it go well with such a People) nor yet to talk of it only,
and speak great words, but to do (effectually and vigorously to do) for it what
in us lies, as the case requires. Seeking implies positive and industrious
Endeavors, in the use of all due means, to obtain a thing; as the use of the
Word, in other places shows: See Psalm. 34.14. Prove. 11.27. and 15.14. and 18.1.
Mat. 13.45. Take a man that seeks Wealth, or seeks Honor, how diligent,
active, sedulous is he in his way, he lays out himself in industrious pursuit
after it: so does a faithful Ruler seek the welfare of the people, so Nehemiah
did (as the story tells us.) But I may not enlarge here.

Reas. 1. Why it is the Work or Duty of Rulers to seek the good and welfare of
the people; 1. Because this is the way whereby the Ruler, as such, glorifies
God; viz. by seeking the good and welfare of the people. To glorify God, is
the last end and great duty of every man, and thither we are to refer all we
do, 1 Cor. 10.31. Now we serve and glorify God in our several stations, (and
as placed amongst men in this world) in a way of seeking and serving the good
of men: hence the Law, which is the Rule of our serving and glorifying God, we
know one Table of it is taken up in enjoining of us to do good to men, to seek
and further the good and welfare of our Neighbor, in all that concerns him, (
in his Honor, Life, Estate, etc.) Would you serve God? then says the Lord,
Love your Neighbor, seek the good and welfare of your Neighbor as your own:
this is that Eternal, Immutable, Moral Rule that lies upon all men. Hence it
lies upon the Ruler, that he do in his place, and according to his capacity and
compass, (which is greater then that of a private person, and therefore more is
expected from him) seek the good of the people he stands related to. For [ our
Neighbour] is any one or more of Mankind, whom we have any opportunity or
capacity to do good unto, Luke 10.29 -- 37. and the more Spiritual opportunity,
advantage and obligation we are under to do good to another, the nearer
Neighbor he is. Hence the People are the Rulers next Neighbor, (as I may say)
they are the direct and eminent Object of his love, and of the fruits thereof,
whom his Place gives him the highest advantages and obligations to do good
unto. Hence to seek the good of the people, is the great work and duty which
the Eternal Law of God lays on those that are called to place of Rule and
Government.

Reas. 2. Hence, The next end of the Ruler, as such, is to be for the people,
and to promote their good and welfare: As the last end is the glory of God, so
the next end is the good of the people, Romans 13.4. As 1 Cor. 11.9. i. e. Woman
is lastly and as Homo (or one of mankind) for God; but nextly and as Mulier
(in her proper place and Sex) for the man, to be an Help to him, Genesis 2.18. So
the Ruler is (as every man is) lastly for God, but nextly, and as a Ruler, for
the People. The people are not for the Rulers, but the Rulers for the people,
Iun Brut. page 74. Bucan. page 7^1.
to minister to their welfare. Now it is the excellency (the goodness) of every
thing, and the duty of the rational creature, to serve to its End; and the more
aptly and fully that any do serve to their End, the better and more excellent
they are.

Reas. 3. From the Trust that is committed unto Rulers: They are betrusted by
God (yea by God and Man) with the Public Weal, and God will call for an
Account of it, they are his Ministers, his Trustees for that business, Romans
13.4. No man can wholly excuse himself from being his Brothers keeper, Genesis
4.9. but the keeping of the Commonweal of all their Brethren, is in a
particular manner committed to Rulers, they are called in Scripture Shepherds,
Psalm. 78.71. and 77.20. Ezekiel. 34.23. Mic. 5.5. Jer. 23.14. who are betrusted
with the Flock; Nursing-fathers, who are betrusted with the care of the Child,
Numb. 11.12. Isa. 49.23. These and such like Titles import the Trust they are
charged with. If the people or their welfare should ever miscarry in their
hands, through their default, it will be required of them by the Lord. The
peoples welfare is a depositum committed to them to keep. If but one Neighbor
commit a thing to another to keep, care and fidelity in that Trust will be
required, Exodus 22.7 -- 12. much more when a whole People, and God by them, do
commit their whole common welfare unto such and such to keep.

Quest. 2. Why they are especially to seek the welfare of the people of God; or
to seek the welfare of the people over whom they are Rulers, especially when as
they are the Lords people.

Reas. 1. From the Preciousness of such a people, and of the things that are
laid up with them: The Lord has but one Darling in all the world, and that is
his People, Jer. 12.7. the dearly beloved of my Soul, even sinful Israel is so
called; Israel is his Son, his firstborn, Exodus 4.22. and such an one he puts
to you to nurse, who are Rulers in Israel; they are his Portion, his
Inheritance, his peculiar Treasure, Deuteronomy. 32.9. even when found in a desert
land, ver. 10. there he leads them about as a Flock, by the hands of Moses and
Aaron; and they are to him as the Apple of his Eye, ver. 11. Psalm. 135.4. Exodus
19.4 5. His Vineyard, Isa. 5.7. and this he commits to your care and keeping
(as Cant. 1 6.) With what care is such a Trust to be managed and looked unto?
and how solemn would the account be if neglected? as 1 King. 14.7. and 16.2.
They are the Brethren of Christ, and what is done to or for them, yea for the
least, for a despised handful of them, he accounts as done to himself, Mat.
25.40, 45. They are the Spouse of Christ, of whom he is very tender, for whose
welfare he is exceeding jealous, Zech. 1.14. They are the Household of Faith,
and there is a specialty of duty and obligation to do good to such, to seek
their good and welfare, Gal. 6.10. The nearer that any are to God, the nearer
they are and ought to be to us. Gods people are precious and honorable in Gods
sight; yea if any part of his people be more holy, more reformed, more
conformable to his Will and Image then others, they are the more precious: and
so they should be in our sight, and will be so with all that have a heart after
the heart of God, and that love the righteous as such, Vi. Dutch and Engl.
Annot. in loc.
Isa. 43.4. Jer. 2.3. When and while Israel was Holiness to the Lord, (an holy
people) not only by designation, but also in measure actually so, the Lord was
more then ordinary tender and chary of them.

Remember also the precious things that are laid up with and among the people
of God; as viz. The holy Ordinances of God, The Truth of Religion, The
dispensation of the glorious Gospel, The helps of everlasting Salvation: These
things are high and strong obligations to seek the good of such a people, Psalm.
122.9. and to maintain, preserve and promote these Enjoyments, wherein the
choicest part of their welfare is contained. When the Ship is laden with Plate
and Treasure, it highly concerns the Master and Pilot to be very careful of
her, that she miscarry not.

Reas. 2. The glory of Gods Name is eminently bound up and concerned in the
welfare of his people; and therefore, if Rulers seek the glory of God, they
must intensely seek the welfare of his people. It is true, that God who brings
good out of evil, can and does make the adversity and sufferings of his people
turn to his glory; but that it does so, is but by accident, and a working by
contraries. The peace and welfare of the Lords people, has a more proper and
direct tendency to the glory of God, as well as their own comfort. Indeed if
you speak of bare outward quiet and prosperity, singly considered, that has
not so near connection with the glory of God (though that was an outward
blessing, and was accounted a great favor in Solomon's time, 1 Kings 5.4) but
take the whole welfare and peace of a Religious people together, that
compriseth the flourishing of Religion, the open exercise of Gods Worship, the
free passage of the Gospel, the most advantageous enjoyment of all the helps of
Salvation, and of all encouragement in the ways of God: and there is a very
near and direct connection between this and the glory of God; his glory is
eminently bound up in it. So Psalm. 102.16. when Zion is pulled down, laid in
the dust, as ver. 14. lies in rubbish, the glory of Gods Name suffers, and is
eclipsed, ( Ezekiel. 36.20. Isa. 52.5.) But when Zion is built up, and restored
from her Captivity into a condition of welfare, then the Lords glory appears,
shines out, and is advanced. So also under the New Testament, when deliverance,
peace, rest, and visible welfare is given and granted to the Church, it is
counted and spoken of as a great glory to God, and his Name is thereby lifted
up amongst men. So in the time of Constantine, as that is commonly taken in
Rev. 12.10. (The Kingdom of God is after a sort visibly seen, says Brightman
on the place, when God sets up godly Rulers to govern his people.) And so
upon the more full and final deliverance and restoration of the Church, and
peaceable flourishing of Religion therein yet to come, (the great issue and
scope of the Providence of God, of the Promises and Prophesies of his Word, and
of the Prayers and Hopes of his people) the peace and welfare of his people
will be matter of great and wonderful glory to God, and an exaltation to his
Name and Kingdom in the world, Rev. 19.1.2, 5, 6. and 11.15 -- 18. It is
therefore no carnal thing, but an holy duty to desire, and in our places to
seek and endeavor the Peace and Tranquillity of Israel, not for low and sensual
ends, but that God might have glory by his mercy to us, and by more abundant
and fruitful service from us. And look as it is in the Body Natural, though God
can and does turn Sickness, Diseases, and other like Afflictions, into great
good to his people, and glory to his Name; yet notwithstanding Health is to be
prized, prayed for, and by all lawful means sought after: and it is a duty of
the sixth Commandment so to do. The same may be said of political health and
welfare: God is to be submitted to, and glorified in Affliction and
Tribulation, if he please to bring it; but he is to be waited on in all regular
ways (in the use of all lawful means) for welfare, even outward peace and
welfare: and it is a great glory to his Name, where he bestows it upon a people
of his, (public peace and welfare upon a whole people especially) and he is to
be glorified for it. And hence to act against the welfare of the people of God,
is (in Scripture account) to act against the Lord himself, and against his Name
and Glory, (which shows how eminently the same is concerned in them, and in
their welfare) Psa. 83.3, 4, 5. (such are enemies to God, therefore to his
glory, ver. 2.) and 74.7, 8, 22, 23. Zech. 2.8. And on the contrary, all that
Nehemiah did for this people, and for their welfare, he did it for God, and the
Lord accepted it, Neh. 5.19. and 13.14. And so Heb. 6.10. you show love to Gods
Name, when you minister to his Saints.

Reas. 3. The Rulers own good and comfort will eminently hereby be promoted;
God will graciously remember Nehemiah for good, for all the good turns that he
does for his people, Neh. 5.19. and 13.31. So Heb. 6.10. God will in a
Gospel-way (by his rich grace) richly reward every such service; Moses had the
recompense of reward to look unto, and so has every faithful Ruler, Heb.
11.25, 26. If you would study for your own welfare, and contrive to find out a
way how you may be well, and do well enough (for one) whatever comes, there is
no way in all the world like this, Faithfully to seek the welfare of the Lords
people: Be and do for God and for his people, and you shall be sure to do well
whatever come. Ebed-melech that did but do for one Jeremiah* found a reward
even in those saddest times, Jer. 39.16, 17, 18. much more shall they (one way
or other) that do for a whole Body of the Lords people. Dan. 4.27. the poor, i.
e. specially the poor people of God (the afflicted Jews) then in his Dominions
in Captivity, if there was any way in the world to lengthen out his
Tranquillity, that was it. As Numb. 10.29, 32. the Lord has spoken good
concerning Israel, if you faithfully seek their good, you shall partake in the
good and blessing that the Lord has laid up for them; you shall be blessed
with them and among them, not in this only, but in another world: for they
shall prosper that love Jerusalem, and faithfully seek the peace thereof, Psalm.
122.6.

USE I. This Point shows us what ought to be the general End and Rule of all
the Motions and Actions of Rulers, viz. the welfare of the people. To that
scope Nehemiah bends all his Actions and Endeavors; and Finis est mensura
mediorum, the End serves to measure, regulate, direct and limit the means, and
show what should be done. That Maxim of the Romans was and is a Principle of
right Reason, Salus Populi Suprema Lex, [The welfare of the People is the
Supreme Law] and is engraven on the Forehead of the Law and Light of Nature.
Hence it is owned and confirmed by the Scriptures, as we see in the Text; and
it is easily deducible from the Law of God: for that that is indeed the Law of
Nature, is a part of the Eternal Law of God; and the Law of God enjoins, that
in Humane Civil Affairs, things be managed according to right Reason and
Equity; and that Rulers, as they are for the people, so they are to make it
their main business, and the scope of all their Actions, Laws and Motions, to
seek the welfare of the people. There is Sun-light for this Maxim, and it was
never doubted nor denied by any that held but to Rational and Moral Principles.
Hence this Law being Supreme, it limits all other Laws and Considerations.
Hence it is impossible that a people or their Rulers should be bound by any
other Law, or Custom, or Consideration whatsoever, to do any thing that is
really and evidently contrary to this. If it be indeed contrary or destructive
to the welfare of the people, (of the Community they stand charged with) it is
impossible they should be bound in Conscience to do it.

This is the Compass that Rulers are to steer by, and the Touchstone of Right
and Wrong in all their Motions, viz. What is for or against the Public good,
and the Welfare of the people, Romans 13.14. That bounds and regulates his whole
Ministration. What is for the Common good, that and that only you are to do;
and all that are set in place of Rule and Government (be they of higher or of
lower quality) do stand charged with the welfare of that people, whom they are
Rulers over.

I know when it comes to particulars, the doubt will still be, What is for the
welfare of the people. One will say, this is most for the common good, another
that. But

1. It will help much if this Principle be settled and acknowledged, That in
Civil Affairs, the Consideration of the welfare of the whole, is that which
shows and determines what is right, and weighs down all other Considerations
whatsoever. Men will say, We must do what is right, whatsoever comes of it:
Fiat Justitia ruat Coelum. True, but it is most certain it is not right, if it
be against the welfare of the people. It is impossible that any thing should be
truly right, that is destructive to the common good: for it will constantly
hold, Salus Populi Suprema Lex.

2. Consider the things wherein the welfare of a people does consist, which are
abovementioned, [ viz. Religion in the first place, and then their Safety, or
the Preservation of their Being, both Personal and Political, and their
participation in the Rules and Fruits of Righteousness, Equity, Order and
Peace] and that will help to discover and discern what is for the welfare of
the people, or for the common good, and what not. There is need of much
prudence and wariness in particular Applications and Cases; but those general
Principles will hold, That a peoples welfare lies in such things as these, and
that Rulers are bound in all their Motions and Actions to seek the welfare of
the people, and to do nothing contrary thereunto.

USE II. Hence see, that difficulties and troubles do not excuse, nor should
discourage Rulers from doing the work of their Places which God calls them
unto, or from seeking the welfare of the people: Such things do not excuse, nor
should discourage from taking and accepting the Place of Rule when called to
it. As they did not Nehemiah, though he heard before that their condition was a
condition of great affliction and reproach, Neh. 1.3. yet he voluntarily left
the Court of Persia, to embarque with the Jews at Jerusalem, when in so stormy
a time as this was; and how is he honored in the Book of God for it? It was a
difficult time and task that Moses was sent upon, accompanied also with a deep
sense of his own infirmity and unfitness, Exodus 3.4. he could not but be slow
and backward to such a work; but yet when he was over-backward the Lord grew
angry, and chides him into a consent: but (I say) difficulties and troubles
should not discourage nor hinder Rulers from doing the work of their Places
when set therein, i. e. from faithful seeking and acting for the welfare of the
people, which is (as we have said) the summary work of the Rulers Place.
Consider a little the difficulties that lay upon the Jews and their Rulers at
this time in Jerusalem, after their return from Captivity, and in the days of
Nehemiah.

1. They were a small, weak and despised people, Nehem. 4.1, 2, 4. and 1.3. and
2.19. Contempt and reproach is a bitter and killing thing to ingenuous Spirits;
yet this they were fain to bear and pass through. It was a day of small things,
which others, yea even themselves are apt to despise, Zech. 4.10.

2. They were in the midst of Enemies, and Adversaries round about them, of
several sorts and Nations; Sanballat a Moabite, (from Horonaim a chief City of
Moab, Isa. 15.5. Jer. 48.3, 5, 34. called the Horonite) and Tobiah the Servant,
the Ammonite, on the East, Neh. 2.10. ( The Servant, he was Governor of the
Ammonites, but of a base and servile spirit; some think that of a mean man* he
was got into Place, and therefore is called Tobiah the Servant: such are often
worst, Prove. 30.21, 22.) Geshem the Arabian (Neh. 6.1. and 4.7.) and others on
the South; and the Samaritans on the North, Neh. 4.2. Ezra 4.9, 10. Thus they
were beset round with Adversaries, and Ill-willers, and many Informers and
Complainers there were against them, as before in the days of Zerubbabel, Ezra
4. and 5.

3. Their Adversaries did labor to affright them with the Accusation of
Rebellion, Neh. 2.19. an old Artifice, but it was an injurious Calumny, and
most groundless Accusation. The building of the Wall of Jerusalem for
self-preservation, had nothing in it of Rebellion: but many clamours and
stories they raised of that nature, Neh. 6.6, 7, 8. and see their end therein,
ver. 9. to weaken and discourage them from their work, that their hearts and
hands might fail them therein, that was it they aimed at.

4. There were Discontents and Divisions among themselves, Neh. 5.1. Great
Complaints of the Inferior sort against their Superiors; of the Poor against
the Rich; of Brethren against Brethren: yea, there were among themselves that
were helpers to their Adversaries, and complied with them, even some chief men
and others, Neh. 6.17, 18. and thereby, among other evils, it came to pass that
nothing could be kept within its due compass, but every thing was carried and
reported to their Adversaries, ver. 19. They uttered my words (or my matters)
unto him; and that doubtless not in the fairest dress. Yea, there were some of
the Prophets that endeavored to weaken the hands of faithful Nehemiah, and to
put discouragement upon him, Vid Ergl Annot.
Neh. 6.10, (This Shemaiah is conceived to be the same that is mentioned Ezra
8.16.) 11, 12, 13. (By the way, who would have said that that would have been a
sin, which might seem to be a prudent retirement for safety? yea, but for
Nehemiah, in a case so circumstanced, to act fear and discouragement to the
prejudice of his Cause and Work, would have been a sin.) But ver. 14. there
were also that raised Slanders of others of their Prophets, those it is like who
were of another mind, ver. 7.

5. They were poor, and low, and weak as to outward estate, conflicting with
wants and straits, and many difficulties in that respect, very unable to
support themselves, and to bear the Public Burdens that were then upon them,
Neh. 5.2 -- 5. and ver. 18. The bondage was heavy upon this people: Neh. 9.37.
We are in great distress.

6. Hence there was hard Work, and weak Instruments, ready many times to be
discouraged, Neh. 4.10. the Workmen themselves, and those that should join
hands together to labor and carry on the work, began to mutter and be
discouraged, by the difficulty of the work, and their own weakness; We are not
able, say they, to carry it on: At the same time when the Adversaries were
high, president and threatening, ver. 11. their own workmen began to be
disheartened and diffident, ver. 10. Here was a juncture of discouraging trial.
Hence hard shifts they were fain to make to carry on the work, and to put forth
themselves to the utmost, and beyond an ordinary measure, by the care and
courage and conduct of good Nehemiah, ver. 16, 17. Every one had both his hands
full, and they were fain to do two works at once, the work of a Soldier, and
of a Labourer, ver. 18, 21, 22, 23.

7. It was a time of many fears; wherein they had many fears among them, and
many that heightened those fears: many Reports, Threatenings and fore-speakings
of this, and that, to that purpose, Neh. 4.12. and 6.9, 13, 14, 19. It is
observeable, that that was the drift and endeavors of Adversaries and
Ill-willers, Fear, fear, fear; a discouraging Heart and Hand-weakning carnal
fear. The great word of God to godly Rulers is, Be strong, and of a good
courage, fear not when in Gods way and work, Josh. 1.6, 7, 9. But the word of
Satan and his Instruments is, Fear, be afraid, look upon the danger of being
faithful: But (as to man and second Causes) they had many very great causes of
fear, many dangers round about them, and to be faithful in duty in a time of
fear, proves a difficult task to flesh and blood.

8. Which was worst of all, Among this people of the Jews after Captivity, when
engaged in Reforming work, there were many sins, disorders and miscarriages,
which were provoking unto God, and a great exercise of discouragement to their
faithful Leaders; such in Ezra's time as made him blush before God, and fear
what God would do with them, Ezra 9. 6, 10, 14. And before that in Haggai's
time, such neglects of carrying on Temple-work, and of finishing what was
begun, as he sharply reproves, yea as God reproved from Heaven, by Drought,
Blastings, etc. Hag. 1.2, 5, 6, 9, 10, 11. and 2.16, 17. And here in Nehemiahs
time there were faults, evils and distempers found among them, as Neh. 5.1, 6,
7, 9. and 13.4, 5, 10, 15, 18, 23, 24, 26, 27. not only matter of Affliction,
but sinful Corruptions and Distempers do sprout up among a Reforming people,
and those they have to wrestle with: yet neither did these take them or their
Leaders off from their Work, nor utterly overturn it; nor did the Lord cast
them off (though he chastened them) but helped them along, though in much
infirmity. He was with them at many a dead lift, ( Hag. 2.4.) and after frowns,
yet smiled on them again: especially while the Leaders were faithful to search
out and testify against evil, and to set upon duty when called to it; and the
people were willing to hearken to them, and to be reduced and reformed by them:
both which may be observed of them all along in the story, Hag. 1.12, 13. Ezra
10.2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 12, 14.

9. Lastly, we may remember the long time wherein this poor people were
conflicting and laboring under Difficulties and Infirmities, and what a
succession of Difficulties and Troubles did attend them in the Reforming, and
Rebuilding work they were upon. From their first Grant by Cyrus, unto the
beginning of Nehemiahs Government (in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes)
according to the shortest Account, were 82 years (so Usher in his Annals.
Junius says 146. Lightfoot says but 37, but few embrace that Vid. Apud Til
li^ghast knowl. of Times, p. 226, to 251.
.) Almost all that time, and so afterward in the time of Nehemiahs Government,
they were followed with various Troubles and Exercises (as the story at large
tells us) though they had their lucid Intervals, and the Lord still helping in
the issue.

Thus that word was made good, Dan. 9.25. that Jerusalem, both City and Wall,
should be built again in troublous times. Yet notwithstanding all this, they
went on in their Work with Courage, and Constancy, and Confidence in God, Neh.
2.20. and he did prosper them, not by preventing Difficulties, but by carrying
on the Work in their hands through all Difficulties, and in the midst of all
their Infirmities. And it is observeable, That every Tragedy they passed
through, had a glad Catastrophe; every stress had a comfortable issue: God
still helped them in the conclusion and upshot of every business, that they
came off well at last, though with much tugging and wrestling, much exercise of
Faith and Patience. So in the Building of the Temple, (thus it went on heavily,
and met with many obstructions, and many Adversaries; yet they got through at
last, to their great joy) Ezra 6.15, 16, 22. So here in the building of the
Wall, Neh. 6.15, 16. and 12.27, 43. And so in the Reformation of Abuses, Ezra
10. Neh. 5. and 13. The story of the Church in all Ages, and especially in the
Scripture, informs us, that the best and greatest works God has delighted to
carry on through many Difficulties and Oppositions, and in much felt infirmity
of Instruments. The time of Moses, of David, of Israel, all along in the Old
Testament, will furnish us with many Instances of it; yea and also of the
Apostles in their Work under the New Testament, Act. 20.19. 1 Cor. 16.9. and
3.3. 2 Cor. 11.23 -- 28, 29, 30. Gal. 4.13, 14. the glorious Gospel must be
preached and carried on through Infirmity of the flesh, i. e. through outward
meanness and affliction of Instruments, yet not therefore to be despised. The
whole Church of God, and every particular concernment thereof, is in a Militant
conflicting condition in this world, and it must be no stumbling to us to see
it so: it occasions the more exercise of Faith, Patience, Prayer, etc. in the
work (as we see in the example of Nehemiah all along) and the more of God to
appear in the issue of it, Neh. 6.16.

Go on therefore in the Work of the Lord, and in the Service of your several
Places, and be not taken off by trouble, difficulties, oppositions, felt
infirmities in your selves, weaknesses and distempers in persons and things
round about you, (which will always be.) When were there work for Patience,
Faith, Fortitude, Self-denial, and for the Spirit of a Soldier, Wrestler, etc.
if it were not for such things? We must none of us say, of one Order or other,
I will serve God in my place, and help build the Wall of Jerusalem, if I may do
it with ease, and tranquillity, without trouble, without hazard, without
reproaches, and ill requitals from men, etc. Christ is little beholden to us,
if that be all we will do for him; that is too low for the Spirit of a good
Soldier of Christ Jesus, 2 Cor. 6.4, 5, 8. Yea, now you look like the
Ministers of God, when you cheerfully discharge your Places, though surrounded
and laden with Afflictions, Distresses, Labors, false Reproaches, etc. Now
you are dressed like a Minister, like a Servant of God, and of his people in
Public Work; and through such things as these, you must go on in your Work, as
the Apostles then did.

USE III. A threefold Exhortation: 1. To our Rulers and Leaders. 2. To the
People. 3. To both jointly, or to the Whole.

1. To Rulers and Leaders, who are betrusted with the Government of this
people; Let them be Exhorted by the Word, and in the Name of the Lord, to
follow the Example of good Nehemiah, and to be of this Spirit, to make it your
work and business to seek the welfare of the Lords people. The Concernments of
a People framed into a Body Politic, are put into your hands, and of such a
people as are the people of God (that no Christian Spirit can deny) a part of
Gods Israel, though but a part, yet no inconsiderable part of the people of God
at this day in the world: such a part of Gods people as are retired into these
Ends of the Earth, for known ends of Religion and Reformation, to serve God in
his Temple and Ordinances according to his appointment: You are betrusted with
as precious an Interest as is this day upon the Earth* viz. with the Lives,
Estates, Liberties, and Religious Enjoyments of some thousands whose Names are
written in Heaven, and bound upon the Breast and Heart of Christ Jesus: yea,
with so much of the Interest of Christ, his Truth, Ways, Worship, Gospel, Name
and Kingdom, as is to be found here amongst this people. This part of Israel
do under God confide in you, and betrust you with their Welfare: To be
Instrumentally the Saviors and Preservers hereof, is a thing more honorable
and excellent (yea and more profitable too, as will appear one day) then to be
Owners of all the Wealth of both the Indies. Poor Nehemiah, who sought and
maintained the welfare of the children of Israel, when but an handful, a poor
small and despised people, is more honorable in the Book of God, then all the
great Ones of the Earth in his time. The Lord Jesus Christ, having asked and
obtained this piece of the uttermost ends of the Earth for his possession, does
commit it unto you, as Instruments under him, to keep and maintain his
possession in it. The eyes of the whole Christian World are upon you; yea which
is more, the eyes of God and of his holy Angels are upon you, to see and
observe how you Manage and Discharge this Trust now at such a time. And though
your Obligations and Encouragements from men, from the people over which you
Rule, are but small, there is little outward advantage you have by them to
engage you to them, or their welfare, (and hence they that look no higher then
the world, will never do much for such a people) yet to men of Religion, and
Conscience, and Faith, there is enough to be said to oblige and encourage them:
the Charge and Commandment of God, and Duty to him, is the highest Obligation.
Remember that the Lord, the great God, lays this solemn Charge and Injunction
upon you ( Honored Fathers) as you will answer it at the great Day, That you
seek the good, and be tender of the welfare of this people: and God may be bold
with you, though we may not; he speaks not without Authority to Command, nor
without Riches and Power to Reward you; he has given an Advantage to set
before you, and encourage you by, though we your poor people have not; he has
the Promise to encourage, as well as the Precept to bind and oblige: they that
can really believe the Promise, will never stick at any Duty, and so not at
this duty of the Precept. When Moses chose to suffer affliction with the people
of God, he made the best bargain for himself that ever man did. Paul never
gained so much, as when he lost all for Christ. The Lord will not let you be
losers by any thing you do for his people, Neh. 5.19. Every peny-worth of such
Service shall have many pounds of reward, Mark 10.29, 30. God in Christ is a
rich and gracious Rewarder, as well as a sovereign Commander; and therefore
when you are before the Lord, and look to him (as it is before him, and in his
Name that we now speak) the Exhortation mentioned is strong and powerful, and
wants no strength of Argument to back it, to persuade and constrain (encourage
and oblige) to seek the welfare of such a people.

And some Helps to this purpose (or useful Directions) we may readily gather
from the Example of Nehemiah.

Direct. 1. Put on bowels of Compassion, so as to have a lively sense of the
Condition and Concernments of this people: So Neh. 1.4. and 2.3. and 5.18.
Think not that it is well enough if I can shift for one; Nehemiah was not of
that mind, he took a view of their case, (in special to see where ought was
broken down and out of order in the Wall of Jerusalem, that he might stir up
himself and them to mend it) Neh. 2.13, 15, 17.

2. Be studious and solicitous about the Public Welfare; bestow intense
thoughts, study and care concerning it, what may be needful or expedient for
it. Neh. 5.7. My heart consulted (took counsel, the phrase is) in me; his mind
wrought about the business: he is also very vigilant and industrious to foresee
evils, and to use means to prevent the same, and to order things in their time
and place; as may be seen in special in Chap. 4. at large.

3. Practice Self-denial and Patience; faithful Rulers will find much need of
that, especially among a people that are poor and full of infirmities: Neh.
5.14, 15, 16, 18. He requires not the bread of the Governor, (i. e. the
Maintenance belonging and suitable to such a Place) because many heavy burdens
were upon that poor people. This was a voluntary departing from his own Right,
and it cannot be urged as binding where the case is not alike (though where, or
so far as the case is alike, the fear of God will teach it, as it did him, ver.
15.) We may fear indeed that there is not that done by the people with us, that
should be, and might be in this particular; it may be time will teach us more
of our duty in that matter: But to be sure great things cannot be done by this
poor people; and where so it is, Rulers shall honor God and themselves much by
Self-denial, and condescending to mean things, and to do that out of love to
God and his people, for the which they are not rewarded by men: (Oh there are
but a few such Nehemiahs in the world, we have cause to prize and be thankful
for such, you cannot find the people upon earth that have so Self-denying and
condescending a Magistracy, as the Lord has given unto us.) But the less your
reward is on Earth, the greater it shall be in Heaven. As you are to practice
Self-denial, so also Patience. When God chose a Ruler for Israel in the
Wilderness, he chose the meekest man in all the Earth, ( Numb. 12.3.) a man of
patience, and he had need be so, to bear the Infirmities, Murmurings,
Unthankfulness, and the Distempers of the people. Moses was a Nursing-father,
Numb. 11.12. The Nurse had need have more patience then the Child, else what
will become of it? If when the Child is froward and unquiet, the Nurse should
be so too, what work would there be? Though it be a time of strife (the great
distemper) of the Congregation, Moses and Aaron must carry it with patience and
moderation, else God will not take it well, Numb. 27.14.

4. Courage and Constancy was another imitable excellency in Nehemiah, and
without which he could never have done his work, nor stood up for the welfare
of that people, especially at such a time. Many sought to drive him from his
work by fear, but he abode undaunted and courageous in the Lord, Neh. 6.9, 11,
(he counts that such an act of fear was very unsuitable to one in such a Place)
13, 14, 19. Threatenings, Letters, Prophets, all cannot discompose him by fear:
yea, he has such a Courage, Faith and Presence of Spirit, as to encourage
others in time of danger, Neh. 4.14, 20. ( Our God shall work for us) If the
Spirits of Leaders fail when Difficulties and Troubles come, all fails; but God
has appointed them to Spirit all about them, to be both the Head and the Heart
of a people, 2 (...) ^^.6, 7, 8. That (I say) is the great word of God to ^^od
Rulers, only be strong, and of a good courage, viz. in the (...) of the Rule,
Josh. 1.6, 7, 9. and they have a strong word to build upon, ( ver. 5) I will
not fail thee, nor forsake thee.

5. Wisdom and Prudence in the management of Affairs; as it is mentioned in
Scripture as a Requisite in Civil Rulers, Deuteronomy. 1.13, ^^. 2 Chronicles. 1.10. so it
was not wanting in Nehemiah, as the whole frame of the story shows us. I might
instance in some acts and fruits of his Wisdom; as in his practicing the lesson
that we have since had from Christ's own mouth, Beware of men, (Mat. 10.16, 17.)
Neh 6.2.3, 4. in his not being carried with pretenses, and taking plausible
shows of Reason, no not from Prophets themselves, Neh. 6.10, 11, 12. (...) with
great words from others, Neh. 2.19, 20. His putting great Trust into the hands
of faithful men, Neh. 7.2. and 13.13, etc* We may here remember, That Religion
is the truest Reason; Honesty the best Policy; and to keep in the way of the
Rule, in the fear of God, is the highest Wisdom: and all sinful deviation or
turning to crooked ways, is folly, Job 28.28. Psalm. 111.10. Prove. 10 9. But
Religion does not take away, but establish the prudent managing of Affairs, as
to the manner and circumstances of Actions. How often may the same thing be
done, and the same end attained, in a discreet, moderate, comely and prudent
way, as well as in a way that is less expedient? David guided them with the
skilfulness of his hands, as well as with integrity of heart, Psalm. 78.72.
Leaders are to exert a skilfulness and prudence in the manner of the Conduct of
Affairs.

6. Be much in Prayer on all occasions: Nehemiah was a praying Magistrate, and
therefore so helped and blessed in his way and work, Neh. 6.9. and 4.8, 9. and
1.4, 11. (He laid the groundwork and beginning of his work and business on
Prayer, and so he carried it on.) He will have an Ejaculation to Heaven, even
when he is upon Action, and has not time for more, Neh. 2.4. The Prayers of
Rulers and Leaders for the People, are a precious means of the peoples welfare.
That is one good way of seeking their good, to set God on work by Prayer, and
engage him to do them good, Psalm. 51.18. When Hezekiah and Isaiah do both cry
and pray to Heaven, there is good hopes it shall go well with that people, and
that God will appear for them, as he did, 2 Chronicles. 32.20, 21, 22. How often did
the Prayer of Moses and Aaron for Israel in the Wilderness, slip in between
them and destruction, Numb. 14.12, 13 -- 19, 20. and 16.20 21, 22 45. and 21.7.
It was an exemplary passage of that worthy Prince of Orange, who when he had
but one breath to draw, spent half of it on the people in prayer for them,
crying (as he fell down slain) Oh my God, take pity of my Soul, V^. Clark
Martyr. page 274.
and of this poor people.

2. This Point may afford several Instructions to the People.

1. It gives a Direction whom to make Choice of for their Rulers; viz. Such as
may be most fit and likely, faithfully to seek the good and welfare of the
people; and of such a people of God as through grace are in this Wilderness,
and so circumstanced as they are. But I shall not insist on this.

2. Learn and be exhorted hence highly to prize and honor such Rulers when
Chosen, and called to Place of Government. Such as have it upon their heart,
and make it their business faithfully to seek your best welfare; such as are in
measure of Nehemiahs Spirit; those whose design it is to seek not themselves,
nor great things for themselves, (alas they are not to be had here) but the
welfare of the people, their Safety, Peace and Prosperity, (and the Prosperity
of Religion, which is the principal part of our welfare) out of love to God and
to his people; Be assured your welfare is bound up in such. It is God that
works and maintains a peoples weal, but he does it by means, and especially* by
this means of faithful Rulers and Leaders. It was the great work of Gods mercy
to the Jews after the Captivity, (which the story is taken up in) that he
raised up for them, and among them, faithful Leaders to be Instruments of their
good; Zerubbabel, Ezra and Nehemiah, to rebuild both the Temple and City of
Jerusalem, and settle things in the Church and Commonwealth. When God means
well to a people, (has thoughts of peace, Jer. 29.11. and 32.41.) he gives
them such Leaders as shall cordially seek their welfare: when ever he has good
days for his people, he lays in this, Isa. 1.26. and 60.17. Jer. 23.4. (See 1
Kings 10.9.) So of old in the Wilderness, Psalm. 77.20. Which Text of Scripture
we heard well improved in a Sermon on the like occasion now Seven years ago;
wherein it was said, That that was the Thirtieth year current that God had
given us godly Magistrates: if so, this is the Thirty seventh year current,
wherein we have enjoyed that mercy. Whereupon it was then solemnly added (by
that Reverend Servant of God who then Preached) That the Sun shines not upon an
happier people then we are in regard of this mercy: The Lord make us thankful
for it, and give us to know and prize the things of our peace, and faithfully
to adhere thereunto, (not meddling with them that are given to change) as also
to love, honor, and acknowledge those that are and have been the Instruments
of our peace and welfare, as does become us.

3. Pray much for Rulers, that God may dispose and assist them to seek and
promote your welfare, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. (that it may be well with us, that we may
enjoy welfare under their Government) their work is great and weighty, and you
are concerned therein unspeakably, [ viz. to be Instrumental under God of your
whole welfare] and therefore you had need to pray hard for them. It was a good
speech of Bugenhagius, (apud Gerhard. de Magistr. Polit. page 924.) Si tam
prompti essemus, etc. If we were but as forward to pray for Magistrates, as we
are to censure and blame them, things would be better with us then they are.

4. Let people be friends and Helpers to their own welfare; or every one in
your several places seek the common good of the whole. If Rulers are to seek
the welfare of the people, then surely people themselves are not to prejudice
or neglect their own welfare. The Patient must contribute Endeavors toward
his own health, as well as the Physician, else there will be but little good
done. It is the Rulers work eminently, as his Place is more eminent; but it is
also the work of every one, according to the compass of his capacity and
opportunity, to seek the welfare of the place and people, where and among whom
he lives, Jer. 29.7. So the Lord speaks to Captives in Babylon, during the time
of Gods patience with it; much more does that duty lie on those that dwell in
Zion, to seek the good and the peace of the place, both by Prayer to God, and
by all other due means within their power. Love thy Neighbor, much more a
whole Community, a multitude of thy Neighbors, is the Lords charge to every
one. A little more particularly.

1. Be sure (every particular person, I now speak to even them that are in
private capacity) to do no hurt to Israel, (to the Lords people among whom you
live) either directly, or indirectly; either wilfully or carelessly: that is
just contrary to seeking the welfare of the place and people where you live;
which is a Moral and great duty lying upon every Soul. Woe to that person,
whosoever he be, that shall be a willing or blameable cause of hurt or harm to
the Lords people here, whom he that touches will be found to touch the Apple
of his Eye, Psalm. 34.21. When God called Abraham forth to follow him in a way
of Reformation, he gave that word along with him, Genesis 12.3. and so to Jacob or
Israel, Genesis 27.29. and he did and will make it good. If you love your Souls,
take heed of touching Israel to their hurt: yea even words that tend to the
reproach or prejudice of the people of God, or Builders in Jerusalem, is not a
small matter, Neh. 4.2, 3, 4, 5. (such Imprecations tell us, what will be the
portion of such except they repent, though not that ordinary and private
Spirits should be forward to wish that it might be so to particular persons)
They have provoked anger (Thee is not in the Hebrew) irritated and raised
spirits (by their Scoffs and Reproaches) before, or in respect of the Builders.
The words may carry that meaning.

2. Think it not enough to do no hurt, but according to your place and
opportunity do good to Israel, to that part of it in special in which the Lord
has cast you. Be willing to put forth thy self for the public good according
to thy Talent. Have thou Estate which the Lord has blessed thee with, (and
gotten, it may be, here under the shadow of the Government?) let not the
Public suffer for want, when as thou have it by thee. Have thou Ability to
serve the Country any other way? be ready thereunto: Do not only pray, but put
forth endeavors according to capacity and opportunity for the peace and good
of Jerusalem; else you do but dally in praying, if you will do nothing for it,
Psalm. 122.9. Seek it in the use of all due means. A public Spirit even in a
private person is a precious thing; i. e. according to the compass of his place
to be ready to do for the common good. Could the Heathen (the Romans and
others) produce such Sayings as these; That man was not born for himself, but
for his Country; That even to die for it is sweet: Dulce and decorum pro Patria
mori; and boast of those among them that practiced accordingly: and shall
Christians be strangers to such a Public Spirit, or be backward to act for the
common welfare. Here in Nehemiahs time every one set his hand to, to build up
the Wall of Jerusalem, and the particular persons and companies that did their
parts therein, are to their honor recorded in the holy story, Neh. 3. Oh that
is a pleasant sight, to see all sorts contributing to the Safety, Peace,
Welfare of Jerusalem, and joining Hearts and Hands therein. Neh. 4.6. Oh! have
you a mind to build or to save the Wall and Welfare of Jerusalem? Are you
cheerful, cordial, forward, industrious therein? not a man to talk only, but
to work when the case requires it.

3. Keep Order: keep in your places, acknowledging and attending the Order that
God has established in the place where you live* Numb. 2.2. the Israelites
were commanded to pitch every man by his own Standard; the LXX. render it
(...), According to order: So 1 Thessalonians. 4.11. Act orderly if you would act any
thing for the public welfare; leave the guidance of the Ship to those that sit
at Helm, and are by God and his people set there, and whom you are immediately
stated under: only pray for them. And if there be place for a modest
Suggestion, tender it as becomes you, but justle not into their Places, nor
refuse to acquiesce in their Conclusions. This people of the Jews after the
Captivity, we find them ready and willing to be ordered by those the Lord set
over them; and by that means things went well, or when ought was amiss it found
amendment, Ezra 10.2, 3.4.8* 12* 14. Neh. 5.12, 13. and 13. It was a good time
in Issachar, when as, 1 Chronicles. 12.32.

3. The third Branch of the Exhortation. Let me speak a few words unto All, to
Rulers and People both together. The Command is (as we see) that we all ought
to aim at, and be studious of the common good, the weal and (...) of the whole;
the Lines of every ones ways and actings should meet in that Center. In the
fear of God be faithful and careful herein. And to this end, let me add a few
general Helps and Directions from the Word of God, such as may concern both
Rulers and People in their several capacities, though more eminently the
former, as having the main stroke in the Conduct of Affairs.

1. Be sure to fix upon a right Basis, or settle upon a right Interest, even
the true Interest of Christ Jesus; i. e. Be found in, and cleave to the way of
the Rule, the way of Gods Word, in those things especially that are of public
and general Concernment. Faithfully keep with God, and then he will be with
you; as we well heard the last Year, from 2 Chronicles. 15.2. That therefore is the
sure and certain way to welfare, Deuteronomy. 5.29. In matters of Religion and
Reformation in a special manner (which is our main Interest) keep close to the
right way, turn not from it to the right hand or left; not in those things
especially that concern your public Profession and Practice in the sight of
the World. Take heed of Corruption here.

(1.) Do not wrong and mar an excellent Work and Profession, by mixing and
weaving in spurious Principles or Practices; as those of Separation,
Anabaptism, Morellian (Anarchical) Confusion, and Licentious Toleration. If any
would secretly twist in and espouse such things as those, and make them part of
our Interest, we must needs renounce it as none of our Cause, no part of the
End and Design of the Lords faithful Servants, when they followed him into this
Land that was not sown. Separation and Anabaptism are wonted Intruders, and
seeming Friends, but secret fatal Enemies to Reformation; as Paul in a case
not much unlike, 1 Cor. 3.10 -- 15. In this Work here on foot, there was a good
Foundation laid, viz. Christ as the only Lawgiver in his Church, and
Reformation designed according to his Will and Apostolical pattern; but take
heed how you build thereupon. If you should build the Hay and Stubble of such
things as those, then verily (though sincere persons will be saved, and the
main of the Work may be saved and revived at last) yet verily sooner or later
there will come a Fire that will burn up this Stubble, and then your poor
Leaders that would have led you the right way, may be remembered when it is too
late. Do not on pretense of avoiding Corruption, run into sinful Separation
from any of the true Churches of God, (and what is good therein) or from the
Children of the Covenant. Prize and hold fast the Covenant of God to you and
yours. Keep with God in his Covenant, and walk up to it, and you may boldly
trust him, God All-sufficient will keep you. If we will own Gods Covenant but
for one generation only, (when as Genesis 17.7. the Covenant runs to us and our
seed after us in their generations) how justly may the Lord tarry with us but
for one generation, and then break up house, and leave us to confusion.

(2.) On the other hand, do not so avoid Separation, as to neglect or prejudice
Reformation. The good old Non-Conformists were very zealous for Reformation,
and yet always steadfast Enemies to Separation: those two may well consist, and
they left us a good example therein. Such things as are or have been known
Corruptions in other Churches, it is no part of sinful Separation, but a part
of just Reformation to avoid them, or refuse to propagate, practice or continue
them. Christ would not separate from (or cast off) the Temple, but he was
zealous to purge the Temple, and so should we be. And it is our Errand into the
Wilderness to study and practice true Scripture Reformation, and it will be our
Crown (in the sight of God and man) if we find it, and hold it without
Adulterating deviations. Oh seek and keep it, and hold it fast, Rev. 3.11. To
leave the Children of non-scandalous Orthodox Christians Unbaptized, will (I
doubt not) be one day found a thing displeasing unto Jesus Christ. But on the
other hand, to Baptize in such a lax and licentious way, as serves to dress men
in the Livery, without bearing the Yoke of Christ; to have his Name upon them,
with rejection of his Government, this will not (...) either the Principles of
Reformers, or the Rules of Scripture. So though Rigid Severity in Admissions to
the Lords Table is to be avoided; yet to be lax and slight therein, to admit
all sorts to full Communion, or upon very slight Qualifications, is against the
Principles and against the Interest of Reformation. Again, to put Election of
Church Officers into the hands of All, (though matters ought to be so
unblameably carried, as none may have any just Objection against the person
Chosen, without matter of satisfaction given them) is such a piece of ruining
Confusion, as none of the Ways or Models of Church Government that have been
of any repute in the world, would ever admit of. That is an Anabaptistical
Tenet; Spanhem. Disput. 1. These. 53. Take heed of Extremes, and of passing from
one Extreme to another, (or from flying from Papal or Prelaticall Tyranny,
into Morellian Anarchy) which man's weakness is very apt to do. Pray and study
to find and keep the true Scripture-way, and be not hurried from it on one hand
or other, by the Devices of our cunning Adversary ( Satan) whose wiles we
should not be ignorant of.

So also in Civil Concernments, fix upon a right Basis, upon Foundations and
Principles that are Righteous and Rational, and that will hold, and let not one
thing justle out another, But I forbear to meddle there.

In all avoid Irregular Extremes, and wild Extravagancies; be for safe and
sober Principles and Practices. It was a wise man's Motto, (viz. Sir Nicholas
Bacon^) Mediocria Firma: Things carried with Moderation and Mediocrity are firm
and stable; Extremes soon run themselves out of breath, tumble down of
themselves, and so end in Confusion.

2. Study Unity, (and to that end Order;) i. e. Unity in the Lord, and in his
Truth and Fear. Unity in Sin, Error and Evil is a piece of Hell; but Unity in
Peace and Righteousness is no little part of Heaven, and a main Ingredient in a
peoples welfare, Psalm. 133.3. To this end,

(1.) Let all that fear God heartily Unite in the main; yea all that fear God
will Unite therein: i. e. in the main Concernments both of things of Religion,
and of the good of the People. He that fears and loves God* will love his
Truth, love his Word, (the Rule of Faith and Life) and love his people, and
love their best welfare: and the main Concernments of all these things are so
plain and palpable, as he that cordially loves them will (unless transported in
a pang of Temptation which will not hold) see and close with them, and unite
therein.

(2.) Let not them that Unite in the main, be dis-united by lesser Differences,
but therein attend the means of Help, and be set down by Order.

1. Attend the Means of discerning and finding out the right way even in lesser
matters, and of agreeing therein. There is nothing so little in the things of
Religion, or of the public Welfare, (especially in matters of practice,
wherein we must of necessity act and practice one way or other) as that we may
neglect it, or neglect our best Endeavors to find it out, and attend the
mind of God therein. We must not disregard the least of Gods Commandments, nor
teach men so to do, Mat. 5.19. Though the Points of Baptism, Church Order, and
such like, be not Fundamentals of Salvation, yet they are matters of necessary
practice, (and of no small moment neither) wherein we ought to use all the
means that God has appointed, and gives opportunity to know and do his Will,
and to labor to agree therein, that we may speak the same thing, 1 Cor. 1.10.
We should not think it a light thing to be of many minds, but diligently use
the utmost means to agree.

2. If after the use of all Means, some smaller and lesser Differences do
remain, (as some there will be while we dwell in the flesh) Agree not to
Disagree about them, but to manage them with Love and Meekness. Agree, I say,
not in order to Separation, that is a strange Agreement to agree to Divide and
Disunite, but in order to Union and Communion: and in the issue, let Order
carry it; be set down by Order, submitting one to another in the Lord, 1 Cor.
14.32, 33. There cannot be peace (but confusion) if there be not an orderly
subjection one to another.

You will say these are but generals. It is not easy to speak more then so
here: but yet they are such generals as (I humbly conceive) admit an easy
application to particulars.

3. Let every one take heed of Sin, and study Holiness, and practical Piety, or
close walking with God, Prove. 14.34. Joel 3.17. Be an holy, and you shall be an
happy People. If any sin be sprouting up or getting head, timely observe it,
and weed it out of your Souls, Churches, Families, Towns, Country. Let
Ministers reprove sin, and spare not, Isa. 58.1. Let Magistrates impartially
punish it, (and God forbid that should ever be found with us, as Amos 5.10.)
And let all sorts of men stand up against sin in their several places, and in
all regular ways, (for a disorderly ungrounded and ill-managed Zeal often does
more hurt then good.) Keep out Sin, and that will keep out Sorrow. Isa. 4.3, 5.
when Jerusalems remnant are holy, and thereby a beauty and glory to God, then
upon all that glory there shall be a defense. We in these places are eminently
obliged, and eminently advantaged to be an holy people; and God expects it from
us: If we be not so, we may expect his Rod, Amos 3.2. yet if we hear his Rod,
and be improving of it unto holiness and amendment, he will not cast us off.

4. In this way (of regular walking before God) put your trust in the Lord God
Almighty, Zeph. 3.12. Be humble and believing: Carry it humbly before God and
man; be not haughty because of the holy Mountain, nor in any other regard. I
wish our whole course, garb and guise might speak Humility and Humiliation, in
so humbling a time as this is. Carry it in all things as becomes a poor and
afflicted people: But if you be the people of God, and God Almighty be your
God, then put your trust in him. Psalm. 62.8. that was the great duty of Israel
in the Wilderness of old, and the want of that the great Controversy, Psalm.
78.22. Never did God take person or people into Covenant and near fellowship
with himself, but he put them upon this sooner or later, to venture all upon
God, and to rely upon his Mercy, Power and Faithfulness, having no other
string to their Bow but Faith in him: So Abraham and Jacob often: so Israel at
the Red Sea, and in the Wilderness, where they were called openly to act and
live by Faith in the sight of the world, both as to Protection and Provision.
And never was God known to fail a people, that in a way of well-doing did trust
themselves with him. We have sundry times read of Weapons formed, but never of
any that prospered against a Reforming people, and relying upon God. The story
of Asa, of Jehoshaphat, of Hezekiah may easily be remembered, 2 Chronicles. 14. and
20. and 32. and of Nehemiah also, Neh. 4.11, 15. and 6.16. and so in the
Promise, Isa. 54.17. That denomination [of a Reforming people] may (I hope) in
some comfortable measure be given to this people. Reformation is that that we
are engaged upon, and are laboring in, though with much infirmity and trouble,
and sometime ready to say as they, Neh. 4.10. yet the Work is in hand, and not
quite given over: And there is a desire to fear Gods Name, and do his Will, as
Neh. 1.11. I hope the greatest and swaying part do sincerely say, Thy Will be
done, though through weakness we cannot reach it; we should not despise* as
Zech. 4.10. God may chasten us for neglects and faults, as he did the^ when
they were upon Reforming-work after the Captivity, Hag. 1. [And indeed there
are such faults among us, as do give matter of fear as well as hope; I mean,
fear of very sore and smart Chastisements: we have no cause to flatter our
selves, or to be secure.] But yet God will be slow to cast off his poor people;
though he chasten us, yet he will not kill us, nor destroy, but save in the
issue, Psalm. 118.18. and therefore we should be slow to cast off our hope. Lay
aside Security, and be awakened. (If there be things of moment amiss among us,
and we will neither mend, nor endeavor it in good earnest, but it may be fall
out with those that would mend us, verily God will make us know that he is in
good earnest, and will not be dallied with; it is a jealous God with whom we
have to do) but do not lay aside your Hope and Faith. Yea, whatever the Lord do
with us, we ought with humble reliance on him, to leave our selves with him.
You that have Faith, put it forth; pray down, and believe down Mercy for the
Lords people, (all manner of mercy, preventing merey, reforming mercy,
pardoning sanctifying mercy, and delivering mercy.) That of Asa, Help us, for
we rest on thee, (2 Chronicles. 14.11.) is wont to bring a good issue.

5. Lastly, Let every one be and do for God and for his people now, as they
would wish to have done, when the great Day of Account shall come. For God, and
for His People, is the Motto of every gracious Soul, 2 Cor. 5.13. and he that
is indeed for God, is for his People, (that is certain, 1 John 5.1. and 4.20,
21.) and does sincerely seek their good and welfare. Why now hearken to this
word, all you that stand before the Lord this day; we must ere long meet in a
far greater Assembly then this is, where we must give Account of our
speaking, and of our hearing and doing; when Christ shall break out of the
Clouds, who is the only Potentate, King of kings, and Lord of lords, and sit
him down on the Throne of his Glory, and call all Nations, and us all before
him; and when it shall be said, What you did to my Brethren, to my People, yea
to the least of these my Brethren, you did it unto me? and what good you did
not do, what you neglected, or had no heart, no affection to do, nor courage to
do for these, you did it not to me, Mat. 25.40, 45. How will these things look
then? when all worldly Interests shall be worth nothing; when Estates, and
Friends, yea Crowns and Kingdoms shall appear to be but pebble-stones,
compared with one good look from Christ Jesus! Will it not then be a comfort to
have sought the welfare of the children of Israel? and will it not then be more
bitter and terrible then many deaths, not to have done it, or to have done the
contrary thereunto? What the Apostle says to Ecclesiastical, I may say to
Civil Rulers, 1 Pet. 5.2, 4. Feed and rule the Lords people, and seek their
good in the integrity of your hearts, and when the chief Shepherd, and chief
Ruler shall appear, then shall you receive a Crown of Glory that fades not
away! And so all the people of God in your several places, the Lord is with
you, while you be with him; as we excellently heard the last year: and if you
be with him, you must and will be with and for his people; yea choose to suffer
affliction with them, if that be their condition, as Moses did, Heb. 11.25. And
you will every one say, as you sometimes had that word on such a day as this,
sweetly left with you by that faithful Nathaniel now with God, Psalm. 122.8. For
my Brethren, and companions sake, I will now say to Jerusalem, Peace be within
thee: and because of the house of the Lord our God, I will seek thy good* that
is the voice of every Soul that loves our Lord Jesus in sincerity. In that
Spirit and way persist, act and walk in your several places, and hold on
therein against all Temptations, in faith and love through Christ Jesus: And at
that day, when every Cup of cold water to a Disciple shall be rewarded; when
the house of Onesiphorus shall be remembered; when every act of love to the
faithful shall be honorably acknowledged: Then shall you stand in the
Congregation of the righteous, (in the same company then, that you cleave unto
now) And the Lord the Righteous Judge shall give you a Crown of Righteousness,
and unto all that love his appearing.

FINIS.

