A Call From Heaven

(...)

I. That the Children of God (...) special Advantages and (...) seek the Lord.
The exceeding danger of (...) to those that (...) such as here (...) That Young
(...) their Creator.
By INCREASE M^^^^^ Teacher of a Church in Boston in (...)

Psalm. 45. 17. I will make thy name (...) all Generations. Psalm. 71.17,18. O
God thou have taugh^ (...) Youth, and hitherto have I declared (...) works.
Forsake me not (...) strength to this Generation, (...) that is to come. Hac
Casti maneant in Relligione (...) Nati Natorum, et qui (...) Boston, Printed by
John (...), 1679.

To the Reader.
THE Wise Man does justly condemn the folly of those, that are always saying
and complaining, what is the cause that the former days were better then
these? Not that he does approve of a spirit insensible of the evils, Sins,
Judgments, Degeneracy of the times wherein we live; only there is in men an
aptness to Morose Repinings, like the Poets Old man, Landator temporis acti, se
pucro; which is not from wisdom; such complaints often proceeding from
ignorance in History, or non-observation of the vices in those of former, and
virtues in some of the present Generation, who are endued Antiqua fide, priscis
moribus. And for any upon this ground to murmr at the providence of God, for
casting their lot to fall into an age of troubles, as if the most High did not
balance humane affairs, with such an equal distribution of blessings as ought
to be, is foolish Arrogance in wretched Mortals, so to take upon them, to teach
him whose ways are unsearchable. Well may the wise man say to such Querulists.
Thou do not wisely enquire concerning this matter. All this notwithstanding,
some times are (...) corrupt, dark and miserable then can be said of all, nor
did Solomon ever say or think otherwise. As Nebuchadnezzars image had a golden
head, and iron feet, so there are golden and iron Ages. And albeit Golden times
are a coming, when Jerusalem shall be holy, and strangers pass through her no
more, when David shall be Prince for ever, yet are we, upon (...) the ends of
the world are come, in an Iron Age; the Divine Oracle having told us, that in
the last days perilous times shall come; yea the dregs of those times are now
at hand. They that have their thoughts exercised to discern things of that
nature, feel it, and bewail it, that there is a woeful decay of Religion
throughout the world, yea, throughout the Protestant World. The Professors of
this Age, have more of Light and Notion, but less of love and Zeal and Power,
then did appear in the Martyrs, and blessed Puritans (for time was when the
Saints were known by that honorable Nickname) that are gone before us. And let
it be our Prayer and endeavor, that they who shall stand upon the Stage of
this world as soon as we are gone, may be and do better then their
Predecessors, that there may be no cause to think of what sometimes an Heathen
expressed, AEtas Parentum, p^jor Avis, tulit (...) ^equiores, mox daturos
Progeni^m vitiosiozem.

What shall come on the Rising Generation in New England, is with Him that
knows all The present Aspect of Providence is dismal on more accounts then
one; especially in that God has been removing the Pillars of this Generation,
even those that have stood in the Gap, and would have done much toward keeping
out a Deluge of overflowing Judgments. It is not ten years since Mitchel died
(not to speak of others whom this Generation lost at that time, for one such
stroke seldom goes alone) and all New England shook when that Pillar fell to
the ground. For all this, his anger is not turned away but his hand is
stretched out still: Of late he that holds the Stars in his right hand, has
caused some of our brightest Lights to set; and is not that a sign of darkness
to follow? Such Rebukes of God make the Pillars of Heaven to tremble. And what
shall we say, when the Lord is threatening to dry up that fountain, whose
streams have made glad the City of God? Poor New England! Shall the day come,
when there will be none to guide thee, of all the Sons thou have brought forth?
Doubtless, the Lord will not as yet, wholly cast off a Generation that are the
Posterity of his faithful Servants, that forsook all for Christ, and that they
might leave their Children under the blessed wings of the Lord, Jesus.
Nevertheless, how low he may bring this Generation, and how long it shall
cotinnue, who can (...) Only it is likely to be until men shall say, Blessed
is he that comes in the Name of the Lord.

As for the ensuing Discourse, if the Reader expect any thing rare, or curious
therein, he will find himself disappointed. I neither can if I would, nor am I
willing to do what I can, in such a way. I would rather let the world see,
that I am of Luthers judgment, who judged him the ablest Preacher
quipueriliter, trivialiter, populariter, simplicissimedocet. And it is a
comfort to think, that such Simple Discourses, which they that account
themselves the Wits of the World, look upon as Babbling, will either be blessed
by Christ for the Conversion and Edification of Souls, or turn for a Testimony
to the Speaker. And what can a Christian desire more, then to be unto God a
sweet savor of Christ in them that are saved and in them that perish? And that
after he is fallen asleep, and gathered unto his Fathers, others shall bear
witness that be served his own Generation according to the will of God?

Some years are past, since notice was given of this intended Publication, (and
indeed since these Sermons (such as they are) were both preached, and thus
transcribed) If I had had nothing else to mind, but what is here presented,
doubtless it would not have stuck in the birth so long: those that are
a^cquainted with my employments, together with my extreme Hebetude, and
inability to the performance of any good ^ork, will not wonder that it comes
forth no sooner. My Brothers Dying Exhortation to the Rising Generation, has
been Printed and reprinted, and the good of souls thereby promoved, and will (I
believe) be some addition to his crown and glory, in the blessed day (which God
in mercy grant that it may come quickly) when the Son of God shall give to
every man, according as his work shall be. The Lord saw good to remove my
Brother out of this into a better world, before he had fully expressed what was
in his heart, respecting this Generation. I have so much the more reason to
bend my knees, before the Father of the Lord Jesus Christ, in all humble
thankfulness, for that he has lengthened the thread of my life to this day,
and given me to endeavor the finishing of what my Brother happily began,
though whether with the like success, is with him unto whom it belongs to give
the Increase.

It is the most glorious work in the World, (the Angels of heaven think so, and
would be glad if they might be so improved) to have an hand in the Conversion,
and consequently in the Salvation of precious immortal Souls. May this poor
Labor, or any other weak and worthless endeavors of mine, be in the least
conducing that way, my design and desires are attained. I trust in Christ it
shall be so.

Increase Mather.
Boston. 3. m. 16. d. 1679.
ERRATA.
P. 5. in Margin r. Mr. Carter.

P. 26. l. 12. r. Luitolph. In the Margin for 223. r. 423.

P. 35. l. 22. for being r. bearing.

P. 52. l. 34. for Covenant r. Account.

P. 70. l. 18. r. Hajamim.

P. 75. l. 13. r. incumbent.

P. 85. l. 29. r. as far as time and

P. 89. l. 12. Add Also before the Parenthesis.

That Quotation referred unto in the Margin of p. 78. is to be seen in p. 140.
of the Book called New-Englands Memorial.

A Call TO THE Rising Generation.
1. Chron. 28. 9. If thou seek him he will be found of thee.


GOd in his Providence does many times so order, as that the last words of his
eminent Servants shall be of most weighty consideration. The Scripture sets a
special Emphasis and Remark upon the last words of David, 2 Samuel 23. 1. now
these are the last words of David-the sweet singer of Israel, not that he never
spoke any words after (...), but they were expressed by him, toward the close
of his days, not very long before he le^t the world. The same is to be said
concerning the words now before us; They are amongst the last, yea, the dying
speeches of that holy man of God; who perceiving that the time of his departure
was at hand, laveth'a most solemn charge upon his son Solomon, that he should
endeavor to approve himself a faithful Servant of his Fathers God. Several
Arguments are made use of to back this charge; one is in these words, taken
from the benefit which would attend a sincere seeking the Lord. If thou seek
him, be will be found of thee; that is to say, thou shall then be made happy in
the enjoyment of God for ever. If others seek God in sincerity of heart, they
shall find him, but (says David) it is eminently true concerning thee, because
the Lord has been thy Fathers God. Thou art a child of a Father that had a
special interest in God, and therefore if thou set thy self to seek him, know
for thy encouragement, that he will be most ready, to show himself favorable
to thee, wherefore the Doctrine which may at present be insisted on from the
words, is,

That the Children of godly Parents are under peculiar advantages and
encouragements to seek the Lord. Doctr.
For the clearing of this Doctrine, two things may be attended, 1. To enquire
what is employed in this seeking the Lord which the Text speaks of? 2. How it
does appear that the Children of godly Parents are under peculiar advantages
and encouragement so to do?

Qu. 1. What is employed in this seeking the Lord?

Answ. 1. It does imply that men by nature are such as have lost God. The
sinner has lost himself, Luke 15. 32. this thy brother was lost, and is found,
yea, and he has lost God too. He is wandered from his Fathers house. Hence the
Apostle said to the Ephesians, they were without God in the World. Yea, it is
true concerning. Children of godly Parents as well as others, Ephesians. 2. 3. we
(says the holy Apostle) were by nature the Children of wrath even as others.
We that are Jews and descended of holy Ancestors, we that are converted, and
made Apostles of Christ, by nature were Subjects of the wrath and righteous
displeasure (...) God. Not but that some of the Children of godly men, have
grace wrought in them whilst in a state of Infancy, as John Baptist was filled
with the holy Ghost from his mothers womb, but they do not derive that grace
from their Parents, and therefore it is not natural but supernatural, when any
of the Children of sinful men are made gracious.

2. Seeking the Lord does imply a sense of this lost condition. Sense of want
puts men upon seeking. The Prodigal was hunger-bitten before he would seek to
be reconciled to his Father, when he saw that he was feign to live upon husks,
and that there was no way but he must perish with hunger, except he sought unto
his Father for a supply, he would do so. If a man has lost a thing, except he
know that he has lost it, he will not seek after it. Hence in the Parable
concerning the lost piece of silver, it is said, what woman if she lose a piece
of silver, does not light a candle, and sweep the house, and seek diligently
till she find it, Luke 15. 8. So that there must be sense of loss before there
will be seeking or finding. Nor will men seek the Lord, except they be by his
Spirit made sensible, that they have lost his favor, and are through sin and
the fall become miserable.

3. This seeking does imply earnest desire to find God. That which a man
seeks after he would be glad to find. When Job sought after Communion with
God, he makes enquiry, where shall I find him, Job. 23. 3. No one will seek
after that which is not an Object of his desires, Psalm. 27. 4. One thing have I
desired, that will I seek after. If thou seek him, that is to say, if thou
earnestly desire to find the Lord, then so it shall be. If God be the chief
Object of thy desires, if the desire of thy Soul be toward the remembrance of
his Name, then he will be found of thee. As it was with David himself, Psalm.
63. 1. O God thou (...), (...) will I seek thee; my Soul thirsts so thee, my
flesh longs for thee, in a dry and thirsty Land Where (...) is. How are the
desires and affections on a thirsty man carried out after water, in a thirsty
Land where no water is a when the desires of the Soul are in like manner
carried ont after God, that is seeking him.

4. Seeking the Lord does imply diligence in the use of means in order to
obtaining the favor of God. The end implies the means which is necessary in
order to obtaining that end, now the favor of God is the end of this (...)
Hence it is called a seeking his face, i. e. his favor, Ps. 10^. 4. Seek the
Lords face, and the means in order to obtaining that end, is Repentance of
former sins, Faith in the righteousness of Jesus Christ, ( Jer. 50. 8.) walking
according to the holy Rules of the Word of God, which is therefore called a
walking in all well Pleasing before the Lord, inasmuch as so to walk is the way
to find the continuance of divine favor.

5. Seeking the Lord does imply the worship and service of God. As they that do
not worship God are said to be such as seek him not; Isai ^^. 7. I am (...) of
them that sought me not, meaning that the Gentiles, who in former times did not
own and worship the true God, should be brought to the knowledge of him. So to
seek God is to worship him, 2 Chronicles. 11. 76. It (...), that such as set their
hearts to seek the Lord God of Israel, i. e. to worship him, came to Jerusalem
to sacrifice to the Lord God of their Fathers. It is true, that in special that
great duty of Prayer (which is a special part of religious worship) is
intended, yet not that only; all other parts of divine worship are comprehended
under this expression. Hence it is in the Context noted by that of serving the
Lord. Now to serve God is to worship him alright. We (said they in Ezra) are
the Servants of the God of Heaven, meaning that they did worship none else but
him, so that a Servant of the Lord is the same with a worshipper of him. This
seeking is here set in opposition to forsaking God. Now forsaking has special
respect to that sin of Idolat^y and false worship, David was a man that was
very faithful to God in the matters of his worship. As for Idols, he would not
so much a^ name them, Psalm. 1^. 4. And we read in the sacred History of David,
that when he had subdued his Enemies, he (...) their Images and Idols; in an
holy indignation at the sin of Idolatry. Now he does exhort his Son Solomon, to
follow his Fathers steps in being to all to God in the matters of his worship.
All these particulars may be intended here, If thou seek the Lord, i. e. If
thou art sensible of thy lost (...) by nature, so as to desire reconciliation
with God in the first place, and do^t therefore repent of sin, and believe in
Christ, and continuest to worship, and serve God, according to his own will,
then be assured that thou shall enjoy his favor, and be everlastingly blessed.

Que. We come now to the second thing propounded, viz. To show how it does
appear that the Children of godly Parents are under peculiar advantages and
encouragement to seek the Lord.

Ans. In that the vein of Election, does (...) though the Joins of godly
Parents for the most part. Though it be not Wholly, and only so, that ^lect
Parents have none but elect Children, or that elect Children are always born
of elect parents Mr. sterbra^* Cov p. ^^ and D (...) fant P. ^
yet God has seen meet to (...) the line of Election so, as that generally
elect Children are (...) upon elect Parents, John, directs one of his (...), To
the elect Lady and her Children, whom he also found walking, in the Truth. Not
only the Mother, but the Children did belong to God, (...) that if the mother
be elect, at least wise some of the Children are so too. There are many
Scriptures which do intimate this truth, Psalm. 105. 8. He has remembered his
Covenant for ever the word which be commanded to a thousand generations.
Intimating both that the longer a generation does continue godly, the more
gracious will the Lord be to the Seed and posterity, and that there are some
that in a continued Succession for many generations the Lord has chosen. Hence
Psalm. 103. 17. The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon
them that fear him, and his Righteousness unto Childrens Children. Showing that
God from Eternity has designed mercy to some Parents and to their Children,
and their Childrens Children, Isai. 69. 20. my Spirit which is upon thee, and
my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor
out of the mouth of thy seeds seed says the Lord, from hence (...) and for
ever. To the same purpose is that, Ezekiel. 37. 25. what more plain can be spoken,
to show that God does many times cast elect Children upon elect Parents in a
continued Succession from generation to generation? See also Isai. 65. 22, 23,
Mine Elect and their offspring with them are the blessed of the Lord. So that
when Parents are Elect, usually their Chileren are so too. Hence it was said to
Zacheus, Salvation is come to thy house, Luke 19. 9. Not only to his Soul. but
to his house. Usually if God intends to save a man, there are some of his
house, i. e. posterity, that are heirs of salvation also. And therefore the
Apostle said to the Jailer* believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be
saved and thy house, Acts 16. 31. How did Paul know that if the Jailer believed
his Children should be saved? was it from any special Revelation concerning
those Children more then with respect unto others? no; but he knew, that when
God brought the Father into a state of Salvation, he was wont to save however
some of his Children and posterity. Hence also Paul said to Timothy, when I
call to remembrance the unfeigned Faith in thee, which dwelt first in thy
Grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice, and I am persuaded in thee also, 2 Timothy 1. 5. He does probably and hopefully conclude, that Timothy did belong to
God, because he was the Son of a godly mother and Grandmother. Moreover,
experience and observation does confirm this truth, that de facto it has been
so. For the Elect are not found in all places alike, but in some Nations more
then in others, and that for many Generations successively. And in some
Families more then in others. There are some Families in the World, that God
has designed to show peculiar mercy to them, from generation to generation.
And if an account should be taken concerning all the godly men that are now
alive in the world, doubtless it would be found, that, the greatest part of
them are sprung from godly Parents. Though there may be many converted ones in
the world, whose Parents did not fear God, yet for the generality of true
believers they are, such as have descended from believing Parents,

2. The Lord has established his Covenant not only with Parents, but with
Children also. Genesis 17. 7. I will establish my covenant between me and thee,
and thy seed after thee, in their generations, for an everlasting covenant, to
be a God to thee and to thy seed after thee, The Saints in all ages are
concerned in Abraham's covenant, under which children are comprehended. To say
that the Covenant was extended to Children under the Old Testament, but not
under the New, is to lessen the grace of God in these days of the Gospel. Yea
then the Jews would hay been great loosers by, believing on Christ. If they
could have said, in former times our Children were interested in the gracious
Covenant of God, but if we embrace the Gospel, they shall have no part in the
Lord, this would have been such an objection against beleiving as could never
have been answered. Wherefore, we shall find that those Scriptures which relate
to Gospel times, expressly declare, That not only Believers themselves, but
their children also, are subjects of the Lords gracious covenant with his
people. Isai. 61. 8. 9. I will make an everlasting covenant with them and their
Seed shall be known among the Gentiles, and their offspring among the people,
all that see them shall ^at-Knowledge, that they are the seed which the Lord
(...) blessed. And Chap. 6. ^. 23. They are the Seed of the Blessed of the
Lord, and their off spring with them. Now this consideration is a great
encouragement to seek the Lord. So it was to them, Jer. 3. 22. We come unto
thee, for thou art the Lord our God. We are thy Covenant people, and that does
encourage us to come unto thee. And this did encourage David to seek and hope
for the Lords salvation. Psalm. 86. 16. Save the son of thine handmaid. And the
Apostle did encourage the Jews to repent and return unto the Lord, from this
argument, viz. in that they were the children of the covenant. Act. 3. 19, 25.
From thence it is evident, that the children of godly Parents stand in a
peculiar relation unto God, and that therefore he will not cast them off,
except there be great cause for it. Not surely as long as they seek him, and
desire to return to him and serve him.

3. There are special promises belonging to such children. Not only the
Covenant in general which is, as it were, a Constellation of glorious promises,
but there are peculiar Promises made concerning them. There is a promise that
they shall be blessed above other children. (...) Generation of the upright
shall be blessed. And that (...) from one generation to another. Psalm. 102. ^8.
The children of thy servants shall continue, and their feed shall be
established before thee. In another place, David speaking concerning the
children of Gods servants, and that in the days of the Messiah, says, A ^eal
s^all serve him it shall be accounted to the Lord for a generation. Psalm. 22.
30. intimating that the Lord will uphold among the children of his people a
certain number that shall be owned as a race of Gods Children. And therefore we
have a promise of converting grace to be bestowed on such children. Deuteronomy. 30.
6. The Lord the God will circumcise thy heart and the heart of thy seed. There
is a promise for grace as well as to grace, as to those that belong to the
election of (...). Circumcision of heart implies Regeneration, which is
promised to the Lords Servants with respect unto their children. And that was
one reason why the Lord did of old appoint Circumcision to be applied to the
children of his people, that so this promise of converting grace in due time to
be (...) might be sealed. The same thing is promised, Isai. 44. 3. I will pour
my Spirit upon thy Seed, and my blessing upon thine off spring. And the Lord
has made a blessed promise of salvation to such children, Isai. 49. 25. I will
save thy children. Hence it is promised that the seed of the Lords Servants
shall (...) Psalm. 69. 36. Which word is made good in these days of the Gospel,
by giving heaven to the children of beleivers as their everlasting inheritance.
Now albeit these promises do not absolutely respect all the children of every
godly man, only the elect amongst them, yet they are generally and indefinitely
propounded; and that is encouragement as to Parents to pray for their children*
(...) for (...) of them, as it was to David, 1. Chr. O my God, thou have told
thy servant, thou will build him an house, therefore thy Servant has found in
his heart to pray before thee. And now Lord, thou art that God that have
promised this goodness to thy servant, now therefore let it please thee to
bless the house (i. e. the family and Posterity*) of thy Servant, that it may
be before thee for ever; for thou blessest O Lord and it shall be blessed for
ever. So it is a wonderful encouragement to the Children of holy men, to seek
unto the Lord for grace and Salvation for themselves. The child of a godly man
may come before the Lord, and say, Lord thou have promised to bestow grace, and
give eternal blessings unto those that are the children of such as fear thy
name, my Father, my Mother thou know did fear thy name, why then may not
that promise belong to me?

4. The children of godly parents are the subjects of much faithful prayer.
David prayed earnestly for his Son Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 29. 19. and 22, 16. So did
Isaac for his son Jacob. Genesis 28. 1, 3, 4. Now it is matter of great
encouragement, that prayer is going: especially the prayers of godly parents
will do much in order to obtaining mercy for their children. For they have a
great natural affection toward their Children, which when it is sanctified,
makes them to be the more earnest with the Lord for them. If a Child were to
ask prayers for his life, let him desire the prayers of his Father, if his
Father be indeed one that has an Interest in Heaven. It is said in the fifth
Commandment, Honor thy Father, and thy Mother, that thy days may be long upon
the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee, Exodus 20, 12, because as for
dutiful Children, their Parents are engaged to pray much for them, and by that
means do lengthen out their days. In the Hebrew it is, they shall prolong
(...) days, (...) thy Father and thy Mother shall do so. How should they do
it? See Dr. Owen on Ps. 130 p. 218.
even by praying for their Posterity, and blessing them in the Name of the
Lord, and by that means prolonging their days not only upon the Earth, but to
Eternity in Heaven, of which that Land of Canaan was a Type. The prayers of
godly parents have a great influence and Interest in obtaining blessings
temporal, spiritual, and eternal for their Children. Abraham's prayers for
Ishmael prevailed far, and his prayers for Isaac prevailed further. Abraham
said unto God, O that Ishmael might live before thee, and God said, as for
Ishmael I have heard thee, behold I have blessed him, but my Covenant will I
establish with Isaac, especially ^f Parents pray in faith. As sometimes a
father has a particular Faith for such a Child. As to those that have much
communion with God, and know much this mind, many times it is so, that a
believing Parent can say, as for such a Child I know he shall be blessed and
made a blessing. I have surely prevailed with God for him. As Isaac said of
Jacob, Genesis 27. 33. I have blessed him, and he shall be blessed, so a godly
Parent can sometimes say, such a Child of mine, Christ has blessed him, yea,
and he shall be blessed for ever. Now this is a great encouragement to
Children, that Prayer and Faith has been acting for them. Yea, that a Stock of
prayers has been laid up for them. Is it not a great encouragement unto a
Child, when he can say, my gracious Father has ^arried my Name before God in
secret many a thousand time, even every day and night since I was born (...)
the world? certainly these prayers shall not all to the ground.

5. Such Children have blessed Examples set before them. Now that is a great
advantage. Seneca.
That wise Heathen could say, plus vivitur exemplis quam proe^cptis, Examples
will do more then precepts, upon young ones especially. A Father that walks
with God may say to his Children as Paul to the Corinthians, unto whom he was a
spiritual Father, 1 Cor. 4. 45, 16. In Christ Jesus I have begotten you through
the Gospel; wherefore I beseech you be you followers of (...) And again, Chap.
11. 1. Be you followers of me, even as I also (...) of Christ. So may a Father
that walks before God as he ought to do, say to his Children, observe my
Example, and follow me as I follow Christ. Or as the same Apostle said to
Timothy thou have (...) is (...) Doctrine and (...) of life, 2 Timothy, 3. 10.
Timothy was intimate with Paul, and therefore doubtless knew more of his secret
way of walking and Communion with God, then was known or imagined by the World,
so do Children observe more of their Parents holy course of life, then others
do, which is no sin all advantage. A Child is witness of his Fathers Zeal,
Faith, Patience; he sees that his Father is conscientious and holy, and much
in prayer to God. Now what an advantage is this? He needs not go far to see
how he ought to walk and please God, for he sees it before his eyes every day,
by the Example and Copy his Father sets before him. Moreover, it is a great
encouragement unto the Child of a godly Parent, when he can think and say, my
Father did serve God and the Lord accepted of him, therefore if I serve God, he
will accept of me. My Father did repent and believe, and walk in the way of
holiness, God blessed him and his Family; therefore if I walk in the steps of
my Fathers faith and obedience, the God of my Father will bless me and mine for
ever.

6. The Children of wicked men fall under heavy (...) and Threat^ings;
therefore they are godly men^ Children unto whom peculiar encouragements to
seek the Lord (...) As (...) transgressors they are cursed not only in their
persons but in their posterity, even cursed in the fruit of their body, Deuteronomy.
28. 15. The house ( i. e. Children) of the wicked shall be overthrown, Prove.
14. 11. The seed of evil doers shall never be renamed, prepare slaughter for
his Children, for the iniquity of his Fathers, Isai. 14. 20, 21. It is true,
that if a Child do unfeignedly repent and turn to God, though his parents
should have been never so wicked, God will accept of him; The repenting Son
shall not be damned merely for his Fathers iniquity, Ezekiel 18. 14. But it is
more rare for such Children ever to repent; and if they do not repent they
shall be punished for their Fathers and Mothers sins as well as for their own,
because they justify them by doing like them. How many Examples are there
recorded in the Scripture of Gods punishing Children with their Parents and
because of their sin? So Achans Children, and Dathan's and Abiram's; yea,
millions of Children that were drowned and damned with their cursed Parents in
Noah's flood, and when Sodom and Gomorrah was destroyed; not only the Parents,
but the Children perished, and now suffer together the vengeance of Eternal
fire; and was not an expres^ charge given concerning the little ones of the
Amalekites, Midianites, etc. that they should be destroyed with their Fathers?
thus does the Lord (...) the iniquity of the Fathers into the (...) of the
Children.

7. We find in the Scripture that the Children of holy (...) have been
encouraged from this consideration, that they ^ere so related to such as bad a
special Interest in God. -- So Jacob, Genesis 3^. 5. The God of my Father has
been with me, and ver. 42. except the God of my Father and fear of Isaac had
been with me and Chap. 32. (...) of my Father Isaac. He was greatly encouraged
in looking up to God from that very consideration, that the Lord was the God of
his Father, and God of his Grandfather. So Moses, Exodus 18. 4. The God of my
Father was my help, and delivered me from the Sword of Pharaoh, and David,
Psalm. 116. 16; O Lord truly I am thy Servant; I am thy Servant, the son of thy
Handmaid. Inasmuch as his mother was a precious godly woman, he was encouraged
to plead his Interest in God. So Solomon; 1 King. 8. 57. The Lord our God be
with us, as he was with our Fathers, let him not leave us nor forsake us.
Inasmuch as the Lord was their fathers God, Solomon and the Lords people with
him had their hearts drawn forth to hope that he would be their God also, so as
never to forsake them. And Daniels heart was enlarged in giving praises to God
since he could say, I thank thee O thou God of my Fathers who have given me
wisdom. Dan. 2. 23.

These things then make it evident that such children are under peculiar
encouragement to seek the Lord.

Hence it is a great mercy to be born and brought up under godly Parents. USE.
1.
Though some make a light matter of it, See Dr. Tuckney on Phil. 38. p. 66, 67,
68.
like Esau that said, what good shall this birthright do me, he despised his
birthright; but the things mentioned make it appear to be a mercy indeed. To
be under the wing of the Covenant, though but as to the external dispensation
of it, is in it self a mercy. To have the means of grace vouchsafed, (which is
ever wont to follow upon a covenant interest in God) is mercy: Wherefore the
Apostle having propounded that Question, What advantage has the Jew above the
Gentile? makes Answer, much every way, chiefly in that to them is committed
the Oracles of God. Romans ^. 2. Next unto Christ and the Spirit of grace, the
blessed Bible is the greatest gift that ever was bestowed on the world; now
this the children of godly Parents are wont to enjoy; Timothy being descended
from a godly mother and grandmother, even from a child knew the Scriptures, 2.
Tim. 3. 15. To enjoy the word and Ordinances of God publicly dispensed is a
great mercy; it is therefore mentioned as such a blessing as is enough to make
amends for many sorrows and afflictions, Thine eyes shall behold thy Teachers,
Isai. 30. 20. This is wont to be the portion of godly men's Children. And to
have the benefit of private instructions, admonitions, exhortations is a great
mercy; Solomon confesses that his Father and his mother taught him good
doctrine: Prove. 4. 2. It was good because for his everlasting benefit and
advantage. Nor are the children of godly men without this benefit, Psalm. 34.
11. Come you Children heaven unto me, and I will teach you the fear of the
Lord. It is a great mercy to be taught and principled in the fear of God, and
that betimes; to be told of the evil of sin, the infinite danger of dying in a
natural unconverted estate, the necessity of obtaining an interest in Christ,
and to be directed in the right way to Salvation. Also to be the subjects of
much prayer is great mercy; it is mentioned concerning Solomon as a special
favor God would vouchsafe to him, Psalm. 72. 15. Prayer shall be made for him
continually. Thus concerning the children of the Lords people, the public
prayers of the Church reach them, and their godly parents are daily praying for
them; so that prayer is made for them continually. Moreover, such children
experience outward blessings and preservations for their parents sake. It is
said concerning him that fears God, His children shall find a place of
Refuge, Prove. 14. 26. And the Lord said to Abraham concerning Ishmael, Genesis 27.
13. v. Manasseh, Ben. Israel Council. p. 43. in Genesis
I will make a nation of him because he is thy seed* And God spared Solomon for
his Father David's sake, -- 1 King. 11. 34. And as for Jehoram all his Children
were destroyed save one, and that one had been cut off too, had it not, been
for the respect which the Lord did bear to his blessed fore-Father. 1 King. 8.
19. Yea, and such Children have a greater blessing with that outward state
which God in his Providence shall see meet to cast upon them, then the Children
of wicked men usually have; Though it may be they have not so much of the World
as some others, yet since what they have was gotten in a way of righteousness,
a blessing comes along with it; for this cause David says, A little that a
righteous man has is better then the riches of many wicked. Psalm. 37. 16.

Hence we ought to nourish hope concerning such Children, and that above what
can be said with respect unto the Children of other Parents. USE. 2.
But some one may object and say, have not good men bad Children, godly men
ungodly Children? how then is there ground of hope with respect unto such
Children in peculiar wise? Answ. This is sadly true sometimes; the most high to
show the Sovereignty of his grace, sometimes chooses some of the Children of a
wicked Parent, and refuses some of a godly Parent; Also to show that it is not
in the power of men to give grace, no not in the power of godly men, so much as
to their own Children; sometimes such Children prove very unlike unto their
godly Parents. It was therefore said to Samuel, thy (...) do not walk in thy
ways, 1 Samuel 8. 5. And that profane Jehojakim how unlike was lie to his
blessed. Father Josiah? It is noted concerning Josiah, that when the word of
God was read to him, he rent his Clothes, humbled himself, and was afraid of
the Lords holy displeasure; but Jehojakim after three or four leaves were read,
he took his pen knife, and cut the Roll in pieces, and burnt it in the fire, he
was not afraid, nor rent his garments. Jer. 36. 23, 24. Yet this is surther to
be added and considered, that when the Children of good men are unlike their
Parents in grace and holiness, it proceeds not from any unfaithfulness in the
blessed God as to his Covenant with such Parents, or with their Children, for

1. Usually it is some evil in such parents (though otherwise godly) which the
Lord does punish in their Children, Either they are not so diligent in teaching
and instructing them as they ought to be; If we must judge all those parents
ungodly whose children are miserably instructed, I am certain that many amongst
us, who have a name to live, and would be thought to have the root of the
matter in them, will be found amongst the ungodly. Or Parents are sinfully
indulgent toward their children; so was Eli; indeed he instructed them, told
them of the evil of those ways they walked in, and exhorted them to reform,
but he corrected and restrained them not; Isaac was too indulgent toward his
profane Esau; so was David toward Absalom, that afterward proved a Rebel,
rising up in arms against his own Father; and he did sinfully indulge Adonijah;
the Scripture takes notice of it, that his Father had not displeased him at
any time in saying why have thou done so? 1 King. 1. 6. No wonder he came to
such an unhappy end, for usually such children are first or last a shame to the
Father that begat them, and bitterness to the mother that bare them. Or it may
be parents do not pray and believe for their Children as they ought to do:
God in this case sometimes says unto parents, according to your faith be it
done unto you. If you pray much, and believe much for your children, you shall
obtain much mercy from the Lord for them. Psalm. 33. last.

2 Many times the children of godly men are like their parents. In some godly
Familyes all the children of the family are made partakers of converting saving
grace. So in Jacobs Family; there is reason to believe that his twelve sons did
repent before they died, and that they are now in heaven, considering that they
were Types of the Elect of God, and their names were written upon the breast of
the high priest, when he entered into the Holy of Holyes. So concerning Jobs
children; the Scripture says, that after the death of his children and the
loss of his estate, the Lord gave Job twice as much as he had before, yet he
had but ten children after that, which was the number he had before, wherefore
Interpreters probably conclude that his other children were not lost; they
might all go to heaven notwithstanding the sad and sudden death which befell
them. And experience confirms the truth of this, we see that in some families
God is pleased to bestow converting grace upon all the children therein;
especially if their parents be very much in prayer to God for them. I remember
I once heard an holy praying man say, my father had six children, and they are
all either with Christ, or in Christ; and he has given me six children, three
of them are already with Christ, and the other (I bless his name) are in
Christ. And I have read v. Full filling of Scriptures P. 442.
of one who held much communion with God, that once said to an intimate friend,
I have this day abtained mercy from God not only for myself, but for all mine,
and evident signs of regenerating grace did afterward appear in all his
Children.

3. God is wont to remember and establish his covenant with some of the
children of his Servants however; if not to all, yet with some of them. It is
commonly seen that as for wicked Parents though they have many Children they
are all ungodly like their Parents; but it is seldom known that if a godly man
has many Children that they all prove wicked; first or last God converts some
of them. If there be an Ishmael in Abraham's Family, there is also an Isaac; if
there be an Esau in Isaac's Family, there is also a Jacob; if there be an
Absalom in David's Family, there is also a Solomon; nor ought we to doubt, but
that Nathan and many more of David's Children are now in Heaven, albeit three of
them perished.

4. If the Lord cast off the immediate Seed, he remembers his Covenant to
others that are more remote. Esau was hated, yet it is conceived by learned men
that Job and his godly friends were of Isaacs posterity by Esau. Voetius disp.
de Gentilismc. p. 603
Samuels son Joel was not like his Father, but his grandchild Heman was an
excellent Prophet like his blessed Grandfather; yea, and many of Samuels great
Grandchildren, were faithful Ministers in the house of God, 1 Chronicles. 6. 33.
and 25. 5, 6. The Lord has sometimes cast off a few generations, and yet at
last remembers his Covenant made with blessed Ancestors; Jer. 31. 17. There is
hope in thine end, (h. e. as to after generations there is hope) says the
Lord, that thy Children shall come again to their own border. There is then
cause to nourish hope concerning such Children; there is so with respect to
succeeding generations in New England; Albeit there is doleful degeneracy
appearing in the face of this generation, and no man can say, but that the body
of the present generation will perish both temporally and eternally, yet there
are some that the Lord will remember his Covenant with, even a remnant
according to Election that shall be saved. We may say of New-Englands Children
(many of them) as the Apostle speaks concerning the Jews, however the case
may be with them at the present, they are beloved for their Fathers sake, Romans
11. 28.

Hence Parents should be careful how they approve themselves for their poor
Childrens Use 3.
(as well as for their own) sake. There are especially three things that
Parents should be careful about for their Childrens sake.

1. That they be in a state of grace themselves; that they have a special and
saving Interest in God. As David said to his son Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 28. 20. The
Lord God, even my God will be with thee; So if you can, upon good grounds say,
the Lord is my God, you may the better hope that he will be with your Children.
If you be indeed righteous in the sight of God, it will be your poor Childrens
advantage; Psalm. 37. 25. I have been young, and now am old; yet have I not seen
the righteous forsaken, nor his Seed begging bread. But if you be unconverted,
and Christless, what a case are your Children in? That if they be in any
distress, they have a Father that cannot pray for them, or if he do, his
prayers find no acceptance with God, because they proceed from one that has
not an interest in Heaven; Remember that Scripture, Deuteronomy. 5. 29. O that there
were such an heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep all my
Commandments always, that it might be well with them, and with their Children
for ever; plainly intimating that if Parents truly fear God, their children
shall fare the better for it; Yea, let me tell you, that then if any of them
dye in their Infancyes, See Mr Whiston's primitive practice of Infant Baptism.
you need not doubt of their Salvation, Deuteronomy. 30. 19. Thou and thy Seed shall
live. God having taken your Children into a Covenant of life, if they never
break that Covenant, shall they not live for ever? yea, they shall live for
ever.

2. Parents should be careful what opinions they embrace. For oftentimes the
poison of a corrupt opinion in the Father proves baneful to the Child; As
Naamans Leprosy went down from Generation to Generation, so the plague of
spiritual Leprosy in the Head, is sometimes propagated from the Father to the
Son.

3. Parents should be careful of their conversation; because their Children are
apt to follow their Example, especially in that which is evil. As it is noted of
Ahaziah, that he walked in the way of his Father and of his Mother, 1 King. 22.
52. And of those superstitious persons, 2 King. 17, 41. They served their
graven Images, both their Children, and their Childrens Children; as did their
Fathers, so do they, to this day. If the Father follow superstitious or
profane practices, it is most likely that the Children will do so too;
Therefore you that are Parents, in the sear of God look to it, that you do not
scandalize your Children by an evil Example; If your Children see you in drink
sometimes, will not they be drunkards too? If they hear you swear, will not
they swear also? if they see you careless in the observation of the Sabbath,
will not they likewise be guilty of Sabbathbreaking? And if they see you live
in the neglect of holy duties, no prayer in the Family, how shall they be
seekers of God? It will be a wonder if such Children do not prove Athiests,
that are brought up in Familyes, where they never see any prayer, or
acknowledgement of God. O think with your selves, if you that are Parents
should any of you perish, and your miserable Children follow you to bell, how
will they curse you there? If thy Children perish through thy evil Example,
they will follow thee up and down in the ever burning Lake, crying out, See
Mr.Bolton of, walking with Go p. 249.
Woe to us, that ever we were born of such Parents! that had no grace to teach
us the ways of God, and lead us in the paths of godliness; If you that were
our Parents, had discharged your duty toward us, we might have been in the
Joys of Heaven, but now our damned Souls must live for ever in these
everlasting flames; Thus will thou hear thine own Children yelling in thine
Ears, world without end; Can thou think of this, and thy heart not break?
then thy heart is an Adamant, and thy heart strings made of Iron sinews.

USE. 4.
Of Exhortation,

1. Let godly parents that are here before the Lord this day, suffer the word
of Exhortation, Do you endeavor to the utmost of your power, that your
children may become seekers and servants of the only true God in Jesus Christ.
And indeed when you present them to the Lord in Baptism, you promise to do
your utmost, that they may become faithful Servants of that God who is Father,
Son and Spirit; take heed that you do not become guilty of violating that
Engagement. God has committed Children unto you, that so you might bring them
up for him, The Children which thou have borne unto me, Ezekiel. 16. 20. If a man
had the children of a Prince or great man committed to his care and charge for
education, would he not be careful about that matter? It is a solemn thing,
which it may be you have not duly considered, that the great God has entrusted
you with those that are his children, that so you may nurse them up for him: O
then bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. It is not enough
for Parents to serve the Lord themselves, but they must use utmost endeavors
that after they are dead, their children may walk in the ways of God. And if
they be duly, careful in that matter, they have reason to expect, that God
will remember and establish his covenant with their Children. For it is noted
concerning Abraham, that his care was that his Family after him ( viz. after he
should cease to be in the world) might keep the way of the Lord, and so did the
Lord bring upon him the thing which he had spoken, and graciously promised with
respect to Abraham's posterity. And in special you that are mothers have a great
advantage put into your hands, to be instilling See Mr. Firmins real Christian.
p. 8
good principles into your childrens souls betimes; Solomon's mother taught him:
we do not read that Absaloms and Adonijahs mother taught them, as Bathsheba
did her son Solomon. And it is not for nothing, that when children have proved
thus or so, particular notice is taken in Scripture, that such or such were
their mothers: Rehoboam did not prove well, and it is noted that his mother was
an Ammonitess. On the other hand, Hezekiah, Jehoshaphar, Josiah were eminent
Servants of God, and the Scripture does mention who were their mothers. O then
you that are mothers should endeavor that your Children (as Luther speaks)
may suck in Religion from their mothers breasts.

And let all godly parents earnestly seek unto the Lord for their poor
children: You onght to do so daily and particularly, and by name before the
Lord and thus should you do every day: as we read concerning Job, that he
offered burnt offerings for his Children, according to the number of them all,
thus did Job continually. Job. 1. 5. Remember that you are under peculiar
encouragement so to do: if the Children of godly parents have special
encouragement to seek the Lord, then the same thing must needs be true
concerning such parents themselves, with respect to their Children. And it is
eminently true with respect to the children of New England inasmuch as they are
the posterity of such as have been sufferers on the account of the name and
truth of the Lord Jesus. Are not such parents pronounced blessed twice over?
Mat. 5. 11, 12. even blessed in themselves, and in their posterity? Who knows
but God may remember the kindness of the fathers in these Churches (who
followed him into this wilderness whilst it was a land not sown) unto their
children after them? Plead it with the Lord; if you that be godly parents lay
up a stock of prayers for your children, it may stand them in more stead then
if you should leave them never such an inheritance, as to the things of the
world, when you are dead your prayers shall live. There is many a child whose
father and mother is now in heaven, that fares the better, and will do so for
ever, on the account of prayers made for him by his blessed parents while they
were in this world. And this further let me say for your encouragement, that if
the Lord stir up your hearts to be importunate with him, for your children, it
is a sign that God intends mercy to them. That instance of Monica, Austins
gracious mother is known and famous* when she made her complaint and wept to a
faithful Minister because her son did for the present follow ungodly courses
and Companions; vade a me (inquit) itvivas. Fieri non potest filim istarum
Lachrioerum pereas. August. onfess. L. 3. Cap. 12.
Be of good comfort (said that holy man) for it cannot be that a Child of so
many prayers and tears should perish.

Say not, Oh! but I have prayed, and yet see no answer to my prayers! Well but
continue seeking to the Lord still; despair not of a good answer at last. That
famous Mr. Rogers of Dedham, would sometimes say, If I see a child that has
either a Godly father or a godly mother, I shall have hope for him a long time,
but if he has a godly Father and Mother too, He never leave hoping for him
until I see him turned off the Gallows.

2. Let me direct my Exhortation to the Children of Godly parents: There are
many such that hear me this day: Be you exhorted to know and serve and seek the
God of your Fathers.

Consider therefore,

1. That the Lord is your Fathers God. Know the God of thy Father, says David.
Prove. 27. 10. Forsake not thy Fathers friend. And will thou forsake thy fathers
God, who is the best friend that ever thy Father had? Children are loath to part
with other things because they were their Fathers; As Naboth said concerning
his vineyard, God forbid that I should part with the inheritance of my Father.
1 King. 21. 3. The Lord was the inheritance of thy Father, and will thou let
go thy interest in him? Remember and consider that Scripture, Exodus 15. 2. The
Lord is my Fathers God, and I will exalt him. So say thou, the Lord is my
Fathers God, and therefore I will fear and seek and serve him.

Consider. 2. The good and benefit that will follow upon a sincere seeking to
the Lord. If there were nothing more to be said, but only this, it should be a
prevalling Motive, viz. That then your parents will have joy in you; A wise son
( i. e. a godly son) makes a glad father. The Apostle John has such an
expression as this, I have no greater joy than to hear that my children walk in
the truth. 3. Joh. 4. Nor is there any greater joy to a godly Father, then to
see truth of grace in his children; this comforts him more than to see that his
Children are become rich or great in the world. Know also for your
encouragement, that if you seek unto the Lord with your whole heart, He will be
found of you: Yea, though your sins and provocations have been never so great:
was there ever a greater Sinner then Menasseh, the son of blessed Hezekiah, Yet
when he besought the Lord his God and humbled himself greatly before the God of
his Fathers, and prayed unto him, he was entreated of him. 2. Chro 33. 12, 13.
O think of it, you that, though the children of holy parents, have been heinous
sinners before the Lord, seek him sincerely, and he will pardon all your sins,
and save your souls from eternal death. I remember I have read concerning the
Impe^ial Hist. ^, 223.
Emperor otho the 2d. that having a son whose name was Luitolp, an haughty
young man, that rebelled against his Father, and for safety betook himself to
the City of Mentz, which being beseiged by the Emperor, Luitolp fled to
another place; and on a day when his father was in the field, his son
unexpectedly came to him and kneeling before his father, humbly begged for
pardon, with tears acknowledging his offenses, and that he was worthy of a
thousand deaths; but if it would please him to give him his life, he should
ever be a loyal and obedient son for the time to come: presently his Fathers
bowels verned over him, and he restored that prodigal son to his former place
and dignityes, who ever after approved himself as became a loyal Subject and
dutiful Son. How much more will the blessed God pardon you, and accept you
into his favor, all your Rebellions notwithstanding, if indeed you humbly and
sincerely seek unto him? Yea and God will bless you when your Parents shall be
taken from you; he will then be a father to you. Psalm. 27. 10. When my Father
and my mother forsake me, the Lord will take me up, viz. as a tender hearted
father takes up his child into his arms, and bears him in his bosom. It is
therefore said concerning the just man, that his Children are blessed after
him. Prove. 20. 7. And Jacob told his Sons that though he died, God would be
with them, Genesis 48. 21. It is also noted concerning Isaac, that God blessed him
after the death of his Father Abraham. Genesis 25. 11. Not but that the Lord
blessed him before that, only after his Fathers death, the blessing of the Lord
was upon him more then ever.

Consider, 3. The evil that is in your not seeking the Lord. What a grief of
mind will this be to your godly Parents? The Father of a fool has no joy.
Alas! there is many a poor parent may say to their Children, as Jephtah upon
another account spoke to his daughter, Judge. 11. 35. He rent his clothes, and
said, alas my daughter, thou have brought me very low, thou art one of them
that trouble me. Why should you bring your Parents down with sorrow to their
graves? How did it go to the heart of David, when Absalom dyed, and was cut off
in his sins? 2 Samuel 18. 33. He was much moved, and as he went, thus he said, O
my Son Absalom, my Son, my Son Absalom, would God I had dyed for thee, O
Absalom, my Son, my Son. As if he had said, had I dyed, my Soul had been happy,
but now thou art dead, I have no other hope but that thy Soul is suffering the
vengeance of eternal fire. Remember that this will aggravate your sin, and
condemnation, that you were born of godly Parents, and did not walk in their
steps, Jer. 50. 7. They sinned against the hope of their Fathers; it is
mentioned as the great aggravation of their sin. Such Children roll reproach
upon the Covenant of God; they cause men to say, there is nothing in being in
Covenant with God, nor is it any mercy to be born of Parents that fear the
Lord; 'And will not the Lord judge you for causing such a vile reproach to be
cast upon his holy Covenant? you will be most inexcusable before the Lord
another day; If a righteous man beget a Son that becomes a Robber, or an
Adulterer, shall he live? he shall not live, but dye, and his blood shall be
upon him, Ezekiel. 18. 10, 13. The blood of thy Soul shall be upon thy own head;
All the instructions, Exhortations, Admonitions, Prayers, Examples of thy godly
Parents, will be brought in as so many witnesses for thy condemnation at the
last day; yea, the tears of thy blessed Parents will be as oil to make the
everlasting flames of hell burn the more vehemently upon thy Soul, throughout
the days of Eternity; The Lord will cast thee off for ever; Thy Father that
begat thee, thy Mother that bare thee, will not pity thee when thou shall be
sentenced to eternal Death at the last day. Remember Dives; In hell he lift up
his eyes being in Torments, and cried, Father Abraham! have mercy on me; but
all the mercy his Father Abraham would show to him, was, he! said, Son,
remember that in thy life time thou had thy good things; As if he had said,
nay, thou art justly dealt with. So will thy Parents say to thee, Remember that
in thy life time we instructed thee, and thou had good counsel given to thee
many a time, but thou would not regard it. Oh consider of it! yea know, that
if thou dyest in thy sins, thy godly Parents will stand forth, and testify
against thee, before the Lord Jesus, at the last day; As that blessed man Mr.
Bolton, would sometimes solemnly profess to his Children, See Mr. Boltons life.
Children, let any of you meet me at the day of Judgment, in an unregenerate
Christless estate if you dare, I will then testify against you before the Lord.
Yea, thy gracious Parents will join with the Lord Jesus, in passing a Sentence
of Eternal Condemnation upon thee; We read in the book of Revelation, how the
Saints say, Hallelujah, our God has Judged the great whore, Righteous are his
Judgments, and when the finoke of her Torment rose up for ever and ever, they
worshipped God, and said, Amen, Hallelujah; Even so, when the Son of God shall
say to thee, depart thou cursed wretch into Everlasting Fire, thy Father will
say, Amen, Lord Jesus! This is the Son, this is the daughter, that I so often
instructed and warned, and told them if they did not repent of sin, and get an
interest in Christ, they should certainly perish for ever, but they would not
hear, therefore let thy Justice be glorified for ever in their eternal
confusion. O what an heart have thou, if this break it not? Nevertheless,

Consider, 4. There are many Children of godly Parents to be seen, that do not
seek the Lord God of their Fathers. Yea, how many such are there in New England,
that are not of their Fathers principles? If a Temptation should come it is to
be feared, that the greatest part of this Generation would comply, and disown
that cause which their Fathers suffered for. How many that are not of their
Fathers Spirit; not heavenly minded, but pursuing worldly Interests with their
whose hearts; Nor zealous for God, and his glory, but lukewarm, and woefully
indifferent in the matters of Religion; Nor in practice and conversation like
their Fathers; Not of an holy gift conversation, but loose and vain, and vile
and vicious; Swearers, Gamesters, given to rioting and drunkenness, Chambering
and wantonness! Nay, how many are there before the Lord in this Congregation,
that never sought the God of their Fathers, even to this day? Some that never
prayed in their lives, or never in earnest; You Children, it may be you say a
prayer, a few words that you have been used to, but are you in earnest? do you
cry to God as for your lives? do you take the Kingdom of Heaven by violence? O
but few such!

Consider, 5. You know not how soon your finding time may be past and gone,
therefore now seek the Lord; up and be doing, lest thy Sun go down at Noon, and
God make the day dark over thy Soul. Do not thou know that the Lord uses to
make quick work with the Children of his Servants, when they will not seek him,
albeit they have been brought up under the solemn warnings of God? It may be he
will give thee up to a reprobate sense, and his Spirit for ever cease striving
with thee; then woe woe be to thee, says the Lord. Remember how it was of old:
when the Sons of God, (even the posterity of godly Seth) the posterity of
eminent professors of Religion, did degenerate, God said his Spirit shall
strive no longer with them, Genesis 6. 3. my Spirit shall not always strive. Or
death may come upon you; How many young men that have fallen down slain of
late? The Sword is raging, and how are they that are of the rising Generation
numbered for the Sword? Deadly Arrows are flying over your heads, yea, death is
climbing in at windows, and carrying away young men apace; now if death
overtake thee before thy Soul be got into the City of refuge, it had been good
for thee never to have been born; It will be too late to seek the Lord then; If
thou should then seek him early, thou can not find him; When once the
gates of death are shut upon thee, and thou locked fast under the bars of the
pit; When once thy Soul is out of thy body, in a moment it shoots the Gulf of
Eternity, and then though thou should seek and cry till Heaven and Earth
shakes, and pray, and weep Seas of tears of blood, all will be in vain. O thy
Sonl, thy Soul mustly weltring in a fiery Ocean, as long as the Eternal God
shall have any Being! Can thy heart endure to think of this? No! O then seek
the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is near.

Something let me speak by way of Direction* briefly,

1. Be thank full to the Lord in that he has given you to be born of godly
parents: in that you have been (as David speaks) cast upon the Lord from the
womb And he has been your God from your mothers belly. Psalm. 22. 10. You might
have been born of such Parents as would have nursed you up in ignorance,
profaness or idolatry, and so your souls have been under a necessity of
perishing for ever, but the Lord has given you to be of parents that have
designed you for God, and for his glory. Yea it was for your sakes especially
that your Fathers ventured their lives upon the rude waves of the vast Ocean.
Was it not with respect unto posterity, that our Fathers came into this
wilderness? that they might train up a generation for Christ: Bless God that
ever you had such Fathers.

2. Plead the Lords g^acious Covenant with him, he is very willing that you
should do so: Ask me concerning my sons and concerning the work of my hands
command ye me. Isa. 45. 11. You say you cannot give grace to your own Souls.
True! But has not the Lord in the Covenant of grace said, I will give you a
new heart. Ezekiel. 36. 26. Plead that Promise, you especially that have had the
Covenant sealed to you; why should you let your Baptism lie by you, as if it
were of no use? Go to God in secret, and say, Lord thou have promised to give a
new heart to the children of thy Servants, and thy Covenant has been sealed to
me in my Baptism; Oh give me a new heart.

3. Do not rest in any thing that is external: Not in your relation to godly
parents, and visible relation to God on that account; it is not you parents
seeking unto God will save you, except you seek him your selves also. Did not
the Lord say to the children of Israel, Are ye not as the children of
AEthiopians unto me? Amos. 9. 7.

They vainly trusted, that no destruction should ever come upon them, because
they were descended from blessed Ancestors. You may be as far from eternal
salvation as the Children of Ethiopians for all that, if you do not serve the
God of your Fathers. Therefore John Baptist said, Think not to say, we have
Abraham for our Father, Math. 3. 9. I have known some that have been so foolish
as to think they should be saved, only because they were the Children of godly
Parents, though they lived in the neglect of God, and of their own Souls.
Beware of so perverting the Truth delivered unto you. And rest not in being
outwardly civil and blameless; was not Paul so before his Conversion, Phil. 3.
6. And they that have been advantaged with a religious Education, often times
are so, though never truly converted. Beware also of taking up a form of
godliness without the power of it. O you that are the Children of godly
Parents, if you outwardly observe the Sabbath day, and pray in secret, and read
the Scriptures, (all which things I charge you in the Name of the Lord, that
you attend unto them whilst you live) you will be apt to rest here, without an
interest in the glorious Righteousness of the Son of God, but for the love of
your immortal Souls, I beseech you, deceive not your selves; build not upon a
false foundation, look to it, in the fear of God, that your hearts be perfect
before him.

4. Never leave seeking God until you find him: Seek, and Seek, and Seek again,
until you know that you have obtained a saving interest in Jesus Christ, and
in the favor of God through him. O make thorough work of it in the matter of
your Conversion; be not almost but altogether Christians; so shall you find
that the blessing of all the Prayers, and Covenant of your gracious Parents
will come upon you for evermore.

A Discourse Concerning the Danger of APOSTASY,

Especially as to those that are the Children and Posterity of such as have
been eminent for God in their Generation.

Delivered in a Sermon, preached in the Audience of the general Assembly of the
Massachusetts Colony, at Boston in New England, May 23. 1677. being the day of
Election there.

By INCREASE MATHER, Teacher of a Church in Boston in New England.

Jer. 23. 28. He that has my word, let him speak my word faithfully. 1 Timothy 5.
21. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels,
that thou observe these things, without preferring one before another, doing
nothing by partiality. Tit. 2. 15. These things speak and exhort and rebuke
with all Authority. Boston, Printed in the Year, 1679.

To the Reader.
THe Title Page prefixed to this Discourse, intimates the Time and Occasion of
its delivery. I had no cause to (nor did I) expect, that it would fall to (...)
to speak before the choice was made; If I had, I would have used means to
prevent that trouble from coming upon my self or others. But it may be, God did
it to prove me and see whether I would please men or Christ. And I hope I may
(in some measure) say after the Apostle, We are bold in our God to speak. Our
Exhortation was not of deceit, but even so we speak not as pleasing men but
God, which tries our hearts. For neither at any time used we flattering words,
nor of men sought we glory. That great Reformer in Scotland, when upon his
Deathbed, could say with comfort, That I did forbear none of what condition
soever, I did it out of the fear of my God, who has placed me in the function
of his Ministry, and I know will bring me to an account. even so I must
confess, the awful sense of the great opportunity which the Lord put into my
hands to discharge my Consciscience, in being witness to his Name and Truth,
and of the account which I certainly know (...) give to him, caused me to speak
as I did; and to (...) more controversal Discourses. There is indeed one (...)
insisted on, which is now become a matter of scruple and (...) aft to some
amongst us, viz. that which concerns the Magistrates power in matters of
Religion. But as it was (...) me either intended or expressed, I know not to
this (...) why any one should be offended at it. I may better (...) in this
cause then some others, as having my self (...) experience what it is to have
Conscience imposed on, (...) fore would be loath that any truly conscientious
should be (...); and it is sufficiently known that I have a greate^^ latitude
and indulgence in the point of Toleration, (...) man, better then myself have.
Nevertheless, I judge it most unreasonable that pretended liberty of
Conscience, should be an Asylum for the profanest errors to take Sanctuary in:
as though men must therefore have liberty to Profane Sabbaths or Sacraments, or
set up an Altar against the Lords Altar, and their Threshold by his Threshold,
and their Posts by his Posts, when and where they please. It can not be, but
the Lord will be provoked by such things; especially in New England, where men
are not under such Temptations to forsake their assembling themselves together,
as in some other places: and where zeal on the other hand has been notorious,
so that such Lukewarmness will in a people, circumstanced as we are, be an
evidence of Apostasy.

I remember I had once the happiness to be acquainted with an eminent Divine in
an other part of the world, who having an opportunity to give his Testimony
against a prevailing evil, which the greatest in that nation were at that time
too far carried away with, in his Sermon had this Expression, What I have to
say, if it were in a Church full of Kings I would speak it. Such a spirit I
believe does become an Ambassador of Christ, when delivering the Message of his
Master Jesus. I shall therefore add no more at present,, only conclude, that if
what is here expressed he but my own words or thoughts, its no great matter
what is said; but if it be (as I am persuaded it is) the Word and Mind of
Christ, then that God whose I am, and desire to serve, and in whose Name I have
spoken, will surely confirm his word.

INCREASE MATHER
Boston, 22. day of the 2. Month. 1678.
1 Chronicles. 28. 9. But if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever.


AS there is a peculiar Excellency in all the Books of Scripture, becoming the
Majesty of their Author; so it is in special manner true with respect unto this
sacred Book of Chronicles; which is See (...) English Dutch (...),
not the same with those Chronicles we sometimes read of in the Kings, those
being civil Records, but these wholly of a divine Inspiration, containing the
History of no less then three thousand and five hundred years; even from the
first man Adam unto the Jews Return from the Babylonish Captivi and many years
after that also. The Hebrews suppose it, (or at least some part of it) to be
the last Book of Scripture that was written, and therefore they are wont to
place it last in their Bibles, as the concluding Book of the Old Testament. The
Greeks entitle it, [ ton paraleipomenon Biblion,] Because diverse things most
worthy of eternal Commemoration, are related in these Books which are no where
else to be found. So in this Chapter, we have David's solemn dying Exhortation.
Words which deserve to be recorded, and yet are no where else seen (at least
wise not in that ample manner) but in this Chapter, And it was in a very solemn
Assembly that these words were spoken; Indeed in a general Assembly, when all
the Lords people, both as to civil and Ecclesiastical order were come together,
for the establishment of another Ruler amongst them, accordingly David does
here direct his Exhortation, first to the Representatives of the People, ver.
1. And David assembled all the Prinoes of Israel, the Princes of the Tribes,
and the Captains of the Companies unto themselves, etc. Hence they are said to
be all Israel, ver. 8. In the sight of all Israel, h. e. the Heads and
Representatives of all Israel, and therefore are said to be the Congregation of
the Lord. Often in the Scripture by the Congregation, the Heads and Rulers of
the Congregation are meant. Now the Exhortation unto them is, that they would
keep and seek all the Commandments of the Lord, h. e. that they would observe
what they did know, and seek to know more of the mind of God. The motive
whereby he ^rgeth this, is, because the Lord had promised the good Land to
them; but it was upon that condition of their keeping his Commandments,
therefore it did highly concern them, to be careful about that matter. 2dly, he
directs his Exhortation to him that was to be established as chief Ruler, soil.
to his Son Solomon, whom God appointed to succeed his Father in the Government.
Now sincerity was the main thing which David his Father did exhort him unto, in
the beginning of this Verse. And thou Solomon my Son know thou the God of thy
Father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind. This is
further urged from three motives, 1. From the consideration of the divine
Omnisciency. For the Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the
imaginations of the thoughts. 2dly, From the benefit and good, which would
follow upon seeking to the Lord. If thou seek him he will be found of thee. 3.
From the evil that is in forsaking him; In the words now before us; which
though they were spoken to Solomon, yet were they of equal concernment unto
others being Circumstanced as he was, h. e. that were of the younger, Rising,
succeeding Generation, being also the Children and posterity of godly Parents.
Especially, the words did and do concern those that are the Posterity of David,
that is to say, of such as have been eminent Servants of God in their
Generation. The Doctrine which I would therefore (by the help of Christ) insist
on, as conceiving that it may not be altogether unsuitable for this great
Audience, is this. Doctr.


That if they that are the Children and Posterity of Gods eminent Servants
shall forsake the Lord, he will cast them off for ever. In the doctrinal
handling of this Truth, there are four things which may be briefly enquired
into. 1. When men especially the Children of Gods Servants, may be said to
forsake him? 2. What is employed, in this casting off for ever? 3. What
forsaking of God that is, which will be attended, with such casting off. 4. The
Reason of this dreadful procedure of the most High toward the Posterity of his
People.

Quest. 1. When may men be said to forsake the Lord?

Answ. 1. When they depart from the blessed Truths of God, then may they be
said to forsake him. Hence the Apostle charge it upon the Apos^^tizing
Galatians, that they were removed from (...) that called them, Gal. 1. 6. h. e.
they had forsaken God himself, because they had corrupted and forsaken the
great Truths of the Gospel. All Truth is from God, therefore he is styled, the
God of Truth, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Yea, Truth it self, 1 John 5, 6. And Truth is said
to be his Name, Christ said to his faithful ones in the Church of Pargamus,
thou hold fast my Name, Rev. 2. 13. The Truths of Christ were much opposed
by the Infidels, and by the Heretics of those days, only some did faithfully
adhere thereunto; and these are said to hold fast his Name. So then to forsake
the Truth is to forsake the Lords Name. Especially when there is Apostasy from
great-Foundation. Truths in Religion, the Lord is forsaken. Albeit every Truth
has the Name of God stamped upon it, yet there are some Truths which have more
of his Name on them, then others have, that the disowning of them is absolutely
to reject the Lord, namely fundamental Truths, which indeed are not many nor
hard to be known. Moreover, when those Truths are disowned by Children, which
their Fathers were eminently engaged in the profession of, (though they should
not be fundamental in their natures) such Children may be said to forsake the
Lord.

2. When men deify any other Object besides the Lord; They that set up other
things in Gods stead, in their so doing forsake the Lord, so it is when men
give religious worship to any other besides him, who alone ought to be feared,
Thus the Children of Israel because they did worship Baal and Ashtaroth, h. e.
the (...)
Sun and Moon, (for those were the first Creatures that the Gentiles Idolized,
and the Syrians called the Sun, Baal; and the Moon Ashtaroth) they are
therefore charged with forsaking God, Judge. (...). ^, 13. Idolatry is the
greatest Apostasy in the world. Such are by way of eminency styled forsakers of
God, Deuteronomy. 32. 15. He forsook God, meaning that they did Apostatize to
Idolatry, therefore in ver. 16. it is added that they provoked him to Jealous^^
with their strange Gods, that is to say, with new Gods or Idols, for new things
are strange, ver. 17. They sacrificed to new Gods which came newly up, whom
their Fathers feared not. And this is true not only with respect unto that more
gross Idolatry, when men shall avow the Service of Idols, but also concerning
secret, spiritual, heart Idolatry, even worldliness, Math 6. 24. Ye cannot
serve both God and Mammon. The Servants of Mammon, h. e. of the world, are
forsakers of God, when men pour out the strength of their affections upon
worldly Objects, or place their chief delight and confidence in these things,
it argues an heart departure from the Lord, Jer. 17. 5. If Fathers have sought
Christ, and the things of Christ in the first place, and their Children shall
come after them, and espouse a worldly Interest, it is a woeful God-forsaking.

3. There is a forsaking God, in respect of his holy Institutions. Hence a
people that are without Ordinances, are said to be without God, 2 Chronicles. 15. 3.
it is there mentioned, that Israel had for a long season been without the true
God, because they had been without the Ministry, and without Ordinances. If
these be not duly observed the Lord is forsaken, Isai. 65. 11. But ye are they
that forsake the Lord, and forget my holy Mountain, so that to forget the holy
Mountain, h. e. the neglect of divine worship and Ordinances, is a forsaking of
the Lord. Look as when the Lord does deprive a people of his Ordinances, he is
said to forsake them, Jer. 23. 33. I will even forsake you says the Lord; the
meaning is (says Calvin) you shall no more have Ministry and Ordiances,
amongst you, so when they are willing to be deprived thereof, they may be said
to forsake him, Judge. 10. 6. they forsook the Lord, and served him not. Not to
regard the service of God is to forsake him. For in Ordinances we have to do
with God, Hebr. 4. 13. in hearing the word, in Prayer, in Sabbaths, in
Sacraments, we have to do with God. Or if the holy Ordinances be corrupted,
then the Lord is forsaken. And so it is when men will be adding their
inventions to Gods institutions, Psalm. 106. 39. Thus were they defiled with
their own works, and went a whoring with their own inventions. When men follow
their own inventions they go a whoring from the Lord, of this nature were the
high Places of old 2 Chronicles. 33. 17. The People did sacrifice in the high
places, yet to the Lord their God only. Those high Places were lawful to
worship God in, (...) Engl. (...). on (...). 6.
until the Temple was built, but after that it was a breach of the second
Commandment to place any Religion in them, and therefore in some degree a
departure from the Lord. If Fathers have prized Ordinances above the world, and
endeavored to uphold them in their power and purity, but their Children after
them shall not regard whether they enjoy the Ordinances of Christ or no, or if
they do, shall not be careful and studious to keep them pure, according to
Scripture Rule, they fall under this dreadful charge of Apostasy from God.

4. There is a forsaking of God in respect of Conversation. There are that by
works do deny God, Tit. 1. 16. An holy heavenly Conversation is expressed in
the Scripture, by that of walking with God. Genesis 5. 24. and 6. 9. Therefore an
evil conversation is a departure from God. It is called a forsaking the Law of
the Lord, Jer. 9. 13. By a corrupt conversation men deviate from the Law, and
are such Apostates as the Text speaks of. In this respect those wicked men,
whose foundation was destroyed with the flood, (as Eliphaz speaks) even the
sinners of the old world were Apostates from God. We do not read of (nor do I
believe that there was) any Idolatry in the old world, but they were over run
with Atheism, Pride, Sensuality, Vncleaness, Oppression, and the like
scandalous Enormityes. And the Apostasy of the Children of Israel, did consist
partly in this, as we see in that woeful instance of the Benjamites, the
greatest part of whom the Lord cast off for ever. Yea and the Antichristian
Apostasy predicted in the New Testament, does consist partly in this: We know
that the Antichristian Generation (Papists I mean) are generally not only (as
all of them are) horribly superstitious and idolatrous, but of most profane and
debauched Consciences and conversations; in the Book of the Revelations (...)
of their murders, Sorceryes, Fornications, Thefts, Rev. 9. 21. If then the
Children of the Covenant shall not walk worthy of God, but in the ways of
Pride, Sensuality, Unrighteousness; If when Fathers have been of an holy,
exempla^^ conversation their Children shall be unholy and profane, they are
forsakers of God, concerning whom he has threatened, to cast them off for ever.

5. When the fear of God is wanting in the hearts of such as are above others
bound to fear and serve him, they are forsakers of the Lord For there is an
inward heart departure from God, as well as that which is outward and visible:
So it is when there is no faith nor fear of God in the heart, Hebr. 3. 12. Take
heed lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in departing from
the living God. Infidelity in the heart is the root of all Apostasy. If the
Children of godly Parents shall not endeavor truly to fear and serve the Lord
God of their Fathers, they are such as do forsake him, yea and such as he will
cast off for ever. And therefore in this Context David did intimate unto his
Son Solomon, that if he did not serve the Lord even with a perfect heart, he
should be cast off for ever.

We proceed therefore to the second Question viz.

Quest. What is employed in this casting off for ever?

Answ. 1. It implies a change as to divine Dispensations. In the Scripture,
when the Lord threatened to cast off his people, that is intended, viz. that he
would make an alteration as to the tenor of his dispensations toward them:
here it is set in opposition to finding God, If thou seek him, he will be found
of thee, but if thou forsake him he will cast thee off: Now finding God does
imply the enjoyment of his favor, and therefore in Casting off is employed the
deprivement of the Lords favorable presence. It is indeed most true, that the
special favor of God is unchangeable, Romans 5. 2. This Grace wherein we stand.
He that has once access into the special grace and favor of God stands and
abides therein for ever, (...) respect of that there is no casting off for
ever; In the Covenant of grace the Lord has promised saying, I will not cast
off the Seed of Israel for all that they have done, Jer. 31. 37. But then there
is common favor, in respect of outward blessings, which are the effects of
common love, and that may utterly cease, Hos. 9. 15. I will love them no more.
I have loved them, (says the Lord) h. e. bestowed outward mercyes on them, but
I will do so no more. They shall have no more such days of peace, no more such
plenty, no more such means of grace as once they did enjoy. Thus of a friend
the Lord may turn to be an Enemy, Isai. 63. 10. But they rebelled and vexed his
holy Spirit: therefore he was turned to be their Enemy, and he fought against
them. Whilst a Covenant people, carry it so as not to break Covenant, the Lord
blesses them visibly, but if they degenerate then blessings are removed, and
woeful Judgments come in their room, and that is employed in this casting off
which the Text speaks of, soil, that mercyes shall be taken away, as it was
said of Saul that when God cast him off he took away his mercy from him, 1 Chronicles, 17, 13. because he was deprived of that great outward blessing and
dignity which once he did enjoy, And the sending of contrary miseryes to those
mercyes; that instead of peace there shall be Wars, instead of plenty poverty,
instead of health terrible sicknesses, instead of planting, plucking up and
destroying, these things are employed in this casting off, thus Psalm. 89. 38.
But Thou have cast off and abhorred; thou have been wroth with thine anotnted.
I conceive the Psalmist in those words has Foor in (...)
respect to the sad change of Providence which befell the Lords People in
Rehoboams time, for the Psalm was written by Ethan, who was contemporary with
Solomen, and probably lived to see the woeful changes which happened five years
after Solomon's death, when the Land was invaded and sorely wasted by Heathen
Enemies, and some (though not all) of the wrath of God poured out upon his
people, and upon the Apostatized Children of David, strong holds were brought
to ruin, and they did not stand in the day of Battle as in former times they
had done, now these temporal Judgments are called a casting off. 2. It does
imply a discovenanting and unchurching. If the Children of godly Fathers shall
forsake the Lord he will cast them off, h. e. it will at last come to this that
the Lord will disown them; and excommunicate them, and say they are none of
his, for although there is no falling from a state of saving grace, yet they
that have only a visible interest in God may fall from that Estate, what they
have shall be taken from them. They that are internally and sincerely in
Covenant with God shall never lose their interest in the Covenant, for they
betrothed unto the Lord for ever, Hos. 2. 19. But they that are externally in
Covenant, may cease to be the Lords visible people; Thus it came to pass
concerning the ten Tribes. Hence the Lord speaks, as Jer. 3. 8. Back ^liding
Israel committed Adultery, and I had put her away and given her a Bill of
divorce, so that the marriage Covenant, which was between the Lord and them was
dissolved, this is confirmed by the Prophet Hosea, Chap. 2. 2. where the Lord
says plead with your mother, plead for she is not my wife, neither am I her
husband, so in Chap. 1. ver. 9. Call his Name Lo-Ammi, for they are not my
people, and I will not be your God, therefore also the Lord by the Prophet
Ezekiel calls the ten Tribes by the name of Aboldh. The two Tribes the Jews,
were then called by the name of Abolibah, which signifies my Tent, because as
yet God had not rejected them. But the ten Tribes are (...) Abolah, which
signifies a Tent, as if the Lord had said they are none of mine, now I have
done with them and utterly rejected them, Ezekiel. 23. 4. After wards the Jews
also were discorenanted and unchurched. The Prophet Zachariah had foretold that
upon their unbelief, in rejecting Jesus Christ the only true Messiah, it should
be so I took my staff Beauty, and cut it asunder, that I might break my
Covenant which I made with all the People, Zach. 11. 10. And Paul tells us that
sad Prediction was fulfilled, therefore Romans 11. 12. he speaks of The Fall of
the Jews, meaning that they were fallen from their visible Church estate to be
in the same condition which the Gentile world was in before the coming of
Christ, so that they were fallen from heaven to earth; and in v. 20, 22. he
speaks of their being broken off and cut off, h. e. cut off from the visible
Church. The Apostle v. Mr. ^otton of ^^fant ^aptism.
in that Chapter does compare covenanting Abraham to a Root, and the visible
Church to an Olive tree, of which there are two sorts of branches, 1. Natural,
viz. the Jewish Church, 2. Ingraffed, i. e. the Church among the Gentiles. Now
the natural branches were broken off: and therefore in the New Testament they
are declared to be none of the Lords people, Rev: 3. 9. They call themselves
Jews, but are not so, but are of the Synagogue of Satan. They say they are
Jews, h. e. they boast of their being the Lords People, but in truth they are
not so (says Christ) they glory in the name of a Synagogue, but now they are
not Gods Synagogue, but Satan's. And in these days of the New Testament the
Lord has disowned, and un-Churched these and those hat once were his People,
Rev. 2. 5. I will remove the Candlestick out of his place. That Threatening is
not only fulfilled (...) Ephesus, but on all the Churches in Asia; there have
been in former Ages bright and glorious Candlesticks in that part of the world,
but they are long since all broken to pieces. The Romish Antichristian
Idolatry, has prevailed so far amongst Christians for above these thousand
years, that they that are overrun there with, Christ does declare them to be
looked upon, as Gentiles, as Heathens, and that they are not to be looked upon
as within the Temple, or as indeed appertaining to the visible Church, Rev. 11.
2. And this disowning and unchurching a people is called a Casting them off. 3.
The expression here does imply everlasting rejection in the other world. The
Hebrew Phrase [jazni chaka lagnad] Arias Montanus translateth execrabitur te in
^ternum. if thou forsake him, he will make thee an eternal execration. Though
it be a deep truth, that the line of election See (...) precedi^^ Sermon P. 29.
does for the most part run through the loins of godly parents, yet not only
so, for men may be descended from godly Parents and Progenitors, and yet be the
subjects of eternal Reprobation and Damnation. Math. 8. 12. The Children of the
Kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness. We read of one that could call
Abraham his Father, and unto whom Abraham said Son remember that in thy life
time thou had thy good things, that nevertheless when he dyed, went to the
place of Torment. If such Children forsake the Lord, it is not the prayers nor
tears of godly Fathers that will save them; Nay, these will be an infinite
aggravation of their misery. The tears of a godly Father, if his Children
forsake the Lord, will make the flames of Eternal Fire burn the more fiercely
upon their Souls for ever. Therefore well might David say to his Son Solomon,
If thou forsake the Lord, he will cast thee off for ever.

We come in the next place to enquire, what forsaking of God that is, that will
be attended with this casting off?

Answ. In two words, 1. this must be understood concerning deep departures from
God, and from his blessed ways, Hos. 9. 9. They have deeply corrupted
themselves therefore he will visit their sins. The Lord is the God of patience,
and of all grace, and thence is very slow in rejecting utterly a people, (of
such Posterity) whom he has once taken into Covenant with himself. Hence it is
not lesser departures, but high and great offenses against the Lord, that
Provokes him to cast off his People, e. g. Idolatry is a sin that causes the
rejection which the Text speaks of* Yea, it is true with reference unto that
Idolatry which is against the second Commandment. When the Children of Israel
committed that Idolatry respecting the Calf in the Wilderness, they sinned
against the second Commandment, for they would worship the Lord still, only
they would do it in such a way, and by such means as God never appointed, and
they were in great danger of being cast off for this sin. Hence the Lord said
to Moses, thy People have corrupted themselves, Exodus 32. 7. The Lord does not
say my People, as he was wont to do, but Thy People, as if it were said; Now
they have violated my Covenant, and deserve that I should for ever disown and
reject them. The Asian Churches have been cast off for this sin especially; we
may read the sin of those Churches written in dreadful Characters, upon the
Forehead of that Judgment which has destroyed them all. God has let loose
the barbarous Turks upon them, who hate and destroy no men so much as those
that worship Images. And as for the Church of Rome, the Apostle Paul did
solemnly predict that they should be cast off, Romans 11. 22. Now it is for this
sin principally that the Lord has cast them off. Again, Heresy causes this
casting off which the Text speaks of, Societies consisting of such as disown
the fundamental Truths of the Gospel, the Lord Jesus disowns them. Hence the
Jews are disowned and rejected by the Lord, for although they own some
fundamental Truths in Religion, indeed all Jac. Cappellu in Heb. 6. 1.
those six principles mentioned by the Apostle to the Hebrews, ( Cap 6. 1, 2.)
the Jews acknowledge, yet there are other foundation Truths, which they reject;
That Jesus of Nazareth is the true Messiah, that Messiah is God as well as man,
the Doctrine of original sin, and of salvation by imputed righteousness, all
which things are necessary to be believed in order to eternal life, this do
they reject and disown; and therefore the Lord has cast them off. when a
People shall be so far degenerate as to loose the Essentials of Religion, they
are the Lords no longer. Heretical Assemblies may be the Flocks of those that
pretend to be Christ's companions, but they are none of Christ's Flocks, Can. 1.
7. So for scandalous miscarriages in life and conversation, these provoke the
Lord to cast off a professing People. In a building, if once the materials be
rotted and corrupted, the house will moulder away, the matter being an
Essential Cause. And in Church building we know that Saints (...) the material
cause; and therefore scandal in life do^^ destroy the Essentials of a Church,
and so brings along with it this casting off which the Text speaks of. 2. It is
an Imperitent, incorrigible forsaking God, that does cause him to cast off a
people or person. Solomon was guilty (notwithstanding the solemn dying charge
of his Father to the contrary) of dreadful forsakings and Apostasies from the
Lord, but he repented of them, as we she by the book of Ecclesiates, and
therefore the Lord did not wholly cast him off for ever Notwithstanding great
degeneracy in a People, the Lord is not wont to cast them off until he has
used all means for their Recovery, so it was with the Children of Israel of
old, 2 Chronicles. 36. 15. The Scripture has recorded the names of above twenty
Prophets which the Lord sent to his People of old to tell them of their
backslidings, and call upon them to repent and reform, before he would cast
them off. And though in these days of the NewTestament, because men sin
against greater light and grace, then in former times, the Lord Jesus makes
quicker work, with an Apostatizing People, then in the days of old, and in the
years of ancient Generations; and therefore he said to the Church in Ephes^s,
except thou consider whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first
works, I will come against thee quickly, and remove the Candlestick out of his
place; nevertheless, he uses means to reduce and recover a backsliding People,
before he casts them off, so he did with the Asian Churches, and so has he
done with the Antichristian Generation, and therefore raised up great
Instruments, who have preached the Everlasting Gospel with a loud voice, and
called for Reformation; and might therefore say (...) parke^o, de polit Eccles.
and ^ainold de dol. Romans Ecclesiae.
as Jer. 51. 9. We would have healed Babylon, and she is not healed, therefore
her Judgment reaches unto Heaven' and is lifted up even to the Skies. The
Lord does give a first and second admonition before he does reject; He tries
what his Word will do, what lesser and greater Judgments will do, yea; and
what mercies and deliverances will do, and if nothing will prevail, then he
casts off for-ever. If a Generation be Apostate, and Incorrigibly Apostate, it
will not belong before God does cast them off for-ever, Jer. 15. 6, 7. Thou
have forsaken me says the Lord, thou (...) gone backward, therefore will I
stretch out my hand against thee, I will destroy my People since they return not
from their ways. In a word, when Apostasy is total and final then the Lord
does reject men, yea, though the Children and Posterity of his own Servants, he
casts them off for-ever.

Quest. But why so?

Answ. For such Reasons as these.

Reas. 1. Because the Transgressions of such Children as the Doctrine speaks of
are peculiar provocations; if the Children of David sin their iniquity is
attended with special aggravations. They sin against greater light, and love,
and grace, then may be said of any persons in the world besides; They this
rebel against the Light do at last provoke the Lord utterly to reject them.
Hence it is that refusing Instruction, is mentioned as the grand procuring
cause of this Rejection, Jer. 6. 8. Be instructed O Jerusalem lest my Soul
depart from thee, and thou become desolate. Now thus it is when the Children of
Godly Parents forsake the Lord, as Solomon does acknowledge, how diligent and
faithful his blessed Father had been in instrncting of him, Prove. 4. 3, 4. I
was my Fathers Son, he taught me also, and said unto me keep my Commandments
and live. And sins against grace, and peculiar mercy do without Repentance end
in Everlasting Rejection, Amos 3. 2. You only have I known, therefore will I
punish you for all your iniquities. Who ever escape (says the Lord) to be sure
you shall not, because you sin against greater grace and favor then any others
in the World ever did. For these causes the Lord threatened Eli that he would
cut off his Arm, and the Arm of his Fathers house, inasmuch as he had sinned
against peculiar mercies and favors. Especially, sins against tenders of
Gospel grace provoke the Lord to cast men off, Math. 23. 37, 38. O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered you, as an Hen her Chickens under
her wings but ye would not, and now your house is left unto you desolate. And
this is sadly true concerning the Children of godly Parents, they sin against
special favors from the Lord, the means of grace is vouchsafed to them, they
have many blessed strivings of the holy Spirit with them, which others have
not, therefore if they forsake the Lord no wonder if he cast them off for-ever.

Reas. 2. Because such Children are guilty of lamentable Covenant breaking
before the Lord, for the Covenant is with Children as well as Parents, Deuteronomy.
29. 10, 11, 12. You and your little ones do enter (...) Covenant, upon this
account David says that the Lord was his God from his Infancy, yea, from his
first coming into the world, Psalm. 22. 10, And the like is noted concerning
Solomon, and therefore his Father said to him, my Son build the house of the
Lord thy God, 1 Chronicles. 22. 11. The Lord is not only my God, but in respect of
his gracious Covenant he is thy God also. And this seems to be the reason why
Abraham is styled the Father of the faithful. (...)
Not merely on the Covenant of the eminency of his faith, for we read of others
in the Scripture, whose faith was not inferior to Abraham's, but in that he was
the first unto whom God expressly declared, I will be a God to thee and to thy
Seed, and withal appointed a sacred sign and Seal of this Covenant. Now
Abraham's Covenant is as to the substance of it Everlasting. And therefore the
Children of the faithful in all Ages, are wrapped under the bond of the
Covenant, otherwise there would be a substantial change of the Covenant from
what it was at first, then which nothing can be more contradictory to the whole
tenor and current of the Scripture. The Apostle therefore testifyeth that the
blessing of Abraham is come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ, Gal. 3. 14.
As God said unto Abraham, I take thee and thy Children into Covenant with my
self, so does he through Jesus Christ say the like to every believing Parent
among the Gentiles; And therefore the Lord Jesus did affirm concerning
Children, of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, Math. 19. 14. Mr. (...) Math 5. 3.
p; 61
It is not only true (says Christ) that Children did belong to God under the
Old Testament, but now that, the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, now that the
Church is to he under the heavenly dispensation of the Gospel, Children must be
acknowledged there also. And it is for-ever to be observed, that when the
New Testament dispensation was ready to be established, the ancient grant
concerning Childrens Interest in the Covenant is expressly confirmed, Act. 2.
39. The promise is to you and to your Children. Hence then, if such Children do
forsake the Lord, they are guilty of violating the Covenant. Now that is an
iniquity which does provoke the Lord to cast off those that are deeply guilty
of it, Isai. 24. 5, 6. They have broken the Everlasting Covenant, therefore
they are cursed, burned, desolate. In old time it was the manner that when a
Covenant was made, some Creature or other was killed, and cut in pieces, by
which rite was signified, that the Lord would kill and cut off him, that being
in Covenant with God, did not make conscience, faithfully to keep and observe,
that Covenant inviolable for-ever.

Reas. 3. From that infinite indignation, which is in the Lords heart against
Apostates. They are fugitives from Christ, and deserting their Captain, the
Lord himself will execute Martial Law upon them. No sinners are greater Objects
of divine hatred and indignation. Hence the Apostle said unto the Hebrews, when
some of them were ready to Apostatize from Christianity to Judaisme, if any man
draw back the Soul of God shall take no pleasure in him, Heb. 10. 38. meaning
that such Creatures, are Vessels of dishonor, and the most loathsome Objects
that can be thought of. Hence the Lord does pursue them with infinite
vengeance, he cuts them off, and casts them off for-ever. As that miserable
Spira at the very moment, when he had renounced the Truth, thought he heard one
say to him; Hence thou Apostate, and receive the Sentence of thy Eternal
Damnation. The Lord is wont to leave marks of his wrath upon such sinners. He
brands them, that all the world may be afraid of that iniquity, seldom has it
been known that any have notoriously turned away from the Lord, but visible
wrath from Heaven has fallen upon them. Jehoram had been religiously educated
under his godly Father Jehoshaphat, but he proved the Apostate child of a
gracious Father; And what came on him? God let loose the Heathen Arabians, who
wasted his Estate, and murdered all his Children save one. Thus did the Lord
cast him off. Joash was religiously educated under his uncle Jehojadah, but he
forsook the Lord, therefore the Ass^^ians with a small Army destroyed a great
Host of his; And afterward his own treacherous Servants murdered him. The like
we read concerning Amaziah. And Histories (besides what is recorded in the
Scripture) are full of awful and amazing Examples of the Lords indignation
against Apostates, and therefore since if David's Children do forsake the Lord,
they are to be reckoned amongst the number of Apostates, no wonder that he does
threaten to cast them off for-ever.

USE

We proceed now to a word of Application, and shall insist upon one only use of
Exhortation, let us be exhorted in the Name and Fear of God this day, to
endeavor that it may not be with us, as the Text and Doctrine expresses, let
us every one in our several places, and capacityes endeavor that the present
and succeeding Generations in New England, may not forsake the Lord God of
their Fathers, and so endanger their being cast off for-ever.

Wherefore Consider, 1. What Fathers and Predecessors have been, they were such
as did seek the Lord. As for the body of the present Generation in New England,
it may be said to them, your Fathers were such as did serve the Lord, yea, it
was love to God, and to Jesus Christ, which brought them into this Wilderness.
As the Lord speaks, Jer. 2. 2. I remember the kindness of thy youth, the love
of thine Espousals, when thou wentest after me in the Wilderness, in a Land
which was not sown. Our Fathers did not in their coming hither propound any
great matters to themselves respecting this world; only that they should have
liberty to serve God; and to walk with him in all the ways of his worship. As
one of our worthies has aptly expressed, God sifted three Nations, that so he
might bring over choice grain into this wilderness Let us then remember what
New England has been. It has been a noble Plant Jer. 2. 21. I plan (...) a
noble Vine, wholly a right Seed. It has been a (...), our Eyes have seen the
Lord fulfilling that Scripture literally and gloriously, Isai. 41. 19. I will
plant in the Wilderness a Cedar. The chief of the Fathers in these New-English
Churches, they were Abraham's. He, when God called him removed out of Ur of the
Chaldees, to the place which the Lord would show him, and there built an Altar
to the Everlasting God, so did our Fathers remove out of their own Land, when
God called them, and came hither, to build an Altar here to the Everlasting
God, yea, and they have set the Altar upon its right Basis too. Our Fathers
have been David's, that is to say, eminent Reformers. Let me speak freely
(without offense to any) there never was a Generation that did so perfectly
shake off the dust of Babylon, both as to Ecclesiastical and civil
Constitution, as the first Generation of Christians, that came into this Land
for the Gospels sake, where was there ever a place so like unto new Jerusalem
as New England has been? It was once Dr. Twiss his opinion, See Dr. (...)
Letters printed in Mr. Medes works. Book. 4. Epist. 42. ^. 979.
that when new-Jerusalem should come down from Heaven America would be the Seat
of it. Truly that such a Type and emblem of new-Jerusalem, should be erected in
so dark a corner of the world, is matter of deep meditation and admiration.

Consider, 2. How subject men are, yea, the Children of blessed Parents and
Predecessors to Apostatize from God. It is possible that the Children of David
may forsake the Lord, and that in a short time too, when Predecessors have been
eminent for God, their Successors have been most degenerate, Jer. 2. 21. I
planted thee wholly a right Seed, how art thou turned into the degenerate plant
of a strange Vine unto me, Isai. 1. 21. How is the faithful City become an
Harlot? it was full of Judgment, righteousness lodged in it, but now
murderers. It was sometimes said unto good Samuel, thy Sons walk not in thy
ways. And it is noted concerning Nabal (a drunken Sot) that he was of the
house of Caleb, 1 Samuel 25. 3. That ever such a branch should spring out of such
a Stock. The Ephraimites were the vilest Idolaters of all the Apostate Children
of Israel, yet they were the Posterity of Joseph the best of Jacobs twelve
Sons. The perfidious and ungrateful Ziphites were also the posterity of that
blessed Caleb but now mentioned. Yea, it is a sad Truth, that Religion has
seldom been upheld in the power of it, for above one or two Generations
together. Therefore it is recorded concerning the Children of Israel, they
turned quickly out of the way which their Fathers walked in, obeying the
Commandments of the Lord, but they did not so, Judge. 2. 17. The Fathers and
Leaders both of the first and second Generation were for purity of worship, but
their Children were not so. Their Fathers did endeavor to uphold Religion in
the power of it, but their Children did not so. Their Fathers did order their
conversation according to the holy Rules of the word of God, but their Children
did not so. Hence is that sad complaint by the Prophet, they rose early and
corrupted all their doings, Zeph. 3. 7. And if we look into the Scripture and
view the story of former Ages, we shall see this to be true. The Posterity of
the Lords Servants, the Children of the Church have in a little time so
forsaken him, as that solemn Reformation has been necessary. Look beyond the
Flood and we shall see it so. One of Adams Children with all his numerous
Posterity forsook the Lord, Cain was excommunicate out of the Church and became
the Father of an excommunicate race and Generation. The first Church that ever
was in the world, even that in Adam's Family continued in some measure pure,
about the space Ow^ de (...) lib. 2. Cap. 2.
of an hundred and thirty years, ( h. e. until Seth was born) but then great
Apostasy prevailed. When the Church was small in one Family, it was more easy
to keep it pure, by casting out the Apostates, but now the world grew numerous,
and a multitude of sinners caused impunity in sin, so as that they that were
godly and conscientious were fain in the very beginning or first Ages and
Generations of the world, to separate themselves and become distinct societies.
Hence is that, Genesis 4. 26. then began men to call upon the Name of the Lord. It
notes a separation of the Church from the profane world. After this, a second
Apostasy followed, that the Church and world were mixed together, even the Sons
of God and daughters of men, the Posterity of godly Seth and of wicked Cain,
until such time as the flood came and cleared the world of them, Genesis 6. 2.
Then were the Inhabitants of the Earth in a most corrupt Estate, wherefore the
Psalmist (as it seems) alluding to that time faith, the Lord looked down from
Heaven, to see if there were any that did understand and seek God, every one of
them is gone back, they are altogether become filthy, Psalm. 53. 2, 3. After
Religion was revived in Noah's Family, his Posterity quickly forsook the Lord,
Chams Apostasy was (as some Learned men observe) about forty years after the
flood. The Church was reformed by his ejection, but within sixty or seventy
years after that, the builders of Babel set upon their wicked attempt, which
was desperate Rebellion against the Lord, although Noah himself was then alive,
he could not by all his Authority restrain his grand Children and Posterity,
but they would needs become guilty of that Babel defection. After this, within
a few Generations the world was overrun with Idolatry. When that iniquity first
began is hard to say, but it is evident that in Jobs time (who is thought to
live about three hundred and fifty years after the Flood) the world was filled
with Idolaters, yea, in Abraham's time there was such Apostasy as that Religion
was almost gone out of the world; only in his Family there was a pure Church
established. Yet his Posterity did quickly forsake the Lord. The Ishmaelites,
Midianites, Edomites, (and other Nations) who were of the Posterity of Abraham,
the Father of the faithful, in a few Generations lost the substantials of
Religion, and were wholly deprived of their Church Estate. The Church was
settled in Jacobs Family. Corruption and Superstition did creep into his Family,
so as that he was fain to set upon a work of solemn Reformation, and that was
not two hundred years after the Reformation begun in his Grandfather Abraham's
Family. After the Church was become National, the truth and power of Religion
did very rarely continue above one or two Generations at the most (sometimes
not so long) witness that Scripture By Mr. Moodey.
which was worthily opened and applied in this place upon the like solemn
occasion two years ago, Judge. 2. 7, 10. And the People served the Lord all the
days of Joshua, and all the days of the Elders that outlived Joshua, who had
seen all the great works of the Lord that he did for Israel: And all that
Generation were gathered unto their Fathers, and there arose another Generation
after them, which knew not the Lord nor yet the works which he had done for
Israel. Those that were the Grandchildren of that Generation which was brought
out of Egypt, did forsake the God, of their Fathers. Hence is that expression,
Hos. 10, 9. O Israel thou have sinned from the days of Gibeah, what horrible
wickedness was in Gibeah, we may read in the nineteenth and twentyeth Chapters
of the Book of Judges, where we have (...) Story of the Levites Concubine,
which though it be mentioned toward the close of that Book, yet it seems
evident that it happened before the Judges, for it seems that Jebus (afterward
Jerusalem) was not then taken, Judge. 19. 11, 12. when as that was taken by the
Children of Israel before they were governed by Judges, Chap. 1. ver. 8. So
that the wickedness (...), and their war with the Benjamites, which followed
thereupon, was between the death of Ioshuah and the Judges. Moreover, Phinehas
the Son of Eleazar, the Son of Aaron was Priest in those days, Judge. 20. 28.
which makes it very manifest that, that most corrupt Generation, were the
Grandchildren of those, that were first embodyed as a peculiar People, when
the Lord did plant the Heavens, and lay the Foundations of the Earth, that is
to say, did build up the Children of Israel as a body politic under
Ecclesiastical and civil government, the third Generation among that People
proved degenerate and apostate. And when they were under a Theocracy or
Government by Judges, whom the Lord immediately raised up and set over them,
how soon did they turn aside from God; when any of their faithful Judges were
taken from them, Judge. 2. 19. So in the days of the Kings. After David's
Reformation Apostasy began in the very next Generation, in the days of his Son
Solomon, and in the days of his Grandchild Rehoboam all Israel forsook the
Lord, until God by a sad war awakened them to some Reformation. In Jehoshaphats
time Religion was upheld in some power; but in the very next Generation there
was Apostasy, Hezekiah was a great Reformer, but his Son Manasseh built up
again the high places, which his Father had destroyed, and seduced the People
to do more evil then did the Nations, whom the Lord destroyed before the
Children of Israel. After this* Josiah wrought a great Reformation, and with
him did the work of Reformation and Religion, dye amongst the Jews, upon
Josiahs death a flood of Land destroying sins brake in upon that Generation,
that within the space of two and twenty years after Josiah was gathered unto
his Fathers, the Jewish State both Civil and Ecclesiastical was quite
overthrown; After the Captivity, Ezra and Nehemiah, and the Prophets Haggai and
Zachary were great Reformers; But Apostasy quickly prevailed, witness the
Prophet Malachi, who declares that not only People but Rulers many of them in
his days, were become very corrupt. Albeit they were not guilty of that more
gross Idolatry, for which their Fathers were sent into Captivity, yet
Covetousness, which is a spiritual Idolatry they were guilty of, whereby they
provoked the Lord to send blasting Providence upon them, there being no
greater punishment to a covetous man then to have the world taken from him.
That Generation did not keep themselves unspotted of the World, upon which
account, they are by the Prophet pronounced unclean, Hag. 2. 13, 14. And when
Christ came into the world, he found the Jews in a most degenerate corrupt
Estate. Therefore did the Lord call them an evil and an Adulterous, and a
viperous Generation.

Furthermore, since the Church has been by divine Institution Congregational,
in these days of the New Testament, men have been no less subject to Apostasy
then in former Ages. The Churches in Galatia were strangely and suddenly
overrun with corrupt Doctrine. Hence the Apostle says, Gal. 1. 6. I marvel
that you are so soon removed unto another Gospel. He might well marvel, if the
observation of Cappellus in Histori Apostol,
great Chronologers be true, that within a year after Paul was removed from
Galatia to ^phesus, false Teachers succeeded him, and overthrew his Foundation,
be endeavoring to advance a mixed Religion consilting of Juda^sine and
Christianity. And I remember Jerome, (...)
testifyeth that in his time all Galatia was overrun with damnable Heresies.
And as for the Church in Ephesus they quickly declined, Rev, 2, 5. Remember
from whence thou art faland repent, and do the first works. It was (as
Historians observe) about twenty years after the Ascension of Christ that Paul
gathered a Church amongst the Ephesians. And sixty years after the Ascension,
the Book of the Revelation was written; So that there had been a Church in that
place about forty-years; In which time the first members of the Church must
needs (in probability) as to the body of them be dead, and another Generation
of Church members were risen up which were not like the first. The Church in
Thyatira, though not so Apostate when the Revelation was written as some other
Churches, yet Ecclesiastical Story mentions how that in a few years after that,
there was no Church in that place; which was one Reason why some ancient
Heretics (...)
denied the divine Authority of the Apocalypse. Because therein mention is made
of a Church in Thyatira, when as (said they) no Church is to be seen there. To
which the Answer is that there had been a Church there only the Cataphrygian
Heresy did prevail so, as in a little time to swallow up the whole Church. In a
word, in all those places, which we read of in the Scripture as having Churches
in them, they that are the Successors at this day, are not like unto them that
once were in those very places. In many places they have only the name not the
Truth of Christianity, and in some not so much as the name. Albeit, when time
was, famous Churches might have been seen in those places. In former Ages (...)
was the Seat of the Church, when as in these latter Ages Europe is so, Med
which is judged the Reason why the Book of Revelation speaks of Events to come
to pass chiefly in Europe; because since the ten Kings arose there, has the
Lord Christ seen meet to uphold and propagate his Church. What shall be said
more? It is evident that in the Apostles days, the mystery of iniquity began
to work, much more after they fell asleep, Ebion and Cerinthus sprang up whilst
the Apostle John was yet living. The very next Ages to the Apostles began to
depart from, and corrupt the simplicity of the Gospel, in diverse respects that
might be mentioned, ^egesyppus
one long since observed, that although the Church continued a Virgin until
after the Apostles death, then it was soon corrupted. It is conceived that Jude
lived after most of the other Apostles were dead, which is judged to be the
reason of his expressing himself as he does in ver. 17. of his Epistle. Now he
complains much of a great degeneracy amongst those that profossed
Christianity.

Consider, 3. The present Generation in New England is lamentably degenerate.
As sometimes Moses spoke to the Children of Israel, Numb. 32. 14. Behold ye are
risen up in your Fathers stead an increase of sinful men. So may we say, the
first Generation of Christians in New England, is in a manner gone off the
Stage, and there is another and more sinful Generation risen up in their stead.
We have in former years enjoyed a sun shine of prosperity, and that has been
attended (as uses to be) with great Apostasy. It is an apt similitude which
some use, that as the heat of the Sun in Summer breeds a multitude of Insects,
so does the warmth of prosperity a multitude of Apostates. Men are leth to hear
on this Ear, but if we should deny it, the Lord does testify against us that it
is so, as Joel. 1. 2. Hear this ye old men and give Ear all ye Inhabitants of
the Land, has this been in your days, or even in the days of your Fathers
says the Lord. Were there (says the Prophet) such Judgments for merly as now
there are, you may therefore conclude that you are departed from God, and by
your sins have provoked him so to punish you. Thus may it be spoken with
reference to our State and Case, and the dispensations of God toward us, you
old men that are here before the Lord this day, what say you to this Question,
did you know such Judgments upon New England formerly, as of late we have
seen? was it so in the days of our Fathers? were there such general and
killing diseases? such a long continuing war? so many hundreds cut of by the
Sword, yea, so many hundred Familyes brought to ruin? Candlesticks removed out
of their places, and Plantations made desolate! In former times we heard of
little besides settlement of Plantations, and gathering of Churches, but of
late years, in stead of that, ruins have been multiplied, yea, mischief upon
mischief. God has been spending his Arrows, and heaping mischief upon this
Generation. This Generation is not like the first. How many ignorant ones? how
many scandalous ones? There is great rudeness amongst young ones in this Land;
and in that respect degeneracy from the good manners of the Christian world.
And such sins as formerly were not known in New England are now become common,
such as swearing, sinful gaming, etc. yea, the present Generation as to the
body of it, is an unconverted Generation. I would not lessen the grace of God,
I know that through grace many of the younger Generation are brought home to
God in Jesus Christ, yet in many (I donbt in most) Congregations, the number of
sincere converts is but small, comparatively with those that remain still in a
natural and unconverted Estate. And as for some that have the Root of the
matter in them, yet they fall much short of their Fathers grace, Solomon was a
good man and his Soul is now in Heaven, yet he was not like David his Father as
to measure of grace and faithfulness, 1 King. 11. 6. we may see here and there,
one that has much of his blessed Fathers Spirit and Principles, but how rare
are such amongst us? Nay, the Interest of New England is now changed, from a
Religious to a worldly Interest; and in this thing is the great Radical
Apostasy of New England. Is not this to choose a strange God? Hence do we see
war in the gates. And the Lord has been letting this Generation blood in the
right vein, since be has taken the world away from them. Trade is almost
ruined. Farms, Oxen, Merchandise, which things have been sought after in the
first place, how have they failed? New England is not like this twenty years,
to be in that comfortable Estate it was in but two years ago.

Consider, 4. There is sad cause to fear what will at last come on this
Generation. There is a consumption on Religion all the world over, as one well
observes v. Full filling Scripture In Epist. p. 2.
the buryals of Christians are frequent and their birth is rare. And as for
what concerns ourselves more peculiarly, we may fear that there will be greater
Apostasy, because they that should have prevented it are gone. Many times the
removal of a few eminent Servants of God in the Commonwealth, or in the
Churches, makes way for great Apostafie quickly to ensue was it not so with
the Children of Israel? when they had a good Judge over them, they would serve
the Lord all the days of that Judge, but it came to pass when the Judge was
dead, they returned and corrupted themselves more then their Fathers, Judge. 2.
18, 19. In Nehemiahs time while he was Governor for twelve years together,
things went well, and God blessed the Land wonderfully, but when he was
removed, in one years time those sins of oppression, sensuality, Sabbath
breaking, were become prevailing common evils, Neh. 13. 6. Alas! our Nehemiahs
are gone, (I speak it not to reflect upon those that survive, but to awaken
from the consideration of our solemn bereavements) our Paul's are likewise
departed from amongst us, in which respect we may fear corruption in Religion
will follow, Acts 20, 29. Deuteronomy. 31. 27. Judge. 8. 33. Have we not seen it in
some places, how that within a year after the death of such an eminent Servant
of Christ, Apostasy to this day irrecoverable has prevailed? Furthermore, the
heads of the second Generation, that were most likely to have done good, the
Lord has snatched them away, and (like Enoch) translated them to Heaven, in
the midst of their days; others that are most likely to prevent backsliding,
and to be Instruments of reforming a corrupted Generation, are not likely to
continue long in this evil world, yea, and of late even since the present war,
that we are bleeding under, began, the Lord has taken away many young ones,
either by Sword or sickness, who were the hopes of the Generation. In many
Plantations, they that have dyed of late, were the most hopeful and desirable
young men in the places where they lived, an Ominous sign that there is some
terrible thing, which God will do, e're this Generation be passed away.

Consider, 5. How sad it would be if succeeding Generations should forsake the
Lord. It is evident, from the considerations mentioned, that it may be so, but
it would be dismal if indeed it should be so. New England would then become of
all Lands the most dark and miserable. How (...) does the Prophet speak of
Bethaven, now what was that Bethaven? even the same that was in former times
Bethel, i. e. the house of God, Hos. 4. 15. with 1 King. 12. 29. Am. 5. 5. If
such places where the house of God has been erected do once degenerate, they
are like to become Bethavens, places of greatest vanity and iniquity in the
world. Hence is that, Hos. 9. 15. all their wickedness is in Gilgal. Gilgal was
once famous upon Religious accounts. There was the Covenant renewed by
Circumcision, there was the first Passover kept by the Children of Israel,
after their coming into the promised Land, there did God appear to Joshua,
there was to be seen a famous Monument of the Lords doing wonders for his
people, there was the Tabernacle for some time, but in after Generations an
Idolatrous Temple was built there, so as that it was a fountain of much
wickedness. All their wickedness was in Gilgal. It seems the Altar of witness
was near that place, which through men's corruptions might easily be abused unto
much Superstition in after Ages. The Devil seeks to corrupt those places
especially, which once were famous for Religion. As Polanus observes that
Wittenberge in Germany was the Town where the Reformation in Luthers time
began, (...)
and therefore the Devil did seek to corrupt that place especially, and caused
it to become the Seat of grievous Herosies. What Land under Heaven, has been
more noted for profession and Religion, then New England? If Apostasy prevail
amongst such a People, it is like to be a sad Apostasy indeed. We see it
already; Hence there are such sad complaints of young men that have been bred
and born in New England, when they go abroad into other Lands that none are so
debauched and profane as some of them. If the Lord should be provoked to pluck
up the Hedge of civil government, what a fearful flood of iniquity would soon
break in? How would madded and enraged profaneness know no bounds? yea, this
Land would become as Sodom, and then most desolating plagues will in short time
follow, Ezekiel. 33. 28. what became of Cain's degenerate race? when they were
become, I know not how many millions, the flood swept away every mothers child
of them. wherefore all the Children of men that are now in the world are styled
the Children of Seth, Numb. 24. 17. Belgic Annot
because as for Cain's Apostate Generation they all perished in the flood. When
the old world did Apostatize, after the Reformation in the days of Seth, that
second Apostasy proved fatal. If Churches in New England degenerate, it is an
Apostasy after Reformation. How fatal is such a relapse like to be? will not
the end thereof be with a flood? And truly to be amongst the last Apostates,
will be most woeful.

Quest. But what shall be done in order to prevention of Apostasy? what shall
be done, that so succeeding Generations in New England may not forsake the Lord
God of their Fathers?

Answ. As I have been meditating an Answer to this Enquiry, I could not but
call to mind that Scripture which some of the chief of the Fathers (at least
wise those two, My Father Cotton and My Father Mather.
whom I have more Reason then any one in the world to think of) have upon the
like solemn occasion, improved many years since, I mean that Scripture, Hag. 2.
4. Yet now be strong O Zerubbabel says the Lord, and be strong O Joshua, and
be strong all ye People of the Land. If Zerubbabel, Joshua, and the People of
the Land, if Magistrates, Ministers, and People all do what duty requires, the
feared. Apostasy, together with the unavoidable calamity coming therewith, may
be prevented, however in great measure and for a long time.

1. Let me apply my Speech unto Zerubbabels, h. e. Rulers in the Commonwealth.
Honored and much esteemed, the welfare or ill fare of the present, yea, and
following Generation does much depend upon you, Magistrates are in the
Scripture compared to Corner stones, because where there is a Commonwealth
erected, the safety of the whole building (under God) depends much upon them.
Hence are they also termed Foundations, Psalm. 11. 3. If the foundations be
destroyed what can the righteous do? If David had perished, Foundations had
been destroyed, and the good People of the Land would have dearly felt the loss
of him. And when in Saul's time there were corrupt Judges and Magistrates, it is
therefore said, that the Foundations of the Earth were out of Course, Psalm. 82.
5. And the Prophet Micah speaking to the Rulers in the Commonwealth of Israel
says, hear ye Foundations of the Earth, Mic. 6. 2. It is with you (by the help
of Christ) to lay such Foundations as shall make Posterity either happy or
miserable. David improved the power which God in his Providence entrusted him
with, to serve his Generation according to the will of God, Acts 13. 36. And
therefore was an eminent blessing to all that Generation wherein he lived. If
the sins of the People under your care and charge should ever provoke the Lord,
to leave you in an hour of Temptation, you cannot possibly turn aside from God
alone, but many others will do so too. Regis ad Exemplum, People are apt to
follow the Examples of those in place. you know it is mentioned concerning
Rehoboam, that he within few years after his coming to the Government did
forsake the Lord, and all Israel with him, 2 Chronicles. 11. 1. Let me then with all
due respect to your places, and to your worth, and yet with that freedom and
faithfulness which becomes a Messenger of the Lord of Hosts, propound some
things to you, which concern the welfare of this, and after Generations in
New England.

1. I pray you in the Name of the Lord, that a speedy and Effectul Course may
be taken, that the great things that God did for our Fathers, in planting these
Heavens, and laying the Foundations of this Earth, be faithfully recorded, and
transmitted to Posterity. This has been thought of, and spoken of long enough,
but why is it not done? If it be neglected till the present Generation be
passed away, the next will be less capable of doing it. The Title of the Book
wherein my Text is, leads me to Insist on this. Why is this Book called the
Chromcles, but because it contains a Record and relation of the things which
God did for his People in ancient time, yea, from time to time. The Hebrews
have termed it, [dibre hajamin] words of days probably (as (...)
some conceive) taken out of the royal Diaryes of those times, by divine
direction and Inspiration; this Book of Chronicles being an unerring (...).
Epitome of those Chronicles mentioned in the Kings. The Truth is, that above
half the Old Testament is a Chronicle of things done, by the Lord, for his
People in the years of Ancient Generations. You have then Scripture Example
abundantly to encourage, in promoting a work of this nature. Hence we read of
the Book of Jasher, 2 Samuel 1. 18. and of the Book of Nathan the Prophet, and of
Gad the Seer, 1 Chronicles. 29. 29. and of Abijah, the Shilonite, and of Shemaiah
the Prophet, 2 Chronicles. 12. 15. and the Story of the Prophet Iddo, 2 Chronicles. 13.
22. There is also plain Scripture precept See Mr. Mar^^als Sermon on Psalm. 102.
18. p. 35.
as well as Example to move hereunto, see Psalm. 78. 5, 6 For he established a
Testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel which he commanded our
Fathers, that they should make them known to their Children, that the
Generations to come, might know these* even the Children which should be born,
who should arise, and declare them to their Children. And again, Psalm. 102. 18.
This shall be written for the Generations to come. So that this is a duty
incumbent upon present Generations to take care that there be a Record of the
great works of God toward them, for the benefit of the Generations that shall
follow, that so God may be glorified. I perceive that some good men are afraid
lest our too great neglect in this matter, may be one thing that God is
offended at. And there be two considerations. which may cause such
apprehensions not to seem groundless, one is in that this thing has been
formerly urged. See Mr. She^pards Election S^mon p. ^^.
That faithful Shepard who spoke here in the Name of the Lord upon the like
occasion, five years ago, insisted upon this very thing, and yet the matter
remains unfinished to this day. Moreover, whilst the body of the first
Generation, whom God planted in this Wilderness was alive, there were Essays
this way, for it See (...) of the Commission Sept. 9. An. 16^.
was propounded to, and concluded amongst the Commissioners of the united
Colonies above thirty years ago, that there should be a Collection of special
Providence of God toward his New England people; And that memorials being
duly communicated, an History should be compiled according to Truth, for the
benefit of Posterity, that they might see how God had been with their Fathers,
in laying the Foundation of the Churches, and of the Commonwealth. Now that
such things should be concluded, and yet never done cannot please God.
Furthermore, how can we testify to Posterity our gratitude toward God, for the
great things he has done for our Fathers, and for us their Children, in more
respects then can be now mentioned, except such a lasting Record and Monument
as is now spoken of, be brought to persection. In the Town house at Geneva, it
is written on Marble Pillars in Letters of gold, such a year God delivered this
place from the Tyranny of Antichrist, and set up his true Religion amongst us,
Clarks ^amples, p. 1. ^36.
therefore the Senate and People of Geneva, have erected this Monument, that so
they might testify to Posterity their gratitude toward God. Let me then
entreat you that are Senators of this Colony, that a work of this nature may
not be always delayed; and the rather, because you know not whether your
opportunity to encourage such an undertaking, will be of long continuance. And
this may (by the blessing of Christ) be one good means to prevent Apostasy, The
Lord therefore commanded his People of old, to keep a Record of his works and
signal Providence toward them, that so their Children after them might set
their hope in God and keep his Commandments, Psalm. 78. 7.

2. I pray you in the Name of the Lord, to take care for the propagation of the
Interest of the Gospel, that the good knowledge of the Lord may be amongst the
people under your Government in your time; yea, and after that also. If
ignorance overspread the Land Apostasy will do so too. Hence David here says,
know thou the Lord God of thy Father and serve him, but if thou forsake him,
etc. intimating, that except succeeding Generations know the Lord, they will
not serve him, but forsake him. Therefore it concerns the Magistrate, to take
effectual care, that the Land be furnished with able and faithful Ministers; So
we read of Jehoshaphat, that he caused Levites to be sent into all the Cities
of Judah who taught the People, 2 Chronicles. 17. 8, 9. And this stands upon Record
to his everlasting Renown. It is not every man that is fit to be employed as a
pulick Teacher, Ezra says (Chap. 8. 17, 18. that he sent unto such and such,
that they would bring unto him Ministers for the house of God, and that by the
good hand of God they brought a man of understanding: He that is employed in
holy things ought to be such an one. Therefore you should endeavor that the
future generation may be furnished with a learned Ministry. The Cen^^ 2. c. 7.
(...) 3. c. 7.
Writers of ecclesiastical Story, inform us, how careful Christians in the
primitive times were, for the settling of Schools of Learning, in all places
where Churches had been planted, that so there might be able instruments raised
up for the propagating of truth in succeeding Generations. And some have well
and truly observed, that the interest of Religion and good literature, has
risen and fallen together. It was Julians policy to pull down Schools among
Christians, that so he might destroy Religion, (...) Mr. (...) of (...)
necessity of burn^ learning for a Gospel Minister.
concluding that the cause that should not have an able defendant would fall.
Therefore let there be a pious and earnest solicitude about that matter. One
of the famous Kings Elfr^^ v. Clari^^ vol. 1. p. 173.
in our nation caused a law to be established, that all Parents should bring up
their children in Learning. I know there are good laws amongst us, respecting
inferior Schools, though doubt as to execution there is great defect in that
as well as in other matters. Let me also beseech you to endeavor that what
concerns the College may be revived, and if it may be in the place where it
has formerly flourished, I have nothing to say against that but much for it
rather; and that greater encouragement be given to those that labor as Tutors
there. M^. Oaks (...) Election (...) Sermon 57.
That was propounded to this general Assembly four years ago, by him that did
then so faithfully declare the counsel of God to this Generation. I would
gladly second a motion of that nature, as supposing that more of the welfare of
the uprising generations is concerned therein then many are aware of.

I remember it is noted concerning the learned Chytroeus that he prevailed with
the Princes of Megapol^ to bestow 3500 crowns of yearly Revenue, upon the
University of Rostoch, by which means the interest of Religion was wonderfully
promoved. And it was one of the usual wishes of that excellent man, Utinant
Reges ac Potentes rerum Domini, majorem Ecclesioe ac Scholarum curam
susciperent, O (said he) that Magistrates would be more careful to encourage
Schools of learning, and thereby promote the good of the Church. The Reformers,
did in this way, and by this means carry on the interest of Religion,and
propagate the Truth to after ages. Calvin therefore persuaded the Senate of
Geneva to erect an illustrious School in that city wherein the Tongues and Arts
were taught; and from whence many worthy Instruments issued forth. And that
excellent Prince Cass^mire did the like at Neostad, where Ursin and Zanchi were
sometimes Professors. So the Senate of Grunberg erected a College, and chose
the learned Bucholtzer to govern it. The like was done at Herborn by Prince
John of Nassau at the persuasion of Olevian, where also Piscator taught and
flourished. So at Leyden in Holland. And (not to mention more places) the same
course was taken at Edenborough in Scotland; of which College that famous and
holy man, Mr. Rollock was the first president, and many choice Instruments of
Gods glory have there been educated. Wherefore let what concerns this matter,
be amongst the chief of your cares and endeavors.

Further, I entreat you, let it be your care, that none but faithful ones (as
far as men can judge) be employed as public Preachers: Though the just
liberties of Churches should not be infringed, yet that every Plantation in the
Country should have allowance to choose, whom they please to labor in the
public dispensation of the word, may be in time a great inlet to ignorance,
error and profaness. Therefore let me humbly propound to you, that you would
think of some expedient, respecting the approbation of such, as shall be under
a constant improvement as public Teachers. Yea, and that there be not any
place settled without such. No doubt but one reason why the Lord has let loose
the Heathen against us, has been, because some Plantations have been erected,
and yet no public acknowledgement of God amongst them, but they have lived
like Heathen, without Sa^^^ths, without the word and Prayer, which are moral
duties that all are bound to attend: and it is therefore incument on the
Magistrates to see that they do so. People are ready to run wild into the woods
again, and to be as heathenish as ever, if you do not prevent it: Take care
also I beseech you, for the propagation of the Gospel amongst these poor
Indians. You know it is expressed in the Patent, as one main end proposed by
our Fathers in their coming into this Wilderness, that so they might endeavor
the Conversion of the Natives, and set up the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus
amongst them. God by the late War has made way for the Gospel to be
entertained amongst them, more then formerly; should not this be considered!

3. I beseech you in the Name of the Lord, that you would in special manner
beware of that which was the sin of Solomon: and what was that? Truly sinful
Toleration was Solomon's great iniquity, whereby he did forsake the Lord. It is
said of him, he built high places for Ashtaroth, 2 King.23. 13. because he did
tolerate and give public allowance, unto those Idolatryes: and that sin of his
was the reason why the Lord stirred up Adver^aryes against him. Do we not find
that all the godly reforming Magistrates, spoken of in the Scripture, thought
it their concern to pull down false worship, as well as to set up the true
worship of God. It is a most vain objection which some have made, that we do
not read in the New Testament, that the Magistrate did ever punish any, on
account of Transgression against the first Table. No more (^aith Calvin) do we
read in the New Testament, that the Magistrate; did ever punish men for murder,
or other crimes, does it therefore follow that he ought not so to do? But
therein it is said that they ought to punish all evil doers. ^om. 13.4. 1.
Tim.1.9. And that Transgressions against the first Table are evil deeds,
Gal.5.19.20. Phil.3.2. 2. Joh. 10,11. And the holy Apostle wished those false
Teachers, who disturbed the peace of the Churches in Galatia cut off. Gal.5.12.
Some judicious Authors conceive v. Hi^^mym. in ^^um.
that he wishes there had been a christian Magistrate in the world to take
such a course with those seducing spirits as they deserved. Moreover, sinful
Toleration is an evil of exceeding dangerous consequence. Men of corrupt minds,
though they may plead for Toleration, and cry up liberty of Conscience, etc.
yet if once they should become numerous, and get power into their hands, none
would persecute more than they: So the Donati^ts See ^^arks ^^artyro^^y p. 89.
of old, and the Germane Anabapti^ts ^^eidan,(...)10. p. 9.
in the last age. And the Arminien Remonstrants ^oet. (...). Vol. (...). 795.
803. ^otius (...). Or^. Hol^d.
in the Netherlands made hideous clamours for liberty of Conscience, and that
the States of Holland were more cruel than the bloody Spanish Inquisitors, yet
when they became potent, they did persecute the Orthodox Professors of the
Truth. And indeed the Toleration of all Religions and Persuasions* is the way
to have no true Religion at all left. That was Julian the Apostate his device,
in order to an extirpation of Christianity. And it is a solemn word which Mr.
Cotton (the first and famous Teacher in this Congregation) ^peaketh, Mr.
Cottons bl^u Tenent washed. p. 19
I wish (^aith he) that Antichrist do not creep in at the back door of
Toleration. I do believe that Antichrist has not at this day a more probable
way to advance his Kingdom of Darkness, then by a Toleration of all Religions
and Persuasions. Hence some of the chief of the Popish Doctors Sic Becanu^,
Mar^ana, Hardi^^ contra J ellum. Heart in Rain dum. Sic Bozzius et Rsoeus, quos
vide ^ita apud Kec^erm. 'in po p. 983. ^t Paroeu^ Romans 13.
have written against the Magistrates power in matters of Religion. But
remember I pray you* how God has punished this sin which I am testifying
against. Of old (as some Mr. Strong Se Sermons. p. 263. 264.
have truly observed) when once the Roman Emperors did indulge and tolerate
Arrians, God was provoked to let the barbarous Goths loose to break in upon the
Empire and destroy it, so as that the Church fled into the wilderness, had like
to have been swept away with that flood. And what misery this sin has more
then once brought upon our own Land and Nation, I need not tell you, It is a
very memorable passage, which I find related in the life of that great learned
Usher; when Popish Idolaters were by the Civil State allowed, Well (said that
Worthy of his time) you shall find that God will punish you forty years hence
by those very men, whom you have sinfully indulged: and so it came to pass; for
just forty years after that was the Irish Rebellion. This very sin which God
calls me to bear witness against this day, has been subversive to the
interest of Religion in some Christian Nations. The Toleration of Sociniani^me
has proved the ruin of the Churches in Poland and Transylvania. Yet it is far
from my design in speaking this, to stir up Magistrates to that which the
Scripture calls Persecution: it were better to err by too much indulgence
^^wards those that have the root of the matter in them, than by too much
severity. Nay, as to those that are indeed Heretical, I can for my own part say
with Luther, Ad judicium sanguinis toerdus sum, (...) Sr. Simond D'Ewes (...)
Primitive Practice (...) preserving Truth. 6, 7.
I have no affection to sanguinary punishments in such cases. And certainly
there are other ways to suppress Heretics besides Hereticide, witness what
was done by great Constantine for the suppression of Arrianisme. Nevertheless,
approved writers who are large enough in the point of Toleration, declare, that
they, the principles of whose Religion are disturbant, to the civil State and
Constitution of any place, may not be indulged, (and that therefore Popish
Priests and Jesuits are not to be permitted) sure then they whose Religion, and
whose Profession does warm in its bowels, a fatal Engine, against the Kingdom
and Churches of the Lord Jesns, ought not to be tolerated. Nor is it tolerable,
for any sort of men amongst us, to set up a Mount Gerizzim, that if these, or
those are Justly cast out of the Churches of Christ, they shall be suffered to
set up an Altar against the Lords Altar, and (it may be) to take those hands
that are in the Name of the Lord Jesus delivered up to Satan, I say, to take
those hands to administer Phriknusie^
the dreadful mysteries of the Kingdom, it is an abomination enough to make
desolate. Certainly (much honored in the Lord) if your blessed Fathers, and
Predecessors were alive, and in place, it would not be so; If Winthrop, See
^^w-Eng^^ds me^^ial.
Dudley, Endicot were upon the Bench, such profaneness as this would soon be
suppressed. And if it be so, that the Spirit of Rulers in New England is
changed, if you do become cold and indifferent in the things of God, departing
from your former love, and zeal for the Name, Truth, and blessed Ordinances of
the Lord Jesus, I will be bold to speak to you, as once Mr. Brightman said, to
a greater man then any of you all, if it be so, you may believe it, that God
will change either you, or your Government ere long. I speak it to you with
great solemnity of Spirit, and in the Name of him that is higher then the
highest.

4. Labor (I likemise pray you in the Name of the Lord) to the utmost of your
power, that the work of Reformation may be promoted in this Generation. I shall
not need to insist here, because this Argument was abundantly and worthily
enlarged on Mr. Torrey in his Elect on Sermon*
by him that spoke in the Name of the Lord on this occasion three years ago.
Since that, the holy dispensations of God toward this People have been very
dreadful, so that the Lord calls for Reformation, now more then ever. If things
should pass away thus, and the Generation that is to come should not see, that
some notable thing was done with respect to a Reformation of provoking evils,
it would be sad indeed; and the more sad, in that there have been Essays this
way, and since the late (and to this day not fully ended) War, a Committee
appointed by the general Court to enquire into the causes of the high
displeasure of God, which has been manifested, and such and such evils,
concluded to be matters of provocation, and Laws enacted for the suppression of
them,and shall it all come to just nothing at last? shall we dare to dally with
the Almighty in things of this nature? The Lord may respite us for a while, but
except there be a Reformation of provoking evils, we have no Reason to expect
otherwise, but that a worse thing will come unto us, and that he will punish us
yet seven times for our sins. And how is there like to be that Reformation
which the Lord requires, except you that are Leaders over this people, do you
utmost to promote it? where do you read of any great and general Reformation
brought to pass, except the civil Magistrate did forward it? It is true, that
many times God does make use of his Messengers and Ministers to set the Wheel a
going, but then Magistrates have fallen in with them. The Prophets Haggai and
Zachary set the work of Reformation upon the Wheel, but Zerubbabel and
She^ltiel (godly Magistrates) carried on the work to Effect, Ezra.5.1,2. Luther
began the Reformation in Germany, yet if some of the Princes there, had not
engaged with him, ^^ead the ^^ves of Lu ^^er, Calvin, Zuing ^^us,
Oec^^^mp^^ius, ^^allerus.
the work had never been carried on with such success. Calvin (and other
eminent Ministers of God) exhorted the People at Geneva, unto Reformation, but
if the Senators of that place had not hearkened to the voice of God in those
Exhortations, the People would have remained unreformed still. Zwi^glius by his
Ministry was instrumental toward the accomplishing a great Reformation in
Zurick, but then the Magistrates of that place fell in with the Word of God.
Oecolampadius was an happy Instrumeut in the hand of Christ to reform Basil;
but if the Magistrates of that City had not set to their helping hand,
Oecolampadius alone might have labored in vain. The like is to be said
concerning the Reformation of Bern, (not to insist on more Instances) where
that learned Halle^us was once a preacher of the Gospel. I know you cannot
change men's hearts, yet you may do much (if God help you) toward the effecting
an outward Reformation, which will, procure outward blessings and prevent
outward Judgments and desolations. There is pride in the hearts of men, you
cannot reform that, but there is pride in Apparel which the Lord has said he
will punish for, you may cause that to be reformed. There is drunkenness in the
sight of God, which does not fall under your Cognizance, but Drunkenness in the
sight of men, and the occasions of it, do; which you may and ought to remove. I
know not any evil, that has brought more misery upon this generation then that
has, and some that have Reason to know it, have told me that there has been
more Drunkenness amongst the Indians, since this war, then there was before;
undoubtedly there is a fault somewhere, that good Laws are not executed upon
those that shall transgress in this kind, and that the course propounded and
enacted by the general Court, for the suppressing of this growing evil has not
been duly attended. Again, as for scandalous Contentions, you may do much
toward the healing of them. All the world knows, that there has been an
unhappy breach between two of the Churches in this great Town. If every one of
you that are in place, shall do what you can, and what the Lord Jesus would
have you do, to help in this case, we may hope that wofnl breach will (by the
help of Christ) soon be healed, and much sin and Judgment that is otherwise
like to follow, will be prevented. And the Lord calls aloud about this matter;
The burning which he has kindled in this place, the voice of the Lord in it
is, out with your sinful fires, le^t I give you burning for burning. And since
that, this Town has been endangered more by fire then ever it was since the
day I knew it. Therefore I come to you in the Name of the Lord, and beseech you
to consider of this matter, lest the Lord kindle another fire in Boston ere
long, that shall burn to the Foundation of the Mountains. And I do the rather
mention this thing, because the Subject I am upon, leads me to it, the welfare
of Posterity being concerned therein, it may be the sour grapes which the
Fathers have eaten will set your Childrens teeth on edge, I Mr. Buroughs
Irenicum* p. 220.
remember blessed Mr. Buroughs in his Irenicum takes notice of it, that it is
very dangerous for the Children of the Church to be brought up in the sight of
Divisions amongst Professors. Was there not a young man that came to a
lamentable end in this Country, Abraham War^er in ^artford.
who professed that the Divisions which he observed amongst godly men, had
occasioned his ruin? Let us remember that Scripture, Jer.32.39. I will give
them one heart to fear me, for the good of them, and of their Children after
them. If there be a divided heart among Christians, and these Divisions appear
openly; it is a wrong to their Children after them. The Lord help us to
consider of it.

And now I shall turn my speech from you that are Zerubbabels amongst this
People: I doubt not but you consider that I have spoken these things, not as a
friend only, but as in the Capacity of an unworthy Ambassador of the most high
God unto you this day. And methinks my Conscience bears me witness in the holy
Ghost, that an earnest desire that the will of God might be done, has caused
me thus to express my self; As also a desire that you might have comfort both
now and in that day when you must give up your account to the Son of God,
concerning your Stewardship, which in his Providence he has entrusted you
with; and that your names might be honorably spoken of in the next Generation,
when you shall be in your graves. It is no honor to Jehu's name that in his
days God began to cut Israel short, 2 King.10.32. nor to Jehoram in that it is
recorded to Posterity, that in his days the Edomites revolted, 2 Chronicles.21. 18.
Nor will it be for your honor, if the next Generation shall say, once such and
such Worthies and Patriots had the management of affairs in New England, and in
their days things went well, God did bless and build, and prosper the Land,
but after they were gone, the work fell into other hands, and in their days
there was trouble upon trouble, wars, sicknesses, Sword, Fire, desolations in
every corner of the Land, for it (thus to be spoken) would not be for your
honor. But now that it should be said, though the Lord afflicted the Land for
a while, you caused the People under your charge to turn unto the Lord, and
then God did own them, and bless them more then ever, this will be to your
honor amongst men in this world, and more to your joy when you shall appear
before Jesus Christ, then if Crowns of Diadems should be set upon your heads.
The Lord grant it may be so.

2. Let me humbly propose this Exhortation to those that are Ministers in the
house of God. There are many such before the Lord in this great Assembly. My
Fathers, and Brethren, the Generation that (...) present, and that which is to
come, will bless God for us, if we do our utmost to promote their welfare; We
are many of us eminently the Children of the Prophets. The Prophets do they
live for ever; and our Fathers where are they? they are now in Heaven beholding
the glory of Jesus Christ; And the Lord Jesus who sometimes said to the Angels
of the Churches, I know your works, speaks to us saying, the great affairs of
my Kingdom, which once were in the hands of your Fathers to manage, are now
come into your hands, they were faithful to my Name, and did acquit themselves
as became them, now let me see what you will do: Follow them as they followed
Christ. Give me leave to mention two or three words, which if the Lord help us
to remember them, we shall serve our Generation according to the will of God.

1. Let us approve our selves faithful in what concerns the house of God. And
therefore we ought to be careful, who are admitted there. Though others are
also concerned therein, yet in a more peculiar manner, that matter belongs to
us. We are in respect of sacred Office relation before the Lord, Porters that
have the charge of his house; and we are solemnly charged, Ezekiel. 44.7. (it is a
Scripture that concerns Ministers of the New Testament) not to bring into the
Lords Sanctuary, uncircumcised in heart, to be in the Sanctuary to pollute it,
and to eat the bread of God there. Indeed as for th^se whom God has admitted
into his house (in any degree) by any Rule of his, we must not turn them out
till the Lord do it. But that which I intend, is the admission of persons into
full Communion, we know what our Fathers have taught concerning that matter,
viz. that there ought to be an holding forth Faith and Repentance before
admission to the Lords Table. And it is well said by blessed Mr. Mitchel Un
An^^er to ^^ol, ^re^^e* (...).
that laxness in that point, would be a real departure from our former
Profession; yet I wi^h there be not Teachers found in our Israel, that have
espoused loose, large Principles here, designing (...) bring all persons to the
Lords Supper, who have an Historical Faith, and are not scandalous in life,
although they never had Experience of a work of Regeneration on their Souls,
and live in the neglect of secret duties, wherein the life and power of
godliness especially consists. Now this would corrupt Churches, and ruin all
in a little time, The neglect ^wen Th^ol. c. 8. c4.
of this principle of Truth, that such members of the Church, as are admitted
to full Communion ought to be Regenerate, converted per^^ns, the non attendance
unto that did (as a worthy Divine of our own has well noted) lay the
Foundation to great Apostasy, which the Christian Church has been long subject
unto. Again, (...) we would be faithful as to what concerns the house of God,
we must endeavor that the building thereof be carried on to perfection: As
David in this Context speaks to Solomon, Take heed now, for the Lord has
chosen thee to build an house for a Sanctuary, be strong and do it. So has
the Lord been pleased to choose us to be employed in building his house, which
has not been carried on to the desired perfection. Our Fathers did like David,
He prepared Materials for the Temple, and then left it to his Son to go on
with the Building: So did our Fathers, leave us Principles of Truth, which they
did with much cost and pains, dig out of the rich veins of the Scripture. We
have need therefore to be much in Prayer, and Humiliations before the Lord,
that so he might vouchsafe to show us the form of the House, and the fashion
thereof, and the goings out thereof, and the comings in thereof.

2. Let us make Conver^ing work our main Design. Shall we be content to go to
heaven alone, and not strive to carry as many of the Generation we live in,
along with us as possibly we can? Alas Apostasy will prevail, and these
Churches cannot be kept pure long except converting work go forward. O
therefore let us preach for this, and pray for this, and study for this, that
precious immortal Souls may be converted to God through Jesus Christ. And to
this end it will be good for us to attend personal instruction of those under
our charge, as far time as and strength will permit us. I remember it is noted
in the lives of Chrysostom and Austin, that besides their public Labors, they
did sometimes attend personal Instruction of these and those of their hearers.
When the Refer tur in (...) Calvini.
Ministers in Geneva did agree to divide the City, so as to call each Family to
an account concerning their Faith: more good was (...) thereby then by all
their public Teachings. (...) me r. Mr. Joseph A leins life with M^ Baxters
Preface. Ames Ca^^ Cons. 1.^ c. 26.
of latter time have been blessed with eminent success, as to the Conversion of
Souls, so as that whole Towns where they have lived have been wonderfully
changed, upon taking this course. I know that where there is but o^e Elder in a
Church (as alas that is now the case of these Churches generally) so much
cannot be done that way as is to be desired; yet if we do as much as we can,
the Lord Jesus will accept of it; and it may be, success will be beyond
expectation. Many an one that minds not a Sermon, yet when he is by a Messenger
of God particularly spoken to, and told, you are yet in your sins: if you be
not new born, better you had never been born; he falls down under conviction.
And possibly words that we little think any such thing of now, will be
mentioned again to our exceeding joy and rejoicing in the day of Christ when we
shall see and hear many Souls stand forth and bless the Lord Jesus that ever
they knew us, and that ever we ^^ake to them in the Name of the Lord both
publicly and privately; even in the day when each of us that has been
faithful in his Generation, shall say, Lord here am I, and the Children that
thou ^ast given me. Moreover, if we would convert Souls, and be blessings
indeed to this Generation, it concerns us to be very careful of our personal
Conversation, and what examples we set before others. If we do not live
Sermons as well as preach them, we are not likely to do any great good. For a
Minister of. Christ *See Dr. Tuckney on Exodus ^.36. P. 429. And Fuller, ^oly
State, p. 268. And ^word ^word Ezekiel. 42. p. 334. And Mr. Dury in his Discourse
on at Question, how far a Mini^^er of the Gospel may engage ^^mself in civil
affairs.
to be a Merchant, and entangle himself with the affairs of this life, against
the express charge of the HolyGhost; or for them to be Gospel Lawyers, to
handle the C^de instead of the Bible, and study the Statutes of the Land,
instead of the Statutes of Heaven; for them to appear as Advocates, and plead
Causes in civil Courts of Judicature, it is very uncomely. One of the Ancients
observes, Jerome.
that Sacerdos in Foro, et Mercator in Templo is not to be tolerated. Certainly
such Preachers are not likely to be instruments of turning many to
Righteousness. Much more do they hinder the Conversion of Souls* that shall
call themselves Ministers of Christ, and yet be of a scandal^^^ Conversation.
When the Prophets of Jerusalem are light Persons, Profaness goes forth into
all the Land. I have read somewhere of one that was grievously tempted to
Atheism on this account: For (said that poor creature) I live under a Minister
that will preach good Sermons, but his conversation is not according thereunto,
he will be drunk sometimes, and secretly vile and la^civious, and therefore how
can I believe that there is any God or Devil, or heaven or hell, or any such
thing? An evil Example in such an one, is enough to make those of the
Generation amongst whom he lives to become Athei^ts.

3. Oh! that our occasional Meetings might be improved for the good of this,
and after Generations. Because of the capacity and holy Relation we stand in
before the Lord, it is expected we should not be like other men, they may meet
together, and spend that time in discourses of their own personal concerns; but
we have the care and charge of Souls committed to us. Yea (in our measure) the
care of all the Churches ought to be upon us: nay, more, we must be sollicitous
for those that shall come after us. Such a public spirit well becomes our
public capacity, and therefore upon all occasions to speak and act
accordingly. And verily, the Lord will write down these discourses in his book
of Remembrance, and we shall be glad to hear of them again at that day* we must
every one of us, (Ministers as well as People) appear in a greater Congregetion
than this, and then we shall not be sorry, that we have laid our selves out for
God and for his People; yea, the more we have done for Christ, and for the
Generation wherein we live, the greater will our glory be, when we shall hear
the Lord Jesus saying, Well done thou faithful Servant, enter thou into the
joy of thy Lord. If the Lord help us to approve our selves faithful unto the
Death, when he the chief Shepherd shall appear, he will give unto us a Crown of
Glory which fades not away.

Let me in the last place, direct my speech and Exhortation in the Name of the
Lord, unto the people of this Land. There are here present those that are
Deputed to act in the name and stead of the people of this Jurisdiction. You
have a great opportunity put into your hands by the providence of God, to do
service for this and after Generations, viz. by endeavoring the establishment
of righteous and religious Laws in the Commonwealth, that so the Lord Jesus
might reign there. Especially, let me propound to you, that you would take some
effectual course, that good Laws which are already established, may be duly
executed; And that some further care might be taken for the suppressing of that
wickedness that is usually committed the night after the Sabbath, God has
lately kindled a fire in this place, and it was on the night after the Sabbath,
why should we wonder at it? I cannot speak it without some anguish of Spirit,
there is more wickedness committed usually on that night then in all the week
besides. Therefore think of some expedient to help in this case, Let me also
mention another thing to you; I have formerly upon a solemn occasion mentioned
it to the Honored Magistracy, and therefore now apply myself to you; it is
this, that you would recommend unto the Churches in this Colony a solemn
renewal of their Covenant with God and one another. That is a great Scripture
expedient for Reformation. Do not think that this is any new notion, but it is
a known Principle owned and avowed by Cart wright, Parker, Ames, etc.
the good old non-Conformists, (whose Children we are) That renew^l of Covenant
is the way to attain Church Reformation, which Principle was much improved by
the chief of the Fathers, of these New-English Churches, (and therefore I the
rather insist upon it) this is the way to prevent Apostasy. The Covenant was
renewed in the days of Joshua, when as the Scripture testifyeth, that in his
days the Children of Israel continued to serve the Lord, wherefore Divines
observe, that Joshuahs special design in putting the People upon renewing
their Covenant, was that so they might be kept from future Aposta^y. I do
therefore in the Name of the Lord, commend this matter to you, and leave it
with you, and God incline your hearts to do that which shall be pleasing in his
sight. And if the Lord intend not further shakings and de^olations amongst
these Churches, I am persuaded that this motion will be hearkened unto, and
complied with. Moreover, there are many others of the People of the Land here,
before the Lord this day, a considerable part of the present Generation is met
together in this great Assembly; a few words let me speak to you, and leave
with you, that so you may not forsake the Lord, the God of your Fathers.

1. Let us labor to be rightly informed respecting Principles which our
Fathers owned. There are mistakes in the minds of some, who think that the
Fathers of this Colony, affirmed thus and so, albeit, it was fat from them, so
to teach, or so to think, I shall not (being now in earnest, and desirous to
speak with utmost solemnity) enter upon things which are more Controversal
amongst us, but certain it is, that our Fathers always owned and avowed this
Principle of Truth, that nothing should be admitted into the worship of God but
what there is Scripture warrant for, larks^s. 493.
nor anything neglected which the Lord ^ath instituted. The cause of the second
Commandment was that which our Fathers were engaged in the defense of. And as
to Church Administrations, that things should be reduced to the Primitive,
Apostolical pattern. An excellent principle, albeit, that blessed Martyr, Mr.
Laurence Saunders was accused of Heresy for asserting it. And I remember that
great learned man and blessed Martyr Peter Ramus, professes in one of his
Epistles, that the deep consideration of this Principle, (...) Ra^^ Epist.
Cardi^^* Lotha^^gum p. 6, 257.
that the Apostolical Age was the golden Age of the Church, and that things
should be regulated according to what was then practiced in the Churches of
Christ, caused him to become a Protestant; yea, and for the Congregational way
of Church Government. And indeed the Congregational way truly stated, is that
which our Fathers have steadfastly owned and avowed, that is to say, as it is
held forth in the platform of Discipline, and by Mr. Cotton in his Book of the
Keys; they were not for Presbyteriani^me, nor yet for Browni^me. Remember
blessed Mr. Nortons last words, in this place and under this Roof.

2. Keep up the power of Discipline in Churches. When Apostasy prevailed, in
the Asiatick Churches there was the original wound. They did not brandish the
Sword of Discipline, which is Christ's own expedient, and appointment, for the
preservation of Churches in purity; yea, this was a fatal neglect, which by
degrees proved ruinous to those once famous and glorious Churches. Some learned
men Voetius alicubi inter disputationes.
have well observed, that the neglect of Discipline in the Churches of Asia
brought in corruption of manners, and corruption of manners was (through the
just revenging hand of God) attended with corruption of Doctrine, and these
together provoked the Lord, to lay those Churches most desolate. And as for the
Children of the Covenant let Discipline be extended toward them, according as
they are Subjects capable thereof. Did not our Fathers come hither in hope that
they should leave their Children, under the Discipline and Government of the
Lord Jesus in his Church? Has not Christ owned the application of solemn
public Admonitions, etc. to some of them that have been Children of the
Church, (though not in full Communion) even so as to convert their Souls
thereby? why then should disputes about the mode wholly evacuate the thing,
when so much of the welfare of Souls, and the Interest of Christ's Kingdom is
concerned therein

3. Look to your Families. Families are the Nurceryes for Church and
Commonwealth, ruin Families, and ruin all. Order them well and the public
State will fare the better; the great wound and misery of New England is that
Familes are out of Order. As to the generality of house holders, Read Mr.
Stockton of Family Instruction*
Family Government is lost, and gone; Servants do not fear their Masters,
Children do not honor their Parents, in that respect the English are become
like unto the Indians. Let Christians make conscience of it as their duty, to
rule their own houses well, and be careful that Family Instruction be upheld;
the Judgments of God should awaken to this. In some Families the Children have
no Father left to instruct them, in other Families Fathers have no Children
left to be instructed by them, by these terrible Judgments they that have
Familyes, should learn to be diligent in Instructing of them, whilst they, have
an opportunity so to do; And this is the way to prevent Apostasy, for ignorance
is the mother (not of devotion but) of Heresy. Usually, they that prove
Heretics, are such as were never well grounded in the knowledge of Principles,
never well instructed in Catechetical Fundamental Doctrines and points of
Religion. The Waldenses Read (...) Histo^^ the Waldenses.
preserved and propagated the Interest of Religion by diligence, in catechizing
their Children. When certain Jesuits were sent amongst them to entice them from
the Truth to Idolatry, they returned amazed, professing that Children of seven
years old amongst those Waldenses knew more in the Scripture, and of the
Mysteries of the Gospel, then many of their learned Doctors did. Take heed also
how you dispose of your Children, you that are Parents look at Religion and the
fear of God, in disposing of your Children. That blessed man Mr. Dod (the Moses
of his time) would sometimes bewail it, that Professors of Religion would say,
there is a portion and Civi^ity, and we will hope for grace; but (said he)
rather make sure of grace, and hope for riches, there is far greater Reason for
it, since Godliness has the Promises, riches have none. It may make us dread
to think what is coming, in that it is with us, as it was with the old world,
the Sons of God are marrying with the daughters of men. Church members in
disposing of their Children look more at portion then at piety. If their
Children are like to live well in the world, and their Familyes to be made
richer, they look no further; a sad sign that Religion will expire, and such
Familyes be cut off from the Covenant, within a few Generations, and the
branches thereof perish for ever.

4. Pray with all manner of prayer and supplication in the Spirit* Pray as
sometimes the Martyr did, Lord do not thou forsake me, left I forsake thee.
Pray for your poor Children and Posterity, as David did for his Son Solomon, 1 Chronicles.29. 19. give unto my Son Solomon a perfect heart. He did not only exhort
and charge his Son to labor after such an heart, but earnestly prayed to God,
that such an heart might be given to him* And truly, if there were more prayers
poured forth before the Lord, for the conversion of the Rising Generation, we
may hope that there would a blessed Effect follow. I have been told that there
is a Church in New England, that has set days apart only to seek unto the
Lord, for converting grace to be vouchsafed to their children. O that all other
Churches would do as they have done, even seek unto the Lord by Fasting and
Prayer, for a poor, perishing, dying, unconverted Generation.

5. Lastly, Be faithful in improving of your Civil Libertyes. Beware of two
extremes, of an Issacharian Spirit, to co^ch under every Imposer: if you
foolishly lose your Libertyes, your Posterity, yea, the children that are yet
to be born will rue it. Beware also of a wanton Spirit, lest you provoke the
Lord, by bitter bondage to make you know the worth of Liberty. It is a great
privilege which you enjoy this day, that you may choose Rulers from amongst
yourselves. And although as to what concerns the T^^nsactions of this day, it
is almost too late to speak, yet you may hear for the time to come. Freemen
remember the Oath of God that is upon you. I doubt there is lamentable guilt
upon many, who in Elections are acted more by Interest and Faction, then by
Conscience. You know what the Rule is, viz. that you should choose men that are
Just and that fear God, and that hate Covetousness. Choose men that shall
approve themselves (like Eliakim) Fathers to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem,
choose men of Hezekiahs Spirit, who spoke comfortably to all those that taught
the good knowledge of the Lord. In a word, choose those that will be zealous for
the Interest of Reformation, and that therefore will improve their power, to
suppress transgressions of the first, as well as of the second Table. If you
will choose such (which mercy forbid that ever it should be) under whose shadow
thorns and briars shall thrive, and those weeds of pride, contention, Heresy
shall receive nourishment, and encouragement; It will be an ominous sign, that
God will ere long, deprive you of your Libertyes, until such time as you know
better how to improve them. And now I hope I may say, that as to the
opportunity put into my hands, this day, I have discharged my Conscience,
delivered my Soul, and can lay down my head with peace. I conclude with Moses,
calling Heaven and Earth to Record, that life and death has been set before
this Generation. O Generation see the Word of the Lord, choose life, that both
thou and thy Seed may live. And God from Heaven says, O that there were such
an heart in this Generation that they would fear me, that so it may go well
with them, and with their Children for ever, Amen!

Tibi Domine:
ECCLES. XII. I. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy Youth.
Solom^n in this Context does apply himself to speak unto Young men, whom he
does, 1.Dehort. 2. Exhort.

His Dehortation is in the two last verses of the former Chapter. And it is 1.
Ironically propounded, v. ^9. Rejoice o^ young man in thy Youth, etc. It is
such another form of speech as that of the Prophet unto Ahab, 1 King.22.15. Go
and prosper. (...) wright ^n (...) II 9*
He saw that Ahab was set upon his design, and therefore by way of Irony bids
him go, and see what would come of it. Thus Solomon here, I see Young man
(^aith he) that thou art resolved to follow the pleasures and vanities,
whatever the event shall be, Do so, and see what will come of it. Wherefore he
adds, Walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes. This is
expressly forbidden elsewhere in the Scripture Mercer in (...)
A clear evidence that the wise man here speaks by way of holy derision, and
thence it is ^urther added, Know thou that for these things God will bring thee
to judgment. q. d. Though its possible thou may escape judgment from men,
parents, Magistrates, etc. yet not from the Lord. 2. This Dehortation is
plainly expressed in the Verse immediately preceding this Text. Remove sorrow
from thy heart. The Hebrew word translated sorrow, (...): ^* d. Beware of
inordinate passions which young men are usually subject unto: And put away
evil from thy flesh, h.e. avoid sinful pleasures. Passions and sinful
pleasures are evils which young men are most in danger of being carried away
by; therefore he does in special caution them against iniquityes of that
nature: withal adding this Reason, for childhood and youth are vanity. h.e.
its soon gone, Thy time (young man!) to enjoy sinful and foolish pleasures
will soon be past and gone, it abides not* therefore set not thy heart upon
such things.

2. We have Solomon's Exhortation unto young men in this verse. Wherein is
expressed, 1. The act that ought to be done, Remember. 2. The Object, thy
Creator, i.e. God, for he and he only is the Creator; since it requires an
infinite power to be able to produce a work of Creation. Hebr.[ Boreeca.] Thy
Creators. Not that there are more Gods or more Creators then one; But there is
a plurality of persons in the Godhead. Though the work of Creation be more
especially ascribed to the Father, as Redemption to the Son, and Application to
the Spirit, yet each of the persons in the sacred and eternal Trinity, does
concur therein.

3. The time or season, when this duty ought to be attended, is expressed, viz.
now in the days of thy youth* not that they that are past the days of their
youth may forget God, or be exempted from this remembrance of him, but young
men are under special obligations and advantages to remember him.

That as it is the Duty of all, Doctr.
so more especially of young men, to remember God their Creator. Remembering God
may not be deferred until old Age, but ought to be attended in the days of
youth.

In the Doctrinal prosecution of this Truth, there are three things to be
enquired into. ^. What is employed in this Remembering? 2. How it does appear
that young men ought to remember God? 3. The Reason why they especially should
do so?

Quest. 1 What is requ^^ed in this Remembering which the Text* speaks of?

Answ. It is a known Rule, that in the Scripture words of Sense do imply the
affections and actions. So here, it is not every kind of Remembrance of God,
but that which is affectionate and practical that is intentended* Particularly,

1. This Remembering does imply a Turning to the Lord, Psalm.22.27. All the ends
of the W^^ld shall remember, and Tur^ to the Lord: Unfeigned Repentance is
employed in this Remembrance. Rev.2.5. Remember from wh^nce thou art fallen, and
Repent. Ezekiel.6.9. They th^^ escape of you shall Remember me among the Nations*
^.e. They shall Repent and turn unto the Lord. A^^ it is a penitential
Remembrance which Solomon here speaks of* Remember thy Creator, that is,
Remember to make thy peace with him, and therefore to Repent of Sin, and turn
to God in the days of thy Youth.

2. This Remembrance which the Text speaks of, does imply Service and
Obedience. Psalm. 119. 55. I have remembered thy name, and have ^ept thy law. As
they that neglect the worship and Service which they owe to the blessed God,
are said to forget him* Psalm.9.17. The wicked shall be turned into d^^ll, and
all the Nations that forget God. That is to say, they that do not serve God.
When the Children of Israel had forsaken the ways, and corrupted the worship
of God, it was said, Israel has forgotten his Ma^er* Hos.8.14. So on the other
hand, the Service of God is noted by that of Remembering him* Remember thy
Creator in the days of thy Youth, h.e. Seek and serve him betimes. As David
exhorted his Son Solomon, whilst yet in his Youth, 1.Chron.28.9. Know, and
serve the Lord with a perfect heart and a willing mind. Hence the Performance
of all religious duties, especially that great duty of Prayer, is employed in
this Remembering which the Text speaks of. Jon.2.7. I Remembered the Lord*
(^aith the Prophet) and how was that? it follows, my Prayer came unto thee,
into thine holy Temple. We read in the Gospel of Children that prayed unto the
Lord, they said Hosann^, i. e. Save now we beseech thee. Math. 21. 15. That is
employed in Remembering God the Creator,

3. It does also imply frequent thoughts and Meditations of God, Psalm.63.6.
When I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night watches.
Where there is that Remembrance of God which the Text requi^eth, there are
frequent holy Meditations on him day and night. As Solomon exhorts, Prove.23.17.
Be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long. Set God before thine eyes;
wherever thou come think of him, from morning unto night, ever and anon, let
there be awful holy thoughts in thy heart concerning the Omnipresence of God.
And this is to Remember him. We come therefore to the second thing to be
enquired into, viz.

Quest.2. How it does appear that Young men ought to remember God?

Answ. 1. The Lord does require this, the commandment ^aith expressly. Luke 10.
27. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and
with all thy strength. If men are bound to serve God with their strength, then
they must not forget him, until those days are come wherein their strength is
gone, and they able to do him little service. Of old, God required that the
first born and the first fruits should be given to him. Exodus.22.29. thou shall
not delay to offer the first of thy ripe fruit, the first born shall thou give
unto me. This did intimate that men ought to give the prime of their Age, the
first and best of their strength unto the Lord.

2. The Truth of this Doctrine is evident, in that Parents are bound to teach
their Children the fear of the Lord whilst they are young, Deuteronomy.6*6,7. The
words which I command thee, thou shall teach them diligently unto thy Children.
Again, it is said, Train up a Child in the way be should go, and when he is
old, he will not depart from it, Prove.22.6. To the same purpose is that of the
Apostle, Ephesians.6.4. Ye Fathers bring up your Children in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord. And according unto this has been the practice of
Saints. The Lord himself does testify concerning Abraham, that he would command
his Children to keep the ways of the Lord, Genesis 18. 19. And Solomon does
acknowledge that his Father David was careful to instruct him, and put him in
mind of God, whilst he was yet in the days of his Youth, Prove.4.3,4. I was my
Fathers Son, he taught me, and said unto me, let thi^^ heart retain my words.
Yea, not only his Father, but his Mother also taught him the fear of the Lord,
Prove.31.1,2. The words of King Lemuel, the Prophes^ that his Mother taught him,
what my Son! and what the Son of my womb! and what the Son of my voms! Now to
what end were it, to teach Children and young ones to fear the Lord, if they
were not bound to learn and do accordingly.

3. Young men as well as others owe service unto God; He is their Creato^^ the
Text expresses. Now that one consideration has great weight in it, to enforce
duty and obedience. For certainly, all owe service unto him, from whom they
have received their Beings, Psalm.95.6. O come let us worship and from (...),
let us k^eel before the Lord our Maker. He ^ath made all for himself: from him
and for him are all things. He as Creator has given unto men reasonable Souls,
in respect whereof, they are capable of knowing and serving the Lord: and he is
able to destroy them: He that made them can destroy them: as it is said
concerning that creature, He that made (...), can cause his sword to approach
unto him, Job 40. 19 Therefore it concerns men to fear their Creator.

But to proceed to the third Particular, namely,

Quest. 3. Why Young men especially ought to remember their Creator?

For these amongst other Reasons,

Answ. Because youth is the fittest season to remember God in, (...) eas.I.
wherefore it is added in the Context, before the evil days come, when thou
shall say I have no pleasure in them. Old age is an evil time: and therefore
(says the wise man) thou must Remember and serve God in thy good days, if
thou would have him to remember and accept of thee in thy evil days: if
thon neglectest God in the spring of thy years, what reason is there to think
that he will regard thee when winter Age is come upon thee? Moreover, it is not
easy to Turn unto the Lord in old age: A young plant is more easily plucked up
then an old tree; so are young men with less difficulty transplanted, and
^^ucked up out of the Soil of nature, then they that are grown old in the ways
of sin. Old Diseases are hardly cured: so when men by a long continuance in a
course of sin, have contracted almost incurable habits of sin, how hard a work
will it be to convert them? were it not that all things with God are possible,
it could not be. Wherefore the Scripture says, can the Ethiopian change his
skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may you also d^e good, that are accustomed
to do evil. Jer. 13.23. When Satan has hel^ possessi^n a long-time, it is not
an easy work to out (...), and disposses him. We read of one in the Gospel that
had a most terrible dispossession, Mark 9.25,26. Jesus rebuked the foul spirit,
saying, I charge thee come out of him and enter no more into him: and the
spirit cried, and rent him sore, and came out of him, and he was as one dead,
insomuch that many said, he is dead. How difficult and how painful was this
Dispossession? Why? v.21. It is noted that the Father of that young man being
enquired of, how long he had been in that condition, he said, Of a child.
Truly, they that spend their childhood in the Service of Satan, if ever they be
converted, are wont to have dreadful Conversions at last. Therefore Young men
should turn to God betimes, that so they may escape those bitter pangs, which
otherwise they must expect to undergo if ever good come of them.

From the good and benefit which does follow upon Remembering and Turning to God
betimes: Reas.^
as it is said, Lam.3.27. It is good for a man to bear the yoke in his Youth:
so it is good for a man to turn to God, and to put his neck under his yoke in
his Youth. It was the Saying of one, that if it were lawful for him to envy
the happiness of any, he would envy the happiness of those that turn to God
betimes, because they are freed from a world of sin and sorrow, which otherwise
they would become subject unto. And this is the way to become eminent for God.
There is a wretched Proverb in the world, viz. That a young Saint will prove an
old Devil. I remember Inpietate Juven. Angelicus Javen is se^bus (...) in and
is v. Heidfeldii sph^^ Philos.p.395.
Erasmus says, the Devil was the A^thor of that Proverb: For nothing can be
more contrary to the Scriptu^^. The most eminent Saints that we read of there,
were such as did Remember God in the days of their Youth. As now, Joseph
proved an eminent good man: There is reason to think that all Jacobs Children
were good men before they dyed, but none of them to be compared with Joseph:
and though he were the youngest but one, yet it seems evident that he was
converted before any of his Brethren who were older then he. Job was an eminent
Saint, not a man upon the face of the whole earth so good as he; and Job was
one that made Conscience of his ways even from his Youth. Job 31.18. David was
a man that attained a great measure of Grace before ^e dyed, and he was godly
even from his Childhood. Therefore does he speak as in Psalm.71.5. Thou art my
hope O Lord God, thou art my trust from my youth. and again, v.17. O God thou
have taught me from my Youth and hitherto have I declared thy wondrous works.
So that David had Faith in Christ, and was savingly taught of God even from his
Youth. Obadiah was an eminent Servant of God, and he could say, I fear the Lord
from my Youth. 1.King.18.22. Josiah was eminent for God, and of him we read,
that while he was young he began to seek after the Lord God of David his
Father. He was truly converted when he was but sixteen years old.2.Chr.34.3.
Timothy was an eminent Minister, and (as Ecclesiastical Story reports) at last
he dyed a Martyr of Jesus Christ; now he was savingly acquainted with the holy
Scriptures [apo^rephous] from a little child. 2.Tim.3.^5. Thus we s^e how God
has owned and blessed those that have Remembered their Creator in the days of
their Youth. And for that Reason Young men should Remember God.

(...). 3. Young men are subject to the stroke of Death as well as others,
Job.21.23. One dies in his full stren^th. The young man of Naim whom Christ
restored to life; notwithstanding his Youth, was subject to the stroke of
Death, Luk.7.14. And Jairus his daughter was but about twelve years of Age,
when she lay a dying, Luk.8.42. was not Eutichus a young man? and yet he fell
down from an upper Chamber, and was taken up dead, Act.20.9. were not Jobs
Children young men? and yet they dyed suddenly. Was not Absalom a young man,
and his brother Adonijah a young man when death surprised them? Did not Ely's
Sons dye in the flower of their Age? 1 Samuel.2.33. Now if young men Remember
their Creator so as to repent of sin, and make sure of an Interest in Christ
before death comes, then happy shall they be. As Jeroboams good Son, though he
were a child ^e dyed; 1 King.14.17. but inasmuch as in him there was found some
good thing toward the Lord God of Israel, death did him no hurt, only he was
taken away from the evil to come, that his eyes might not behold the miserable
ruin, that was coming upon his Fathers Family. But if death find a young man
in his sins, in an unconverted, Christle^s estate, woe to him that ever he was
born! His naked Soul must appear before God his Creator, and receive a Sentence
of eternal Damnation.

USE.

I proceed therefore to apply this Truth, by way of Exhortation. O let young
men this day be Exhorted in the Name and fear of God, to follow the counsel of
the wise man, even to Remember their Creator in the days of their Youth. All
you young men that are here before the Lord, (and there are many such in this
Assembly) hear me this day, that so God may hear you another day, now turn to
the Lord, now repent of sin, now make sure of an Interest in Jesus Christ, And
therefore lay to heart some motives and per^wa^ives.

Consider, Mot.
what special Reason they that are of the younger Rising Generation in
New England have to Remember their Creator. Now there is cause for it more then
ever, In that there are so few that do so. Multitudes of young men are risen up
in this Land, who have been forgetting God all their days; unto whom the Lord
may say as Jer.22.21. This has been thy ^^^ner from thy youth, that thou
obeyest not my voice. And as it was said, concerning them of old, the Children
of Israel, and the Children of Ju^a^ have only done evil before (...) from
their Youth; Jer.32.30. It is true, that there are some young ones that are
Remembering, and turning to the Lord, which ought to be acknowledged to the
praise of his glorious grace, yet it must be said with lamentation, that the
generality of the Youth in this Land, walk in ways of looseness, profaneness,
pride, drinking, gaming, o^ in a careless neglect of God, and of their own
Souls. Hence the Lord does not seem to take pleasure in many of the Youth of
this Country. ^ it is a sad word that is spoken, Isai.9.17 The Lord shall have
no joy in their young men. How many young men even in New England, that have
been cut off either by Sword or sickness within these two years? now shall the
Lord have cause to complain as he does by the Prophet, (Amos 4.10.) your young
men have I slain with the Sword, yet have you not returned unto me. Moreover,
young men in this Country enjoy means of grace plentifully dispensed, God is
calling from Heaven to them, and striving with them, in the days of their
youth, and therefore if they forget him, they will be left most inexcusable
before his Judgment Seat. Yea, and many are the Children of godly Parents,
(...) the (...) Chron. (...). 9.
and in that respect under peculiar engagement to seek and serve the Lord, who
is not only their Creator, but the God of their Fathers. Their God not only by
right of Creation, but in respect of his holy Covenant.

2. Consider, How pleasing it will be to the Lord, if you do indeed Remember
him in the days of your Youth, Jer.2.2. I remember the kindness of thy Youth.
You heard but now, how the Lord is pleased with first, fruits, When Abel
brought of the fir^^^^ngs of his Flock the Lord (...) respect to Abel and his
offering, Gen.14.4. we read also, how the Lord chose the Almond Tree, Numb. 17.
8. now that is the first Tree that blossoms. The fruit of it is ripe in the
Spring; The Hebrew word for Almond Tree is Sheked, (...) comes from a Verb
signifying make have, Jer.1.11. (...) that Tree above all others in makes
haste to bear fruit. Floomnium prima Amygd Mense Januario Martio (...) pomum
maturat. Bochar (...) Plin. Not. Hist. 1. 16. c. Drus. Miscell Ce^^. 1. c. R.
Kimchi in verbo Shak
yea, (as ^riters affirm) in the first month of the year. So when young men
shall bring forth the fruit of Repentance, Faith, and holiness, that pleases
the Lord. He has a sp^cial delight in young men who truly fear and serve him,
Hos. 11.1. When Israel was a Child then I loved him: One of the Ancients
obser^^th that Christ loved his youngest Disciple best. John was the beloved
Disciple, and he is reported to be younger at his first calling, then any of
the Disciples of the Lord Jesus. And we find in the Scripture how the Lord
blessed little Children when they came to him, or were brought to him, Mar.
10.13,14,16. They brought young Children to him, and when Jesus saw it, he
said, suffer little Children to come unto me, and for bid them not -- and He
took them up in his Arms, and blessed them. You young ones hearken, would you
not have the Son of God to bless you, O come to him, now in the days of your
Youth, and he will surely bless you, for his Arms are open to receive you. And
such are the special Subjects of a gracious promise, Prove.8.17. They that seek
me early shall find me. If you will be persuaded to seek the Lord whilst it is
yet early days with you, Christ has promised, that you shall find him, and
Everlasting Life and happiness by him.

3. Consider the danger of neglecting God in the days of Youth. It may be it
will cost thee thy life, yea, the life of thy Soul for ever. Who knows but
that the Time of Youth is the only time which the Lord will allow you to
repent, and make your peace with God in, through Jesus Christ? If these golden
days be lost, probably thou will be undone for ever. I must needs tell you,
that for the most part it is so, that men are either converted in youth or not
at all. We read but of one that was called at the eleventh hour. If a Tree do
not blossom in the Spring* it is commonly dead all the year after. So they
that are not converted in the Spring of their Age, are rarely converted at all.
Now and then one is converted in old Age, but such Examples are exceeding rare.
Especially, it is true with respect unto those that have in the days of their
youth lived under the means of grace, heard many Sermons, experienced frequent
strivings of the Spirit of God with their hearts, if they remain unconverted
until the days of their Youth are past and gone, the Lord usually gives them
up to Judicial hardness of heart, that they shall never be converted, never
saved. Young men think sadly of it in the fear of God.

4. Consider, what Examples have been set before you, of early Conversions.
Have you not read or heard of those that have turned to God in the days of
their Youth? nay, that in their Childhood, the fear of God has been planted in
their hearts, that they have no sooner began to have the use of Reason, but one
might discern signs and effects of grace in their souls. There is a Mr.
^^ne^ays ^^ken for ^^ildren.
Book which many of you have in your houses, that gives an account of thirteen
Children, the eldest of them not above fourteen years old, some of them but
seven years old, some not so much, that nevertheless it was evident that the
fear of God and unfeigned love to Jesus Christ was wrought in their hearts. And
there is a printed Relation of John ^p.
a Child that dyed not long since in this Country, who for several years before
his death, had his heart changed and was made a new Creature. O how may this
shame many young ones that are here before the Lord this day, who (...) are
older then that Child was, it may be fifteen years old, nay, perhaps twenty
years old; and for all that, in a natural, Christless Estate to this day.
Lamentable is thy condition, that have lived so*long under means of grace, and
yet continuest an unconverted Creature. God be merciful to thee, and help thee
to think of it.

5. Consider you have a great work to do before you go out of this
world,andbut a little time to do it in. As young as you are, you have much sin
to repent of, and to obtain the pardon of, Original sin thou art guilty of, and
that must be mortified. And who can declare how many actual sins thou have
committed in words, thoughts, and deeds, that have been evil? and all those to
repent of, and endeavor that they may be mortified: and but little time to be
attending works of this nature: for what is your life? It is but a vapor that
appears for a little while, and then vanishes away. Jam. 4. 14. If a man
have a long journey to go in a winters day, he had need set out betimes. Thou
have a long journey to go: Is it not a long journey from earth to heaven? and
but a winters day to dispatch this journey. When once the short day of thy life
is expired, then it will be too late. There is no work in the Grave whether
thou art going. O then up betimes, be going, he doing, and the Lord be with
thee.

By way of Direction.

1. Beware of those sins especially which they that are in their Childhood and
Youth are most subject unto, and apt to be carried away from God by.
2.Tim.2.22. Flee youthful lusts, (...), those sins which Youth is mostly
exposed unto. It is infinite mercy to be kept pure from the corruptions of
Youth. If ever you should find grace to repent of the sins of Youth, and so to
obtain the pardon of them, yet they will be bitterness and shame to you all
your days. Those vanities of Youth, which now thou art so foolish as to
dellght in, it may be they will be a trouble to thee forty years hence,
should thou live so long. Does not Job complain saying, Thou make me to
possess the iniquityes of my youth. Job.13.26. And did not holy David pray, as
in Psalm.25.7. Remember not the sins of my youth, And does not converted Ephraim
make an humble confession concerning the sins of Youth, Jer. 31. 19. I was
ashamed, yea even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my Youth. So
it is, that the remembrance of the sins and vanities of Youth, are matter of
reproach and shame a long time after: yea the very thought of them does fill
the soul that is truly converted, with an holy confusion of face. Beware then
of the sins of Youth* To instance in some particulars, Pride is a (...) that
young ones are very much under the power of Hence we see that young people are
strangly addicted to vanity in Apparel: Proud fashions they must and will
follow, there is no persuading them to the contrary: but beware of that sin. So
for stubborness and disobedience to Superiors, it is an evil that Youth is
very subject unto. You that are Servants, young men and maids that are here
before the Lord; have not you been guilty of stubborn, disobedient carriage
toward your Masters? though God in his word tells you that you ought to be
obedient to them with fear and trembling, Ephesians.6.5. And you that are Children,
have not you disobeyed-your Parents? Thou have been disobedient to thy Father
sometimes, but especially to thy Mother. Thy heart may ache to think what is
like to come on thee, if thou repent not speedily, Did you ever know any dye
upon the Ga^lows, but they confessed they had been guilty of this sin, and
thereby provoked the Lord to leave them unto those things which have brought
them to untimely, unhappy ends? And this is but according to what the Scripture
speaks, Prove.30.17. The eye that mocketh at his Father, and despises to obey
his Mother, the Ravens of the Valley shall pick it out, and the young E^gles
shall eat it. Intimating that such Children are like to come unto miserable and
shameful deaths at last. Again, lying is a sin, which Childhood and Youth is
for the most part deeply guilty of, Psalm.58.3. They go astray as soon ^s they
be born speaking Lies. How natural is it for Children to commit a fault, and
then to excuse it by telling a Lie? Art thou a lying Child? then the Devil is
thy Father, and except thou repent of this sin, and beware of it for the time
to come, when once thy Soul is out of thy body, it must be cast into that Lake
which burns with fire and brimstone which is the second Death, Joh.8.44.
Rev*21.8. So for breaches of the seventh Commandment, they are Youthful Lusts.
Wherefore Solomon ^aith, that he looked out at the window of his house, and
discerned amongst the Youths a young man void of understanding, and he was
going to an whore house like an Ox to the slaughter, or a fool to the
correction of the Stocks, not knowing that it is for his life, nor considering
that her house is the way to Hell, going down to the chambers of Death, Prove.
7.7,etc. Young men whose natures are not changed by the regenerating grace of
the Spirit of God, do usually live in some unclean lust or other. Either
Fo^ication, or self-pollution, or in secret wanton pranks of darkness. You
young men whose Consciences accuse you of guilt before the Lord in respect of
these evils, I charge you in the Name of God, that you humble your selves
deeply in his sight for past transgressions, and sin no more, as ever you
desire to escape eternal Damnation. Though these cursed Lusts may be as dear to
you as life and limbs, yet better to pluck out thy right eye, to cut off thy
right hand, then that thy whole body* should be cast into Hell fire, where* the
worm dies not, and where the fire never shall be quenched.

Again, Sabbath breaking is a sin which Young ones are often found guilty of
before the Lord. There was a young man ^. Thomas Savage, who was executed ^t
Ratcliff D^t^b.28. 1668.
(whom many of you have heard of) that came to an untimely end, and that sin of
Sabbath breaking made way to his ruin: when he should have been hearing the
word on the Lords day, he would rather go to wicked houses; that at last, God
was so provoked with him, as to leave him to commit a Capital sin upon the
Sabbath day, for which he was brought to deserved execution. And when in
Prison, he said to some that came to visit him, O Wretch that I was! I studied
how I might spend the Lords day in the Devils work: that time which I should
have served God in, I did most for Satan (...) it: O (said he) tell young men
from me, that the break^^g of the Sabbath is a dangerous and costly sin. And
therefore young men beware of that sin. Remember the Sabbath to keep it holy,
or you will never Remember your Creator as you ought to do.

Once more: Sinful Company keeping is an evil that young men are apt to be
drawn away from God their Creator by. Many an hopeful young man, that has
been well instructed, that has had great convictions upon his spirit, and
friends that wished him him well, have been comforted in him; yet has
afterward fallen in with bad Company, and that has proved the eternal ruin
of his Soul. I have known young men that upon sick-beds, and deathbeds, have
made lamentable cries, O my sinful Company keeping has undone me for ever!
Therefore let young men remember what the Scripture speaks to them, My son if
sin^^^s entice thee consent thou not* Walk not thou in way of them, refrain thy
foot from their path, Prove.1.10.15. Again, He that walks with the wise shall
be wise* but a Companion of Fools shall be destroyed, Prove.13.20. Young man,
would thou not be destroyed? then be not a Companion of Fools. Remember also
what David faith, and follow his example, Psalm.26.4,5,9. I have not sat with
vain persons. I have hated the Congregation of evil doers, and will not sit
with the wicked. Gather not my Soul with Sinners. When thou dyest, thou
would not have thy soul to be gathered to the place where sinners must be
for ever* then ^it not with them, hold not familiarity with them now: For they
that are thy Companions and Familiars here, are like to be so to eternity.

2. Hearken to good Instruction. In the holy Scriptures God himself instructs
you. And therefore let young ones be diligent in reading the Scripture, that is
the way to become like unto Timothy, to whom it was said, from a Child thou
have known the holy Scriptures which are able to make thee wi^e ^^to Salvation,
through the Faith that is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy.3.15. And when David had
propounded that Question, wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? the
Answer given is, by taking heed thereto according to thy Word, Psalm.119.9. For
the most part it is so, that the ways of young men need much cleansing. Youth
is commonly the unclean part of a man's Age, but those young men that will make
conscience to order their ways and walkings according to the Word of God,
shall thereby be cleansed. And, the Word preached, and publicly dispensed, is
a means appointed by the Lord for the instruction of young ones, that they may
learn the fear of God, Deuteronomy. 31*12,13. Gather the People together, men and
women, and Children, that they may hear, and that they may learn, and fear the
Lord your God, and that their Children which have not known any thing may learn
to fear the Lord. And therefore mind seriously what the Ministers of God speak
in his Name. Mind it young men, le^t you mourn at last, and say, How have I
hated Instruction, and have not obeyed the voice of my Teachers, nor inclined
mine Ear to them that instructed me! Yea, and hearken to the good Instructions
which you receive from those whom God has set over you. Have you not Masters,
Fathers, Mothers, that admonish you and give you good counsel from day to day!
despise them not. Does not the Scripture say to you, ^ear ye Children the
Instruction of a Father, Prove.4.1. And again, My Son hear the Instruction of
thy Father and forsake not the Law of thy Mother, Chap.1.18.* Eternal woe is
like to be the portion of those Children that regard not what Father and Mother
say to them: Remember Eli his Sons; they were proud and headstrong; their
Father reproved them, and exhorted them to amend their ways, it is said,
Notwithstanding they ^earkned not to the voice of their Father because the Lord
would slay them. 1.Sam.2*25. Art thou the young man that wilt not hearken to
the voice of thy Father when he gives thee good Counsel? This is a sign that
the Lord will slay thee: a sad sign that thou art appointed to some terrible
destruction at the last.

3. Remember those things which if duly thought on, may cause you to Remember
your Creator in the days of your Youth. e.g. Think sadly of the preciousness
of Time, that so you may pass the time of your sojourning here in fear. You
Young men, are exceeding apt to mi^pend precious hours, nay days in sin and
vanity, but it is because you do not consider how precious time is. Are not
some that were once your companions in sin, dead, and (as there is cause to
fear) dropped down into Hell? They would give Worlds (were it in their power)
to enjoy that precious time, that is lost and can never be regained. Shortly
your time to remember your Creator in, will be past and gone forever. Remember
also the worth of your own souls, what shall a man give in Exchange for his
Soul? If he should gain the whole world,andloose his own Soul, what is he
profited? young men and children, do you think of this! As young as you are,
you have immortal Souls that must be either saved or damned, that when once you
are dead, your Souls must go to be either in Heaven or Hell to all Eternity.
And remember Death, which may b^ on you, ere you be aware of it. Thou know
not but that this night thy Soul may be taken from thee. It has been truly
said, Aqun^s.
An old man has death before his face, but in young man has death behind his
back, that may overtake him before he thinks of any such thing. Children may
dye as well as others, Rev.2.23. I will (...) Children with Death. I remember I
have somewhere read, of a serious godly child, that would not speak vain words
like other Children, but was careful to improve his time well, and being asked
the Reason of his seriousness, O (^aith he) I remember that I must dye. When
some replied to him, you are young* and may live many a fair day, what should
you think of Death for? nay (said he) I was in the burying place,and there I
saw a grave, that was shorter then I am. So Children, look into the burying
place, and there you will see graves that are shorter then you are; there you
will see that those that have been as young as you are, and younger too, have
dyed and been put into their graves, and therefore it may be so with you. O
then Remember your Creator in the days of your Youth. And remember the day of
Judgment. As Solomon in this Context ^aith, Know O young man; that God will
bring thee to Judgment. Young men are apt to put the thoughts of death and
Judgment far away, and therefore they remember not their Creator. Think with
thy self, I must stand before Jesus Christ the Son of God at the great day; and
what shall I then say to him? and what will the Lord in that day say unto me?
will he say, come thou blessed? or will he not say to me, depart thou cursed.

4. Look unto Jesus Christ. O betake your selves to him. He calls from Heaven
unto you young me^ and children, that are here before the Lord this day, go to
him by Prayer, and to God by him. Some of you, when you are asked that
Question, do you pray, Answer, I cannot pray. You would do it, you say, but you
know not how to pray. Why, get into a secret place, and there lift up thine
Eyes and heart to the Lord Jesus, and if thou can say nothing else, yet say,
O thou Son of God have mercy on me! O convert me, and save my poor Soul! who
knows but the Lord from on high, may look upon thee, since the Lord Jesus
himself has said, They that seek me early shall find (...)*

Tibi Domine.

