THE Possibility of Gods Forsaking a people, That have been visibly near and
dear to him TOGETHER, With the Misery of a People thus forsaken, Set forth in a
SERMON, Preached at Weathersfield, Nov. 21. 1678.

Being a Day of FAST and HUMILIATION.

By Mr. Joseph Rowlandson Pastor of the Church of Christ there. Being also his
last SERMON,

2 Chronicles. 15.2. The Lord is with you, while ye (...) with him, and if ye seek
him, he will be found (...) you: but if y^ forsake him he will forsake you.

Hos. 9.12. Woe also to them, when I depart from them.

BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND Printed for John Ratcliffe, and John Griffin. 1682.

To the Courteous READER, (especially the Inhabitants of the Town of
Weathersfield, and Lancaster, in New England.
GOds forsaking of such as he has been near to (...) a thing of such weight,
and solemnity, and has such bitter effects, that it is a ^eat Subject,
(especially in a dark and mourning day) for Ministers (...) speak to, and for
People to hear of: that the one ^ay (...) of the danger, and the other avoid
the judgment. As Gods presence is the greatest (...) to a People on this side
Heaven, so his absence (...) greatest misery on this side hell; this therefore
(...) needs be a concerning point, to such a^ wi^^ (...) themselves in their
concernments. The (...) Sermon will appear a solemn word, if duly consid^red:
the subject matter is very solemn and weight^^ (Treating of Gods being with, or
forsaking a (...)) the time when it was delivered was a solemn time, (a d^^ of
FAST throughout the Colonies) the Re^er^nd Author that Composed, and Preached
it* was one solemn and serious above many others, and ^^at which add^ one great
circumstance to its solem^ity, is, in that it was the last word be sp^ke to the
World, being but about two days before he left it. As it is solemn, so it is
seasonable, and pertinent. It is a time wherein we have giv^n God just cause to
forsake us, a time wherein God is threatening to forsake us. A time wherein God
has in some measure forsaken us already, and what can be more seasonable, then
to show the evils that befall a forsaken People, that we may yet be awakened,
and return, that the Lord do not forsake us utterly.

As for the Reverend Author, there needs nothing to be said in his
commendation, he was known amongst the Churches in the Wilderness, and known to
be a workman that needed not to be ashamed. That his Name (which was sometimes
precious amongst those that knew him) may not be forgot, and that being dead,
he may yet speak to a land that have in some measure forsook their God, and are
in danger of being forsak^n, is the ground work of the (...) this small part of
his labors. It is (...) especially to the perusal of the Inhabitants of
Lancaster and Weathersfield: He was a Man well known to you, the one had his
Life, and the other his death; and both his loss, you cannot easily forget his
name, and it is desired that you may not forget the labor and travel, he has
had amongst you* the word which he Preached to you was acceptable whilst he was
living, and it is presumed it will be accepted with the like candor now he is
dead. Indeed had it been intended, and fitted by himself for the Press, you
might have expected, and found it more large, and polished; but as it is, it is
thought f^^* not to be lost, and may be of great use, and benefit, to open to
us the danger of forsaking God, to humble us for all our coolings, and
declinings from God, to quicken us in our return to, and close walking with
God, and that it may attain this end, is the hearts desire, and prayer of him,
who abundantly wishes thy welfare, and prosperity in Christ Jesus.

B. VV.

Jeremiah 23.33. And when this People, or the Prophet, or a Priest, shall ask
thee, saying, what is the burden of the Lord? thou shall then say unto them,
what burden? I will even forsake you; says the Lord.


IN the Words, there lies before us, ( First) A Question, supposed, to be
propounded, wherein there is two things: 1. The Questionists, this People, or a
Prophet, or a Priest. 2. The Question it self, or the matter of it, What is the
burden of the Lord? (Secondly,) There is an Answer, and a solemn Answer too,
which is put into his mouth by the Lord, and which he is to return as the Lords
Answer to the Question? thou shall then say unto them, what burden? I will even
forsake you, says the Lord.

In which Answer there is three things.

1. An expression of Indignation, What burden?

2. An assertion by way of Answer to the question, I will forsake you.

3. A Seal of ratification, in the last words, Says the Lord.

God having before de^lt with the Pastors that did destroy, and scatter the
flock, as in the beginn^ng of the Chapter, Woe be to the Pastors that destroy
and scatter the sheep of my pasture, and ver 2 I will vi^^t upon you the evil
of your doings, says the Lord, and also with the false Prophets, that
prop^^^ied lies in his Name, as ver. 9. My heart within (...) is broken ^^cause
of the Prophets, and ver. 32. Behold I am against them, that prophecy false
dreams, says the Lord, and do tell them, and cause my (...) to (...) by their
lies, and by their lightness: which ^^re of Prophets w^nt without their
Commission as ver. 21. I have not sent th^se Prophets yet they ^an. He proceeds
from the head Rulers, to the people that were seduced by them: for b^ this
m^ans their hands were strengthen^d (...), so as that they did not retu^n from
their wickedne^s, as ver 14. It was a usual thing for the Prop^ets of the Lord,
to begin their Sermons (the matter whereof was minatory, wherein the Lord
threatened them with just judgments) with that Phrase, the burden of the Lord,
(...) will easily appear^^ you consult, Isai. 13.1. and ^5 1* and 22 1. and 30*
6 Now they do in the words of the Te^t o^ ^re supposed in moc^ery (...) demand,
what burden he had from the Lord* for them.

For the opening of the words. And: or moreover because he here enters upon new
matter: (...) People, or the proph^ne sort of them, whom the false Prophets had
seduced to which he joins the Prophet, and the Priest, in h^^ they were alike
profane, as ver. 11. for both Prophet and Priest are profane, yea in my
house* says the Lord: and when Prophets are profane there is ^ore to be a
pack of them, as Jer 5.31. The Prophets prophesies falsely, and the Priests bear
rule by their means, and my people love to have it so: shall ask thee saying,
viz. in a deriding way, not out of a holy end, or desire, What is the burden of
the Lord? or from the Lord? so were the Prophesies styled, that contained in
them, Threatenings, Judgments, and Plagues, 2 King. 9 25. as if they had said,
what have thou further mischief in (...) head to declare? further Woes and
Threatenings to pronounce? have thou nothing else to prophecy, (...) Mischief
and Calamity? What is the burden (...) Thou shall then say unto them, the Lord
(...) what they would say to him, and tells him what he should say, by way of
reply, What burden? a retorting by way of holy indignation; ask ye indeed what
burden? and that in a way (...) ^^^^sion? are you of that strain, and spirit? I
will even forsake you says the Lord a burden heavy enough, and you ^^e like to
feel it so ere long* heavy enough to break your Backs, to break your Church,
and your Common wealth, and to sink your haughty Spirits, when this Burden
shall come upon you, in its force and weight.

Doct. That the Lord may even forsake a People that have been near to him, and
he has been near to, though for the Lord thus to do, is as fearful and ^^deous
a judgment as can be inflicted on any People.

The Doctrine is double, it has two parts:

First, That the Lord may do thus.

Secondly, When he does, it is a very sad and heavy burden. It may be
prosecuted as two distinct points.

1. God may forsake a People that has been near to him, and that he has been
near to. This may be spoken to in this order.

1. What is meant by Gods forsaking a People.

2. How may it appear that God may forsake, ^ven such a People as the point
speaks of?

3. The Reasons.

4. The use.



(...) Gods withdrawing himself, as (...) Prophet Hosea phraises it, Hos. 5.6.
They shall go with their Flocks and their Herds to seek the Lord, but shall not
find him, he has withdrawn himself from them. They shall seek him, and not
find him, and there is a good reason, he has withdrawn himself, he is gone, in
respect of his gracious presence. We must here distinguish betwixt Gods general
presence, and his precious presence. In respect of his general presence, he is
not far from any one of us, for in him we live, and move, and have our being,
Act. 17.27, 28. We have not only our beginning from, but our being in him. As
the beam h^th its being in the Sun* Of this general presence of God, we read,
Psalm. 139.7. There is no flying from it. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or
whither shall I fly from thy presence? In this sense God is every where, as it
is ver. 8, and 9. If I ascend up into Heaven thou art there* if I make my bed
in Hell, behold thou art there. He fills Heaven and Earth, and there is no
hiding from him, Jer. 23.24. Can any hide himself in secret places, that I
shall not see him,? says the Lord do not I fill Heaven and Earth? says the
Lord. He has Heaven for his Throne, and the Earth for his Foo^^tool, as it is,
Isai. 66.1. This general presence of God, if believingly apprehended, and
strongly ^^lieved, might be of great use.

Bu^ (...) ^ot this general presence that is mea^^ but his especial presence,
his favorable (...) gracious ^^^sence, the removing whereof, is th^^ that ^^
^^^nded, by the forsaking that the Text and (...) speaks of. God is said to
forsake a Be^^ (...) ways.

(...) Affection.

(...) Action.

1. As to Affection, when he discontinues his love to them, when he takes away
his love from a people, then he takes his leave of a people. My mind is not
toward this people, Jer. 15.1. a very heavy Judgment, and sad removal. Be
instructed O Jerusalem, least my Soul depart from thee.

2. As to Action, when God takes away the signs of his presence.

1. When he takes away merciful and gracious providence, when he c^rries not
toward them as he was wo^^ to do: but vexes the^ with all manner of adversity,
Deuteronomy. 31.17. I will forsake them, and many evils and troubles shall befall them:
when he ceases to protect them from evils, and enemies, as in times past, and
provides not for them, as he was wont to do. 2. When he ^^^es away his
Ordinances, and bereaves a people of the glorious things of his house; or take
away his spirit from accompanying them, whereby the glory ceases, and the
ordinances are rendered in effectual for the saving good of a people.



It may appear by what God has threatened. (...) God has threatened, to such as
the point speaks of, may be inflicted on them: but God ^ath threatened such
judgments to such a people. My anger shall be kindled against them, and I will
forsake them, as near as they are to me, and as dear as they have been to to
me* Deuteronomy 31.17. Many such threatenings are found in the Scripture against
Israel, who are styled a people near unto him.

In h^t such as have been near to God, and he near to them, have complained of
their being forsaken by God. Thou have forsaken us, is one of the bitter m^ans,
on record, that the Church of God did often make unto him

What God has inflicted on such, may be inflicted on such again* what God has
done to some, he may do to others* in the same state, and relation: for he is
unchangeable. Those that were once the only peculiar people of God, near to
God, and had God near to them, yet what is is their condition at this day? A
forsaken condition, is the condition, of the Offspring of Abraham Gods Friend,
a seed whom he had chosen, and h^th been so, for above sixteen ^^ndred years.
God has been angry with them, and forsaken them, as they were foretold long
ago. How is it with the Churches of Asia, that were once famous golden
Candlesticks? that had Epistles written to them. A^e they not in a forsaken
condition? not the face of a Church to be found amongst them.

In that they may do that, which may deserve a forsaking, therefore they may do
that which may actually procu^e it. They may do that which may deserve a
forsaking, they may through the corruption and unbelief of their hearts forsake
God, and God may injust judgment retaliate, and thereupon forsake them. This
is spoken to in the forequoted place, Deuteronomy. 31.16, 17. They will forsake me,
and break my Covenant which I have made with them: then my anger shall be
kindled against them in that day, and I will forsake them, and hide my face
from them. So again, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. But if you forsake him he will forsake you;
the first is supposed, if you forsake him, the latter is imposed, he will
forsake you*



1. To show that he has no need of any, he has forsaken many, and may forsake
many more, to show that he has no need of any. God would have all the world to
take notice, (that though all men have need of him, yet) he has no need of any
man.

2. To testify his Sanctity, and severity against sin. He will not spare them,
that have been near him, if they will not spare their sin for him. He is a holy
God, and if they will have their sins, and their lusts, and their ways and
their o^ers, he will vindicate his holiness, by infl^cting this judgment on
them.

3. To be a war^ing to all that enjoy his gracious presence. That they see that
they make much of it, and that they take heed that they do not sin against him,
and forsake him, and provoke him to forsake them also.

Cant. The point is to be understood of a people that are visibly and
externally near and dear to him, and these may be totally and finally forsaken
of God: and yet here it must be noted, that God may exercise a deal of
patience, and forbearance toward such as he is about to forsake, he did so with
the old world, he did so with the Israelites of old, he did so with the seven
Churches of Asia: he is not wont suddenly, and at once to forsake a people,
that have been near and dear to him; but he is wont to give them warning, and
in patience to bear a while with their frowardness, and wait to see if there be
any returning to him, before he does inflict this heavy and sharp judgment.

Use It serves to admonish us, not to bear our selves too high, upon the
account of privileges. It is a great privilege to have the Lord near us, and
to be near unto him: and some lean upon this though they abide in their sin,
Micah 3.10, 11. They build up Sion with blood, and Jerusalem with ini^uity, yet
will they lean upon the Lord, and say, is not the Lord amongst us? But if our
deportment be not according to our privileges, if we do not carry it
thereafter, by becoming an humble, fruitful, and holy people; the Lord will
bring forth this heavy burden against us, we shall be rejected, and forsaken of
the Lord, whatever our external privileges be.

But the second part of the Doctrine; or the second Doctrine may be now spoken
to, viz.

That it is the heaviest burden, or the sorest of Judgments for the Lord to
forsake a people.

There may be two things spoken t^ in the management of this truth. 1.
Arguments to evidence it. 2. The Uses of it.

1. If God has threatened it as a very sore judgment, then sure it is so. Now
when God has been angry with a people, he has manifested the same by menac^ng
them with his forsaking them: when he has been designed to do them a deep
displeasure, upon the account of some high provocation he is won to threaten
them not by taking away this, or that outward comfort from them, but by taking
away himself from them.

And that is a woe indeed, a woe with a witness, Hos. 9.12. Yea, woe also to
them, when I depart from them: this is the wofullest day that such a people are
wont to meet with.

2. Gods forsaking a People is a sore judgment, in that i^ exposes them to all
judgments. Sin is a great evil in that it exposes to all evil this is a great
evil of punishment, in that it expose^ to all pu^ishments. If God be gone, our
guard is gone, and we are as a C^t^* in the midst of Enemies, wh^^e w^lls are
b^o^en down. Our strength (...) that is Gone, for God is our strength, as a
carcass without life, is a prey, to beasts or prey; so are a people forsaken of
their God, to all their devouring enemi^s, and to infernal, and cursed spirits:
they are exposed to mischief, and the malice of all their malignant enemies.
When the Lord had forsaken Jerusalem, the Romans quickly made a prey of it*
when they were destitute of God, their h^bitation became desolate. There is no
Protection to a People, whom the Lord forsaken; but they are perplexed on every
side.

3. Because the evils that are on such, whom God has forsaken* they are only
evils. The Prophet Ezekiel sometime has the expression, Ezekiel. 7.5. Thus says
the Lord God, an evil, an only evil behold is come. This is such an evil, an
only evil to a people. An evil whilst God is present, may have much good in it,
the Lord may sanctify it for abundance of blessing: there is hopes of this
whilst the Lord continues amongst them; but if he be gone, it is an only evil,
and the evils that come upon them are such, they have nothing but evil in them.

4. Because no creature can then afford any help; for what can creatures do
when God is departed, he makes the creatures useful and helpful, but without
him they can do us no good, stand us in no stead* they may say to thee as the
King of Israel, said to the Woman, that cried Help O King, He answered, If the
Lord don't help, whence shall I help thee? all creatures may say if God be
departed, we cannot help: Nay the very Devil cannot help if God be gone: when
God departed from Saul, he sought help from the Devil, 1 Samuel 28.15. Wherefore
(says the Devil) ask thou of me? seeing the Lord is departed from thee.

5. It appears to be a sore judgment, by the anguish and distress, that such
have been in, that have been sensible that God has forsaken them. Sin has
flown in the face of such, and terified them: Oh the blessed God is gone, and
if he is gone, mercy is gone; and Oh for such and such sins, that lie upon me!
what shall I do? what a moan have Saints themselves made in such a case? as
David, Psalm. 22.1.2. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Why art thou so
far from helping me? and from the words of my roaring? Oh my God, I cry in the
day time, but thou hear not, and in the night season, and am not silent. Oh
how Saul roared out his distress! and that on this account especially, that God
was departed from him, not so much that the Philistines were upon him, had not
God been gone, he could have dealt well enough with them; but here was the
misery, and the sting of the misery, God was departed from him.

6 It is a sore punishment, in that it is a great part of the punishment of
Hell. The essential parts of that punishment, is pain of loss, and sense, and
the former some reckon the greater.

Vs^ 1. How foolish are sinners that do even bid God dep^r^ from them? as we
(...), ^ob 21.14. Therefore they say unto God dep^rt from us, for we desire not
the knowledge of thy ways. But do they know what they say? Of sinners is this
your wish? if it be gran^ed it will pro^e your woe for ever. Happily Gods
pres^nce is now your trouble; but I tell you his absence would be your torment.

2. Se he^e what (...) it is to forsake God, is it a judgment of ju^gements to
be forsaken of G^d? su^ely then it is the sin of sins to forsake him: the e^il
of punishment is in being left by God, and the evil of sin is in leaving God.
What, forsake God* who is our only good? God who made us* and p^ssest us from
our beginni^g. God that has been the guide of our Youth* that has been good to
us, and fed us all our days? Jer 2.19. Knew therefore and see, that it is an
evil thing and bitter, that thou have fors^ken the Lord thy God. And there is
an aggravation of it* ver. 17. Thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, when he led
thee by the way. As a guide to dir^ct thee, as a staff to support thee, as a
convoy to guard thee, as a Father to provide for thee, that t^ou have wanted
nothing: well may it be said, how evil and bitter a thing ^s it, that thou have
f^r^aken the Lord? He adds in the 31. verse. Oh Generation! Generation of what?
of what you will; God leaves a space that you may write, what y^u please,
generation of Vipers, or Monsters, or any thing rather then Generation of Gods
people. See ye the word of the Lord b^hold your face in that Glass. So your
causless apostasies, have I been a wilde^ne^s unto ^srael? Have you wanted any
thing, Oh ye degenerating crooked, and wilful generation? God may say to such
sinners, as Pharaoh to Hadad, when he would be go^e, 1 King. 11.22. But what
have thou lacked with me, that thou seek^st to be gone? what have thou lacked
sinner, that thou seek to be gone from the Lord? The sinner must answer with
him, nothing howbeit let me go in any wise. He came to him in his di^tress, and
when hi^ turn was answered, away he packs. They forsake because they will
forsake.

3. Wonder not that Gods Saints have been so solicitous with him, not to
forsake them Thus David, Psalm. 119 8 Oh forsake me not utterly. He might well
be soli^itous in this matter, for he understood what it was to be forsaken of
the Lord. They press hard with the Lord whatever he does he would not leave
them* nor forsake them, Jer. 14.9. Leave us not. And no wonder, there are such
m^ans, when the Lord may have seemed, to have forsaken them.

4. If Gods for^aking be so sore a judgment, it should make us more cautelous,
and wary least we pull down this judgment on our heads Men should be afraid of
this heaviest of judgments* more ^hen the Child of whipping.

5. Let Gods dear ones take heed of concluding against themselves, that they
are under this judgem^nt. They are readiest to conclude against themselves* and
yet really in the least danger. Thus we read, Isa 49.14. But Zion said, the
Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me. But why said Zion (...)?
i^ was from diffidence* as ^aints do not fo^sake God as othe^s do, Psalm 18.21.
I have not wickedly departed from my God: so God will not forsake them as he
forsakes others not utterly forsake them: His forsaki^g of his is but
tempo^ary, and partial.

But h^re a que^^ion may be moved what is the diffe^ence betwixt a sinner
for^ak^n and a Saint forsaken? so the Lord does not fo^sake both alike. 1. When
God forsake his own, yet they cr^ after him he wit^dra^s himself from them
s^met^mes, yet so as that he draws their hearts a^t^r him as a mo^h^r may hide
away from her Child, hat it man seek and cry the more earnestly after ^er. 2
They reta^n good thoughts of him in ^is withdrawment* or absence. As the Spouse
in the Cantic^es, she calls him her beloved still. As the faithful wife: she
retains good though^s ^f her h^sband, and keep^ up her resp^ct though he be
gone from h^n^e but the wicked when the Lord fo^sakes ^h^m, harbor hard
thou^hts of him. Is this to ser^e the Lord* and (...) in his ways? what good
have I got (...)? see how he has served me.

3. They will seek him, till he return again, when the Lord forsakes others,
the will sees (...) v^nities to ma^e up the want of G^d pr^sence. (...)
Adu^tress in ^er Hu^ban^s abse^ce w^ll seek after other l^vers. The ^ru^ Saint
w^ll be satisfied in no^h^ng el^e but the Lord (...) re^urn. Moreover ^here i^
a diffe^ence in Go^s fors^king the si^ner and the Sa^nt, when he forsakes the
wicke^ (...) in da^kness: but when he wi^hd^aw^ from his own he leaves some
lig^t, whereby the^ see which way he is gone, he (...) some gl^mm^^ing l^ght,
by which they may foll^w after him, and find him.

And again, when he leaves his own, yet his bowels are ^owa^ds them, Jer. 31.^0
My bowels are troubled for him, I w^ll surely have mercy upon him, says the
Lord. He has an eve toward them for much good, in his forsaking them.

Use. 2 Of Ex^ortation: 1. To th^nkfulness to God, of that he has not yet
forsaken us. Whatever he has stripped us off, he has ^ot yet stripped us off
himself, (...) forsa^en us. He might h^ve done it, and have done us no wrong
(...) not yet done it.

2 (...) that he may not forsake us. An^ here the^e may be added Motives and
Mean^.

1. Consider (...) to forsak^ us. This is a (...) of he does not wil^ingly
(...) of Affliction or grievous (...) grievous stroke. God has showed himself
loath to depart from those that have departed from him; but have warned them of
his displeasure, that they might stay him. It goes near Gods heart to forsake a
People that have been near to him. Methinks I hear him saying thus, How shall I
give thee up, Oh New England! thence speaking to warn us, of our forsakings of
him, and to be instructed, why? least his Spirit depart from us, Jer. 6.8. Be
thou instructed Oh Jerusalem, least my Soul depart from thee, least I make thee
desolate, a land not inhabited. You may easily stay him, the matter is not so
far gone, but you might yet stay him were we but as loath he should forsake us,
as he is to forsake us, he would never leave us. His g^adual motions from a
people argue his lothness, and unwillingness to leave them.

2. Consider what the Lord is to us, or wh^t relation he stands in to us, while
he is with us. He is our friend, we have found him to be so, and a special
friend too: men in the World are not willing to forego a Friend, a good Friend:
he is as faithful, skilful, power^ul, and tenderhearted a Friend as ever a
people had, he stuck by us when also we had been in a woe case, Psalm. 124.1. If
it had not been the Lord, who was on our side may Israel now say. And had not
the Lord been on our side, may New England now say. He is a Father* and a
tenderhearted Father, Isai. 63.16, Doubtl^ss thou art our Father. Can child^en
be willing their Father should leave them? he is a Husband, Isai. 54 5. For thy
Maker is thy Husband, a loving, careful, tender husband too; can the Wi^e be
willing to part with her Husband? if the Lord forsake us we are bereft of our
friend, left friendless, he is all fr^ends in one none can be our friend, if he
be not. If he leave us, we shall be as Orphans, for he is related as a Father,
and how sad is the state of poor Orphans: and we shall be in a state of
Widow-hood, a very solitary, and sorrowful state. He is our guide* and our
pilot; what will become of the blind if their guide leave them? and what will
become of the Sh^p if the Pilot desert it? thus the Lord is to his, and well
may he say, as Mic. 6.3. Oh my People what have I done? or wherein have I
wearied thee, or given thee any cause to be weary of me.

3. Consider there are shrewd signs of Gods intent to leave us, unless somewhat
be done. If you enquire what? I Answer:

1. The sins for which God has forsaken others are rise amongst us. The sins
for which God fors^ok the Jews are our sins.

1. Horrid Pride* Hos 5.5. The Pride of Israel does testify to his f^ee. Pri^e
in Parts* and pride of Hearts, pri^e ^n Apparel, and Vistures, and in Gestures,
and in books, how lofty are their eyes! New-En^l^nd is taken no^ice of abroad,
for as proud a People, of a professing people, as the Worl^ afford^.

When a People are humble the Lord (...) with them. If our immunities, which
are (...) mercies, puff us up, God will emp^y us: he will blast that to us
that we are proud of.

2. Deep and high Ingratitude. Do you that requite the Lord? Deuteronomy. 32.6. So the
Prophet Hosea taxes them, Hos. 2, 8. God gave her Corn, and Wine, and Oil,
silver and Gold, but she consumed them on Baal. We have been blessed but (...)
God had the glory of our blessings.

3. Oppression. Amos 8 4. Ye that swallow (...) the needy. These Jews were like
the Fishes, the grea^er did devour the less. Some are like wild Beasts, like
Wolves that tear off the fleece, and eat the flesh of the Flocks. There is more
justice to be found in hell, then amongst some men on earth: for there is no
innocent person oppressed there.

4. Weariness of Gods Ordinances. Amos 8.5. When will the Sabbath be done? They
that are weary of the service of God, and the Ordinances of God, they are weary
of God. God indeed has fed us to the full, as to Ordinances: and we are
glutted, and surfeited, and have lost our esteem.

(...) men's Commodities bare but a little price (...), they will remove the
market! if Gospel Ordinances are but a cheap commodity, have lost their price,
and men are weary of them: God will let out his Vineyard to another People. If
our mercies become our burdens, God will ease us of them.

5. Cousenage in men's dealings, making the (...) small, and the Shekel great,
selling the (...) of Wheat, Amos 8.5, 6. They pick out the best Grain for
themselves, and the refuse is to sell.

6. Idolatry, which is Spiritual Adultery, and is there nothing of this?
choosing of new Gods.

7. Incorrigibleness, or opposition of a spirit of reformation. When God calls
to a People to return, by repentance, but they will go on still in their sin:
God calls to them by his judgments, and by his Rod; but they will not hear, as
it is Ier. 5.3. Thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved; thou have
consumed them, but they have refused to receive Correction: they have made
their faces harder than a Rock, they have refused to return. When it is thus
with a People, God will pluck up and be gone; so Ier. 7.13, 14 Because they
would not hear, and would not answer the call of God, I will do to this house,
as I did to Shiloh, why? what did the Lord do to Shiloh? ver. 12. Go to Shiloh,
and see what I did to it, for the wickedness of my People Israel. Go, and view
it, and you will see what he did, he left tokens of his wrath upon them, and
forsook them.

2. Another sign of his intent to forsake us, (...), in that he is dealin^ with
us as he is wont to deal with them that he is about to forsake. He takes away
those that (...) mostly with him. He will take away his Mo^^^'s those that
stand in the Gap, and bi^ds his hands with their Prayers, when he is design^d
to pour out wrath upon a People: he will remove ^he lights, when he is ab^ut to
da^ken a^and. W^e men send away their Plate and Jewels and (...) things; it
intim^tes their (...) of r^moval

3. Another sign is our Luke warmness, and Indifferency in Relig^on: a usual
forerunner of its rem^val When a People care not for God, and the things of
God, he has left them in some measure, already* and if that Spirit abide he
w^ll not tarry long with them.

Vs^ 1 Of Dir^cti^n. 1. Examine and humble your selves, for all your departures
from Go^, your forsak^ngs of him; humble your selves for them, confessing with
bitterness your evil therein bemoaning your selves before the Lord upon the
^ccount thereof. May the Lord hear his People from Dan to Beersheba bemoaning
themselves, Ephraim like, then the Lord will hear, and have mercy, and not
leave us, for his Names sake.

2. Judge your selves worthy to be forsaken, because of your forsaking of him.
If you judge yourselves wo^thy to be forsaken, God will not ju^ge you worthy to
be forsaken, 1 Cor. 11.31.

3. Pr^y the Lord not to fo^sake you, the Lord is sometimes staid with Prayers:
Prayers have prevailed with his Majesty often, and may do again.

4. Forsake your sins, whereby you have forsaken him Nothing less then this
will prevent this mischief, coming upon us. If there be my, either Son or
Daughter that will not leave their (...) for God, God will leave such.

FINIS.
ERRATA. In the P^eface to Mrs. Rowlandsons Narrative Page 1. Line 3. for
Thursday read Tuesday.


