AN ORDER FOR REGULATING CONSTABLES PAYMENTS, And for the Rating of Unimproved
Lands; and Relating to Troopers, Made at the second Session of the GENERAL
COURT Held at BOSTON, October. 11. 1682. Edward Rawson Secr'
WHereas it is informed, that several Constables have not made up their
Accounts with the Treasurer; and that there is much of the last Years Rates yet
unpaid:

This Court does Order. that what is so unpaid, be paid in according to the
valuation of all sorts of Corn made the present Court.

IT Appearing a Grievance among us that sundry Gentlemen, Merchants and others,
having great Tracts of Land, bounded out to them in Propriety, pay not to
Public Charges; although they have a considerable profit to themselves by the
continual Rise of the estimate of said Lands: For the Easing whereof;

It is Ordered by this Court, that all Lands circumstanced as is above
promised, shall in the Levy now to be made by this present Court, for payment
of the Country Debts, pay unto the Treasurer of the Country two shillings
Money for every hundred Acres: and in like proportion for lesser quantities.

ANd it is Ordered, that the Select men of every Town and Peculiar within this
Jurisdiction, sometime in the Month of November next, shall Assess all Lands
within their Town bounds, liable to be Rated by this Order; And also to Assess
all Country Grants of Lands called Farms, belonging to peculiar persons that
lie nearest unto such Town or Towns; and to draw up fair Lists of the said
Assessments, with the Names of the persons and Quantities of Lands Assessed,
and Deliver the said Lists to the Commissioners chosen to examine this years
Rates, who are required to meet at the Shire Town, the second Tuesday of
December next, who are ordered carefully to examine the said Lists and
Assessments, and transmit the same with all speed to the Treasurer of the
Country being perfected and subscribed with their Names. And the Treasurer is
required to issue forth his Warrants to the Constables of the several Towns, to
Collect for such Lands as lie in their Bounds; and to the Marshal General or
Marshal of the County, to Collect for such Lands as lie not in any Town Bounds;
who shall Collect the same, and return it to the Treasurer as the Law directs.

And it is further Ordered that the said Commissioners give in to the Treasurer
the number of the Troopers in their respective Towns, and he to grant out
Warrants to the Select Men to assess, and the Constables to Collect what may
arise to be due to the Country upon the Duplication of Rates, for this present
year.

And for the better effecting of this Order about the Rating of Unimproved
Lands.

It is Ordered by this Court, that the Major General, Captain Fisher, Captain
Elisha Hutchinson, and Lieut. Jonathan Danforth, together with the Secretary,
be a Committee forthwith to examine the Court Records and Returns of all Grants
of Farms and Out-lands, laid out without the Bounds of any Township; who are
Ordered and Desired to make a List of all Out lands they can by any means gain
the knowledge of, as to the quantity of the same, and to whom at present they
do belong, and where they do lie: and to transmit the same lists unto the
Country Treasurer, that they may be added to, and compared with the several
Countries Lists, that so no Lands may be omitted, or twice Entered. Major John
Pynchon, and Lieut. John Smith in Hampshire, are appointed to do the like, and
make like Certificate:

And that the Treasurer forthwith send forth his Warrants to the Select Men of
each Town accordingly.

FINIS.

