SOME Important Truths CONCERNING Conversion, And the Improving Seasons of
GRACE; As also about PRAYER in Families, and in Secret: Delivered in Several
SERMONS;

By Mr. INCREASE MATHER.

The Second Edition.

Joh. 13. 17. If ye know these things, happy are you if you do them.

Phil. 3. 1. To write the same things to you, to me indeed is not grievous, but
for you it is safe.

Printed at Boston in New England by Samuel Green for John Griffin. 1684.

To the Reader
I T is thought Convenient in a Presatory Line or two, to Advertise the Reader,
that the Discourses which are a Price so get Wisdom, now put into his hands,
are such as have heretofore seen the light among diverse others a kin to These,
in two several Books of this Worthy Author, whose Labors have praised him, as
otherwise; so by the good success of them, in which, no doubt, he has seen the
fruit of his Soul travels, to satisfaction; And though the Treatises from
whence these are Gleaned are by some intended to be Reprinted elsewhere ere
long; nevertheless the Republication of These, in this little Manual (it is
hoped) is not amiss attempted by sundry who have been desirous to promote Pure
Religion among those that stick not to purchase and peruse a small one, while
they are affrighted at larger Volumns.

Wherein also they presume that the Reverend Author himself from whom they had
no encouragement to do This, will not be displeased, because his own Grand Aim
when he first emitted those Important Truths, namely, The Conversion, and
Edification, and Salvation of never-dying Souls, is that on the score of which
this New-Impression is accomplished; And let the Blessing of Heaven go along
therewith!

A Sound and Through Conversion, is of absolute necessity in Order to the Souls
Entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven.
Matthew. 18. 3. Verily, I say unto you, Except you be Converted, and become as
little Children, you shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
THese Words were spoken by the Lord Jesus Christ; the occasion of them we may
see in the first Verse of the Chapter; viz. An Ambitious Enquiry amongst the
Disciples, which of them should be the greatest Man, or have the greatest
Dominion in the heavenly Kingdom of Christ: The Lord tells them in this Verse,
that such Ambition was not the way to Heaven; but on the contrary, that if it
did continue unmortified, it would surely exclude them out of that Kingdom.

In the words we may take notice of three things: 1. The main Truth which is
here affirmed, sc. That Conversion is of absolute necessity, in order to
obtaining the Kingdom of Heaven, Except there be Conversion, or (which
explaineth the other) except there be a becoming as little Children, even a
Regeneration, and beginning the World anew, as it were, except there be this,
there shall be no entering into the Kingdom of Heaven. 2. We have here the
Persons unto whom this was spoken, sc. the Disciples of Christ; Except [you] my
own Disciples be converted, I say to [you] that [ye] shall not enter: not but
that they were converted already; yet this may well be spoken, even to
converted persons, thereby to convince them further of the necessity of that
Conversion which they had already attained. Also, because though they were
converted in respect of their state, yet they stood in need of a further
Conversion, in (...) of a particular ill, which they were too much under the
present prevailing power of. And this shows, that all men whatsoever are
concerned in the truth delivered: For if it be true concerning Disciples of
Christ that they must be either Converted, or not saved, certainly this is
true, concerning other men. 3. We have here the manner of the expression. This
Truth is not barely affirmed, but with a Verily; Christ does not only say, but
pronounces it with a Verily, saying, Verily, except you be Converted, you
shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; which notes both the certainty
and the solemnity of the thing expressed. This word [verily] was frequently
used by Christ, yet never but when there was some weighty and solemn truth
affirmed by him. The Doctrine therefore which we shall (by the Lords
assistance) speak unto from the words, is, That it is a most certain and
weighty Truth, that a sound through Conversion, is of absolute necessity, in
order to the Souls extra^ct into the Kingdom of Heaven.

In the Doctrinal prosecution of this point, we shall attend two things: First,
we shall lay down some Propositions for clearing and opening the Truth about
Conversion. Secondly, we shall demonstrate the Truth by Argument.

1. The Explication of the Truth, may be set before us in sundry Propositions.

Propos. I. God is the principal cause and Author of that Conversion which is
here spoken of. The words indeed may be rendered, Except you Convert; but that
shows rather man's duty, than his power to convert himself; I say, God and not
man is the principal cause of this work. Hence converted persons are said to be
born of God, and not of man; because not man, but God alone is the Author of
Regeneration, Joh. 1. 13. therefore it was that Ephraim prayed, TURN thou me,
and I shall be turned, Jer. 31. 18. as if he had said, Except the Lord turn me,
the work will never be done. And God does this by his holy Spirit, therefore a
converted person is said to be born of the Spirit, Joh. 3. 6. and, born after
the Spirit, Gal. 4. 29. And the Spirit of God is called, the Spirit of Grace,
Heb. 10. 29. because all Grace, and especially Converting Grace, is from him:
The truth is, that as Conversion is taken for the infusing of a new Principal
of Saving Grace into the Soul; so men are altogether passive in their
Conversion, and the Eternal Spirit is the only principal Agent therein, Hence
Conversion is called, a new begetting, 1 Pet. 1. 3. Now in begetting, the thing
begotten is not active but wholly passive: and it is called a Resurrection, or
quickening of a dead person, Ephesians. 2. 1. Joh. 5. 14, 25. Has a dead man power to
raise himself out of his Grave; or is it in the power of Men or Creatures to
quicken those that are dead? much-more may we say thus as to dead Souls, that
are buried in a Grave of sin, guilt and misery: yea, in Converting a Soul,
there is a Creating power put forth, Col. 3. 10. which shows both that the
Soul is passive in this work; and also, that it is above the power of Men or
Creatures to accomplish. Creation is a bringing of something out of nothing:
Now inasmuch, as there is a kind of Infinite distance between Being and
No-being; therefore an Infinite power is required, to produce a work of
Creation. So is it in Conversion. Nay, that is harder than mere Creation:
because in the first Creation there was no opposition: But now when God enters
upon this work of the n^w and second Creation, there is whatever resistance all
the powers of darkness can make against him. Look, as it is an easier matter to
make a new Glass, than to mend a broken one; so it is easier to create a new
Soul, than by Conversion, as it were, to make anew the broken, ruined Souls of
men.

Propos. II. The Word of God is the Instrumental means of Conversion, James 1.
18. Of his own will begat he us, with the word of Truth. God is (as was said)
the principal Cause, but the Word of truth is the Instrument and Mean in the
hand of the Spirit, whereby this mighty and astonishing work is brought to
pass, Psalm. 19. 7. The Law of the Lord is perfect converting the Soul. The word
of the Law, strictly taken, is partly Instrumental and influential to the Souls
Conversion. For thereby is Conviction of sin and misery, Romans 3. 20. By the Law
is the knowledge of sin. If a man comes to see and acknowledge himself to be a
sinful and miserable Transgressor, this conviction is by means of the Law. The
Ceremonial Law was a plain conviction and evidence of the guilt of sin. Hence
it is called, the Handwriting that is against us, Col. 2. 14. because it was
as it were, a Bill of Indictment against the Observers of it: the Jews when
they observed Circumcision, did thereby confess themselves guilty of Original
Sin, which is the sin of nature; and when they offered any Sacrifice, they did
thereby acknowledge, that they deserved to be dealt with, as they did unto that
creature which was sacrificed by them; yea, to be made an Eternal Sacrifice to
Infinite Justice. And the Moral Law does convince of sin. When that in the holy
nature and exact purity of it, is brought home to the Soul, Conscience is
convinced and awakened thereby, with the sense of transgression and guilt.
Hence the Apostle says, Romans 7. 9. I was alive without the Law once: He
speaks of what he was, when in his natural, unconverted estate; before the
Law was effectually brought home to his heart, he was alive in his own conceit:
But when the Commandment came, I died; when God set the Law, in the spiritual
nature of it before him, then his Conscience was touched indeed, that he saw
himself to be by nature, no better than a dead and damned creature: Now
Conviction of sin is the way, and indeed the first step toward Conversion. But
especially the Word of the Gospel is the great means of Conversion: Hence it is
called, The ministration of the Spirit, and of life, 2 Cor. 13. 6. because it
is the mean by which Spiritual life is conveyed to the Elect. The Law without
the Gospel will never Convert: Hence men that have been strangers to the
Gospel, have been unacquainted with the mystery of Conversion, all their
knowledge in the Law notwithstanding. The Gentiles notwithstanding the Internal
Law written in the heart; and the Jews notwithstanding their knowledge of the
External-Law, yet were strangers to true Conversion, because they knew not the
Gospel in the power of it. The Law without the Gospel, will but drive to
despair, and to set the sinner farther off from God, but will never bring him
home to God again: It is also true, that God does many times bless Providence,
Afflictions especially, to help forward the Conversion of his Elect; but that
is, by causing them thereby to mind and remember what the Word says,
Affliction makes a sinner to think of Christ. But how came he to hear of a
Christ, or to know that any help; to be had for his Soul? This knowledge is by
the Gospel; so that still it remains true, that the Word is the principal
Means of Conversion.

Propos. III. In true Conversion, the Soul is turned from Satan, the World, Sin
and Self. In all changes, there is the term from which the change is: now the
Proposition is expressive of the term from which the change in Conversion is
wrought. There are four Particulars comprehended under this; we shall briefly
touch upon each of them as they go along: 1. The Converted Soul is turned from
Satan; therefore when Paul was Instrumental toward the Conversion of the
Gentiles, he is said to turn them from the power of Satan, Act. 26. 18. and
when the Disciples were sent forth to Preach the Gospel, and thereby to Convert
the World, Satan is said to fall before them, Luke 10. 18. Conversion is the
same with effectual vocation: Now in Vocation, the term from which the Soul is
called, is Satan's Kingdom, 1 Pet. 2. 9. He has called you out of darkness;
namely, out of the dark Kingdom of Satan. 2. From the World; therefore Christ
said to his Disciples after their conversion, Ye are not of the World, I have
chosen you out of the World, John 15. 19. Sin does carry away the Soul from God
to the creature; but now in conversion, it is taken off from the creature
again; as we see (...) David, Psalm. 119. 96: I have seen an end of all
perfection: his heart was taken off from the creature, so as he did not look
for his happiness there: The like we see in converted Paul, Gal: 6: 14: I am
crucified to the World, and the World unto me. The World was as a dead object
before his eyes, which is unlovely and undesirable. 3. From Sin: Often in
Scripture, conversion is called turning from sin, Isai: 59. 20: Jer: 26: 3: and
a breaking off from sin, Dan. 4. 27: and a casting away transgression, Ezekiel:
18: 31: Isai 31: 7: yea, it is a turning from all sin, Ezekiel: 18: 21, 30: Herein
especially conversion does consist; namely, in a true turning from sin; that
is, when the life and heart is thoroughly divorced from every false and evil
way. Men may confess sin, yet if they do not forsake it, this is no conversion,
Prove: 28: 13: They may forsake sin in their lives, yet if there be a love and
liking unto any lust in the heart, there is no true conversion. But of this
more afterward. 4. The converted man is turned from Self also: This is the
first, and indeed one of the hardest Lessons in Christianity, that a man must
deny himself, Mat: 16: 24: A natural man, makes not only the World, but Self
his God. He makes himself his own Last end: He lives to himself; but the
converted man does not so. Herein is a main matter in Conversion, and that
wherein the Truth of the work is discerned, namely, when the Sinner is indeed
unbottomed from Self, especially from righteous Self: and Conversion does imply
a work of Humiliation, which is that whereby the Soul is taken off from resting
in righteous Self: Some there are that attain unto a seeming, and as it were,
an half-conversion, but here they stick and perish; they do in part forsake the
World and Sin, but then they go to duties and righteousness of their own: But
in true Conversion, the Soul is taken off from this bottom also. Hence Paul,
after his Conversion, could say, not having my own righteousness, Phil. 3. 9.
He did renounce all that was his own; not only his own Sins, or his own Will,
or his own Relations, so far as they stood in opposition to Christ, but his own
Righteousness and all.

Propos. IV. In true Conversion; the Soul is turned to God in Christ. In all
changes there is the term to which, as well as the term from which the change
is. Thus in Conversion, the former Proposition was expressive of the term from
which; this is expressive of the term to which the Sinner is changed: we have
them both mentioned, Act. 26. 19. where the conversion of the Gentiles is
called, not only a turning from Satan and Darkness but unto God: Therefore it
is said of John Baptist, that he should turn many of the Children of Israel
into the Lord their God, Luke 1. 16. because he was instrumental toward their
Conversion: God went forth with John Baptists Ministry to the conversion of
many Souls, therefore he is said, to turn many to the Lord: and very often
Conversion is called, a turning to the Lord, Deuteronomy. 30. 10. Hos. 1. 2. 6.
Conversion is an undoing of the work of Sin; Sin is a departure from God: So
Conversion is a going to him again. Hence the converting Prodigal said, he
would go to his Father, Luke 15. 18. by these two parts, or terms, is the whole
nature of Conversion described; see Isai. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his
way, and the unrighteous Man his thoughts. These words are expressive of the
first part of Conversion; sc. when the sinner is turned from evil, and that not
only as to his way, or outward conversation, but in his own thoughts, and
inward disposition of heart; it follows, and let him return to the Lord -- To
our God: These words are expressive of the other and positive part of
Conversion. Moreover, this turning must be to God in Christ, for true
conversion is an Evangelical work; Though a Man should repent with legal
Repentance, and turn to God in a legal way, this is no Conversion, if Christ be
not turned unto, and God, even the Father in him. The Jews did thus return, yet
they converted not, because they sought God out of Christ, Romans 9. 32. Hence
Conversion is called, a seeking of Christ, Hos. 3. 5. and Converted ones are
described to be such as are in Christ, Romans 16. 7. Paul there says, that his
Kinsmen Andronicus and Junius were in Christ before him; meaning that they were
converted before him, Christ, Gal. 3. 27. and to have put on Although there are
many that call themselves Christians, that know not what Conversion means, yet
a true Convert, and a true Christian, are the same: Conversion does imply Faith
in Christ. It has been a great Question amongst some, Whether Faith or
Repentance be first wrought; and a great deal of disputing there has been
about this point, which might have been spared. The true and plain Answer is,
That as Repentance is taken for the first part of Conversion, so it is in order
of Nature before Faith, though in Time with it: The term from which, is in
order of Nature, before the term to which; but as Repentance is taken for the
whole work of Conversion (as often in Scripture it is) so it implies Faith in
Christ. You heard but now, that conversion and vocation are the same; now in
Vocation the term to which the Soul is called, is the Kingdom of Christ, Col.
1. 13. This Text does intimate, that Converted ones are brought into the
Kingdom of Heaven; and it must needs be so, because in Conversion, the term to
which the Soul is brought, is the Kingdom of Christ; now that is meant by the
Kingdom of Heaven, even the Heavenly Kingdom of the Messiah: Christ's Kingdom,
and the Kingdom of Heaven are the same.

Propos. V. True Believers on Christ may undergo a farther, and as it were, a
second Conversion. This is plainly (and indeed a main thing intended therein)
intimated in the Text; Christ here tells his own Disciples, that except they
were converted; i. e. except there were a farther, and as it were, a new
conversion wrought in them, and upon them, they should not see Heaven. There is
an universal conversion, and a particular conversion: one in the state of
nature, needs the former; a true Christian may stand in need of this latter.
This may be secretly hinted at by that expression, Jer. 4. 3. Plough up the
fallow ground of your hearts. Fallow ground you know, is such as has been once
broken up already; but by reason of its being overgrown with weeds and thorns,
etc. may need a further and new breaking up. So it is here, they that have had
their hearts truly broken up for sin, may become fallow ground, so as to need
that new furrows should be made in their Souls: They may be so overgrown with
the weeds of sin, as that the Plough-share of Repentance must again break up
their hearts. Conversion is sometimes taken for a spiritual habit infused into
the Soul, so it is not to be reitterated; for the habit of Grace wrought in the
first Conversion, is never lost. Sometimes it is taken for an act proceeding
from that habit: Thus a Man may be converted over and over again; yea, thus a
Christian is converting all his life long; that is to say, he is still getting
farther off from sin and the world and nearer unto God in Christ; the life of a
Christian is and ought to be a life of Faith and Repentance. Hence even true
Believers yet are called upon to repent: So we find in those Epistles which the
Lord Jesus sent from Heaven to the Churches, they are commanded to repent that
is, to renew their Repentance. And this truth is evident, in that a true Child
of God may be too far subject to the prevailing power of some special
corruption, in which case, a new or further conversion is requisite. This was
the case of the Text; the Disciples were under the present predom^nancy of an
ambitious Lust, in a great measure, therefore the Lord tells them, they must be
converted. The like we find, in respect of another corruption in that good
Prophet Jeremiah see Chapter 15. 19. Thus says the Lord, if thou return then will
I bring thee again and thou shall stand before me: You may see in the former
Verse. that the good man was surprised with a pang of Unbelief; and while the
temptation and corruption prevaded upon him, he manifests much impatiency and
murmurings of Spirit: Now says God to him, if thou will return from these evil
frame of Spirit if thou will convert thee from these evils then will I again
make use of thee in my service, etc. So that a very good man may be distempered
with particular corruptions, so as to need a returning and converting from them
to the Lord again. Yea, it ^^ a sad Truth, that a godly man may possibly be
under the present power or some corruption, in such a degree, as that it is
impossible for him to get to Heaven until that corruption be further mortified.
This is plainly affirmed by the Text, Christ declares to his Disciples, that
except the lust of Pride were further mortified in them, they should not enter
into Heaven. Some sins which true Believers are guilty of, they must and shall
repent of them before they go out of this World, that so they may be fit for
Heaven.

Again, Grace may be exceeding weak in a true Believer, and in that case a
further Conversion is necessary: Ordinarily it is thus with new-Converts; in
such many times Grace is very weak, and corruption is very strong; there is
little knowledge, and much ignorance; little humility, and much pride; thence a
further conversion must be. This we see in the Disciples themselves, a long
time they were marvelously ignorant, and yet too full of Pride and other
Corruptions: but after the Ascension of Christ, there was a mighty change
wrought in them; Then was that accomplished upon them, which here Christ said
must be, a new Conversion, they were endued with power from on high, Luke 2. ^.
19. The Lord from on high poured his Spirit mightily upon them, and thereby
were they wonderfully changed: The change which was then wrought upon the
Disciples, was not much less, than that which was wrought on them at their
first Conversion; they differed from what themselves; were before, well nigh as
much as at their first conversion they were made to differ from other men.

Again, true Believers may be under sad spiritual decays, and in this respect
they may need, as it were a new Conversion. This we see in the collapsed
Churches of Asia; yea, a godly man may fall into gross sins, such as wast and
wound the Conscience, and break communion with God; indeed into any sin, though
never so vile, except only that sin against the Holy Ghost, and final
Impenitency. Now in this case a new conversion is necessary; we see instances
hereof in David, Psalm. 51. 10. after his fearful fall and miscarriage in that
matter about Uriah (for that, as the Title shows, was the occasion of his
penning that Psalm) he prays, that God would create a clean heart, and renew
a right spirit in him: He speaks as if all the work of conversion were to
begin anew again. And in Solomon, His penitent Soul wrote a Book of Repentance;
Ecclesiastes is the Book of Solomon's Repentance, not of his first but of his
second Repentance. And another Instance hereof we have in Peter: Hence Christ
said to him, Luke 12. 32. When thou art converted, etc. Peter was converted
before that time, but Satan so far prevailed upon him, as that by the sudden
surprizal of a temptation, he became guilty of Lying and Perjury, and (which
was worst of all) denied Christ too: Now in regard of this fearful fall into
sin, he stood in need of being, as it were, converted anew; therefore Christ
said to him, When thou art Converted, meaning, when he should have repented of
his grievous Transgression. Besides all this, the truth of what you hear is
evident, if we consider the several steps of Conversion; e. g. A true Believer
may undergo a new work of Conviction and Illumination; God may teach him that
which he has not yet seen, Job 34. 32. he may have further Visions of God, and
Visions of his own heart too, yea such discoveries, as may differ in degree, as
much from the enlightnings received, when first Illuminated, as the knowledge
of a man differs from the knowledge of a Child, 1 Cor. 13. 11. and he may
undergo a new work of Compunction or Contrition for sin. Hence David after his
fall complains of broken bones, Psalm. 5^. 8. because his sin occasioned and
caused as much grief to him, as if all his bones had been shivered in pieces.
And Solomon found his Vanity in the end of it, more bitter than death, Eccles.
7. 26. And Peter, when his Conscience was touched with a saving remorse for his
Sin, went out and wept bitterly, Mat. 27. ult. So for Humiliation, a true
Believer may undergo that work anew: We see it in Job, after the sinful
distempers of his Spirit had broke loose, he cries out against himself, I am
vile, Chap. 40. Ver. 4. And inasmuch as his Repentance and Humiliation was not
altogether so deep and through as should have been, the Lord speaks more
awakingly to him until he cry out a (...) time. I (...) my self, and repent in
dust and ashes, Chap. 42. 6. And the like we read concerning Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles.
32. 26. He humbled himself, for the pride of his heart; not but that he had
humbled himself for that and other sins many a time, and many a day before that
time, but then he renewed his Humiliation before the Lord. and a further work
of Conversion may be wrought upon the Believer, in respect of Separation from
sin and amendment of life. Thus also with David Psalm. 119. 67. Before I was
afflicted I went astray, but now I have kept thy word: not but that he made
Conscience of his ways from his youth up, but that affliction was a means to
make him more circumspect and exact in his walking before God. So the
Corinthians after that humbling Providence about the Incestuous Person, were
much reformed, 2 Cor 7. 11. Also in respect of closing with Christ, a true
Believer may fall as it were, under a second Conversion: we therefore read,
that the Disciples believed Joh. 2. 11. the Disciples believed before,
otherwise they had not been called Disciples, but now they renewed their
closing with Christ. So that the Holy Spirit does sometimes go over the work of
Conversion in all the steps of it, in the hearts of his Children, and that
again and again; yea, and sometimes he does all this in a very eminent manner:

Propos. VI. In the true Conversion, there is a change, even of the whole man.
The sanctifying change wrought in Conversion must be proportionable to the
defilement of natural corruption. Now that is total, what the Prophet speaks,
concerning that woeful defection and corruption of the Jewish state, Isai 1. 6.
From the sole of the foot even to the head there is no soundness in it but
wounds, and bruises and pu^rifying sores may truly and fitly be applied unto
the corrupted estate of all men by nature. This corruption of nature was
Typified under the Law by the spreading Leprosy ( Lev. 13. 12, 13.) which
covered all the skin of him that had the Plague, from his head even to his
foot. Now the Plaster must be answerable to the fore; therefore inasmuch as
the corruption of nature is universal, as to all parts and faculties; so must
Repentance and conversion be universal. Hence a true Convert is said to be a
new, and another creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. If any man be in Christ he is a new
Creature: old things are passed away, behold all things are become new. In
conversion, Heaven and Earth is new; that is to say, all is new from the top to
the bottom; it is such another change as that, which shall pass upon the World
at the last and great day: indeed, then the materials shall be the same, but
there will be a wonderful alteration as to qualities; so it is when a Soul is
converted. As if a man should deface a deformed Picture, and in the room of it
should draw another complete and beautiful; here the subject matter is the
same, only here is a new Image. Thus the holy Spirit draws the blessed Lines
of the Image of God on that Soul, where once was the deformed Image of Satan.
But to evince the truth of this Proposition, by Induction of particulars. 1. In
Conversion the head is made new A true convert has a renewed mind. Ephesians 4. 23.
Hence conversion is in the Scripture called, Illumination Heb 10. 32. and
opening of the eyes of the Soul, Act 26. 18. Ephesians. 1. 18. Whenever God converts
a Soul he lets in a new, and a blessed light into the Understanding, that the
sinner has other apprehensions about God, and Christ, and Heaven, and Sin, and
Hell, and spiritual Objects, than once he had. Every converted Sinner may say,
as the man that was born blind said, after Jesus Christ had healed him, Joh 9.
25. One thing I know that wherein I was born blind now I see. Some that are
truly converted, cannot tell exactly the time, or the means, or manner of their
Conversion; yet this they know, that now they see spiritual things with another
kind of sight and apprehension, than once they did. The truth is, that
conversion does begin here: As in the first Creation God began with Light, so
in this second and new creation, the Lord begins with effectual Conviction and
Illumination. 2. In Conversion, the heart is made new, Ezekiel. 36. 26. A new
heart will I give. Converting Grace is promised to the Elect under that
expression. A new heart is given to a man, when that heart which once was hard
and senseless, is become soft and tender; when an heart of stone, is turned
into an heart of flesh; and when that heart which once was full of nothing but
Pride and Vanity is become humble and meek. And when that heart which was
foolish is become spiritually wise, Prove. 10. 8. The Heart is often in Scripture,
put for the Will; because it is the ^eat and subject thereof; as the head is of
the Understanding. Now in Conversion, the will is wonderfully changed, Psalm.
110. 3. A willing people in the day of thy power; when the day of Gods power
does pass upon the Soul in converting Grace, the Will is captivated. The Will
then refuses old sinful Objects which once were delighted in; and instead
thereof, chooses new and better Objects: That Will which before obstinate and
rebellious, is now become pliable to the will of God in every thing. You see it
in Paul, when he was in the pangs of the new birth, Lord, says he, what will thou have me to do? Act. 9. 6. And this alone proves the truth of the
proposition before us; for a change of the heart or Will, infers a change of
the whole man; the reason is, because the will is the Empress and Commandress
of the Soul. Hence the act of any faculty or part belonging to a man, is not to
(...) accounted the act of the whole, except the will be involved in it. 3. In
Conversion, the affections are renewed: A sincere Convert does not affect those
evils, which once he did affect; and does affect those good things which once
he did not affect: converting Grace causes a marvelous change upon the
affections; e. g. If we speak of Love and Hatred, when a sinner is converted,
these affections are much altered and placed upon new and other Objects: He
loves spiritual good things in the chief place; he loves God and Christ above
all, Psalm 33. 25. Luke 14. 26. he loves Truth, Ordinances, Saints, Holiness,
as such, which the Natural man does not; he hates sin, and that universally,
Psalm. 119. 128. Prove. 8. 13. he has an heart after Gods own heart, Act. 13.
22. that is to say he does love the things which God does love, and hates the
things which God does hate. Again the sincere Convert has new joys and
sorrows in his Soul. As for the natural man, his chief joy and delight is in
some carnal, worldly object, either in the Pleasures, or Profits, or Honors
which the World affords: But as for the converted man, his chief delight is in
Spiritual Objects; as in the favor of God, and communion with him by Jesus
Christ, and in the precious promises, etc. yea, he finds more sweetness in one
good look from God in Christ, or in one Promise, than in all that the whole
Earth can afford, Psalm. 46. and 94. 19.

So for Sorrow; the greatest sorrows of a natural man are upon the account of
some worldly cross or disappointment; but the converted man is grieved most of
all with the loss of Gods favor, Psa. 30. 6. and with the dishonor done to
Gods name in the World, Psalm. 119. 136, 158. as to intellectual and rational
sorrow, Sin is the matter of greatest grief unto his Soul especially those sins
which before Conversion, were the most delightful, after conversion are the
greatest bitterness of Soul^ Again, where there is true Conversion, there are
new hopes and fears; his hopes are placed chiefly upon eternal Objects, upon
Christ, and Heaven, and Eternal Life, Col. 1. 5, 27, and the like may be said
concerning his Fear, it is not placed so much upon temporal, as upon spiritual
and eternal objects. I do but touch at things as we go along; but by this you
see, that converting Grace makes a wonderful change upon the affections; yea,
upon all the affections, whether they be affections of Union, or affections of
Aversion 4. In conversion, there are new thoughts put into the heart; and if
there be a real and through change, in respect of the thoughts, it is a special
evidence of true Conversion, Isai. 55. 7. An unconverted sinner, or one that
has only a common work of Gods Spirit upon him, may possibly make some
Conscience of he Words and outward Actions; but its rare for such an one to
look narrowly and di^^gently to the inward thoughts and workings of his heart;
but where the Gospel pre aileth to a sound Conversion of the Soul, it brings
every thought into subjection to the Will of God, 2 Cor. 10. 5. The sincere
Convert will not allow himself so much as in vain and unprofitable thoughts,
Psalm. 119. 113. vain thoughts do I hate; much less in proud thoughts, or
unclean thoughts, or revengeful thoughts. 5. In conversion, there is a great
change wrought, in respect of words: It is therefore sometimes expreded in the
Scripture, by the Circumcision of the lips. And by that phrate, of a pure
Language, 2 Cor. 3. 9 The same man that before his Conversion, was, it may be,
a Reviler of good men, a scoffer of godliness, a profane Swearer, or a silthy
speaker; alter his conversion, you shall hear no more such evil communication
from him; but instead thereof, he will be speaking about Christ, and Heaven,
and the estate of his own immortal Soul, and be full of gracious, edifying
discourse, such a mighty change does converting Grace work, when it comes in
power. And certain it is, that except a man's lips and language be sanctified,
he is a stranger to conversion, and to the power of Religion or Christianity,
Jam 1. 26 If any man seem to be Religions, and bridleth not his tongue, he
deceives his own heart, his Religion is vain. Men may call themselves
Christians, and yet have unbridled tongues; and they may think to be saved,
because of their Profession of Christianity; but alas, they deceive themselves;
and all their pretenses to Religion will prove a vain thing, if they have not a
pure Language. 6. Where there is Conversion, there is new life and
conversation, Ephesians. 4. 22. Rom 6. 4. He that is converted does, as it were,
turn over a new leaf, and leads a new life, quite differing from what he
formerly lived. And this is that which is especially signified by the word [
Conversion:] The word is a Metaphor taken from a man, that is walking in a
wrong way; but if ever he would come to his journies end, he must turn quite
about, and go in a contrary way to that, which at present he walks in. Men by
Sin turn out of the right way; sinners are perverters of their way, but by
Repentance and Conversion they return and are brought back into the right way
again, Jer. 3. 21, 22. The true Convert walks in new ways, and takes new
courses: he did walk in the way of sin, he does walk in the way, which is
called holy; he did walk in the broad way, he does walk in the narrow way. 7.
Where there is Conversion, there will also be a change in respect of company:
As a new Conversation, so a new Company to converse withal, Prove. 13. 20. We
see a sudden and marvelous change, in this respect, wrought in Paul at his
first conversion, Act. 9. 26. before his Conversion, he delighted in the
company of none but carnal Jews, but after his conversion, none so welcome to
him as godly Christians: those very persons that before he did malign, and hate
to the death, afterward he ventured his life for their sakes. And indeed there
is nothing that does make a greater discovery of a man's spirit, than the
company which he does frequent and delight in. A profane spirited man, loves
profane company, one that is not profane and yet unconverted, only civil and
outwardly blameless in his conversation, delights not in profane company, nor
yet in godly society, only in such as are in the same state and form with
himself: But gracious Souls delight in such as truly fear God; yea, the more
there is of God in any one, the more does the true convert delight in communion
with him, Psalm. 119. 63. I am (though a King) a companion of all them (be they
never so mean in this World) that fear thee, and of them that keep thy
Precepts. By these things then see, that in conversion there is an universal
change wrought upon the sinner. Thus much may suffice to be spoken by way of
Explication. The nature of true conversion has been opened unto you in the
Propositions cleared, which are expressive of the causes, parts, degrees,
subject of true conversion.

We come now to demonstrate the point sc. That a sound through conversion is of
absolute necessity to the Souls entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven. And this
is proved, 1. From plain testimony of Scripture The words of this Text (if
there were no more) are a plain proof of this Doctrine, they stand like a
Flaming-Sword, to keep all unconverted sinners from any hopes of entering into
lost Paradise: see also John 3. 3. Jesus said Verily, verily, I say unto thee,
except a man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Mark how every
word is solemn and weighty, [ I] say unto thee, [ I] that am truth it self; [
I] that never spoke, nor can speak an untrue or an idle unprofitable word [ I]
say unto thee, and this with a verily; and that doubled, verily, verily except
a man, that is to say any man whatsoever he be high or low, be he learned or
unlearned, if he be a man except he be born again, its not only true that he
shall not, but that he cannot see the Kingdom of God: therefore also the
Apostle has said, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, I
Cor. 15. 50. Mere nature, or unsanctified nature, can never go to heaven. And
indeed all the threatenings in the Word of God, are evidences of this truth: the
Law threatens sinners with most certain death, Genesis 2. 17. And the Gospel
denounces no less than Eternal Damnation, against every Unbeliever, Mark. 16.
15, 16. Therefore without conversion, there can be no salvation.

Argum. 2. Because a natural unconverted man, has no interest in Jesus Christ;
there is no Salvation to be expected, but by Christ, Act. 4. 12. neither is
there salvation in any other; for there is none other name under Heaven,
whereby we must be saved: If ever a Man would get to Heaven, he must be sure to
go in at the right door; now Christ is that door, John 10. 9.

Christ himself there says, I am the door, by me if any man enter in, he shall
be saved. And again, I am the way, the truth, and the life, Joh. 14. 6. Men may
imagine there are diverse ways which lead to heaven; but it will be found true,
that there is, and always was, but one way to heaven, and that is the way of
Faith unfeigned in Jesus Christ the Son of God. Now as for a natural
unconverted man, he has no real interest in Christ; he is a miserable stranger
to the life of Union and communion with the Son of God: therefore the Apostle,
declaring what the Ephesians were by nature, says, they were without Christ,
Ephesians. 2. 12. and the same Apostle says to the Corinthians, If any man be in
Christ, he is a new creature 2 Cor. 5. 17. They therefore that are not become
new creatures, but do remain still in their old, natural, sinful estate, are
not in Christ, and therefore living and dying in their present states, they
shall no^ (...) into the Kingdom of heaven.

Argum. 3. Because one sin, if loved and lived in, will certainly exclude the
soul out of Heaven. This Text does plainly intimate that that one sin of
unmortified Pride, is enough to keep out of heaven. The like may be said
concerning any other sin; one wound may kill a man, as well as a hundred; one
leak will as certainly sink a Vessel to the bottom of the Sea as many: so one
Lust, if loved and lived in, will kill and sink a man's Soul for ever: therefore
the Scripture says, Repent and turn from [ All] your Transgressions, so
iniquity shall not be your ruin, Ezekiel. 18. 30. Though a sinner should turn from
many Iniquities, if there be but one sin left behind unturned from, that one
will prove the utter and eternal ruin of his Soul. This is the undoing misery
of many, that go far, and bid fair for Heaven, that they leave one unmortified
lust behind which becomes their ruin at last. Jehu went far, but there was a
lust of ambition left in him that was never subdued. Judas went far but there
was a lust of covetousness never mortified in his heart. Herod went far, and
did many things, but there was a lust of uncleanness that he was never
delivered from; and by this means did these men all lose their precious Souls.
Know therefore for certain, that if there be but one lust loved and lived in,
that will exclude out of Heaven. Though a man's sin should be as dear to him as
his right hand, or his right eye; if he do not forsake it, he must be cast into
Hellfire where the worm dies not, and where the fire never shall be quenched,
Mark 9 47. 48.

Having opened and proved the Point, we proceed, in the Lords fear, to make
some Application of it.

Now by way of Use, I. We may hence infer, That they that are truly and
thoroughly converted to God in Christ, are in a very happy condition. There are
two things here that do show the happiness of such Souls: 1. In that a Kingdom
is theirs, they do enter upon a Kingdom; therefore sincere Converts are called
the children of the Kingdom, Mat. 13. 38. they are such children as have a
Kingdom for their inheritance. Amongst men, a Kingdom is the highest dignity;
so to show the glorious happiness wherewith such shall be dignified, they are
styled Heirs of a Kingdom. 2. Another thing which sets forth their happiness,
is the quality of the Kingdom which they shall possess, its an heavenly
Kingdom: The Text calls it, the Kingdom of Heaven. All earthly Kingdoms are as
nothing, compared with this. This Kingdom of Heaven notes three things; all
which do set forth the wonderful happiness of truly converted ones. 1. It
notes a state of saving sanctifying Grace: oft-times in Scripture, the being
brought out of a state of Nature into a state of Grace is called entering into
the Kingdom, Col. 1. 13. Mat. 21. 13. For then men are delivered out of Satan's,
and are become Subjects of the Lords Kingdom. Now they that are brought into a
state of grace are happy indeed: for grace is Heaven begun; he that has Grace,
shall as certainly go to heaven, as if he were there already; which may be one
reason why this expression, of the Kingdom of heaven, is put to signify a
state of Grace. 2. It may note the glory and dominion which the Saints shall
possess at the last and great day, Luke 22. 29, 30. I appoint unto you a
Kingdom -- You shall sit upon Thrones judging, etc. which evidently intimates,
that at the Judgment-day the Saints shall have a Kingdom. And no doubt this is
a special thing aimed at in the Text, as will appear to him that well considers
the occasion of these words: and though the Judgment shall be in this lower
visible world; yet this is fitly called the Kingdom of heaven, because it will
be a most heavenly dispensation; also in respect of the original of it, the God
of heaven will set it up. New Jerusalem comes down from God out of heaven,
Rev. 21. 2. In a word, at the last day, converted ones shall be so many
heavenly Kings; therefore happy are they. 3. This expression may note, that
eternal bliss which the Saints shall enjoy with Christ in the highest heaven.
Many times in the Scripture, Heaven, and the Kingdom of Heaven, notes that
life of glory which the saints shall partake of with Christ in Heaven to all
Eternity. And this also is intimated here in the Text, to be the portion of
converted ones. And besides these things which the Text expresses, there are
other things that manifest the happy estate of such persons. For 3 dly They are
the Children of God. Christ proves, that Peacemakers are blessed, because
they are the children of God; Mat. 5. 8. Now then are converted ones blessed,
for they are the Children of God; therefore are they said to bear his Image,
Col. 3. 10. even as a child bears the image of his Father. Hence, after the
Prodigal was converted, the Lord says of him, This my Son was dead, but he is
alive again, Luke 15. 24. So then God then owneth him for his Son. All the men
and women in the World are divided into these two ranks, either they are the
children of God, or else they are the Children of the Devil, 1 John 3. 10.
Natural men are still the Devils children, Scripture calls them so: But as for
converted persons, they are Gods Children, and therefore happy. 4. All their
sins are pardoned: Blessed is the man whose transgression is forgiven, whose
sin is covered: Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity;
Psalm. 32. 1, 2. Now this is true concerning all that are indeed converted, Romans
8. 30. Whom he called, them he justified. Where there is effectual calling, or
conversion, there is Justification, which implies the Rimission of sins; yea,
though a man may have been guilty of never so many and great sins, yet if he
truly repent of them, and turn from them unto God in Christ, they shall all be
pardoned, Isai. 55. 7. We see it in Paul, he was the chief of sinners, yet he
found mercy, that is, pardoning mercy (for by Mercy, forgiveness is many times
meant in the Scripture) upon his conversion to (...), 1 Timothy 1. 14, 15. And Mary
Magdalene (if she were the person spoken of, Luk 7. 47. was a great sinner, yet
when she truly repented, and turned to the Lord, her sins, which were many,
were forgiven: Yea more let me say, though a man had been the greatest sinner
in the world, if he truly and thoroughly convert from the evil of his ways, and
turn to God in Jesus Christ, the Lord will take him into his favor, and be as
fully reconciled to him, as if he had never committed any such sins: this we
see also in Paul and Peter, though both of them had transgressed heinously (as
before was said) yet when they converted, God took them into his favor; and to
show that he was fully reconciled toward them, he employed them in his
service, and made them instrumental in the conversion of many a Soul.

Use II. We may likewise see by this, the woeful misery of all those that remain
in an unconverted estate. But every one will be ready to say, Unconverted
persons are miserable indeed, as being such as shall be excluded out of Heaven.
But are we not all converted? are we not all Christians? Alas Friends, deceive
not your own Souls, I do beseech you: But therefore know. 1. They that remain
ignorant in spiritual things are unconverted, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man
receives not the things of the spirit, neither can he know them, because they
are spiritually discerned: So that they that are unacquainted with the things
of the spirit, are in their natural estate still. What shall we think of those
then, that mock and deride at the workings of Gods Spirit upon the Soul in its
first, or in after Conversion? And what shall we say of those that remain
ignorant in Fundamental Points in Religion? Some, though they live under
Gospel Light, yet are so, if they be examined about the great matters of
Religion, especially about Christ, they bewray lamentable ignorance. Certainly
if ye are not turned from darkness to light, ye are not converted, Act. 26. 18.
And if the Soul be without knowledge, it is not good, Prove. 19. 2. Its not
possible for the Soul to be entered into the Kingdom of Heaven, and yet to live
in darkness and ignorance still. 2. They that are profane either in heart or
life, are unconverted. Esau was a Type of all natural irregenerate men; and he
is called a profane person, Heb. 12. 16. Alas, how many such are there whose
hearts flight and despise spiritual blessings, even as profane Esau did? Oh
the secret profaneness and Atheism of the hearts of men and women! Whence is
it that many live in a careless neglect of God, and of the things of God, and
of their own Salvation by Christ, but from the Profaneness and Atheism of
their hearts? Psalm. 14. 1, 2. So as for all those that live in any scandalous
sins against the first or second Table of the Law, it is certain that they are
not converted. Hence the Apostle speaks as you find, 1 Pet. 33, 4. the time
past of our lives may suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, when
we walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, revellings, banquetings,
and abominable Idolaters wherein they think it strange that you run not with
them to the same excess of riot. So that when they were converted, they quite
left off their profane courses that once they had lived in. All you therefore
that are Drunkards, or Lascivious persons, or that follow any other profane
courses except you be converted, you shall not enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. 3. They that have nothing beyond civility and morality, are in an
unconverted estates There is a generation risen up of late, who give out, as if
saving Grace and Morality were the same. But woe to that man's soul that shall
either say or think so: certainly, there is a difference between a mere moral
man, and a true Christian. Many Heathens have excelled as to moral Endowments.
Nay, the Apostate Infidel Julian the Emperor, yet as to moral Accomplishments,
was a rarely qualified person; But shall we say, that that Enemy of Christ had
Grace in his Soul? Its true, that Morality is good and lovely; yea, and such
persons are nearer to conversion than profane ones are, Mar. 12. 34. yet this
may be without Grace. The young man in the Gospel was a very civil moral man,
but he lacked saving Grace for all that, Luke 18. 21, 22. The Pharisee was no
Extortioner, nor Unjust, nor an Adulterer, nor like the Publican; and yet for
all that, in his natural, unconverted estate, Luke 18. 11. Paul before his
conversion, was touching the righteousness of the Law blameless, Phil. 3. 6.
They therefore that bless themselves in their condition, only because none can
say to them, that black is their eye, or charge them with any scandalous
miscarriages in their lives, are in an unconverted estate. 4. So likewise are
they all whose Religion is nothing else but Education. Alas, there are many
that are deceived with this; all their Religion is the mere impression of a
godly Education, without any special work of the holy Spirit upon their Souls.
Not but that a Religious Education is a great mercy, yea, and to many of the
Elect it is the great means of their conversion. But when Education alone is
rested in, without experience of a regenerating work of the Spirit, then a
man's case is sad. There are, that because they were born of christian Parents,
and baptized, and when grown up, profess the Christian Religion which they have
been educated in therefore they think that they need no other conversion. Like
that Prelate, who when one was convented before him for going to hear out of
his Parish Church; the man alleging; that the reason why he did it, was,
because the Minister whom he went to hear, was the instrument of his
conversion, and therefore he could not but love to hear him Preach. How (said
the Prelate) Converted by him! Were thou a Jew, or wast thou a Turk, that thou
should talk of Conversion? Art thou born an Englishman, and a Christian, and
do thou speak of Conversion? Thus, I say, many Christians are like Nicodemus,
who thought that the Doctrine of Conversion amongst the Jews that were by
Education and Profession the People of God, was a strange Doctrine, Joh. 3. 5,
6, 7. There are many Christians that have no Religion or Conversion, but such,
as if they had been brought up amongst Jews, they would have been Jews; if
amongst Mahomotans, or Papists, they would have been so too; only through the
efficacy of Education, in conjunction with natural Devotion, they make some
show of Christianity, without ever experiencing the saving operations of the
holy Spirit in their hearts, whereas he that is converted indeed is born of the
spirit, John 3. 6.

Lastly, They all, whose Religion is, in being of this or that persuasion, are
in an unconverted estate. True it is, that Men must be of a right persuasion
and belief in the Fundamental Points of the Christian Faith, or they cannot
enter into the Kingdom of heaven. But though Orthodoxy in respect of Judgment,
be necessary, yet it is not sufficient unto Salvation: Nevertheless, there are
some Christians, that if we take from them this or that particular Opinion in
some lesser points, all their Religion is gone. This is sad; what says the
Scripture? Gal. 6. 15. In Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing,
nor Uncircumcision, but a new creature: So that a man may be of that Party or
Persuasion which are for Circumcision, or of that Party or Persuasion that are
against Circumcision, and yet not be a new creature. If therefore all a man's
Religion lies in this, that he is for or against Circumcision, the case is sad
with him: for he is no new creature; no true Convert. Some there are, that
their Souls are undone with the Monopoly of an Opinion, their Religion is all
in parties. And Oh that there were not need to speak of this amongst us also!
Some, if they be of the Anabaptist Persuasion, here is all their Religion;
others, if they be Independents (as the World speaks) here is all their
Religion; others, if they be against this or that Superstition, here is all
their Religion. Alas, alas! Conversion does not consist in these matters only;
if therefore these things be the main of ones Religion, that is a sure sign,
that his conversion was slight and overly, and that he has not attained to
that sound and through conversion, which the Text and Doctrine speaks of.

Now then we come a little to spread before you the woeful misery of all such
unconverted Souls. Know then, 1. That as long as thou art unconverted, all the
sins that ever thou did commit in thy life, remain un-pardoned. Hence is
that, Mark 4. 12. Lest at any time they should be converted, and their sins
forgiven them. So that sins are not forgiven, except there be conversion:
therefore thy Soul is in a miserable case; for any one of thy sins, though it
were the least sin that ever thou did commit in thy life, yet if it remain
unpardoned, the guilt of it is enough to sink thy soul down into the bottomless
Pit: What then is like to become of thee, since all thy sins, thy numberless
sins, thy great sins, ly in bank against thy Soul; not so much as one of them
forgiven? 2. An unconverted sinner has no Friend: he has no Friend in Heaven;
God, in whose favor is life, is an Enemy to such a sinner: Natural Men are
called the Enemies of God, Romans 5. 10. Col. 1. 21. Oh, to be out of Gods
favor, that is misery indeed. Hence Cain cried and roared at the doleful
apprehension of his wretchedness, when he saw himself cast out of Gods favor:
Oh says he, my punishment is greater than I can bear, for I must be hid from
the face of God. This is thy very doom, that art in thy natural, unconverted
estate. And in as much as God is thy Enemy, all creatures in Heaven and on
Earth are so too, Hos. 2. 18. yea, there is a secret curse upon all thy
enjoyments. For, 3. Thou do nothing else but sin against God: An unconverted
sinner never thought one good thought, nor spoke one good word, nor did one
good action before God in all his life: his civil actions are sins, Prove. 21.
24. The ploughing of the wicked is sin: So his natural Actions, his eating and
drinking, etc. is sin: nay, his Religious actions are sins, his praying, and
hearing, and fasting, and reading, all are so many sinful abominations in the
Lords sight, Prove. 15. 9 and 28. 9. Psalm. 109. 7. A natural man may do and
speak, and think many things, which for the matter of them are good; but as
done by such a person as is out of Christ they are not good, but evil in the
sight of God. Certainly, this would be an awakening consideration, if sinners
would think sadly of it: can thou make light of this that look how many
actions there have been done by thee in all thy life time, how many words thou
have spoken, how many thoughts have been in thy heart, so many sins art thou
guilty of, and must one day answer for them all! Lastly, Thou art in a state of
death and condemnation. A natural man is dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2.
1. A poor sinner has all the miserable properties of a dead man belonging to
him. As now a dead man cannot stir or go, so it is with a sinner, he cannot
walk in the ways of God; one that is dead cannot hear, so a sinner is deaf to
all the calls of Heaven. The Lord gives many a loud knock and call, yet the
sinner hears nothing; the reason is, because he is dead. Again, a dead man
cannot speak; so it is with a sinner, he has no ability for spiritual
discourse: This is the reason why some of you live in the neglect of Prayer.
The Word has told you many time, that you must pray in your Families, and in
your Closets too, and you go with convinced Consciences that this is your duty,
and yet you do it not; why? you say you cannot: I would pray in my Family, but
I cannot. Alas poor creature, I believe thee; for thou art dead in sins, and
how should a dead creature speak unto God in Prayer? Yea, and an unconverted
sinner is not only under spiritual Death for the present, but he remains under
a sad Sentence of eternal Death, Joh. 3. 18. He that believes not is condemned
already: Its not only true, that he shall be condemned hereafter, but he is so
already. The Sentence of death is already pronounced against him, and shall as
certainly be executed upon him, if he turn not, as if it were already done. Oh
consider and tremble at it, all you that live in sin. I must tell you, for I
should not be able to hold up my head before the Son of God another day, if I
should forbear to tell you the truth; and therefore I tell you plainly and
truly; If any person amongst you, man or woman, be they high or low, rich or
poor, shall not turn from sin, yea, and from all sin, Eternal death shall as
certainly be your portion, as if you were already in Hell.

Use III. Let such a solemn Truth as this, put us upon serious and impartial
Examination about this point, whether we be indeed converted or no. Sure it is
no wisdom for us to let a matter of such momently at uncertainties; yet such
madness is in the hearts of many of the Sons of men, that they go on carelessly,
although if they should die in their present condition, they know not whither
their Souls must for Heaven, or for Hell, as not minding whether they be in a
converted, or an unconverted estate. But Oh, put this matter to the trial, and
come to some certainty about your spiritual and eternal states.

You Will say, But how shall we know whether we be converted or no?

Ans. 1. Try by that Character which the Text does afford; viz. That converted
persons become as little Children. Look, as little Children are come into a
World, where they never were before; so it is in Conversion, the Soul begins the
World anew, as it were, and the sinner leads a new life which before he was not
acquainted with. Hence is that Expression, Romans 6. 4. Walk in newness of life.
Particularly, there are diverse properties in little Children, which s^t forth a
converted person: e. g.

1. Humbleness of mind: A Child has no ambitions high designs in his heart,
only minds lesser matters. Hence David says, Psalm. 131. 1. 2. Lord my heart is
not haughty nor mine eyes lofty, neither do I exercise my self in great
matters, or in things too high for me: Surely I have behaved my self as a child
that is wearied, my soul is as a weaned Child. David was accused, as if he had
had ambitious aspirings after Readiness Kingdom; But, says he, I am as free from
those Imputations as a Child that is but aweanling, who has no such aspirings
in his thoughts. Now this humbleness of mind, is a special thing intended in
the Text by conversion. Unmortified Pride is a soul-damning sin: yet there is
no sin more natural, or more hard to subdue than Pride; its the first that
lives, and the last that dies. Hence the work of conversion is well expressed
in the Text, by the mortification of that one lust. And often in the Scripture, a
natural man and a proud man are the same, Mal. 4. 1. and a converted man, and
an humble man are also the same, Jam 4. 6. Luke 18. 14. He that humbles himself
shall be exalted. That humbling notes Conversion.

2. A Child is teachable and tractable: A Child is far more easily brought
under Discipline, than an elder person that was never used to it. Thus it is
with a Convert: He is become mavelous teachable, ready to be led with the
Word and Spirit of God: It is said of such, Isai. 11. 6. A little child shall
lead them Now then consider, will the least Word of God aw you, and lead you
this way or that way? Though the Instrument be never so contemptible, yet if he
bring Scripture along with him, does the Authority of that carry you before it,
this is a good Sign.

3. Children are apt to forget wrongs: Hence is that, 1 Cor. 14. 20. in malice
be ye Children. You often observe that Children, though they fall out never so,
yet in a little time all will be forgotten, and they will become as good
friends as ever they were. Truly, he that cannot forgive wrongs, has no Grace
in his heart; so if a man has a forgiving spirit, its a good sign; yea, if a
man does freely forgive those that wrong him, and if he does it out of
conscience to the holy Commandment of God, and out of a sense of the Grace of
God toward him, in pardoning of his many sins, it is one of the clearest
Evidences of a true Child of God that can be given. This has Christ taught us,
Mat. 6. 14, 15. For if you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father
will also forgive you: But if you forgive them not their trespasses, neither
will your heavenly Father forgive you your trespasses. So that you see it holds
true both in the Affirmative, and in the Negative, That a forgiving spirit is
an evidence of a true child of God; and the want of this, an evidence of the
contrary. But besides these Characters which the Text does afford, some other
things may be mentioned as marks of Trial here Therefore.

2. Try this matter by the greatness of this (...) which is wrought in
Conversion. You heard in opening the point, how conversion does imply an
universal change: Is it so with you? have you new heads, new hearts, new words,
new thoughts, new lives and all? Moreover, the change wrought in conversion is
universal, in respect of entire obedience unto all Divine commands, and an
utter forsaking of every false way. Therefore it is said, the fruit of the
spirit is in [All] goodness, etc. Ephesians. 5. 9. Where the spirit has wrought
grace there is all goodness: Such a Soul does practice all duties, and forsake
all sins. It is indeed the greatest change that men are subject to. It is a
marvelous change which death brings along with it; hence Job calls his death
his change: It is so ^y way of eminency; Job 14. 14. But Conversion brings a
greater change with it: For at death the change is only in respect of place and
degree, etc. But in Conversion there is a change wrought in respect of state and
kind, Ephesians. 5. 8. Ye were sometimes darkness, but now are light in the Lord.
There are new and quite contrary qualities wrought in the Soul, so as the
sinner Converted differs as much from the sinner Unconverted, as light differs
from darkness. For,

3. If a man be converted, then his nature is changed; therefore such are said
to partake of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. Such an one does not only new
acts, but there is in him a new nature, from whence these acts do proceed. He
has not only new practices, but a new Principle. Hence it is in some sort
unnatural for a converted man to Sin, that is, so far forth as he is
Regenerate, 1 John 3. 9. Whosoever is born of God does not commit sin, for his
seed remains in him; and he cannot sin, because he is born of God And it is
natural unto him to do good and to endeavor to please God. Hence Paul says to
the Philippians concerning Timothy, that he did naturally care for their
estate, Chap. 2. V. 20. This was, because Timothy was a converted gracious man,
and so a new nature was conferred upon him. Had it not been for converting
Grace, such a care as that was, had never been natural to him.

4. You may try whether you are converted, by that spiritual Combat which is
peculiar to the Regenerate. It is with a Child of God, as it was with Rebecca,
in whom there was a Jacob and an Esau; or as it was with the house of Abraham,
where there was an Isaac and an Ishmael: So it is with the heart of a
Christian, there is a regenerate and un-regenerate part conflicting and
combating, the one against the other, Gal. 5. 17. Now if there be Spirit
lusting against the Flesh, that is a sure sign that there is Spirit; only there
is a dangerous delusion here, which many deceive themselves with; they take the
Reluctance of a natural enlightened Conscience against Sin, to be the spiritual
Combat, which is peculiar to the Regenerate, but these differ much. As to the
ground of the opposition, there is a difference, the one opposes Sin, because
of the vileness and filthiness of its nature; the other only, or chiefly for
fear of punishment. It may be illustrated by this familiar Comparison: Some men
are loath to meddle with coals of fire, because of filth which is about them;
others never stick at it, only because of fire, lest happily their fingers should
be burnt, they are loath to meddle: So it is here, a Natural man would never
fall our with sin, because of the filth of it, only there is fire in sin, which
would burn his Conscience, if he should meddle with it, and therefore he
forbears some acts of sin; but the sincere Convert is acted from another
Principle. There is also a difference as to the evils opposed; for when the
conflict is only from an enlightened Conscience, the evils opposed are wont to
be more gross and vile; but in the spiritual combat, seemingly little Sins are
mourned under, even vain thoughts are a wearisome burden. In the one, only
some sins are opposed; in the other, all sin. So likewise there is wont to be a
difference, in respect of the continuance of the opposition: that which
proceeds only from an enlightened conscience is wont to be but now and then,
perhaps when some gross sin has been committed, or the like; but the spiritual
Combat is constant, and without intermission.

Use IV. Let it be a word of Exhortation; Oh convert your selves to God in
Christ. Consider therefore the happy condition of all converted ones; of this
you heard in the first Use. Consider the misery of the unconverted: of this you
heard in the second Use. Consider also the absolute necessity of this
conversion; you [Must] be born again, Joh. 3. 7. There Is a must for it; you
must be so, or else be shut out of Heaven to all Eternity: of this you heard in
the demonstration of the point which has been insisted on.

A word or two more let me say, 1. Remember that you are in continual danger of
ruin, as long as you remain unconverted. It is a dangerous thing for any man to
defer his Conversion one day, or but one hour. I have sometimes put you in mind
of an Expression of Mr. Bolton's, who said, He would not be in the condition of
an unconverted man one hour, though he might have all the World for it, lest
happily death should come upon him in that hour, and so Repentance be too late.
Oh methinks, I would not be in my Natural, unconverted estate again one moment,
though I might have ten thousand Worlds for it, lest Death should seize upon me
in a moment, and so my immortal Soul be lost. Think sadly of it, you that know
not what the new Birth means: if Death should find thee in thy present
condition, it had been better for thee never to have been born; better for you
never to have been born, than not to be new born; yea, it had been better for
thee to have been a Dog, or a Toad, or a Serpent, or the vilest Creature in the
World, than to die in a natural, unconverted estate: for these doleful Creatures
when they die, see an end of their misery; but when thou die, thy misery
begins; when once thy immortal Soul is out of thy Body, thy endless and
easeless woes will come upon thee, without any hope of remedy. 2. One word more
I must needs say unto you; and therefore be it known unto you, that if any of
you will venture on still in your trespasses, so as to die in your sins, your
blood shall be upon your own heads. I Remember what the Lord said to his
Prophet, Ezekiel. 3. 17, 18, 19. Son of man, I have made thee a Watchman unto the
house of Israel, therefore hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning
from me: When I say unto the wicked thou shall surely die, and thou give him
not warning nor speak to warn the wicked from his wicked way to save his
life, the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity, but his blood will I
require at thine hand: yet if thou warn the wicked and he turn not from his
wickedness nor from his wicked way, he shall die in his iniquity, but thou have
delivered thy soul. Now then let me deliver my Soul this day; Behold I do here
in the Name of the Lord solemnly and earnestly warn every sinner amongst you,
that you make haste to turn unto God in Jesus Christ; and I declare to you,
that if you do it not, you shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. God
before whom I stand, and holy Angels that are here present, and all this
Assembly, shall bear me witness at the last day, that warning was given to you:
Now if you will not take the warning, at your peril be it. And I have rejoicing
in my own soul, that this is not the first time that I have given you warning,
but many a time, yea, without ceasing, for the space of these ten years, that
the Lord has upheld me amongst you, you have been told of these things. Now I
call Heaven and Earth to record this day, that I have set before you Life and
Death; therefore choose Life, else your blood will be upon your own heads.

Object. But some will say, We cannot convert our selves:

Ans. Yet observe these two Rules:

1. Put away all vain thoughts of being in a good estate already. Many might
have been converted, if they had not taken up with a false and groundless
persuasion of their being in a good and converted estate already: This was the
ruin of the Jews and Pharisees especially, Joh. 9. 2, ult. Remember that
conviction of misery, is the first step toward Conversion. We see it in the
Prodigal, Luke 15. 17. he cried out, I perish; Thou must see that thou have a
perishing, dying, damning Soul, and then there is hopes of a right Conversion.

2. Go to God for converting Grace, say as Ephraim did, Jer. 31. 18. Turn thou
me and I shall be turned: And go and pray, as for thy life and soul, which lies
at stake until the Lord convert thee. Suppose thou were condemned to die a
natural death; if the Judge should tell thee, if thou would pray and beg hard
for thy life, thou should have it: Oh how would thou pierce the Heavens
with thy cries: So it is here, thou art condemned to die an everlasting death;
nevertheless, the Lord says, if thou will pray and seek to him for life, the
Sentence may yet be reversed. Therefore do thus before thy Decree bring forth,
Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is near.

Seasons of Grace (especially the present season) are carefully to be improved
and redeemed.
Col. 4. 5. Redeeming the time.


THe usual method observed by the Apostle Paul in his Epistles, is, first to
discourse Doctrinally, and then Practically; and so he does in this Epistle to
the Colossians. The two first Chapters are Doctrinal, and the two last are
Practical.

This Chapter then does contain matter of Exhortation unto duty: 1. We have a
special Oeconomical Precept, even a rule concerning Houshold-Government, (which
in the former Chapter the Apostle had been speaking of, ver. 1. 2. He lays down
sundry general Moral Precepts which concern Christians, in whatever state or
relation they may stand in.

And here the Apostle does Exhort: 1. To the practice of that great duty of
prayer, ver. 2. and in special that they would pray for him, ver. 3, 4. 2. He
exhorts unto Christian Wisdom. And this is the scope of this verse, in which we
have three things 1. The duty exhorted unto, namely, wise walking, Walk in
Wisdom, that is, cautelously and circumspectly, as it is expressed by the same
Apostle, writing to the Ephesians, chapter 5. v. 16. 2. We have the object of this
duty, toward them that are without, that is Infidels, who are out of the Pale
of the visible Church. The Church is compared to an House, hence they that are
of the Church, are said to be within, that is, within doors, in respect of that
sacred House of the Church; and they that do not belong to the visible Church,
are described to be without, that is, they are not admitted within doors, but
are kept out of the Temple.

3. Here is that which is the special work and evidence of this wisdom, namely,
to redeem the time, which are the words, that by Gods help, we are to speak of.

Time is sometimes taken for space of time. Sometimes it is taken for
opportunity of time; it is the same with Season. It may be taken both ways
here, and especially in the latter sense; for the Greek word is not (...) the
usual word for time, but (...) which signifies Season or Opportunity. The
Doctrine which the words do afford unto, is this, That it is a great part of
Christian Wisdom, timely to improve Opportunities and Seasons of Grace.

Intending to dispatch the point at this time, we shall in the Doctrinal
prosecution of it, only speak to two things. 1. What those seasons are which
ought to be improved. 2. What is implied in redeeming seasons of Grace; or when
a man may be said to redeem the time.

Q. What are those seasons which ought to be improved?

Answ. 1. A man's life time in this world is to be improved: Thus Christ has
taught us by his own unerring Example, Joh. 9. 4. I must work while it is day,
the night comes when no man can work. A man's life is but a season, even a day
which shall have a night to follow it; and therefore it is to be improved: Yea,
and it is but a short season, 1 Cor. 7. 30. The time is short. He that has
longest to live, yet has but a short time to be in this world; therefore James
says, What is your life? it is even a vapor that appears for a little time,
and then vanishes away, Chap. 4. ver. 14. and David says, Behold thou have
made my days an hand-breadth, and mine age is as nothing before thee, Psalm.
39. 5. A man's time in this World is as nothing before God, that is to say, as
nothing in comparison of Eternity; therefore this time ought so much the more
carefully and diligently to be improved; and it may be, a man's time is much
shorter than himself does think for. We read of one in the Gospel that was so
foolish, as to dream of many years, whenas he had not so much as one day to
live: He said he had goods for many, not only days, but years, whenas before
the next day, his Soul was taken from him, Luke 12. 20. Besides, when a man's
life is once gone, it is irrecoverable, men must die, and out of this World
they shall go, and yet they die but once, Heb. 9. 27. It is appointed for men
[Once] to die; When once men are dead, the places that have known them, shall
know them no more; the eyes that have seen them, shall see them no more; and
the ears that have heard them, shall hear them no more. And thence if men do
not improve their time whilst they are alive in the World, they lose their
season for ever. When death is come, it is then too late to improve time;
therefore Hezekiah says, they that go down into the pit, cannot hope for thy
truth, Isai. 38. 18. When a man's body is gone down into the pit of the Grave,
and his Soul is gone into the pit of Hell, he is past hope, and past help; he
cannot hope for Gods mercy, and cannot hope for pardon of sin, he cannot hope
for the salvation of his Soul: Therefore lifetime is to be improved:

2. Times set a part for the solemn Worship of God are carefully to be improved
Christians ought to redeem time from their particular, to attend the duties of
their general calling; they ought not to serve themselves only, but they must
look to it, that they allow themselves time also for the service of God. It is
true, that some are so much in the outward performance of Religious duties, as
that they do thereby entrench upon their particular callings, spending more
time in outward Worship, than any rule of God does require, or allow them to
do: So the Heretical Euchites of old, etc. But the greatest part of men err on
the other hand, in allowing too little time, rather than too much, for the
performance of sacred duties. But it is a great point of Christian wisdom, to
order things aright about this matter; so as that neither a man's particular
calling may entrench upon his general calling as a Christian, nor yet his
general upon the particular. I say, that time must be allowed for the worship
of God. A man may not neglect the Worship of God, either in his Family, or in
his Closet, or in the public Assemblies of his people, out of pretense that he
wants time; rather let a man deny himself time to sleep, nay time to eat and
drink, than not to take time to Pray, and to serve God. Moreover, when a man is
worshipping God in any duty, such a season is very heedfully to be improved,
else the Lords Name will be taken in vain; and men instead of serving and
pleasing God, will provoke him to displeasure by an heedless serving of him.
And in special the Lords day is a season of Grace which ought to be improved,
that is the day appointed to solemnize the Name and Worship of God in Christ
amongst men, to the end of the World, Psalm. 118. 24. This is the day which the
Lord has made we will rejoice in it: the day of Christ's Resurrection, which
was upon the first day of the week, even this very day is to be observed in
commemoration of the resurrection and Redemption of Christ: This is the Day,
which above others, ought to be prized and improved: It is a Market day for the
Soul, and therefore to be redeemed. Besides, if men take hold of opportunities,
to attend there where God is worshipped, they come where the Lord himself
comes, and thence may hope for a blessing: In which respect such seasons
should earnestly be laid hold on, You read in the fifth of John, concerning an
impotent man that lay waiting at the Pools of Bethesda, and Christ finding him
there, he was healed: Had not the man layen at the Pools of Bethesda, Christ
had not found him there; and had not Christ found him there, he had not been
healed. Now the Ordinances of God are the pools of Bethesda, if Christ find men
there, who knows but that Grace and life may be given into their Souls; but
if they be not there, they keep themselves out of the way of a blessing.

3. The time of presperity is a season which ought to be well improved: Thus
you find David calling upon the Princes of Israel, 1 Chronicles. 22. 11, 18, 19. Is
not the Lord your God with you? has he not given you rest on every side? now
set your heart and your soul to seek the Lord your God. It is (says he) a
prosperous season with you, and therefore now be looking after God, and the
things of God; and indeed this is the most commodious season. Husbandmen you
know will take the season whilst the Sun shines, and the weather is
favorable, to be gathering in the fruits of the Earth: So if men would be
laying in for Eternity, if they would be laying up in store for themselves a
good Foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold of Eternal
Life, it will be their Wisdom to improve the time of prosperity in order
thereunto. As now, if God give unto a man a time of health and strength, let
him improve it, in order to making his peace with God, and promoting the
eternal welfare of his own Soul. Thus the Holy Ghost by Solomon does exhort
hort, Eccles. 12. 1. Remember thy Creator; Ay, but when? When old age comes;
or when sickness and death comes, but never before that; so the carnal heart
says, and so the Devil says, but the Lord teaches otherwise; therefore it is
added, In the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years
draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them. The evil days of
sickness, or the troublesome years of old age will come upon you; but see that
you remember to make your peace with God before those days come. So again, if
the Lord bestow upon a man an estate, and cause him to prosper in the World in
that respect, let him improve this, to honor God with his substance, and
wisely make unto himself friends in Heaven, with the unrighteous Mammon of this
World. And truly if men do neglect such seasons, they have no reason to expect
other, but that God will deprive them of them, and alter the tenor of his
gracious dispensations toward them. As it was said to Hesther, Who knows
whether thou art come to the Kingdom for such a time as this? if thou
altogether hold thy peace at this time, thou and thy Fathers house shall be
destroyed, Esth. 4. 14. So I say, who knows but that the Lord has given men
health and wealth, and prospered them here and there in the World, that so they
might improve these mercies and good things, to the honor of him that gave
them, and for their own spiritual and eternal comfort: If therefore they
altogether neglect this season, let them look that God will blast their
estates, and smite them with sickness, yea, and that a worse thing shall be^al
them. Nevertheless,

4. The time of Adversity is a season which ought likewise to be improved:
Hence, this Apostle says, Redeem the time, because the days are evil, Ephesians. 5.
16. The times were then as they are now. It was in the Apostles days a time of
Persecution and suffering to the People of God, therefore he calls that time an
evil day: Now in this season, time was to be redeemed: the worse the times are,
the better Christians ought to be; if the times be very bad, Christians ought
to be very good:

Hence also is that 2 Timothy 4. 2. Preach the Word, be instant in season, and out
of season. In season, is in time of prosperity; out of season is a time of
Adversity, when a man cannot Preach, nor hear a Sermon, without incurring
danger; yet such times must be improved to be doing and receiving good. If the
times be bad, then the Lord threatens men, to deprive them of seasons of Grace,
and in that respect there is the more need to improve them. And this is a
special thing intended by the Apostle in the Text, Walk in wisdom redeeming the
time: Show your wisdom (says he) by making the best of a bad Market. As wise
Merchants, if the times be bad, will be more wary; if Trading be dead and low,
they will be loath to venture upon a bad bargain, or to let slip the advantage
of a good Bargain. Thus should men deal as to their Souls; as for seasons of
Grace, they should see that they husband them (...), especially when the Lord
is threatening to take them away.

5. Times of being in company and converse with others, ought to be improved.
Such times should be improved for the receiving of spiritual good: It is said,
He that walks with the wise, shall be wise, Prove. 13. 20. If a man does fall
into the company of such as are godly and wise, he has now an opportunity put
into his hands to get wisdom; he might propound many profitable Questions,
which he is not able to resolve himself, but one that God has given a greater
measure of wisdom and understanding unto, could soon resolve him, had he an
heart to improve such an opportunity. Again, such times should be improved for
doing good, that is, by holy conference and exhortations unto the thing that
good is; as we see in the Context, Redeem the time, says the Apostle; and then
the very next words are, let your speech be always with Grace, seasoned with
salt, that ye may know how ye ought to answer every man, Col. 4. 6. So that
that is one way of improving time aright, even by gracious and savoury
Discourses. The neglect of this is the great sin of many Professors: Alas, how
is it, as if holy Conference were banished out of the World? Christians meet
together, and much discourse passes about this or the other matter, but it may
be not one edifying word all the while: But what says the Scripture? Exhort
one another daily, Heb. 3. 13. As you have opportunity of daily converse you
should take occasion to exhort and call upon one another, and say, how is it
with you as to spirituals? have you got assurance yet? do you grow in Grace?
how is it with your Soul, does that prosper?

6. Solitary times are also to be improved* I say not only times of being in
company, but times of being alone, are to be improved. Such seasons should be
made use of for Prayer. Meditation, and Self-Examination, etc. We read
concerning Nathaniel that Christ said to him, When thou wast under the
fig tree, I saw thee; Joh. 1. 48. though no mortal eye beheld him, yet the Son
of God that has eyes like a Flame of fire looked upon him there: Jesus Christ
who is God as well as man, saw Nathaniel when he was alone under the fig tree:
Indeed it is not said what Nathaniel was doing there; but it is very probable,
that he was praying or meditating, or about some such holy design, that Christ
should take such special notice of him. So concerning Isaac, we read that he
went out to meditate in the field, Genesis 24. 63. He retired himself into a
solitary place, that so he might with the more freedom and convenience practice
that much neglected, and get profitable duty of meditation. So for Jacob, Genesis
32. 24. Jacob was left alone and there wrestled a man with him until the
breaking of the day. He spent a good part of the night in secret Prayer, none
being there present but Christ and he. Yea, Christ himself has taught us this,
by his own blessed Example, Mat. 14. 23. He went up into a mountain apart to
pray, and when evening was come, he was there alone. And the truth is, that a
time of privacy is the fittest season for holy converse and communion with God,
because then a man may freely and fully open his whole heart to God. Men have
their special Corruptions, which it is not fit the World should hear of; yea
all that are Christians indeed, have their special and fore temptations that do
molest them; as for looser formal Professors, they may go on smoothly and
easily; but as for such as have taken up not only the form, but the power of
Godliness, they meet with many rubs and difficulties, and strong assaults from
the great Enemy of Salvation: Now secret places are the fittest to complain to
the Lord in about these temptations therefore times of privacy, may and must be
taken hold on by Christians for such an end.

7. The time wherein Gods Spirit (...) strive with men is to be improved. There
are seasons wherein the holy Spirit is blessedly at work with the heart; now
these are seasons which ought carefully to be improved. If men be to set sail,
they must take the opportunity when the wind serves: So if they would be
setting Sail toward Heaven, they must observe the gales of the Spirit; they
must lay hold on the opportunity, wherein the blessed breathings of the Spirit
are afforded to them. These should be improved in order to Repentance, lest
hap^y the spirit of the Lord do forsake a man, and give him up to the hardness
of his own heart for ever; as you have lately heard that with some sinners it
is so. And these Seasons ought to be improved for Prayer, Ephesians. 6. 18. Pray
always, ((...)) in every season, as the Greek phrase is, watching thereunto,
etc. You must watch when the Spirit of God (...) you up to Prayer, and then
upon your knees, sometimes the Lord by his Spirit secretly moves unto Prayer,
yea, sometimes he puts the heart into a praying frame: Now that is a season of
Grace which may not be neglected, without great danger to a man's Soul.

Lastly, The present time is that which should carefully be improved; So Eccl.
12. 1. Remember [Now] thy Creator. Men, especially young men, when they are
called upon to be mindful of God, and the things of God, and the great
concernments of their Souls, are apt to put it off till tomorrow, or sometimes
hereafter; but the Holy Ghost says now. Mind this matter without any further
delays: Do not think to put off God with Excuses, or with Tomorrows, but the
first thing you do, make sure of an interest in him. 2. Cor 6. 2, Behold now is
the accepted time; Behold, now is the day of Salvation. Satan says, and a
self-deceiving heart says, Tomorrow, tomorrow; but the Lord says, Now, now:
Yea, there is a double Behold added to it, Behold, behold, now, now is the time
for you to look after your Salvation, if ever you desire to be saved. But of
this more in the Application of the point.

We proceed therefore to the second thing, namely, to show what is implied in
redeeming seasons of Grace, or, When a man may be said to redeem the time?

For answer to that, 1. Herein is implied, An heart to receive and do all the
good that may be. Except there be an heart to receive Spiritual good when it is
offered a man cannot be said to redeem time; a Solomon complains, Prove. 17. 16.
Wherefore (...) a price in the hand of a Fool to get Wisdom seeing he has no
heart to it. Sometimes it is so, that there is a precious Sermon preached at a
man's door; If he would come and hear, who knows how much good might be done
to his Soul: But he comes not, and yet has no sufficient Reason to excuse
himself, only he has no heart to it; therefore he is not worthy to be
accounted a Time Redeemer. So again, there must be a heart to do good. As the
Apostle Exhorts, Gal. 6. 10. As we have opportunity let us do good unto all men
especially to them who are of the Household of Faith: When a man does seriously
and conscientiously think with himself, how may I improve my time and talent
most to the honor of God, and the good of men, and comfort of my own Soul, in
the great day, and does accordingly; such an one does redeem the time. Though a
man should be providentially disappointed as to actual performance, yet (...)
indeed he has an heart to lay hold on opportunities of receiving or doing
Spiritual good, he is a Time-Redeemer.

2. Herein is implied Wisdom to discern of Times and Seasons. As it is said of
the Children of Issachar, that they had understanding of the times to know what
Israel ought to do, 1 Chronicles 12. 32. There is no redeeming the time without
wisdom; therefore the Apostle says, Walk wisely, redeeming the time: And
Solomon says, A wise man's heart discerns both time and judgment, Eccles. 8.
5. As in civil affairs, except a man know when the Market is, how should he
take hold of the opportunity while the Market is up, to buy and furnish himself
with what he stands in need of: So if a Man has not wisdom to discern of times
and seasons, he will never improve them aright; hence Christ complains of the
Jews, How is it that you do not discern this time, Luke 12. 56. and again Chap
19. 42. 44. If thou had known in this day the r^^ings that belong to thy
peace. Thou knew not the time of thy visitation They did not improve their
day of Grace; therefore are said, not to know their time.

3. Herein is implied, a willingness to part with those things that would
hinder from receiving or doing good: The Greek Word ((...)) which is here used,
signifies to buy* Now in buying there is always a parting with something; as
the Gospel speaks of the wise Merchant, that he parted with all that he had
for the Pearl of great price: So it is in buying, or redeeming time, there must
be a parting with those things that would make a Man (...) his time. The
Original Word is a Metaphor taken from wise Merchants or Tradesmen, that prefer
their profit above their ease and pleasure: So if a man would redeem time, he
must forgo those things which would hinder him from glorifying God, or that
would keep him from promoting the eternal Salvation of is own Soul; yea, and he
must be con^^nt to put himself to some trouble and disadvantage, that he may
promote the spiritual and Eternal Welfare of other (...) Souls; and this is
here intended by its Apostle, Walk in wisdom toward them that are without,
redeeming the time; as if he had said, take hold of opportunities to (...)
Infidels to Christ, though it should (...) your own outward disadvantage; (...)
that you do what you can to gain men (...) Christ, though you your selves
should (...) by it, as to temporal concerns.

4. When a man does endeavor to make up his former losses and mispence of time
by a diligent improvement of the present season, then he may be said to redeem
time; when a man has lived and spent his time unthristily, but now he
endeavors by double diligence to redeem, and as it were, to buy back again the
time that is past and lost; when he is made sensible, that he has done little
for God in former times, and therefore endeavors to live much unto, and do
much service for God in Christ now, then he redeems time. As the Children of
Israel in the last year of their being in the Wilderness, dispatched more way
than in forty years before: So when a man does more for God now in one year,
than he has done twenty or forty years; we may say that, that man redeemeth
time.

Come we to the Use of the Point:

USE 1. Here is matter of sad Reproof unto those that do mispend precious time.
You shall have some that say, They do such a thing to pass away time, and such
a thing is very good to pass away time. O lamentable! as if men had more
precious time than they knew what in the world to do with, or how to bestow it!
And alas, how many are there, that spend their time exceeding unprofitably; it
may be in going from house to house, and there hearing or telling tales: Oh if
that time which is spent in vain jangling, were spent in secret Communion with
God, and in faithful endeavors to promote the welfare of the Souls of men, how
comfortable, and how glorious would it be for such a man at the great day! how
would he then rejoice that ever he lived upon the face of the Earth! Alas there
be that spend their time even in sinful practices, for which no time ought to
be allowed. There is one practice which I hear much precious time is spent in,
that I must needs bear my testimony against: That which I mean, is those
unlawful Games of Cards and Dice: Those Games have always been condemned by
the Servants of God, as things that are in themselves unlawful. I use not to
tell you much what Fathers say, else I might say, that Cyprian, clemens,
Alexandrines. Ambrose, Chrsiesto^^, Austin, etc. have of old condemned such
practices. Yea, in the days of Christian Emperors, there have been severe Laws
against such Gamesters. In Justinian's time there was a Law, not only that no
Man should play at Cards and Dice, but that no men should so much as be present
to see others play; nay, even Heathens by the light of nature, have condemned
such practices. The Philosopher speaks against it in his Morals: An Heathen
Pee^ sharply inveighs against it; and Cicero (...) one of his Orations objects
against (...), that he was a Dice-player, and one that entertained such
Gamesters in his House. And amongst Reformers, these kind of Games have ever
been disapproved. Popish Authors usually plead for the lawfulness of them, but
Protestants generally write against them. And it must needs be acknowledged by
all men's Consciences, that it is unlawful to spend so much time in any
Recreations, as is usually spent in attending those Games by those that use
them. There is a secret (...) of God goes along with them: ^^lence it is, that
if persons he once given to this practice, they can know no bounds, but spend
day and night therein. Besides there is therein a breach of the third
Commandment, inasmuch as these Games are not without Lottery, though there may
be something of skill in them, yet there is something of Lottery. Now a ^ot is
a sacred thing wherein the Name (...) God is much concerned: In all Lots there
is an appeal to Providence to decide (...) matter in controversy. It is said
concerning a Lot, that the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord, Prove. 16.
33. Hence (...) that Lots may not be used in trivial (...): Search the
Scriptures, and you (...) never find that Lots were used in (...), but only in
weighty momentous (...), which might be prayed over. (...) no man, whose
Conscience is not (...), dare pray over his Cards, and (...) Where we may not
make a prayer (...) word, we may not do it an act, or in (...) to signify it,
as it is in a Lot. And (...) good Rule, That (...) which a (...) dare not pray
over, let him evermore suspect it for an unlawful practice. Moreover, as these
Games are usually practiced, there is in them a breach of the eighth
Commandment, that is when men play for Money. If a man get another Goods at
under price, this is Injustice, it is Theft, and a Transgression of the Rule of
Righteousness: How much more to take from another his Estate for nothing at all
in the lieu thereof, but only play. Every lawful way of getting is sanctified
by Prayer which you heard but now that these Games are not; and therefore the
Estate got thereby is unlawful gain. And in this respect also, the Name and
Providence of God is abused therein: for when God has by his Providence
possessed a man of a just Estate, for him now to go and make a question,
whether this Estate shall be his or another man's, and then decide the
Controversy by Dice, is unworthily to abuse the good Providence of God. Again,
this practice is of evil report, and therefore ought not to be amongst
Christians: The Scripture bids us follow the things that are of good report
Phil. 4. 8. which shows that things of evil report in the World ought to be
avoided by those that profess the Name of Christ. Now so are these Games. You
heard how Heathens by the light of Nature condemned them, and shall Christians
take up such practices? The People of God are offended and grieved at such
things; and therefore I beseech those of you that have been guilty here, for
the Lords sake to reform this evil. O it is a sad thing that such a practice
should prevail in New England; that once was, and ever ought to be, a land of
uprightness. Yet I hear, that the Rising Generation, are many of them, tainted
with this vice, not only in this great Town, but in many places in the
Country: This is a sad and a sure sign of Degeneracy in the Rising Generation;
For twenty years ago, there was no such practice known amongst Children born
and bred in New England: And therefore that now it should be so common, does
testify against young ones, that they are degenerate Plants.

I have not spoken this out of the least prejudice against any that have been
guilty this way; only that so this evil might be repented of, or however that I
might witness against sin and for God this day in this particular.

USE II. Exhortation, O labor to improve present seasons of Grace: and for
that end consider seriously a few things;

1. That the present time is the only time which men can say is theirs. As for
the time past, that is none of yours, that is gone never to be seen again, Psalm.
90. 9. We spend our days as a tale that is told. Why? a tale that is told can
never be untold again; so the time that is past, will never be here again. A
man may lose other things, and find them again; he may lose his Estate, and
have it again, or he may lose his Name, and recover it again; but if he lose
his time, he shall never have it again: It is impossible that yesterday should
be here again, or that the time past should be present, and not past. As I
remember, I have read of a poor Woman, that being in great distress of
Conscience, many Ministers came to speak with her, and they could have nothing
from her, only she looked upon them with a ghastly countenance, and cried, Call
Time again! Call time again! except you can bring back time again, you can do
nothing for me. This was the doleful effect of neglecting the present season
when time was. Oh think what they in Hell would give to have those hours, which
they have lost in sin and vanity! They would give ten thousand thousand Worlds
if they had it, that they might again have a space to repent in; yea, that they
might have but one hour to pray and seek the face of God, with any hopes of
mercy, but it cannot be. And for time to come, you cannot say, that that is
yours, for that is altogether uncertain: A man cannot live a moment beyond the
time appointed. One miserably cried out upon a Deathbed, A World of Wealth,
for an inch of time, a world of Wealth for an inch of time. And another when
dying, said, If I had ten thousand Worlds, I would give them all, that I might
live one day longer. Remember the Scripture, which says, Boast not thy self of
tomorrow, for thou know not what a day may bring forth, Prove. 27. 1. Men
have not, as Hezekiah had, a promise of life for fifteen years. It may be thou
have not fifteen days, nay, not fifteen hours to live: if thou were sure thou
should live but one week, how would thou redeem the time? yet it may be
thou shall not live one day, and dare thou then mispend thy time?

Consider, 2. The exceeding danger which is, in neglecting the present season.
This is marvelous dangerous, because there is no promise for tomorrow, but only
for to day Heb. 3. 7. [to day] if you will hear his voice; and again, ver. 14.
Exhort one another [Daily] while it is called [Today,] and ver. 15. [Today] if
you hear his voice harden not your hearts. Thus does the Lord say, Today,
Today, Today; but you will no where find in all the Book of God, any promise,
that, Tomorrow if you will hear his voice, it shall go well with you. The Devil
and a man's own treacherous heart may promise for tomorrow, but God does not so.
It may be either now or never; all times will not serve for soul-saving
purposes. Hence is that. Isa. 55. 6. Seek ye the Lord while he may be found,
call upon him while he is near. There is then a time wherein God may be found,
and a time wherein God may be found, and a time wherein he will not be found:
if you delay and put off God for the present, it may be he will not be found
for the future; Oh therefore make thy peace with God quickly, lest it be too
late. Mat. 5. 25. Know this for certain, that the longer you delay your
Repentance, the harder work you will find of it; the longer any man lives in
sin, the harder it is for him to turn from sin, Jer. 13. 23. Can the (...)
change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may you do good, that are
accustomed to do evil. This very delusion, that men will repent hereafter, and
therefore that they may venture to neglect the present season, has been the
eternal ruin of millions of Souls. Oh Sirs, if some of you could but speak with
your old Companions in sin, that are dead and gone to their own place, they
would tell you dismal stories to this purpose; they would say to you, Ah fools
that we were, to neglect the present season, out of a vain confidence, that
hereafter we would repent and turn to God: This has brought us into the place
of Torment, from whence there is no Redemption.

Consider, 3. That the Lord will surely call you to an account one day for your
time. You shall all appear before the Son of God one day, and give an account
how you have lived and spent your time in this World: Men must give an account
how they have improved Talents, especially this great and precious Talent of
time. The Lord keeps an exact account how many Years, days, hours, is allowed
to every man in this World, and will reckon with men for all one day. As I
remember it is storied of Ignatius, that if he did hear the Clock strike, he
would say, There is another hour gone which I must answer for. Oh if men did
think sadly of this, how would they improve their time? Did they know how great
a sin it is to mispend so much as one hour, would they spend it may be whole
days in vanity?

Consider, 4. That you have lost much precious time already; and therefore it
is high time to look about you, and to consider well how you may improve the
present season, 1 Pet. 43. The time past of our life may suffice us, to have
wrought the will of the Gentiles: So the time past which has been misspent is
enough, and too much to be lost Alas, men spend the greatest part of their time
either in doing nothing or in doing amiss: How much time is there spent in
excessive sleep, or in need^ess Recreations, or in unprofitable discourses?
nay, how much time is spent in sin? All the days of a man's irregeneracy, are
days of vanity: All that time (which as to the most of you has been the
greatest part of your lives) has been utterly lost. Hence Paul speaks of his
being born out of the time 1 Cor. 15. 8. Because before his Conversion, his life
was a death rather than life, he lost all that time, even as if he (...) not
been born into the World. An old man once said, when dying, I have lived but
seven years; because he was converted but seven years before his death, and
before, that he made account he w^^ as a man that did not live, as a man that
had no time or being in the World.

Consid. 5. Your time in this World is but short; therefore improve it, it is
pity to lose any part of a short time. Christ lived not much above two and
thirty years, therefore did he go up and down doing good, and was wonderfully
careful to improve his time to the best advantage: who knows how soon thy
Soul may launch forth into the Ocean of Eternity? Thy time will quickly be gone
hence Job says. Chap 9. ver. 25, 26. My days are swifter than a Post, they
flee away they are passed away as the swift ships, as the Eagle that hastes to
the prey. When (...) Post, you know, they go swiftly, (...) a (...) the Sea
has a swifter motion and flying is swifter than that, and an Eagle is amongst
the swiftest of Birds, and the motion of an Eagle when hastening to the Prey,
is more swift than ordinary. All this is said, to show how fast a (...) time
does spend away. If a man (...) much work to do, and but (...) (...) to do it
in, he had need to bes^^^ himself. (...) Suppose the (...) to be almost set,
and yet much work must if necessity be done over the Sun be down* How needful
is it to improve that little (...)? So it is here, every man has much (...) of
absolute necessity to be done* many duties to perform, many corruptions to
subdue, many sins to repent of (...) if all this be not done before Sunset
(...) undone for ever, and therefore improve his time (...).

(...) as time in this World has been improved or neglected. Within a few
days thy immortal Soul shall be either in eternal joy or else in eternal
torment; that after thou have been therein; as many millions of Ages, as there
are Stars in Heaven; as many millions of Ages, as there are piles of Grass upon
the Earth; as many millions of Ages, as there are sands upon the Seashore,
thou shall then be no nearer unto an end of that condition, than thou wast at
the first moment when thou did enter into it. Oh, I do (...) you for Gods
sake, for Christ's sake, and for your immortal Souls sake, that you would think
of this seriously, though it be but one quarter of an hour together.

Quest What shall we do that we may improve time?

Ans I Will mention but one Rule, and that is this, Live every day as (...) it
were your last day. Let me preach, as (...) I were never to preach more; and do
you hear, as if you were never (...) more: Do nothing, say nothing, think
nothing, but what you would be willing to do, if you were to die next day.

If you were sure, that as soon as this Sermon is ended, your naked Souls
should appear before God the Judge of all, how then would you hear? Verily if
these truths were realized to the hearts of men, they would labor to redeem
their time, yea, they would watch and pray.

Now blessed is the Servant whom the Lord at his coming shall find so doing.

The true Fearers of God will practice Family Prayer.
Acts 10. 2. One that feared God with all his House -- And prayed always.
IN this Chapter, we have an account of the great acceptance which Cornclius
his Prayers found with God, together with the gracious offects following
thereupon. In the two first verses Cornelius is described. 1. From the City
where he dwelt, viz. (...). 2. From his Calling he was a Soldier; and no
common Soldier, but a (...). 3. From the Nation which he had belong unto; he
was an Italian a Commander belonging to the Italian (...). And indeed Cornelius
is a Roman Name. 4. He is described from his Religion, in this verse, he was a
devout man, h. e. He was though a Roman, and so a Gentile by nature, yet no
mere Heathen in respect of his Religion, but a Proselyte. Elsewhere Proselyt's
are (...)! Devout Pers^^^, Act. 17. 4. We read of Devout Greeks, that is (...)
were Proselytes to the Jewish Religion. Hence also, Cornelius is described to
be one that feared God, h. e that did worship the only true God. Thus (...) 26.
Children of the (...) of Abraham, and (...) amongst you fears God; meaning
such as though they were not (as the Jews are) descended from Abraham,
nevertheless worshipped the God of Abraham as the Jews did. These Fearers of
God are in verse 4^. called Religious Proselytes There were two sorts of
Proselytes amongst the Jews of old.

1. Some that were styled Proselytes of the Covenant, those were Circumcised,
and also admitted to all privileges in the Church of Israel; no difference
being made either as to Civil or Church Communion between them, and those that
were natural Israelites.

2. Those that were styled Proselytes of the Gate. These did own the God of
Israel to be the only true God; and hoped for Salvation by the Messiah; and did
endeavor to frame their lives according to the holy Rules of the Moral Law.
Cornelius was a Proselyte of this, and not of the former fort. And hence Peter
was unwilling to converse with him, until such time as God by a vision
commanded him so to do. The truth of Cornelius his Religion is in this verse
intimated by two things.

1. In that he was careful, not only to (...) unto God himself alone, but that
his family should do so too. He did Worship (...) with all his House, h. e.
with his whole Family. The house is frequently in the Scripture put for the
Family, Genesis 7. 1. and 30. 30. Exodus 12. 3.

2. In that he did thus always. He did not only pray with his Family once or so,
but always: that is to say, always in the due and stated seasons for that duty:
the meaning is not, as though Cornelius did spend his time in nothing else but
Prayer and Religious Exercises, but that he was constant in his Attendance unto
that duty in the seasons appointed for that end.

The Doctrine which the Words do therefore afford unto us, is, That the true
Fearers of God will be constant in the practice of that duty of Family Prayer.

In order to the clearing of this Truth, there are three things to be enquired
into.

1. How it does appear that Family Prayer is a duty?

2. What is implied in being constant therein, or in doing thus always?

3. The Reasons why they that truly fear God do thus practice.

Q 1. How does it appear that Family Prayer is a duty?

Ans 1. The Scripture does enjoin this. God in his Word, commands men to pray
with all Prayer. Ephesians. 6. 18. Not only prayer in Closets, and in solemn
Assemblies, but in Families, is comprehended under that expression of All
Prayer Nor can a Man be said to pray with all Prayer, except he does practice
public, secret, and Family Prayer. And in the Scripture, Husbands and Wives
are required to live lovingly together, that their prayers be not hindered, 1
Pet. 3. 7. what Prayers? Surely Family Prayers. They that are contending and
quarrelling one with another, are very unfit to go to Prayer together:
Therefore Husband and Wife should live in love, that so they may not be
indisposed to pray together in their Family. Again, the Scripture declares,
that men should take care that their Families as well as themselves serve God.
Fathers are to bring up their Children, in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord, Ephesians. 6. 4. which they cannot do except they pray with them, and by
example as well as precept, let them see that God ought to be worshipped and
prayed unto. Thus Joshua was resolved to do, Chap. 24 v. 15. As for me and my
house, we will serve the Lord. Joshua did exhort the Children of Israel, that
they should all of them in their Houses serve God, which does imply Prayer unto
him; inasmuch as prayerless Families cannot be said to be God-serving
Godfearing Families.

2. As there are Scripture-precepts requiring this duty, so there are
Scripture-Examples, which God has caused to be Recorded in his Word for our
instruction and imitation. We (...) that the Lord Christ, who has le^t himself
for an example in this as well as in other things, for us to follow; did pray
with his Family, Luk 9. 18. As he was alone praying, his Disciples (who were
his Family) were with him. And when Christ did keep the Passover with his
Domestic Disciples alone, it is certain that he prayed with them, Mat. 26. 18.
etc. David also was wont to Worship God with his Family. And was resolved to
continue in that practice all his days. Hence he could say, as Ps. 101. 2. I
will walk within my house with a perfect heart And we read concerning him, that
after he had been attending the Worship of God in public, he returned to bless
his house, 1 Chr. 16. 43. so that he did not think it enough to Worship God in
a public solemn Assembly amongst his People, but when he comes home, he
prays with his family, that the blessing of God might be there.

3. Of old thhere were not only public but private Family Sacrifices. Jonathan
relates concerning David that he said to him our Family (...) a Sacrifice in
the City, and my Brother commanded me to be there, 1 Samuel 20. 29 which
undoubtedly were not without Family Prayers. And although Sacrifices in a
legal, literal sense are ceased, in these days of the Gospel Christ by that
one offering of himself, having put an end thereto, yet spiritual Sacrifices
must be offered up still, 1 Pet. 2. 5. Ye are a spiritual house, an holy
Priesthood to offer up spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable unto God by Jesus
Christ. When Christians offer up prayers and praises unto the Lord, these are
spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable unto God through Jesus Christ.

And indeed every Believer is a spiritual Priest. Jesus Christ has made us
Priests unto God and his Father* Rev. 1. 6. And inasmuch as he is a Priest in
his own Family, therefore he ought to offer up spiritual Sacrifices there.
Every Master of a Family is a Prophet in his own Family, because he ought to
instruct them in the things of God: and a King there, inasmuch as he ought to
govern his Family according to the Rules of the Word of God, and a Priest also,
for that he ought to offer up Spiritual Sacrifices therein.

4. The very light of nature teaches men that Family Prayer is a duty. Hence
the Gentiles that had no Scripture to direct them, yet have made conscience of
Family Worship. They had their Penates, household Gods, whom they did adore Yea,
Mahometans at this day, Worship their god not only in public Assemblies, but
in their Families. So (...) Men who call themselves Christians, and yet
acknowledge no God in their Families, are in that thing worse than Infidels.
Many Heathen People, nay Turks, will at the Day of Judgment rise up against
such pretended Christians, and condemn them.

Quest: 2. What is implied in a man's praying [Alway] with his Family?

Ans. This Praying always, implies frequency in that duty. Family Prayer should
be attended daily. In that sense the Phrase is sometimes used in the Scripture.
As when he is said, that Mephibosheth did eat ( continually, or as the Hebrew
word Tamid signifies) always at the Kings Table; the meaning is that it was his
daily custom so to do. Thus Cornelius with his House prayed always; Family
Prayer was daily observed in that House-Families need daily supplies of mercy.
And there are Family occasions to be attended every day, which Masters in
Families are concerned to look up to God, that his blessing may be thereon: And
there are daily mercies which they ought to bless God for. Yea, it is good to
practice this Duty more than once every day, h: e: in the Morning and in the
Evening also. It is a good thing to praise the Lord, and show forth his
loving kindness in the morning, and every evening, Psalm. 92. 1, 2. The
continual offering under the Law was that whereby Prayer was typified: and that
was to be both at morning and at the even, Exodus: 29: 38: Numb: 28: 3: 4: So
should it be as to Family Prayer: And therefore it is very observable, that the
Apostle speaking to Masters in Families, uses that expression, continue in
Prayer, Col: 4: 2: In which words he does evidently allude unto the continual
offering under the Law, which was to be attended daily, both at morning and at
even; you (says he) that are Masters of Families, forget not the continual
offering of Prayer, which you ought to present before the Lord. It is as if he
had said, pray constantly morning and evening in your Families.

Therefore,

2. This Expression implies perseverance. Men should not only begin to
practice this duty, but they ought to hold on therein, all their days. Christ
has taught us that men ought always to pray and not to faint Luk: 18: 1: And we
are bid to pray without ceasing, 1 Thessalonians: 5: 18: As there ought to be
perseverance in attending unto the public Worship of God, on the times
appointed for that end: As Hezekiah professes that he had taken up a
resolution to praise God all the days of his life in the House of the Lord.
Isai. 38. 20. So should Men praise the Lord, and pray to him all the days of
their lives in their own houses. There ought to be perseverance in all Prayer,
and therefore Christians are to continue all their days in the practice of
private or family, as well as in public and in closet-prayer: So may they be
said to do as Cornelius did, even to pray always, Ephesians. 6. 18.

Q. 3. Whence is it that the true Fearers of God do thus?

Reas. 1. Because they that truly fear God respect the honor of his Name. They
cannot but desire that God might be honored every where, and more especially
in their own Families. Now Prayer honors God. Hence is that expression, Mat.
15. 8. They honor me with their lips: when men pray unto God with their lips,
they honor him therewith: and when they pray with their hearts, as well as
their lips, they honor him with both. As when they neglect this so great a
duty, they withold that honor from God, which is due unto him from his
creatures, Isai 43. 23. Thou have not honored me with thy Sacrifices. So does
the Lord say to Masters of Families, that pray not with their Houses, thou have
not honored me with thy Prayers. But as for those that call upon his Name,
their Prayers and praises glorify him. When men own the Lord to be the God of
their Families they put honor upon him. And so it is when Family Worship is
duly upheld.

Reas. 2. They that truly fear God, are desirous that the interest of Religion
should be upheld and promoted. One that is truly Religious himself cannot but
desire that others may be so too. Paul being himself a real Christian,
earnestly wished that others were in that respect as he was (...) When Agrippa
said to him, thou almost perswadest me to be a Christian, he replied, I would
to God, that not only thou but also all that hear me this day, were both almost
and altogether such as I am, except these Bonds, Act. 26. 28, 29. So it is,
(and cannot but be) where there is true Grace. Especially they are desirous
that those who are related to them: and are of the same Family with them, may
be acquainted with the good ways of the Lord. Therefore they will make
Conscience, not only to pray for them, but to pray with them; since thereby
Religion and the Fear of God will be promoted. And to have Religion in Families
is the way to have it elsewhere. Families are the Nurseries of all Societies.
If Religion should not be upheld there, it would fall to the ground every where.

USE I. For Reprehension: And there are many that fall under just and sad
Reproof from this Doctrine.

1. It condemns those that live in the total neglect of this duty of Family
Prayer. And what is like to come on prayerless Families at last? Let prayerless
Fathers, and prayerless Masters hear the Word of the Lord, and tremble at it. O
that you would consider, how you expose not only your selves but Families, to
the vengeance of Heaven. How often have you been put in mind of that awful
Scripture, Jer. 10. 25. Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen that know thee not.
What Is that to us? some one will be ready to say; we are no Heathen, we are all
Christians: but mark what follows, and upon the Families that call not upon thy
Name. Not only professed Heathen, but Families that live like Heathen without
any prayer, the fury of the Almighty will come pouring down from Heaven upon
them: Hence are temporal judgments upon Families many times. The Lord kills
Children with death, because Parents do not show them an example of Religion to
pray with them in the Family as well as for them in secret. Yea, the Souls of
your poor Children are ruined by this sin of yours. And O how sad will it be,
when God shall require the blood of the Souls of Children, at the hands of
their prayerless Fathers; and the blood of the Souls of Servants at the hands
of their prayerless Masters. Think with your selves what answer you will make
before Jesus Christ the Son of God at the last and great day. If thy Children
shall be thine accusers before the Lord then; if any of them shall stand before
the Lord Jesus in the day when he shall judge the World, and say, Lord, there
is the man that was my Father, I never heard him pray in all my life, and that
made me live in the neglect of God also; or if thy servants shall any of them
say, Lord, there is the man that was my Master, I lived in his house so many
months, but I never heard him praying unto God all that time, what answer will thou then make for thy self? you shall not be able to plead ignorance. For I
will then call Heaven and Earth to record against you, that you were often told
of your duty in this particular. And yet I hear some say, that there are many
prayerless families in this great Town. The thing is lamentable, if it be so.
What, for men that call themselves Christians, to have no prayer in their
families? for men that live under the light of the Gospel, to live without
Prayer in their families! for men that live in New England, and that have lived
in Boston, not so much as to pray in their families! Such have known to do
good, and yet have not done it; therefore sin and guilt and wrath most fearful
does abide them. And this word reaches Masters of Vessels that never pray with
their Ships-Company, who are their family, with whom they ought to worship God
continually.

2. This reproves those that do not pray in their Families All way. There are
some that pray in their families; but when is it? once in a week perhaps. It
may be on the Sabbath day, they will pray in their families, and serve God
therein no more all the days of the week after. Is this to pray always when
there are such wide and woeful gaps in prayer? It is thy duty to serve God all
the days of thy life. Luke 1. 75. Do thou serve God all thy days, when thou
do serve him, and pray to him, but one day in seven? God will not be put off
so. When once thou shall see the day wherein thy family shall stand in no need
of God's blessing; neglect Prayer in thy family for that day; but til then
willingly omit it not under any pretense whatsoever. And are there not some,
that time was when they would worship God with their families; but they are
fallen away, and have cast off the practice that is good? O foolish creatures,
you did run well, but who has driven you back? Remember the word that was
spoken by the Lord Jesus, Luke 9. 26. No man having put his hand to the Plough,
and looking back is fit for the Kingdom of God. Did thou begin to pray with
thy family? This was to set thy hand to the Lords Plough: Woe to thee if thou
drawest it back again.

3. This reproves those who do that in families which is quite contrary unto
praying and serving God therein. Are there not families in this place, wherein
there is Drinking to excess, Gaming, wantonness, Uncleanness? Indeed, when such
deeds of darkness are brought to light, they are put to shame amongst us; and
it is a great mercy to the Land, that open profaneness and wickedness is
punished, but the Lord sees what is done in private Houses. He knows who
they are that assemble themselves by troops in the Harlots House; Jer. 5. 7.
And are there not families in the which instead of Prayer, there is Cursing,
Sweating, Sabbath-breaking and the like Transgressions that provoke the
glorious eyes of the Holy Majesty of Heaven? Let the Masters of such families
look to themselves. For the Sabbath-breaking, and other prophanenesses that are
indulged in their families will be charged upon them who ought to rule their
houses better. Exo. 20. 10.

Use. 2. Of Exhortation: To be constant in the practice of this necessary duty
They that are so, their labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. If they be
sincere therein, special mercy will follow: We see it in this example of
Cornelius. He worshipped God with his House, and prayed always; and what special
notice did the Lord take of him? those prayers were not lost. And sometimes
when outward Judgments come, God shows peculiar mercy to praying families. I
remember I have read of a Town in Switzerland, that was destroyed with an
Earthquake, excepting only one House, where it so sell out, that at the time
when the Earthquake happened, the Master of the House was at prayer with his
family. But especially spiritual blessings, are wont to follow upon the sincere
attendance unto this duty. If there be a praying Father, it is to be hoped that
there will be praying Children: And if there be a praying Master, it is to be
hoped there will be praying Servants. And (...) not that a blessed thing for a
man to have the Children and Servants of his own family praying for him
continually? Thus do we read concerning Abraham's Servants, Gen 24. 12. He said,
O Lord God of my Master Abraham, I pray thee send me good speed this day, and
show kindness unto my Master Abraham. How came Eliezer to be a praying Servant?
doubtless, he observed that his Master was much in prayer; and such an Example
might be well followed.

I shall only answer two or three Objections, and conclude.

Obj. 1. Some one may say, I have not time to pray in my Family. My business
and worldly occasions are such as I cannot attend prayer.

Ans. No man shall fare the worse as to his outward Estate, because he does
make conscience to set some time apart daily to serve God; no man's Family shall
be the poorer, but rather the richer for that. O that you would remember and
consider more on that Scripture, Mat. 6. 33. Seek (...) first the Kingdom of
God and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added to you. And it
is certainly better to want time for other things, than to take no time to pray
in. Yea, a man should rather deny himself a little of his natural rest and
sleep, than to live an ungodly and prayerless life. Nor is it needful, or
indeed convenient, that Family duties should be ordinarily long and tedious;
and therefore the objection is a vain excuse. There are others in the World,
that have as much business upon their hands as thou have, who nevertheless can
find time to pray in their Closets, and in their Families too. Had not David as
little time to spare, and as much business to attend as any man can ordinarily
pretend unto; yet he always found time to pray in. Let thy Conscience speak;
can thou not find time for other things that are of less concernment? thou
can find time it may be to sit in some Tavern, and there to discourse, the
Lord knows about what. If that time which is spent in vain, unprofitable
Discourse, were spent in Communion with God, it would be happy for thee. Can
thou find time for vain Discourse, and yet not find time for Prayer? and can
thou then think that God will ever find a time to save thy poor soul? deceive
not thy self, thou must be another man, or that time will never come.

Obj. 2. I am ashamed to pray in my Family?

Ans, What ashamed to own God, and the Lord Jesus Christ! do thou not know
that that is the way for a man to lose his Soul for ever? see else what the Lord
Jesus has spoken, Mark 8. 3. last verses. What shall it profit a man if he
gain the whole World and lose his own Soul, or what shall a man give in
exchange for his Soul: whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me, and of my
words, in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him also shall the Son of
Man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his Father, with the Holy Angels.
If thou art ashamed of prayer, thou art ashamed to own the ways of Christ: and
then what will become of thy precious and immortal Soul?

Obj. 3. I would pray in my Family, but I cannot, I have not the gift of
utterance and expression?

Ans. 1. It is better for thee to make use of a form them not to pray at all. I
confess, I look upon it as sinful to make use of those Forms of Prayer which
are taken out of the Popes Mass Book, because in so doing men put too much
honor upon an Idol. It is also true that the imposition of Forms of Prayer is
unwarrantable; yet all use of Forms is not prohibited in the Scripture, witness
the Form of Blessing therein expressed. Learned and judicious Mr. Cartwright,
does from Luke 24. 35. conjecture, that ordinarily Christ used the same words
in his Blessing at Meal-times, with his Domestic Disciples. Now there is no
man of ordinary understanding, but he may attain unto a Form of Prayer; and he
had better make use of that, than to live without any Worship of God at all in
his Family. But I am far from persuading you to take up with Forms.

Therefore,

2. Practice, and that will make you able. As in other things practice makes
men ready and able, so it is in respect of the gift of Prayer. Some that when
they began first to Pray, were able to make but poor work of it; by frequent
practice have attained unto an excellent gift in Prayer. And there are some who
complain they cannot Pray, whenas it is because they do not practice. If they
would set upon practice, God would be with them. And O that I could prevail
with those of you, that make this Objection against praying in your Families;
to go home and make trial. I am persuaded that if you would try, and set upon
the practice of Family Prayer in earnest, the Lord God would be with you.

3. Labor for the true fear of God in your hearts. No man that truly fears
God, but he can pray in some measure, as you heard from Psalm. 32. 6. Every one
that is godly shall pray. Grace will make a man sensible of his spiritual
wants, and that will set him a praying. They that see themselves perishing will
cry to God for Salvation. So it is with the godly man. Yea, where there is true
grace, there will be Family Prayer. The Lord says, He will pour upon the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of grace, and then Families, Families,
would pray and mourn apart, Zec. 12. 10.

4. Be much in secret Prayer: Go into thy closet; there beg for Grace; yea,
pray for the Spirit of Prayer. That the Lord would be pleased to give his Holy
Spirit unto you, and thereby enable you to pray. And by praying in thy closet,
thou will be made able to pray with thy Family. So may thou become like to
Coruelius, who feared God with all his house, and prayed always.

The sincere Servants of God will make Conscience of Secret Prayer.
2 Timothy 1. 3. Without ceasing I have remembrance of thee in my Prayers day and
night.
THe Apostle Paul in this Verse does intimate two things:

1. His own sincerity in serving God. He freely confesses himself to be the
Lords Servant, God whom I serve. And there are two expressions, both which may
denote his sincerity therein. One is that of his serving God from his
forefathers. He served the same God, and after the same manner that his
forefathers had done. As for his immediate forefathers they were Jews and
Pharisees; and time was when he had served God as they had taught him: but
those words may have respect to more remote Fathers, viz. The holy Patriarchs,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, etc. Another expression denoting the Apostles
sincerity, is, that of his serving God with a pure Conscience, which implies
that he was ever careful to act according to the Light of his Conscience; so
indeed he was before his conversion unto Christ, Act. 13. 1. It implies also,
that his heart was perified by Faith in the Lord Jesus. For only they have a
pure Conscience in the sight of God who are purged from the guilt of sin, in
the blood of Christ. It implies moreover an holy conversation; a due respect
both to first and second Table duties. Men's Consciences are wont to be
according to their actions: evil actions will pollute the Conscience: yea, the
expression imports inward as well as outward serving God, Romans 1. 9.

2. The Apostle in this verse, intimates his love and affection unto Timothy.
Both in that he did give thanks to God for him. So the verse begins, I thank
God, namely* for Timothy, partly in that Timothy had such a great respect for
Paul; and it is matter of thankfulness unto God, when he gives a man a great
interest in the hearts of others who fear the Lord though in gifts his
Inferiors. He says in the next verse, I am mindful of thy tears. Probably in
those words, he may have respect unto the tears which Timothy shed, at his
parting with the Apostle, when he removed from Ephesus: and he did bless God
for the Grace which he saw in Timothy; that there was Faith unfeigned in him,
which dwelt first in his Grandmother Lois, and in his Mother Eunice, ver 5. We
should bless God for the Grace we see in others, and especially in young men;
Paul was now aged, and hastening out of the World; but he thanked God, when he
saw that Timothy a young man did inherit the Graces of his godly Predecessors.
And he must needs rejoice the more to see how Religion and the fear of God was
propagated from Generation to Generation, even to the third Generation.

Again, he testified his affection toward Timothy, by being abundant in Prayer
for him. We find that this Apostle does begin another Epistle after the same
manner signifying his affection to those he wrote unto, by declaring how he did
give thanks and pray in their behalf, Romans 1. 8, 9. The Prayers here referred
unto, must of necessity be understood of his secret Prayers. For we cannot in
reason suppose that he did always remember Timothy in public, but in his
secret addresses to the Throne of Grace; which shows that He was constant and
conscionable in the practice of that sort of Prayer.

From which consideration the Doctrine is, That the sincere Servants of God,
will make conscience to practice that duty of Secret Prayer, day and night
without ceasing.

There are three things that may here be enquired into.

1. How it does appear that the sincere servants of God, will make conscience
of practicing that duty of secret prayer?

2. What is implied in this expression of praying day and night without ceasing?

3. The Reasons why Men especially sincere Christians should practice this duty.

Q 1. How does it appear that the sincere Servants of God will make conscience
of practicing that duty of Family Prayer?

Ans. The many Instances Recorded in the Scripture, concerning the faithful
Servants of God, who have conscientiously practiced this duty, are an evidence
of the truth of this Doctrine. As to the great and essential duties of
Religion, all that truly fear God, practice alike: As the Apostle does here
intimate, where he says, I serve God from my Forefathers. A true Servant of
God, will follow the pious Example of those that have gone before him walking
in the same way of Holiness, which they have done, Prove. 2. 20. Heb. 6. 12. Now
concerning this duty of Secret Prayer, we find many Examples (both in the Old
Testament, and in the New) of the Lords Servants who have thus practiced; and
that as to all sorts of Men, Superiors, Inferiors, Fathers, Children, Masters,
Servants, who have had the fear of God planted in their hearts; thus did
Abraham, Genesis 18. 23. and Eliezer, Abraham's godly Servant, Genesis 24. 12. And
Isaac his gracious Son; it is noted of him, ver. 63. That he went out to
meditate; or (as the He brew word Lasuach may be read) to pray. The word
signifies both to pray and to meditate, and it is not improbable but that
Isaac did at that time, nothing but what was his daily custom to do, even
retire himself from all company, for secret Prayer and meditation. And the like
we read concerning Jacob, that he did wrestle with the Lord in secret Prayer,
Genesis 32. 24. They are not the spiritual seed of Jacob that never do thus. I
might mention Hezekiah, Daniel, Jeremiah Peter, and many other holy Servants of
God, of whom we read in the Scripture, that they did practice this duty. Yea,
we have the greatest Example that ever was, set before us for our imitation in
this particular, that is Christ's own Example; of whom it is said, that He
departed into a solitary place and there prayed, Mark 1. 35. That he went apart
to Pray, Mat. 14. 23. That he withdrew himself and prayed, Luke 5. 16. And as
the Lord Jesus Christ said, respecting another duty, I have given you an
Example that ye should do as I have done, Joh: 13: 15: so does he say as to
this duty of Secret Prayer: I have given you an Example, and caused it to be
entered upon everlasting Record, that so you that are my Disciples may in this
follow me; and truly the sincere Disciples of Christ, will make conscience, so
to walk as he walked, 1 John: 2: 6: They will strive to write after the blessed
Copy which their Master Christ has set before them.

2: The truth is further evident, in that every sincere Servant of God does
make Conscience of obeying all his Commandments, Psalm: 119: 6: Then shall I not
be ashamed when I have respect unto all thy Precepts. Now the Lord has
commanded men that they should Worship him, not only in public, and in
Families, but in secret also, Ephesians: 6: 18: Pray with all Prayer: we have
formerly showed, that secret Prayer is in that precept enjoined, as well as
public and Family Prayer. And when the Lord in his Word says to men, Commune
with your hearts, Psalm: 4: 4: those two great duties wherein much of Religion
does consist, viz: Self-Examination, and secret Prayer are implied: Yea, this
Duty is most expressly commanded by the Lord Jesus Christ, who says When thou
prayest enter into thy Closet, and when thou have shut the door, pray to thy
Father which is in secret, Mat. 6. 6. The sincere man does not live in the
commission of any known sin, nor in the wilful omission of any known duty.
Surely then not in the omission of so great and known, and plainly commanded
duty as this of secret Prayer, is:

3. He that is sincere does in special aim at approving himself in the sight of
God. Hence is that expression of Godly sincerity 2 Cor. 1. 12. because the
sincere man does especially desire to have God's approbation. And therefore he
abstains from secret sins, as Joseph did; yea, he dare not so much as in his
thoughts give way unto that which he knows sinful, because he remembers that
the eye of God is upon him, and does therefore study to approve himself, not
only unto men, but unto God. Hence also he practices secret duties, which the
Lord alone is witness of. This we see in Nathaniel, that Israelite indeed in
whom there was no reigning guile, Joh. 1. 47. 48. when that sincere Israelite
was alone under the Fig Tree, no doubt praying there; The Son of God who has
eyes like a Flame of Fire saw him, and did highly approve of his sincerity, of
which the spirit that breathed in his secret Prayers was a great discovery.

4. They that are sincere do in a peculiar manner delight in those duties
wherein the greatest intimacy with God is to be enjoyed.

That Is one difference between an Hypocrite and a sincere Child of God. An
Hypocrite will rest in the external performance of duty, though he has no
communion with God therein, whenas one that is sincere does aim at that in
duty; and therefore the more intimacy of Communion with God, is to be enjoyed,
the more careful is he not to neglect such a duty.

Now this is true concerning Secret Prayer. Did Abraham, did Jacob, did Moses,
did Daniel, and other Servants of the Lord, whom we read of in the Scripture,
ever meet with more of God, then when they were in secret, pouring out their
hearts before him? Intimate Friends when they are alone can speak more freely,
and have a fuller communion then when others are by: so it is here. A Believer
cannot so freely express himself before the Lord as to many particulars when
others are by, as he can when there is none present but God and he. In secret
places, he can speak his whole heart; and pour out his soul into the bosom of
God, and of Jesus Christ.

Q 2. What is implied in this expression, of praying day and night without
ceasing?

Ans. (...) implies constancy in the practice of this duty. Thus when it is
said, Pray without ceasing. 1 These. 5. 17. i. e. don't begin to practice the
duty, and afterward leave off; but hold out all your days therein. It is the
same with that, Ephesians. 6. 18. Praying with all perseverance. So that Phrase of
night and day, intends the same thing, Rev. 7. 15. They serve him day and night
in his Temple, h. e. continually and without intermission. Thus Isai. 62. 6.
The Watchmen of Jerusalem shall not hold their peace day nor night, h. e. they
shall hold on in their duty. Time you know is divided into day and night. If
then a man shall continue to serve God, both by night and by day, then he does
serve him always.

2. It implies Frequency. Those words without ceasing, some read without
intermission. Not but that the duty of Prayer may and must be intermitted, as
to actual performance, that so other duties as to our general or particular
calling may be attended, but the spirit of the duty should not be intermitted,
Christians must be careful that they never lose that: There ought to be an
habitual inclination, and readiness to attend the duty of Prayer, whenever
called thereunto: Also, there should be a frequency therein, as to actual
performance. And when it is said, that a man should pray in secret, day and
night, that implies, that he should do so very often, Psalm: 1. 2. 1 Thessalonians. 3.
10. Indeed secret Prayer should be every man's daily practice. Therefore when
Christ bid his Disciples pray in secret, he bids them say, Give us this day,
etc. Mat. 6. 6, 11. from whence we may infer that secret Prayer should be a
Christians daily practice.

It is not determined in the Scripture, how often every man must pray in
secret: only that he ought to do thus daily. We find that Daniels constant
course was to pray by himself three times every day, Dan. 6. 10. And David
says, that he did praise God seven times a day, h. e. often times, Psalm. 119.
164. And there is great reason that men should offer Prayers and praises before
God in secret, at least once every day, and once every night; so may they be
said to pray without ceasing day and night.

We come now to enquire into the Reasons of this Doctrine.

Reas. 1. From the consideration of the omnipresence of God. He sees and hears
what is done not only in public Assemblies, and in Families, but in Closets,
Jer. 23. 24. Can any hide himself in secret places that I shall not see him,
says the Lord, do I not fill Heaven and Earth? This reason is urged as an
Argument for secret Prayer, even because our Heavenly Father sees in secret,
Mat. 6. 6. If Men do not practice this Duty, it argues great Atheism, and that
they do not really, and with their whole hearts, believe the omnipresence of
God; so by the practice hereof, they testify that they have the sense of this
Truth upon their hearts; therefore should they pray in secret.

Reas. 2. Because there are many requests fit and necessary to be mentioned
before the Lord in secret, that may not be expressed before others, e. g.
Requests concerning a man's particular wants, which may press him, and oppress
him: and concerning his secret sins which he has been guilty of before the
Lord. If God by his providence has kept a man's sins from the knowledge of the
World, he would sin grievously in divulging his own secret sins, and yet as
ever he does desire the pardon of them, or the salvation of his Soul, he must
confess and bewail them before God in secret places: in which respect, secret
Prayer is necessary. Again, a Child of God may be molested with the prevalency
of some particular corruption or temptation, which it is not meet to speak of
before others, yet it concerns him to cry unto God day and night for power
against it. There are also requests which may respect particular persons, whose
cases and circumstances may be such as others should not know of; upon which
account also prayer in secret is necessary. There are some that a man may have
special reason to pray for them in his secret addresses to the throne of grace,
as Paul for Timothy. There are also some that we ought to pray against them,
viz. special and implacable Enemies of the Lords Name and People, whom it may
not be convenient to mention whilst others are in hearing; but we should put
the Lord in mind of them, and those Arrows which are shot out of Closets, will
at last fall upon them, and smite them down into the pit.

Reas. 3. Equity requires this from the Lords Servants. He brings them into
his Chambers, Cant. 1. 4. The King has brought me into his Chambers. Therefore
they ought to bring him into their Chambers. There is a secret providence of
God at work for them continually, Psalm. 31. 20. Thou shall hide them in the
secret of thy presence, thou shall keep them secretly in a Pavilion, Shall the
Lord hide his Servants in those Chambers of safety which he has prepared for
them? And shall not they pray unto him and praise him in their secret Chambers?
Yea, and as for sincere Believers, the Lord has provided Chambers for them in
his house, even in the Palace Royal of Heaven, there to praise his Name for
evermore. Therefore in the mean time they should praise him and pray unto him
day and night in their Chambers here. The Lord said unto the Prophet Zechariah,
If thou will keep my charge, I will give thee places to walk amongst these that
stand by, Zech: 3: 7: Intimating that the faithful Servants of God, shall one
day walk in the Galleries of Heaven, amongst the holy Angels that are there. It
is but reason then, that they should bring the Lord into their Closets here
upon earth.

USE. 1. Of Reprehension:

1: To them that neglect secret Prayer. Are there not many whose Consciences
are smiting them whilst the word of the Lord is speaking to them. How many
Children, and young ones that never go alone to Pray! You Children did you this
day go, and the last night go alone to pray? yea, and there are elder ones,
that the Chambers they lodge in, will witness against them at the last day, for
living in the neglect of secret Prayer before the Lord. They are many times
alone whole nights together, but as it is said of the wicked, God is not in all
their thoughts. Well, be assured, if ever God intend mercy to thy soul, he will
make thee get alone to pray, and to pour out thy Soul in his presence. For (as
I have formerly showed) in Conversion, that is one of the first things, a poor
sinner begins to be in earnest in his Secret Prayers and cries to heaven. As it
was said of Paul, whilst in the pangs of the new Birth, Act. 9. 11. Behold he
Prays, so if the Lord convert and save thy Soul, Behold thou will pray in
secret.

2. This Reproof belongs to them also, who are not freequent and constant in
the practice of this duty. Alas! I know there have been many that the Word of
the Lord has met with them; they have been Sermon-sick, and then they would
pray in secret; but they have not done thus without ceasing. Their Convictions
have died, and they became as Prayerless as ever in their lives before. Or it
may be some distressing affliction or other, has brought them upon their Knees
before the Lord. Like those in Isai. 26. 16. Lord, in trouble they visited
thee, they poured out a Prayer, when thy chastening was upon them. Ah! Lord
God, has it not been thus, with many a soul that hears me this day? but their
distresses being removed, they continue not in secret Prayer. Oh consider what
the Scripture says, Heb. 10. 38. If any draw back, my Soul shall have no
pleasure in him. To begin a course of Prayer, and then to leave off again, is
to draw back. Will the Lord take pleasure in such? He has said, he will not.
And yet I wish there be not Professors of Religion, Church Members, whose
Consciences do (or may) accuse them for inconstancy in the performance of this
great duty of secret prayer: If thou art such an one, thou have on thee one of
the sad marks of an Hypocrite: for it is said of the Hypocrite, Will he always
call upon God? Job 27: 10: I wonder how such men and women, can think that they
belong to God, or that they have a real interest in Heaven, who can find in
their hearts to live without secret communion with him: especially considering,
that the Scripture tells them that he that shall allow himself in the wilful
breach of the least Commandment, shall not be admitted, nor accounted of in the
Kingdom of Heaven, Mat: 5: 19: where then will they appear, who live in the
neglect of so great a Commandment as this of Secret Prayer is?

3: This reproves those that instead of Praying in secret are sinning in
secret: The Apostle says, it is a shame to speak of those things which are
done of some in secret, Ephesians: 5: 12: How do wretched sinners bless themselves,
if they can sin out of the sight of men: especially as to that iniquity of
which it is said, That the abhorred of the Lord shall fall into it: They commit
Adultery, and other sorts of unclean Abominations in secret places: or they
live in secret Self-pollution, which is commonly the young-mans sin; an evil
condemned in the Scripture, under the Name of Uncleanness, and sometimes under
the Name of Effeminateness; and the Word of the Lord says, that whoever lives
in it, shall certainly be excluded out of the Kingdom of Heaven. Instead of
mourning and bleeding in secret places that ever thou have been guilty of this
sin, do thou still live in it? then woe to thy soul. There are two things
which I am sure thou do not remember as thou should do.

1. Thou do not remember that the all-seeing eye of an infinite God looks
upon thee. If a Child of seven years old saw thee, thou would be afraid and
ashamed to commit that sin; and would thou do it, if thou did behold God
looking on thee?

2. Neither do thou remember the day of Judgment. For then every secret thing
whether it be good or whether it be evil will be brought to light, Eccles. 12.
14. If thou did believe, that all the World should one day hear of that
secret sin of thi^^, would thou commit it? certainly if Men considered this,
they would sin in secret less, and pray in secret more.

USE II. Of Exhortation, to follow the Apostles Example, by being much in the
practice of this Duty of secret Prayer.

Do but consider, the good and benefit which will follow. Whoever is sincere
therein shall find that his secret Prayers have not been lost labor. A Man may
thereby obtain mercy for his own Soul: even Grace and spiritual blessings.
Solomon's Wisdom was given to him as an Answer unto his secret Prayers. Comfort
and assurance of Gods favor may in this way be obtained: you that complain,
you have not assurance of your Salvation, consider of it. There have been those
(I could tell you of marvelous instances to this purpose) that when they have
been upon their knees in secret, the holy Spirit has broke in upon their Souls
with everlasting Consolation. Yea, a Man by secret Prayer may obtain mercy for
his Family. The lives of all Jacobs Children were spared, in answer to their
Fathers Prayers in secret. Nay, more, one righteous man by Prayer in secret,
may be a means to divert Judgment, and to obtain mercy for the whole Town, and
Land where he dwells. How far did Abraham by his Prayers in secret prevail for
Sodom; and Moses for Israel? And what mercy did Elijah and Amos obtain for the
whole Land by their secret Prayers?

And truly they are the persons who are like to experience special mercy in the
evil day. They that pray much in secret and that mourn continually in secret
places, because of the sins of the times, shall experience if not temporal
(that which is better) spiritual preservations in a day of general Calamity,
Ezekiel. 9. 4. Jer. 13. 17.

For Direction here;

1. Be very particular in secret Prayer. Men should in secret before the Lord,
often bewail every sin they have been guilty of, whilst in a state of
Unregeneracy. As to the kind of sin, that is, though it may be the acts of sin
have been so often iterated, as it is not possible to mention them all
particularly. And if after Conversion they fall into evils, for which
Conscience condemns them, they should particularly acknowledge those sins in
their secret addresses unto the Throne of Grace, begging for the Pardon of
them. Particular Plagues of Heart should be mourned for in secret: so there are
particular mercies to be prayed for; and particular Friends (near Relations
especially) which ought to be remembered in secret Prayers day and night without
ceasing. Personal and particular concerns are to be enlarged upon in closet
Prayer especially.

2. Take heed of resting in the external performance of this Duty. Do not think
that you must needs be saved, merely because you Pray in secret. You especially
who are the Children of Godly Parents, and have ever practiced this Duty,
because of the frequent Exhortations, and Examples which have been set before
you. Oh rest not here, without experiencing a work of true Faith and
Regeneration in your Souls. Remember, that though a man cannot be sincere, if
he live in the neglect of so great a Duty, yet he may continue in the practice
of it, after a formal manner (as Paul before his Conversion did, Phil. 3. 6.
Luke 18. 14. and for all that, remain in a state of Hypocrisy. Nor indeed is
there any duty, but an Hypocrite may attend it without ceasing, as to the
external part of the Duty. Wherefore, beware of taking up with that.

3. Labor after intimacy of Communion with God therein. Its true, we must
remember our distance, considering that God is in Heaven, and we are on Earth.
He is an infinite Majesty, and we are poor inconsiderable Dust-heaps; and
therefore may not forget that we are dust and ashes, when we take upon us to
speak unto the Lord of Heaven and Earth. Nevertheless he allows us to be
humbly familiar with his divine Majesty. An holy man upon his Deathbed could
say, If the walls of this Chamber could speak, they would testify how often I
have met with God here; and how familiar he has been with my Soul. Oh labor
after that, to know by blessed experience, what it is to have intimate
communion with God in Closets, and to be familiar with the Lord Jesus there.

4. Practice other Duties in secret, which are an help to Prayer. e. g.
Self-Examination is a great help unto secret Prayer. When a man upon
Examination and serious reflections upon himself, sees what his defects have
been and are; and withal perceives what God has done for his Soul, he must
needs thereby be quickened in his calling upon the Name of the Lord. And read
the Scriptures daily in secret; and having so done, meditate and ponder upon
what you have read; and then fall upon your knees before the Lord, and pour out
your very hearts in his presence. And know for your encouragement, that your
secret Prayers shall one day be rewarded openly, Mat. 6. 6. When you come to
die, you will not repent of the time that has been thus spent. Nor at the last
day, when the Lord Jesus will openly before all the World speak of the secret
Prayers (as well as secret Alms-deeds) of his Servants. O how glorious will it
be when Christ shall say (as sometimes to Natha^^el) I saw thee every day and
night upon thy knees in thy Closet; I bestowed mercy on others out of respect
to thy Prayers, and brought about great changes in the World, in answer
thereunto? Blessed is that Servant whom the Lord shall find thus doing.

FINIS.

