A Seasonable Discourse Wherein SINCERITY and DELIGHT in the Service of GOD is
earnestly pressed upon PROFESSORS of RELIGION.

Delivered on a Public FAST, at Cambridge in NEW ENGLAND,

By the Reverend, and Learned VRIAN OAKS, Late Pastor of the Church there and
Praesident of HARVARD COLLEGE.

Zech. 1.5, 6. Your Fathers, where are they? and the Prophets, do they live for
ever?

But my Word and my Statutes, which I Commanded my Servants the Prophets, did
they not take hold of your Fathers?

Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the Dead, which die in the Lord; from henceforth: yea,
says the Spirit, that they may rest from their Labors, and their works do
follow them.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by Samuel Green 1682.

To the READER.
THere are, especially, two things whereby discourses are commended unto the
acceptance of their Readers. One is the Weight, Excellency, and seasonablenesse
of the Subject: The other's, the known Worth, Ability, and Fame of the Author:
Upon both which accounts the ensuing Sermon may (and I doubt not; will) find a
ready reception amongst all that are godly and judicious, into whose hands it
shall come.

As for the subject matter of this Discourse, it is that which highly concerns
a Professing People (and the Lords New England People are eminently so) most
intensely to consider of. The heart-searching God requires that those that
enter into Covenant with Him, should be sinc^^e in all their Callings upon His
Name. Josh. 24.14. Fear the Lord, and serve Him in Sincerity, and Truth He
knows who have only a form of godliness, but are strangers unto the power of
it; Bernard.
whose services can never please Him. Sapiens Nummularius est Deus, Nummum
fictum non recipiet. Nor is there a more sure discovery of secret, and deep
hypocricy in the hearts of Men, then that of being weary of Gods service, or
thinking a little service too much for the great God. When the Jew brought a
lean sacrifice, and then said, What a weariness is it? as, if he were tired
with so great a burden; he did serve the Lord, and yet not serve Him at the
same Time. Mal. 1.13. See Mr Smith survey of th^^. (...)
Nor is there any thing more offensive to the Lord Jesus then luke-warmnesse in
profession, or having a Name to live, and being dead: as we see by the Epistle
sent from Heaven unto the Churches of Asia, and consequently unto all other
Churches to the end of the World, cautioning (...) watchful against (...) that
kind, as they would not have the Lord deal by them as He has done to
Jerusalem, or as He has done to the Churches in Asia: who because of
hypocrisy, and formality in Profession, are rejected, and their Ruins become
such, as tha^ Travelers cannot look upon them without horror and amazement.
That there is still a blessed number of lively Christians in these Churches is
(through the grace of Christ) very true; the Lord increase them, and make them
a thousand times more then they are. Nevertheless, that there is also a
prevailing spirit of Apostasy among multitudes is no less certain. Where is
the love of our Espousals? When our Fathers followed the Lord into this vast,
and then, wast Wilderness, having no other interest but Religion, and no other
design, but Reformation, before them. Have not many of this generation left,
and lost, that love to the pure, and holy institutions of Christ, which those
of the former generation desired, and delighted in? Are not some weary of that
Theocracy, or Government which God has established amongst us, as to sacred,
and civil respects willing for a change in both? This Wise Master Builder has
then accommodated the word by Him spoken, upon a very public occasion, to the
state of these Times, and of this People. And he has thereby manifested
himself to be of the same spirit with that faithful, and worthy Shephard, who
went before him in the work of the Ministry, in that precious flock of Christ
which is at Cambridge: This Sermon seconding and confirming those of his
eminent predecessors, as 2 Chronicles. 12.8. long ago both preached, and Printed.
How happy has Cambridge been? Indeed the Church at Ephesus enjoyed the Ministry
of Paul, and Timothy, and Tychicus [Blessed men of God] but such a succession
and eminent lights is seldom known in the same Church, the unthankfulness, and
unprofitablenesse of men, provoking the Lord to eclipse their Glory.

Concerning the Author; His worth is well known [and I wish it were more known)
in both Englands. Doctor Pr^^^on chose to be a preacher in Cambridge in
England, Rather than in another place, because he had then a spe^ial
opportunity, d^^^re ^on tantum Lapides, sed Archite^^s. The Lord was merciful
to all these Churches in ordering the labors of this able Workman to be in a
place so suitable for his more then ordinary Capacity. There have been several
of the same Name heretofore renowned for their rare accomplishments in some
particular faculty wherein they have excelled. Josephus Quercetanus was a
learned and famous Physician. Joh. Drusius [the Greek word for Oaks) was a
great Divine, and eminent for his Critical Genius. But an Age does seldom
produce one so many ways excelling as this Author did. If we consider him as a
Divine, as a Scholar, as a Christian, it is hard to say in which he did most
excel. I have often, in my own thoughts, compared him to Samuel among the
Prophets of old; inasmuch as he did truly fear God from his youth, and was
betimes improved in holy Ministrations, and was at last called to be the head
of the Sons of the Prophets in this New-English Israel, as Samuel was President
of the College at Najoth: And in many other particulars I might enlarge upon
the parallel, but that it is inconvenient to extend such instances beyond their
proportion. What shall I now say? New-Englands Samuel is dead! How does
Cambridge? How does the College? How does New England shake? since this Oak
whom Christ had made a Pillar in the Temple of his God, is removed.

Hen tua Nobis.
Morte simul tecum solatia rapta*
It may without reflection, upon any, be truly said, that He was one of the
greatest Lights that ever shone in this part of the World, or that is ever like
to arise in this Horizon. He is now become a Royal Diadem in the hand of the
Lord being (as one speaks concerning a great Worthy) An ornament to Heaven it
self. Mr. Crook 's life p. ^.^.


This Sermon was not by the Reverend Author des^gned for publication. (...) and
beyond what others do ordinarily attain unto. It is to be lamented that he did
not live to finish his meditations on this subject; and I hope that this will
but make way for the publication of some other of his judicious and elaborate
Sermons. And I do earnestly wish the like with respect to the labors of his
immediate predecessor, blessed Mr. Mitchel, who was a man of such vast
abilities, and exemplary piety, and close walking with God as is rarely known.
There are some of his Sermons very suitable for the present Time, and junctour
of affairs amongst us; and in a peculiar manner, those which concern the
interest of Christ's Kingdom in this wilderness, which if they were published,
would [by the blessing of Christ] tend to strengthen the hearts and hands of
those that are willing to venture themselves in the cause of God, and of his
People, It would be for the honor of N. E. and of Cambridge in special, that
the world, and posterity should know what Excellent and able men the Lord has
sent and raised up amongst us; and that we Remember [not only those that do,
but) them that have taught us the word of God. Whose Faith the Lord grant that
we may follow, considering the End of their conversation.

BOSTON, 2. 1^: 1682. Increase Mather.

Isaiah 43.22. But thou have not called upon me O Jacob, but thou have been
weary of me, O Israel.
AT the fourteenth verse, (which some make the first) of this Chapter, The Lord
by the Prophet foretells the Destruction of the Babylonians, and Ruin of the
Assyrian Monorchy, in favor to his oppressed people of the Jews; and in Order
to their Deliverance, For your sakes I have sent [that is will as sertainly
send in due time, as if I had already sent) to Babylon, namely such unwelcome
Messengers and Instruments of vengeance, as the Medes and Persians, under the
Conduct and Command of Cyrus, Gods appointed and Anointed servant, to execute
his holy purposes in the sudden unavoidable overthrow of these barbarous and
bloody enemies of the only Church he had then in the world: And because this
might seem to be a matter of huge difficulty, very improbable and incredible
considering the present power* and Grandeur of the Caldeans, that had set their
nest among the Stars, out of the reach of all dangers, as they imagined;
therefore the Lord helps the faith of his people, by ascerting his relation to
and interest in his people, whom those Caldeans detained in Captivity, which
oblidged him to do great things for their deliverance: I am the Lord, your Holy
One, the Creator of Israel your King verse 15. And also by a Commemoration of
his merveilous works for them of old, especially his conducting them through
the red Sea, ruining the Chariot and Horse, the Army and power of Pharaoh ver
15, 16. And why should they not believe, that he was able to do such works over
again, considering that his hand was not shortened, nor his Power circumscribed
or limited more than heretofore. Nay the Lord assures them that he would do for
them yet greater things, that he would outdo what he had done before; bidding
them not to remember the former things, nor consider the things of Old, for he
would do a new thing ver. 18, 19. Not that he would have former works laid out
of their minds and memories; but to intimate he was about to work out such a
deliverance for them by Cyrus, as especially such redemption in the fullness of
time, by the Lord Jesus Christ and which was figured by that temporal
deliverance, as should far surpass all that had been wrought for them in
former ages: He would make a way in the wilderness and Rivers in the desert,
verse. 19. Give them a plain, easy, ready passage into their own Land, and
provide them of all conveniences in their travel to it* yea, so signally would
the Lord own them (...) a way of protection, provision and special blessing,
that the ve(...) beasts of the field, the Dragons and Owls should honor them,
ver. 20. or God in them, doing them no harm, but showing them (...) kind of
reverence and awful respect; or rather should fare the be(...)ter for their
passage thorough these dry and thirsty places, sharei(...) with them in the
waters God would provide for his peoples refr(...)meant, and so in their kind
and way honor God for it: Or else the deliverance of Gods people should be
such a magnificent st(...)ely work of providence, that not only men, but even
the very beasts of the field should be amazed at it; and in stead of limiting
or hindering them in their passage, would, if they had reason, adore God on
that account: the Lord here foretells that the deliverance of the Jews out of
their captivity, especially the redemption of his Elect by the Messiah out of
their spiritual bondage, should be very marvelous and glorious. And thus with
respect to the deliverance by Christ fore signified and figured by this
deliverance by Cyrus, some conceive that by the beasts of the field, the
Dragons and Owls or Ostriches, are intended the savage, wild brutish Gentiles,
that should drink of the waters of Life, the saving doctrine of the Gospel, and
so glorify God: Moreover, if it should be any man's question why the Lord would
do these new and marveilous things for the Jews, and his Elect among the
Nations; he satisfies that inquiry, verse. 21. This People have I formed for my
self. His own free grace had formed up the Jews into a Church and
Commonwealth, made them his peculiar People; especially were his Elect formed
by his grace for himself; which work of his grace engaged him to do more then
ordinary works for them: Free grace was the first cause, and his glory was the
last end of all he should do for them

Now, in the words read, as also in those that follow my text, the Lord
prevents an objection, that might be made against the fullness of his graces,
in all that he had done or should do for them, checks the arrogance of that
people, anticipates and argues down their swelling conceit, that the reason of
their deliverance, and the wonderful appearances of God for them, was their
dutifulness and diligence in his service, or some worthiness of their own;
as, you know, they were wont to entertain a very good opinion of themselves,
when they had very little reason: Such swelling bladders are poor creatures,
vainly puffed by their fleshly mind, with a proud conceit of their own
goodness, when they are full of nothing but air, wind, or what is worse. Now
the Lord here pricks those bladders, pulls down those high conceits,
demonstrates their obligation to his free grace and favor for all these
things, that the mercy hitherto shown them, and the deliverance that was in due
time to be commanded for them, was not to be attributed to their prayers,
sacrifices, services, good Abearing, or obliging deportments of themselves
toward the Lord; but entirely, absolutely, solely ascribed to his gracious
good pleasure. It was not on the account of their merits, but of his own free
grace, in order to his own praise and glory, that he would deal so mercifully
with them. The truth of this ascertion he confirms, and most convincingly makes
cut in my text, wherein he upbraids them with their prodigious ingratitude,
unkindnesse and utter unworthiness of any favor from him, instancing in these
particulars, instead of many demonstrations*

For He charges them, 1. That they had not called upon Him* But thou have not
called upon me, O Jacob; I need not tell you that by Jacob, we are to
understand the seed and posterity of Jacob and such as were descended from him,
or the house of Jacob, as they are sometimes Denominated in Scripture. The Lord
here challenges the Jews with a grievous omission or neglect of calling upon
him* Now though the Invocation of God, is not the w^o^e of Gods worship, yet
being a special part of it, it is by a synecdoche very usual in Gods word put
for the whole worship of God; so it is said when Enos was born to Seth, then
men began to call upon the name of the Lord, Genesis 4 26. That is, as may be
probably conceived, those of Seth's family began to separate themselves, and
worship apart from Cain's wicked apostaticall family, whence arose that
distinction of the sons and daughters of God, from the sons and daughters of
men. Pour out thy wrath (says the Psalmist) on the hea^ then that have not
known thee, and upon the Kingdoms that have not called upon thy Name, Psalm.
79.6. By calling upon God, or the Name of God, we must frequently understand
the whole worship of God, in all the parts of it. Thus, in the text, the Lord
upbraids the Jews with their neglect of his worship. Thou have not called upon
me, that is, worshipped me, O Jacob. A strange charge it may seem, and
questionless unexpected and very surprising to the Jews that cried the temple
of the Lord, were haughty because of Gods holy mountain: sought God daily,
delighted to know his ways, as a Nation that did righteousness, and forsook
not the ordinance of their God, Isa. 28.2. gloried in their services, boasted
of the multitude of their sacrifices and oblations, superarogated in their own
opinion, and exceeded rather then came short, and were deficient as to
frequency and diligence in the worship of God.

Nevertheless, the Lord upbraids them with great neglect of his worship: Thou
have not called upon me, O Jacob: Had he said, Thou have not called upon me, Oh
Chaldean, or Egiptian, or any other heathen Kingdom, there had been nothing
strange in it, but that Jacob, or the people of the Jews should be so charged,
may look like a parodox indeed. But the meaning of God is, that they had not
called upon him as they should have done, nor worshipped him in due manner.
Doubtless, many there were that called upon him in truth, and worshipped him
aright But the body of that people did all in hypocrisy, kept up a gaudy
pageant of Religion, a form of godliness in prayers, sacrifices and other
services, without life or power, which was very loathsome to the Lord: They
rested in the exterior part of duties; their external ceremonial worship was
not attended with internal moral worship of their souls in faith, love, and
knowledge, humility, fear of God, and respect to his glory, and such like holy
dispositions of soul as must accompany and animate outward worship, or else it
is little better than mocking of God, and a solemn affront of His Majesty. They
rested in externals, in shows, outsides, appearances, godly performances, to
look to; with their mouth and in their outward carriage they showed much love
to God, but their heart went after their covetousness, Ezekiel. 33.31. The grace
of God was not their principal, nor His Glory the end of what they did: They
fasted, but not unto the Lord, Zech. 7.5. There services were pompous operous,
gaudy things, but liveless, superficiary, insignificant performances; all they
did was to no purpose: To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto
me? says the Lord, Isai. 1.21. They are such as God required not, verse. 12.
their oblations were vain, their incense abomination, their assemblies and
solemn meetings on high days were iniquities, loathsome, and troublesome to
the Lord, verse. 13, 14. They made Religion a cloak to their vilanies, that they
might drive a close unsuspected trade of wickedness, with less trouble to their
own consciences, thought to make God amends with external worship for their
moral enormities; would steal, murder, commit adultery, swear falsely, burn
incense to Baal, and walk after other Gods: allow themselves in horrible
impieties and immortalities, and then come and stand before the Lord in his
house, and say, We are delivered to do all these abominations; Jer. 7.9, 10.
They praised, but regarded iniquity in their hearts, They brought their
sacrifices but with a wicked mind, Prove. 21.27. They drew near God with their
mouth, and honored him with their lips, but removed their hearts far from Him,
Isa 29.13 God reckons such bodily exercise as nothing worth, no calling upon
Him, no worshipping of Him, Thou have not called upon Me, O Jacob, whatever
thou have pretended or imagined; but thou have all this while been implicitly,
and interpretatively, in ^ due construction, calling upon some fictitious
deity, or strange God, that will be satisfied with sacrifices and external
worship, lip-labor and the carcases of duty without the soul of them. Hence we
may observe in passage, and by the way, for I shall not fix upon it.

Doctr. That there may be little or no calling upon God indeed, where there is
(...) calling upon Him. There may be no worship of God; where is in appearance
much worship of Him. One would wonder God should challenge the Jews with the
neglect of His worship, that fasted, and prayed, and sacrificed, and accounted
it their glory to keep His ordinances; And yet thou have not called upon Me, O
Jacob, says the Lord. If your critical worship is in effect no worship in
Gods account, external worship is required, but never accepted without the
inward soul worship* Many of these Jews were laborious in the externals of
Religion; but because there was no labor of their souls, no sincere engagement
of their hearts and affections in them, the Lord tells them they had done
nothing all the while, but offered affronts to His Majesty, put fallacies upon
their own souls. Men may do many duties, and yet do none of them well, and
consequently do none at all in Gods estimation: Men may go the round of duty
and plod on in a course of Religious performances, and yet do nothing the while
to any purpose. In all the duties of worship, it is not the bare outward
action, but the manner of performance that gives the denomination, and is
rejected especially of the Lord. Hence Luther's Saying, that Adverbs are of
more account with God than Verbs, meaning that the manner of our performances
(which is commonly denoted by this or that Adverb) is more available with God
than the bare performance of duty, which is usually expressed by some Verb or
other. There are many necessary requisites, to and essential ingredients in the
true worship of Cod, which, if they be wanting, the external performance of it
is as a thing of naught in Gods valuation; though the worship be materially
good, not idolatrous, superstitious, uncommanded, or unlawful in it self, but
such as God has instituted and enjoined; yet it may be formally evil and want
such conditions and qualifications, as would render it acceptable to God. Men
may pray, hear, receive sacraments, be much in duties of worship, and yet do
nothing from a principal of grace, in obedience to God, with a due respect to
His glory: and is not all this (think you) as good as nothing in point of
acceptance with the Lord? A man may be doing every day, and yet do nothing in
Religion: All his prayers may be nothing else, but the lazy wishings and
wouldings of sinful sloth, the bablings of formality* the cravings
inordinate, selfish, greedy cravings of his lusts, the discontented murmerings
and grumblings of the flesh, or howlings in a time of affliction, Hosea 7.14.
Yea, as the plowing of the wicked is sin, Prove. 21.4. so is his praying also.
The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 15.8. God
looks with a gracious aspect on him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit,
and trembles at His Word: But he that without these inward, holy dispositions
of spir^^ ^^ayeth an Ox, is as if he slew a man, etc. Isa. 66.2.3. Of so
little account with God is external worship without the internal, as He will
hardly allow it the name of invocation and worship, but gives it very hard
names, importing that such invocation, is indeed a great provocation of God.
All the use that I would make of it, is in th^se three Words.

First, This may serve to check the pride and petulancy, to beat down the
confidence and conceit of hypocrites, that glory in their performances, and
reckon God indebted to them for their servivices: That think they have done
some great matter when they have prayed, fasted, heard Gods word, done these or
those duties, and bear themselves high upon the frequency of their external
devotion, and think God does them great wrong, if He does not consider and
reward, their diligence and dutifulness. No Hypocrite acts beyond the sphere of
the Covenant of Works, but think, to winn it and wear it, And is (whatever he
professes) of a mercenary spirit, and quarrels with God, if he do not hear his
prayers, and reward his services, so those supercilious, proud hypocrites;
wherefore have we fasted (says they*) and thou see not? Wherefore have we
a^^icted our souls, and thou take no knowledge, Isa. 58 3. Thus they fly out
and expostulate with God, because their external humiliations, and hypocritical
performances were not regarded and rewarded according to their mind. There is
this saucy spirit in all hypocrites. Ah! poor proud man, thou may boast of
thy prayers and duties, and quarrels with God, that He does not hear and
reward, but thou have no reason; for take this home with thee, thou have never
prayed in thy life, never called upon God to this day, thou have done much in a
way of duty, in thy kind and fond opinion of thy self, but as good as nothing
in God's account. Thou have more reason to admire the patience and mercy of
God, for not punishing thee for such sinful, as well as insignificant
performances, then expostulate with Him, and question His justice, and
faithfulness, because He h^th not rewarded them.

Secondly, We see, then we have great reason to examine our selves, and bring
all our services to the test and touchstone of the Word of God, and try whither
our worship of God is true or false, sincere or hypocritical; any thing,
indeed, or nothing in God's estimation. What if God should say to thee, after
all the prayers thou have made, Fasts thou have kept, Sermons thou have heard,
Sabbath Days, Lecture days, in season, and out of season, and Sacraments thou
have received: Man, Woman, thou have never called upon Me, nor worshipped Me
unto this day; no thou have never yet prayed one Prayer, heard one Sermon,
received one Sacrament, sanctified one Sabbath, done one duty of religious
Worship. Truly, it is to be feared, this is the very case of many Professors
amongst us. Oh! the cold, dead, sleepy Prayers in families, the dull and
drowzie work we make on days of humiliation, the careless, fruitless hearing,
the slight unworthy receiving of Sacraments that is amongst us: May we not fear
this is the general condition of Professors amongst us in these secure and
perrilous times. We can travel into a Road of Duty, jogg on in a formal,
heartless manner, in a way of religious performances: But Oh, where is the
reverance of the Divine Majesty, the faith in His Son and Promises, the hope in
His mercy, the love to Him and the zeal for His glory, the unutterable groans,
and fervency of spirit, the attention of mind and intention of will and
affections, to such like gracious dispositions and qualifications of the
worship of God? Are not these things grown out of fashion with us? I doubt not
but there are many (through grace) among us that call upon God in truth,
wrestling Isreal's, a generation of seekers, praying souls that can weep and
make supplication, and prevail with God in a princely manner: Many that pray,
and hear and receive Sacraments, and worship God in spirit and in truth, that
are accepted, acknowleldged, owned, and shall be rewarded as true worshippers. I
would not be all in complaining, it is good to be thankful for what there is of
God among us Many there are of the good old generation, many of the middle and
of the young generation; yea, more, I doubt not, then we are aware of, that
call upon God, in sincerity; yea, there may be many a wise Virgin in a
slumbering fit that may say (with the spouse, Cantic. 5.2. I sleep but my heart
waketh; That must by no means be secluded, and so shut out of the company of
true worshippers. As there were seven thousand in Elijah's time, a time of the
greatest Apostasy of Israel that had not bowed a knee to Baal, nor defiled
themselves with idolatrous worship; so, no doubt, there were many thousands
that called upon God, and worshipped Him indeed, even in those degenerous times,
when the Lord said, Thou have not called upon me, O Jacob: But He speaks of
the body of that People that were hypocritical, formal, and irreligious: So
questionless we have many among us in these days of degeneracy and apostasy,
that worship God aright and seek Him with their whole heart, bear up the
Pillars of our Land, Are the Chariots and Horsemen of our Israel, and can do
wonders upon their knees. But what shall we say or think of the body of this
People? May not God upbraid us, and say, Thou have not called upon Me, O
New England? Do not many profanely neglect the worship of God in public
assemblies, in their families, in secret? Do not more perform it in such an
unworthy manner, as God will never acknowledge it for His worship; yea, though
it be a time of fear and danger, wherein the blessed God, New-Englands best
friend, the hope of our Israel and Savior thereof in time of trouble,
threatens us to be gone and carry away all our pleasant things, and our glory
with Him: Yet, may we not say with the Prophet? There is none (that is, few or
none in comparison) that call upon His Name and stir up themselves to take hold
of Him Isai. 64.7. Good it will be for us to consider it in order to our
humiliation and reformation. I know indeed, it is better for men to call upon
God and worship Him as they can, then profanely to neglect it: but assuredly
external worship, without internal, moral worship, will be of no account
with God, nor is by any means to be rested in. And if this be all the worship
that the body of Professors among us tender unto God, we are in a very bad
condition; it had need to be well considered and laid to heart by us.

Thirdly, Labor we then to call upon God and worship Him in truth: To tender
such homage and service to Him as He will graciously accept as such. Let us
make sure that our calling upon God be such indeed, and well pleasing to the
Lord. You that are out of Christ, never yet made a Prayer, heard a Sermon,
sanctified a Sabbath, worshipped God in any one instance, as you ought to do.
God says to every impenitent unbelieving sinner, Thou have never yet called
upon Me. But yet pray as well as you can, beg the spirit to humble you and draw
you to Christ, beg Faith, and every other Grace, and wait upon God in the use
of all means, as well as you can for the communication of grace; and when you
have it, be sure to improve it, and actuate it, and stir it up, mingle Faith
with Prayers, Sermons, Sacraments, that you may call upon God and worship Him
acceptably; that all your external worship may be accompanied with, animated by
natural and internal worship, which is the very soul of it: That there may be a
connection of these two, so that inward worship, in Faith, Love, fear of God,
and such like graces, may be exercised, expressed, strengthened, actuated as to
the principal of it to the glory of God and our comfort. Then will the Lord say
you call upon Him and worship Him indeed, and shall not loose your reward. Would
it not be a sad thing if you should loose all your Prayers, and all your
calling upon God should be nothing in His account? Will not their case be very
sad, that shall say unto Christ in the great day, Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy Name? and in thy Name cast out Devils? and in thy Name done
many wonderful works, and He shall profess unto them I never knew you, Mat.
7.22, 23. And will not your condition be deplorable, if in that day you should
say, Blessed Lord we have prayed, we have called upon God in thy Name, we have
worshipped God in hearing His Word, and receiving Sacraments: And He should
reply, I profess, I know no such matter, I am sure you never called upon God,
never prayed unto Him, or worshipped Him in all your lives? What a confusion
would this cover you with? and yet this entertainment will many professors meet
with in that day; look about you therefore in time, least you loose all the
prayers you make and worship you perform, and make sure you call upon God in
sincerity. Thus much for the first challenge and charge in the Text. Had the
Jews done all that was commanded them, respecting the Principle, Matter,
Manner, End of Gods Worship in a way of Gospel sincerity; yet they would have
been unprofitable Servants, far from meriting the lest Divine favor: much more
then when they had not (as to the body of them] called upon God at all in
sincerity. The second charge is, 2. That they had been weary of God. But thou
have been weary of me, O Israel. Others indeed read the words; Thou have not
called upon me, O Jacob, when thou have Labored or wearied thy self with me
or for me. As if he should say, it is true, thou have Labored in external
duties; been at much cost and pains in sacrifices, offerings, observances, but
yet for all that thou have not called upon me, worshipped me therein Thou have
tired thy self and labored hard in pretense for me, yet I disclaim all that
thou have done as none of my worship, because it has not proceeded from inward
hearty devotion, nor been attended with universal Obedience and a Religious
holy Conversation. Thou have labored much in sacrifices and offerings, but
have not sacrificed thy lust, mortified thy corruptions; offered and given me a
believing, humble, contrite, sincere, obedient heart, the sacrifice of a broken
and a contrite heart, which is required by me, and without which all thy other
sacrifices are unacceptable: Therefore I reckon thou have not called upon my
Name indeed, or worshipped me all this while. Thus the whole ver. should be
resolved into one discretive proposition to this effect; Though thou have taken
a great deal of pains in pretense and appearance for me, in thy sacrifices and
oblation, and ceremonial worships; yet in reality thou have not called upon me,
or performed any worship to me. Thus men may make as many prayers, and fast as
often as the Pharisees used to do; run to all the Lectures about them, frequent
Ordinances, and take a great deal of pains in appearance for God and in his
worship, and yet never call upon God, nor worship him in due manner: they may
seem to be very laborious in duties and Religious services for Gods sake, with
respect to Gods glory, as well as their own good, and yet all their pains in
that kind be rejected by the Lord as nothing worth. Others read the words; Thou
have not called upon me, seeing thou have wearied thy self for me, or in my
service. And if they be thus rendered and sensed, the latter clause is
exageticall or explanatory of the former, rendering a reason why the Lord says,
they had not called upon Him; namely, because though they had brought a
multitude of sacrifices, and kept up His worship in all the outward instituted
ways and means of it, yet they exhibited no worship to Him without trouble and
weariness, not with any promptness and alacrity of mind, but with an ill will,
which made all they did as good as nothing in Gods account. Others read, Thou
have not called upon me, when thou have wearied thy self against me, O Israel.
As if He should say, you have indeed taken a great deal of pain^ about the
outward part of worship, in killing sacrifices, bringing oblations, keeping
festivals, observing the ceremonies of the Law; but all this you have done in
such a wretched manner, without Faith and Obedience, in hypocricy and
formality: and so not for me as you pretend, but against me in Truth, not for
my Glory, but to my great dishonor, not for my satisfaction, but to my grief
and trouble. When men pray, hear the word, perform duties of worship, but
without an inward principle of grace, with a false and hypocritical heart,
without any care and conscience of Evangelicall Obedience; nay, in effect to
palliate their sins, that they may go on without regrett and remorse in a way
of wickedness; truly then their prayer and worship is not for God but against
him, to his great provocation and dishonor. God is affronted and despighted,
rather than delighted and gratified with such worship so ill circumstanced and
conditioned. The great design of God, in instituted, outward worship, is to
produce exercise, increase and draw forth faith and obedience in his people to
his Glory: But when this is not done, but external worship is kept up, without
any due regard to Faith and Obedience; nay, for a cover, excuse and protection
(as it were) of unbelief and disobedience, it looses its end, is good for
nothing but to dishonor and provoke God with the greater solemnity. But we
need not labor much here about the vanity of reversions. We may safely keep to
our English Translation, which is genuine plain, expressive of the Original:
And so there are two propositions in the words as we have intimated: Thou have
not called upon me, O Jacob; but thou have been weary of me, O Israel. And then
in the latter words there is a gradation and aggravation of their sins: Thou
have not only, not called upon me, but thou have been weary of me.

I need not tell you, that Israel here is the same with Jacob there: Children
descended from that holy, powerful Patriarch, whose Names were Jacob and
Israel, inheriting their Father's Name, even when they had little of His Piety.
The Lord charges them here with a weariness of Him, that in-stead of calling
upon Him with Faith, fervency, delight, as they should have done in all
respects, they were grown weary of Him. Here, Observe.

2. Doct. That it is sometimes the general, but unworthy, wretched frame of the
visible Church and People of God, to be weary of God. The Lord speaks here to
Jacob and Israel, a People in Covenant with Him, the only Church He had then
upon the face of the Earth, the People of His holiness, His peculiar Treasure,
whom He had honored above all other Nations, in giving His Word unto Jacob,
His statutes and judgments unto Israel, whereas He had not dealt so with any
other Nation Psalm. 147.19, 20. He had committed to them His Oracles and
Ordinances, formed them into a Church and Commonwealth, for Himself and His
own Glory; planted their Heavens, laid the Foundation of their Earth, and said
unto them, Thou art my People. They were a People very near, and dear to the
Lord, as appeared by His redeeming them from Egyptian bondage, leading them
through the Wilderness, giving them His Laws, taking them under the wing of His
Covenant, conducting them to, and settling them in the Land of Canaan* and then
giving them all things richly to enjoy. Yet this People, after all [as to the
body of them] grew weary of God. This, we may think, was monstrous,
dis-ingenuity and ingratitude to grow weary of Him that was their Father,
founder, Protector, Benefactour, on all accounts better to them then all the
world: We may think, when we read the Story, the Jews were a very strange
unworthy people in their deportments toward the Lord, and so they were indeed:
But know, withal, that we have the same hearts and natures, and are disposed
also to the like frame* too prone to make God the like requital of His
kindness to us, and to grow weary of Him. Gospel Churches are not secured
from, but subject to this unworthy, sinful frame of spirit. It is too often the
case of Professors in these Gospel times to be weary of God.

We shall here enquire.

1. Quest. When is a Person or People weary of God?

Answ. The original word (as Avenarius observes) has not so much respect, is
not so much referred to the weariness of the flesh or body, as of the mind and
spirit. Doubtless it is soul-weariness that is here intended. Now this would
require a large discourse, but I shall bring all into as narrow a compass as I
can.

Professors then are said to be weary of God, when they are weary of
subjection, service and obedience unto God. The Lord charged them with
omission, or neglect of His worship and service, Thou have not called upon me,
O Jacob, and then subjoynes, but thou have been weary of me, O Israel. Thou
have been so far from serving me according to my will, and thy duty, that thou
have been weary of me and my service. That service and obedience unto God that
should have been esteemed by them, as it was indeed their privilege, honor,
benefit and happiness; was their load, burden, trouble, and they were sick and
weary of it. This includes sundry things.

I. Weariness of the service of God it self, or of the kind and matter of
obedience. When professors are weary of the work that must be done in Gods
service, they are weary of God. The matter of Christian obedience is the
preceptive will of God, summarily comprehended in the Decalogue or moral Law
in the two Tables containing ten Commandments. When men are weary of doing and
suffering what God in His Law requires; so that to worship God with his own
prescribed worship, in that reverential, awful, holy manner, at such times as
he requires, and to make conscience of keeping close to all the Rules of
Justice and Charity in their converses and dealings with men (or in the
Apostles concise and comprehensive expressions) To live soberly, righteously,
and godly in this present world, Tit. 2.12. and to have due respect to, or walk
in all the Commandments of God, and to fulfill all His Wills [as the phrast is,
Act. 15 22.) When I say, men call this a weariness, a bondage and burden, so
as to esteem the burden of Christ that He lays upon them, a burden indeed,
and the yoke of His Law, galling and troublesome, and His Commands very
grievous, then doubtless they are weary of God. Weariness of Gods Laws and
holy ways, is weariness of God himself in a just construction. When men have
set upon a course of reformation, and obedience, seem to run well for a time,
but then tire and grow weary. Religion is not a matter of Theory and Orthodox
notions only, but of practice and labor. We may say of Theology, as the
Philosopher of civil prudence and policy, the end of it is (...) not bare
knowledge but practice God will have no idle servants in His family, He has
set them work to do; there is a race of odedience set before them, and the line
of their obedience must run parallel with the whole Law of God. But when men
are weary of this work, and hard duty, as they account it, they are weary of
God. Paul exhorts the Galathians, cap. 6 9. and the Thessalonians, 2 Epistle
3.13. not to be weary in well-doing, applying it to the particular duties He is
there pressing upon them. Now when men are not only weary, or wearish in, but
weary of well-doing, according to the revealed will of God, they are weary of
God. And this weariness of Gods service will be better understood, if we
consider it as opposed.

1. To a love and liking of the service of God When there is love to God and
His service, it will carry a man unwearedly in a course of obedience, that
though he may be weary in it, he will not be weary of it. The flesh may be weak
and tiresome, but (...) the spirit is willing Love will not easily tire, or
grow weary. Amor meus pondus meam (says Austine) ^o feror, quocunque feror.
Love is the weight and wing of the soul that carries on above all
difficulties, and discouragements in a course of service. It is strong as
death, and will not be stopped and hindered in its way. But weariness of Gods
service implies a dislike of it, displicency in it: It is not grateful in a
carnal heart, so much weariness of Gods service, so much aversation of it, and
want of love to it. When the Israelites were weary of the Manna, their souls
loathed that light bread, Number. 21.5. So, when men are weary of the service of
God in duties, and ordinances, and all kind of evangelicall obedience, their
souls dislike and loath it. They do even nauseate, and grow sick of Prayer,
Sermons, Sacraments, Sabbaths, Duties of Piety and Charity, all those ways
wherein God is to be served by us.

2 To strength, courage, vigor in the service of God. Where this is, there is
no difficulty, no Lion in the way, no discouragement that will deter, and
dishearten a man from his duty: Or, if through, that infirmity that the best of
Saints are subject to, man should give in, or give back, and shrink back from
his service of God for a time, yet he will recover himself again, and go
forward in the way of duty whatever he meet with in it: It is an observable
expression of Solomon, The way of the Lord is strength to the upright, Prove
10.20. Other ways tire men, the further they go the weaker they grow. But the
Lords way of faith and obedience is strength to the upright, whatever it is to
the unsound hypocrite; the further he travels in it, the stronger and more
vigorous he grows. The righteous shall hold on his way, and he that has clean
hands shall be stronger, and stronger, Job 17.9. Now this weariness of Gods
service, as opposed to this growing strength courage and vigor in the ways of
God, is, when a man has no life, no spirit, no vigor in the service of God:
He dare not obey God in the way of duty, because of difficulties, he has weak
hands, feeble knees, he has no heart, no strength, no vigor in the service of
God; and this not only for a fit, and in an hour of temptation, but in the
whole course of his profession, unless in some good mood, and pang of
affliction, which has no root, or spring, and soon vanishes away. The word
(...) Psalm. 6.9. rendered, let us not be weary, imports a shrinking from our
duty through pusilanimity and cowardly, dastardly weakness of spirit: and it is
explained also by that word (...) if we faint not: This weariness imports a
resolution as it were of sinews, a kind of Paralytick weakness, opposite to
strength, courage, and vigor of spirit.

3. To Alacrity and cheerfulness of spirit in the service of God. There ought
to be a promptness and alacrity of mind in our obedience, without which it is
of no value with the Lord. God loves a Cheerful giver, 2 Corinthians 4.7. not
a dull, heartless, but a lively, cheerful servant, that will do, or suffer for
Him with alacrity: He loves to be served with joyfulness and gladness of heart,
Deuteronomy. 28.47. They that will keep a Sabbath aright, must call it a delight, Isa
58.13. They that will worship God in public assemblies, must be glad when they
say, let us go into the house of the Lord, Psalm 1.2.1. They that will wait upon
God in His ordinances, must wi^h joy draw water out of the Wells of Salvation,
Isai. 12.3 They that will serve God by giving to any pious use or work of
charity, must (...) with cheerfulness, not grudgingly, or of necessity; for God
loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 4.7* So when they contributed to the Temple in
David 's t^me, King and People rejoices greatly, 1 Chronicles 29.9^ A man loses
all he does otherwise in Gods service. It is said of Jehosaphat to his
commendation, that his heart was lift up in the ways of the Lord, 2 Chronicles,
17.6. It signifies both his courage and cheerfulness in the work of
reformation. But weariness of Gods service is of a quite other import: Such as
are weary of Gods service, if they do not profanely cast it off, yet go on very
dully in it. They drive on very heavily, as the Egyptians drove their Chariots,
when God had taken off their wheels, Exodus 14 25. They do all as a task in a
slavish way. They have no delight, no comfort, no joy, nor alacrity in their
obedience.

4. To Zeal in the service of God.

Zeal is a genuine concomitant of true obedience. It is good to be zealously
affected always in a good thing, Gal. 4.18. As the service of God is the best
thing we can be occupied about. This zeal is an intense degree of sincere
affection to God and his service. It is the love, vigor, alacrity in Gods
service before spoken of, boiled to the height; a fervor of spirit in the work
of God. So Apollos was fervent in spirit, teaching diligently the things of the
Lord, Act. 18, 25. It is one of Paul's exhortations, that we should not be
slothful in business, but fervent (boiling hot) in spirit, serving the Lord,
Romans 12.11. But those that are weary of Gods service are luke warm; yea, cold,
dead, slothful, indifferent in it. Their prayers freez in their lips, and
there is no fervency of spirit put forth in their service.

5. To constancy and evenness in the way of Gods service. It is an excellent
thing when a man keeps on his pace in the way of service, or if there be any
difference he mends his pace and does better and better. When he holds on his
way, and grows stronger and stronger, Job. 17.9. That he does not flagg and
falter, but (...) progress and endeavor to do the work of God: But this
weariness of Gods service is contrary thereunto. It makes a man, if he do not
wholly turn aside from the way of duty, yet to be very unconstant, and uneven,
and make many balks in it. He walks with God at all adventures, Levi. 26.21.
Not by any stedy rule, or keeping any constant pace.

Hence we neglect the service of God, secret prayer, and other duties, and then
a terrible Sermon, or some dangerous Sickness, some sore affliction, or
remarkable providence awakens him to his work, and then he prays, and reforms,
and does duties a while, but in a little time the impression of those things
wear off his spirit, and then he relapseth into his former neglect, and is as
bad as ever. This is weariness indeed of Gods service; like the Israelites that
in times of affliction sought God with much affection, but there was no
stedfastness in them, Psalm. 78.34, 37.

6. To perseverance to the end in a way of duty. Gods servants must hold on in
a way of service, and not give in till they come to the end of their race. It
is the persevering Saint that shall have the reward. He that endures to the end
shall be saved, Matthew. 24.13. But now this weariness of Gods service tends to
and frequently is such in a total apostasy. Where such men as be weary of duty
have served God in their lives by fitts and starts, and in some good mood for a
time, they do at last many times grow quite cold, and turn aside to the
service of sin and satan: Like Demas that accompanied Paul, and did service a
while, but then forsook the service of Christ and embraced the world; and as
Ecclesiastical story says of him, became a Priest in an idols temple. This
weariness of Gods service often ends in a forsaking of it: And no wonder if a man
cast off his burden as soon as he can. Thus professors are weary of Gods
service it self, or of the kind and matter of obedience, and this weariness of
Gods service, is attended with

II. Weariness of their relation to God as their Master. They look upon the
service of God as very grievous, and God himself as an hard Master, and hence
are weary of the relation of servants to him: They do not find His yoke easy,
and His burden light; but it is intolerable to their wretched hearts; hence
they grow into a dislike of God Himself, and are weary of their relation to
Him. They seemed to have chosen Him for their Master; but upon experience of
his service they repent their choice, and now He shall be no Master of theirs:
Now they can change away their glory, Ier. 2 11. Renounce their relation to,
and interest in the Lord, if it cannot be had on easier terms then such hard
service. Like that people that said to the Prophets, Isa. 30.10, 11. Prophecy
smooth things, and get you out of the way, turn ye aside out of the path (we do
not like this way of preaching law, and duty, threatenings and judgments here,
and damnation hereafter to the disobedient) leave this way of preaching, and
cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us: Trouble us no more with
messages from God, talk no more of Him and His Commands, and threatenings, we
are weary of His Word and service, and care to hear no more of it. They loved
not to hear their duty of Gods service pressed upon them

They had done with God and His service. Such are not like the servant, that in
the year of release, was contented out of love to his Master, and liking of his
service, to have his ear bored, and to serve him for ever, Exodus 21.6. But have
such a dislike of the service of God, that they are willing to cast off His
hard service, and abandon their relation to Him.

This is attended with,

III. Weariness of their Covenant obligation to the Lord and His service,
whereby they are engaged to be His People, Subjects, Servants, to hear true
faith and allegiance to Him, and renouncing all other Lords that have had
dominion over them, to cleave to Him, trust in Him, fear, love and serve Him
alone.

They could even wish their Indentures cancelled and burnt, are sorry they are
so far engaged in Church Covenant and fellowship, that they are under such
strickt solemn ties, and obligations to service and obedience. It troubles them
that they are tied up so short, so chained, so bound with the bonds of the
Covenant, that their hands are so manicled that they cannot act as they would,
feet so fettered that they cannot walk as they please. They cannot endure these
shackles; could wish they were handsomely quit of their Covenant-engagements
which hold them in, abridg and infringe their liberty to live as they list.
They are impatient of being staked down to so short a tedder, that they cannot
range as they please.

In some good mood, and for some by-end they entered into Covenant with God and
His People: but now they are sorry that the yoke of obedience and service is
with their own consent so bound and fastened to their neck by the Covenant; that
they know not well how to shake it off, and get clear of it. So much weariness
of the service of God, so much weariness there will be of Covenant-obligations
to it.

Again,

IV. Weariness of Divine Truth, which directs them in the way of Gods service.

They would have smooth things, not right things, prophesied unto them. Deceit
and errors that will countenance their hypocrisy and sloth, and give them
liberty, and elbow room, rather then this severe truth, that leads them right
on in the way of piety and obedience, and will not allow them to turn aside
from it, to the right or left hand. They see no beauty and glory in Divine
Truth, have had little or no experience of the power of it upon their hearts,
receive not the love of it, 2 Thessalonians, 2.10. Have no stomach or appetite
to it, wholesome Truths (referring to Christian practice] will not down with
them, they cannot endure sound Doctrine, but love dawbing with untempered
Mortar, to be stroked and flattered; and strengthened in a way of looseness, and
to have Pillows sewed under their Elbows. This Truth is a biteing them, and
they cannot beat it.

Hence men make no great difference between Truth and Error, are not concerned
for defense of the Truth and suppression of Error, have no ^eal to contend
earnestly for the Faith. Truth may sink or swim for all them. Nay, they had
rather it were drowned and buried out of the way, it is so troublesome to them.

Again,

V. Weariness of Gods providential discipline (as I may call it] whereby He
would quicken them to His service, and reduce them into the way of it, when
they have wandered from it.

My meaning, is God in His providence exercises severe discipline in His
visible Church, by chastisements and afflictions in order to their correction
and emendation. He will not bear that in His Vovenant People, that He will
overlook and wink at in others for a time. You only have I known of all the
families of the Earth: therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities,
Amos. 3.2. He will not let them prosper in their sins as He suffers other men.
Now hypocrites in the Church cannot brook this discipline, but are weary of
Gods correction. My son (says Solomon, Pro. 3.11.] Despise not the chastning
of the Lord, neither be weary of His correction: The best of Gods People may be
weary and faint under it for a time, but when they come to themselves, and see
how righteous it is with God, how profitable to themselves, they recover
themselves, and say, it is good for them to be afflicted; because thereby they
are reduced from their strayings, into the way of obedience. But other men are
quite weary of such correction, had rather be let alone in their neglect of
Gods service, then whipped into a better behavior: They love ease and immunity
from affliction; more then holiness and obedience.

Again,

VI. Weariness of Gods government, whereby He would hold them close to His
service and obedience.

Weary they are. 1. Of Gods inward government; the government of conscience
rightly informed from the Word of God, and aided by at least a common work of
the spirit in the discharge of its office, dictating their work and duty,
obliging them to the service of God, impelling and putting them on to perform
it, accusing and condemning them for neglect of it, or slightness and
hypocrisy in it. They are weary of this troublesome Conscience, that will not
let them be quiet in sin, endeavor to bribe it, corrupt it, divert it, stop
its mouth, rock it asleep, and cast off the government of it, and get the
mastery over their consciences.

Weary also, 2. Of Gods outward government, whereby they are over awed,
checked, held in from exorbitancies, and driven against their mind to the
service of God. Weary of family government, long to be at liberety, at their
own dispose, to live at their own hand, that they may not be troubled with
commands, counsels, corrections of pious Parents, that would hold them to
their duty, and engage them to keep the way of the Lord. Weary of
Church Discipline and government, had rather live at a loose end then under
such discipline, cannot bear reproofs, admonitions, the rod of discipline,
would break the bands and cast away the cords of Christ. Weary of government in
the Common wealth, would be glad to be rid of pious Rulers that are a terror
to evil works, and will not let them sin impune; cannot bear such Masters of
restraint, long for a change, and think they cannot be worse than they are. The
bottom is, They are weary of Gods service.

Again,

VII. Weariness of spiritual Privileges, that are to be enjoyed in the way of
Gods service.

They are weary of the pleasant things of Jerusalem, the Word, Worship,
Ordinances of God, liberty to serve Him in the way of His appointments. If they
could have Baptism for their Children, Lord's Supper for themselves, enjoy
these and those Privileges, without any labor of theirs, without any
injunction of service, they could like it better. But all these Privileges are
so charged with duty, so clogged and encumbred with service, they set at so
great a rent of service, and pay so dear (as they think) for their Privileges,
that they are weary of them. They have little sense or experience of the worth
of Privileges, but feel the burden of service, and are willing, so they may be
discharged of the one, to part with the other. Yea, they are full of their
mercies, and nauseate their Privileges, as much as ever the Israelites did the
Manna.

Again,

VIII. Weariness many times of their very profession of service, and obedience
to God.

A bare empty profession grows a burden to them, especially when they have
served their turn of it, and it is grown out of fashion in the World. They
repent they are so far engaged as to have taken up a Profession, and would
desert and abandon it, if it were not for shame, and they knew how to secure an
honorable retreat. As they never had experienced the power of godliness, so
they grow at last to be weary even of the form of godliness: To maintain a
Name to live and keep up a Profession of Religion, requires more labor and
pains then they are willing to bestow upon it. But thus you see when a Person,
or People may be said to be weary of God.

The second Question should be, Whence comes it to pass, that a Person, or
People are weary of God? and that this is the general frame of the Church and
People of God sometimes. But this would require a very large discourse, and I
must leave it to some other opportunity.

USE, 1. Of Examination.

Have we not then great reason to examine our selves narrowly, and impartially,
whether we are not such a People as are weary of God* We see the People of the
Jews were deservedly charged with it: Jacob and Israel were weary of God: yea,
many Churches in New Testament times, on whom more of Light, Grace, Spirit was
shed forth, have been most unworthily weary of the blessed God. And what are we
that we should plead any privilege or think our selves secured from such a
sinful frame of spirit as this is? I know we have a great opinion of our
selves. We are ready to think, God has hardly such another People in the
World, as His People in New England.

Hence it will hardly sink into many men's hearts, that God should leave New
England, and give up His People and Interest here into the hands of
Adversaries, that are ready enough to stretch forth their hands upon our
pleasant things. We are prone to imagine the Churches and People of God here,
are too good to be destroyed or tied down by any foot of pride and violence:
But I wish there be not more of pride and fancy, then of Faith in this opinion.
I confess the Lord Jesus Christ has a very glorious interest among us: but it
is very little beholding to us, that have weakened and disparaged it
exceedingly by our great miscarriages. I know also that there are a number of
very choice People among us, very dear to God, for whom we fare the better at
this day. And I do indeed hope that God is very unwilling to break up house
among us, and remove from us, Very loath to sell His People for naught, when he
is not like to increase His wealth by their price, Psalm. 44.12. Yea, that He
fears (to speak in His own language, Deuteronomy. 31* 27.) The wrath of the enemy,
least our adversaries should behave themselves strangely, and say, our hand is
high, and the Lord has not done all this. I hope the Lord may be saying at
this day, as in Hosea 11.8, 9. How shall I give thee up, Oh, New England? My
heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together. I will not
execute the fierceness of mine anger, Doubtless, the Lord remembers the
kindness of our youth, and the love of our espousals, when we came after Him
into this Wilderness, and were Holiness to the Lord. He has not forgot the
Faith, the Love, the Zeal, the self Denial, the Holiness and
Heavenly-mindedness of those Worthies that laid the Foundation of this
Plantation.

Questionless, He has many among us at this day of the same spirit, that
follow hard after God, and shall never be forsaken by Him. So that we have no
reason to despair, and sink into discouragement, but to hope in the mercy of
God. But alas! have we not great reason to fear what God may do unto us? Is not
this the too general frame, and spirit of Professors among us, to be weary of
God? I truly grant, that if it be so; yet it does not unavoidably follow, that
God will presently forsake us. Jacob and Israel were weary of God, and yet He
promises to blot out their transgaessions for His Name sake; and though He let
their enemies carry them Captive, yet to command a very great deliveverance for
them. The sum of all is, what prerogative mercy may do for us in Pitying,
Pardoning, Healing, Saving, we cannot tell: but if we are indeed generally
weary of God; according to common Law we perish.

Are you willing then to put all upon this issue, whether it be (I say not the
universal, I believe it is not, but) the too general frame of Professors
among us to be weary of God? It is a matter of great concernment: Shall we
examine it a little, and put it to the trial? I might call over the
particulars before mentioned, and say, Are we not weary of the service of God?
Where is our Love and Kindness to Gods service? Where is our Strength and
Vigor, our Alacrity, our Zeal, our Evenness and Constancy, our Perseverance in
the service of God? Do we not drive very heavily, and plod on without love,
life, vigor, in a dull, formal, careless manner, as if the service of God
were a burden and drudgery to us? Are we not weary of our relation to God?
Weary of our Covenant-obligation to Him? Weary of His Truth? Weary of His
Correction? Weary of His Government? Weary of our Privileges and Mercyes? Do
not our murmurings ( like those of Israel in the Wilderness] show this? Do not
many People think, and say, if there be any little thing amiss among us, or
they be crossed in any thing, we cannot be worse then we are? Do they not wish
for changes? Are we not a sick People, and think, if we could change our bed
[as sick men are wont to fancy) then we should be well? Are not our Privileges
too costly, too chargable and burdensome for us? Are we not grown fatt and
wanton [with Jesurun, Deuteronomy. 32.15.] So as to s^urn at the Bowels of God, kick
against His Ordinances, and would kick them away? Are there not many that would
spurn down the Churches with greatest scorn? Yea, Are there not many Professors
even weary and ashamed of their profession? But I shall not insist on these
things: All I shall do is to give some Criteria or Rules by which duly applied,
we may judge whether we are weary of God or no. Are there not sad signs and
symptoms, Pathog^^monicall signs (as Physicians speaks) of this spiritual
Lacistude, this wearyness, this dangerous threatening disease among us?

Consider,

First, All these among us that are not weary of themselves are certainly weary
of God. Those that are not weary of that burden of flesh they carry about with
them, the body of Sin and Death, their sinful natures, their vile hearts that
are so much estranged from God and His service, disframed for Communion with
Him; That weight that presses them down, and the Sin that easily besets them,
Heb. 12.1. That are not sick of themselves and their aversness and
indisposition to Gods service, are doubtless weary of God. For experience shows
that the best of Gods People have their weary fits; much of what we have spoken
of weariness of God and His service, may be applied to the sincere faithful
Servants of God at sometimes, and in some pangs of temptation; they have their
weary frames, wherein they are ready to say, Behold what a weariness is it,
Mal. 1.13. But then they do not allow themselves in it, but judge and condemn
and hate themselves for it. As Paul when he could not, by reason of indwelling
sin, obey the Law of God perfectly, does not fall out with the Law, as if it
were too strict and severe, but takes part with it against himself: The Law is
holy, and the Commandment is holy, just and good, and we know that the Law is
spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under sin, Romans 7.12, 14. He does not blame
the Law for his occasional, accidental irritation of his corruptions, or for
any rigor in condemning him for the transgression of it, or setting him hard
tasks, impossible for him to perform as the Law exacts: But he approves and
commends the perfect holiness and equity of the Law, and lays all the blame on
his own flesh and sinful nature, and is quite weary of himself, Cries out,
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this Death? Romans
7.24. So it will be with every faithful Servant of God in the case before us.
He may be weary sometimes of Gods service, but then he is weary of himself for
it, weary of that weariness of God, falls out with himself on the account, is
full of displeasure and indignation against himself, and his own wretched
heart, abhorrs himself for such an unworthy frame, and repents in dust and
ashes: and indeed God will not leave his own Children to an allowance of
themselves in such weary frames, but will reduce them to a true christian
temper again by his Word, Spirit, Rod, one means or other. But now when a man
is good friends with himself, loves himself, never fell out indeed with
himself, never loathed himself; never was humbled to any purpose for his
Original as well as Actual sins, never mourned for that wretched aversation of
his heart from the Law and Service of God, was never weary of himself in that
respect, we may be sure he is weary at the very heart of the holy God (...) his
service. For a man's flesh and carnal heart cannot but be weary of Gods
service, it is so spiritual and holy, and he so unsuitable to it, and if he do
feel this, grown under it as his burden: if he be not heart sick and weary of
himself, you may be sure he is under the power of this spirit of weariness of
God.

II. All those that are not weary of the World and the service of it, are weary
of God.

This World and the things of it, were made for the service and accommodation
of man in his way of serving God.

Man had originally an Empire and Dominion over these creatures here below,
they stood ready pressed to his service; he could command them in God's Name to
do him service, and had free liberty to make use of them to the glory of God
and his own comfort.

But Sin has inverted this Order, and brought confusion upon earth. Man is
dethroned, and become a servant and slave to those things that were made to
serve him, and he puts those things in his heart, that God has put under his
feet. Profits, Pleasures, Honors, these lusts of the World, are the Masters,
yea the Idols of sinful men: The life of their spirits is in these things.
They find the life of their hand in these things, therefore they are not
grieved, or sick and weary, Isaiah 57.10. These worldly things agree well with
the frame of their hearts, they find satisfaction, sweetness, rest, happiness
in these enjoyments.

Is not this the condition of many among us? Needs there any secret search,
or digging, (as the word is, Jer. 2 34.) To discover this worldly spirit among
us? does it not lie above ground? Is it not very obvious? Have we not many
proud, covetous, sensual professors? Would not blessed Paul, if he were here,
weep over us in this respect, that there are so many, whose God is their belly,
whose glory is in their shame, and who mind earthly things? Phil. 3.19 Was
there ever a People that pretended so high to the service of God, and yet are
so heartily engaged in the service of the World? Are we weary of the World?
sure then it is not that we are weary of it, but even tire and weary our selves
in the service of it, and yet have never enough. Truly, those that are not
weary of the World, so as to find no rest and satisfaction in it, and in the
service of it, are certainly weary of God, and and so weary, That they have
changed away their glory for things that do not profit: Our Savior has given
us the reason of it, Math. 6.24. No man can serve two Masters, for either he
will hate the one, and love the other, or else he will hold to the one, and
despise the other; ye cannot serve God and Mammon. A man will be weary of the
service of God or the World*

III. Those that are wearying God with their iniquities, and making Him to
serve with their sins, are certainly weary of God.

For thus the Lord brands His People, that He charges to have neglected His
worship and been weary of Him. Thou have made me to serve with thy sins, thou
have wearied me with thine iniquities, Isa. 43.24. God is wearied by our
unbelief, refusing His gracious offers and disregarding His message, Isai.
7.13. They that are weary of God will weary God with their sins, and they that
weary God, we may be sure are weary of Him, when men load God (as it were]
with their sins, not of infirmity (for infi^mities acknowledged and mourned
for, do not weary God] but presumptious sins impenitently persisted in, then
they are wearying of God with their multiplied aggravated iniquities, who is
pressed under them, As a Cart is pressed that is full of sheives, Amos, 2.13.
(...) love and delight in Gods service, though they may grieve him now and then
through infirmity, yet they will not continue a course of sin, to the wearying
of God. Those are weary of Gods service: that weary Him with their iniquities,
and make Him serve with their sins. When men are weary of Gods service they
will either cast it off, or else will use the service of God, not to please and
glorify God, but as a means to compass some inferior, carnal ends of their
own.

Thus too many Professors when Religion is in fashion, will make use of it to
further their advancement and honor; yea, some can make use of Gods Ordinances
as Instruments of their revenge to wreak their malice or anger upon those that
have offended them. This is to make God serve with their sins; yea, to serve
their lusts, when men subordinate Religion, and make their profession of it
subservient to their own base or worldly designs. And it is well if there be
not very much of this among us. That whereas we should (as Austin says) Frui
Deo uti creaturis, enjoy God as our end and happiness, and use creatures as
means in order to that end. We do invert the due order, and do frui creaturis
et uti Deo, enjoy the creatures as our end and happiness, and use God and His
service to further our enjoyment of created things, and as a means in order to
that end; which is a very prepostrous thing, and a great affront to the Lord to
make Him a servant, an underling, quasi mancipium (as one says upon the place]
as it were a slave, to bear our burdens and serve our turns.

IV. All those that are weary of the Image of God in His People that most
resemble Him, are doubtless weary of God.

David was a man that delighted in Gods Law and Service, and followed hard
after God, Psalm. 63.8. Hence he loved and delighted in those that were created
after Gods Image, and the more he saw of God in them, the more he loved them.
The Saints on earth were the excellent Ones, in whom was all his delight, Psalm.
16.3. A companion of such, Psalm 119.63 As delight in man, because of God
appearing in them is an evidence of greater delight in God; so weariness of
men, because of what of God appears in them, is a certain sign of greater
weariness of God Himself.

Now is not this the frame, not only of profane persons among us, but of many
Professors that they are weary of the power and practice of godliness in those
that follow God fully, they despise and loath and are weary of the Image of God
in His faithful Servants, could be glad to be rid of them, when they die lay it
not to heart, but are secretly glad of it, because their lives and practices
condemn them, and are a perpetual standing reproof of their loose walking. It
is well if we have not many Church Members of this spirit, that they are weary
of the society of good People, and of communion of Saints, tired with their
company, discourses, holy communication and conversation. Do not many of our
formal, sensual Professors, that can typple and swill it, and keep vain
company, and spend their time in idle chat, learn to deride and jeer the
preciseness and holiness of better men then themselves? Do they not dislike and
loath the presence and fellowship of such persons, in whom much of God and His
grace shines? I wish there be not that malignity in the hearts of many men;
yea, many withered Professors among us, as will if the wheel turn and the
Church interest sink, break forth into bitter persecution of the most pious and
faithful Servants of God. Sure they that are weary of God in His People, are
weary of God Himself.

V. All those of whom God is weary, are undoubtedly themselves weary of God.

The reason is, because when God has called a People to His service, and
conferred great privileges upon them, He does not tire and grow weary first.
He is faithful and constant, and will never grow weary of them, as long as
they hold to His service, and follow it hard with hearty love to it, vigor,
alacrity, zeal, constancy in it, but when they grow sick of His service, wanton
and full of their privileges, then God has reason to be weary of them.

Now does not the Lord seem to be weary of us? Do not His dispensations speak
as much? Does He not carry Himself toward us, as if His very soul was loosned
and disjoynted from us? As the phrase is, Jer. 6.8. Time has been when the
Lord Jesus, the Head and King of His Church was held or bound in His galleries,
Cantic. 7.5. So taken with the Faith and Order, the Piety, Loyalty (...) very
enemies themselves being judges. The growth and prosperity of this Plantation
has been the admiration of all, the eyesore and envy of adversaries. But does
not God change His dispensation? And may we not be sure it is not from any
fickleness, unfaithfulness, inconstancy in God, but occasioned by a sad change
in us? Were not many ready to say of our worthy Predecessors, when they were
laying our foundation, as Sanballat said of the Jews, when they were building
the wall of Jerusalem, Nehem. 4.2. What do these feeble People? But did it not
quickly appear that the Lord was with them? Did not the work here prosper even
beyond the faith and expectation of His Servants that followed Him into this
Land, which God had espied out for them? But does not God seem to be about to
break down what He has built, and pluck up that which he has planted* Are
there not many sad tokens of His weariness of us? And is not this a
demonstration of our weariness of God? May not the Lord say, Hear, O Heavens,
and give ear O earth, I have nourished and brought up Children, and they have
been weary of their Father, weary of the only best friend they have in the
World? We have little reason to be offended or wonder at Gods withdrawing,
hiding, frowning, threatening to be gone from us, considering our weariness of
Him.

The wonder is, He has waited and spared so long such an unworthy People: Let
us therefore search and try our hearts and ways Be not deceived, God will not
be mocked with shows and outsides, empty and lazy professions: His eyes ^^e
upon the heart, and if there be heart-weariness of God among us, God will not
endure it.

But how happy would it be for the Professors of New England, if now at last
they would examine their hearts, judge themselves for this unreasonable,
inexcuseable weariness of God, recover themselves from under the prevailing
power of this spirit and frame of weariness of Gods service, and stir up
themselves, and to take hold of God, when He is ready to be gone from us, and
follow hard after Him in a course of hearty service and obedience. Then would
the Lord repent of what He is threatening to do unto us, restore His wonted
glorious presence, Be to us a place of broad Rivers and Streams, for necessary
defense, and plentiful supplies of all comforts.

Then would the Lord be a wall of fire round about us, and the Glory in the
midst of us: Yea, then should our eyes see our Jerusalem, a quiet Habitation, a
Tabernacle that shall not be taken down, not so much as one of the Stakes
removed, nor any one of the Cords thereof broken* Isaiah, 33.20.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 3. line 8. read freeness of his grace. p. 4. l. 19. r. Isa. 58. p. 5. l.
4. r, goodly. l. ^2. r. Isa. 1.11. l. 21. r. immorrallity. p. 6. l. 5. r.
hypocritical l. 18. r. regarded. p. 7. l. 29. r. quarrel. l. ult. r. toward.
p. 8. l. 23. r. worshipers. p. 12. l. 27. r. variety o^ version. l. 36. r.
pr^yerfull. p. 14. l. 30. r. will. ^. 31. r. Act. 13. p. 15. l. 22. r. the some
times. l. 29. r. to. p. 16. l. 5. r. the service. l. 9. r. 29. l. 24. r. Gal.
6.9. l 23. r. 2 Cor. 9.7. p. 17 l. 6. r. they. l. 7. r. rejoiced. p. 18. l. 2.
r. purpose. l. 18. r, he neglects, l. 22. r, issues r. when. l. 23. r. way. p.
19. l. 17. r. and. l. ult. r. Cords. p. ^0. l. 30. r. thing. p. 23 l. ^, r. at
last. p. 24. l. 32. r. freely. l. 36. r* merveilous. p. 26. l. 2^. r. for his.


