AN ESSAY FOR THE RECORDING OF Illustrious Providence: WHEREIN, An Account is
given of many Remarkable and very Memorable Events, which have happened in this
last Age; ESPECIALLY IN NEW ENGLAND.

By INCREASE MATHER, Teacher of a Church at Boston in New England.

Psalm. 107. 5. Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his
wonderful works to the Children of Men. Psalm. 145. 4. One Generation shall
praise thy works to another, and shall declare thy mighty acts. Printed at
BOSTON in New England, and are to be sold by George Calvert at the Sign of the
Half Moon in Paul's Churchyard, London, 1684.

THE Preface.
ABout six and twenty years ago, a Design for the Recording of illustrious
Providence, was under serious consideration among some eminent Ministers in
England and in Ireland. That motion was principally set on foot by the Learned
Mr. Matthew Pool, whose Synopsis Criticorum, and other Books by him emitted,
have made him famous in the World. But before any thing was brought to effect,
the Persons to have been employed, had their thoughts diverted another way.
Nevertheless, there was a M. SS. (the Composer whereof is to me unknown) then
written, wherein the Subjects proper for this Record, and some Rules for the
better managing a design of this nature, are described. In that M. SS. I find
notable Stories related and attested, which elsewhere I never met with.
Particularly, the Sorry of Mr. Earl of Colchester, and another mentioned in our
subsequent Essay. And besides those, there are some very memorable Passages
written, which have not as yet been published, so far as I understand. There
are in that M. SS. several Remarkabless about Apparitions, e. g. It is there
said, that Dr. Frith, (who was one of the Prebends belonging to Windsor) lying
on his Bed, the Chamber Doors were thrown open, and a Corpse with attending
Torches brought to his Bedside upon a Bier; The Corpse representing one of his
own Family: After some pause, there was such another show, till he, the said
Dr. his Wife and all his Family were brought in on the Bier in such order as
they all soon after died. The Dr. was not then sick, but quickly Melancholy,
and would rising at Midnight repair to the Graves and monuments at Eaton
College; saying, that he and his must shortly take up their nabitation among
the Dead. The Relater of this Story (a Person of great integrity) had it from
Dr. Frith's Son, who also added, My Fathers Vision is already Executed upon all
the Family but my self, my time is next, and near at hand.

In the mentioned M. SS. there is also a marvelous Relation concerning a young
Scholar in France: For, it is there affirmed, that this profane Student,
having by extravagant courses outrun his means; in his discontent walking
solitarily, a Man came to him, and enquired the cause of his sadness. Which he
owning to be want of Money, had presently a supply given him by the other. That
being quickly consumed upon his Lusts; as soon as his Money was gone his
Discontent returned; and in his former Walk, he met with his former Reliever,
who again offered to supply him; but asked him to contract with him to be his,
and to sign the contract with his Blood. The woeful wretch consented: but not
long after, considering that this contract was made with the Devil; the terrors
of his Conscience became insupportable; so as that he endeavored to kill
himself to get out of them. Some Ministers, and other Christians being informed
how matters were circumstanced, kept days of Prayer for him and with him: and
he was carefully watched that so he might be kept from Self-Murder. Still he
continued under Terror, and said he should do so, as long as the Covenant which
he had signed, remained in the hands of the Devil. Hereupon, the Ministers
resolve to keep a day of Fasting and Prayer in that very place of the Field
where the distressed creature had made the woeful Bargain, setting him in the
midst of them. Thus they did, and being with special actings of Faith much
enlarged to pray earnestly to the Lord to make known his power over Satan, in
constraining him, to give up that contract, after some hours continuance in
Prayer, a Cloud was seen to spread it self over them, and out of it the very
contract signed with the poor crearures Blood was dropped down amongst them;
which being taken up and viewed, the party concerned took it, and tore it in
pieces. The Relator had this from the mouth of Mr. Beaumond, a Minister of Note
at Caon in Normandy, who assured him that he had it from one of the Ministers
that did assist in carrying on the Day of prayer when this memorable providence
happened. Nor is the Relation impossible to be true, for Luther speaks of a
providence not unlike unto this, which happened in his Congregation.

This M. SS. does also mention some most Remarkable Judgments of God upon
Sinners, as worthy to be Recorded for Posterity to take notice of. It is there
said, that when Mr. Richard Juxon was a Fellow of Kings College in Cambridge,
he led a most vicious life: and whereas such of the Students as were serious in
matters of Religion, did endeavor by solemn Fasting and Prayer to prepare
themselves for the Communion which was then (this was about the year 1636) on
Easter Day. This Juxon spent all the time of preparation in Drunken wild
Meetings, and was up late and Drunk on the Saturday night. Nevertheless, on the
Lords day, he came with others to the Communion, and sat next to the Relator,
who knowing his Disorder the night before, was much troubled: but had no
remedy; Church Discipline not being then so practiced as ought to have been.
The Communion being ended, such of the Scholars as had the fear of God in their
hearts, repaired to their Closets. But this Juxon went immediately to a
Drunken-meeting, and there to a Cockfight, where he fell to his accustomed
madness, and pouring out a volley of Oaths and Curses; while these were between
his Lips, God smote him dead in the twinkle of an eye. And though Juxon were
but young, and of a comely person, his Carcass was immediately so corrupted as
that the stench of it was insufferable, insomuch that no house would receive
it; and his Friends were forced to hire some base Fellows to watch the Carcass
till night; and then with Pitch and such like Gums covered him in a Coffin, and
so made a shift to endure his Interment. There stood by a Scholar, whose name
was George Hall, and who acted his part with Juxon in his profaneness: but he
was so astonished with this amazing Providence of God, as that he fell down
upon his knees, begging pardoning mercy from Heaven, and vowing a Reformation;
which vow the Lord enabled him to keep, so as that afterward he became an able
and famous Minister of the Gospel.

One strange passage more I shall here relate out of the M. SS. which we have
thus far made mention of. Therein I find part of a Letter transcribed; which is
as follows:

Lismore, October. 2. 1658. In another part of this Country, a poor man being
suspected to have stolen a Sheep was questioned for it; he forswore the thing,
and wished that if he had stolen it, God would cause the Horns of the Sheep to
grow upon him. This man was seen within these few days by a Minister of great
repute for Piety, who says, that the Man has an Horn growing out of one corner
of his Mouth, just like that of a sheep: from which he has cut seventeen
Inches, and is forced to keep it tied by a string to his Ear, to prevent its
growing up to his eye: This Minister not only saw but sel^ this Horn, and
reported it in this Family this week, as also a Gentleman formerly did, who was
himself an eyewitness thereof. Surely such passages are a Demonstrative
evidence that there is a God, who judges in the Earth, and who though he stay
long, will not be mocked always.

I shall say no more concerning the M. SS. only that it was sent over to
Reverend Mr. Davenport, by (as I suppose) Mr. H^rtlib. How it came to lie
dormient in his hands I know not: though I had the happiness of special
Intimacy with that worthy Man, I do not remember that ever I heard him speak
any thing of it. But since his Death, looking over his M. SS's I met with this,
and communicated it to other Ministers, who highly approved of the noble design
aimed at therein. Soon after which, some Proposals in order to the reviving of
this work were drawn up, and presented at a general Meeting of the Ministers in
this Colony. May 12. 1681. which it may not be unsuitable here to recite.

Some PROPOSALS concerning the RECORDING of Illustrious PROVIDENCE.
I. IN Order to the promoving of a design of this Nature, so as shall be indeed
for Gods Glory, and the good of Posterity, it is necessary that utmost care
shall be taken that All, and Only Remarkable Providence be Recorded and
Published.

II. Such Divine Judgments, Tempests, Floods, Earthquakes, Thunders as are
unusual, strange Apparitions or what ever else shall happen that is Prodigious,
Witchcrafts, Diabolical Possessions, Remarkable Judgments upon noted Sinners:
eminent Deliverances and Answers of Prayer, are to be reckoned among
Illustrious Providence.

III. Inasmuch as we find in Scripture, as well as in Ecclesiastical History,
that the Ministers of God have been improved in the Recording and Declaring the
works of the Lord; and since they are in diverse respects under peculiar
Advantages thereunto: It is proposed, that each one in that capacity may
diligently enquire into, and Record: such Illustrious Providence as have
happened, or from time to time shall happen in the places whereunto they do
belong: and that the Witnesses of such notable Occu^rents be likewise set down
in Writing.

IV. Although it be true, that this Design cannot be brought unto Perfection in
one or two years, yet it is much to be desired that something may be done
therein out of hand, as a Specimen of a more large Volumn, that so this work
may be set on foot, and Posterity may be encouraged to go on therewith.

V. It is therefore Proposed that the Elders may concur in desiring some one
that has Leisure and Ability for the management of such an undertaking, with
all convenient speed to begin therewith.

VI. And that therefore other Elders do without delay make Enquiry concerning
the Remarkable Occurrents that have formerly fallen out, or may fall out
hereafter, where they are concerned, and transmit them unto the aforesaid
person, according to the Directions above specified, in order to a speedy
P^llication.

VII. That Notice be given of these Proposals unto our Brethren, the Elders of
the Neighbor Colonies, that so we may enjoy their Concurrence, and Assistance
herein.

VIII. When any thing of this Nature shall be ready for the Press, it appears
on sundry Grounds very expedient, that it should be read, and approved of at
some Meeting of the Elders, before Publication.

These things being Read and Considered; the Author of this Essay, was desired
to begin the work which is here done; and I am Engaged to many for the
Materials, and Informations which the following Collections do consist (...) It
is not easy to give an Account (...) things, and yet no circumstantial
mistakes attend what shall be related. Nor dare I averr, that there are none
such in what follows. Only I have been careful to prevent them; and as to the
substance of each passage, I am well assured it is according to Truth. That
rare accident about the Lightning which: caused a wonderful change in the
Compasses of a Vessel then at Sea, was as is in the Book expressed Page 91.92.
Only it is uncertain whether they were then exactly in the Latitude of 38. For
they had not taken an Observation for several days, but the Master of the
Vessel affirms that to be the Latitude so near as they could conjecture. Since
the Needle was changed by the Lightning, if a lesser Compass be set over it,
the Needle therein (or any other touched with the Lodestone) will alter its
polarity and turn about to the South, as I have diverse times to my great
admiration experimented. There is near the Northpoint a dark spot, like as if
it were burnt with a drop of Brimstone, supposed to be caused by the Lightning.
Whether the Magnetic impressions on that part of the Needle being dissipated by
the heat of the Lightning, and the effluvia on the South end of the Needle only
remaining untouched thereby, be the true natural reason of the marvelous
alteration; or whither it ought to be ascribed to some other cause, the
Ingenious may consider.

There is another Remarkable Passage about Lightning which happened at Duxborough
in New England, concerning which I have lately received this following Account.

September 11. 1653. (being the Lords Day) ^here were small drizling Showers,
attended with some seldom and scarce perceivable rumbling Thunders until
toward the Evening; at what time Mr. Constant Southworth of Duxbury returning
home after evening Exercise, in company with some Neighbors, Discoursing of
some extraordinary Thunderclaps with Lightning, and the awful effects and
consequents thereof,) being come into his own House (there were present in one
room, himself, his Wife, two Children, viz. Thomas (he was afterward drowned)
and Benjamin, (he was long after this killed by the Indians) with Philip Delano
a Servant,) there broke perpendicularly over the said House and Room a most
awful and amazing clap of Thunder, attended with a violent flash, or rather
flame of Lightning; which brake and shivered one of the Needles of the Katted
or Wooden Chimney, carrying diverse Splinters seven or eight Rods distance from
the House: it filled the Room with Smoke and Flame. Set fire in the Thatch of a
Leanto which was on the backside of a Room adjoining to the former, in which
the five persons abovementioned were. It melted some Pewter, so that it ran
into drops on the outside, as is often seen on Tin ware; melted round holes in
the top of a Fireshovel proportionable in quantity to a small Goose-shot;
struck Mrs. Southworths Arm so that it was for a time benumbed; smote the young
Child Benjamin in his Mothers Arms, deprived it of Breath for a space, and to
the Mothers apprehension squcased it as flat as a Planck; smote a Dog
stone-dead which lay within two foot of Philip Delano, the Dog never moved out
of his place or potsture, in which he was when smitteh, but giving a small
yelp, and quivering with his toes, lay still, blood issuing from his Nose or
Mouth. It smote the said Philip, made his right Arm senseless for a time,
together with the middle finger in special (of his right hand) which was
benumbed, and turned as white as Chalk or Lime, yet attended with little pain.
After some few hours that finger began to recover its proper color at the
Knuckle, and so did gradually whiten unto its extremity; And although the said
Delano felt a most vioilent heat upon his Body, as if he had been scorched in
the midst of a violent burning fire, yet his Clothes were not singed, neither
had the smell of fire passed thereon.

I could not insert this Story in its proper place, because I received it after
that Chapter about Thunder and Lightning was Printed. Some credible, persons
who have been Eyewitnesses of it, inform me, that the Lightning in that House
at Duxborough, did with the vehemence of its flame, cause the Bricks in the
Chimney to melt like molten lead: which particular was as Remarkable as any of
the other mentioned in the Narrative, and therefore I thought good here to ^^d
it.

In this ESSAY, I design no more than a Specimen; And having (by the good hand
of God, upon me) set this Wheel a going, I shall leave it unto oothers, whom
God has fitted, and shall incline thereto, to go on with the undertaking.

Some Digressions I have made in distinct Chapters, handling several
considerable Cases of Conscience, supposing it not unprofitable, or improper so
to do; since the things related gave the occasion: both Leisure and Exercise of
Judgment are required in the due performance of a Service of this Nature:
There are some that have more leisure, and many that have greater Abilities
than I have: I expect not that they should make my Method their Standard; but
they may follow a better of their own, as they shall see cause. The Addition of
Parallel Stories is both pleasing and edifying: Had my reading and remembrance
of things been greater, I might have done more that way, as I hope others will
in the next Essay.

I could have mentioned some very memorable Passages of Divine Providence,
wherein the Country in general has been concerned. Some Remarkables of that
kind are to be seen in my former Relations of the Troubles occasioned by the
Indians in New England. There are other particulars no less worthy to be
Recorded, but in my judgment, this is not so proper a season for us to divulge
them. It has been in my thoughts to publish a Discourse of Miscellaneous
observations, concerning things rare and wonderful; both as to the works of
Creation and Providence; which in my small Readings I have met with in many
Authors: But this must suffice for the present. I have often wished, that the
Natural History of New England, might be written and published to the World;
the Rules and method described by that Learned and excellent person Robert
Boil Esquire. being duly observed therein. It would best become some Scholar that
has been born in this Land, to do such a service for his Country. Nor would I
my self decline to put my hand (so far as my small capacity will reach) to so
noble an undertaking, did not manifold diversions and employments prevent me
from attending that which I should account a profitable Recreation. I have
other work upon me, which I would gladly finish before I leave the World, and
but a very little time to do it in: Moreover, not many years ago, I lost (and
that is an afflictive loss indeed!) several Months from study by sickness. Let
every Godfearing Reader, join with me in Prayer, that I may be enabled to
redeem the time, and (in all ways wherein I am capable) to serve my Generation.

INCREASE MATHER.
Boston in New England, January 1. 1683.
Remarkable Providence.
CHAP. I.
Of Remarkable Sea Deliverances. Mr. Anthony Thacher's Relation concerning his
and his wives being marvelously preserved alive, when all the ships company
perished. The wonderful preservation of Major Gibbons and his company. Several
other remarkable Sea-deliverances mentioned by Mr. Janeway, wherein N. E. men
were concerned. Mr. Grafton's preservation. A vessel lately coming from Bristol
for New England, saved out of great distress at Sea. Some providentially met
with by a New England vessel in an open Boat, many Leagues off from anyshoar,
strangely preserved. An account of are markable Sea-Deliverance which happened
this present Year. Another like unto it which happened (...) twenty years ago.

THe Royal Pen of the Prophet David has most truly affirmed, that they who go
down to the Sea in Ships, that do business in great waters, see the works of
the Lord, and his wonders in the deep. And in special, they see wonders of
Divine goodness in respect of eminent Deliverances wrought by the hand of the
most High, who stills the noise of the Seas, the noise of their waves. It is
meet that such Providence should be ever had in remembrance, as most of all by
the persons concerned in them, so by others, that the God of Salvation, who is
the confidence of them that are afar off upon the Sea, may have eternal praise.
Many remarkable Stories of this kind, are to be seen in Books already
published. E.G. in Mandelslo's Travels Hackluit, and Linshoten's Voyages;
W^^ley's History; Causin's Holy Court; Mr. Burton's Treatises lately printed,
and in Mr. Janeway's Sea-Deliverances. I shall in this Chapter confine my self
unto things which have happened either in New England, or wherein N-England
Vessels have been concerned. We shall begin with that Remarkable
Sea-Deliverance which Mr. Anthony Thacher did Experience at his first coming to
New England. A full and true Relation whereof, I find in a Letter directed to
his Brother Mr. Peter Thacher, then a Faithful Minister of Christ in Sarum in
England (he was Father to my worthy dear Friend Mr. Thomas Thacher late Pastor
of one of the Churches in this Boston.) This Letter of Mr. Anthony Thacher's to
his Bro^^er being written within a few days after that eminent Providence
happened unto him, matters were then fresh in his memory; I shall therefore here
insert his Narrative in his own words; who expresses himself as follows;

I must turn my drowned Pen and shaking Hand to Indite the Story of such sad
News as never before this happened in New England. There was a League of
perpetual Friendship between my Cousin Avery (note that this Mr. Avery was a
precious holy Minister who came out of England with Mr. Anthony Thacher) and my
self never to forsake each other to the Death, but to be partakers of each
others misery or welfare, as also of habitation in the same place. Now upon our
Arrival in New England, there was an offer made unto us. My cousin Avery was
invited to Marble-head to be their Pastor in due time; there being ^o Church
planted there as yet, but a Town appointed to set up the Trade of Fishing.
Because many there (the most being Fishermen) were something loose and remiss
in their behavior; my Cousin Avery was unwilling to go thither, and so
refusing we went to Newbery, intending thereto sit down. But being solicited so
often both by the Men of the place, and by the Magistrates, and by Mr. Cotton,
and most of the Ministers, who alleged what a benefit we might be to the
People there, and also to the Country and Commonwealth; at length we embraced
it, and thither consented to go. They of Marble-head forthwith sent a Pinnace
for us and our Goods. We Embarked at Ipswich, August 11. 1635. with our
Families and Substance, bound for Marble-head, we being in all twenty three
Souls, viz. eleven in my Cousin's Family, seven in mine, and one Mr. William
Eliot sometimes of New Sarum, and four Mariners. The next morning having
commended our selves to God, with cheerful hearts, we hoised Sail; but the Lord
suddenly turned our cheerfulness into mourning and lamentations. For on the
fourteenth of this August 1635. about ten at night, having a fresh Gale of
wind, our Sails being old and done were split. The Mariners because that it was
night, would not put to new Sails, but resolved to cast Anchor till the
Morning. But before daylight, it pleased the Lord to send so mighty a Storm, as
the like was never known in New England since the English came, nor in the
memory of any of the Indians. It was so furious that our Anchor came home.
Whereupon the Mariners let out more Cable, which at last slipped away. Then our
Sailers knew not what to do, but we were driven before the wind and waves. My
Cousin and I perceived our danger, solemnly recommended our selves to God the
Lord both of Earth and Seas, expecting with every wave to be swallowed up and
drenched in the Deeps. And as my Cousin, his Wife, and my tender Babes sat
comforting and chearing one the other in the Lord against ghastly Death, which
every moment stared us in the face, and sat triumphing upon each ones Forehead,
we were by the violence of the Waves and fury of the winds, (by the Lords
permission) lifted up upon a Rock between two high Rocks, yet all was one Rock,
but it raged with the stroke which came into the Pinnace, so as we were
presently up to our middles in water as we sat. The Waves came furiously and
violently over us, and against us, but by reason of the Rocks proportion could
not lift us off, but beat her all to pieces. Now look with me upon our
distress, and consider of my misery, who beheld the Ship broken, the water in
her, and violently overwhelming us, my Goods, and Provisions swimming in the
Seas, my Friends almost drowned, and mine own poor Children so untimely (if I
may so term it without offense) before mine eyes drowned, and ready to be
swallowed up and dashed to pieces against the Rocks by the merciless waves, and
my self ready to accompany them. But I must go on to an end of this woeful
Relation. In the same room whereas he sat, the Master of the Pinnace not
knowing what to do, our foreMast was cut down, our Mainmast broken in three
pieces, thefore part of the Pinnace beat away, our Goods swimming about the
Seas, my Children bewailing me, as not pitying themselves, and my self
bemoaning them; poor Souls, whom I had occasioned to such an end in their
tender years, whenas they could scarce be sensible of death. And so likewise my
Cousin, his Wife, and his Children, and both of us bewailing each other, in our
Lord and only Savior Jesus Christ, in whom only we had comfort and
cheerfulness, insomuch that from the greatest to the least of us, there was not
one scriech or outcry made, but all as silent sheep were contentedly resolved
to die together lovingly, as since our acquaintance we had lived together
friendly. Now as I was sitting in the Cabin room-door with my body in the
room, when ^o one of the Sailers by a wave being washed out of the Pinnace was
gotten in again, and coming into the Cabin room over my back, cried out, we
are all cast away, the Lord have mercy upon us, I have been washed overboard
into the Sea, and am gotten in again. His speeches made me look forth. And
looking toward the Sea, and seeing how we were, I turned my self to my Cousin
and the rest, and spoke these words, Oh Cousin, it has pleased God to cast us
here between two Rocks, the shore not far off from us, for I saw the tops of
Trees when I looked forth. Whereupon, the Master of the Pinnace looking up at
the Scuttle hole of the quarter Deck, went out at it, but I never saw him
afterward. Then he that had been in the Sea, went out again by me, and leapt
overboard toward the Rocks, whom afterward also I could not see. Now none
were left in the Barque that I knew or saw, but my Cousin, his Wife and
Children, my self and mine, and his maidservant. But my Cousin thought I would
have fled from him, and said unto me, Oh Cousin leave us not, let us die
totogether, and reached forth his hand unto me. Then I letting go my Son
Peter's hand took him by the hand, and said, Cousin, I purpose it not, whither
shall I go? I am willing and ready here to die with you and my poor Children.
God be merciful to us, and receive us to himself, adding these words, the Lord
is able to help and deliver us. He replied, saying, truth Cousin, but what his
pleasure is we know not: I fear we have been too unthankful for former
deliverances, but he has promised to deliver us from sin and condemnation, and
to bring us safe to heaven through the alsufficient satisfaction of Jesus
Christ, this therefore we may challenge of him. To which I replying said, that
is all the deliverance I now desire and expect. Which words I had no sooner
spoken, but by a mighty wave I was with the piece of the Barque washed out upon
part of the Rock, where the wave left me almost drowned, but recovering my feet
I saw above me on the Rock my Daughter Mary, to whom I had no sooner gotten,
but my Cousin Avery, and his eldest Son came to us, being all four of us washed
out by one and the same Wave, we went all into a small hole on the top of the
Rock, whence we called to those in the Pinnace to come unto us, supposing we
had been in more safety than they were in. My Wife seeing us there was crept up
into the scuttle of the Quarter Deck to come unto us, but presently came
another wave and dashing the Pinnace all to pieces, carried my Wife away in the
Scuttle, as she was, with the greater part of the quarter Deck unto the Shore;
where she was cast safely, but her Legs were something bruised, and much Timber
of the Vessel being there also cast, she was sometime before she could get away
being washed by the Waves. All the rest that were in the Barque were drowned in
the merciless Seas. We four by that wave were clean swept away from off the
Rock also, into the Sea; the Lord in one instant of time disposing of fifteen
Souls of us, according to his good pleasure and will, His pleasure and
wonderful great mercy to me was thus. Standing on the Rock as before you heard,
with my eldest Daughter, my Cousin and his eldest Son, looking upon, and
talking to them in the Barque, whenas we were by that merciless wave washed off
the Rock, as before you heard. God in his mercy caused me to fall by the stroke
of the wave flat on my face, for my face was toward the Sea, insomuch that as I
was sliding off the Rock into the Sea, the Lord directed my toes into a joint
in the Rocks side, as also the tops of some of my fingers with my right hand,
by means whereof, the wave leaving me, I remained so, having in the Rock only
my head above the water. When on the left hand I espied a Board or Plank of the
Pinnace. And as I was reaching out my left hand to lay hold on it, by another
coming over the top of the Rock, I was washed away from the Rock, and by the
violence of the waves was driven hither and thither in the Seas a great while,
and had many dashes against the Rocks. At length past hopes of Life, and
wearied in body and spirits, I even gave over to nature, and being ready to
receive in the waters of Death, I lifted up both my heart and hands to the God
of Heaven. For note, I had my senses remaining perfect with me all the time
that I was under and in water, who at that instant lifted my head above the top
of the water, that so I might breathe without any hindrance by the waters. I
stood bolt upright as if I had stood upon my feet, but I felt no bottom, nor
had any footing for to stand upon, but the waters. While I was thus above the
water, I saw by me a piece of the Mast, as I suppose about three foot long,
which I labored to catch into my arms. But suddenly I was overwhelmed with
water, and driven to and fro again, and at last I felt the ground with my right
foot. When immediately whilst I was thus grovelling on my face, I presently
recovering my feet, was in the water up to my Breast, and through Gods great
mercy had my face unto the shore, and not to the Sea. I made have to get out,
but was thrown down on my hands with the waves, and so with safety crept to the
dry shore. Where blessing God, I turned about to look for my Children and
Friends, but saw neither, nor any part of the Pinnace, where I left them as I
supposed. But I saw my Wife about a Butt length from me getting her self forth
from amongst the Timber of the broken Barque: but before I could get unto her,
she was gotten to the shore: I was in the water after I was washed from the
Rock, before I came to the shore a quarter of an hour at least. When we were
come each to other, we went and sat under the Bank. But fear of the Seas
roaring and our coldness would not suffer us there to remain. But we went up
into the Land and sat us down under a Cedar Tree which the wind had thrown
down, where we sat about an hour almost dead with cold. But now the Storm was
broken up, and the wind was calm, but the Sea remained rough and fearful to us.
My Legs were much bruised, and so was my head, other hurt had I none, neither
had I taken in much quantity of water: but my heart would not let me sit still
any longer, but I would go to see if any more were gotten to the Land in
safety, especially hoping to have met with some of my own poor Children, but I
could find none, neither dead nor yet living. You condole with me my miseries,
who now began to consider of my losses. Now came to my remembrance the time and
manner, how and when I last saw and left my Children and Friends. One was
severed from me sitting on the Rock at my feet, the other three in the Pinnace:
my little Babe (Ah poor Peter) sitting in his Sister Ediths arms, who to the
uttermost of her power shelt^ed him from the waters, my poor William standing
close unto them, all three of them looking ruefully on me on the Rock; their
very Countenances calling unto me to help them, whom I could not go unto,
neither could they come at me, neither would the merciless waves afford me
space or time to use any means at all, either to help them or my self. Oh I yet
see their cheeks, poor silent Lambs, pleading pity and help at my hands. Then
on the other side to consider the loss of my dear Friends, with the spoiling
and loss of all our Goods and Provisions, my self cast upon an unknown Land, in
a Wilderness, I knew not where, nor how to get thence. Then it came to my mind
how I had occasioned the Death of my Children, who caused them to leave their
native Land, who might have left them there, yea, and might have sent some of
them back again and cost me nothing: these and such like thoughts do press down
my heavy heart very much. But I must let this pass, and will proceed on in the
Relation of Gods goodness unto me in that desolate Island, on which I was cast.
I and my Wife were almost naked both of us, and wet and cold even unto death,.
I found a Snapsack cast on the shore, in which I had a Steel and Flint and
Powder-horn. Going further I found a drowned Goat, then I found a Hat, and my
Son William's Coat, both which I put on. My Wife found one of her Petticoats
which she put on. I found also two Cheese and some Butter driven ashore. Thus
the Lord sent us some clothes to put on, and food to sustain our new lives
which we had lately given unto us; and means also to make fire, for in an Horn
I had some Gunpowder, which to mine own (and since to other men's) admiration
was dry. So taking a piece of my Wives Neckcloth, which I dried in the Sun, I
struck fire, and so dried and warmed our wet Bodies, and then skinned the Goat,
and having found a small Brass-pot, we boiled some of her. Our Drink was
brackish water; Bread we had none. There we remained until the Monday
following, When about three of the Clock in the afternoon, in a Boat that came
that way, we went off that desolate Island; which I named after my name,
Thachers Woe, and the Rock Avery his fall: to the end that their fall and loss,
and mine own might be had in perpetual remembrance. In the Isle lies buried
the body of my Cousins eldest Daughter, whom I found dead on the shore. On the
Tuesday following in the afternoon we arrived at MarbleHead. Thus far is Mr.
Thachers Relation of this memorable Providence.

We proceed to some other:

Remarkable was that deliverance mentioned both by Mr. Janeway, and Mr. Burton,
wherein that gallant Commander Major Edward Gibbons of Boston in New England,
and others were concerned. The substance of the Story is this. A New England
Vessel going from Boston to some other parts of America, was through the
continuance of contrary winds, kept long at Sea, so that they were in very
great straits for want of Provision, and seeing they could not hope for any
relief from Earth or Sea, they apply themselves to Heaven in humble and hearty
Prayers, but no Calm ensuing, one of them made this sorrowful motion, that they
should cast Lots, which of them should die first, to satisfy the ravenous
Hunger of the rest. After many a sad Debate, they come to a result, the Lot is
cast, and one of the company is taken, but where is the Executioner to be found
to act this Office upon a poor Innocent? It is death new to think who shall act
this bloody part in the Tragedy: But before they fall upon this in-voluntary
Execution, they once more went unto their Prayers, and while they were calling
upon God, he answered them, for there leapt a mighty Fish into the Boat, which
was a double joy to them, not only in relieving their miserable hunger, which
no doubt made them quick Cooks, but because they looked upon it to be sent from
God, and to be a token of their Deliverance. But Alas! the Fish is soon caten,
and their former Exigencies come upon them, which sink their spirits into
despair; for they know not of another Morsel. To Lot they go again the second
time, which falls upon another person; but still none can be found to
Sacrifice him; they again send their Prayers to Heaven with all manner of
fervency, when behold a second Answer from above! a great Bird lights, and
fixes it self upon the Mast: which one of the Company espies, and he goes, and
there she stands, till he took her with his hand by the wing. This was life
from the dead the second time, and they feasted themselves herewith, as hoping
that second Providence was forerunner of their complete Deliverance. But they
have still the same Disappointments, they can see no Land, they know not where
they are. Hunger increases again upon them, and they have no hopes to be saved
but by a third Miracle. They are reduced to the former course of casting Lots,
when they were going to the heartbreaking work, to put him to death whom the
Lot fell upon, they go to God, their former Friend in adversity, by humble and
hearty Prayers; and now they look and look again; but there is nothing: Their
prayers are concluded, and nothing appears, yet still they hoped and stayed;
till at last one of them espies a Ship, which put new life into all their
spirits. They bear up with their Vessel, they Man their Boat, and desire and
beg like perishing, humble Supplicants to Board them, which they are admitted.
The Vessel proves a French Vessel, yea, a French Pirate. Major Gibbons
petitions them for a little Bread, and offers Ship and Cargo for it. But the
Commander knows the Major, (from whom he had received some signal kindnesses
formerly at Boston) and replied readily, and cheerfully, Major Gibbons, not a
hair of you or your Company shall perish, if it ly in my power to preserve you.
And accordingly he relieveth them, and sets them safe on shore.

Memorable also is that which Mr. Janeway in his Remarkable Sea-Deliverances,
P.35. has published. He there relates that in the Year 1668. a Ketch whereof
Thomas Woodbery was Master, Sailing from New England for Barbados; when they
came in the Latitude of 35.gr. because there was some appearance of
foul-weather, they lowred their Sails, sending up one to the top of the Mast,
he thought he saw something like a Boat floating upon the Sea, and calling to
the Men below, they made toward it, and when they came near, it appeared to be
a LongBoat with eleven Men in it, who had been bound for Virginia; but their
Ship proved leaky, and Foundred in the Sea; so that they were forced suddenly
to betake themselves to their Longboat; in the which they had a Capstone Bar,
which they made use of for a Mast, and a piece of Canvas for a Sail, so did
they Sail before the Wind. But they having no Victuals with them, were soon in
miserable distress. Thus they continued five days, so that all despaired of
Life. Upon the sixth day they concluded to cast Lots for their lives, viz. who
should die that the rest might eat him, and have their lives preserved. He that
the Lot fell upon, begged for his Life a little longer; and being in their
ext^emity, the wonder-working Providence of God was seen: for they meet with
this New England Vessel, which took them in, and saved their lives. And hour
after this a terrible Storm arose, continuing forty hours, so that if they had
not met the Vessel that saved them in the nick of opportunity, they had all
perished: and if the New England Men had not taken down some of their Sails, or
had not chanced to send one up to Tallow the Mast, this Boat and Men had never
been seen by them. Thus admirable are the workings of divine providence in the
World.

Yet further;

That Worthy and now blessed Minister of God Mr. James Janeway, has published
several other Remarkable Sea-Deliverances; of which some belonging to
New England. were the Subjects. He relates (and I am informed that it was
really so) that a small Vessel (the Masters Name Philip Hung are) coming upon
the Coast of New England suddenly sprang a Leak, and so Foundered. In the
Vessel there were eighteen Souls, twelve of which got into the Long Boat. They
threw into the Boat some small matters of Provision, but were wholly without
fire. These twelve Men sailed five hundred Leagues in this small Boat, being by
almost miraculous Providence preserved therein for five weeks together. God
sent relief to them by causing some flying Fish to fall into the Boat, which
they eat raw, and were well pleased therewith. They also caught a Shar^ and
opening his belly, sucked his blood for drink. At the last the divine
providence brought them to the West Indies. Some (...) them were so weak as
that they soon died; but most of them lived to declare the Works of the Lord.

Again he Relates that Mr. Jonas Clark of New England going for Virginia, the
Vessel was cast ashore in the night. They hoped to get their Ship off again; to
which end the Master with some others going in the Boat, when they were about
sixty Fathom from the Shore, there arose a great Sea which broke in upon them,
and at last turned the Boat over. Four Men were drowned. Mr. Clark was held
under water till his Breath was gone, yet (through the good hand of a gracious
God) he was set at liberty, and was enabled to swim to the shore, where the
providence of God did so overruled the hearts of Barbarians, as that they did
them no hurt, until at last they were brought safe unto the English
Plantations. These things have (as was said) been related by Mr. Janeway. I
proceed therefore to mention some other Sea-Deliverances. And that notable
preservation deserves to be here Inserted and Recorded; Wherein Mr. John
Grafton and some others of his Ships Company were concerned; who as they were
bound in a Voyage from Salem in New England, for the West Indies, in a Ketch
called the Providence; (on September 16. 1669.) their Vessel suddenly struck
upon a Rock; at the which they were amazed, it being then a dark and rainy
night; the force of the wind and Sea broke their Vessel in a moment. Their
Company was ten Men in number, whereof six were drowned. The Master, and the
Mate were left upon the Rock. As they sa^ there, the Sea came up to their
wastes. There did they embrace each other, looking for Death every moment; and
if the Tide had risen higher it would have carried them off. By the same Rock
was one of the Seamen, being much wounded and grievously groaning. In the
Morning they saw an Island about half a mile off from them. The Rocks were so
sharp and cragged that they could not tread upon them with their bare feet nor
had they Shoes or Stockins. But they found a piece of Tarpoling, which they
wrapped about their feet, making it fast with Rope-yarns; so getting each of
them a stick, they sometimes went on their feet, and sometimes crept, until at
last they came to the Island, where they found another of their Company ashore,
being carried thither by a piece of the Vessel. Upon the Island they continued
eight days, four of which they had no fire. Their Provision was salt Fish and
Rain Water, which they found in the holes of the Rocks. After four days they
found a piece of Touch-wood, which the Mate had formerly in his Chest, and a
piece of Flint, with which having a small Knife they struck fire. A Barrel of
Flower being cast on shore they made Cakes thereof. Now their care was how to
get off from the Island, there being no Inhabitants there. Finding a piece of
the Main-sail, and some hoops of Cask they framed a Boat therewith. Yet had
they no Tools to build it with. But providence so ordered, that they found a
Board twelve foot long, and Some Nails; also a Box was cast ashore wherein was
a Bolt-rope Needle; they likewise found a Tar-Barrel, wherewith they Tarred
their Canvas. Thus did they patch up a Boat in fashion like a Birchen Canno;
and meeting with some thin Boards of Sieling which came out of the Cabin, they
made Paddles therewith, so did they venture in this dangerous Vessel ten
Leagues, until they came to Angu^lla, and St. Martins, where they were
courteously entertained, the People admiring how they could come so many
Leagues in such a strange kind of Boat. Besides all these particulars, which
have been declared, Information is brought to me concerning some Sea
preservations which have happened more lately.

There was a small Vessel set Sail from Bristol to New England, Sept.22. 1681.
The Masters Name William Dutten. There were seven Men in the Vessel, having on
Board Provision for three Months, but by reason of contrary Winds, they were
twenty Weeks before they could make any Land; and some unhappy Accidents fell
out which occasioned their being put to miserable straits for victuals, but
most of all for Drink. The Winds were fair and prosperous until October 28.
when they supposed themselves to be gotten 600 Leagues Westward. But after that
the Norwest Winds blew so fiercely, that they were driven off from the Coast of
New England, so that December 12. they concluded to bear away for Barbados.
But before this, one of their Barrels of Beer had the head broken out, and the
Liquor in it lost. They had but seven barrels of Water, three of which proved
leaky, so that the Water in them was lost. When their Victuals failed, the
Providence of God sent them a supply by causing Dolphins to come near to the
Vessel, and that still as their wants were greatest, nor could they catch more
than would serve their present turn. But still their misery upon them was
great, through their want of Water. Sometimes they would expose their Vessels
to take the Rainwater, but often when it Rained the Winds were so furious, that
they could save little or no Rain, yet so it fell out that when they came near
to the Latitude of Barmudas they saved two Barrels of RainWater, which caused
no little joy amongst them. But the Rats did unexpectedly eat holes through the
Barrels, so that their water was lost again. Once when a shower of Rain fell
they could save but a pint, which though it was made bitter by the Tar, it
seemed very sweet to them. They divided this pint of Rainwater amongst seven,
drinking a thimble full at a time, which went five times about and was a great
refreshing to them. On January 27. a good shower of Rain fell; that so they
might be sure to save some Water, and not be again deprived thereof by the
Rats; they laid their Shirts open to the Rain, and wringing them dry, they
obtained seven Gallons of Water, which they put into Bottles, and were for a
time much refreshed thereby. But new straits come upon them. They endeavored
to catch the Rats in the Vessel, and could take but three or four, which they
did eat, and it seemed delicate meat to their hungry Souls. But the Torment of
their Drought was insufferable. Sometimes for a Week together they had not one
drop of fresh water. When they killed a Dolphin they would open his Belly and
suck his blood a little to relieve their thirst. Yea, their thirst was so great
that they fell to drinking of salt water. Some drank several Gallons, but they
found that it did not allay their thirst. They greedily drank their own Urine
when they could make any. They would go overboard with a Rope fastened to their
bodies, and put themselves into the water, hoping to find some refreshment
thereby. When any of them stood to steer the Vessel, he would think a little to
refresh himself by having his feet in a pail of Seawater. In this misery some
of the Seamen confessed that it was just with God thus to afflict them, in
that they had been guilty of wasting good drink, and of abusing themselves
therewith before they came to Sea. The divine Providence so ordered, that on
February 7, they met with a Vessel at Sea, which happened to be a Guiny Man (
Samuel Richard Master) their Boat was become leaky, that they could not go
aboard, if it had been to save their lives. But the Master of the other Vessel
understanding how it was with them, very courteously sent his own Boat to them,
with ten pieces of Guiny Beef, two ankors of fresh water, and four bushels of
Guiny Corn, whereby they were sustained until they arrived at Barbados; being
weak and spent with their hardships, but within a fortnight they were all
re^^vered, and came the next Summer to New England. This Account I received from
the Mate of the Vessel, whose Name is Joseph But^^er.

Remarkable also, is the preservation of which some belonging to Dublin in
Ireland had Experience; whom a New England Vessel providentially met, in an
open Boat, in the wide Sea, and saved them from perishing. Concerning which
memorable Providence, I have received the following Narrative: A Ship of Dublin
burdened about seventy Tuns Andrew Bennet Master, being bound from Dublin to
Virginia; this Vessel having been some Weeks at Sea, onward of their Voyage,
and being in the Latitude of 39. about 150 Leagues distant from Cape God in
New England, on April 18. 1681. a day of very stormy Weather, and a great Sea,
suddenly there sprang a Plank in the fore part of the Ship, about six a Clock
in the morning: whereupon the Water increased so fast in the Ship, that all
their endeavors could not keep her from sinking above half an hour: so when
the Ship was just sinking, some of the Company resolved to lanch out the Boat,
which was a small one. They did accordingly, and the Master, the Mate, the
Boat-swain, the Cook, two Fore-mast-men and a Boy, kept such hold of it, when a
Cast of the Sea suddenly helped tem off with it, that they got into it. The
heaving of the Sea now suddenly thrust them from the Ship, in which there were
left nineteen Souls, viz. 16 Men and three Women; who all perished in the
mighty Waters, while they were trying to make Rafters by cutting down the
Masts, for the preservation of their lives, as long as might be. The seven in
the Boat apprehended themselves to be in a condition little better then that of
them in the Ship, having neither Sails nor Oars, neither Bread nor Water, and
no Instrument of any sort, except a Knife and a piece of Deal-board, with which
they made sticks, and set them up in the sides of the Boat, and covered them
with some IriseCloth of their own Garments, to keep off the spray of the Sea,
as much as could be by so poor a matter. In this condition they drove with an
hard Wind and high Sea all that day, and the night following. But in the next
morning about six a Clock, they saw a Ketch (the Master whereof was Mr. Edmund
Hen, field of Salem in New England) under Sail, which Ketch coming right with
them, too^ them up and brought them safe to New England. And it is yet further
remarkable, that when the Ship Foundred, the Ketch which saved these persons
was many Leagues to the Westward of her, but was by a contrary Wind caused to
stand back again to the East, ward where these distressed persons were (as has
been said) met with, and relieved.

Another Remarkable Sea-Deliverance, like unto this last mentioned, happened this
present year; the Relation whereof take as follows. A Ship Called the
Swallow, Thomas Welden of London Master; on their Voyage from St. Christophers
toward London, did on March 23. last (being then about the Latitude of 42.)
meet with a violent Storm. That Storm somewhat allayed, the Ship lying in the
trough of the Sea, her Rudder broke away. Whereupon the Mariners veered out a
Cable, and part of a Mast to steer by; but that not answering their
expectation, they took an Hogs-head of Water, and fastened it to the Cable to
steer the Ship; that also failing, they laid the Ship by: (as the Sea-mens
phrase is) And on March 25. an exceeding great Storm arose, which made the
Vessel ly down with her Hatches under Water, in which condition on the
continued about two hours, and having much Water in the Hold, they found no
other way to make her rise again, but by cutting down her Masts, and
accordingly her Mainmast and her Mizen-mast being cut down, the Ship righted
again. The Storm continuing, on March 28. the Ship made very bad Steeridge, by
reason of the loss of her Rudder and Masts, The Sea had continual passage over
her, and one Sea did then carry away the Larbord quarter of the Ship, and brake
the side from the Deck, so that there was an open passage for the Sea to come
in at that Breach; and notwithstanding their endeavors to stop it with their
Bedding, Clothes, etc. so much Water ran in by the sides of the Ship, that it
was ready to sink. Now all hopes of saving their lives being gone; the Divine
Providence so ordered, that there appeared a Vessel within sight, which happened
to be a French Ship bound from St. John de luce to Grand Placentia in Newfound
Land; this Vessel took in the distressed Englishmen, carried them to Grand
Placentia, from whence the Master and sundry of the Mariners procured passage
in a Ketch bound for Boston in New England. There did they arrive June 21.
1683. declaring how they had seen the wonders of God in the deep, as has been
expressed.

There was another memorable Sea-Del^verance like unto these two last. The
persons concerned in it being now gone out of the World, I have not met with
any who perfectly remember the particular year wherein that remarkable
Providence happened; only that it was about twenty two years ago: when a Ship
(William Laiton Master) bound from Pascataqua in New England to Barbados,
being 250 Leagues off from the Coast, spran^ a leak. They endeavored what they
could to clear her with their Pump for fourteen hours. But the Vessel filling
with Water, they were forced (being eight persons) to be take themselves to
their Boat, taking with them a good supply of Bread, and a pot of Butter. The
Master declaring that he was persuaded they should meet with a Ship a^ Sea that
would relieve them: but they ha^ little Water, so that their allowance was at
last a spoonful in a Day to each man. In this Boat did they continue thus
distressed for 19 days together. After they had been twelve days from the
Vessel, they met with a Storm which did very much endanger their lives, yet God
preserved them. At the end of eighteen days a flying Fish fell into their
Boat, and having with them an Hook and Line, they made use of that Fish for
Bait, whereby they caught two Dolphins. A Ship then at Sea, whereof Mr. Samuel
Scarlet was Commander, apprehending a Storm to be near, that so they might fit
their Rigging in order to entertain the approaching Storm, suffered their
Vessel to drive right before the Wind; and by that means they happened to meet
with this Boat full of distressed Seamen. Captam Scarlet's Vessel was then
destitute of Provision; only they had on board Water enough and to spare. When
the Mariners first saw the Boat, they desired the Master not to take the Men
in, because they had no Bread nor other Victuals for them; so that by receiving
eight more into their Company, they should all die with Famine. Captain Scarlet
who as after he left using the Sea, he gave many demonstrations both living and
dying of his designing the good of others, and not his own particular Advantage
only, did at this time manifest the same Spirit to be in him; and therefore
would by no means hearken to the selfish suggestions of his Men, but replied to
them, (as yet not knowing who they were) It may be these distressed Creatures
are our own Contrymen, or if not, they are Men in misery, and therefore
whatever come of it, I am resolved to take them in, and to trust in God who is
able to deliver us all. Nor did God suffer him to lose any thing by this Noble
Resolution. For as in Captain Scarlet's Ship there was Water which the Men in
the Boat wanted, so they in the Boat had Bread and the two Dolphins lately
caught, whereby all the Ships Company were refreshed. And within few days they
all arrived safe in New England.

CHAP. II.
A further Account of some other Remarkable Preservations. Of a Child that had
part of her Brains struck out, and yet lived and did well. Remarkable
Deliverances of some in Windsor Of several in the late Indian War. The Relation
of a Captive. Skipper How Is Memorable Preservation. Several Examples somewat
parallel, wherein others in other parts of the World were concerned.

BEsides those notable Sea-Deliverances which have been in the former Chapter
Related, many other memorable Providence and Preservations have happened. A
multitude of Instances to this purpose are now lost in the Grave of Oblivion,
because they were not Recorded in the season of them. But such Observables as I
have been by good hands acquainted with, I shall here further Relate.

Remarkable was the Preservation and Restoration which the gracious providence
of God vouchsafed to Abigail Eliot, the Daughter of Elder Eliot of Boston in
New England; concerning whom a near and precious Relation of hers, informs me,
that when she was a Child about five years old, playing with other Children
under a Cart an iron hinge being sharp at the lower end happened to strike her
head between the right Ear and the Crown of her Head, and pierced into the
skull and Brain. The Child making an outcry, the Mother came; and immediately
drew out the Iron, and thereupon some of the Brains of her Child which stuck to
the Iron, and other bits were scattered on her Forehead. Able Chyrurgeons were
sent for; in special Mr. Oliver and Mr. Prat. The Head being uncovered, there
appeared just upon the place where the Iron pierced the Skull, a bunch as big
as a small Egg. A question arose, whether the skin should not be cut and
dilated from the Orifice of the Wound to the Swelling, and so take it away.
This Mr. Prat inclined unto, but Mr. Oliver opposed, pleading that then the Air
would get to the Brain, and the Child would presently die. Mr. Oliver was
desired to undertake the Cure. And thus was his operation. He gently drove the
soft matter of the bunch unto the Wound, and pressed so much out as well he
could; there came forth about a spoonful, the matter which came forth was
Brains and Blood (some curdles of Brain were white and not stained with Blood)
so did he apply a Plaster. The Skull wasted where it was pierced to the
bigness of an half Crown piece of Silver or more. The skin was exceeding
tender, so that a Silver Plate like the skull was always kept in the place to
defend it from any touch or injury. The Brains of the Child did swell and swage
according to the Tides. When it was Spring Tide, her Brain would heave up the
tender skin, and fill the place sometimes. When it it was Nip Tide, they would
be ^unk and fallen within the skull. This Child lived to be the Mother of two
Children. And (which is marvelous) she was not by this Wound made defective in
her Memory o^ Understanding.

In the next place, we shall take notice of some Remarkable Preservations which
sundry in Windsor in New England have experienced; the Persons concerned
therein being desirous that the Lords goodness toward them may be ever had in
Remembrance: wherefore a faithful hand has given me the following account.
January 13. 1670, Three Women, viz. the Wives of Lieut. Filer, and of John
Drake, and of Nathaniel Lomas, having crossed Connecticut River upon a
necessary and neighbourly account, and having done the work they went for, were
desirous to return to their own Families; the River being at that time partly
shut up with Ice old and new, and partly open. There being some pains taken
aforehand to cut a way through the Ice, the three Women abovesaid got into
(...) Canoo, with whom also there was NathanielBissel, and an Indian. There was
likewise another Canoo with two men in it, that went before them to help them
in case they should meet with any distress, which indeed quickly came upon
them; for just as they were getting out of the narrow passage between the Ice,
being near the middle of the River, a great part of the upper Ice came down
upon them, and struck the end of their Canoo, and broke it to pieces; so that
it quickly sunk under them: the Indian speedily got upon the Ice, but Nathaniel
Bissel, and the abovesaid Women were left floating in the Middle of the River,
being cut off from all manner of humane help besides what did arise from
themselves, and the two men in the little Canoo, which was so small that three
persons durst seldom, if ever, venture in it, they were indeed discerned from
one shore, but the dangerous Ice would not admit from either shore, one to come
near them. All things thus circumstanced, the suddenness of the stroke and
distress (which is apt to amaze men, especially when no less then life is
concerned) the extreme coldness of the weather, it being a sharp season, that
persons out of the water were in danger of freezing, the unaptness of the
persons to help themselves, being mostly Women, one big with Child, and near
the time of her Travel (who was also carried away under the Ice) the other as
unskilled and unactive to do any thing for self-preservation as almost any
could be, the Waters deep, that there was no hope of footing, no passage to
either shore, in any eye of reason, neither with their little Canoo, by reason
of the Ice, nor without it, the Ice being thin and rotten, and full of holes.
Now, that all should be brought off safely without the loss of life, or wrong
to health, was counted in the day of it a Remarkable Providence. To say, how it
was done, is difficult, yet something of the manner of the Deliverance may be
mentioned the abovesaid Nathaniel Bissel perceiving their danger, and being
active in swimming, endeavored what might be, the preservation of himself, and
some others, he strove to have swum to the upper Ice, but the Stream being too
hard, he was forced downwards to the lower Ice, where by reason of the
slipperiness of the Ice, and disadvantage of the Stream, he found it difficult
getting up; at length by the good hand of providence, being gotten upon the
Ice, he saw one of the Women swimming down under the Ice, and perceiving an
hole, or open place, some few Rods below, there he waited, and took her up as
she swum along. The other two Women were in the River, till the two Men in the
little Canoo came for their relief; at length all of them got their heads above
the Water, and had a little time to pause, though a long, and difficult, and
dangerous way to any shore, but by getting their little Canoo upon the Ice, and
carrying one at a time over hazardous Places, they did (though in a long while)
get all safe to the shore, from whence they came.

Remarkable also, was the Deliverance which John and Thomas Bissel of Windsor
aforesaid, did at another time receive. John Bissel on a Morning about break of
day taking Nails out of a great Barrel wherein was a considerable quantity of
Gunpowder, and Bullets, having a Candle in his hand, the Powder took fire,
Thomas Bissel was then putting on his clothes, standing by a Window, which
though well fastened, was by the force of the Powder carried away at least four
Rods; the Partition Wall from another Room was broken in pieces; The roof of
the House opened and slipped of the Plates about five foot down; also the great
Girt of the House at one end broke out so far, that it drew from the Summer to
the end, most of its Tenant: the Woman of the House was lying sick, and another
Woman under it in bed, yet did the divine Providence so order things as that no
one received any hurt, excepting John Bissel, who fell through two Floors into
a Cellar his shoes being taken from his feet, and found at twenty foot
distance, his hands and his face very much scorched, without any other wound in
his body.

It would fill a Volume to give an account of all the memorable Preservations
in the time of the late War with the Indians.

Remarkable was that which happened to Jabes Musgrove of Newbery, who being shot
by an Indian, the Bullet entered in at his Ear and went out at his Eye, on the
other side of his Head, yet the Man was preserved from Death, yea, and is still
in the Land of the living.

Likewise several of those that were taken Captive by the Indians are able to
relate affecting Stories concerning the gracious Providence of God, in carrying
them through many Dangers and Deaths, and at last setting their feet in a large
place again. A Worthy Person has sent me the Account which one lately
belonging to Deerfield, (his name is Quintin Stockwell,) has drawn up
respecting his own Captivity and Redemption, with the more notable Occurrences
of Divine Providence attending him in his distress, which I shall therefore
here insert in the Words by himself expressed: He Relates asfollowes;

In the year 1677. September 19. between Sunset and dark, the Indians came
upon us; I and another Man, being together, we ran away at the outcry the
Indians made, shouting and shooting at some other of the English that were hard
by. We took a Swamp that was at hand for our refuge, the Enemy espying us so
near them, ran after us, and shot many Guns at us, three Guns were discharged
upon me, the Enemy being within three Rod of me, besides many other, before
that. Being in this Swamp that was miry, I slumpt in, and fell down, whereupon
one of the Enemy stepped to me, with his Hatchet lift up to knock me on the head,
supposing that I had been wounded, and so unfit for any other travel. I (as it
happened) had a Pistol by me, which though uncharged, I presented to the Indian,
who presently stepped back; and told me, if I would yield, I should have no hurt,
he said (which was not true) that they had destroyed all Hatfield, and that the
Woods were full of Indians, whereupon I yielded my self, and so fell into the
Enemies hands, and by three of them was led away unto the place, whence first I
began to make my flight, where two other Indians came running to us, and the
one lifting up the Butt end of his Gun, to knock me on the head, the other with
his hand put by the blow, and said, I was his Friend. I was now by my own House
which the Indians burnt the last year, and I was about to build up again, and
there I had some hopes to escape from them; there was an Horse just by, which
they bid me take, I did so, but made no attempt to escape thereby, because the
Enemy was near, and the Beast was slow and dull, then was I in hopes they would
send me to take my own Horses, which they did, but they were so frighted that I
could not come near to them, and so fell still into the Enemies hands, who now
took me, and bound me, and led me away, and soon was I brought into the
Company, of Captives, that were that day brought away from Hatfield, which were
about a mile off; and here methoughts was matter of joy and sorrow both, to see
the Company: some Company in this condition being some refreshing, though
little help any ways; then were we pinioned and led away in the night over the
Mountains, in dark and hideous ways, about four miles further, before we took
up our place for rest, which was in a dismal place of Wood on the East side of
the Mountain. We were kept bound all that night. The Indians kept waking and we
had little mind to sleep in this nights travel, the Indians dispersed, and as
they went made strange, noises, as of Wolves and Owls, and other Wild Beasts,
to the end that they might not lose one another; and if followed they might not
be discovered by the English.

About the break of Day, we Marched again and got over the great River at
Pecomptuck River mouth, and there rested about two hours. There the Indians
marked out upon Trays the number of their Captives and Slain as their manner
is. Here was I again in great danger; A quarrel arose about me, whose Captive I
was, for three took me. I thought I must be killed to end the controversy, so
when they put it to me, whose I was, I said three Indians took me, so they
agreed to have all a share in me: and I had now three Masters, and he was my
chief Master who laid hands on me first, and thus was I fallen into the hands
of the very worst of all the Company; as Ashpelon the Indian Captain told me;
which Captain was all along very kind to me, and a great comfort to the
English. In this place they gave us some Victuals, which they had brought from
the English. This morning also they sent ten Men forth to Town to bring away
what they could find, some Provision, some Corn out of the Meadow they brought
to us upon Horses which they had there taken. From hence we went up about the
Falls, where we crossed that River again; and whilst I was going, I fell right
down lame of my old Wounds that I had in the War, and whilst I was thinking I
should therefore be killed by the Indians, and what Death I should die, my pain
was suddenly gone, and I was much encouraged again. We had about eleven Horses
in that Company, which the Indians made to carry Burdens, and to carry Women.
It was afternoon when we now crossed that River. We traveled up that River
till night, and then took up our Lodging in a dismal place, and were staked
down and spread out on our backs; and so we lay all night, yea so we lay many
nights. They told me their Law was, that we should lie so nine nights, and by
that time, it was thought we should be out of our knowledge. The manner of
staking down was thus; our Arms and Legs stretched out were staked fast down,
and a Cord about our necks, so that we could stir no ways. The first night of
staking down, being much tired, I slept as comfortably as ever; the next day we
went up the River, and crossed it, and at night lay in Squakheag Meadows; our
Provision was soon spent; and while we lay in those Meadows the Indians went an
Hunting, and the English Army came out after us: then the Indians moved again,
dividing themselves and the Captives into many Companies, that the English
might not follow their tract. At night having crossed the River, we met again
at the place appointed. The next day we crossed the River again on Squakheag
side, and there we took up our quarters for a long time, I suppose this might
be about thirty miles above Squakheag, and here were the Indians quite out of
all fear of the English; but in great fear of the Mohawks; here they built a
long Wigwam. Here they had a great Dance (as they call it) and concluded to
burn three of us, and had got Bark to do it with, and as I understood
afterward, I was one that was to be burnt. Sergeant Plimpton an other, and
Benjamin Wait his Wife the third: though I knew not which was to be burnt, yet
I perceived some were designed thereunto, so much I understood of their
Language: that night I could not sleep for fear of next days work, the Indians
being weary with that Dance, lay down to sleep, and slept soundly. The English
were all loose, then I went out and brought in Wood, and mended the fire, and
made a noise on purpose, but none awaked, I thought if any of the English would
wake, we might kill them all sleeping, I removed out of the way all the Guns
and Hatchets: but my heart failing me, I put all things where they were again.
The next day when we were to be burnt, our Master and some others spoke for us,
and the Evil was prevented in this place: And hereabouts we lay three Weeks
together. Here I had a Shirt brought to me, to make, and one Indian said it
should be made this way, a second another way, a third his way. I told them I
would make it that way that my chief Master said; Whereupon one Indian struck
me on the face with his Fist. I suddenly rose up in anger ready to strike
again, upon this happened a great Hubbub, and the Indians and English came about
me; I was fain to humble my self to my Master, so that matter was put up.
Before I came to this place, my three Masters were gone a hunting, I was left
with an other Indian, all the Company being upon a March, I was left with this
Indian, who fell sick, so that I was fain to carry his Gun and Hatchet, and had
opportunity, and had thought to have dispatched him, and run away; but did not,
for that the English Captives had promised the contrary to one another, because
if one should run away, that would provoke the Indians, and endanger the rest
that could not run away. Whilst we were here, Benjamin Stebbins going with
some Indians to Wachuset, Hills, made his escape from them, and when the news
of his escape came; we were all presently called in and Bound; one of the
Indians a Captain among them, and always our great Friend, met me coming in,
and told me Stebbins was run away; and the Indians spoke of burning us; some of
only burning and biting off our Fingers by and by. He said there would be a
Court, and all would speak their minds, but he would speak last, and would say,
that the Indian that let Stebbins run away was only in fault, and so no hurt
should be done us, fear not: so it proved accordingly. Whilst we lingered
hereabout, Provision grew scarce, one Bears Foot must serve five of us a whole
day; we began to eat Horseflesh, and eat up seven in all: three were left
alive and were not killed. Whilst we had been here, some of the Indians had
been down and fallen upon Hadley, and were taken by the English, agreed with,
and let go again; and were to meet the English upon such a Plain, there to make
further Terms. Ashpalon was much for it, but Wachuset Sachims when they came
were much against it: and were for this, that we should meet the English
indeed, but there fall upon them and fight them, and take them. Then Ashpalon
spoke to us English not to speak a word more to further that matter, for
mischief would come of it. When those Indians came from Wachuset, there came
with them Squaws, and Children about four-score, who reported that the English
had taken Uncas, and all his Men, and sent them beyond Seas, they were much
en^aged at this, and asked us if it were true; we said no, then was Ashpalon
angry, and said, he would no more believe Englishmen. For they examined us
every one apart; then they dealt worse by us for a season than before: Still
Provision was scarce. We came at length to a place called SquawMaug River,
there we hoped for Sammon, but we came too late. This place I account to be
above two hundred Miles above Deerfield: then we parted into two Companies;
some went one way and some went another way; and we went over a mighty
Mountain, we were eight days a going over it, and traveled very hard, and
every day we had either Snow or Rain: We noted that on this Mountain all the
Water run Northward. Here also we wanted Provision; but at length met again on
the other side of the Mountain, viz. on the North side of this Mountain at a
River, that run into the Lake, and we were then half a days journey off the
Lake, we stayed here a great while to make Canoos to go over the Lake; here I
was frozen, and here again we were like to starve: All the Indians went a
Hunting but could get nothing: diverse days they Powow'd but got nothing, then
they desired the English to Pray, and confessed they could do nothing; they
would have us Pray, and see what the English-man's God could do. I Prayed, so
did Sergeant Plimpton, in another place. The Indians reverently attended,
Morning and Night; next day they got Bears: then they would needs have us
desire a Blessing, return Thanks at Meals: after a while they grew weary of it,
and the Sachim did forbid us: When I was frozen they were very cruel toward
me, because I could not do as at other times. When we came to the Lake we were
again sadly put to it for Provision; we were fain to eat Touchwood fried in
Bears Grease, at last we found a company of Raccoons, and then we made a Feast;
and the manner was, that we must eat all. I perceived there would be too much
for one time, so one Indian that sat next to me, bid me slip away some to him
under his Coat, and he would hide it for me till another time; this Indian as
soon as he had got my Meat, stood up and made a Speech to the rest, and
discovered me, so that the Indians were very angry, and cut me another piece,
and gave me Raccoo^ Grease to drink, which made me sick and Vomit. I told them
I had enough; so that ever after that they would give me none; but still tell
me, I had Raccoon enough: so I suffered much, and being frozen was full of
Pain, and could sleep but a little, yet must do my work. When they went upon
the Lake, and as they came to the Lake, they light of a Moose and killed it,
and staid there till they had eaten it all up; and entering upon the Lake there
arose a great Storm, we thought we should all be case away, but at last we got
to an Island, and there they went to Powawing. The Powaw said that Benjamin
Wait, and another Man, was coming, and that Storm was raised to cast them away:
This afterward appeared to be true though then I believed them not. Upon this
Island we lay still several days, and then set out again, but a Storm took us,
so that we lay to and fro upon certain Islands about three Weeks: we had no
provision but Raccoons, so that the Indians themselves thought they should be
starved. They gave me nothing, so that I was sundry days without any
Provision: We went on upon the Lake upon that Isle about a days journey: we
had a little Sled upon which we drew our Load; before Noon, I tired, and just
then the Indians met with some Frenchmen; then one of the Indians that took me
came to me, and called me all manner of bad Names; and threw me down upon my
back: I told him I could not do any more, than he said he must kill me, I
thought he was about it, for he pulled out his Knife, and cut out my Pockets,
and wrapped them about my Face, helped me up, and took my Sled and went away, and
gave me a bit of Biscake, as big as a Walnut, which he had of the Frenchman,
and told me he would give me a Pipe of Tobacco; when my Sled was gone, I could
run after him, but at last I could not run, but went a foot-pace, then the
Indians were soon out of sight, I followed as well as I could; I had many Falls
upon the Ice; at last I was so spent, I had not strength enough to rise again,
but I crept to a Tree that lay along, and got upon it, and there I lay; it was
now night, and very sharp Weather: I counted no other but that (...) must die
there; whilst I was thinking of Death, and Indian Hallowed, and I answered
him; he came to me, and called me bad names, and told me if I could not go he
must knock me on the head; I told him he must then so do: he saw how I had
Wallowed in that Snow, but could not rise: then he took his Coat, and wrapped me
in it, and went back, and sent two Indians with a Sled, one said he must knock
me on the Head, the other said No, they would carry me away and burn me; then
they bid me stir my Instep to see if that were frozen. I did so, when they saw
that, they said (...) was Wurregen; there was a Surgeon at the French that
could cure me; then they took me upon the Sled, and carried me to the fire, and
they then made much of me; pulled off my wet, and wrapped me in dry Clothes,
made me a good Bed. They had killed and Otter, and gave me some of the Broth,
and a bit of the Flesh: here I slept till toward day, and then was able to get
up, and put on my clothes; one of the Indians awaked, and seeing me go,
shouted, as rejoicing at it: as soon as it was light I and Samuel Russel went
before on the Ice, upon a River, they said I must go where I could on foot,
else I should frieze. Samuel Russel slipped into the River with one Foot, the
Indians called him back and dried his Stockins, and then sent us away; and an
Indian with us to Pilot us: and we went four or five miles before they overtook
us: I was then pretty well spent; Samuel Russel was (he said) faint, and
wondered how I could live, for he had (he said) ten meals to my one: then I was
laid on the Sled, and they ran away with me on the Ice, the rest and Samuel
Russel came softly after. Samuel Russel I never saw more, nor know what became
of him: they got but half way, and we got through to Shamblee about midnight.
Six miles of Shamblee (a French Town) the River was open, and when I came to
travail in that part of the Ice, I soon tired; and two Indians run away to
Town, and one only was left: he would carry me a few rods, and then I would go
as many, and that (...) we drove, and so were long a going six miles. This
Indian now was kind, and told me that if he did not carry me I would die, and
so I should have done sure enough: And he said, I must tell the English how he
helped me. When we came to the first House there was no Inhabitant: the Indian
spe^^^ both discouraged; he said we must now both die, at last he left me
alone, and got to another House, and thence came some French and Indians, and
brought me in: the French were kind, and put my hands and feet in cold Water,
and gave me a Dram of Brandey, and a little hasty pudding and Milk; when I
tasted Victuals I was hungry, and could not have forborne it, but that I could
not get it; now and then they would give me a little as they thought best for
me; I lay by the fire with the Indians that night, but could not sleep for
pain: next morning the Indians and French fell out about me, because the French
as the Indian said, loved the English better than the Indians. The French
presently turned the Indians out of doors, and kept me, they were very kind and
careful, and gave me a little something now and then; while I was here all the
Men in that Town came to see me: At this House I was three or four days, and
then invited to another, and after that to another; at this place I was about
thirteen days, and received much civility from a young man, a Batchelour, who
invited me to his House, with whom I was for the most part, he was so kind as
to lodge me in the Bed with himself, he gave me a Shirt, and would have bought
me, but could not, for the Indians asked a hundred pounds for me. We were then
to go to a place called Surril, and that young man would go with me, because
the Indians should not hurt me; this Man carried me on the Ice one days
Journey: for I could not now go at all: then there was so much Water on the
Ice, we could go no further: so the Frenchman left me, and Provision for me;
here we stayed two nights, and then travailed again, for then the Ice was
strong; and in two days more I came to Surril; the first house we came to was
late in the night, here again the People were kind. Next day being in much
pain, I asked the Indians to carry me to the Surgeons, as they had promised,
at which they were wroth, and one of them took up his Gun to knock me; but the
Frenchmen would not suffer it, but set upon him, and kicked him out of doors;
then we went away from thence to a place two or three miles off, where the
Indians had Wigwams; when I came to these Wigwams some of the Indians knew me,
and seemed to pity me. While I was here, which was three or four days, the
French came to see me, and it being Christmas time, they brought Cakes and
other Provisions with them, and gave to me, so that I had no want: the Indians
tried to cure me, but could not, then I asked for the Surgeon, an which one
of the Indians in anger, struck me on the face with his Fist, a French man
being by, the Frenchman spoke to him, I knew not what he said, and went his
way. By and by came the Captain of the place into the Wigwam with about twelve
armed Men, and asked where the Indian was that struck the Englishman, and took
him and told him he should go to the Bilboes, and then be hanged: the Indians
were much terified at this, as appeared by their Countenances and Trembling. I
would have gone too, but the Frenchman bid me not fear, the Indians durst not
hurt me. When that Indian was gone, I had two Masters still, I asked them to
carry me to that Captain that I might speak for the Indian, they answered, I
was a Fool, did I think the Frenchmen were like to the English, to say one
thing and do another? they were men of their words, but I prevailed with them
to help me thither, and I spoke to the Captain by an Interpreter, and told him
I desired him to set the Indian free, and told him what he had done for me, he
told me he was a Rogue, and should be hanged; then I spoke more privately,
alleging this Reason, because (...) English Captives were not come in, if he
were hanged, it might fare the worse with them; then the Captain said, that was
to be considered: then he set him at liberty, upon this condition, that he
should never strike me more, and every day bring me to his House to eat
Victuals. I perceived that the common People did not like what the Indians had
done and did to the English. When the Indian was set free, he came to me, and
took me about the middle, and said I was his Brother, I had saved his life
once, and he had saved mine (he said) thrice. Then he called for Brandy and
made me drink, and had me away to the Wigwams again, When I came there, the
Indians came to me one by one, to shake hands with me, saying Wurregen Netop;
and were very kind, thinking no other, but that I had saved the Indians Life.
The next day he carried me to that Captains house, and set me down; they gave
me my Victuals and Wine, and being left there a while by the Indians, I showed
the Captain my Fingers, which when he and his Wife saw, he and his Wife run
away from the sight, and bid me lap it up again, and sent for the Surgeon,
who when he came, said he could cure me, and took it in hand, and dressed it;
the Indian toward night came for me, I told them I could not go with them,
they were displeased, called me Rogue, and went away; that night I was full of
pain, the French did fear that I would die, five Men did Watch with me, and
strove to keep me chearly: for I was sometimes ready to faint: Often times they
gave me a little Brandy. The next day the Surgeon came again, and dressed
me; and so he did all the while I was among the French. I came in at
Christmas, and went thence May 2d. Being thus in the Captain's house, I was
kept there till Ben. Waits came: and my Indian Master being in want of Money,
pawned me to the Captain for 14. Beavers, or the worth of them, at such a day
if he did not pay he must lose his Pawn, or else sell me for twenty one
Beavers, but he could not get Beaver, and so I was sold. But by being thus sold
he was in Gods good time set at liberty, and returned to his Friends in
New England again.

Thus far is this poor Captives Relation concerning the changes of Providence
which passed over him.

There is one Remarkable passage more, affirmed by him: For he says, that in
their Travails they came to a place where was a great Wigwam (i.e. Indian
House) at both ends was an Image; here the Indians in the War time were wont to
Powaw (i.e. invocate the Devil) and so did they come down to Hatfield, one of
the Images told them they should destroy a Town; the other said no, half a
Town. This god (said that Indian) speaks true, the other was not good, he told
them lies. No doubt but others are capable of declaring many passages of Divine
Providence no less worthy to be Recorded than these last recited; but inasmuch
as they have not been brought to my hands, I proceed to another Relation.

Very Memorable was the Providence of God toward Mr. Ephraim How of New Haven
in New England, who was for an whole twelve Month given up by his Friends as a
dead Man, but God preserved him alive in a desolate Island where he had
suffered Shipwreck, and at last returned him home to his Family.

The History of this Providence might have been mentioned amongst
Sea-Deliverances, yet considering it was not only so, I shall here Record what
himself (being a godly man) did relate of the Lords marvelous dispensations
toward him, that so others might be encouraged to put their trust in God, in
the times of their greatest straits and difficulties.

On the 25. of August, in the year 1676. the said Skipper How with his two
eldest Sons set sail from New Haven for Boston in a small Ketch, Burden 17 Tun
or thereabout: After the Dispatch of their Business there, they set Sail from
thence for New Haven again, on the 10th of September following: but contrary
Winds forced them back to Boston, where the said How was taken ill with a
violent flux, which Distemper continued near a Month, many being at that time
sick of the same Disease, which proved mortal to some. The merciful Providence
of God having spared his life, and restored him to some measure of health; he
again set Sail from Boston, October 10. By a fair Wind they went forward so as
to make Cape Cod; but suddenly the Weather became very Tempestuous, so as that
they could not seize the Cape, but were forced off to Sea; where they were
endangered in a small Vessel by very fearful Storms and outrageous Winds and
Seas. Also, his Eldest Son fell sick and died in about eleven days after they
set out to Sea. He was no sooner dead, but his other Son fell sick and died
too. This was a bitter Cup to the good Father. It is noted in I Chron.7.22.
that when the Sons of Ephraim were dead, Ephraim their Father mourned many
days, and his Brethren came to comfort him. This Ephraim when his Sons were
Dead his Friends on Shore knew it not, nor could they come to comfort him. But
when his Friends and Relations could not, the Lord himself did: for they died
after so sweet, gracious and comfortable a manner, as that their Father
professed he had joy in parting with them. Yet now their outward distress and
danger was become greater, since the Skipper's two Sons were the only help he
had in working the Vessel. Not long after, another of the Company, viz. Cale^
Jones (Son to Mr. William Jones one of the Worthy Magistrates in New Haven)
fell sick and died also, leaving the World with comfortable manifestations of
true Repentance toward God, and Faith in Jesus Christ. Thus the one half of
their Company was taken away, none remaining but the Skipper himself, one Mr.
Augur, and a Boy. He himself was still sickly, and in a very weak estate, yet
was fain to stand at the Helm 36 hours, and 24 hours at a time; in the mean
time the boisterous Sea overwhelming the Vessel, so as that if he had not been
lasht fast, he had certainly been washed overboard. In this Extremity, he was
at a loss in his own thoughts, whether they should persist in striving for the
New England Shore, or bear away for the Southern Islands. He proposed that
Question to Mr. Augur, they resolved that they would first seek to God by
Prayer about it, and then put this difficult case to an issue, by casting a
Lot. So they did; and the Lot fell on New England. By that time a Month was
expired, they lost the Rudder of their Vessel, so that now they had nothing but
God alone to reply upon. In this deplorable state were they for a fortnight.
The Skipper (though infirm (as has been expressed) yet for six weeks together,
was hardly ever day; nor had they the benefit of warm Food for more then thrice
or thereabouts. At the end of six weeks, in the Morning betimes, the Vessel was
driven on the Tailings of a ledge of Rocks, where the Sea broke violently;
looking out they espied a dismal Rocky Island to the Leeward, upon which if the
Providence of God had not by the Breakers given them timely warning, they had
been dashed in pieces. And this extremity was the Lords opportunity to appear
for their deliverance; they immediately let go an Anchor, and get out the Boat;
and God made the Sea calm. The Boat proved leaky; and being in the midst of
fears and amazements they took little out of the Vessel. After they came ashore
they found themselves in a rocky desolate Island (near Cape Sables) where was
neither Man nor Beast to be seen, so that now they were in extreme danger of
being starved to Death. But a Storm arose which beat violently upon the Vessel
at Anchor, so as that it was staved in pieces; and a Cask of Powder was brought
ashore, (receiving no damage by its being washed in the Water) also a Barrel of
Wine; and half a Barrel of Molosses, together with many things useful for a
Tent to preserve them from cold. This notwithstanding, new and great distresses
attended them. For though they had Powder and Shot, there were seldom any Fowls
to be seen in that Dismal and Desolate place, excepting a few Crows, Raven^ and
Gulls. These were so few as that for the most part, the Skipper shot at one at
a time. Many times half of one of these Fowls with the Liquor made a Meal for
three. Once they lived five days without any Sustenance, at which time they
did not feel themselves pincht with hunger as at other times; the Lord in mercy
taking away their appetites, when their Food did utterly fail them. After they
had been about twelve Weeks in this miserable Island, Mr. Hows dear Friend and
Consort Mr, Augur Died; so that he had no living creature but the Lad before
mentioned to converse with: And on April 2. 1677. that Lad Died also, so that
the Master was now left alone upon the Island, and continued so to be above a
quarter of a year, not having any living Soul to converse with. In this time he
saw several Fishing Vessels Sailing by, and some came nearer the Island than
that which at last took him in; but though he used what means he could that
they might be acquainted with his Distress, none came to him, being afraid: for
they supposed him to be one of those Indians who were then in Hostility against
the English. The good Man whilst he was in his Desolate Estate, kept many
days of Fasting and Prayer, wherein he did confess and bewail his Sins, the
least of which deserved greater Evils than any in this World ever were on can
be subject unto; and begged of God that he would find out a way for his
Deliverance. At last it came into his mind, that he ought very solemnly to
praise God (as well as pray unto him) for the great mercies and signal
preservations which he had thus far experienced. Accordingly he set apart a day
for that end, spending the time in giving thanks to God for all the mercies of
his Life, so far as he could call them to mind, and in special for those Divine
Favors which had been mingled with his afflictions; humbly blessing God for
his wonderful goodness in preserving him alive by a Miracle of Mercy.
Immediately after this, a Vessel belonging to Salem in New England
providentially passing by that Island, sent their Boat on shore, and took in
Skipper How, who arrived at Salem, July 18. 1677. and was at last returned to
his Family in New Haven.

Upon this occasion it may not be amiss to commemorate a Providence not
altogether unlike unto the but now related preservation of Skipper How. The
Story which I intend is mentioned by Mandelsloe in h^^ Travails, Page 280. and
more fully by Mr. Clark in his Examples, Vol. 2. Page 618. Mr. Burton in his
Prodigies of Mercies, Page 209. yet inasmuch as but few in this Country have
the Authors mentioned, I shall here insert what has been by them already
published.

The Story is in brief as follows:

In the Year 1616. A Fleming whose name was Pickman, coming from Norway in a
Vessel laden with Boards, was overtaken by a Calm, during which the Current
carried him upon a Rock or little Island toward the extremities of Scotland To
avoid a Wreck he commanded some of his Men to go into the Shallop, and to Tow
the Ship. They having done so, would needs go up into a certain Rock to look
for Birds Eggs: But as soon as they were got up into it, they at some distance
perceived a Man, whence they imagined that there were others lurking
thereabouts, and that this man had made his escape thither from some Pirates,
who, if not prevented, might surprise their Ship: and therefore they made all
the have they could to their Shallop, and so returned to their Ship. But the
Calm continuing, and the Current of the Sea still driving them upon the Island,
they were forced to get into the Longboat, and to Tow her off again. The Man
whom they had seen before-was in the mean time come to the brink of the Island,
and made signs with his hands lifted up, and sometimes falling on his knees,
and joining his hands together, begging and crying to them for relief. At first
they made some difficulty to get to him, but at last, being overcome by his
lamentable signs, they went nearer the Island, where they saw something that
was more like a Ghost than a living Person; a Body stark naked, black and
hairy, a meagre and deformed Countenance, with hollow and distorted eyes; which
raised such compassion in them, that they essayed to take him into the Boat:
but the Rock was so steepy thereabouts, that it was impossible for them to
land: whereupon they went about the Island, and came at last to a flat shore,
where they took the Man abroad. They found nothing at all in the Island,
neither Grass nor Tree, nor ought else from which a man could procure any
subsistence, nor any shelter, but the ruins of a Boat, wherewith he had made a
kind of a Hutt, under which he might lie down and shelter himself, against the
injuries of Wind and Weather. No sooner were they gotten to the Ship, but there
arose a Wind, that drove them off from the Island: observing this Providence,
they were the more inquisitive to know of this Man, what he was, and by what
means he came unto that uninhabitable place?

Hereunto the Man Answered;

I am an English Man, that about a Year ago, was to pass in the Ordinary
Passage. Boat from England to Dublin in Ireland; but by the way we were taken
by a French P^rate, who being immediately forced by a Tempest, which presently
arose, to let our Boat go; we were three of us in it, left to the mercy of the
Wind and Waves, which carried us between Ireland and Scotland, into the main
Sea: In the mean time we had neither Food nor Drink, but only some Sugar in the
Boat; upon this we lived, and drank our own Urine, till our bodies were so
dried up, that we could make no more: whereupon one of our Company being quite
spent, died; whom we heaved overboard: and a while after a second was grown so
feeble, that he had laid himself along in the Boat, ready to give up the Ghost:
But in this extremity it pleased God that I kenned this Island afar off, and
thereupon encouraged the dying man to rouse up himself, with hopes of life: and
accordingly, upon this good news, he raised himself up, and by and by our Boat
was cast upon this Island, and split against a Rock.

Now we were in a more wretched condition than if we had been swallowed up by
the Sea, for then we had been delivered out of the Extremities we were now in
for want of Meat and Drink; yet the Lord was pleased to make some provision for
us: for on the Island we took some Sea-mews, which we did eat raw: We found
also in the holes of the Rocks, upon the Seaside, some Eggs; and thus had we
through Gods good Providence wherewithal to subsist, as much as would keep as
from starving: but what we thought most unsupportable, was thirst, in regard
that the place afforded no fresh Water but what fell from the Clouds, and was
left in certain Pits, which time had made in the Rock. Neither could we have
this at all seasons, by reason that the Rock being small, and lying low, in
stormy Weather the Waves dashed over it, and filled the Pits with Salt Water.

When they came first upon the Island about the midst of it, they found two
long Stones pitched in the Ground, and a third laid upon them, like a Table;
which they judged to have been so placed by some Fishermen to dry their Fish
upon; and under this they lay in the nights, till with some Boards of their
Boat, they made a kind of an Hutt to be a shelter for them. In this condition
they lived together, for the space of about six Weeks, comforting one another,
and finding some ease in their common calamity: till at last one of them being
left alone, the burden became almost insupportable: For one day, awaking in the
Morning he missed his Fellow, and getting up, he went calling and seeking all
the island about for him, but when he could by no means find him, he fell into
such despair, that he often resolved to have cast, himself down into the Sea,
and so to put a final Period to that affliction, whereof he had endured but the
one half, whilst he had a Friend that divided it with him. What became of his
Comrade he could not guess, whether despair forced him to that extremity, or
whether getting up in the night, not fully awake, he fell from the Rock, as he
was looking for Birds Eggs: for he had discovered no distraction in him,
neither could imagine that he could on a sudden fall into that despair, against
which he had so fortified himself by frequent and fervent Prayer. And his loss
did so affect the Surviver, that he often took his beer, with a purpose to have
leaped from the Rocks into the Sea, yet still his Conscience stopped him,
suggesting to him, that if he did it, he would be utterly damned for his
Self-murder.

Another Affliction also befell him, which was this; his only Knife wherewith he
cut up the Sea-Dogs and Sea-Mews, having a bloody cloth about it, was carried
away (as he thought) by some fowl of Prey; so that, not being able to kill any
more, he was reduced to this extremity, with much difficulty to get out of the
Boards of his Hutt, a great Nail, which he made shift so to sharpen upon the
Stones, that it served him instead of a Knife. When Winter came on, he endured
the greatest misery imaginable: for many times the Rock and his Hutt were so
covered with Snow, that it was not possible for him to go abroad to provide his
Food; which extremity put him upon this Invention: he put out a little stick at
the crevice of his Hutt, and baiting it with a little Sea-Dogs fat, by that
means he got some Sea-Mews, which he took with his hand from under the Snow,
and so kept himself from starving. In this sad and solitary condition, he lived
for about eleven Months, expecting therein to end his days, (...) Gods
gracious providence sent this Ship thither, which delivered him out of the
greatest misery that ever man was in. The Master of the Ship commiserating his
deplorable condition, treated him so well, that within a few days he was quite
another creature; and afterward he set him a shore at Derry in Ireland; and
sometimes after he saw him at Dublin: where such as heard what had happened unto
him, gave him Money, wherewithal to return into his Native Country of; England.

Thus far is that Relation.

I have seen a Manuscript, wherein many memorable Passages of Divine Providence
are Recorded. And this which I shall now mention amongst others.

About the Year 1638. A Ship fell foul upon the Rocks and Sands, called the
Rancadories, sixty Leagues distant from the Isle of Providence. Ten of the
floating Passengers got to a spot of Land, where having breathed awhile, and
expecting to perish by Famine, eight of them chose rather to commit themselves
to the mercy of the waters; two only stood upon the spot of Land, one whereof
soon died, and was in the Sands buried by his now desolate Companion. This
solitary Person in the midst of the roaring Waters was encompassed with the
goodness of Divine Providence. Within three days God was pleased to send this
single person (who now alone, was Lord and Subject in this his little
Commonwealth) good store of Fowl, and to render them so same, that the forlorn
man could pick and choose where he list. Fish also were now and then cast up
within his reach, and somewhat that served for Fuel, ^nkindled by Flint to
dress them. Thus lived that Insulary Anchorite for about two years, till at
last having espied a Dutch Vessel, he held a rag of his Shirt upon the top of a
stick toward them, which being come within view of, they used means to fetch
him off the Said-spot of Sand, and brought him to the Isle of Providence. The
Man having in so long a time conversed only with Heaven, looked at first very
strangely, and was not able at first Conference promptly to speak and answer.

CHAP. III.
Concerning Remarkables about Thunder and Lightning. One at Salisbury in
New England struck dead thereby. Several at Marshfield. One at North-Hampton.
The Captain of the Castle in Boston. Some Remarkables about Lightning in
Rocksborough, Wenham, Marblehead, Cambridge. And in several Vessels at Sea.
Some late parallel Instances, Of several in the last Century. Scripture
Examples of Men stain by Lightning.

THere are who affirm that although terrible Lightnings with Thunders have ever
been frequent in this Land, yet none were hurt thereby (neither Man nor Beast)
for many years after the English did first settle in these American Deserts.
But that of later years fatal and fearful slaughters have in that way been made
amongst us, is most certain. And there are many who have in this respect been
as Brands plucked out of the burning, when the Lord has overthrown others as
God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. Such solemn works of Providence ought not to
be forgotten. I shall now therefore proceed in giving an account of Remarkables
respecting Thunder and Lightning, so far as I have received credible
Information concerning them; The Particulars whereof are these which follow:

In July 1654. A Man whose Name was Partridge (esteemed a very godly person) at
Salisbury in New England was killed with Thunder and Lightning, his House being
first set on fire thereby, and himself with others endeavoring the quenching
of it, by a second crack of Thunder with Lightning (he being at the door of his
House) was struck dead, and never spoke more. There were ten other persons also
that were struck and lay for dead at the present, but they all revived,
excepting Partridge. Some that viewed him, report that there were holes (like
such as are made with shot) found in his Clothes, and Skin. One side of his
Shirt and Body was scorched, and not the other. His House, though (as was said)
set on fire by the Lightning in diverse places, was not burnt down, but
preserved by an abundance of Rain falling upon it.

July 31. 1658. There happened a Storm of Thunder and Lightning with Rain, in the
Town of Marshfield in Plymouth Colony in New England: Mr. Nathaneel Thomas,
John Philips, and another belonging to that Town, being in the Field, as they
perceived the Storm a coming, betook themselves to the next House for Shelter:
John Philips sat down near the Chimney, his Face toward the inner Door. A
black Cloud flying very low, (...) of it there came a great Ball of Fire, with
a terrible crack of Thunder; the Fire-ball fell down just before the said
Philips, he seemed to give a start on his Seat, and so fell backward, being
struck dead, not the least motion of life appearing in him afterward. Captain
Thomas who sat directly opposite to John Philips, about six foot distance from
him, and a young Child that was then within three foot of him, through the
Providence of God received no hurt, Yet many Bricks in the Chimney were beaten
down, the principal Rafters split, the Battens next the Chimney in the Chamber
were broken, one of the main Posts of the House into which the Summer was
framed rent into shivers, and a great part of it was carried several Rod from
the House, the Door before Philips, where the fire came down, was broken.

On the 28 of April A. D. 1664. A Company of the Neighbors being met together
at the House of Henry Condliff in North-Hampton in New England, to spend a few
hours in Christian Conferences, and in Prayer; there happened a Storm of Thunder
and Rain; and as the good Man of the House was at Prayer, there came a Ball of
Lightning in at the roof of the House which set the Thatch on fire, grated on
the Timber, pierced through the Chamber-floor, no breach being made on the
Boards; only one of the jouy^es somewhat rased; Matthew Cole (who was Son in
Law to the said Condliff) was struck stone dead as he was leaning over a Table,
and joining with the rest in Prayer. He did not stir nor groan after he was
smitten, but continued standing as before, bearing upon the Table. There was no
visible impression on his body or clothes, only the sole of one of his Shoes
was rent from the upper Leather. There were about twelve persons in the Room;
none else received any harm, only one Woman (who is still living) was struck
upon the Head, which occasioned some deafness ever since. The Fire on the House
was quenched by the seasonable help of Neighbors.

July 15. 1665. There were terrible cracks of Thunder. An House in Boston was
struck by it, and the Dishes therein melted as they stood on the Shelves, but
no other hurt done in the Town. Only Captain Davenport (a Worthy Man, and one
that had in the Pequot War, ventured his life, and did great service for the
Country) then residing in the Castle where he commanded: having that day
wrought himself weary, and thinking to refresh himself with sleep, was killed
with Lightning, as he lay upon his Bed asleep. Several of the Soldiers in the
Castle were struck at the same time; but God spared their lives. It has been an
old Opinion mentioned by Plutarch (sympos. lib. 4. q.2.) that Men asleep are
never smitten with Lightning; to confirm which it has been alleged, that one
lying asleep, the Lightning melted the Money in his Purse without doing him any
further harm: And that a Cradle, wherein a Child lay sleeping, was broken with
the Lightning, and the Child not hurt; And that the Arrows of King Mithridates
being near his Bed, were burnt with Lightning, and yet himself being asleep
received no hurt; but as much of all this, may be affirmed of persons awake.
And this sad Example (Triste jaces lucis evitandumque B^dental) of Captain
Davenport, whom the Lightning found and left asleep, does confute the vulgar
error mentioned. And no doubt but that many the like Instances to this have
been known in the World, the Records whereof we have not. But I proceed:

June 23. 1666. In Marshfield, another dismal Storm of Rain with Thunder and
Lightning happened. There were then in the house of John Philips (he was Father
of that John Philips who was slain by Lightning in the year 1658.) fourteen
persons; the Woman of the house calling earnestly to shut the Door, that was no
sooner done, but an astonishing Thunderclap fell upon the house rent the
Chimney, and split the Door. All in the house were struck. One of them (who is
still living) says, that when he came to himself, he saw the house full of
Smoke, and perceived a grievous smell of Brimstone, and saw the fire ly
scattered; though whether that fire came from Heaven or was violently hurled
out of the Hearth, he can give no account. At first he thought all the people
present, except himself, ha^ been killed. But it pleased God to revi^^ most of
them. Only three of them were mortally wounded with Heavens Arrows viz. the
Wife of John Philips, and another of his Sons a young Man about twenty years
old, and William Shertly, who had (...) Child in his Arms, that received no
hurt (...) the Lightning when himself was slain. The Shertly was at that time a
sojourner in John Philips his house; having been a little before burnt out of
his own house. The Wife (...) this Shertly was with Child and near her f^^
time, and struck down for dead at present but God recovered her, so that she
received no hurt, neither by fright nor stroke. Two little Children sitting
upon the edge of a Table, had their lives preserved, though a Dog which lay
behind them under the Table was killed.

In the same year (in the latter end of May) Samuel Ruggles of Rocksborough in
New England, going with a laden Cart, was struck with Lightning. He did not
hear the Thunderclap, but was by the force of the Lightning e're he was aware,
carried over his Cattle about ten foot distance from them. Attempting to rise
up he found that he was not able to stand upon his right Leg, for his right
foot was become limber, and would bend any way, feeling as if it had no bone in
it, nevertheless, he made a shift with the use of one leg to get to his Cattle
(being an Horse and two Oxen) which were all killed by the Lightning. He
endeavored to take off the Yoke from the neck of one of the Oxen, but then he
perceived that his thumb and two fingers in one hand were stupefied that he
could not stir them; they looked like cold clay, the blood clear gone out of
that part of his hand. But by rubbing his wounded leg and hand, blood and life
came into them again. As he came home pulling off his Stocking, he found that
on the inside of his right Leg (which smarted much) the hair was quite burnt
off, and it looked red. Just over his Ankle his Stocking was singed on the
inside, but not on the outside, and there were near upon twenty marks about as
big as pins heads, which the Lightning had left thereon. Likewise the Shoe on
his left foot, was by the Lightning struck off his foot, and carried above two
Rods from him. On the upper leather at the heel of the Shoe, there were five
holes burnt through it, bigger than those which are made with Duck Shoe. As for
the Beasts that were slain, the hair upon their skins was singed, so that one
might perceive that the Lightning had run winding and turning strangely upon
their bodies, le^ving little marks no bigger then Corns (...) Gunpowder behind
it. There was in the Cart a Chest which the Lightning pier^^ through, as also
through a quire of Paper and twelve Napkins, melting some pewter dish that were
under them.

At another ^^ne in Rocksborough, a Thunder Storm happening, broke into the house
of T^^mas Bishop, striking off some Clapboards, spl^^ting two Studs of the end
Spar, and running down by each side of the Window, when stood a Bed with three
Children in it. Ov^^ the head of the Bed were three Guns and Sword, which were
so melted with the Lightning that they began to run. It made hole through the
floor, and coming into lower room it beat down the shutter of the Window, and
running on a shelf of Pewter it melted several Dishes there; and descending
lower, it melted a Brass Mortar, and a Brass Kettle. The Children in the Be^
were wonderfully preserved: for a Lath (...) the corner of it was burnt, and
Splinters flew about their Clothes and Faces, and there was not an hands
breadth between them and the fire, yet received they no hurt.

On the 18 of May (being the Lords day) A.D. 1673. The People at Wenham (their
worthy Pastor Mr. Antipas Newman being lately dead) prevailed with the Reverend
Mr. Higginson of Salem, to spend that Sabbath amongst them. The afternoon
Sermon being ended, he with several of the Town went to Mr. Newman his House;
whilst they were in discourse there, about the word and works of God, a
Thunder storm arose. After a while a smart Clap of Thunder broke upon the
House, and especially into the Room where they were sitting, and discoursing
together; It did for the present deafen them all, filling the Room with smoke,
and ae strong smell as of Brimstone. With the Thunderclap, came in a Ball of
Fire ^s big as the Bullet of a great Gun, which suddenly went up the Chimney,
as also the Smoke did. This Ball of Fire was seen at the ^eet of Richard
Goldsmith, who sat on ae Leather Chair, next the Chimney, at which instant he
fell off the Chair on the Ground. As soon as the Smoke was gone, some in the
^^om endeavored to hold him up, but found him dead; also the Dog that lay
under the Chair was found stone dead, but not the least hurt done to the Chair.
All that could be perceived by the Man, was, that the hair of head near one of
his Ears was a little singed. There were seven or eight in that room, and more
in the next; yet (through the merciful providence of God) none else had the
least harm. This Richard Goldsmith, who was thus slain, was a Shoemaker by
Trade, being reputed a good Man for the main; b^^ had blemished his Christian
Profession by frequent breaking of his promise, it being too common with him
(as with too many Professors amongst us) to be free and forward in engaging but
backward in performing. Yet this must further be added, that half a year before
his Death, God gave him a deep sense of his Evils, that he made it his business
not only that his peace might be made with God, but with Men also, unto whom he
had given just offense. He went up and down bewailing his great sin in
promise-breaking; and was become a very conscientious and lively Christian,
promoting holy and edifying Discourses, as he had occasion. At that very time
when he was struck dead, he was speaking of some passages in the Sermon he had
newly heard, and his last words were, blessed be the Lord.

In the same year, on the 21, of June, being Saturday in the afternoon; another
Thunder-storm arose; during which Storm Josiah Walton (the youngest Son of Mr.
William Walton late Minister of Marble-head) was in a Ketch coming in from Sea,
and being before the Harbors mouth, the Wind suddenly shifted to the
Northward; a violent Gust of Wind coming down on the Vessel, the Seamen
concluded to hand their Sails, Josiah Walton got upon the Main-yard to expedite
the matter, and foot down the Sail; when there happened a terrible flash of
Lightning, which breaking forth out of the Cloud, struck down three Men who
were on the Deck, without doing them any hurt; but Josiah Walton being (as was
said) on the Main-yard, the Lightning shattered his Thighbone all in pieces,
and did split and shiver the Mainmast of the Vessel, and scorcht the Rigging.
Josiah Walton falling down upon the Deck, his Leg was broken short off. His
Brother being on the Deck, did (with others) take ^him up, and found him alive,
but sorely scorched and wounded. They brought him on shore to his Mothers
House. At first he was very sensible of his case; and took leave of his
Friends, giving himself to a serious preparation for another World. His
Relations used all means possible for his recovery; though he himself told them
he was a dead man, and the use of means would bu^^ put him to more misery. His
Bones were so shattered, that it was not possible for the Art of Man to reduce
them; Also, the violent heat of the weather occasioned a Gangrene. In this
misery he continued until the next Wednesday morning; and then departed this
life; he was an hopeful young man.

In the Year 1678. on the 29 th. of June, at Cambridge in New England; A
Thunderclap with Lightning broke into the next house to the College. It tore
away and shattered into pieces a considerable quantity of the Tyle on the Roof
thereof. In one Room there then happened to be the Wife of John Benjamin
(Daughter to Thomas Swetman, the Owner of the House) who then had an Infant
about two Months old in her Arms; also another Woman. They were all of them
struck; the Child being by the force of the Lightning carried out of the
Mothers Arms, and thrown upon the Floor some distance from her. The Mother was
at first thought to be dead, but God restored her, though she lost the use of
her Limbs for some considerable time. Her feet were singed with the Lightning,
and yet no sign thereof appearing on her Shoes. Also the Child and the other
Woman recovered. In the next room were seven or eight persons who received no
hurt. It was above a^ quarter of an hour before they could help the persons
thus smitten, for the room was so full of Smoke (smelling like Brimstone) that
they could not see them. Some Swine being near the Door as the Lightning fell,
were thrown into the House, and seemed de^d awhile, but afterward came to life
again. A Cat was killed therewith. A Pewter Candlestick standing upon a
joyntstool; some part of it was melted and carried away before the Lightning,
and stuck in the Chamber floor over head, like Swan shot, and yet the
Candlestick it self was not so much as shaken off from the Stool whereon it
stood.

June 12. 1680. There was an amazing Thunder-storm at Hampton in New England.
The Lightning fell upon the House of Mr. Joseph Smith, strangely shattering it
in diverse places. His Wife (the Granddaughter of that Eminent Man of God, Mr.
Catton, who was the famous Teacher of the Church of Christ, first in Old, and
then in New Boston) lay as dead for the present; being struck down with the
Lightning, near the Chimney, yet God mercifully spared and restored her. But
the said Smith his Mother (a gracious Woman) was strvck dead and never
recovered again.

Besides all these which have been mentioned, one or two in Connecticut Colony,
and four Persons dwelling in the Northern parts of this Country, were smitten
with the fire of God, about sixteen years ago; the circumstances of which
Providence (though very Remarkable) I have not as yet received from those that
were acquainted therewith; and therefore cannot here publish them. Also, some
Remarkables about Thunder happened the last year.

A Reverend Friend in a Neighbor Colony, in a Letter bearing August 3. 1682.
Writes thus;

We have had of late great Storms of Rain and Wind, and some of Thunder and
Lightning, whereby Execution has been done, though with sparing mercy to Men:
Mr. Jones his House is New Haven, was broken into by the Lightning, and strange
work made in one Room especially, in which one of his Children had been but a
little before. This was done June 8. 1682. A little after which at Norwalk,
there were nine working Oxen smitten dead at once, within a small compass of
Ground. The next Month at Greenwich, there were seven Swine and a Dog killed
with the Lightning, very near a dwelling House, where a Family of Children
(their Parents not at home when Lightning happened) were much frighted, but
received no other hurt: what are these but warning pieces, showing that Men's
lives may go next? Thus he,

I proceed now to give an account of some late Remarkables about Thunder and
Lightning, wherein several Vessels at Sea were concerned.

July 17.1677. A Vessel whereof Mr. Thomas Berry was Master, set Sail from
Boston in New England, Bound for the Island of Madera. About 3. h. P. M. being
half way between Cape Cod and Brewsters Islands, they were becalmed; and they
perceived a Thundershower arising in the North-Northwest. The Master ordered
all their Sails (except their two Courses) to be furled. When the shower drew
near to them, they had only the foresail abroad; all the Men were busy in
lashing fast the Longboat; The Master was walking upon the Deck, and as he
came near the Mainmast, he beheld something very black fly before him, about
the bigness of a small Mast, at the Larboard side; and immediately he heard a
dreadful and amazing noise, not like a single Canon, but as if great Armies of
Men had been firing one against another; presently upon which the Master was
struck clear round, and fell down for dead upon the Deck, continuing so for
about seven minutes; but then he revived, having his hands much burnt with the
Lightning. The Ship seemed to be on fire; and a very great Smoke having a
Sulphurous smell came from between the Decks; so that no man was able to stay
there, for more than half an hour after this surprising Accident happened. The
Mainmast was split from the Top-gallant-mast head to the lower Deck. The
Partners of the Pump were struck up at the Star-board side, and one end of two
Cabbins staved down betwixt Decks. Two holes were made in one of the Pumps
about the bigness of two Musket Bullets. They were forced to return to Boston
again, in order to the fitting of the Vessel with a new Mast. Through the mercy
of the most high, no person in the Vessel received any hurt, besides what has
been expressed. Yet it is Remarkable that the same day, about the same time,
two Men in or near Wenham were killed with Lightning, as they sat under a tree
in the Woods.

On June the sixth A. D. 1682. A Ship called the Jamaica Merchant, Captain
Joseph Wild Commander, being then in the Gulf of Florida, Lat.27. gr. about I
h. P. M. was surprised with an amazing Thunder shower; the Lightning split the
Mainmast, and knocked down one of the Seamen, and set the Ship on fire
between Decks, in several places. They used utmost endeavor to extinguish the
fire, but could not do it; seeing they were unable to overcome those Flames,
they betook themselves to their Boat. The fire was so furious between the
Cabin and the Deck in the Steeridge, that they could not go to the relief of
each other, insomuch that a Man and his Wife were parted. The Man leaped
overboard into the Sea, and so swam to the Boat: his Wife and a Child were
taken out of a Gallery Window into the Boat. Three Men more were saved by
leaping out of the Cabin Window. There were aboard this Vessel which Heaven
thus set on fire, thirty four persons; yet all escaped with their lives: For
the gracious providence of God so ordered, as that Captain John Bennet was then
in company, who received these distressed and astonished Creatures into his
Ship: so did they behold the Vessel burning, until about 8 h. P. M. when that
which remained sunk to the bottom of the Sea. The Master with several of the
Seamen were by Captain Bennet brought safe to New England, where they declared
how wonderfully they had been delivered from Death which God both by fire and
water had threatened them with.

March 16. 1682. 3. A ship whereof Robert Luist is Master being then at Sea
(bound for New England) in Lat. 27.gr. about 2.h. A.M. it began to Thunder and
Lighten. They beheld three Corpusants (as Mariners call them) on the Yards: The
Thunder grew fiercer, and thicker than before. Suddenly their Vessel was filled
with Smoke, and the smell of Brimstone, that the poor men were terrified with
the apprehension of their Ships being on fire. There came down from the Clouds
a stream or flame of Fire as big as the Ships Mast, which fell on the middle of
the Deck, where the Mate was standing, but then was thrown flat upon his back
with three Men more that were but a little distance from him. They that were
yet untouched, thought, not only that their fellow Mariners had been struck
dead, but their Deck broken in pieces by that blow, whose sound seemed to them
to exceed the report of many great Guns fired off at once. Some that were less
dangerously hurt, made an Outcry that their legs were scalded; but the Mate
lay spe^chlets and senseless. When he began to come to himself, he made sad
complaints of a burden lying upon his back. When Day came, they perceived their
Main-top-mast was split, and the Top-sail burnt. The Lightning seemed like
small coals of fire blown overboard.

There is one Remarkable more about Thunder and Lightning, which I am lately
informed of by persons concerned therein; some circumstances in the Relation
being as wonderful, as any of the preceding particulars. Thus it was: On July
24. in the Year 1681. The Ship called Alben^^^ (whereof Mr. Edward Lad was then
Master) being an hundred leagues from Cape Cod, in Lat. 48. about h. P. M. met
with a Thunder Storm. The Lightning burnt the Main-top-sail, split the Main-cap
in pieces, rent the Mast all along. There was in special one dreadful Clap of
Thunder, the report bigger than of a great Gun, at which all the Ships Company
were amazed; then did there fall something from the Clouds upon the stern of
the Boat, which broke into many small parts; split one of the Pumps, the other
Pump much hurt also. It was a Bituminous matter, smelling much like fired
Gunpowder. It continued burning in the stern of the Boat, they did with Stick^
dissipate it, and poured much Water on it, and yet they were not able by all
that they could do to extinguish it, until such time as all the matter was
consumed. But the strangest thing of all, is yet to be mentioned, When night
came, observing the Stars, they perceived that their Compasses were changed. As
for the Compass in the Biddikil, the North point was turned clear South. There
were two other Compasses unhung in the Locker, in the Cabin. In one of which
the North point stood South, like that in the Biddikil; as for the other, the
North point stood West. So that they Sailed by a Needle whose Polarity was
quite changed. The Seamen were at first puzzled how to work their Vessel right,
considering that the South point of their Compass was now become North, but
after a little use, it was easy to them. Thus did they Sail a thousand
Leagues. As for the Compass wherein the Lightning had made the Needle to point
Westward, since it was brought to New England the Glass being broke, it has by
means of the Air coming to it, wholly lost its virtue. One of those Compasses
which had quite changed the Polarity from North to South, is still extant in
Boston; and at present in my custody. The North point of the Needle does remain
fixed to this day, as it did immediately after the Lightning caused an
alteration. The natural reason of which may be enquired into in the next
Chapter: But before I pass to that, it may be, it will be grateful to the
Reader, for me here to commemorate some parallel Instances, which have lately
happened in other parts of the World, unto which I proceed, contenting my self
with one or two Examples, reserving others for the subsequent Chapter; where we
shall have further occasion to take notice of them.

The Authors Ephemeridum Medico-Phys^carum Germanicarum, have informed the
World, that on August 14. 1669. it Thundered and Lightened as if Heaven and Earth
would come together. And at the house of a Gentleman who lived near Bergen, the
fiery Lightning flashed through four inner rooms at once, entering into a Beer
Cellar, with its force it threw down the Earthen Vessels, with the Windows and
Doors where it came: but the Tin and Iron Vessels were partly melted, and
partly burnt with black spots remaining on them. Where it entered the Cellar,
the Barrels were removed out of their right places; where it went out, it left
the Taps shaking, In one room the binding was taken off from the back of a
Bible, and the Margin was an ^uca^ely cut by the Lightning without hurting the
Letters, as if it had been done by the hands of some Artists: beginning at the
R^^^lation, and (which is wonderful) endi^^ with the twelfth Chapter of I
Epistle to the Corinthians, which Chapter fell in course (...) be expounded in
public the next Lords day^^. Six Women sitting in the same Chimne^ f^lled with
a Sulphurous and choking Mi^^ that one could scarce breathe; not far from the
Bed of a Woman that was then lying in, were struck down, the hangings of the
room burnt, and the Mother of the Woman in Childbed lay for dead at present;
but after ^while, the other recovering them senses, examined what hurt was done
to the Woman thought to be dead: her Kerchief was burnt as if it had been done
with Gunpowder she had about her a silver Chain, which was melted and broke
into five parts: her under Garments were not so much as singed; but just under
her Paps she was very much burnt. After she came to her self, she was very
sensible of pain in the place where the Lightning had cause that wound. To
lenifie which Women. Milk was made ^^se of. But Blisters arising, the dolor
was increased until a skilful Physician prescribed this Unguent. R. Mucilag.
Sem. Cydoniorum C. a^Malv. extract half an Ounce. Succ.Plantagrec. an ounce and
half. Lytharg. aur. Subt. pert. half a dram. m. ad. fict. whereby the
inflammation was allayed.

By the same Authors, it is also Related, that in June A.D. 1671. an house was
struck with Lightning in four places, in some places the Timber was split, and
in other places had holes made in it, as if bored through with an Awger, but no
impression of fire were any where to be seen. A Girl fifteen years old, fitting
in the Chimney, was struck down and lay for dead, the space of half an hour.
And it is probable, that she had never recovered, had not an able Physician
been sent for, who viewing her, perceived that the Clothes about her Breast
were made to look bluish by the Lightning: It had also caused her Paps to look
fiery and blackish, as if they had been scorched with Gunpowder. Under her
Breast the Lightning had left creases, a cross her body, of a brownish color.
Also some creases made by the Lightning as broad as ones finger run along her
left Leg reaching to her Foot. The Physician caused two spoonfuls of
Apoplectick Water to be poured down her throat, upon which she instantly
revived, complaining of a great heat in her Jaws and much pain, in the places
hurt by the Lightning. Half a dram of Pulvis Bez^atticus Anglicus, in the
water of sweet Che^vil was given to her, which caused a plentful sweat, whereby
the pain in her Jaws wa^ diminished. Being still feverish, an emulsion made
with Poppy feed, Millet, Cardu^ Benedictus, etc. was made use of, upon which
the Patient had ease and recovered. It appears by this as well as other
instances, that great care should be had of those that are Thunderstruck, that
they be not given up for quite dead, before all means be used in order to their
being revived. Paulus Zacchias in Questionibus Medicis gives Rule^ whereby it
may be known whether persons smitten with Lightning be dead, past all recovery
or no. And the History put forth by Jacobus Javellus in an Epistle emitted with
his Medicinae Compendium, describes the cure of persons struck with Lightning.
I have not my self seen those Books; but who so shall see cause to obtain and
consult them, will I suppose find therein things worth their reading and
consideration. Something to this purpose I find in the Sc^o^ion on the Germ
Ephem. for the year 1671. obs. 37. p. 69. The Reader that is desirous to see
more Remarkable Instances about Thunder and Lightning, wherein persons living
in former age were concerned, if he please to look into Zuinger his Theatrum
vit. Human. Vol. 2. Lib. 2. P. 322. and Lib. 7. P. 475, 545. and Vol. 3. Lib.
I. P. 621. and Vol. 5. Lib. 4. P. 1371. he will find many notable and memorable
passages which that industrious Author has collected. Though none more awful
(to my Remembrance) than that which happened A.D. 1546. when Meckelen (a
principal City in Braban.) was set on fire, and suffered a fearful
Conflagration by Lightning: So it was, that at the very time when this
Thunder-Storm happened, an Innkeeper (whose Name was Croes) had in his house
some Guests, who were playing at Cards. The Innkeeper going into his.
Wine-Celler to fetch Drink for his merry Guests, at that moment the furious
Tempest plucked up the house and carried it a good way off. Every one of the
Men that were playing at Cards were found dead with their Cards in their hands;
only the Innkeeper himself, being in the Wine-Cellar (which was arched)
escaped with his Life.

This brings to mind a strange passage related by Cardan ( de variet Lib.8.
C.43.) who says, that eight men sitting down together under an Oak, as they
were at Supper, a flash of Lightning smote and slew them all; And they were
found in the very posture that the Lightning surprised them in: one with the
Meat in his Mouth, another seemed to be Drinking, another with a Cup in his
hand, which he intended to bring to his Mouth, etc. They looked like Images
made black with the Lightning.

As for Scripture Examples of Men slain by Lightning; it is the judgment of
the Judicious and Learned Zuinger, that the Sodomites and those 250 that being
with Co^^^ in his Conspiracy presumed to offer Incense, Numb.16.35. And Nadah
and Abihu, and the two Sem^centurions with their Soldiers, who came to
apprehend the Prophet Elijah, were all killed by Lightning from Heaven.

CHAP. IV.
Some Philosophical Meditations. Concerning Antipathies and Sympathies. Of the
Loadstone. Of the Nature and Wonderful Effects of Lightning. That
Thunder-Storms are often caused by Satan; and sometimes by good Angels. Thunder
is the Voice of God, and therefore to be dreaded. All Places in the habitable
World are subject to it more or less. No Amulets can preserve men from being
hurt thereby. The miserable estate of Wicked Men upon this account, and the
happiness of the Righteous, who may be above all disquieting fears, with
respect unto such terrible Accidents.

HAving thus far Related many Remarkable Providence, which have happened in
these goings down of the Sun; and some of the particulars, (especially in the
last Chapter) being Tragical Stories: The Reader must give me leave upon this
occasion a little to divert and recreate my mind, with some Philosophical
Meditations; and to conclude with a Theological Improvement thereof. There are
Wonders in the Works of Creation as well as Providence, the reason whereof the
most knowing amongst Mortals, are not able to comprehend. Do thou know the
ballancings of the Clouds, the wondrous works of him who is perfect in
knowledge? I have not yet seen any who give a satisfactory reason of those
strange Fountains in New Spain, which Ebb and Flow with the Sea, though far
from it; and which fall in Rainy Weather, and rise in dry; or concerning that
Patnear St. Barthohmew's into which if one cast a stone though never so small,
it makes a noise as great and terrible as a clap of Thunder. It is no difficult
thing to produce a World of Instances, concerning which the usual Answer is, an
occult Quality is the cause of this strange operation, which is only a Fig-leaf
whereby our common Philosophers seek to hide their own ignorance. Nor may we
(with Erastus) deny that there are marvelous Sympathies and Antipathies in the
natures of things. We know that the Horse does abominate the Camel; the mighty
Elephant is afraid of a Mouse: And they say that the Lion, who scorneth to turn
his back upon the stoutest Animal, will tremble at the Crowing of a Cock. Some
Men also have strange Antipathies in their natures against that sort of Food
which others love and live upon. I have read of one that could not endure to
eat either Bread or Flesh. Of another that sell into a Swoonding fit at the
smell of a Rose. Others would do the like at the smell of Vinegar, or at the
sight of an Eel or a Frog. There was a Man that if he did hear the sound of a
Bell, he would immediately die away. Another if he did happen to hear any one
sweeping a Room, an inexpressible horror would sieze upon him. Another if he
heard one whetting a Knife his Gumms would fall a bleeding. Another was not
able to behold a Knife that had a sharp point, without being in a strange
agony. Quercetus speaks of one that died as he was sitting at the Table, only
because an Apple was brought into his sight. There are some who if a Cat
accidentally come into the Room, though they neither see it, nor are told of
it, will presently be in a Sweat and ready to die away. There was lately one
living in StowMarket, that when ever it Thundered would fall into a violent
Vomiting, and so continue until the Thunder-storm was over. A Woman had such an
An^^^athy against Cheese that if she did but eat a piece of Bread, cut with a
Knife, which a little before had cut Cheese, it would cause a Deliquium, yet
the same Woman when she was with Child delighted in no meat so much as in
Cheese. There was lately (I know not but that he may be living still) a Man
that if Pork, or any thing made of Swines flesh were brought into the room, he
would fall into a convu^^sive Sardonian Laughter; nor can he for h^^ heart
leave as long as that object is before him, so that if it should not be
removed, he would certainly laugh himself to death. It is evident that the
peculiar Antipathies of some persons are caused by the imaginations of their
Parents. There was one that would fall into a Syncope if either a Calves-head
or a Cabbage were brought near him. There were noevi materni upon the
Hypocondria of this person, on his right side there was the form of a Calves
head, on his left side a Cabbage imprinted there by the Imagination of his
Longing Mother. Most Wonderful is that which L^bavius and others report,
concerning a Man that would be surprised with a Lipothymy at the sight of his
own Son; nay, upon his approaching near unto him, though he saw him not, for
which some assigned this reason, that the Mother when she was with Child, used
to feed upon such Meats as were abominable to the Father (concerning the
rationality of this con^^ture see S^. Kenelm Digby's discourse of Bodies, P.
409, 410.) but others said that the Midwife who brought him into the World was
a Witch. No^ are the Sympathies in Nature less Wonderful than the Antipathies.
There is a mutual Friendship between the Olive tree and the Myrtle. There is a
certain Stone called Pantarbe which draws Gold unto it. So does the Adamas
hairs and twigs. The Sympathy between the Lodestone and Iron, which do
mutually attract each other, is admirable. There is no Philosopher but speaks
of this. Some have published whole Treatises (both profitable and pleasant)
upon this Argument; In special Gilbert, Ward, Cabeus, Kepler, and of late
Kircherus. I know many Fabulous things have been related concerning the
Lodestone by inexperienced Philosophers, and so believed by many others, E. G.
that Onions, or Garlic, or Ointments will cause it to lose its virtue.
Johnston, (and from him Dr. Brown in his vulgar Errors) has truly asserted the
contrary. Every one knows that the head of a Needle touched therewith will
continue pointing toward the North Pole: so that the Magnet leaves an
impression of its own nature and virtue upon the Needle, causing it to stand
pointed as the Magnet it self does. The Loadstone it self is the hardest Iron;
and it is a thing known that such Mines are naturally so (notwithstanding the
Report of one who says, that lately in Devonshire, Loadstones were found
otherwise) posited in the Earth. Just under the Line the Needle lies Parallel
with the Horizon, but Sailing North or South it begins to incline and increase
according as it approaches to either Pole, and would at last endeavor to
erect it self, whence some ascribe these strange effects to the North Star,
which they suppose to be very magnetical. There is reason to believe that the
Earth is the great Magnet. Hence (as Mr. Seller observes) when a Bar of Iron
has stood long in a Window, that end of it which is next to the Earth will have
the same virtue which the Lodestone it self has. Some place the first Meridian
at the Azores, because there the Needle varies not: but the like is to be said
of some other parts of the World; yea under the very same Meridian in diverse
Latitudes there is a great variation as to the pointing of the Needle. It is
affirmed, that between the shore of Ireland, France, Spain, Guiny, and the
Azores, the North point varies toward the East, as some part of the Azores it
deflecteth not. On the other side of the Azores, and this side of the Equator,
the North point of the Needle wheeleth to the West; so that in the Lat.36. near
the shore, the variation is about 11 gr. but on the other side of the Equator
it is quite otherwise, for in Brasilia the South point varies 12 gr. unto the
West, but Elongating from the Coast of Brasilia toward the Shore of Africa it
varies Eastward, and arriving at the Cape Delas Aquilas, it rests in the
Meridian and looks neither way. Dr. Brown in be Psudodoxia Epidemica P. 63.
does rationally suppose that the cause of this variation may be the inequality
of the Earth variously disposed, and indifferently mixed with the Sea. The
Needle drives that way where the greater and most powerful part of the Earth
is placed. For whereas on this side the Isles of Azores the Needle varies
Eastward, it may be occasioned by that vast Tract, viz. Europe, Asia, and
Africa, seated toward the East, and disposing the Needle that way. Sailing
further it veers its lilly to the West, and regards that quarter wherein the
Land is nearer or greater; and in the same Latitude, as it approaches the
shore augmenteth its variation. Hence at Rome there is a less variation ( viz.
but five degrees) than at London, for on the west side of Rome are seated the
great Continents of France, Spain, Germany; but unto England there is almost no
Earth West, but the whole extent of Europe and Asia lies Eastward, and
therefore at London the variation is 11 Degrees. Thus also, by reason of the
great Continent of Brasilia, the Needle deflects toward the Land 12 Degrees;
but at the Straits of Magellan, where the Land is narrowed, and the Sea on the
other side, it varies but 5 or 6. So because the Cape of De las Agullas has
Sea on both sides near it, and other Land remote, and as it were aequidistant
from it, the Needle conforms to the Meridian, In certain Creeks and Valleys it
proves irregular; the reason whereof may be some vigorous part of the Earth
not far distant. Thus D. Brown, whose arguings seem, rational. Some have truly
observed of Crocus Martis or Steel corroded with Vinegar, Sulphur, or
otherwise, and after reverberated by Fire, that the Lodestone will not at all
attract it: nor will it adhere, but ly therein like Sand. It is likewise
certain, that the fire will cause the Lodestone to lose its virtue, inasmuch
as its Bituminous Spirits are thereby evaporated. Porta (Lib.7. Cap. 7.) says
that he did to his great admiration see a Sulphurous flame brake out of the
Lodestone which being dissipated, the Stone lost it is attractive virtue.
Moreover, the Lodestone by being put into the fire may be caused quite to
change its polarity. The truly Noble and Honorable Robert Boil Esquire, many of
whose excellent Observations and experiments have been advantageous, not only
to the English Nation but to the Learned World; in his Book of the Usefulness
of Experimental, Natural Philosophy, Page 15. has these words; Taking an
Oblong Lodestone, and beating it red hot, I found the attractive faculty in
not many minutes, either altogether abolisht, or at least so impaired and
weakened, that I was scarce if at all able to discern it. But this has been
observed, though not so faithfully related, by more than one; wherefore I shall
add, That by Refrigerating this red hot Lodestone either North or South, I
found that I could give its extremes a Polarity (if I may so speak) which they
would readily display upon an excited Needle freely placed in aequilibrium: And
not only so, but I could by refrigerating the same end, sometimes North, and
sometimes South, in a very short time change the Poles of the Lodestone at
pleasure, making that which was a quarter of an hour before the North Pole,
become the South; and on the contrary, the formerly southern Pole become the
northern. And this change was wrought on the Lodestone, not only by cooling it
directly North and South, but by cooling it perpendicularly: that end of it
which was contiguous to the Ground growing the Northern Pole, and so (according
to the Laws Magnetical) drawing to it the South end; and that which was
remotest from the contrary one: As if indeed the Terrestial Globe were as some
Magnetic Philosophers have supposed it, but a great Magnes, since its
effluvium's are able in some cases to impart a magnetic faculty to the
Lodestone it self, Thus far Mr. Boil;

Also D. Brown shows, that if we erect a red hot Wire until it cool, then hang
it up with Wax and untwisted Silk where the lower end and that which cooled
next the Earth does rest, that is the Northern point. And if a Wire be heated
only at one end, according as the end is cooled upwards or downwards, it
respecttively requires a verticity. He also observes, if a Lodestone be made
red hot in the fire, it amits the magnetical vigor it had before, and acquireth
another from the Earth, in its refrigeration, for that part which cools next
the Earth will acquire the respect of the North; the experiment whereof he made
in a Lodestone of parallelogram or long square figure, wherein only inverting
the extremes as it came out of the fire, he altered the Poles or faces thereof
at pleasure. Unto some such reason as this, must the wonderful change
occasioned by the Lightning in the Compasses of Mr. Lad's Vessel be ascribed:
probably the heat of the Lightning caused the Needle to lose its virtue, and
the Compass in the Bidikle might stand pointed to the South, and that unhung in
the Locker to the West, when they grew cold again, and accordingly continue
pointing so ever after.

There is also that which is very mysterious and beyond humane Capacity to
comprehend, in Thunder and Lightning. The Thunder of his Power, who can
understand? Also, Can any understand the spreadings of the Clouds, or the noise
of his Tabernacle? Hence Elih^ said (some Interpreters think there was a
Thunder-storm at the very instant when those words were spoken) in Job 37. 5.
(...) He Thundreth marveils. It is indeed manifest that these wonderful Meteors
are generated out of a Nitrous and Sulphurous Matter. Hence it is commonly out
of dark and thick Clouds that Hall and coals of Fire break forth, Psalm. 18. 11,
12. The Scent which the Lightning uses to leave behind it, in places where it
falls, is a sufficient evidence of it is being of a Sulphurous nature. Nay the
persons (as well as places) smitten there with have sometimes smelt strong of
Brimstone. Two years ago there was a Ship riding at Anchor in a place in
France, and a furious Tempest suddenly arising, the MainMast was split in
pieces with a Clap of Thunder; the Pendant on the top of the MainTop-Mast was
burnt to Ashes, twelve Men were beat upon the Deck, five of which lay for dead
a considerable time, no Pulse o^ Breath being perceived, their Eyes and Teeth
Immovable, yet had they no visible wound, only an intolerable smell of
Brimstone; about half an hour after by rubbing and forceing open their Mouths,
and pouring down some Cordials, they recovered. At the same time six others
were miserably burnt, their flesh being scorched, yet their Garments not so
much as singed; their skin much discolored. See Mr. Burton's Miracles of
Nature, Page 181.

Likewise, August 23. 1682. A Man walking in the Field near Darkin in England,
was struck with a Clap of Thunder. One who was near him, ran to take him up,
but found him dead, and his body exceeding hot, and withal smelling so strong
of Sulphur that he was forced to let him ly a considerable time ere he could be
removed. It is reported, that sometimes Thunder and Lightning has been
generated out of the Sulphurous and Bituminous matter which the fiery Mountain
AEina has cast forth, We know that when there is a mixture of Nitre, Sulph^^,
and unslaked Lime, Water will cause fire, to break out. And when unto Nitre
Brimstone is added, a Report is caused thereby. And unquestionably, Nitre is a
special ingredient in the matter of Thunder and Lightning; This we may gather
from the descension of the flame, which descends not only obliquely but
perpendicularly, and that argues it does so not from any external force, but
naturally, Mr. William Clark in his natural History of Nitre, observes that if
the quantity of an ounce be put in a fire-shovel, and a live coal put upon it,
the fire-shovel in the bottom will be red hot, and burn through whatever is
under it; which demonstrates that this sort of fire does naturally burn
downwards, when as all other fires do naturally ascend. For this cause Stella
cadens is rationally concluded to be a Nitrous Substance; the like is to be
affirmed of the Lightning. H^nce also is its terrible and irres^^table force.
The Nitre in Gunpowder is as the aforesaid Author expresses it Anima Pyri^
Pulver^^, Sulphur without Salt Peter has no powerful expulsion with it. The
discharging great pieces of Ordnance is fitly called Artificial Thundering and
Lightning, since thereby Men do in a moment blow up Houses, beat down Castles,
batter Mountains in pieces. So that there is nothing in nature does so
admirably and Artificially resemble the Thunder and Lightning, both in respect
of the Report, and the terrible, and sudden and amazing execution done thereby:
Flammas Jovis and sonitus imitatur Olympi: Hence as those that are shot with a
Bullet do not hear the Gun, being struck before the report comes to their
Ears; so is it usually with them that are Thunderstruck, the lightning is upon
them before the noise is heard. Men commonly tremble at the dreadful crack when
as, if they hear any thing, the danger uses to be past as to that particular
Thunderclap; though another may come and kill them before they hear it. The
Nitre in the Lightning may likewise be esteemed the natural cause of its being
of so penetrating and burning a nature. For there is not the like fiery
substance in the World again as Nitre is. Many have been of the Opinion that
there is a Bolt or Stone descending with the Thunder, but that is a vulgar
Error, The Fulmen or Thunderbolt is the same with the Lightning, being a
Nitro-sulphurious Spirit. It must needs be a more subtle and spiritual body
than any Stone is of, that shall penetrate so as these Meteors do, Its true
that our Translation reads the words in Psalm. 78.41. He gave their Flocks to
hot Thunderbolts: But the Original Word (...) Translated Thunderbolts,
signifies Burning Coals; so that Lightning is thereby intended. Avicenn^ does
indeed say, that he saw a Thunderbolt which fell at Corduba in Spain, and that
it had a Sulphurous smell, and was like Ammoniac. It is possible that not only
Sulphurous and Bituminous but stony substances may be generated in the Clouds
with the Lightning. George Agricola writes that near Lurgea, a mass of Iron
being fifty pound in weight, fell from the Clouds, which some attempted to make
Swords of, but the fire could not melt it, nor hammers bring it into form.

In the Year 1492. At Ensishemium, a stone of three hundred pound weight fell
from the Clouds, which is kept as a Monument in the Temple there. And in 1581,
A Stone came out of the Clouds in Thuringia, which was so hot that it could not
be touched, with which one might strike fire as with a Flint. There is now to
be seen at Dresden a Stone which descended out of a Cloud, and is reserved
amongst the Admiranda belonging to the Elector of Saxony: some lately living
were present at the Fall of that Stone. Again An. 1618. In Bohemia, a
considerable quantity of Brass metal fell from the Clouds. No longer since
than May 28. 1677. at a Village near Hana in Germany, there was a Tempest of
Lightning, and a great multitude of stones of a green and partly caerulean
color fell therewith, and a considerable mass of Mineral matter, in taste like
Vitriol, being pondrous and friable, having also metallic sparks like Gold
intermixed. That which is by some called the Rain-stone or Thunderbolt, was by
the Ancients termed Ceraunia, because of the smell like that of an Horn when
put into the fire, which does attend it. Learned Gesner (who in respect of his
vast Knowledge in the works of God, may be called the Solomon of the former
age) says that a Gentleman gave him one of those Stones, supposing it to be a
Thunderbolt, and that it was five digits in length, and three in breadth. This
fort of Stone is usually in form like unto an Iron Wedge, and has an hole quite
through it Job. de Laet in his Treatise de Gemm^^ Lib. 2. Cap. 24. relates that
he saw another of those Stones. Boethius (de Gemmis Lib.2. Cap.261.) reports
that many persons worthy of credit, affirmed that when Houses or Trees had been
broken with the Thunder, they did by digging find such Stones in the places
where the stroke was given. Nevertheless, that Fulminous Stones or Thunderbolts
do always descend out of the Clouds, when such breaches are made by the
Lightning, is (as I said) a vulgar Error.

The Effects produced by the Lightning are exceeding marvelous, sometimes Gold,
Silver, Brass, Iron has been melted thereby, when the things wherein they have
been kept, received no hurt; yea, when the Wax: on the Bags which contained
them, has not been so much as melted. Liquors have been thereby exhausted out
of Vessels, when the Vessels themselves remained untouched: And (which is more
wonderful) when the Cask has been broken by the Lightning, the Wine has
remained as it were included in a skin, without being split; the reason whereof
Sennertu^ supposes to be, in that the heat of the Lightning did condense the
exterior parts of the Wine. It is also a very strange thing, which Histories
report concerning Marcia (a Roman Princess) that the Child in her body was
smitten and killed with Lightning, and yet the Mother received no hurt in her
own Body. It is hard to give a clear and satisfactory Reason why if a piece of
Iron be laid upon the Cask it prevents the Thunder from marring the Wine
contained therein, and also keeps Milk from turning. The Virtuosi of France in
their Philosophical Conferences ( vol.2. P.427.) suppose a Sympathy between
Iron and the gross vapors of Thunder and Lightning. They say that which is
commonly called the Thunderbolt does sometimes resemble Steel, as it were to
show the correspondence that there is between Iron and Thunder: So that the Air
being impregnate by those noisome vapors which are of the same nature with
Iron, meeting with some piece of it laid on a Vessel, is joined to the Iron by
Sympathy, the Iron by its attractive virtue receives them, and by its retentive
retains them, and by that means prevents the effects. This conjecture is
ingenious. Nor is it easy to give a solid Reason why the Lightning should hurt
one creature rather than another. Naturalists observe that it is so Feles canes
and capras magis illorum obnoxios ictibui observatio sedula dedit, says
Johnston. Bart^^linus conjectures the reason to be the halitus in the bodies of
those creatures, which are a fit nutriment for the fulminious spirits to prey
upon. When fire is set to a train of Gunpowder; it will run accordingly
straight or crooked, upwards or downwards as the matter it feeds upon is
disposed: So proportionably here: but this is a Subject for ingenious minds
further to inquire into. It is moreover difficult to determine how Men are
killed therewith, when no visible impression is made upon their Bodies. Some
think it is by a mere instantaneous suffocation of their An^^^al spirits. That
poysonful vapors do sometimes attend the Lightning is manifest. Seneca says,
that Wine which has been congealed with the Lightning, after it is dissolved,
and in appearance returned to its pristine state, it causes the persons that
shall drink of it, either to die or become mad. Naturalists observe, that
venomous Creatures being struck with Lightning lose their poison; the reason of
which may be, not only the heat but the venom of those Vapors attracting the
poison to themselves. And that Vapors will kill in a moment is past doubt. In
the Philosophical transactions for the year 1665. ( P.44.) It is related that
seven or eight persons going down Stairs into a Coal-pit, they fell down dead
as if they had been shot: There being one of them whose Wife was informed that
her Husband was stifled, she went near to him without any inconvenience; but
when she went a little further, the Vapors caused her instantly to fall down
dead. And it is famously known, concerning the Lake Avernus in Campania, that
if Birds attempt to fly over it, the deadly vapors thereof kill them in a
moment. But the Lightning does more than merely suffocate with mortiferous
vapors. It sometimes penetrates the Brain, and shrivels the Heart and Liver
when nothing does appear outwardly. And it does (as Dr. Goodwin in his lately
published judicious Discourse about the punishment of Sinners i^ the other
World ( P.44.) aptly expresses) lick up the vital and animal spirits that run
in the Body, when yet the body it self remains unburnt. Those spirits are the
Vinculum, the tie of Union between the Soul and Body, which the Lightning may
consume without so much as singing the body or clothes there. Nevertheless,
upon some it leaves direful marks, and breaks their very bones in pieces,
and sometimes tears away the flesh from the Bones. There are some Remarkable
Instances confirming this, published in the Philosophical Transactions. Dr.
Wallis in a Letter written at Oxford, May 12. 1666. giving an account of a very
sad accident which had then newly happened there. He says, that two Scholars of
Wadham College, being alone in a Boat (without a Waterman) having newly thrust
off from shore, at M^dley to come homewards, standing near the head of the
Boat, were presently with a stroke of Thunder or Lightning, both struck off out
of the Boat into the Water, the one of them stark dead, in whom though
presently taken out of the water (having been by relation scarce a minute in
it) there was not discerned any appearance of Life, sense or motion: the other
was stuck fast in the Mud (with his feet downwards, and his upper parts above
water) like a Post not able to help himself out; but besides a present
astonying or numness had no other hurt: but was for the present so disturbed in
his Senses that he knew not how he came out of the Boat, nor could remember
either Thunder or Lightning that did effect it: and was very feeble and faint
upon it (which though presently put into a warm Bed) he had not thoroughly
recovered by the next night; and whither since he have or no, I know not.
Others, in another Boat, about ten or twenty yards from these (as by their
description I estimate) felt a disturbance and shaking in their Boat, and one
of them had his Chair struck from under him, and thrown upon him, but had no
hurt. These immediately made up to the others, and (some leaping into the Water
to them) presently drew them into the Boat or on shore; yet none of them saw
these two fall into the water (not looking that way) but heard one of them cry
for help presently upon the stroke, and smelt a very strong stinking smell in
the Air; which, when I asked him that told it me, what kind of stink? he said,
like such a smell, as is perceived upon the striking of Flints together.

He that was dead (when by putting into a warm Bed, and rubbing, and putting
strong Waters into his month, etc. no Life could be brought into him) was the
next morning brought to Town; where among multitudes of others, who came to
see; Dr. Willis. Dr. Mellington, Dr. Lower, and my self, with some others, went
to view the Corpse, where we found no wound at all in the skin; the face and
neck swart and black, but not more than might be ordinary, by the settling of
the blood: on the right side of the Neck was a little blackish spott about an
inch long, and about a quarter of an inch broad at the broadest, and was as if
it had been seared with a hot Iron: and as I remember, one somewhat bigger on
the left side of the neck below the ear. Straight down the Breast, but toward
the left side of it, was a large place, about three quarters of a foot in
length, and about two inches in breadth; in some places more, in some less,
which was burnt and hard, like Leather burnt with the fire, of a deep blackish
red color, not much unlike the scorched skin of a losted Pig: and on the
forepart of the left Shoulder such another spot about as big as a shilling; but
that in the neck was blacker and seemed more seared. From the top of the right
shoulder, sloping downwards toward that place in his Breast, was a narrow line
of the like scorched skin; as if somewhat had come in there at the neck; and
had run down to the breast and there spread broader.

The Buttons of his Dublet were most of them off, which some thought might have
been torn off with the blast, getting in at the neck, and then bursting its way
out, for which the greatest presumption was (to me) that besides four or five
Buttons wanting toward the bottom of the breast, there were about half a dozen
together clear off from the bottom of the Collar downwards, and I do not
remember that the rest of the buttons did seem to be near worn out, but almost
new. The Collar of his Doublet just over the forepart of the right Shoulder
was quite broken asunder, cloth and stiffening, straight and downwards, as if
cut or chopped asunder, but with a blunt tool; only the inward linen or fustian
lining of it was whole, by which, and by the view of the ragg'd edges, it
seemed manifest to me, that it was from a stroke inward (from without) not
outward from within.

His Hat was strangely torn, not just on the Crown, but on the side of the Hat,
and on the Brim. On the side of it was a great hole, more than to put in ones
fist through it: some part of it being quite struck away, and from thence
diverse gashes every way, as if torn or cut with a dull tool, and some of them
of a good length, almost quite to the edges of the brim. And besides these, one
or two gashes more, which did not communicate with that hole in the side. This
also was judged to be by a stroke inwards; not so much from the view of the
edges of those Gashes (from which there was scarce any judgment to be made
either way) but because the lining was not torn, only ripped from the edge of the
Hat (where it was sown on) on that side where the hole was made. But his Hat
not being found upon his head, but at some distance from him, it did not appear
against what part of his head that hole was made.

Another sad disaster happened January 24. 1665,6. When one Mr. Brooks of
Hampshire going from Winchester toward his House near Andover, in very bad
weather, was himself slain by Lightning, and the Horse he rode on under him.
For about a Mile from Winchester he was found with his face beaten into the
Ground, one Leg in the Stirrup, the other in the Horses main; his Clothes all
burnt off his back, not a piece as big as an Hankerchief left entire, and his
Hair and all his body singed. With the force that struck him down, his nose was
beaten into his face, and his Chin into his Breast; where was a Wound cut
almost as low as to his Navil; and his clothes being as aforesaid torn, the
pieces were so scattered and consumed, that not enough to fill the crown of a
Hat could be found. His Gloves were whole, but his hands in them singed to the
Bone. The Hip-bone and Shoulder of his Horse burnt and bruised, and his Saddle
torn in little pieces.

Very Remarkable also was that which happened forty five years ago at another
place in England, viz. Withycomb in Devonshire, where on October 21. A. D.
1638. being Sabbath, day, whilst the People were attending the public Worship
of God, a black Cloud coming over the Church, there was suddenly an amazing
Clap of Thunder, and with it a Ball of fire came in at the Window, whereby the
House was very much damnified, and the People many of them struck down. Some of
the Seats in the body of the Church were turned upside down, yet they that sat
in them received no hurt. A Gentleman of note there (one Mr. Hill) sitting in
his Seat by the Chancil, had his head suddenly smitten against the Wall, by
which blow he died that night. Another had his Head cloven, his Skull rent in
three pieces, and his Brains thrown upon the Ground whole. The hair of his head
through the violence of the blow stuck fast to the Pillar that was near him. A
Woman attempting to run out of the Church, had her clothes set on fire; and her
flesh on her back torn almost to the very bone. See Mr. Clarks Examples Vol.1.
Chap.104. P,501.

It is not Heresy to believe that Satan has sometimes a great operation in
causing Thunder-storms. I know this is vehemently denied by some. The late
Witch-Advocates call it Blasphemy. And an old Council did Anathematize the men
that are thus persuaded: but by their Favor; An orthodox and rational Man may
be of the Opinion, that when the Devil has before him the Vapors and Materials
out of which the Thunder and Lightning are generated, his Art is such as that
he can bring them into form. If Chemists can make their aurumsulminans, what
strange things may this Infernal Chemist effect? The Holy Scriptures intimate
as much as this comes to In the sacred Story concerning Job, we find that
Satan did raise a great Wind which blew down the House where Job's Children
were Feasting. And it is said, Chap.1. ver.16. That the fire of God fell from
Heaven, and burnt up the Sheep and the Servants; This (...) Fire of God was no
doubt Thunder and Lightning; and such as was extraordinary, and is therefore
expressed with the Name of God, as is usual amongst the Hebrews. Satan had a
deep policy in going that way to work, thereby hoping to make Job believe God
was his Enemy. Mr. Caryl (according to his wonted manner) does both wittily and
judiciously paraphrase upon the place; The fire of God (says he) here is
conceived to have been some terrible flash of Lightning; and it is the more
probable because it is said to fall down from Heaven, that is, ^ut of the Air.
There Satan can do mighty things, command much of the Magazine of Heaven, where
that dreadful Artillery which makes men tremble, those fiery Meteors, Thunder
and Lightning are stored and lodged. Satan let loose by God can do wonders in
the Air; He can raise Storms, He can discharge the great Ordnance of Heaven,
Thunder and Lightning; and by his Art can make them more terrible and dreadful
than they are in their own nature. Satan is said to be the Prince of the Power
of the Air, Ephesians.2.2. And we read of the working of Satan with all power and
signs; and lying words, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. It is moreover predicted in the
Revelation, that Antichrist should cause fire to come down from Heaven,
Rev.13.13. Accordingly we read in History, that some of the Popes have by their
skill in the black Art, caused Balls of fire to be seen in the Air. So then it
is not beyond Satan's power to effect such things, if the great God give him
leave, without whose leave he cannot blow a Feather: much less raise a
Thunder-storm. And as the Scriptures intimate Satan's Power in the Air to be
great, so Histories do abundantly confirm it by remarkable Instances. One of
the Scholars of Empedocles has testified, that he saw his Master raising Winds
and laying them again; and there were once many Witnesses of it, whence they
called Empedocles (...) Clemens Alexandrinus mentions this as unquestionably
true. Our great Rainold (de libr^s Apocryphis Lect.202.) says, that we may
from jo^ conclude, it was not impossible for Empedocles by the Devils aid, to
do as has been reported of him. Dio relates that when the Roman Army in the
days of the Emperor Clandius, pursuing the Africans, was in extreme danger of
perishing by Drought: a Magician undertook to procure water for them, and
presently upon his Incantations, an astonishing shower fell. Jovianus Pontanus
reports, that when King Ferdinand besieged the City Suessa, all the waters in
the Cisterns being dried up, the Citizens had like to have lost their lives by
the prevailing Drought. The Popish Priests undertook by Conjuration to obtain
Water. The Magical Ceremonies by them observed were most horrid and ridiculous.
For they took an Ass, and put the Sacrament of the Eucharist into his Mouth,
sang Funeral Verses over him, and then buried him alive before the Church
doors; as soon as these rites, so pleasing to the Devil were finished, the
Heavens began to look black, and the Sea to be agitated with Winds, and anon it
rained, and lightened, after a most horrendous manner. Smetius in his
Miscellanies, Lib. 5. Relates that a Girl foolishly imitating the Ceremonies of
her Nurse, whom she had sometimes seen raising Tempests, immediately a
prodigious Storm of Thunder and Lightning happened, so as that a Village near
Lipsia was thereby set on fire; This Relation is mentioned by Sennertus, as a
thing really true. At some places in Denmark, it is a common and a wicked
practice to buy Winds, when they are going to Sea^ If Satan has so far the
power of the Air as to cause Winds, he may cause Storms also Livy reports
concerning Romulus, that he was by a Tempest of Thunder and Lightning
transported no man knew whither, being after that never heard of. Meurerus (in
Comment. Meteorolog.) speaks of a Man, that going between Lapsia and Torga,
was suddenly carried out of sight by a Thunder-storm, and never seen more. And
the truth of our assertion, seems to be confirmed by one of those sad effects
of Lightning mentioned in the precedeing Chapter. For I am informed that when
Matthew Cole was killed with the Lightning at North-hampton, the Daemo^s which
disturbed his Sister Ann Cole (forty miles distant) in Hartford, spoke of it;
intimating their concurrence in that terrible accident.

The Jewish Rabbis affirm, that all great and sudden Destructions are from
Satan, the Angel of Death. That he has frequently an hand therein is past
doubt. And if the fallen Angels are able (when God shall grant them a
Commission) to cause fearful and fatal Thunders, it is much more true
concerning the good and holy Angels, 2 King. 1. 14, 15. When the Law was given
at Mount Sinar, there were amazing Thundrings and Lightnings, wherein the great
God saw meet to make use of the Ministry of Holy Angels, Act.7.53. Gal. 3.19.
Heb. 2. 2. Some think that Sodom was destroyed by extraordinary Lightning. Its
certain that Holy Angels had an hand in effecting that Desolation, Genesis 19.13.
We know that one Night the Angel of the Lord smote in the Camp of the Assyrians
an 185000. It is not improbable, but that those Assyrians were killed with
Lightning: For it was with respect to that tremendous Providence, that those
words were uttered, Who amongst us shall dwell with the devouring Fire,
Isai.33.14. Ecclesiastical History informs us that the Jews being encouraged by
the Apostate Julian, were resolved to re-build their Temple; but Lightning from
Heaven consumed not only their Work, but all their Tools and Instruments
wherewith that cursed Enterprise was to have been carried on, so was their
design utterly frustrate. Why might not holy Angels have an hand in that
Lightning? There occurs to my mind, a Remarkable Passage mentioned by Dr. Beard
in his Chapter about the Protection of Holy Angels over them that fear God (
P.443.) he says, that a certain Man traveling between two Woods in a great
Tempest of Thunder and Lightning, rode under an Oak to shel^er himself, but his
Horse would by no means ^ay under that Oak, but whither his Master would or no,
went from that Tree and stayed very quietly under another Tree not far off; he
had not been there many Minutes before the first Oak was torn all to fitters
with a fearful Clap of Thunder and Lightning. Surely there was the invisible
Guardianship of an Holy Angel in that Providence.

But though it be true, that both natural Causes and Angels do many times
concur when Thunder and Lightning, with the awful effects thereof, happen;
nevertheless, the supreme cause must not be disacknowledged. The Eternal
himself has a miglity hand of providence in such works. He thundreth with the
voice of His Excellency. Among the Greeks Thunder was styled (...) And the
Scripture calls it the Voice of the Lord. The God of Glory Thundereth. The
Voice of the Lord is very powerful, the Voice of the Lord is full of Majesty,
the Voice of the Lord breaks the Cedars, the Voice of the Lord divides the
Flames of Fires: Lightnings are also said to be the Arrows of God, Psalm.18.14.
upon which account the Children of Men ought to dread the hand of the Highest
therein. And the more for that all places in the habitable World are ^xposed
unto Dangers and Destruction by his Artillery of Heaven; though some parts of
the Earth are naturally subject thereunto more than others. Acosta says, that
it seldom Thunders about Brasil: but such Lightnings are frequent there, as
make the Night appear brighter than the Noon Day. Travelers report, that there
are some Snowy Mountains in Africa, on which the Cracks of Thunder are so loud
and vehement, as that they are heard fifty Miles off at Sea. In some parts of
Tartaria, it will both Snow and Thunder at the same time. In the Northern
Climates, there use to be vehement Thunders, and Men are often struck dead
thereby; In the Province of Terravara in Spain, grows the Wood for the Cross,
to which Superstious Papists attribute a power to preserve Men from Thunder. So
did the Gentiles of Old, vainly think to secure themselves from Heavens
Gunshot, by carrying those things about them, which they supposed would be as
Amulets to defend them from all harm. The Tents of the old Emperors were made
of Seal-Leather, because they imagined that the SeaCalf could not be
Thunderstruck. Tyberius wore a Crown of Laurel upon his Head, for that the
Philosophers told him that the Lightning could not hurt the Bay Tree. R^diginus
affirms the like concerning the Figtree. But others declare that they have seen
the Laurel smitten and withered with the Lightning: therefore the
Conimbricensi^^ Philosophers acknowledge this immunity to be fictitious. The
like vanity is in their Opinion, who suppose that the Stone by Philosophers
called Brontias (i. e.) the Thunderbolt will secure them from harm by
Lightning. To conclude, must miserable is the State of all Christless Sinners,
who know not but that every Thunder-storm which comes, may send them to Hell in
a moment.

Hi sunt qui trepidant and ad omnia fulgur^ pallent,
Cum tonat, exanimes primo quoque murmurt Coeli.
The Psalmist alludes to a Thunder Storm, when he says, The Lord will rain
upon the Wicked Snares (the Lightning comes suddenly, and takes Men as Birds
in a snare before they think of it) Fire and Brimstone and a tempest of
horrors, Psalm. 11. 6. The Atheism of Epicurus of old, (and of some in these
days) who taught, that inasmuch as Thunder proceeds from natural causes, it is
a childish thing for Men to have an awe upon their hearts when they hear that
voice, I say such Atheism is folly and wickedness. For the great God makes the
way for the Lightning of Thunder; nor does it ever miss or mistake its way, but
always lights where God has appointed it, Job 28.26. He directs the Lightning
under the whole Heaven, and unto the ends of the Earth; after it a voice
roareth, that they may do whatsoever he commanded them upon the face of the
world in the Earth, Job 37.3,12. Yea, and good Men should from this
consideration be incited to endeavor that their Garments be kept from
defilement, and that they be always walking with God, since they know not but
that Death may come upon them suddenly in such a way and by such means as this;
As to outward Evils, there is one event to the Righteous and to the Wicked; to
him that sacrifices and to him that sacrifices not, as is the good so is the
sinner. The examples mentioned in the preceding Chapter do confirm it, since
diverse of those whom the Thunder killed, were good men. And they that are in
Christ, and who make it their design to live unto God, need not be dismayed at
the most terrifying Thunderclaps, no more than a Child should be afraid when
he hears the voice of his loving Father. Notable is that passage related by Mr.
Ambrose, in his Treatise of Angels ( P.265. and by Mr. Clark, vol.1. P. 512.) A
profane Man, who was also a Persecutor of Mr. Bolton, riding abroad, it
Thundered very dreadfully; at the which the Man greatly trembled; his Wife, who
was eminent for Godliness being with him, asked, why he was so much afraid? to
whom he replied; are not you afraid to hear these dreadful Thunder claps? no
(says she) not at all, for I know it is the voice of my Heavenly Father; and
should a Child be afraid to hear his Fathers voice? At the which the Man was
amazed, concluding with himself, these Puritans have a divine principle in
them, which the World sees not, that they should have peace and serenity in
their Souls when others are filled with dismal fears and horrors. He thereupon
went to Mr. Bolton, bewailing the wrong he had done him, begging his Pardon and
Prayers, and that he would tell him what he must do that so his Soul might he
saved: and he became a very godly man ever after. This was an happy
Thunder-Storm.

CHAP. V.
Concerning things preternatural which have happened in New England. A Remarkable
Relation about Ann Cole of Hartford. Concerning several Witches in that Colony.
Of the Possessed Maid at Groton. An account of the House in Newberry lately
troubled with a Demon. A parallel Story of an House at Tedworth in England.
Concerning another in Hartford. And of one in Portsmouth in New England lately
disquieted by Evil Spitits. The Relation of a Woman at Barwick in New England
molested with Apparitions, and sometimes tormented by invisible Agents.

INasmuch as things which are praeternatural, and not accomplished without
diabolical operation, do more rarely happen, it is pity but that they should be
observed. Several Accidents of that kind have happened in New England; which I
shall here faithfully Relate so far as I have been able to come unto the
knowledge of them.

Very Remarkable was that Providence wherein Ann Cole of Hartford in
New England was concerned. She was, and is accounted a person of real Piety and
Integrity, Nevertheless, in the Year 1662. then living in her Fathers House
(who has likewise been esteemed a godly Man) She was taken with very strange
Fits, wherein her Tongue was improved by a Demon to express things which she
her self knew nothing of. Sometimes the Discourse would hold for a considerable
time. The general purpose of which was, that such and such persons (who were
named in the Discourse which passed from her) were consulting how they might
carry on mischievous designs against her and several others, mentioning sundry
ways they should take for that end, particularly that they would afflict her
Body, spoil her Name, etc. The general answer made amongst the Demons, was,
She runs to the Rock. This having been continued some hours, the Demons said,
Let us confound her Language, that she may tell no more tales. She uttered
matters unintelligible. And then the Discourse passed into a Dutch-tone (a
Dutch Family then lived in the Town) and therein an account was given of some
afflictions that had befallen diverse; amongst others, what had befallen a Woman
that lived next Neighbor to the Dutch Family, whose Arms had been strangely
pinched in the night, declaring by whom, and for what cause that course had
been taken with her. The Reverend Mr. Stone (then Teacher of the Church in
Hartford) being by, when the Discourse happened, declared, that he thought it
impossible for one not familiarly acquainted with the Dutch (which Ann Cole had
not in the least been) should so exactly imitate the Dutch-tone in the
pronunciation of English. Several Worthy Persons, ( viz. Mr. John Whiting, Mr.
Samuel Hooker, and Mr. Joseph Hains) wrote the intelligible sayings expressed
by Ann Cole, whilst she was thus amazingly handled. The event was that one of
the persons (whose Name was Greensmith) being a lewd and ignorant Woman, and
then in Prison on suspicion for Witchcraft) mentioned in the Discourse as
active in the mischiefs done and designed, was by the Magistrate sent for; Mr.
Whiting and Mr. Ha^nes read what they had written; and the Woman being
astonished thereat, confessed those things to be true, and that she and other
persons named in this preternatural Discourse, had had familiarity with the
Devil: Being asked whether she had made an express Covenant with him; she
answered, she had not, only as she promised to go with him when he called,
which accordingly she had sundry times done; and that the Devil told her that
at Christmas they would have a merry Meeting, and then the Covenant between
them should be subscribed. The next day she was more particularly enquired of
concerning her Guilt respecting the Crime she was accused with. She then
acknowledged, that though when Mr. Hains began to read what he had taken down
in Writing, her rage was such that she could have torn him in pieces, and was
as resolved as might be to deny her guilt (as she had done before) yet after he
had read awhile, she was (to use her own expression) as if her flesh had been
pulled from her bones, and so could not deny any longer: She likewise declared,
that the Devil first appeared to her in the form of a Deer or Fawn, skipping
about her, wherewith she was not much affrighted, and that by degrees he became
very familiar, and at last would talk with her. Moreover, she said that the
Devil had frequently the carnal knowledge of her Body. And that the Witches had
Meetings at a place not far from her House; and that some appeared in one
shape, and others in another; and one came flying amongst them in the shape of
a Crow. Upon this Confession, with other concurrent Evidence, the Woman was
Executed; so likewise was her Husband, though he did not acknowledge himself
guilty. Other persons accused in the Discourse made their escape. Thus does the
Devil use to se^ve his Clients. After the suspected Witches were either
executed or fled, Ann Cole was restored to health, and has continued well for
many years, approving her self a serious Christian.

There were some that had a mind to try whither the Stories of Witches not
being able to sink under water, were true; and accordingly a Man and Woman
mentioned in Ann Cole's Dutch-toned discourse, had their hands and feet tied,
and so were cast into the water, and they both apparently swam after the manner
of a Buoy, part under, part above the Water. A by-stander imagining that any
person bound in that posture would be so born up, offered himself for trial,
but being in the like matter gently laid on the the Water, he immediately sunk
right down. This was no legal Evidence against the suspected persons; nor were
they proceeded against on any such account; However doubting that an Halter
would choke them, though the Water would not; they very fairly took their
flight, not having been seen in that part of the World since. Whether this
experiment were lawful, or rather Superstitious and Magical, we shall ((...))
enquire afterward.

Another thing which caused a noise in the Country, and wherein Satan had
undoubtedly a great influence, was, that which happened at Groton. There was a
Maid in that Town (one Elizabeth Knap) who in the Month of October, Anno.
1671. was taken after a very strange manner, sometimes weeping, sometimes
laughing, sometimes roaring hideously, with violent motions and agitations of
her body, crying out Money, Money, etc. In November following, her Tongue for
many hours together was drawn like a semicircle up to the roof of her Mouth,
not to be removed, though some tried with their fingers to do it. Six Men were
scarce able to hold her in some of her fits, but she would skip about the House
yelling and looking with a most frightful Aspect. December 17. Her Tongue was
drawn out of her mouth to an extraordinary length; and now a Demon began
manifestly to speak in her. Many words were uttered wherein are the Labial
Letters, without any motion of her Lips, which was a clear demonstration that
the voice was not her own. Sometimes Words were spoken seeming to proceed out
of her throat, when her Mouth was shut. Sometimes with her Mouth wide open,
without the use of any of the Organs of speech. The things then uttered by the
Devil were chiefly Railings and Revilings of Mr. Willard (who was at that time
a Worthy and Faithful Pastor to the Church in Groton.) Also the Demon belched
forth most horrid and nefandous Blasphemies, exalting himself above the most
High. After this she was taken speechless for some time. One thing more is
worthy of Remark concerning this miserable creature. She cried out in some of
her Fits, that a Woman, (one of her Neighbors) appeared to her, and was the
cause of her Affliction. The Person thus accused was a very sincere, holy
Woman, who did hereupon with the Advice or Friends visit the poor Wretch; and
though she was in one of her Fits, having her Eyes shut, when the innocent
person impeached by her came in; yet could she (so powerful were Satan's
Operations upon her) declare who was there, and could tell the touch of that
Woman from any ones else. But the gracious Party thus accused and abused by a
malicious Devil, Prayed earnestly with and for the Possessed creature; after
which she confessed that Satan had deluded he^; making her believe evil of her
good Neighbor without any cause. Nor did she after that complain of any
Apparition or Disturbance from such an one. Yea, she said, that the Devil had
himself in the likeness and shap^ of diverse tormented her, and then told he^ it
was not he but they that did it.

As there have been several Persons vexe^ with evil Spirits, so diverse Houses
have been woefully Haunted by them. In the Year 1679, the House of William Morse
in Newberry in New England, was strangely disqui^eted by a Demon. After those
troubles began, he did by the Advice of Friends write down the particulars of
those unusual Accidents. And the Account which he gives thereof is as
follows;

On December 3. in the night time, he and his Wife heard a noise upon the roof
of their House, as if Sticks and Stones had been thrown against it with great
violence; whereupon he rose out of his Bed, but could see nothing. Locking the
Doo^s fast, he returned to Bed again. About midnight they heard an Hog making a
great noise in the House, so that the Man rose again, and found a great Hog in
the house, the door being shut, but upon the opening of the door it ran out.

On December 8. in the Morning, there were five great Stones and Bricks by an
invisible hand thrown in at the west end of the house while the Man's Wife was
making the Bed, the Bedstead was lifted up from the floor, and the Bedstaff
flung out of the Window, and a Cat was hurled at her; a long Staff danced up
and down in the Chimney; a burnt Brick, and a piece of a weatherboard were
thrown in at the Window: The Man at his going to Bed put out his Lamp, but in
the Morning found that the Saveall of it was taken away, and yet it was
unaccountably brought into its former place. On the same day, the long Staff
but now spoken of, was hanged up by a line, and swung to and fro, the Man's
Wife laid it in the fire, but she could not hold it there, inasmuch as it would
forcibly fly out; yet after much ado with joint strength they made it to burn.
A shingle flew from the Window, though no body near it, many sticks came in at
the same place, only one of these was so scragged that it could enter the hole
but a little way, whereupon the Man pusht it out, a great Rail likewise was
thrust in at the Window, so as to break the Glass.

At another time an Iron Crook that was hanged on a Nail, violently flew up and
down, also a Chair flew about, and at last lighted on the Table where Victuals
stood ready for them to cat, and was likely to spoil all, only by a nimble
catching they saved some of their Meal with the loss of the rest, and the
overturning of their Table.

People were sometimes Barricado'd out of doors, when as yet there was no body
to do it: and a Chest was removed from place to place, no hand touching it.
Their Keys being tied together, one was taken from the rest, (...) the
remaining two would fly about making a loud noise by knocking against each
other. But the greatest part of this Devils feats were his mischievous ones,
wherein indeed he was sometimes Antic enough too, and therein the chief
sufferers were, the Man and (...) Wife, and his Grandson. The Man especially
had his share in these Diabolical Molestations. For one while they could not
ea^ their Suppers quietly, but had the Ashes on the Hearth before their eyes
thrown into their Victuals; yea, and upon their heads and Clothes, insomuch
that they were forced up in^^ their Chamber, and yet they had no rest there;
for one of the Man's Shoes being left below, 'twas filled with Ashes and Coa^,
and thrown up after them. Their Light was beaten out, and they being laid in
their Bed with their little Boy between them, a great stone (from the Floor of
the Loft) weighing above three pounds was thrown upon the man's stomach, and he
turning it down upon the floor, it was once more thrown upon him. A Box, and a
Board were likewise thrown upon them all. And a Bag of Hops was taken out of
their Chest, wherewith they were beaten, till some of the Hops were scattered
on the floor, where the Bag was then laid, and left.

In another Evening, when they sat by (...) fire, the Ashes were so whitled at
them, that they could neither eat their Meat, nor endu^e the House. A Peel
struck the Man in the face. An Apron hanging by the fire, was flung upon it,
and singed before they could snatch it off. The Man being at Prayer with his
Family, a Beesom gave him a blow on his head behind, and fell down before his
face.

On another day, when they were Winnowing of Barley, some hard dirt was thrown
in, hitting the Man on the Head, and both the Man and his Wife on the back; and
when they had made themselves clean, they essayed to fill their half Bushel but
the foul Corn was in spite of them often cast in amongst the clean, and the Man
being di^^^times thus abused was forced to give over what he was about.

On January 23 (in particular) the Man had an iron Pin twice thrown at him, and
his Inkhorn was taken away from him while he was writing, and when by all his
seeking it he could not find it, at last he saw it drop out of the Air, down by
the fire: a piece of Leather was twice thrown at him; and a shoe was laid upon
his shoulder, which he catching at, was suddenly rapt from him. An handful of
Ashes was thrown at his face, and upon (...) is clothes: and the shoe was then
clapped upon his head, and upon it he clapped his hand, holding it so fast, that
somewhat unseen pulled him with it backward on the floor.

On the next day at night, as they were going to Bed, a lost Ladder was thrown
against the Door, and their Light put out; and when the Man was a bed, he was
beaten with an heavy pair of Leather Breeches, and pulled by the Hair of his
Head and Beard, Pinched and Scratched, and his Bed-board was taken away from
him; yet more in the next night, when the Man was likewise a Bed; his Bed-board
did rise out of its place, notwithstanding his putting forth all his strength
to keep it in; one of his Awls wa brought out of the next roominto his Bed, and
did prick him; the clothes wherewith he hoped to save his head from blows were
violently plucked from thence. Within a night or two after, the Man and his Wife
received both of them a blow upon their heads, but it was so dark that they
could not see the stone which gave it; the Man had his Cap pulled off from his
head while he sat by the fire.

The night following, they went to bed undressed, because of their late
disturbances, and the Man, Wife, Boy, presently felt themselves pricked, and
upon search found in the Bed a Bodkin, a knitting Needle, and two sticks picked
at both ends. He received also a great blow, as on his Thigh, so on his Face,
which fetched blood: and while he was writing a Candlestick was twice thrown at
him, and a great piece of Bark fiercely smote him, and a pail of Water turned
up without hands. On the 28 of the mentioned Month, frozen clods of Cow Dung
were diverse times thrown at the man out of the house in which they were; his
Wife went to milk the Cow, and received a blow on her head, and sitting down at
her Milking-work had Cow Dung diverse times thrown into her Pail, the Man tried
to save the Milk, by holding a Piggin side-wayes under the Cowes belly, but the
Dung would in for all, and the Milk was only made fit for Hogs. On that night
ashes were thrown into the porridge which they had made ready for their Supper,
so as that they could not eat it; A^^es were likewise often thrown into the
Man's Eyes, as he sat by the fire. And an iron Hammer flying at him, gave him a
great blow on his back; the Man's Wife going into the Cellar for Beer, a great
iron Peel flew and fell after her through the trapdoor of the Cellar; and going
afterward on the same Errand to the same place, the door shut down upon her,
and the Table came and lay upon the door, and the man was forced to remove it
e're his Wife could be released from where she was: on the following day while
he was Writing, a dish went out of its place, leapt into the pale, and cast
Water upon the Man, his Paper, his Table, and disappointed his procedure in
what he was about; his Cap jumpt off from his head, and on again, and the
Pot-lid leapt off from the Pot into the Kettle on the fire.

February 2. While he and his Boy were eating of Cheese, the pieces which he
cut were wrested from them, but they were afterward found upon the Table under
an Apron, and a pair of Breeches: And also from the fire arose little sticks
and Ashes, which flying upon the Man and his Boy, brought them into an
uncomfortable pickle; But as for the Boy, which the last passage spoke of,
there remains much to be said concerning him, and a principal sufferer in these
afflictions: For on the 18. of December, he sitting by his Grandfather, was
hurried into great motions and the Man thereupon took him, and made him stand
between his Legs, but the Chair danced up and down, and had like to have cast
both Man and Boy into the fire: and the Child was afterward flung about in
such a manner, as that they feared that his Brains would have been beaten out;
and in the evening he was tossed as before, and the Man tried the project of
holding him, but ineffectually. The Lad was soon put to Bed, and they presently
heard an huge noise, and demanded what was the matter? and he answered that his
Bed-stead leaped up and down: and they ( i. e. the Man and his Wife) went up,
and at first found all quiet, but before they had been there long, they saw the
Board by his Bed trembling by him, and the Bed-clothes flying off him, the
latter they laid on immediately, but they were no sooner on than off; so they
took him out of his Bed for quietness.

December 29. The Boy was violently thrown to and fro, only they carried him to
the house of a Doctor in the Town, and there he was free from disturbances, but
returning home at night, his former trouble began, and the Man taking him by
the hand, they were both of them almost tript into the fire. They put him to
bed, and he was attended with the same iterated loss of his clothes, shaking
off his Bed-board, and Noises, that he had in his last conflict; they took him
up, designing to sit by the fire, but the doors clattered, and the Chair was
thrown at him, wherefore they carried him to the Doctors house, and so for that
night all was well. The next morning he came home quiet, but as they were doing
somewhat, he cried out that he was pricked on the back, they looked, and found a
three-tin'd Fork sticking strangely there; which being carried to the Doctors
house, not only the Doctor himself said that it was his, but also the Doctors
Servant affirmed it was seen at home after the Boy was gone. The Boys vexations
continuing, they left him at the Doctors, where he remained well till awhile
after, and then he complained he was pricked, they looked and found an iron
Spindle sticking below his back; he complained he was pricked still, they
looked, and found Pins in a Paper sticking to his skin; he once more complained
of his Back, they looked, and found there a long Iron, a bowl of a Spoon, and a
piece of a Pansheard. They lay down by him on the Bed, with the Light burning,
but he was twice thrown from them, and the second time thrown quite under the
Bed; in the Morning the Bed was tossed about with such a creaking n^i^e, as was
heard to the Neighbors; in the afternoon their knives were one after another
brought, and put into his back, but pulled out by the Spectators; only one
knife which was missing seemed to the standers by to come out of his Mouth: he
was bidden to read his Book, was taken and thrown about several times, at last
hitting the Boys Grandmother on the head. Another time he was thrust out of his
Chair and rolled up and down with out cries, that all things (...) on fire;
yea, he was three times very dangerously thrown into the fire, and preserved by
his Friends with much ado. The Boy also made for a long time together a noise
like a Dog, and like an Hen with her Chickens, and could not speak rationally.

Particularly, on December 26. He barked like a Dog, and clock't like an Hen,
and after long distraining to speak, said, there is Powel, I am pinched; his
Tongue likewise hung out of his mouth, so as that it could by no means be
forced in till his Fit was over, and then he said 'twas forced out by Powel. He
and the house also after this had rest till the ninth of January: at which time
because of his intolerable ravings, and because the Child lying between the Man
and his Wife, was pulled out of Bed, and knocked so vehemently against the
Bed-stead Boards, in a manner very perilous and amazing. In the Day time he
was carried away beyond all possibility of their finding him. His Grandmother
at last saw him creeping on one side, and dragged him in, where he lay miserable
lame, but recovering his speech, he said, that he was carried above the Doctors
house, and that Powel carried him, and that the said Powel had him into the
Barn, throwing him against the Cart-wheel there, and then thrusting him out at
an hole; and accordingly they found some of the Remainders of the Threshed
Ba^ley which was on the Barn-floor hanging to his Clothes.

At another time he (...) into a Swoon, they forced somewhat Refreshing into
his mouth, and it was turned out as fast as they put it in; e're long he came
to himself, and expressed some willingness to eat, but the Meat would fo^cibly
fly out of his mouth; and when he was able to speak, he said Powel would not
let him eat: Having found the Boy to be best at a Neighbors house, the Man
carried him to his Daughters, three miles from his own. The Boy was growing
antic as he was on the Journey, but before the end of it he made a grievous
hollowing, and when he lighted, he threw a great stone at a Maid in the house,
and fell on eating of Ashes. Being at home afterward, they had rest awhile,
but on the 19 of January in the Morning he swooned, and coming to himself, he
roared terribly, and did eat Ashes, Sticks, Rug-yarn. The Morning following,
there was such a racket with the Boy, that the Man and his Wife took him to Bed
to them. A Bed-staff was thereupon thrown at them, and a Chamber pot with its
Contents was thrown upon them, and they were severely pinched. The Man being
about to rise, his Clothes were diverse times pulled from them, himself thrust
out of his Bed, and his Pillow thrown after him. The Lad also would have his
clothes plucked off from him in these Winter Nights, and was woefully dogged
with such fruits of Devilish spite, till it pleased God to shorten the Chain of
the wicked Demon.

All this while the Devil did not use to appear in any visible shape, only they
would think they had hold of the Hand that sometimes scratched them; but it
would give them the slip. And once the Man was discernably beaten by a Fist,
and an Hand got hold of his Wrist which he saw, but could not catch; and the
likeness of a Blackmore Child did appear from under the Rugg and Blanket, where
the Man lay, and it would rise up, fall down, nod and slip under the clothes
when they endeavored to clasp it, never speaking any thing.

Neither were there many Words spoken by Satan all this time, only once having
put out their Light, they heard a scraping on the Boards, and then a Piping and
Drumming on them, which was followed with a Voice, singing Revenge! Revenge!
Sweet is Revenge! And they being well terrified with it, called upon God; the
issue of which was, that suddenly with a mournful Note, there were six times
over uttered such expressions as Alas! Alas! me knock no more! me knock no
more! and now all ceased.

The Man does moreover affirm, that a Seaman (being a Mate of a Ship) coming
often to visit him, told him that they wronged his Wife who suspected her to be
guilty of Witchcraft; and that the Boy (his Grandchild) was the cause of this
trouble; and that if he would let him have the Boy one day, he would warrant
him his house should be no more troubled as it had been; to which motion he
consented. The Mate came the next day betimes, and the Boy was with him until
night; after which his house he says was not for some time molested with evil
Spirits.

Thus far is the Relation concerning the Demon at William Morse his House in
Newbery. The true Reason of these strange disturbances is as yet not certainly
known: some (as has been hinted) did suspect Morse's Wife to be guilty of
Witchcraft.

One of the Neighbors took Apples which were brought out of that house and put
them into the fire; upon which they say, their houses were much disturbed.
Another of the Neighbors, caused an Horse-shoe to be nailed before the doors,
and as long as it remained so, they could not persuade the suspected person to
go into the house; but when the Horse-shoe was gone, she presently visited
them. I shall not here enlarge upon the vanity and superstition of those
Experiments, reserving that for another place: All that I shall say at present
is, that the Demons whom the blind Gentiles of old worshipped, told their
Servants, that such things as these would very much affect them; yea, and (...)
certain Characters, Signs and Charms would render their power ineffectual; and
accordingly they would become subject, when their own directions were obeyed.
It is sport to the Devils when they see silly Men thus deluded and made fools
of by them. Others were apt to think that a Seaman by some suspected to be a
Conjurer, set the Devil on work thus to disquiet Morse's Family. Or it may be
some other thing as yet kept hid in the secrets of providence might be the true
original of all this Trouble.

A Disturbance not much unlike to this happened above twenty years ago, at an
house in Tedworth, in the County of Wilts in England, which was by wise men
judged to proceed from Conjuration.

Mr. Mompesson of Tedworth being in March 1661. at Lungershall, and hearing a
Drum beat there, he demanded of the Bailiff of the Town what it meant, who told
him, they had for some days been troubled with an idle Drummer, pretending
Authority, and a Pass under the hands of some Gentlemen. Mr. Mompesson reading
his Pass, and knowing the hands of those Gentlemen, whose Names were pretended
to be subscribed, discovered the Cheat, and commanded the Vagrant to put off
his Drum, and ordered a Constable to secure him: but not long after he got
clear of the Constable. In April following, Mr. Momposson's house was much
disturbed with Knockings, and with Drummings; for an hour together a Demon
would beat Roundheads and Cuckolds, the Tattoo and several other points of War
as well as any Drummer. On November 5. The Demon made a great noise in the
House, and caused some Boards therein to move to and fro in the day time when
there was an whole room full of People present. At his departure, he left
behind him a Sulphurous smell, which was very offensive. The next night, Chairs
walked up and down the Room; the Childrens Shoes were hurled over their heads.
The Minister of the Town being the^e, a Bedstaff was thrown at him; and hit him
on the Leg, but without the least hurt. In the latter end of December, 1662.
They heard a noise like the jingling of Money, the occasion of which was
thought to be, some words spoken the night before, by one in the Family; who
said that Faires used to leave money behind them, and they wished it might be
so now. In January Lights were seen in the House, which seemed blue and
glimmering, and caused a great stiffness in the eyes of them that saw them. One
in the room (by what Authority I cannot tell) said, Satan, if the Drummer set
thee a work give three knocks and no more, which was done accordingly. Once
when it was very sharp severe Weather, the room was suddenly filled with a
Noisome smell, and was very hot though without fire. This Demon would play
some nasty and many ludicrous foolish tricks. It would empty Chamberpots into
the Beds; and fill Porringers with Ashes. Sometimes it would not suffer any
light to be in the room, but would carry them away up the Chimney. Mr.
Mompesson coming one morning into his Stable, found his Horse on the ground,
having one of his hinder legs in his mouth, and so fastened there, that it was
difficult for several men with a Leaver to get it out. A Smith lodging in the
House, heard a noise in the room, as if one had been shoeing an Horse, and
somewhat come as it were with a Pincers snipping at the Smith's Nose, most part
of the night. The Drummer was under vehement suspicion for a Conjurer. He was
condemned to Transportation. All the time of his restraint and absence, the
House was quiet. See Mr. Glanvil's Collection of Modern Relations, P.71. etc.

But I proceed to give an account of some other things lately happening in
New England, which were undoubtedly praeternatural, and not without Diabolical
operation. The last year did afford several Instances, not unlike unto those
which have been mentioned. For then Nicholas Desborough of Hartford in
New England, was strangely molested by stones, pieces of earth, cobs of Indian
Corn, etc. falling upon and about him, which sometimes came in through the
door, sometimes through the Window, sometimes down the Chimney, at other times
they seemed to fall from the floor of the Chamber, which yet was very close;
sometimes he met with them in his Shop, the Yard, the Barn, and in the Field at
work. In the House, such things happened frequently, not only in the night but in
the day time, if the Man himself was at home, but never when his Wife was at
home alone. There was no great violence in the motion, though several persons
of the Family, and others also were struck with the things that were thrown by
an invisible hand, yet they were not hurt thereby. Only the Man himself had
once his Arm somewhat pained by a blow given him; and at another time, blood
was drawn from one of his Legs by a scratch given it. This molestation began
soon after a Controversy arose between Desborough and another person, about a
Chest of Clothes which the other said that Desoerough did unrighteously retain:
and so it continued for some Months (though with several intermissions.) In
the latter end of the last year, when also the Man's Barn was burned with the
Corn in it; but by what means it came to pass is not known. Not long after,
some to whom the matter was referred, ordered Desborough to restore the Clothes
to the Person who complained of wrong; since which he has not been troubled as
before. Some of the stones hurled were of considerable bigness; one of them
weighed four pounds, but generally the stones were not great, but very small
ones. One time a piece of Clay came down the Chimney, falling on the Table
which stood at some distance from the Chimney. The People of the House threw it
on the Hearth, whereit lay a considerable time: they went to their Supper, and
whilst at their Supper, the piece of Clay was lifted up by an invisible hand,
and fell upon the Table; taking it up, they found it hot, having lain so long
before the fire, as to cause it to be hot.

Another Providence no less Remarkable than this last mentioned, happened at
Portsmouth in New England, about the same time: concerning which I have
received the following account from a Worthy hand.

On June 11. 1682. Being the Lords Day, at night showers of stones were thrown
both against the sides and roof of the house of George Walton: some of the
People went abroad, found the Gate at some distance from the house, wrung off
the Hinges, and stones came thick about them: sometimes falling down by them,
sometimes touching them without any hurt done to them though they seemed to
come with great force, ^et did no more but softly touch them; Stones flying
about the room the Doors being shut. The Glass-Windows shattered to pieces by
stones that seemed to come not from without but within; the Lead of the Glass
Casements, Window-Bars, etc. being driven forcibly outward, and so standing
bent. While the Secretary was walking in the room a great Hammer came brushing
along against the Chamber floor that was over his head, and fell down by him. A
Candlestick beaten off the Table. They took up nine of the stones and marked
them, and laid them on the Table, some of them being as hot as if they came out
of the fire; but some of those marked stones were found flying about again. In
this manner, about four hours space that night: The Secretary then went to bed,
but a stone came and broke up his Chamber Door, being put to (not locked) a
Brick was sent upon the like Errand. The abovesaid Stone the Secretary locked up
in his Chamber, but it was fetched out, and carried with great noise into the
next Chamber. The Spit was carried up Chimney, and came down with the point
forward, and stuck in the Back-log, and being removed by one of the Company to
one side of the Chimney, was by an unseen hand thrown out at Window. This trade
was driven on the next day, and so from Day to Day, now and then there would be
some intermission, and then to it again. The stones were most frequent where
the Master of the house was, whether in the Field or Barn, etc. A black Cat was
seen once while the Stones came, and was shot at, but she was too nimble for
them. Some of the Family say, that they once saw the appearance of an hand put
forth at the Hall Window, throwing stones toward the Entry, though there was
no body in the Hall the while: sometimes a dismal hollow whistling would be
heard; sometimes the noise of the trotting of an horse, and snorting, but
nothing seen. The Man went up the great Bay in his Boat to a Farm he had there,
and while haling Wood or Timber to the Boat he was disturbed by the Stones as
before at home. He carried a stirrup iron from the house down to the Boat, and
there left it; but while he was going up to the house, the iron came jingling
after him through the Woods, and returned to the house, and so again, and at
last went away, and was heard of on more. Their Anchor leapt overboard several
times as they were going home and stopped the boat. A Cheese has been taken out
of the Press and crumbled all over the floor. A piece of Iron with which they
weighed up the Cheese-press stuck into the Wall, and a Kittle hung up thereon.
Several Cooks of English-hay mowed near the house, were taken and hung upon
Trees; and some made into small whisps, and put all up and down the Kitchen,
Cum multis al^is, etc. After this manner, have they been treated ever since at
times; it were endless to particularize. Of late they thought the bitte^ness of
Death had been past, being quiet for sundry days and nights: but last week
we^e some Returnings again; and this week ( Aug. 2. 1682.) as bad or worse than
ever. The Man is sorely hurt with some of the Stones that came on him, and like
to feel the effects of them for many days. Thus far is that Relation.

I am moreover informed, that the Demon was quiet all the last Winter, but in
the Spring he began to play some ludicrous tricks, carrying away some Axes that
were locked up safe. This last Summer he has not made such disturbances as
formerly. But of this no more at present.

There have been strange and true Reports concerning a Woman now living near
the Salmon Falls in Barwick (formerly called Kittery) unto whom Evil Spirits
have sometimes visibly appeared; and she has sometimes been sorely tormented by
invisible hands: Concerning all which, an Intelligent Person has sent me the
following Narrative.

A Brief Narrative of sundry Apparitions of Satan unto and Assaults at sundry
times and places upon the Person of Mary the Wife of Antonio Hortado, dwelling
near the Salmon Falls: Taken from her own mouth, Aug.13. 1683.
In June 1682. (the day forgotten) at Evening, the said Mary heard a voice at
the door of her Dwelling, saying, What do y^^^ here? about an hour after,
standing at the Door of her House, she had a blow on her Eye that settled her
head near to the Doorpost, and two or three days after, a Stone, as she judged
about half a pound or a pound weight was thrown along the house within into the
Chimney, and going to take it up it was gone; all the Family was in the house,
and no hand appearing which might be instrumental in throwing the stone. About
two hours after, a Drying Pan then hanging in the Chimney was heard to ring so
loud, that not only those in the house heard it, but others also that lived on
the other side of the River near an hundred Rods distant or more. Whereupon the
said Mary and her Husband going in a Cannoo over the River, they saw like the
head of a man new-shorn, and the tail of a white Cat about two or three foot
distance from each other, swimming over before the Cannoo, but no body appeared
to join head and tail together; and they returning over the River, in less than
an hours time, the said Apparition followed their Cannoo back again, but
disappeared at Landing. A day or two after, the said Mary was stricken on her
head (as sh^^adged) with a stone, which caused a Swelling and much soreness on
her head, being then in the yard by her house, and she presently entering into
her house was bitten on both Arms black and blue, and one of her Breasts
scratched; the impressions of the Teeth being like Man's Teeth, were plainly
seen by many: Whereupon deserting their House to sojourn at a Neighbors on the
other side of the River, there appeared to said Mary in the house of her
sojourning, a Woman clothed with a green Safeguard, a short blue Cloak, and a
white Cap, making a profer to strike her with a Firebrand, but struck her not.
The Day following the same shape appeared again to her, but now arrayed with a
gray Gown, white Apron, and white Head-clothes, in appearance laughing several
times, but no voice heard. Since when said Mary has been freed from those
Satanical Molestations.

But the said Antonio being returned in March last with his Family, to dwell
again in his own house, and on his entrance there, hearing the noise of a Man
walking in his Chamber, and seeing the boards buckle under his feet as he
walked, though no man to be seen in the Chamber (for they went on purpose to
look) he returned with his Family to dwell on the other side of the River; yet
planting his Ground though he forsook his House, he has had five Rods of good
Log-fence thrown down at once, the feeting of Neat Cattle plainly to be seen
almost between every Row of Corn in the Field yet no Cattle seen there, nor any
damage done to his Corn, not so much as any of the Leaves of the Corn cropped.

Thus far is that Narrative.

I am further informed, that some (who should have been wiser) advised the poor
Woman to stick the House round with Bays, as an effectual preservative against
the power of Evil Spirits. This Counsel was followed. And as long as the Bays
continued green, she had quiet; but when they began to wither, they were all by
an unseen hand carried away, and the Woman again tormented.

It is observable, that at the same time three Houses in three several Towns
should be molested by Demons, as has now been related.

CHAP. VI.
That there are Demons. And Possessed Persons. Signs of such. Some Mad Men are
really Possessed. Not withstanding many Fabulous St^ries ^^out Witchcrafts.
That there are Witches proved by three Arguments. That Houses are sometimes
troubled by Evil Spirits. Witchcraft often the cause of it. Sometimes by the
Devil without Witchcraft; ordered by providence as punishment for Sin. The
disturbance in Waltons House further considered, with a parallel Story. That
the things related in the preceding Chapter were undoubtedly Praeternatural and
Diabolical.

THe Sadduces of those days being like unto Avicenna, and Averroes, and other
Atheistical Philosophers in former times; say that there are no Spirits, and
that all Stories concerning them are either Fabulous or to be ascribed unto
natural causes. Amongst many others, the Learned V^^tius (in disp. de
operationibus Daemonum) has sufficiently refuted them. And as the experience of
other ages and places of the World; so the things which divine providence has
permitted and ordered to come to pass amongst our selves (if the Scriptures
were silent) make it manifest beyond all contradiction, that there are Devils
infesting this lower World. Most true it is, that Satan and all his wicked
Angels are limited by the providence of God: so as that they cannot hurt any
Man or Creature, much less any Servant of his, without a Commission from him,
whose Kingdom is over all. It is a memorable Passage, which Chytraeus relates
concerning Luther, that when he was sought after by his Popish and Implacable
Enemies (being then hid by the Duke of Saxony) they consulted with Magicians
that so they might find where Luther absconded, but the Wizzards confessed they
could not discover him. Undoubtedly the Devils knew where Luther hid himself;
only God would not suffer them to reveal it. Nevertheless, the Lord does for
wise and holy ends, sometimes lengthen the Chain which the infernal L^ons are
bound fast in. And as there are many tremendous Instances confirming the Truth
hereof, so that of Satan's taking bodily possession of Men, is none of the
least. Sometimes indeed it is very hard to discern between natural Diseases and
Satanical Possessions; so as that persons really possessed have been thought to
be only molested with some natural Disease, without any special finger of the
Evil Spirit therein. Fernelius (de abditis rerum causis, Lib.2. Cap.16.)
speaks of a certain young Gentleman, that was taken with strange Convulsions,
which did surprise him at least ten times in a day. In his Fits he had the use
of his Speech and Reason free. Otherwise his Disease would have been judged no
other than an ordinary Epilepsy. Much means was used by skilful Physicians for
his relief, but without success for three Months together; when all on a
sudden, a Demon began to speak out of the miserable Patient; and that with not
only Latin but Greek Sentences, which the afflicted party himself had no
knowledge of; and the Demon discovered many secrets both of the Physicians and
of other persons that attended, deriding them (...) their vain attempts to cure
a Man whom he had the possession of. There are sundry Authors (in special
Balduinus in his Cases of Conscience, and Darrel in his History of the seven
possessed persons in Lancashire) who have endeavored to describe and
characterise possessed persons. And such particulars as these following are by
them mentioned as signs of Possession.

1. If the party concerned shall reveal secret things, either past or future,
which without supernatural Assistance could not be known, it argues Possession.

2. If he does speak with strange Languages, or discover skill in Arts and
Sciences never learned by him.

3. If he can bear burdens, and do things which are beyond humane strength.

4. Uttering words without making use of the Organs of speech, when persons
shall be heard speaking, and yet neither their Lips nor Tongues have any
motion, it is a sign that an evil spirit speaks in them.

5. When the Body is become inflexible.

6. When the Belly is on a sudden puffed up, and instantly flat again.

These are thought to be certain Arguments of an Energumenical person. Some
other signs are mentioned by Thyraeus (de obsessis Part 2. Cap.25,26.)

There are who conceive (and that as they suppose upon Scripture grounds:) that
Men may possibly be Daemoniacal, when none of those mentioned particulars can
be affirmed of them. The Excellently learned and judicious Mr. Mede, is of
Opinion, that the Daemontacks whom we read so frequently of in the
New Testament, were the same with Epilepticks, Lunaticks, and Mad Men. The
Turks at this day have their Mad men in great veneration, supposing them to be
acted by a spirit, but they (in that being themselves mad) take it to be a good
when as it is an evil spirit that does operate in such persons. And that the
Jews of old did look upon Maniacks to be possessed with an evil Spirit, is
evident from that expression of theirs, Joh.10.20. He has a Devil and is Mad.
Moreover, we read of one, Mat.17.15. that was Lunatic, and did often fall into
the fire, and often into the water. No^ that this Lunatic person was a
Daemoniack is clear from ver.18. where it is said, that Jesus rebuked the Devil
and he departed out of him. And of the same person it is said, in Luk.9.39. A
Spirit takes him and teareth him. So Beza and Heinsius, in Mat.8.16. and 17.
15. It has been commonly said that in Christ's time more persons were possessed
with evil Spirits than ever was known before or since; but if that were so, the
Jews, and probably some Historians would have noted it as a thing strange and
extraordinary; whenas we read of no such observation to be made on those times.
And says Mr. Mede, (in his Discourse on John 10.20.) If those possessed
Persons were not such as we now adays conceive to be no other than Mad men,
the World must be supposed to be well rid of Devils, which for my part I
believe it is not. There is in special, a sort of Melancholy madness, which is
called Lycantbropia, or Lupina Insania, h. e. When Men imagine themselves to be
turned into Wolves or other Beasts. Hippocrates relates concerning the
Daughters of King Praetus, that they thought themselves Kine. Wierus (de
praestigiis Daemonum, L.3.C.21.) speaks of one in Padua, that would not
believe to the contrary but that he was a Wolf: and of a Spaniard, who thought
himself a Bear. Euwichius (and from him Horestus) writes of a Man that was
found in a Barn under the Hay, howling and saying he was a Wolf. The foolish
Rusticks, who surprised him, began to flay him, that so they might see if he
had not hair growing on the inside of his skin. Forestus has many instances to
this purpose. Heurnius says, that it is a Disease frequent in Bohemia and
Hungaria. No doubt but this Disease gave occasion to Pliny's Assertion, that
some Men in his time were turned into Wolves, and from Wolves into Men again.
Hence was Ovid's Fable of Lycaon, and the Tale of Pausanias, being ten years a
Wolf, and then a Man again. He that would see more instances, may read Austin
de civ. Dei. L.18. C.5. Burton of Melancholy. Page.9. They that are subject
unto this Malady, for the most part ly hid all the day, and go abroad In the
night, barking and howling at Gravel and in Deserts. We may suppose that
Nebuchadnezzar was troubled with this Disease. And that such persons are
molested with a Demon is evident from Luk 8.27. with Mark.5. 3,4. The
possessed person there spoken of was Lycanthropos.

There are that acknowledge the existence of Spirits, and that the Bodies of
men are sometimes really possessed thereby; who nevertheless will not believe
there are any such woeful creatures in rerum naturd, as Witches, or persons
confoederate with the Devil. I have read of a famous Wizard, whose Name was
William de Lure, that after he had labored much in opposing their Opinion, who
think that there are Men on Earth joined in an explicit confoederacy with the
fiends of Hell, was himself convicted and condemned for that crime which he
designed to make the World believe that no Man was or could be guilty of. I
shall not suspect all those as guilty of Witchcraft, nor yet of Heresy, who
call the received Opinion, about Witches into question. There are four or five
English Writers, viz. Mr. Scot, Ady, and of late Wagstaff and Webster, and
another Anonymous Author; who do with great vehemence affirm that never any did
maintain that familiarity with the evil Spirits, which is commonly believed.
Wierus (otherwise a judicious Author) conceives that all those things supposed
to be done by Witches are done by the evil Spirits themselves, without any
confoederates. But he is sufficiently refuted by Binsfieldius, Bodinus,
Sennertus, and others. True it is, that many things have been looked upon as
proceeding from Witchcraft, when it has not been so. The Sympathies and
Antipathies of Nature have sometimes been esteemed the effects of Witchcraft. A
Sympathetical Powder, made without any Magical Ceremonies has done strange
things, so as that the Artist which used it, has upon that account been
suspected of Witchcraft. A Man may easily by such natural Magic, as is
described by Porta, and by Weckerus de secretis make the ignorant believe he is
a Wizard. It is also true, that the World is full of Fabulous Stories
concerning some kind of Familiarities with the Devil, and things done by his
help, which are beyond the power of Creatures to accomplish. What Fables are
there concerning Incubt and Succubae and of Men begotten by Demons? No doubt
but the Devil may delude the fancy that one of his Vassals shall think (as the
Witch at Hartford did) that he has car^^^ and cursed Communion with them,
beyond what is real. Nor is it impossible for him (...) assume a dead Body, or
to form a lifeless on^ out of the Elements, and therewith to make his Witches
become guilty of Sodomy. Austin says, they are impudent who deny this. But to
imagine that Spirits shall really generate Bodies, is irrational. I am not
ignorant, th^^ that there have been Men in the World (more than one or two)
pretended to be thus begotten and born. Thus does Niderius affirm concerning
all the old Inhabitants of the Isle of Cyprus. The like has been reported
concerning Arcturus, and concerning our British Merlin. Yea, the Gentiles
believed that Homer, AEneas, Hercules, and others were begotten by Demons;
whom thereupon they esteemed as Semidei. And Olympias the Mother of Alexander
the Great, supposed her self to be with Child by Jupiter Hammon. When her
Husband King Philip of Macedo^ was absent from her, Nectanebus (an Egyptian
Prince and a great Magician) sent her word that Jupiter would embrace her, and
that he would come to her such a night in the form of a Dragon; at the time
appointed Nectanebus himself by his Magical impostures made Olympias believe
that a Dragon was in the room, and so did himself do that which the deluded
Queen thought Jupiter had done. I doubt not but that Merlin and others imagined
to come into the World not in the usual way, were the Sons of Demons just as
Alexander was. It has been a received maxim, that though the Devil may by his
Art produce Insects and Vermin (to the generation whereof a seminal v^rtue is
not always necessary) yet he cannot bring forth a perfect animal. How then is
it consistent with reason, that he should produce a real Man, who is of all
Animals the most perfect, and noble? It is also extremely Fabulous, that
Witches can transform themselves or others into another sort of Creatures, e.
g. into Horses, Wolves, Cats, Mice, etc. Carminibus Circe jocios mutavit
Ulyssis. A blind Heathenish fancy: And yet Stories of this nature have been
generally believed; and I have not without wonderment seen grave Authors
relating them, as if the things had been really so. But it is beyond the power
of all the Devils in He^l to cause such a transformation; they can no more do
it than they can be the Authors of a true Miracle (see Horstius
Inst.Med.Disp.3.Exere^t.9.Quest.9.) Though I deny not but that the Devil may so
impose upon the imagination of Witches as to make them believe that they are
transmuted into Beasts. Sennertus (in Pract. Med.L.6. Part 9. Cap. 5.) reports
that a Noble Person, and one worthy of credit, gave him an account of a strange
passage to this purpose, which himself was particularly acquainted with. The
Story is this;

A certain Woman, being in Prison on suspicion for Witchcraft; pretending to be
able to turn her self into a Wolf, the Magistrate before whom she was brought
promised her, that she should not be put to death, in case she would then in
his presence so transform her self. Which she readily consented unto.
Accordingly she anointed her head, neck and armpits; immediately upon which
she fell into a most profound sleep, for three hours; after which she suddenly
rose up, declaring that she had been turned into a Wolf, and been at a place
some miles distant, and there killed first a Sheep, and then a Cow; the
Magistrate, presently sent to the place; and sound that first a sheep and then
a Cow had there been killed. Wierus and Baptista Porta have diverse Stories to
the same purpose. It is then evident, that the Devil himself did that mischief,
and in the mean time the Witches who were cast into so profound a sleep by him,
as that they could not by any noises or blows be awakened, has their Phansies
imposed upon by Dreams and Delusions according to the pleasure of their Master
Satan. It must moreover, be sadly confessed, that many innocent persons have
been put to death under the notion of Witchcraft, whereby much innocent blood
has been shed. Especially it has been so in Popish times and places.
Superstitious and Magical ways of trying Witches have been a bloody cause of
those Murders. Sometimes Persons have been tried for Witchcraft by hot,
sometimes by cold water (of which more in the eighth Chapter of this Essay)
sometimes by pricking them; sometimes by sticking Awls under their Seats,
sometimes by their ability, or otherwise to repeat the Lords Prayer.

An Irish Witch which was tried at Toughall, Sept.11. 1661. being by the Court
put upon repeating the fifth Petition, always left out the words Forgive us
our Trespasses. Another Witch tried at Taunton 1663. could not repeat the last
Petition, but though she was directed to say it after one that repeated it
distinctly, would say Leadus into Temptation, and could never repeat it right,
though she tried to do it half a score times. But Judge Arche^^^d wisely
admonish the Jury, that they were not in the least measure to guide their
Verdict by that, since it was no legal evidence. The Author of the
Advertisement to Mr. Glanvil's Relations ( P.171.) says that his curiosity led
him to examine certain Witches at the Castle in Cambridge, and that the most
notorious Witch of them all pleaded that she was no Witch, because she was able
to say the Lords Prayer and the Creed, and though she was out in repeating the
Creed, she said the Lords Prayer right. But from such considerations as those
which have been mentioned; Wierus and some others not Atheists but persons of
worth, have (...) run into an extreme on the other hand, so as to question
whether there were any persons really confoederate with the infernal spirits.
Nevertheless, that there have been such, the following Arguments do manifest.

1. The Argument by many insisted on from the Scripture is irrefragable.
Therein Witch-crafts are forbidden. And we often read in the Scripture of
Metaphorical Bewitchings, Noehum 3.4. Gal. 3.1. which Similitudes are
undoubtedly taken from things that have a real existence in rerum nature. Yea,
the Scripture makes particular mention of many that used those cursed Arts and
Familiarities with the Devil, e. g. Jannes, and Jambres, Balaam, Manasseh,
Simon, Elymas. Nor is the Relation which the Scripture gives of the Witch of
Endor, and the reasons from thence deduced, to prove the being of Witches,
sufficiently confuted by any of our late Witch-Advocate. Though (as one
speaks) some men to elude the Argument from that instance, play more
Hocus-Pocus tricks in the Explication of that passage than the Witch her self
did in the raising deceased Samuel. It is a poor evasion in those who think to
escape the dint of this Argument, by pretending that the Witches and Familiar
Spirits spoken of in the Scripture, were only Juglers, or men that by
Legerdemain would do strange feats of activity. The Divine Law requires that
such Witches should be cut off by the Sword of Justice; which may not be
affirmed of every one that shall without any confoederacy with the Devil play
tricks of Legerdemain.

2. Experience has too often made it manifest that there are such in the World
as hold a co^respondence with Hell. There have bin known Wizards; yea such as
have taught others what Ceremonies they are to use in maintaining communion
with Devils. Trithemius his Book de septem Intelligentiis, and Cornelius
Agrippa's Books of occult Philosophy, wherein too much of these nefandous
abominations is described, are frequently in the hands of men. Several other
Books there are extant, which do professedly teach the way of Familiarity with
Demons. The Titles whereof, as also the Names of the Authors that have
published them, I designedly forbear to mention, lest happily any one into whose
hands this Discourse may come, should out of wicked curiosity seek after them
to the ruin of his soul. There are famous Histories of several, who had their
Paredr^ or Familiar Spirits, some in one likeness, some in another, constantly
attending them. Thus had Apollonius, Thyanaeus of old. And of later times Mich.
Scot, and Josephus Niger. Likewise Cardanus (de subtilitate, Lib. 19. P. 963.)
writes, that his own Father had such a Familiar for thirty years together. So
had Christopher Waganeer a Familiar in the form of an Ape for seven years
attending him; so had T^^pardus, which two were at last carried away Body and
Soul by the Devil; unto whose service they had devoted their lives. There is
also a true (as well as a Romantic) Story of ^^^ustus. The excellent
Camera^ius in his Herae subsecivae Cent. 1. Cap.70. re^ateth strange things of
him, which he received from those who knew Faustus, and were Ey-witnesses of
his Magical and Diabolical Impostures: He also had a familiar Devil in form of
a Monk accompanying of him for the space of twenty four years. Housdorfius, and
Lonicer ad 2 Praec. P. 167. speak of Faustus. Melancthen declares that he knew
the Man: so that Naudeus is to be convinced of vanity, in denying that ever
there was such a Person in the World. In a word, it is a thing known, that
there have been Men who would discourse in Languages, and reason notably about
Sciences which they never learned; who have revealed Secrets, discovered hidden
Treasures, told whither stolen Goods have been conveyed, and by whom; and that
have caused Bruit Creatures, nay Statues or Images to speak, and give rational
Answers. The Jews Teraphims oftentimes did so: vide R. Sol. Jarchi in Hos.3.4.
Seldom de diis syriis. Part 1. Cap.2. Thom. contra gentes Lib. 3. Cap. 104.
Such things as these cannot be done by the help of mere natural causes. It must
needs be then, that the practisers of them are in confoederacy with Satan.

3. There have been many in the World, who have upon conviction confessed
themselves guilty of Familiarity with the Dev^^^ A multitude of Instances this
way are (...) by Bodinus, Codronebus, Delrio, Jacquerius, Remigius, and others.
Some in this Country have affirmed, that they knew a Man in another part of
the World, above fifty years ago, who having an ambitious desire to be thought
a wise man; whilst he wa^ tormented with the Itch of his wicked Ambition, the
Devil came to him, with promises that he should quickly be in great reputation
for his wisdom, in case he would make a covenant with him; the conditions
whereof were, that when Men came to him for his counsel, he should labor to
persuade them that there is no God, nor Devil, nor Heaven, nor Hell; and that
such a term of years being expired, the Devil should have his Soul. The
Articles were consen^ed to. The Man continuing after this to be of a very civil
Conversation, doing hu^t to none, but good to many; and by degrees began to
have a Name to be a person of extraordinary sagacity, and was sought unto far
and neat for counsel, his Wo^ds being esteemed Oracles by the vulgar. And he
did according to his Covenant upon all occasions secretly disseminate
Principles of Atheism, not being suspected for a Wizard. But a few weeks before
the time indented with the Devil was fulfilled; inexpres^^^ horror of
Conscience surprised him, so that he revealed the secret transactions which had
passed betwixt himself and the Devil. He would sometimes, with hideous roarings
tell those that came to visit him, that now he knew that there was a God and a
Devil, and an Heaven, and an Hell. So did he die a miserable spectacle of the
righteous and fearful judgment of God. And every Age does produce new Examples
of those that have by their own confession made the like cursed Covenants with
the Prince of Darkness.

In the Year 1664, Several who were Indicted at the Assizes held at Taunton in
Somersetshire, confessed that they had made an Explicit League with the Devil,
and that he did Baptize Pictures of Wax with Oil, giving them the Names of
those persons they did intend mischief unto.

Annu. 1678. One John Stuart, and his Sister Annabil Stuart, at the Assizes
held at Paysley in Scotland, confessed that they had been in confoederacy with
the Devil; and that they had made an Image of Wax, calling it by the name of
St. George Maxwel, sticking Pins in the sides and on the breast of it. Such an
Image with pins in it, was really found in the Witches Houses; and upon the
removal of it, the pins being taken out, Sir George had immediate ease, and
recovered his health.

There is lately published (by Dr. Horneck) the History of the Witches in
Sweden, by whose means that Kingdom was fearfully plagued: upon Examination
they confessed their crime, and were executed in the year 1670.

And no longer since than the last year, viz. on Aug.25. 1682. three women who
were executed at Exon in Devonshire, all of them confessed that they had had
converses and familiarities with the Devil.

But the Instance of the Witch Executed in Hartford, here in New England (of
which the preceding Chapter gives an account) considering the circumstances of
that Confession, is as convictive a proof as most single examples that I have
met with. It is a vain thing, for the Patrons of Witches to think that they can
Sham off this Argument, by suggesting that these Confessions did proceed from
the deluded imaginations of Mad and Melancholy persons. Some of them were as
free from distemperature in their Brains, as their Neighbors. That diverse
Executed for Witches have acknowledged things against themselves which were
never so, I neither doubt or deny. And that a deluded Fancy may cause persons
verily to think they have seen and done these things which never had any
Existence, except in their own Imaginations is indisputable. I fully concur
with a passage which I find, in Worthy Dr. Owen's late excellent Discourse
about the work of the Spirit in Prayer ( Page 202.) where he has these words:
We find by experience that some have had their Imaginations so fixed on things
evil and noxious by satanical Delusions, that they have confessed against
themselves things and crimes that have rendered them obnoxious to Capital
Punishment, whereof they were never really and actually guilty. This not
withstanding, that Persons whose Judgment and Reason has been free from
disturbance by any Disease, should not only voluntarily acknowledge their being
in cursed Familiarities with Satan, but mention the particular circumstances of
those Transactions, and give ocular demonstration of the truth of what they
say, by discovering the Stigmata made upon their bodies, by the Devils hand:
and that when more than one or two have been examined apart, they should agree
in the circumstances of their Relations, and yet that all this should be the
mere effect of Melancholy or Frenzy, cannot without offering violence to
Reason and common Sense be Imagined. And as there are Witches so many times
they are the causes of those strange disturbances which are in houses haunted
by Evil Spirits, such as those mentioned in the former Chapter. Instances
concerning this may be seen in Mr. Glanvils Collections, together with the
continuation thereof; published the last year by the Learned Dr. Henry More.
Sometimes providence permits the Devil himself (without the use of Instruments)
to molest the houses of some as a punishment for sin committed. Most commonly
either for the sin of Murder. Plutarch writes that the House of Pusanias was
haunted by an evil spirit after he had Murdered his Wife. Many like Instances
have been reported and recorded by credible Authors. Or else for the sin of
Theft. As for Walton the Quaker of Portsmouth, whose House has been so
strangely troubled, he suspects that one of his Neighbors has caused it by
witchcraft, she (being a Widow-woman) charge him with injustice in detaining
some Land from her. It is none of my work to reflect upon the Man, nor will I
do it; only if there be any late or old guilt upon his Conscience it concerns
him by Confession and Repentance to give Glory to that God, who is able in
strange ways to discover the sins of Men. I shall here take occasion to
commemorate an alike notable scene of Providence, which was taken notice of in
another part of the World Soil. at Brightling in Sussex in England: The
Minister in that Town ( viz. Mr. Joseph Bennet) has given a faithful account of
that strange Providence, which is published by Mr. Clark in his Examples, Vol.
2. Page 593, etc. I shall relate it in his Words, thus he writes concerning it:

Anno Christi 1659. There was at Brightling an amazing Providence, containing
many strange passages. A wonderful hand of God, by what Instrument or
Instruments soever: which was, a fire strangely kindled, which burnt down a
Man's house, and afterward kindled in another, to which the man's Goods were
carried, and to which, himself, and his Wife, and his Servant Girl were
removed; and several things were thrown by an invisible hand, powerfully
convincing, and thereby discovering the Hypocrifie and Theft of the Man, and
for a warning to others to take heed of the like.

November 7. In the Evening. The fire first kindled in this Man's Milk-house,
and November 9. there was dust thrown upon this Man and his Wife, as they lay
in Bed together, and there was knocking several times and the same morning
diverse things were thrown about, and the Fire again kindled in the Milk-house,
which was yet put out by the Woman her self; then it kindled in the Eves of the
house, in the Thatch, which was put out by a Man which was their next
Neighbor. That night as the Man had a pot of Beer in his hand, a stone fell
into the Pot: then did he set down the pot upon the Table. When some Men came
to be with them that night, they were speaking how convenient it would be to
have a Tub filled with Water, to stand ready, in case they should have occasion
to use it, and as they were going out of the door to prepare it, the fire again
kindled in the Milk-house, and suddenly the whole house was on fire, but most
of the Goods and Household Stuff were carried out and preserved: The fire was a
strange fire, very white, and not singing their hands when they pulled the
things out of it.

The next day the Household Stuff was carried to another house, wherein was a
Family: but those were to be in one end of the House, and the other, in the
other end. But before the Man and his Wife went to Bed, there was dust thrown
upon them, which so troubled them, that the Man having another Man with them,
and a Candle and Lanthorn in his hand, came up to me (says my Author) who was
in Bed, and asleep, but when I was awakened, I heard him say, The hand of God
still pursues me, and so he entreated me to go down with him, and accordingly I
and my Brother went down, where we found them in the house, greatly troubled by
reason of things that were thrown about, and some things were thrown presently
after we came in. Hereupon we went to Prayer, and as I was kneeling down, dust
was thrown upon me, but afterward all was quiet, so long as we were (...)
Prayer. When we arose from Prayer, I applied my self to the reading of a
portion of Scripture, which was Psalm.91. The Man standing by me, and holding
the Candle, but presently something did beat out the Light; whereupon the Man
said, That some body else must hold it. Presently a Knife was thrown at me,
which fell behind me; my Brother said, he saw it come. Then a chopping Knife
was thrown (I think at the Man's Wife) whereupon the Man said, Things are
thrown at others for my sake. At length he fell upon his knees, and confessed
that he had been an Hypoerite, and a Pilfering Fellow, and that he had robbed
his Master, etc. and he wa^ willing to separate the things which he had taken
wrongfully from the rest, which he did accordingly; laying forth several things
which he said, were none of his, naming the persons from whom he had taken
them: And as a great Chest was carrying forth, Trenchers, Platters, and other
things were thrown about in so dreadful a manner, that one not much noted for
Religion, said, pray you let us go to Prayer; and indeed that was our only
Refuge, so to go to God; and so we spent our time as well as we could, in
Prayer, reading some portions of Scripture; and singing of Psalms: And though
diverse things were thrown, as a Dish several times, so that once I had a smart
blow on the Cheek with a Dish, and the Man that lived in the House had his
Boots thrown at him, and a chopping Knife twice; Crabs out of a Tub standing in
the midst of the room, a fire Brand though without fire, and an hammer thrown
twice, and a Bible. The Man's Wife who lived in the house, usually took up the
things thus thrown; yet still in time of Prayer, all was quiet. In the morning
after I had prayed (before which Prayer I was hit with a Dish) my Brother and I
came away, and as we were coming near home, we turned aside to speak with a
Friend, but before we got home, we heard that the house was on fire: hereupon
they sent for me again, and in the mean time, they carried out their Goods,
pulled off the Thatch, and quenched the fire; yet ( as I beard) it kindled
again, and again, till all the Man's Goods were carried out: and when these
People whose House was burnt down to the ground, together with all their Goods,
were removed into the Field, all was quiet in this second house; But some
things were thrown in the Field; and in the afternoon, when another Minister
and I went to them, some assured us that some things had been thrown. This was
November II. the night following some noise was heard among the Household Stuff,
as was testified to me.

Thus these poor Creatures were distressed, their House was burned down, that
to which they were removed several times fied, so that neither they nor their
Goods might stay any longer there, nor durst any other receive them: but they,
with their Goods were forced to lie in the open Field for diverse days and
nights together; being made a sad spectacle to all sorts of people that came
far and near, to see and hear of the Business. Hereupon I sent to some
neighboring Ministers, to join with us in keeping a Fast on November 15. and
four spent the time in Prayer and Preaching. The Sermons were upon these Texts,
Joh 11. 13. If thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out thine hands toward
him: if Iniquity be in thine hand, put it far away, and let not wickedness
dwell in thy Tabernacles: For then shall thou lift up thy Face without spot;
yea, thou shall be steadfast, and shall not be afraid; etc. Amos 3. 6. Shall a
Trumpet be blown in the City, and the People not be afraid? shall there be evil
in a City and the LORD has not done it? Luke 13. 2, 3. etc. suppose ye that
these Galileans were sinners above all the Galileans, because they suffered
such things? I tell you nay: But except ye Repent, ye shall all likewise
perish: or those eighteen, etc. Isai. 33. ^^.^5,16. The Sinners in Sion are
afraid, fearfulness has surprised the Hypocrites. Who among us shall dwell
with devouring fire? Who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? He
that walks righteously and speaks uprightly: he that despises the gain of
Oppression, that shakes his hand from holding Bribes, that stops his Ears
from hearing of blood, and shutt^eth his eyes from seeing of evil: He shall
dwell on high. His place of desire shall be the munitions of Rocks: Bread shall
be given him, his Water shall be sure.

The distressed persons attended diligently, and a great Congregation was
assembled. These providential dispensations were not ordinary; yet there was a
seeming blur cast, though not on the whole yet upon some part of it; for their
Servant Girl was at last found throwing some things: and she afterward
confessed that an old Woman came to her, November 7. a little before these
things come to pass, and told her that her Master and Dame were bewitched, and
that they should hear a great fluttering about their house for the space of two
days; she said also, that the old Woman told her, that she must hurl things at
her Master and Dame, and withal bad her not to tell, for if she did the Devil
would have her: and she confessed that she hurled the Firebrand, an Hammer,
and an iron Tack; and said; that she did it because the old Woman bad her, and
said to her, that if she hurled things about the House, it would be the better.
But ^^^^es the throwing of the things about, there were other passages of
providence very observable and remarkable. One House was at several times
strangely fired, and notwithstanding the warning they had, at last quite burned
down: and another house to whom they removed, greatly molested, and at length
fired. Besides the efficacy of Prayer is most observable, for the encouragement
of the Duty, and God's Omniscient and Omnipotent providence wonderfully
magnified, thus to discover the Hypocrisy and Theft of the Man, and yet
withal, graciously and mercifully delivering them. For though they were not
wholly delivered when the Fast was first appointed; yet after the Fast they
were fully freed, and not at all any more troubled in that manner. Thus far is
Mr. Bennets Relation.

That the things which have been related in the Chapter immediately praeceding,
came not to pass without the operation of Daemens is so manifest, as that I
shall not spend many words concerning it. Though whether the afflicted persons
were only possessed, or bewitched, or both, may be disputed. As for the Maid at
Groton, she was then thought to be under bodily possession: Her uttering many
things (some of which were Diabolical Railings) without using the Organs of
speech, and being able sometimes to act above humane strength, argued an
extraordinary etc. Satanical operation, Concerning the Woman in Berwick. Evil
Spirits without being set on^ work by Instruments, have sometimes caused she
like Molestation; but commonly such things are occasioned by Witchcraft. Dr.
Balthazar Han (who was chief Physician to the Prince Elector of Saxony) relates
concerning one of his Patients: that in November 1634. She was to the amazement
of all Spectators, pricked and miserably beaten by an invisible hand; so as
that her body from head to foot was wounded, as if she had been whipped with
Thorns. Sometimes a perfect sign of the Cross was imprinted in her skin;
Sometimes the usual configurations whereby Astronomers denote the Caelestial
Bodies, such as (...) and their Conjunctions, and oppositions by (...) and the
Characters used by Chemists (...) etc. (in which Sciences, though that be not
usual for those of her Sex, she was versed) These Characters would remain for
several Weeks after the invisible hand had violently impressed them on her
body; also a Needle was thrust into her foot, which caused it to bleed. Once
she took the Needle and put it into the fire; and then an Old Woman to whom she
had given some of her wearing Linen, appeared to her with a staff in her hand,
striking her with a cruel blow, etc. saying Give me my Needle. At last the
miserable Patient by constant attendance to prayer and other Religious
Exercises was delivered from her affliction. Many Instances of an alike nature
to this, are to be seen in the Writings of those that Treat upon Subjects of
this kind. Sometimes (as Voetius and others observe) bodily possessions by evil
Spirits are an effect of Witchcraft. Examples confirming this, are mentioned
by Hier^m, in the life of Hilarion; Theodoret in his History of the Fathers,
and by Anastasius. And there are more Instances in Sprenger, and in Tyraeus de
Daemoniacis. It may be Ann Cole of Hartford might be subject to both of these
miseries at the same time. Though she be (and then was) esteemed a truly pious
Christian; such amazing Afflictions may befall the Righteous as well as the
Wicked in this World. The holy Body of Job, that so his patience might be
tried, was sorely handled by Satan. We read in the Gospel of a Daughter of
Abraham, whom Satan had bound for eighteen years, Luke 13. 16. Mary Magdalen,
and several others who had been molested and possessed by Evil Spirits, yet
belonged to God, and are now in Heaven. So ^^ght Ann Cole be a true Christian,
and yet be for a time under Satan's power as has been ^olated. And that her
Malady was not a mere natural Disease, is past all doubt, inasmuch as in those
strange Paroxysmes wherewith she was at times surprised, the tone of her
Discourse would sometimes be after a Language unknown to her. Lemnius indeed
supposes that Melancholy Humors may cause persons not only to divine, but to
speak with strange Tongues; And Forestus Lib. 10. observat 19.) does not
contradict his Opinion. But the unreasonableness of that Fancy has been
sufficiently evinced by sundry Learned Men. Vide Johnston, Thaumatograph,
Sect.10. Chap.7. Art.1. La Torr, Disp. 27. How shall that be in the Mouth which
never was in the mind; and how should that be in the mind, which never came
there through the outward senses? This cannot be without some supernatural
influence. As when things destitute of Reason, have given rational Answers unto
what has been demanded of them; it must needs have proceeded from the operation
of a supernatural Agent. It is reported that one of the Popes in way of
pleasan^y, saying to a Parrat, what art thou thinking of? the Parrat
immediately replied, I have considered the days of old, the years of ancient
times; at the which, Consternation fell upon the Pope and others that heard the
Words, concluding that the Devil spoke in the Parrat, abusing Scripture
Expressions; whereupon they caused it to be killed. De La Cerda speaks of a
Crow, that did discourse rationally; undoubtedly, it was acted by a
Caco-Daemon: Some write of A^billes his Horse, and that Simon Magus had a Dog
that would. Discourse with him; yea, it is storied concerning the River Causus,
and the Keel of Ship Argus; and of many Statues, that they have been heard
speaking. The Image of Memnon in Egypt, as the rising Sun shined upon its
Mouth began to speak. The Image of Juno Moneta, being asked if she would be
removed to Rome: Replied, that she would. The Image of Fortune being set up,
said rite me consacrastis. Valor. Maxim. Lib. I Capult. A Gymnosophist in
Ethiopia caused an Elm with a low and soft voice to salute Apollonius. Such
things must needs be the operation of Caco-Daemons. The like is to be
concluded, when any shall utter themselves in Languages which they were never
learned. It is not they but a Spirit which speaks in them. The Noble Man whom
Fernelius Writes of, was first known to be possessed by a Demon, inasmuch as
many Sentences uttered by him were Greek, in which Languages the Diseased
person had no knowledge. A Maid in Frankfor^ was concluded to be possessed, it
that when in her Fits, she could speak the High Dutch Language perfectly,
though she never learned it. Manlius writes of a possessed Woman, who used to
speak Latin, and Greek to the admiration of all that heard it.

I remember an Honorable Gentleman told me; that when he was at Summers in
France a Woman there was possessed with a Devil; many Learned Divines, both
Protestants and Papists discoursing with her; she would readily answer them,
not only in the French Tongue, but in Latin, Greek or Hebrew. But when one Mr.
Duncan, after he had Dis^^^sed and received Answers in more learned Languages,
spoke to her in the British tongue, the Demon made no Reply; which occasioned
great wonderment, and too much sporting about a sad and serious matter.

CHAP. VII.
Concerning Apparitions. That they are not so frequent in places where the
Gospel prevails as in dark corners of the Earth. That good Angels do
sometimes visibly appear. Confirmed by several Histories. That Caco-daemons
oftentimes pretend to be good Angels. That Satan may appear in the likeness of
Holy men; proved by notable Instances. Concerning the appearance of Persons
Deceased. The procuring cause thereof is usually some sin committed. Some late
remarkable Examples. Of Men's Covenanting to appear after their Death. It is an
heavy judgment when places are infested with such doleful Specter.

As yet no place, nor a^^ person in New England (excepting the Instances before
mentioned) have been troubled with Aparitions: Some indeed have given out, that
I know not what Specter were seen by them; but upon enquiry, I cannot find
that there was any thing therein, more than Fancy, and frightful
Apprehensions without sufficient ground. Nevertheless, that Spirits have
sometimes really (as well as imaginarily) appeared to Mortals in the World, is
amongst sober Men beyond contrioversie. And that such things were of old taken
notice of, we may rationally conclude from that Scripture, Luke 24. 37. where
it is said, that the Disciples were terrified and affrighted, and supposed that
they had seen a Spirit. It is observable, that such frightful Specter do most
frequently show themselves in places where the light of the Gospel has not
prevailed. Some have propounded it as a question worthy the inquiring into;
What should be the reason that Demons did ordinarily infest the Gentiles of
old, as also the East and West Indians of later times, and that Popish
Countries are still commonly and grievously molested by them; but in England,
and Scotland, and in the united Provinces, and in all Lands where the Reformed
Religion has taken place, such things are more rare. Popish Authors do
acknowledge that as to matter of fact it is really thus; and the reason which
some of them assign for it, is, that the Devils are so sure of their Interest
in Heretical Nations, as that they pass over them, and come and molest Papists,
whom they are most afraid of losing. But they should rather have attributed it
to the Light of the Gospel, and the power of Christ going along therewith.
Justin Martyr, Tertullian, and others observe that upon the first promulgation
of the Gospel, those Diabolical Oracles, whereby Satan had miserably deceived
the Nations, were silenced; in which respect the Word of Christ Luk.10.17. was
wonderfully fulfilled. The like may be said as to Protestant being less imposed
upon then Popish Nations, by deceitful Demons. It is moreover, sometimes very
difficult to pass a true judgment of the Specter which do appear, whether
they are good or evil Angels, or the Spirits of deceased men. That Holy Angels
were frequently seen in old times, we are from the Scriptures of truth assured.
And that the Angelical ministration does still continue is past doubt,
Heb.1.14. But their visible appearance is less frequent than formerly. They do
invisibly perform many a good Office for the Heirs of Salvation continually.
Nor is it to be questioned, but they may still appear visibly, when the work
which they are sent about cannot otherwise be performed. I would not reject as
fabulous all those passages which are related by Judicious Authors referring to
this subject.

At a time when Grynaeus, Melancthon, and several other learned Men were
discoursing together at an House in Spyres, there came a Man of very grave and
godly countenance into the House, desiring to speak with Melancthon; who going
forth to him, he told him that within one hour some Officers would be at that
house to apprehend Grynaeus, and therefore required Melancthon to advise
Grynaeus to flee out of that City; and having so spoken, he vanished out of
sight. Melancthon returning into the room, recounted the words of this strange
Monitor; whereupon Grynaeus instantly departed; and he had no sooner Boated
himself upon the Rhine, but Officers came to lay hold of him. This Story is
mentioned by Melancthon in his Commentary upon Daniel. And he concludes that
the Man who had appeared to him was indeed an Angel, sent in order to Grynaeus
his being delivered from the bloody hands of them that sought his life. Many
Instances like to this I could mention. But I shall only take notice of a
strange providence which came to pass of late years; the particulars whereof
are known to some who I suppose may be still living.

I find the History of the matter I intend in Mr. Clark's Examples, Vol. 2.
Page 18, 19. It is in brief as follows;

One Samuel Wallas of Stamford in Lincolnshire, having been in a Consumption
for thirteen years, was worn away to a very skeleton and lay bedridden for four
years. But April 9. 1659. being the Lords Day, about 6 h. P.M. Finding himself
somewhat revived, he got out of the Bed, and as he was reading a Book
Entitled, Abraham's suit for Sodom, he heard some body knock at the Door.
Whereupon (there being none then in the house but himself) he took a staff in
the one hand, and leaning to the wall with the other, came to the door, and
opening it, a comely and grave old Man of a fresh complexion, with white curled
Hair, entered; and after walking several times about the room, said to him,
Friend, I perceive you are not well. To whom Wallas replied, he had been ill
many years, and that the Doctors said his Disease was a Consumption, and past
cure, and that he was a poor Man, and not able to follow their costly
prescriptions, only he committed himself and life into the hands of God, to
dispose of as he pleased. To whom the Man replied, Thou say very well, be
sure to fear God, and serve him; and remember to observe what now I say to
thee; Tomorrow morning go into the Garden, and there take two leaves of red
Sage, and one of Blood-wort; and put those three Leaves into a cup of small
Beer, and drink thereof as often as need requires; the fourth Morning cast away
those Leaves, and put in fresh ones, thus do for twelve days together; and
thou shall find e're these twelve days be expired, through the help of God thy
Disease will be cured, and the frame of thy body altered. Also he told him that
after his strength was somewhat recovered, he should change the Air, and go
three or four Miles off; and that within a Month he should find that the
Clothes which he had on his Back would then be too strait for him: Having
spoken these things, he again charged Samuel Wallas to remember the Directions
given to him, but above all things to fear God, and serve him. Wallas asked
him, if he would eat any thing? unto whom he answered, No Friend, the Lord
Christ is sufficient for me. Seldom do I drink any thing but what comes from
the Rock. So wishing the Lord of Heaven to be with him, he departed. Samuel
Wallas saw him go out of the door, and went to shut the door after him, at
which he returned half way into the Entry again, saying Friend, Remember what I
have said to you, and do it, but above all fear God, and serve him. Wallas
beheld the Man passing in the Street, but none else observed him, though some
were then standing in the doors opposite to Wallas his House. And although it
Rained when this Grave Person came into the House, and had done so all that
day, yet he had not one space of wet or dirt upon him. Wallas followed the
Directions prescribed, and was restored to his Health within the days
mentioned. The Fame of this strange Providence being noised abroad, sundry
Ministers met at Stamford, to consider and consult about it, who concluded that
this cure was wrought by a good Angel, sent from Heaven upon that Errand.
However it is not impossible, but that Holy Angels may appear, and visibly
converse with some. Yet for any to desire such a thing is unwarrantable, and
exceeding dangerous. For thereby some have been imposed upon by wicked Demons,
who know how to transform themselves into Angels of Light.

Bodinus has a strange Relation of a Man that prayed much for the assistance
of an Angel; and after that for above thirty years together, he thought his
prayer was heard; being often admonished of his Errors by a Caelestial Monitor,
as he apprehended, who once appeared visibly in the form of a Child; otherwhile
in an orb of Light. Would sometimes speak to him when he saw nothing. Yet some
fear that this Spirit which he took to be his good Genius was a subtle
Cacodaemon. Plato writes concerning Socrates, that he had a good Genius
attending him, which would still admonish him if he were about to do any thing
that would prove ill or unhappy.

The Story of the Familiarity which was between Dr. Dee and Kellet, with the
Spirits which used to appear to them, is famously known. Those Demons would
pretend to discover rare Mysteries to them, and at ^^nes would give them good
Advices in many things, so that they verily thought they had had extraordinary
communion with Holy Angels, whena^ it is certain they were deceived by subtle
and unclean. Devils, since the spirits they conversed with, did at last advise
them to break the seventh Commandment of the Moral Law. Satan to insinuate
himself and carry on a w^^ked design, will sometimes seem to persuade Men unto
great Acts of Piety.

Remigius (and from him others) write of a young Man whose Name was Theodore
Maillot, unto whom a Demon appearing, advised him to reform his life, to
abstain from Drunkenness, Therts, Uncleanness, and the like evils; and to Fast
twice a Week, to be constant in attendance upon public worship, and to be very
charitable to the Poor.

The like pious Advice did another Demon follow a certain Woman with, unto
whom he appeared. Could a good Angel have given better Counsel? but this was
Satan's policy, hoping that thereby he should have gained an advantage to take
silly Souls alive in his cruel Snare. Like as Thieves upon the Road will
sometimes enter into Religious Discourse, that so their fellow-Travellers may
have good thoughts of them, and be the more easily dispoyled by them. And as
the evil Spirit will speak good Words, so does he sometimes appear in the
likeness of good Men, to the end that he may the more effectually deceive and
delude all such as shall be so unhappy as to entertain converses with him. No
doubt but that he knows how to transform himself into the shape of not only an
ordinary Saint, but of an Apostle, or holy Prophet of God, 2 Cor.11.13,14. This
we may gather from the sacred History of dead Samuel's appearing to Saul. Some
are of Opinion that real Samuel spoke to Saul, his Soul being by Magical
incantations returned into his Body, so diverse of the Fathers and Schoolmen;
also Mendoza, Delrio, and other Popish Authors. Of late M. Glanvil and Dr.
Windet, do inpart favor that notion. But Tertullian, and the Author of the
Quest. and Respons. which pass under the Name of Justin Martyr are of the
judgment, that a lying Demon appeared to Saul in Samuel's likeness. Our
Protestant Divines generally are of this judgment. It was customary amongst
the Gentiles for Magicians and Necromancers to cause dead persons to appear,
and they would bring whomsoever they were desired to call for. Thus did a
Wizard by Pompeys command, call a dead Soldier, of whom he enquired of the
event of the Pharsalic War, vide Lucan Lib.6. Many Examples to this purpose,
are Recorded in the Histories of former times; and mentioned by the old Poets.
Those Apparitions were Cacodaemons, which feigned themselves to be the Spirits
of Men departed. I see no cogent reason why we should not conclude the like
with respect unto Samuel's appearing unto Saul. Most certain it is, that the
Souls of holy Men departed, are not under the power of Devils, much less of
Magicians to bring them hither when they please. As for those that are gone
into the other World, there is a Gulf fixed, that if men would they cannot pass
into this World again without leave, Luk.16.26. If Dives could not bring
Lazarus his Soul out of Abraham's Bosom, how the Witch of Endor should be able
to bring Samuel's Soul from thence I know not. Lyra (and from him others)
pretends that God then interposed and sent real Samuel as he unexpectedly
appeared to Baalam, when employed about his Magical impostures. But I dare not
believe that the Holy God, or the true Samuel would seem so far to countenance
Necromancie or Psycomancy as this would be, should the Soul of Samuel really
return into the World, when a Witch called for him, Saul desiring that it might
be so. This Opinion establishes Necromancy, the main Principal upon which that
cursed and lying Art is built, being this, that it is possible for men to cause
the Souls of dead persons to be brought back again. This seeming Samuel did not
at all ascribe his appearance to the extraordinary Providence of God, but
rather to the Devil, since he complained that Saul had by the Witch disquieted
him. The appearing Samuel was seen ascending out of the Earth, whenas the true
Samuel would rather have appeared as descending from Heaven. Moreover the words
of the Witches, Samuel, when he said, tommorrow thou and thy Sons shall be with
me, 1 Samuel.29.18. are hardly consistent with truth. Nor is it likely, that the
true Samuel would Preach nothing but Desperation to Saul, without so much as
once exhorting him in a way of Repentance, to endeavor that his peace might be
made with that God whom he had provoked by his sins, V. P. Martyr. in 1 Samuel.28.
P.161,162. and Voet. de Spectris Page 1006. This Instance then, does
suffi^cently prove that Satan may appear in the shape of an holy Man. Some
acknowledge that he may do so as to persons that are dead, but that he cannot
personate good and innocent Men who are still living. It is by some reported,
that Mr. Cotton did once deliver such a notion. Nothing is more frequent, then
for the judgment of worthy Men to be misrepresented after they are gone, and
not capable of clearing themselves. I know Mr. Cotton was a Man of great
reading, and of deep Judgment. I shall therefore rather suppose that they who
relate Mr. Cotton's Opinion, did themselves mistake him, then believe that a
Man so learned and wise, would express himself, as some say he did. Sure I am,
that Authentic Historians mention Examples to the contrary.

Memorable is that which Lavater (de spectris Part. I Cap.19. P. mi^i 86.) has
testified, sc. That the Prefect of Zurick traveling abroad with his Servant
betimes in the Morning, they saw an honest Citizen committing nefandous
villainy, at the which being astonished, they returned back, and knocking at the
Citizens door, they found him in his own House, nor had he been abroad that
Morning, so that what the Prefect and his Servant beheld, appeared to be
nothing else but a Diabolical illusion; a spiteful Demon designing to blast
the credit, and take away the life of an innocent man. It is also reported by
Albertus Granzius (Lib. 4. Cap. 5.) that Kunegund the Empress, was for some
time thought to be guilty of Adultery, by reason that a Noble person was
frequently seen going out of her Chamber; but it after appeared that the
suspected Noble person had not been there, only a Demon in his shape. I
concern not my self, with the Authentickness of that Relation. The Matter in
hand is sufficiently confirmed by a thing that happened more lately, and nearer
home: For if any of the old Puritans, who, lived in Colchester in England,
fifty years ago, be yet surviving, they can doubtless remember the strange
things which happened to one Mr. Earl, a young man in those days. The Devil did
then frequently appear to him in the shape of some of his acquaintance, and
would persuade him to three things. 1. That he should abstain from Praying. 2.
That he should not frequent Church-Meetings. 3. That he should never Marry. But
he did not hearken to these suggestions. The night wherein he was Married, soon
after he and his Wife were Bedded, the Devil came into the room, and pulled two
of his Teeth out of his head, which put him to great pain; whereupon he cried
out, and when his Friends came in, they found his Mouth bloody, and used means
to ease his pain. This Mr. Earl was afterward for the space of ten years ever
and anon assaulted by the Devil, who under many appearances of his Friends, did
endeavor to seduce him. There were their two famous Men Ministers of those
parts, viz. Mr. John Rogers of Dedham, (who was Father to the late eminent Mr.
Nathaniel Rogers of Ipswich in New England) and Mr. Liddal of Colchester. With
these Mr. Earl did converse for comfort and instruction; but chiefly with Mr.
Liddal, then whom there was not a man more eminent for Godliness. It fell out
once that the Devil came to Mr. Earl in Mr. Liddal's shape, and as Mr. Earl's
custom was, he did propose to the seeming Mr. Liddal his cases of Conscience,
but found that Mr. Liddal did not Discourse after his ordinary rate, which made
him suspect whether he was not imposed upon by a deceitful Demon. The next Day
going to Mr. Liddal's House, he enquired whether he was with him the Day
before, Mr. Liddal told him that he was not; then said Mr. Earl it was my Enemy
in your shape. What a miserable Man am I, that know not when I speak with my
Enemy or with my Friend? To which Mr. Liddal replied, if you would know when
you speak with a Spirit or with a Man, remember and follow the advice of
Christ; who when he appeared to his Disciples after his Resurrection, and they
thought he had been a Spirit, and were therefore troubled; he said to them,
bandle me and see, for a Spirit has not Flesh and Bones as you see me have,
Luk.24.39. This Advice Mr. Earl followed. For not long after the Devil coming
to him in Mr. Liddal's shape, he went to take hold on his Arms, but could feel
no substance, only a vanishing shadow. It seems that this Mr. Earl was once an
Athiest, that did not believe that the^e was either God or Devil, and would of
on walk in solitary and dismal places, wishing for the fight of a Spirit; and
that he was first assaulted by a Devil in a Churchyard. And though God
mercifully gave him Repentance yet he was miserably haunted with an evil Spirit
all his days. I find that Mr. Clark in his first Vol. of Examples, Chap. 104.
P.510. has some part of this strange Providence, but he mentions not Mr.
Earl's Name. A Gentleman worthy of credit affirmed this Relation to be most
certainly true, according to the particulars which have been declared. I have
thought it therefore not unworthy the publication.

There is another Remarkable Passage to this purpose, which happened of later
years, wherein the Turkish Chaous Baptized at London, January 30. A. D. 1658.
was concerned. This Chaous being alone in his Chamber, 3. h.P.M. a person in
the likeness of Mr. Dury, the Minister with whom he did most ordinarily
converse, came and sat by him. This seeming Mr. Dury told him, that he had
waited with a great deal of patience as to the matter of his Baptism; and that
himself had endeavored by all means possible to procure it, to be performed
with public Countenance; and to that effect, had dealt with Richard, and
several of his Counsel, but that now he perceived that it was in vain to strive
or wait longer. And therefore advised him not to be much troubled at it, but
setting his mind at rest, to leave these thoughts, and take up his resolution
another way. When the Chaous heard this Discourse, being much perplexed in his
Spirit, he lifted up his hands and eyes to Heaven, uttering Words to this
effect. O my Lord Jesus Christ, what a miserable thing is this, that a true
Christian cannot be owned by other Christians; that one who believes on thee
cannot be Baptized into thy Name. When he had so spoken, looking down, he saw
no body, the appearance of Mr. Dury being vanished, which was at first an
amazement to him; but recollecting himself, he began to rejoice, as hoping that
Satan would be disappointed of his Plot. About 8 h. at night, the true Mr. Dury
met with the Chaous who acquainted him with what happened to him, so did he more
fully understand how he had been imposed upon by Satan. The mentioned
Instances, are enough to prove that the Devil may possibly appear in the shape
of good Men, and that not only of such as are dead, but of the still living. It
might as a further confirmation of the truth we assert, have been here noted,
that the Devil does frequently amongst the Papists visibly appear, pretending
to be Christ himself, as their own Authors do acknowledge. They affirm, that he
came in the shape of Christ to Pachomius and to St. Martin. So has he often
appeared in the Form of the Virgin Mary, whereby miserable Souls have been
seduced into gross Idolatries. It is likewise reported, that when Luther had
spent a Day in Fasting and Prayer, there appeared to him one seeming to be
Christ;but Luther said to him, away thou confounded Devil, I will have no
Christ but what is in my Bible, whereupon the Apparition vanished. As for the
Spirits of Men deceased, it is certain they cannot reassume their Bodies, nor
yet come to Men in this World when they will, or without a permission from him,
in whose hand they are. Chrysostom in his second Sermon concerning Lazarus,
says that Demons would oftentimes appear, falsely pretending themselves to be
the Souls of some lately dead. He says, that he himself knew many Daemoniacks,
that the Spirits in them would feign the voices of men lately killed, and would
discover the secrets of such Persons, professing that they were the Souls of
those very men. But those were no other then devilish lies. Upon which account
men had need be exceeding wary what credit they give unto, or how they
entertain communion with such Specter. I do not say that all such Apparitions
are Diabolical. Only that many of them are so. And as yet I have not met with
any (...) whereby the certain appearance of a Person Deceased, may be
infallibly discerned from a mere Diabolical illusion. The Rules of judging in
this case described by Malderus are very fallible.

As for the moving and procuring cause of such Apparitions, commonly it is by
reason of some sin not discoverable in any other way. Either some act of
injustice done, or it may be some Murder committed. Platina, Nauclerus, and
others relate, that Pope Benedict. 8 did after his death appear sitting upon a
black Horse before a Bishop of his acquaintance, declaring the reason to be, in
that he had in his life time nefariously consumed a great sum of Money, which
belong^^ to the Poor. And there are fresh Examples to this purpose lately
published in the second Edition of Mr. Glanvils Sadducismus Triumphatus. He
there speaks of a Man in Guilford, unto whom belonged some Copyhold Land,
which was to descend to his Children, he dying, leaving no Child born, his
Brother took possession of the Estate. So it happened that the deceased Man's
Wife conceived with Child but a little before her Husbands death, which after
she perceived, by the Advice of her Neighbors, she told her Brother in Law how
matters were circumstanced; he raised upon her, calling her Whore, and said he
would not be fooled out of his Estate so. The poor Woman went home troubled,
that not only her Child should lose the Land, but which was worse, that she
should be thought an Whore. In due time she was Delivered of a Son. Some time
after which, as her Brother in Law was going out of the Field, his dead Brother
(the Father of the injured Child) appeared to him at the Style, and bid him
give up the Land to the Child, for it was his Right. The Brother being greatly
affrighted at this Spectre, ran away, and not long after came to his Sister,
saying, she had sent the Devil to him, and bid her take the Land; and her Son
is now possessed of it.

The same Author relates, that the Wife of Dr. Bretton of Deptford (being a
person of extraordinary Piety) did appear after her Death. A Maid of hers,
whose name was Alice (for whom in her life time she had a great kindness)
Married a near Neighbor. As this Alice was rocking her Infant in the night,
some one knocking at the door, she arose and opened it, and was surprised by
the sight of a Gentlewoman, not to be distinguished from her late Mistress. At
the first sight she expressed great amazement, and said were not my Mistress
dead I should conclude you are she. The Apparition replied, I am she which was
your Mistress; and withal added, that she had a business of great importance to
employ her in, and that she must immediately go a little way with her. Alice
trembled, and entreated her to go to her Master, who was sitter to be employed
than she, The seeming Mistress replied, that she had been in the Chamber of him
who was once her Husband, but he was asleep; nor had she any Commission to
awake him. Alice then objected that her Child was apt to cry vehemently, and
should she leave it, some hurt might come to him. The Apparition replied, the
Child shall sleep until you return. Seeing there was no avoiding it; Alice
followed her over the Style into a large Field, who said, observe how much of
this Field I measure with my feet, and when she had took a good large leisurly
compass, she said, all this belongs to the Poor; it being gotten from them by
wrongful means, and charged her to go and tell her Brother, whose it was at
that time, that he should give it up to the poor again forthwith as he loved
her and his Deceased Mother. This Brother was not the person that did this
unjust act, but his Father. She added, that she was the more concerned, because
her Name was made use of in some Writing that related to this Land. Alice asked
her how she should satisfy her Brother that this was no Cheat or Delusion of
her Fancy? She replied, tell him this Secret which he knows that only himself
and I am privy to, and he will believe you. Alice promised her to go on this
Errand. She entertained her the rest of the night with divine Discourse, and
Heavenly Exhortations. But when the twilight appeared, the Spectre said, I must
be seen by none but your self, and so Disappeared. Immediately Alice makes have
home, being thoughtful for her Child, but found it as the Spectre said, fast
asleep in the Cradle. That Day she went to her Master, the Doctor, who amazed
at the account she gave, sent her to his Brother in Law. He at the first
hearing of Alice's Story, laughed at it heartily; supposing her to be troubled
with strange whimsies. But then she told him of the Secret, which her appearing
Mistress the Gentleman's Sister, had revealed; upon which he presently changed
his countenance, and told her he would give the Poor their own, which
accordingly he did, and they now enjoy it. D. Bretton himself (being a Person
of great sincerity) gave a large Narrative of his Wives Apparition, to several;
and amongst others to Dr. Whichcot. And this Narrative was attested unto by Mr.
Edward Fowler, Feb. 16. 1680. See Mr. Glanvil's Collection of Relations, P.
197. In the same Book, P. 243. He relates concerning one Fran^^ Taverner, that
in September 1662. riding late at night from Hilbrough in Ireland there
appeared to him one in the likeness of James Haddock, formerly an Inhabitant in
Malone, where he Died five years before. Taverner asked him who he was? the
Spectre replied, I am James Haddock; you may call me to mind by this Token,
that about five years ago, I and two other Friends were at your Fathers house,
and you by your Fathers appointment brought us some Nuts, therefore be not
afraid. And told him if he would ride along with him he would acquaint him with
a business he had to deliver to him. Which Taverner refused to do; upon his
going from the Spectre, he heard hideous scrieches and noises, to his great
amazement. The night after there appeared again to him, the likeness of James
Haddock; telling him, that the Woman, who had been his Wife, when living; was
now Married unto one Davis in Malone; and that the said Davis and his Wife
wronged the Son of James Haddock; and that the Will of Haddock, who had given a
Lease to his Son, was not fulfilled; and therefore he desired Taverner to
acquaint them therewith, and to see his Son righted. Taverner neglected to
deliver his message, whereupon the Spectre appeared again unto him in diverse
formidable shapes, threatening to tear him in pieces, if he did not do as he was
required. This made him leave his House where he dwelt in the Mountains and
remove to the Town of Belfast, where it appeared to him again in the house of
one Pierce, severely threatening of him. Upon which Taverner being much troubled
in his Spirit, acquainted some of his Friends with his perplexity. They take
Advice from Dr. Downs, then Minister in Belfast. and Mr. James South, Chaplain
to the Lord Chichester; who went with Taverner to the house of Davis, and in
their presence he declared to her, that he could not be quiet for the Ghost of
her former Husband James Haddock, who threatened to tear him in pieces, if he
did not tell her she must right John Haddock her Son by him, in a Lease wherein
she and Davis her now Husband had wronged him. Two nights after the Spectre
came to him again, looking pleasantly upon him, asking if he had done the
message? He answered, he had. Then he was told, he must do the like to the
Executors. The Day following Dr. Jeremie Tailor Bishop of Down, Conner, and
Dromore, being to keep Court at Dromore; ordered his Secretary (Thomas Alcock)
to send for Taverner, who accordingly came, and was strictly examined. The
Bishop advised him, the next time the Spectre appeared to him, to ask him these
Questions: When^^ are you? Are you a good or a bad Spirit? where is your abode?
what station do you hold? How are you Regimented in the other World? And what
is the reason that you appear for the relief of your Son in so small a matter,
when so many Widows and Orphans are oppressed in the World and none of their
Relations appear as you do to right them? That night Taverner lodged at my Lord
Conways, where he saw the Spectre coming over a Wall; and approaching near to
him, asked if he had done his Message to the Executor also? He replied, he had,
and wondered that he should be still troubled. The Apparition bid him not be
afraid, for it would not hurt him, nor appear to him any more, but to the
Executor, if the Orphan were not righted. Taverners Brother being by, put him
in mind to propound the Bishops Questions to the Spirit. Which he did; but the
Spectre gave no answer to them; only seemed to crawl on his hands and feet over
the Wall again, and vanished with a melodious Harmony. The persons concerned
about the Lease (much against their wills) disposed of it for the use of
Haddock's Son, only for fear lest the Apparition should molest them also. Thus
concerning this. Before I pass to the next Relation, I cannot but Animadvert
upon what is here expressed, concerning the Questions which the Bishop would
needs have propounded to, and resolved by this Spectre. I am persuaded, that
the Apostle Paul who speaks of a Man's Intruding into those things which be has
not seen, Col.2.18. would hardly have given such counsel as the Bishop did. One
of his Questions, ( viz. Are you a good or a bad Spirit?) seems to be a
needless and impertinent enquiry. For good Angels never appear in the shape of
dead Men; but evil and wicked Spirits have oftentimes done so. His other
Queries savor too much of vain curiosity. They bring to mind what is by that
great Historian Thuanus (Lib. 130. Page 1136.) reported concerning Peter Cotton
the Jesuit, who having a great desire to be satisfied about some Questions
which no Man living could resolve him in; he applied himself to a Maid who was
possessed with a Devil, charging the Spirit in her to resolve his Proposals.
Some of which were relating to this World, e. g. He desired the Devil, if he
could, to rest him when Calvinism would be extinguished; And what would be the
most effectual means to turn the Kingdom of England from the Protestant to the
Popish Religion. What would be the issue of the Wars and great designs then on
foot in the World? Other of his Enquiries respected the Old World, e. g. How
Noah could take the living Creatures that were brought into the Ark? Who those
Sons of God were that loved the Daughters of Men? Whether Serpents went upon
feet before Adam's Fall, etc. Some of his Questions respected the other World;
He would have the Spirit to resolve him, How long the fallen Angels were in
Heaven before they were cast down from thence? And what is the most evident
place in the Scripture to prove that there is a Purgatory? Who are the seven
Spirits that stand before the Throne of God? Who is the King of the
Archangels? Where Paradise is? Now let the Reader judge wheter D. Tailors
Questions, when he would have the Spectre resolve him, Where is your abode?
What station do you hold? How are you Regimented in the other World? etc. be
not as curious as some of these of the Jesuits, Wise men thought it tended much
to the disreputation of Peter Cotton when through his incogitant leaving the
Book wherein his enquiries of the Demon were written with a Friend; the matter
came to be divulged. I cannot think that Dr. Tailors Secretary his publishing
these curiosities of his Lord, has added (...) to his credit amongst sober and
judicious Persons. There is a Tragical passage related in the Story of the
Demon which for three Months molested the House of Mr. Perreaud a Protestant
Minister in Matijcon. One in the Room would needs be propounding needless
Questions for the Devil to Answer, though Mr. Perreaud told him of the danger
in it. After a deal of discourse; the Devil said to him, You should have
hearkened to the Ministers good counsel, who told you that you ought not to ask
curious Questions of the Devil, yet you would do it, and now I must school you
for your pains. Presently upon which, the Man was by an invisible hand plucked
up by his Thumb, and twirled round, and thrown down upon the floor, and so
continued in most grievous misery. I hope then, that none will be emboldened
from the Bishops Advice, to enquire at the mouth of Devils or of Apparitions,
until such time as they know whether they are Devils or no. But to pass on.
That the Ghosts of dead persons have sometimes appeared that so the sin of
Murder (as well as that of Theft) might be discovered, is a thing notoriously
known. I shall only mention two or three Examples for, this; and the rather
because some who are very unapt to believe things of this nature, yet have
given credit to those Relations. Two of the Stories are recited by Mr. Webster
in his Book of Witchcraft.

He says, ( P.298.) that about the year 1623, one Fletcher of Rascal, a Town
in the North Riding of Yorkshire, a Yeoman of a good Estate married a Woman
from Thornton Brigs, who had formerly been naught with one Ralph Raynard, who
kept an Inn, within half a mile from Rascal, in the high Road betwixt York and
Thuske, his Sister living with him; this Raynard continuing in unlawful Lust
with Fletcher's Wife, and not being content therewith, conspired the death of
Fletcher; one Mark Dunn being made privy, and hired to assist in the Murder;
which Raynard and Dunn accomplished upon May Day, by drowning him, as they were
Traveling all three together, from a Town called Huby, and acquainted the Wife
with the deed, she gave them a Sack, therein to convey his Body, which they
did, and buried it in Raynard's back side, or Croft, where an old Oak had been
stubbed up, and sowed Mustard Seed in the place, thereby to hide it; they then
continued their wicked course of Lust and Drunkenness; and the Neighbors did
much wonder at Fletchers absence, but his Wife excused it, and said, he was
only gone aside for fear of some Writs being served upon him, and so it
continued till about July 7th. after, when Raynard going to Topcliff-Fair, and
setting up his Horse in the Stable, the Spirit of Fletcher in his usual shape
and habit, did appear unto him, and said, O Ralph, Repent, Repent, for my
Revenge is at hand; and ever after, until he was put in the Goal the Spirit
seemed continually to stand before him, whereby he became sad and restless, and
his own Sister over-hearing his Confession and Relation of it to another
person, did through fear of losing her own life, immediately reveal it to Sr.
William Sheffield, who lived in Rascal; whereupon Raynard, Dunn, and the Wife,
were all three apprehended, and sent to the Goal at York, where they were
Condemned and Executed, near the place where Raynard lived; and Fletcher was
buried; the two Men being hung up in Chains, and the Woman burned under the
Gallows. I have recited this Story punctually, as a thing that has been very
much fixed on my Memory (being then but young) and a certain Truth, I being
(with many more) an Ear-witness of their Confessions, and eyewitness of their
Executions, and likewise saw Fletcher when he was taken up, where they had
^uried him in his Clothes, which were a green Fustian Doublet pinckt upon
white, and his walking Boots, and brass Spurs, without Rowels. Thus Mr. Webster.

Again, the same Author ( P.308.) relates that about the Year 1632. there lived
one Walker, near Chester, who was a Yeoman of a good Estate, and a Widower; he
had a young Kins-woman to keep his House, who was by the Neighbors suspected
to be with Child, and was sent away one Evening in the dark, with one Mark
Sharp a Collier, and was not heard of, nor little notice taken of her, till a
long time after one James Grayham a Miller, who lived two Miles from Walker's
House, being one night alone very late in his Mill, grinding Corn, about twelve
a Clock at night, the Doors being shut, there stood a Woman in the midst of the
Floor, with her hair hanging down all bloody, and five large Wounds in her
head; he was very much frighted, yet had the courage to ask her who she was,
and what she wanted? to whom she answered, I am the Spirit of such a Woman, who
lived with Walker, and being got with Child by him, be promised to send me to a
private place, where I should be well locked to, till I was brought a Bed, and
^well, and then I should come again and keep his House, and accordingly (said
the Apparition) I was one night late sent away with one Mark Sharp, who upon a
Moor, (naming a place which the Miller knew) slew me with a Pick (such as Men
dig Coals withal) and gave me these five Wounds, and after threw my Body into a
Coal-pit hard by, and hid the Pick under the Bank, and his shoes and stockins
being bloody, he endeavored to wash them, but seeing the blood would not wash
off, be left them there; And the Apparition further told the Miller, That he
must be the Man to reveal it, or else she must still appear and haunt him. The
Miller returned home very sad, and heavy, but spoke not one word of what he had
seen, yet eschewed as much as he could to stay in the Mill in the night without
company, thinking thereby to escape the seeing this dreadful Apparition; But
notwithstanding, one night when it began to be dark, the Apparition met him
again, and seemed very fierce and cruel, threatening him, that if he did not
reveal the Murder, she would continually pursue and haunt him; yet for all
this, he still concealed it, until St. Thomas Eve before Christmas, when being
soon after Sunset walking in his Garden, she appeared again, and then so
threatened and affrighted him, that he promised faithfully to reveal it the next
morning: In the morning he went unto a Magistrate, and discovered the whole
matter, with all the circumstances, and diligent search being made, the Body
was found in a Cole-pit, with five wounds in the head, and the Pick, and Shoes,
and Stockins yet bloody, and in every circumstance as the Apparition had
related to the Miller: Whereupon Walker and Mark Sharp were both apprehended,
but would confess nothing. At the Assizes following, (I think it was at Durham)
they were arraigned, found guilty, and Hanged; but I could never hear that they
confessed the Fact. It was reported that the Apparition did appear to the
Judge, or the Foreman of the Jury, but of that I know no certainty. There are
many persons yet alive that can remember this strange Murder, and I saw and
read the Letter which was sent to Sergeant Hutton about it, from the Judge
before whom they were tried, which makes me relate it with greater confidence.
Thus far we have Mr. Webster's Relations.

It is also credibly Attested that a thing no less Remarkable than either of
the former, happened but nine years ago at another place in England. The sum of
the Story as it is published in Mr. Glanvil's Collection of Relations, P. 172.
is this: On the ninth of November 1674. Thomas Goddard of Marlborough in the
County of Wilts, as he was going to Ogborn, about 9. h. A. M. he met the
Apparition of his Father in Law Edward Avon, who had beed dead about half a
year. He seemed to stand by the Style, which Goddard was to go over. When he
came near, the Spectre spoke to him with an audible voice, saying, Are you
afraid? to whom he answered, I am, thinking of one who is dead and buried, whom
you are like. To which the Apparition replied, I am he; come near me I will do
you no harm; to which Goddard replied, I trust in him who has bought my Soul
with his precious blood, you shall do me no harm. Then the Spectre said, how
stand cases at home? Goddard asked what cases? Then it asked him, how does
William and Mary? meaning belike, his Son William and his Daughter Mary, whom
this Goddard had married. And it said, What? Tayl^r is Dead; meaning as Goddard
thought, one of that Name in London, who had married another of Avon's
Daughters, and died in September before this. The Spectre offered him some
Money, desiring it might be sent to his Daughter that was lately become a
Widow; but Goddard answered, In the Name of Jesus Christ I refuse all such
Money. Then the Apparition said, I perceive you are afraid, I will meet you
some other time: so it went away. The next night about 7 h. it came and opened
his Shop-Window, and looked him in the face, but said nothing. And the next
night after as Goddard went into his backside with a Candle light in his hand,
but he being affrighted ran into his House, and saw it no more at that time.
But on Thursday November 12. as he came from Chilton, the Apparition met him
again, and stood (about eight foot) directly before him, and said with a loud
voice, Thomas, bid William Avon take the Sword which he had of me, which is now
in his House, and carry to the wood as we go to Alton to the upper end of the
wood by the ways side, for with that sword I did wrong above thirty years ago,
and he never prospered since ^was his. And do you speak with Edward Lawrence,
and I desire you to pay him twenty shillings out of the Money which you
received of James Eliot at two payments; for I borrowed so much Money of Edward
Lawrence, and said that I had paid him, but I did not pay it him. This Money
was received of James Eliot on a Bond due to Avon and Goddard had it at two
Payments after Avon had been Dead several Months. Lawrence says that he lent
Avon twenty shillings in Money about twenty years ago, which was never paid him
again. November 23. Goddard did by Order from the Mayor of the Town, go with
his Brother in Law William Avon, with the Sword to the place where the
Apparition said it should be carried. And coming away thence Goddard looking
back saw the same Apparition, whereupon he called to his Brother in Law, and
said, Here is the Apparition of your Father; William replied, I see nothing,
then Goddard fell on his Knees, and said, Lord, open his eyes that he may see.
But William said, Lord grant I may not see it, if it be thy blessed Will. Then
the Ghost did to Goddard's apprehension becken with his hand. To whom Goddard
said, what would you have me to do? the Apparition replied, take up the Sword
and follow me. To which he said, should both of us come? or but one of us? The
Spectre replied, Thomas do you take up the Sword. So he took it up and followed
the Apparition about ton poles into the wood. Then the Spectre coming toward
Goddard he stepped back two steps; but it said to him, I have a permission to
you, and a commission not to touch you. Then it took the Sword, and went to the
place at which before it stood, and pointed the top of the Sword into the
ground and said, In this place was buried the Body of him whom I Murdered in
the Year 1635. but it is now rotten and turned to Dust. Whereupon Goddard said,
For what cause did you Murder him? The seeming Avon replied I took Money from
the Man, and he contended with me, and so I Murdered him. Then Goddard said,
who was confederate with you in the Murder? the Spectre Answered, none but my
self. What (said Goddard) would you have me do in this thing? The Apparition
replied, Only (...) let the World know that I Murdered a Man, and buried him in
this place, in the year 1635. Then the Spectre laid down the Sword on the bare
ground there, whereupon grew nothing, but seemed to Goddard to be as a Grave
sunk (...). All this while William Avon remained where Goddard left him, and
said he saw no Apparition, only heard Goddard speak to the Spectre, and
discerned another voice also, making Reply to Goddard's enquiries, but could
not understand the words uttered by that voice. The next day the Mayor caused
men to dig in the place where the Spectre said the Body was buried, but nothing
could be found. These examples then, show that the Ghosts of Dead men do
sometimes appear, and that for such causes as those mentioned. There have been
some in the world so desperate as to make solemn Covenants with their living
Friends, to appear unto them after their Death; and sometimes (though not
always) it has so come to pass. It is a Remarkable passage which Baronius
relates concerning Marsilius Ficinus, and his great Intimate Michael Mercatus.
These two having been warmly Disputing about the immortality of the Soul,
entered into a solemn Vow, that if there were truth in those Notions about a
future State in another World, he which died first should appear to his
surviving Friend. Not long after this, Ficinus Died. On a morning when Mercatus
was intent upon his Studies, he heard the voice of Ficinus his Friend at his
Window with a loud cry, saying, O Michael, Michael, Vera, vera sunt illa: O my
Friend Michael, those notions about the Souls of Men being immortal they are
true, they are true. Whereupon, Mercatus opened his Window, and saw his Friend
Marsilius Ficinus, whom he called unto, but he vanished away. He presently sent
to Florence to know how Ficinus did, and was informed that he Died about the
hour when his Ghost appeared at Mercatus his Window. There are also later
Instances, and nearer home, not altogether unlike to this. For in Mr. Glanvil's
late Collection of Relation, (which we have had occasion more than once to
mention.) It is said, that Dr. Farrar and his Daughter, made a compact, that
the first of them which Died, if happy, should after Death appear to the
surviver if possible; his Daughter with some difficulty consenting to the
agreement. Some time after, the Daughter living then near Salisbury, fell in
Labor, and having by an unhappy mistake a noxious Potion given to her, instead
of another prepared, suddenly Died. That very night she appeared in the room
where her Father then Lodged in London, and opening the Curtains looked upon
him. He had before heard nothing of her illness, but upon this Apparition
confidently told his Servant that his Daughter was Dead, and two Days after
received the News. Likewise one Mr. Watkinson, who lived in Smithfield, told
his Daughter (taking her leave of him, and expressing her fears that she should
never see him more) that should he Die, if ever God did permit the Dead to to
see the living, he would see her again. Now after he had been Dead about half a
Year, on a night when she was in Bed but could not sleep, she heard Music, and
the Chamber grew lighter and lighter, she then law her Father by the Bedside.
Who said Mall, did not I tell thee that I would see thee again? He exhorted her
to be patient under her afflictions, and to carry it dutiful toward her
Mother; and told her that her Child that was born since his departure should
not trouble her long. And bid her speak what she would speak to him now, for he
must go and she should see him no more upon Earth, Vid. Glanvil's Collections,
P. 189,192. Sometimes the Great and Holy God, has permitted, and by his
Providence ordered such Apparitions to the end that Atheists might thereby be
astonished and affrighted out of their Infidelity.

Nam primus timor fecit in or be Deos.

Remarkable and very solemn is the Relaon of the Appearance of Major Sydenham's
Ghost, mentioned in the Book but now cited ( P. ^31.) It is in brief this.
Major George Sydenham of Delverton in Somerset, and Captain William Dyke of
Skillgate in that County; used to have many Disputes about the Being of God,
and the Immortality of the Soul: in which point they continued unresolved. To
issue their controversies, they agreed that he that died first should the third
night after his Funeral, between the hours of twelve and one, appear at a
little House in the Garden. After Sydenham was dead, Captain Dyke repairs to
the place appointed between them two. He acquainted a near Kinsman, Dr. Thomas
Dyke with his design, by whom he was earnestly dissuaded from going to that
place at that time; and was told, that the Devil might meet him and be his
ruin, if he would venture on in such rash attempts. The Captain Replied, that
he had solemnly engaged, and nothing should discourage him; accordingly betwixt
twelve and one he went into the Garden-house, and there tarried two or three
hours, without seeing or hearing any thing more than what was usual. About six
weeks after, Captain Dyke rides to Eaton, to place his Son a Scholar there. The
morning before he returned from thence, after it was light, one came to his
Bedside, and suddenly drawing back the Curtains, calls Cap. Cap. (which was
the term of familiarity which the Major when living used to call the Captain
by) He presently perceived it was his Major, and replieth, What my Major! On
the Table in the Room there lay a Sword which the Major had formerly given to
the Captain. After the seeming Major had walked a turn o^ two about the Room,
he took up the Sword, and drew it out, and not finding it so bright and clean
as it ought, Cap. Cap. (said he) This Sword did not use to be kept after this
manner, when it was mine. He also said to the Captain, I could not come to you
at the time appointed, but I am now come to tell you, That there is a God, and
that he is a very just and a terrible God, and if you do not turn over a new
leaf, you will find it so. So did he suddenly disappear. The Captain arose, and
came into another Chamber (where his Kinsman Dr. Dyke lodged) but in a visage
and form much differing from himself, his Hair standing, his Eyes staring, and
his whole Body trembling, telling with much affection what he had seen. The
Captain lived about two years after this, but was much altered in his
Conversation, the Words uttered by his M^jors Ghost, ever sounding in his Ears.
Thus of that remarkable Providence.

I have not mentioned these things, as any way approving of such desperate
Covenants. There is great hazard attending them. It may be after Men have made
such agreements, Devils may appear to them, pretending to be their Deceased
Friends, and thereby their Souls may be drawn into woeful Snares. Who knows
whether God will permit the persons, who have thus confederated, to appear in
this World again after their Death, and if not then the Surviver will be under
great temptation unto Atheism; As it sell out with the late Ea^l of Rochester,
who (as is reported in his life, P. 16. by Dr. Burnet) did in the Year 1665.
enter into a formal engagement with another Gentleman, not without Ceremonies
of Religion, that if either of them Died, he should appear and give the other
notice of the future state, if there were any. After this the other Gentleman
was killed, but did never appear after his Death to the Ea^l of Rochester,
which was a great snare to him, during the rest of his Life. Though when God
awakened the Earl's Conscience upon his Deathbed, he could not but
acknowledge, that one who had so corrupted the natural Principles of Truth as
he had, had no reason to expect that such an extraordinary thing should be done
for his Conviction. Or if such agreement should necessitate an Apparition, how
would the World be confounded with Specter? How many would probably be scared
out of their W^^s? or what curious Questions would vain Men be proposing about
things which are (and it is meet they should be) hid from Mortals I cannot
think that Men who make such Covenants (except it be with very much caution, as
I have heard that Mr. Kn^wstubs and another eminent Person did) are duly
mindful of that Scripture, Deuteronomy. 29.29. The secret things belong to the Lord;
but those things which are revealed belong to us. Moreover, such sights are not
desirable. For many times they appear as forerunners of notable Judgments at
hand. I could instance out of approved History, how particular Families have
found that things of this nature, have come to them as the Messengers of Death.
Lavater in his Book De Spectris, and Goulartius in his Select History, say,
that Specter are the Ha^binge^s of public Mutations, Wars, and Calamitous
times. Voetius in his Disputation De Peste, shows that sometimes the Plague
or strange Diseases follow after such Appearances. There was lately a very
formidable Apparition at Meenen: We are advised, that there did appear in that
place, a person all in white, with a Mitre on his head, being followed with two
more in black; after him came four or five Squadrons, who drew up as if they
intended to storm the Town. The Soldiers there refused to stand their Centry,
having been so affrighted as that some of them fell down in their posts. These
Specter appeared every night in June, 1682. How it is there since that, or
what events have followed in that place, I know Lon But I find in credible
Authors, that oftentimes Mischief and Destruction unto some or other has been
the effect of Apparitions: Luther tells us of a Shepherd (of whom also he
speaks charitably) that being haunted with a Spirit; the Apparition told him,
that after eight days he would appear to him again, and carry him away, and
kill him; and so it came to pass: the Ministers whom the poor man acquainted
with his sorrowful estate, advised him not to despair of the Salvation of his
Soul, though God should suffer the Devil to kill his Body. I have read of
threescore Persons all killed at once by an Apparition. George Agricola gives
an account of twelve Men, that as they were digging in the Mines, a Spectre
slew them. Some have been filled with such Anxiety at the appearance of a
Spectre, that in one nights time the Hair of their heads has turned white.
Lavater speaks of a Man, who one night meeting with an Apparition, the ter^or
of it caused such a sudden charge in him, as that when he came home, his own
Children did not know him. We may then conclude that the Willings of this
Dr^^ng age know not what they do, when they make themselves sport with subjects
of this nature. I shall only add this further here, that from the things which
have been related, it is evident that they are mistaken who suppose Devils
cannot appear to Men except with some deformities whereby they are easily
discovered. The Nymphs which deluded many of old, when the World was buried
under Heathenism; were Demons, presenting themselves in shapes very formose.
Vide Martinii Lexic. in verbo Nymphae.

CHAP. VIII.
Several Cases of Conscience cons^dered. That it is not lawful to make use of
Herbs of Plants to drive away evil Spirits. Nor of Words or Characters. An
Objection answered. Whether it be lawful for Persons bewitched, to burn things
or to nail Horse-shoes before their doors, or to stop Urin in Bottles, or the
like, in order to the recovery of Health. The Negative proved by several
Arguments. Whether it be lawful to try. Witches by casting them into the Water.
Several reasons evincing the vanity of that way of Probation. Some other
Superstitions witnessed against.

THe preceding Relations about Witchcrafts and Diabolical Impostures give us
too just occasion to make enquiry into some Cases of Conscience, respecting
things of this Nature. And in the first place the Quaere may be;

Whether it is lawful to make use of any sort of Herbs of Plants to preserve
from Witchcrafts, or from the power of Evil Spirits? The Answer unto which is;
That it is in no wise lawful, but that all attempts of that nature are Magical,
and Diabolical, and therefore detestable Superstition. As appears 1. In that if
the Devils do either operate or cease to do mischief upon the use of such
things it must needs be in that they are signs which give notice to the Evil
Spirits what they are to do; Now for Men to submit to any of the Devils
Sacraments is implicitly to make a covenant with him. Many who practice these
nefarious Vanities little think what they do. They would not for the World
(they say) make a Covenant with the Devil, yet by improving the Devils signals,
with an opinion of receiving benefit thereby, they do the thing which they
pretend to abhor. For, 2. Angels (bad as well as good) are by nature
incorporeal Substances. There are some Authors who by a corporal substance
intend no more but a real being; so that the term is by them used in opposition
to mere Phantasms in that sense, none but Sadduces will deny Angels to be
Corporeal. And in that respect the Ancient Doctors, Tertullian and others call
them Corpora. But commonly a Body is set in opposition to a mere Spiritual
Substance, Mat.10.28. Heb.12.13. And thus it is certain that Demons are
incorporeal, Ephesians.6.12. they are frequently, not only by Authors, but in the
Holy Scripture styled Spirits, because of their being incorporeal. And thence
it is that they are not visible or palpable or any way incurring the outward
senses, Luk.24.39. Homer says that when the Ghost of Anticlea appeared to
Ulysses, he attempted three times to embrace that Image, but could feel
nothing; for it had not (...) but as Virgil expresses it, Tenues sine
corporevitas. Cajetan and Vasquez affirm, that Apparitions can at no time be
felt. It is not to be doubted but that Spirits may make use of vehicles, that
are subject to the outward senses; nevertheless, a mere Spirit cannot be
touched by humane hands. Moreover, we read of a Legion of Demons possessing
one miserable Body, Luk.8.30. A Legion is at least 6000; now if they were
corporeal Substances, it could not be that so many of them, should be in the
same person at the sametime. And if they are incorporeal Substances, then it is
not possible that Herbs or any sensible objects should have a natural influence
upon them, as they have upon Elementary Bodies. This Argument is of such
weight, as that Porphyrius, and other heathenish Authors who affirm that
Demons are affected with smells, and with blood, etc. Suppose them to have
aereal bodies. So do some Talmudical and Cabalistical Writers; they hold that
there are a middle sort of Devils, made of Fire and Air, who live upon the
Liquidity of the Air, and the smoke of fire, etc. These they call (...).
Munster in his Notes on Lev.17. does out of R.Abraham, ate many passages to
this purpose. But such Jewish Fables are so foolish, as that they need to
confutation. And as the Argument we have mentioned is a sufficient refutation
of them that Imagine a natural virtue to be in Herbs, whereby Evil Spirits are
driven away; so may it be improved against their Superstition, who suppose that
Fumes are of force to expel Demons. The Author of the Book of Tobit Chap. 6.
tells a Tale, that the heart and Liver of a Fish, if a smoke be made therewith,
the Devil will smell it, and then be forced to flee away from any one that
shall be troubled with an Evil Spirit; and that Tobit following the counsel
which Raphael gave him about these matters, the Devil fain to run for it, as
far as to the utmost parts of Egypt, Chap.8, ver.2,3. This passage, is so far
from being divine, as that indeed it is Profane and Magical. Whereas the
Author says, that whoever is troubled with an Evil Spirit, shall by that means
find relief, he does expressly contradict the Son of God, who has taught
otherwise, Mat.17.21. Mark 9.28. And his ascribing such virtue to the heart of
a Fish, is as true as what Cornelius Agrippa says, who affirms that the Gall
of a black Dog will drive away Evil Spirits, and free from Witchcrafts. And
there is as much credit to be given to these things as to another Jewish Fable,
viz. that the clapping of a Cocks Wings will make the power of Demons to
become ineffectual; yet that this Fable has obtained too much credit in the
World is evident by words of Prudentius, who says,

Ferunt vagantes Daemonas
Laetos ten^bris noctium
Gallo canente exterritos
Sparsim timere and cedere.
3. God in his Holy Word has forbidden his People to imitate the Heathen
Nations. He requires, that those who profess his Name should not learn the way
of the Heathen; nor do after their manners, Lev. 20. 23. Jer.10.2. But to
attempt the driving away of Evil Spirits by the use of Herbs, Fumes, etc. is an
Heathenish Custom. Whose shall read Proclus his Book De sa^^^ficio and Magia,
will see how the Ethni^^^ taught, that Smells and Smokes would cause Demons to
depart. And the like they believed (and practiced accordingly) with respect
unto several sorts of Herbs. See Sennertus Med. Pract. L.6. Part.9. Cap.7.
Dioscorides being deceived with the Doctrine of that great Magician Pythagor^s,
says, that the Sea-Onion being hung in the Porch of an House, will keep Evil
Spirits from entering therein. In that Book which passes under the name of
Albertus Magnus de mirabilibus Mundi, (though Picus Mirandula in his
Disputation about Magic is so favorable as to think Albertus was not the
Author of it) but that the true Author has abusively prefixed Albertus his
Name) There are many Superstitious Vanities of this nature; which in times of
Popish darkness were received from the Arabians and other Heathenish
Worshippers of the Devil. It is true, that the Jews did some of them practice
this kind of Magic. Josephus (Antiq, Lib.8. Cap.2.) confesses that those of
their Nation (in special one whose name was Eleazar) did by holding an Herb (
viz. that called Solomon's Seal) to the Noses of Daemoniacks, draw the Devils
out of them. He speaks untruly, in saying, that they learned such nefarious
Arts from Solomon, for they had them from the Heathen, who received them from
the Devil himself; as is evident from another passage in the mentioned
Josephus. In his History of the Wars with the Jews, Lib.7. Cap.25. He says,
that there is a Root by the Jews, called Baaras, which if a Man pluck it up, he
dies presently; but to prevent that they make bare the Root, and then tie it
with a string to a Dog, who going away to follow his Master, easily plucks up
the Root, whereupon the Dog dies, but his Master may then without danger
handle the Root, and thereby flight the Devils out of persons possessed with
Infernal Spirits: whom he (in that also following the Heathen) supposes to be
the Spirits of wicked men deceased. And that the Jews received these curious or
rather cursed Arts from Ethnicks, is manifest, inasmuch as Pliny taught that
the Herb called Aglaophotis had power to raise the Gods, (so did they call the
Devils whom they served.) Now that was the same Herb with Baaras; For as
D^lacampius, Rainold, and others have observed, both names have the same
signification. So then the making use of Herbs to fright away Devils, or to
preserve from the power of Witches, is originally an Heathenish custom, and
therefore that which ought to be avoided and abhorred by those that call
themselves Christians.

It is no less Superstitious, when Men Endeavor by Characters, Words or
Spells, to charm any Witches, Devils or Diseases. Such Persons do (as Fuller
speaks) fence them selves with the devils Shield against the devils Sword,
Agrippa in his Books De occulta Philosophia has many of these impious
curiosities. But in his Book of the vanity of Sciences, Chap.48. he
acknowledges that he wrote his other Book of Occult Philosophy, when he was a
young Man, and bewails his iniquity therein, confessing that he had sinfully
misspent precious time in those unprofitable Studies. There is also an horrid
Book full of Conjurations and Magical Incantations, which the profane Author
has ventured to publish under the name of King Solomon: There cannot be a
greater vanity than to imagine that devils are really frighted with Words and
Syllables: such practices are likewise of diabolical and heathenish original.
They that have read Subjects of this nature, are not ignorant of what is
related concerning the strange things done by the Incantations of that famous
Wizard Apollonius. The like has been also noted of the Brackmanes of old, who
were much given to such unlawful Arts. It is still customary amongst the
Heathenish Africans, by Incantations to charm Serpents; Which when they are in
that way brought to them by the devil, they use with the blood of such Serpents
to anoint their Weapons, that so they may become the more mortiferous. And that
the like Incantations were practiced amongst the Gentiles of old is evident
from that verse of Virgil, in his 8 Eclog.

Frigidus in pratis cantando rumpiter anguis.

As also by that of Ovid in Metam. Lib. 7.

Viperiasrumpi verbis and carmina fauces.

Yea, the Holy Scriptures intimate, that such diabolical practices were used by
some in the days of old, Those words of David, Psalm.58.4,5. imply no less, as
our Excellent Rainold has with great Learning and Judgment evinced. It must be
acknowledged that the notion which many have from Austin taken up, as if
Serpents to avoid the power of Charms, would lay one Ear to the ground, and
with their tails stop the other ear, is to be reckoned amongst vulgar errors;
nevertheless, that there were then Charmers in the World, the mentioned (as
well as other) Scriptures notify. Moreover, those Inchanters had their
formulae, whereby they did imprecate the persons whom they designed hurt unto;
and the Devil (when the Great and Holy God saw meet to permit him) would upon
the using of those words go to work, and do strange things. Hence Livy speaks
of the Devotaria Carmina used by Wizards. The truth of this is also manifest
from some passages in AEschines his Oration against Ctesiphon. And of this
nature were Balaams Curses, desired by Baalak, as Enchantments against Jacob,
Numb. 22.6. and 23.23. If it had not been a thing famously known, that Baalam
(a black Wizard) did mischief others by his Incantations, the King of Moab
would never have sent to him for that end. And as Witchcrafts of this kind were
frequent among the Gentiles who know not God; so in a more especial manner
amongst the Ephesians before they were enlightened by the Gospel of Jesus
Christ. Upon their Conversion to the Christian Faith, as many as had used
curious (i. e. as the Syriac Translation rightly Interprets Magical) Arts,
brought their Books together and burned them before all men, Acts 19.19. Which
shows that Ephesus did once abound with these Heathenish Superstitions. They
pretended that they could by certain Words cure Diseases, eject Devils, etc.
Hence it became a Proverbial Phrase, to say, (...), when Magical Spells and
Incantations were intended. Hesychius mentions some of those charms being
obscure and barbarous words; such as (...) etc. These words they would
sometimes carry about with them, fairly written; and then they were a Sacrament
for the Devil to operate by. That insignificant word ^br^da^ord, is by
Sammonicus mentioned as a Magical Spell; which hobgoblin word the late miracle
Monger or Mirabilarian st^oaker, in Ireland, Val^ntin Greatrix attempted to
cure an Ague by. Porphyrius says, that the Egyptians had Symbols, which
Serapis appointed them to use in order to the driving away Demons. Now he whom
the Egyptians called Serapis, is by the Greeks called Pluto, and by the Jews
Bel-z^bub. And as the Heathen learned such things from Bel-z^bub, so have the
Papists (who are called Gentiles in the Scripture, Rev.11.2. and well they may
be so, since as to all manner of Idolatry and Superstition they Gentilize) from
them learned to cure Diseases, and drive away Evil Spirit by Words and Spells,
Exorcizations, etc. M^tthi^lus reports that he knew a man that would and that
without seeing the persons wounded, by Charms heal those that were stung with
deadly Serpents; and Fernelius says, that he has seen some curing a Fever
only by muttering words, without the use of any natural means. Not only
professed Heathen but Papists, have by reciting certain Verses, bin wont to
cure other Diseases. Yea they have practiced to free persons from the
Epilepsie; by mentioning the Names of the three Kings of Colon (as the wise Men
which came from the East, are usually called) Hence are those celebrated Verses:

Haec tria qui secun^ Portabit nomina Regum
Solvitur a morbo Christi pietate caduco.
It is too well known, that Popish Countries do still abound with such
Superstitious Vanities as these mentioned. And as Voetius (in his Dissertation
de Exorcismo) truly tells them, the Exorcizations of the Papists are as like
those of the Heathen as Milk is like to Milk, or as one Egg is like to another.
I know that some Popish Authors (who are more ingenious) write against
attempting the cure of Diseases by Words or Charms. Fernelius, Benev^nius and
(as I remember) Valesins disapprove of it. But few (if any) of them are against
Conjuring away Evil Spirits, by Words, and I know not what Formulae of their
own, or rather of the Devils inventing. One of them ( viz. Hi^^omymus Mengus)
haring Published a Book filled with Conjurations, Entituleth it, The Scourge of
Devils. It adds to the abomination when Men shall not only break the first and
second Commandment, but the third also, by making use of any of the sacred
Names or Titles belonging to the Glorious God, or to his Son Jesus Christ, as
Charms; then which nothing is more frequent amongst Romanists. To conclude, God
in his word does with the highest severity condemn all such Practices,
declaring not only that Enchanters and Charmers are not to be tolerated amongst
his People; but that all who do such things are an abomination to him,
Deuteronomy.18.10,11,12. The Jews are wont to be extremely charitable toward those of
their own Nation, affirming, That every Israelite shall have a part in the
World to come; only they except such as shall by Incantations heal Diseases.
There are some that practice such things in their simplicity, not knowing that
therein they gratify the Devil. Voetius in his Disputation, de Magia, P. 576.
speaks of one that according to the vain conversation received by Tradition
from fore Fathers, would sometimes attempt things of this nature, but upon
Voetius his instructing him concerning the sin and evil which was therein, the
Man durst never more do as formerly. If this Discourse fall into the hands of
any whose Consciences tell them they have been guilty of the same iniquity; God
grant that it may have the same effect on them. It is a marvelous and an
amazing thing, that in such a place as New England, where the Gospel has
shined with great power and glory, any should be so blind as to make attempts
of this kind; yet some such I know there have been. A Man in Boston gave to one
a Sealed Paper, as an effectual remedy against the Toothache, wherein were
drawn several confused Characters, and these words written, IN Nomine Patris
Filii, and Spiritus Sancti, Preserve thy Servant, such an one. (Bodinus and
others write of a convicted Witch, whose Name was Barbary Door, that confessed
she had often cured Diseases, by using the like words unto those mentioned.)
Not long since a Man left with another in this Town, as a rare secret a Cure
for the Ague, which was this, five Letters, viz. z, a, etc. were to be written
successively on pieces of Bread and given to the Patient, on one piece he must
write the word Kalendant, and so on another the next day, and in five days (if
he did believe) he should not fail of cure. These considerations have made me
the more willing a little to enlarge upon the Argument in hand.

But before I proceed to handle the next Case, it may not be amiss to Answer
that which seems the most considerable Allegation against the Arguments thus
far insisted on. It is then by some objected that Music drives away Evil
Spirits. For when David took an Harp and played with his hand, the Evil Spirit
departed from Saul, 1 Samuel.16.23. so that it seems the Devils are driven away by
Sounds, and why not then by Words, or Fumes, or Herbs?

Ans. 1. It is confessed that Satan does take great advantage from the ill
humors and diseases which are in the Bodies of Men greatly molest their
Spirits. Especially it is t^^e concerning Melancholy, which has therefore been
called Balneum Diaboli, the Devils Bath, wherein he delights to be stirring.

2. When Bodily Diseases are removed by the use of natural means, the matter
upon which the Evil Spirit was wont to operate being gone, he does no more
disturb and disquiet the minds of men as before that he did. The passive
disposition in the Body ceasing, the active affliction caused by the Devil
cease also. Rulandus Writes of Possessed persons who were cured by Emetic
Medicines, clearing them of those melancholy humors, by means whereof the Evil
Spirit had sometimes great advantages over them. This also Pomponatius does by
many Instances confirm. Sennertus likewise has diverse passages to the same
purpose. Also we see by frequent experience, persons strangely hurried by
Satan, have by the blessing of God upon the endeavor of the Physician been
delivered from those woeful molestations. Ferrarius, Delrio, Burgensis, and
others, Commenting on 1 Samuel 16. conceive that the Ingress and Egress of Evil
Spirits depends upon the humors and dispositions of the Body; which Assertion
is not universally true: For sometimes the Devil has laughed at the
Physicians, who have thought by Medicinal Applications to dispossess him.
Examples for this may be seen in Fernelius and Codronobus. Wherefore Voetius in
his Disputation, de Emergumenis, Page 1025. speaks cautiously and
Judiciously, in asserting that we may not suppose that the Devils taking bodily
possession of this or that person, depends wholly upon corporeal dispositions;
nevertheless that natural Distempers sometimes are an occasion thereof.

3. It is also true that Music is of great effi^a^y against Melancholy
discomposures. This notwithstanding, there is no reason to conclude with
Mendozo, Bodin, and others, that M^sick is so hateful to the Devil, as that he
is necessitated to depart when the pleasant sound is made. If that were so, how
comes it to pass that appearing Demons do sometimes depart with a melodious
sound? or that in the Conventicles of Witches there is Music heard? But La
Torr has notably confuted such Imaginations. Indeed the sweetness and
delightfulness of Music has a natural power to lenifie Melancholy passions.
They say that Pythagoras by Music restored a Frantic Man to his Wits again.
Thus was Readiness pensive Spirit refreshed by David's pleasant Harp, and when he
was refreshed and well, the Evil Spirit which took advantage of his former
pensiveness, upon his alacrity departed from him. So that it remains still a
truth, that corporeal things have no direct Physical influence upon Infernal
Spirits, and that therefore for men to think that they shall drive away Demons
by any such means is folly and Superstition. I shall add no more in Answer to
the first Quaere proposed.

A second Case, which we shall here take occasion to enquire into, is, Whether
it be lawful for Bewitched Persons to draw blood from those whom they suspect
for Witches, or to put Urin into a Bottle, or to nail an Horse-shoe at their
Doors, or the like, in hopes of recovering health thereby?

Ans. There are several great Authors who have discovered and declared the evil
of all such practices. In special Voetius, Sennertus, and our Perkins
disapprove thereof. There is another Question much what of the same nature with
this, viz. Whether a Bewitched person may lawfully cause any of the Devils
Symbols to be removed in order to gaining Health? As suppose an Image of Wax in
which Needles are fixed, whereby the Devil does at the instigation of his
Servants, torment the diseased person whether this b^ing discovered may be
taken away, that so the Devils power of operation may cease, and that the sick
person may in that way obtain health again? The Affirmative of this Quaestion
is stiffly maintained by Scotus, Cajetan, Delrio, Malderus, and by Popish
Authors generally. Yet amongst them Hesselius, Estius, and Sanchez, hold the
Negative. And so do all our Protestant Writers, so far as I have had occasion
to observe. And although some make light of such practices, and others
undertake to justify them, yet it cannot justly be denied but that they are
impious follies.

For 1. They that obtain Health in this way have it from the Devil. The Witch
cannot recover them, but by the Devils help. Hence as it is unlawful to entreat
Witches to heal bewitched persons, because they cannot do this, but by Satan,
so is it very sinful by scratching, or burnings, or detention of ^^in, etc. to
endeavor to constrain them to unbewitch any; for this is to put them upon
seeking to the Devil. The Witch does neither inflict not remove the disease,
but by the assistance of the Devil; therefore either to desire or force
thereunto, is to make use of the Devils help. The person this recovered cannot
say, The Lord was my Healer, but the Devil was my Healer. Certainly it were
better for a Man to remain sick all his days, ye? (as Chrys^stom speaks) he
had better die than go to the Devil for health.

Hence 2. Men and Women have by such practices as these mentioned, black
commerce and communion with the Devil. They do (though ignorantly) concern and
involve themselves in that Covenant which the Devil has made with his devoted
and accursed Vassals. For, whereas it is pleaded, that if the thing bewitched
be thrown into the fire, or the Urin of the sick stopped in a Bottle, or an
Horse-shoe nailed before the door, then by virtue of the compact which is
between the Devil and his Witches, their power of doing more hurt cease; they
that shall for such an end so practice, have fellowship with that Hellish
Covenant. The Excellent Sennertus argues solidly, in saying, they that force
another to do that which he cannot possibly do, but by virtue of a compact with
the Devil, have themselves implicitly communion with the Diabolical Covenant.
And so is the case here. Who was this A^t of unbewitching Persons in such a way
(...) learned of? If due enquiry be made, it will be found that Magicians and
Devils were the first discoverers. Porphyri^ says, it was by the revelation of
the Demons themselves that Men came to know by what things they would be
restrained from, and constrained to this or that: Eus^b. praep.Evan. L.5. C.7.
Dr. Willet in Ex.7. Quest.9. To use any Ceremonies invented by Satan, to attain
a supernatural end, implies too great a concernment with him. Yea, such persons
do honor and worship the Devil by hoping in this Salvation. They use means to
obtain Health which is not natural, no^ was ever appointed by God, but is
wholly of the Devils Institution; which he is much pleased with, as being
highly honored thereby. Nay such practices do imply an invocation of the Devil
for relief, and a pleading with him the Covenant which he has made with the
Witch, and a declaration of confidence that the Father of Lies will be as good
as his word. For the nefandous Language of such a practice, is this: Thou O
Devil, have made a Covenant with such an one, that if such a Ceremony be used,
thou will then cease to torment a poor creature that is now afflicted by thee.
We have used that Ceremony, and therefore now O Satan we expect that thou
should be as good as thy word which thou have covenanted with that Servant
of thine, and cease tormenting the Creature that has been so afflicted by thee.
Should Men in words speak thus, What horrid Impiety were it? therefore to do
actions which import no less, is (whatever deluded Souls think of it) great and
heinous Iniquity.

3. Let such practitioners think the best of themselves, they are too near a
Kin to those creatures who commonly pass under the name of white Witches. They
that do hurt to others by the Devils help, are called black Witches: but there
are a sort of persons in the World, that will never hurt any, but only by the
power of the Infernal Spirits they will un-bewitch those that seek unto them
for relief: I know that by Constantius his Law, black Witches were to be
Pnnished, and white ones indu^^^d: But M. Perkins says, that the good (...) is
a more horrible and detestable Monster than the bad one. Balaam was a black
Witch, and Simon Magus a white one. This later did more hurt by his Cures, than
the former by his Curses. How persons that shall unbewitch others by putting
Urin into a Bottle, or by casting Excrements into the fire, or nailing of
Horse-shoes at Men's doors, can wholly clear themselves from being white
Witches, I am not able to understand.

4. Innocent persons have been extremely wronged by such Diabolical tricks. For
sometimes (as is manifest from the Relation of the Groton Maid, mentioned in
the fifth Chapter of this Essay) the Devil does not only himself inflict
Diseases upon Men, but represent the visages of innocent persons to the
phansies of the diseased, making them believe that they are tormented by them,
when only himself does it. And in case they follow the Devils direction, by
observing the Ceremonies which he has invented, he will afflict their Bodies no
more. So does his malice bring the persons accused by him (though never so
innocent) into great suspicion. And he will cease afflicting the body of one,
in case he may ruin the credit of another, and withal endanger the Souls of
those that hearken to him. If the Devil upon scratchings, or burnings, or
stoppings of Urin, or the nailing of an Horse-shoe, etc. shall cease to afflict
the body of any, he does this either as being compelled thereto, or
voluntarily. To imagine that such things shall constrain the Evil Spirit to
cease afflicting, whether he will or no, is against all reason. But if he does
this voluntarily, then instead of hu^ting their bodies, he does a greater
mischief to Souls. (...). The Devil heals the Body that he may wound the Soul.
He will heal them with all his heart, provided that he may but thereby draw men
to look unto him for help, instead of seeking unto God alone, in the use of his
own means, and so receive that honor (the thing that he aspires after) which
is the Lords due. How gladly will that wicked Spirit heal one body upon
condition that he may entangle many Souls with Superstition. And if Men and
Women (especially in places of light) will hearken to him, it is a righteous
thing with God to suffer it to be thus. It is past doubt that Satan, who has
the ^^wer of death, Heb. 2.14. has also (by divine permission) power to
inflict, and consequently to remove Diseases from the bones of men. In natural
Diseases he has many times a great operation, and is willing to have them cured
rather by the use of Superstious then of natural means. It is noted in their
Germanic Ephemeris for the year 1675. that a Man troubled with a Fistula, which
the Physicians by all their Art could no way relieve; a person that was
esteemed a Wizard undertook to cure him; and applying a Powder to the wound,
within a few days the sick party recovered. The powder was some of the ashes
of a certain Woman who had been burnt to death for a Witch. This was not
altogether so horrid as that which is by Authors worthy of credit reported to
come to pass, in the days of Pope Adrian VI. when the Plague raging in Rome, a
Magician (whose Name was Demetrius Spartan) caused it to be stayed by
sacrificing a B^ll to the Devil. See P. Jovius Histor, Lib.21. Such power has
the righteous God given unto Satan over the sinful Children of Men; yea such a
Ruler has he set over them as a just punishment for all their wickedness. His
chief design is to improve that power which by reason of sin he has obtained
to seduce into more sin. And the Holy God to punish the World for iniquity,
often suffers the Enemy to obtain his desires this way. What strange things
have been done, and how have Diseases been healed by the sign of the Cross many
times? By which means Satan's design in advancing staurolatry to the destruction
of thousands of Souls, has too successfully taken place. And this iniquity did
he early and gradually advance amongst Christians. I have not been able without
astonishment to read the passages related by Austin de civitate D ei Lib.22.
Cap. 8. He there speaks of one Innocentis, whom he calls a most Religious
Woman, who having a Cancer in her Breast; the most skilful Physicians doubted
of the cure. But in her sleep she was admonished to repair unto the Font where
she had been Baptized, and there to sign that place with the sign of the Cross,
which she did, and was immediately healed of her Cancer. In the same Chapter,
he reports that a Friend of Hesperius did from Jerusalem send him some Earth
that was taken out of the place where our Lord Christ had been buried; and that
Hesperius had no sooner received it but his House which before had been
molested with Evil Spirits was rid of those troublesome guests. He gives an
account also, of strange Cures wrought by the Relics of the Martyrs. It was
not (he says) known where the bodies of Protasius and Gervas (holy Martyrs)
were buried; but Ambrose had it revealed to him in his sleep; and a blind Man
approaching near unto the Bodies instantly received his sight. Another was
cured of Blindness by the Relics of the Martyr Stephen. And a Child playing
abroad, a Cart wheel run over him and bruised him, so that it was thought he
would immediately expire; but his Mother carrying him into the House that was
built to honor the memory of St. Stephens life and health were miraculously
continued. Many other wonderful cures does Austin there mention, as done by
Stephen's Relics. But who sees not that the hand of Joab was in all these
things? For by this means Satan has filled the World with Superstition. The
Cross is worshipped; The Relics of Martyrs are adored; The honor due to God
alone is given to the creature. The same method has the grand Enemy observed,
that so he might bring that Superstition of Iconolatry or Image Worship, which
is so provoking to the jealous God, into repute amongst Christians. It would be
endless to enumerate how many in Popish Countries have been cured of Diseases
which for their sins God has suffered the Devil to punish them with, by
touching the Image of this or that Saint. Nay, some whose bodies have been
possessed with evil Spirits, have in that way of Superstition found relief; in
a more especial manner, when the Image of the Virgin Mary has been presented
before persons Possessed, the Devil in them has cried out, and shrieked after
a fearful manner, as if he had been put to horrible torture at the sight of
that Image, and so has seemed to depart out of the miserable creature molested
by him; and all this that so deluded Papists might be hardened in their
Superstitious opinion of that Image. Many such devices has Satan to ensnare
and ruin the Souls of Men. Some report that the Bodies of Excommunicates in the
Greek Churches at this day, are strangely handled by the Devil, after Death
has taken hold of them. M. Ricaut in his Relation of the present state of the
Greek Churches, Page 279. etc. says that a grave Kaloir told him that to his
own certain knowledge, a person who fell under their Church-censure, after he
had been for some time buried, the People where his corpse lay interred, were
affrighted with strange Apparitions, which they concluded arose from the Grave
of the accursed Excommunicate, which thereupon was opened, and they found the
Body uncorrupted, and replete with Blood, the Coffin furnished with Grapes,
Nuts, etc. brought thither by infernal Spirits. The Kaloirs resolved to use the
common remedy in those cases, viz. to cut the body in several parts, and to
boil it in Wine, as the approved means no dislodge the evil Spirit, but his
Friends, entreated rather that the Sentence of Excommunication might be
reversed, which was granted. In the mean time Prayers, and Masses, and
Offerings were presented for the dead, and whilst they were performing these
Services, on a sudden was heard a rumbling noise in the Coffin of the dead
party. Which being opened, they found the body consumed and dissolved into
dust, as if it had been Interred seven years. The hour and minute of this
dissolution being compared with the date of the Patriarchs release when signed
at Constantinople, was found exactly to agree with that moment. If there be
truth in this Relation, it is a dreadful evidence of Satan's Reigning amongst a
Superstitious People, who nevertheless call themselves Christians; and that he
does by such means as these keep them under chains of darkness still. The Devil
has played such Reax as these are, not only amongst Christians but amongst the
Gentiles of old. For Titus Latinus was warned in his sleep that he should
declare unto the Senate that they must reniew their Stage Plays; he neglecting
to deliver his Message, was again by the same Demon spoken unto in his sleep
and severely reproved for his Omission, and his Son died. Still persisting in
his omission the Demon again comes to him, so that he was surprised with an
acute and horrible disease. Hereupon by counsel of his Friends, he was carried
in his Bed into the Senate, and as soon as he had declared what he had seen,
his Health was restored, that he returned home upon his feet: The issue was,
Stageplays were more in fashion than ever before. Augustine de civitate Dei,
Lib.4. Cap.26.Learned men are not ignorant that strange Cures were effected
amongst the Heathen by the use of Talismans, or Images; of which inventions
Zoroaster (the Father of Magicians) is supposed to be the first Author. It is
reported that Virgil made a brazen fly, and a golden horse-leach, whereby Flies
were hindered from coming into Naples, and the Horse-leaches were all killed in
a Ditch. Thus does Beelzebub draw miserable Men into Superstition.

And although I am upon a serious Subject, any my design in writing these
things; that is so I might bear witness against the Superstition, which some in
his land of light have been found guilty of; and that (if God shall bless what
has been spoken to convince men of the error of their way) the like evils may
no more be heard of amongst us; this notwithstanding, it may not be improper
here to recite some facerious passages, which I have met with in Hemmingius his
Discourse, De superstitione Magica, since they are to my present purpose, as
discovering what delight the infernal Spirits take in drawing Men to make use
of Superstitious means for the recovery of health unto their bodies. The
Learned Author mentioned, reports, that as he was instructing his Pupils in the
Art of Logic, he had occasion to recite a couple of Verses consisting of nine
Hobgoblin words, Fecana, cajeti, dephenes, etc. adding by way of Joke, that
those Verses would cure a Fever, if every day a piece of Bread were given to
the sick person, with one of these words written upon it. A simple Fellow that
stood by, thought Hemmingius had been in earnest in what he spoke, and not long
after having a Servant that f^ll sick of a Fever, he gave him the first day a
bit of Bread, with a Paper wherein Fecana was written, and so on for six days
until he came to the word Gebali; and then on a sudden his Servant was well
again. Others seeing the efficacy of the Amulet did the like, and many were
cured of Fevers thereby. In the same Chapter, P.908. Hemingius writes of a
knavish Scholar, that a certain Woman repairing to him for help, who was
excedingly troubled with sore eyes, promising him a good reward for his cure,
the Knave, though he had no skill, yet for lucre sake, he promised to effect
the cure; and in order thereto takes a Piece of Paper, and makes therein
Characters, unto which he never saw the like before, only then devised them,
and writes in great Letters these Abominable Words, Diabolus eruat tibi
oculos, and foramina stercoribus impleat. (The Papists say that their Saint
Francis caused the Devil to depart out of a possessed person by using an a like
brutish expression.) He folded up the Paper in a cloth, requiring the diseased
party to wear it about her neck, which she did and her disease was healed.
After two years, being desirous to know what was in the Paper, she caused it to
be opened and read; and being greatly offended and enraged at this Indignity,
cast the Paper away, immediately upon which her sore eyes returned again.
Without doubt then, the Devils design in this cure, was to encourage the
profane Impostor to endeavor the removal of diseases by like Superstitious
and wicked practices, whereby his own and the Souls of others unto whom he
should impart the Mystery, would be endangered. The like is to be affirmed
concerning attempts to heal diseases, by scratching suspected Witches, or
stopping Urin in Bottles, nailing of Horse-shoes, etc. It may be the time will
come, when they that have been thus foolish, will feel their own Consciences
smiting them for what they have done. Let them remember the Example of that
gracious and famous Gentlewoman, Mrs. Honeywood; the occasion of whose
sorrowful and doleful desertion, was, in that having a Child sick, she asked
counsel of a Wizard about its Recovery. Certainly, it is better for persons to
repent of sin the procuring cause of all affliction, and by the prayer of Faith
to betake themselves to the Lord Jesus, the great Physician both of body and
soul, and so to wait for healing in the use of lawful means, until God shall
see meet to bestow that mercy on them; I say this is better, than to follow
such dark methods as those declared against, wherein if they have found any
success, they may fear it is in wrathful judgment unto them or theirs. Some
observe that persons who receive present healing in such unlawful ways,
usually come to unhappy ends at last. Let me then conclude the Answer unto the
case propounded with the words which th Angel bid the Prophet Elijah speak to
Abaziah's Messengers, 2 King.1.3. Is it because there is no God in Israel, that
you go to Baalzebub the God of Ekron?

There is another Case of Conscience which may here be enquired into, viz.
Whether it be lawful to bind persons suspected for Witches, and so cast them
into the Water, in order to making a discovery of their innocence or
guiltiness; so as that if they keep above the Water, they shall be deemed as
confoederate with the Devil, but if they sink they are to be acquitted from the
crime of Witchcraft. As for this way of purgation it cannot be denied but that
some learned men have indulged it. King JAMES approves of it, in his Discourse
of Witchcraft B. 3. Chap.6. supposing that the water refurseth to receive
Witches into its Bosom, because they have perfidiously violated their Covenant
with God, confirmed by Water in Baptism. Kornmannus and Scribonius do upon the
same ground justify this way of trial. But a worthy Casuist of our own, gives
a judicious Reply to this supposed, viz. that all Water is not the Water of
Baptism, but that only which is used in the very act of Baptism. Moreover,
according to this notion the Proba would serve only for such persons as have
been Baptized, Wierus and Bodinus have written against this Experiment. So has
Hemmingius; who says, that it is both superstitious and ridiculous. Likewise,
that Learned Physician John Heurnius has published a Treatise, which he calls,
Responsum ad supremam curiam Hollandiae nullum esse aequae innatationem
lamiarum indicium. That Book I have not seen, but I find it mentioned in
Meursius his Athenae Batavae Amongst English Authors, Dr. Cott has endeavored
to show the unlawfulness of using such a practice. Also Mr. Perkins is so far
from approving of this probation by cold water, as that he rather inclines to
think that the persons who put it in practice are themselves after a sort
practisers of Witchcraft. That most Learned, Judicious, and Holy Man,
Gisbertus V^etius in his forementioned Exercitation de Magia, P.573. endeavors
to evince that the custom of trying Witches by casting them into the Water is
unlawful, a Tempting of God, and indirect Magic. And that it is utterly
unlawful, I am by the following Reasons convinced:

1. This practice has no Foundation in nature, nor in Scripture. If the Water
will bear none but Witches, this must need proceed either from some natural or
some supernatural cause. No natural cause is or can be assigned why the bodies
of such persons should swim rather than of any other. The Bodies of Witches
have not lost their natural Properties, they have weight in them as well as
others. Moral changes and viceousness of mind, make no alteration as to these
natural proprieties which are inseparable from the body. Whereas some pretend
that the Bodies of Witches are possessed with the Devil, and on that account
are incapable of sinking under the water; Malderus his reply is rational, viz.
that the Allegation has no solidity in it, witness the Gadarens Hoggs, which
were no sooner possessed with the Devil but they ran into the Water, and there
perished. But if the experiment be supernatural, it must either be Divine or
Diabolical. It is not divine; for the Scripture does no where appoint any such
course to be taken to find out whether persons are in league with the Devil or
no. It remains then that the experiment is Diabolical. If it be said, that the
Devil has made a compact with Wizards, that they shall not be drowned, and by
that means that Covenant is discovered; the Rephy is, we may not in the least
build upon the Devils word. By this Objection the matter is ultimately resolved
into a Diabolical Faith. And shall that cast the scale, when the lives of men
are concerned? Suppose the Devil says these persons are Witches, must the
Judge therefore condemn them?

2. Experience has proved this to be a fallacious way of trying Witches,
therefore it ought not to be practiced. Thereby guilty persons may happen to be
acquitted, and the innocent to be condemned. The Devil may have power to cause
supernatation on the water in a person that never made any compact with him.
And many times known and convicted Wizards have sunk under the water when
thrown thereon. In the Bohemian History mention is made of several Witches, who
being tried by cold water were as much subject to submersion as any other
persons. Delrio reports the like of another Witch. And Godelmannus speaks of
six Witches in whom this way of trial failed. Malderus says It has been known
that the very same persons being often brought to this probation by Water, did
at one time swim and another time sink; and this difference has sometimes
happened according to the different persons making the experiment upon them; in
which respect one might with greater reason conclude that the persons who used
the experiment were Witches, then that the persons tried were so.

3. This way of purgation is to be accounted of, like other provocations or
appeals to the Judgment of God; invented by men: such as Camp-fight,
Explorations by hot water, etc. In former times it has been customary (and I
suppose it is so still among the Norwegians) that the suspected party was to put
his hand into scalding water, and if he received no hurt thereby then was he
reputed innocent; but if otherwise, judged as guilty. Also, the trial by fire
Ordeal has been used in our Nation in times of Darkness. Thus Emma the Mother
of King Edward the Confessor, was led barefoot and blindfold over certain hot
irons, and not happening to touch any of them, was judged innocent of the crime
which some suspected her as guilty of. And Kunegund Wife to the Emperor Henry
II. being accused of Adultery, to clear her self, did in a great and honorable
Assembly take up seven glowing irons one after onother with her bare hand, and
had no harm thereby. These bloody kind of Experiments are now generally
banished out of the World. It is pity the Ordeal by cold water is not exploded
with the other.

4. This vulgar probation (as it uses to be called) was first taken up in
times of Superstition, being (as before was hinted of other Magical Impostures)
propagated from Pagans to Papists, who would (as may be gathered from Bernards
66 Sermon. in Cantica) sometimes bring those that were under suspicion for
Heresy unto their Purgation in this way. We know that our Ancestors, the old
Pagan Saxons had amongst them four sorts of Ordeal ( i. e. Trial or Judgment
as the Saxon word signifies) whereby when sufficient proof was wanting, they
sought (according as the Prince of darkness had instructed them) to find out
the truth concerning suspected persons, one of which Ordeals was this, the
persons surmised to be guilty, having Cords tied under their Arms, were thrown
with it into some River, to see whether they would sink or swim. So that this
Probation was not originally confined to Witches, but others supposed to be
Criminals were thus to be tried: but in some Countries they thought meet thus
to examine none but those who have been suspected for familiarity with the
Devil. That this custom was in its first rise Superstitious is evident from the
Ceremonies of old used about it. For the Proba is not canonical, except the
person be cast into the Water with his right hand tied to his left foot. Also,
by the Principle which some approvers of this Experiment allege to confirm
their fancies; their Principle is, Nihil quod per Necromantian fit, potest in
aqua fallere aspectu^ intuentium. Hence William of Malmsbury, Lib.2. P.67.
tells a fabulous Story (though he relates it not as such) of a Traveller in
Italy that was by a Witch transformed into an Ass, but retaining his humane
understanding would do such feats of activity, as one that had no more wit than
an Ass could not do; so that he was sold for a great price; but breaking his
Halter he ran into the Water, and thence was instantly unbewitched, and turned
into a Man again. This is as true as Lucian's Relation about his own being by
Witchcraft transformed into an Ass; and I suppose both are as true as that
cold water will discover who are Witches. It is to be lamented, that
Protestants should in these days of light, either practice or plead for so
Superstitious an Invention, since Papists themselves have of later times been
ashamed of it. Verstegan in his Antiquities, Lib.3. P.53. speaking of the trial
by Ordeal, and of this by cold water in particular, has these words; These
aforesaid kinds of Ordeals, the Saxons long after their Christianity continued:
but seeing they had their beginnings in Paganism and were not thought fit to be
continued amongst Christians: at the last by a Decree of Pope Stephen II. they
were abolished. Thus he. Yea, this kind of trial by Water, was put down in
Paris A. D. 1594. by the supreme Court there. Some learned Papists have
ingenuously acknowledged that such Probations are Superstitious. It is
confessed that they are so, by Tyraeus, Binsfeldius, Delrio, and by Malderus de
magia, Tract. 10. Cap. 8. Dub. 11. who says, that they who shall practice this
Superstition, and pass a judgment of Death upon any persons on this account,
will (without repentance) be found guilty of Murder before God.

It was in my thoughts to have handled some other Cases of the like nature with
these insisted on: but upon further consideration, I suppose it less needful,
the practices which have given occasion for them being so grossly Superstitious,
as that they are ashamed to show their heads openly. The Chaldaeans and other
Magicians amongst the Heathen Nations of old practiced a sort of Divination by
Sieves (which kind of Magic is called Coscinomantia) The like Superstition has
been frequent in Popish Countries, where they have been wont to utter some
words of Scripture, and the Names of certain Saints over a Sieve, that so they
might by the motion thereof, know where something stolen or lost was to be
found. Some also have believed that if they should cast Lead into the Water,
then Saturn would discover to them the thing they enquired after. It is not
Saturn but Satan that makes the discovery, when any thing is in such a way
revealed. And of this sort is the foolish Sorcery of those Women that put the
white of an Egg into a Glass of Water that so they may be able to divine of
what Occupation their future Husbands shall be. It were much better to remain
ignorant than thus to consult with the Devil. These kind of practices appear at
first blush to be Diabolical; so that I shall not multiply Words in evincing
the evil of them. It is noted that the Children of Israel did secretly those
things that are not right against the Lord their God, 2 King.17.9. I am told
that there are some who do secretly practice such Abominations as these last
mentioned, unto whom the Lord in mercy give deep and unfeigned Repentance and
pardon for their grievous Sin.

CHAP. IX.
A strange Relation of a Woman in Weymouth in New England, that has been Dumb
and Deaf ever since she was three years old, who nevertheless has a competent
knowledge in the Mysteries of Religion, and is admitted to the Sacrament. Some
parallel Instances of ways to teach those that are naturally Deaf and Dumb to
speak. Another Relation of a Man in Hull in New England, under whose Tongue a
Stone bred. Concerning that Petrification which humane Bodies are subject unto.
That Plants and diverse sorts of Animals have sometimes bred in the Bodies of
Men.

HAving dispatched the Digression, which the things related in some of the
preceding Chapters did necessarily lead us into: I now proceed in commem^^^ing
some other Remarkables, which it is pity but that Posterity should have the
knowledge of. I shall in this Chapter only take notice of two particulars
amongst our selves, with some parallel Instances which have happened in other
parts of the World. I am informed that there is now at Weymouth in New England
a Man and his Wife who are both of them Deaf, and that the Woman had been so
from her Infancy; and yet that she understands as much concerning the state of
the Country, and of particular persons therein, and of observable occurrences,
as almost any one of her Sex; and (which is more wonderful) though she is not
able to speak a word, she has by signs made it appear that she is not ignorant
of Adam's fall, nor of Man's misery by nature, nor of Redemption by Christ, and
the great concernments of Eternity, and of another World, and that she her self
has had experience of a work of Conversion in her own Soul. I have made enquiry
about this matter of some that are fully acquainted therewith, and have from a
good hand received this following account. Matthew Prat aged about fifty five
years, was in his minority by his godly Parents educated religiously, and
taught to read: When he was about twelve years old, he became totally Deaf by
sickness, and so has ever since continued; after the loss of his hearing he
was taught to write: his Reading and Writing he retains perfectly, and makes
much good improvement of both, but his Speech is very broken, and imperfect,
not easily intelligible; he makes use of it more seldom; only to some few that
are wonted to it. He discourses most by Signs, and by Writing. He is studious
and judicious in matters of Religion, has been in Churchfellowship, a partaker
of all Ordinances near thirty years, has approved himself unto good
satisfaction therein, in all ways of Church Communion, both in public and
private; and judged to be a well wrought Convert and real Christian. Sarab Prat
his Wife, being about forty three years old, was also quite deprived of Hearing
by sickness, when about the third year of her Age, after she could speak, and
had begun to learn Letters, having quite lost Hearing, she lost all speech
(doubtless all remembrance and understanding of Words and Language,) her
Religious Parents being both dead, her godly Brother Ephraim Hunt (yet
surviving) took a Fatherly care of her, she also happily fell under the
Guardianship and Tuition of the Reverend Mr. Thomas Thacher, who labored with
design to teach her to understand Speech or Language by Writing, but it was
never observed that any thing was really effected; she has a notable accuracy
and quickness of understanding by the Eye, she discourses altogether by signs,
they that are able to discourse with her in that way, will communicate any
matter much more speedily (and as full) as can be by Speech, and she to them.
Her Children sign from the Breast, and learn to speak by their eyes and fingers
sooner than by their tongues. She was from her Childhood naturally sober, and
susceptible of good civil Education, but had no knowledge of a Deity, or of any
thing that does concern another life and world. Yet God has of his infinite
mercy, revealed Himself, his Son, and the great Mysteries of Salvation unto her
by an Extraordinary and more immoderate working of his Spirit (as it is believed)
in a saving work of Conversion. An account of her Experience was taken from her
in writing by her Husband; upon which she was Examined by the Elders of the
Church, they improving her Husband and two of her Sisters, intelligent persons,
and notably skilled in her artificial Language; by whose help they attained
good satisfaction, that she understands all the Principles of Religion: Those
of the Unity of the Divine Essence, Trinity of Persons, the Personal Union, the
Mystical Union, they made most diligent enquiry about, and were satisfied that
her Knowledge and Experience was distinct and sound, and they hoped saving. She
was under great exercise of Spirit, and most affectionately concerned for and
about her Soul, her Spiritual and Eternal estate. She imparted her self to her
Friends, and expressed her desire of help. She made use of the Bible and other
good Books, and remar^t such places and passages as suited her condition, and
that with tears; she did once in her Exercise, write with a Pin upon a Trencher
three times over, Ah poor Soul! and therewithal burst forth into tears, before
diverse of her Friends. She has been wont to enquire after the Text, and when
it has been showed to her to look and muse upon it. She knows most, if not
all persons Names that she has acquaintance with. If Scripture Names, will
readily turn and point to them in the Bible. It may be conceived, that although
she understands neither Words, Letters, nor Language; yet she understands
things Hieroglyphically. The Letters and Words are unto her but signs of the
things, and as it were Hieroglyphics. She was very desirous of
Church Communion in all Ordinances, and was admitted with general and good
satisfaction, and has approved her self to the best observation, a grave and
gracious Woman. They both attend public Worship with much reverence and
constancy, and are very inoffensive (and in diverse respects) exemplary in their
Conversation. Thus far is that Narrative, written June 27. 1683.

I suppose no one that rightly consider the Circumstances of this Relation will
make a scruple about the lawfulness of admitting such Persons to participate in
the Holy Mysteries of Christ's Kingdom. All judicious Casuists determine, that
those who were either born, or by any accident made Deaf and Dumb, if their
Conversation be blameless, and they able by sign; (which are Analogous to
verbal expressions) to declare their knowledge and faith; may as freely be
received to the Lords Supper, as any that shall orally make the like
Profession. Of this judgment was Luther. And Melancthon ( in consil. Part I.
Page 268.) Gerhard Loc. Com. Tom. 5. These. 226. Alting Loc. Gom. Part I. Page
90. Voetius Disp. (...). Part 2. In appendice de surdis. Balduicus in his Cases
of Conscience ( Lib.2. C.12.) does confirm this by producing several Instances
of Dumb persons admitted to the Communion. Its certain that some such have been
made to understand the Mysteries of the Gospel, so as to suffer Martyrdom on
that account.

In the Year 1620, one that was Leaf and Dumb, being solicited by the Papists
to be present at Mass, chose rather to suffer death. It is also a thing known,
that Men are able by signs to discourse, and to communicate their sentiments
one to another. There are above thirty Mutes kept in the Ottoman Court for the
Grand Seignior to sport with: Concerning whom Mr. Ricaut in his History of the
present State of the Ottoman Empire ( P.62.) reports, that they are able by
signs not only to signify their sense in familiar Questions, but to recount
Stories, and understand the Fables of the Turkish Religion, the Laws and
Precepts of the Alcoran, the Name of Mahomet, and what else may be capable of
being expressed by the tongue. This Language of the Mutes is so much in fashion
in the Ottoman Court, that almost every one can deliver his sense in it. And
that Deaf persons have been sometimes able to write, and to understand what
others say to them by the very motion of their Lips is most certain. Camerarius
tells us of a young Man and a Maid then living at Noremberg, who though Deaf
and Dumb, could Read and Write, and ^^pher, and by the motion of a man's Lips,
knew his meaning. Platerus speaks of one Deaf and Dumb born, that yet could
express his mind in a Table Book, and understood what others wrote therein, and
was wont to attend upon the Ministry of Oecolampadius, understanding many
things by the motion of the lips of the Preacher. Mr. Clark in his Examples (
Vol.1. Chap. 33.) says, that there was a Woman in Edinburg in Scotland (her
Name was Gennet Lowes) who being naturally Deaf and Dumb, could understand what
People said merely by the moving of their Lips. It is famously known that Mr.
Crisp of London, could do the like. Borellus gives an account of one that lost
his Hearing by a violent Disease when he was five years old, yet if they did
but whisper to him, he could by their Lips perceive what they said. There is
one now living (or that not many years since was so) in Silesia in whom that
Disease of the Small Pox caused a total Deafness; who nevertheless, by exact
observing the motion of Men's Lips, can understand what they say; and if they do
but Whisper he perceives what they say better than if they vociferate never so
loudly. He attends upon public Sermons, being able to give an account of what
is delivered, provided he may but see the Preacher speaking, though he cannot
hear a word. It is consistent with reason that Mutes should understand what
others say by the motion of their Lips, since it is evident that the lips are
of great use in framing Speech. Hence Job calls his speech, the moving of his
lips, Chap.16. Ver.5, and we know that tongueless persons by the help of their
lips and other Organs of speech have been able to speak. Ecclesiastical story
informs us of several Confessors of the truth, who after their Tongues were cut
out by bloody Persecutors could still bear witness to the truth. Hon^richius
(that cruel King of the Vandals) caused the Tongues of many to be violently
plucked out of their mouths; Who after that could speak as formerly: Only two of
them when they became guilty of the sin of Uncleanness were able to speak no
more; this has been attested by three credible Witnesses who knew the persons:
See Mr. Baxter's Church History, P. 130. There is lately Published (in Latin) a
very strange Relation of a Child in France (his Name was Peter Durand) who
being visited with the Small Pox when he was about six years old, his Tongue
putrified, and was quite consumed. After which (the Uvula in his Mouth being
longer than it was before) he could by the help of the other Organs of Speech
discourse as plainly as if he had never lost his Tongue. These things are
mavelous. And yet I have lately met with a passage more strange than any of
these related. There is (or was in the Year 1679.) living near Kerchem in
Germany, a Man (his name is John Algair) who suddenly lost the use of his
Speech: the case has been so with him, that fourteen years together, he can
never speak but at one hour of the Day, just as the Sun comes to the Meridian
he has the liberty of his Speech for an hour and no more; so that he knows
exactly when it is twelve a Clock, because then he can speak, and not a minute
before that, nor a minute after one. This is related in the Germanic
Ephemerides of Miscellaneous Curiosities, for the Year 1679. Observat. 188. It
is evident that the Sun has a marvelous influence as to some Diseases, which
the bodies of Men are subject unto. For in Egypt though the Plague rage the day
before, on that very day when the Sun enters into Leo, it cease, when also
the Floods of Nilus abate, as Geographers inform us.

Moreover, it is possible by Art to teach those that are by nature Deaf and
Dumb to speak. The Dectylogy of Beda is pretty, whereby Men speak as nimbly
with the fingers as with the tongue; taking five fingers of the one hand for
Vowels, and the several positions of the other for Consonants. But that Deaf
persons may learn to speak, happy experience has proved, and that by many
Instances. A Castro has given an account of the method by him successfully
observed in teaching a Boy to speak that was born Deaf. After the use of some
purgative medicines, he caused the Hair to be shaved off from his head, over
the Coronal suture; and then frequently anointed the shaven place with a
mixture of Aqua vitae, Salt peter, Oil of Butter, Almonds, etc. Having done
this, he began to speak to the deaf person (not at his Ear, but) at his Coronal
suture; and there after the use of Unctions and Emunctions the sound would
pierce, when at his Ears it could not enter, so did he by degrees teach him to
speak ( vide Ephem. German. Anno 1670. Observat. 35.) But others have with good
effect, followed another kind of method. There was a Spanish Noble Man (Brother
to the Constable of Castile) who being born Deaf and consequently Dumb from his
Infancy, Physicians had long in vain tried Experiments for his Relief. At last
a certain Priest undertook to teach him to speak. His attempt was at first
laughed at, but within a while the Gentleman was able (notwithstanding his
Deafness still remained) to converse and discourse with any Friend. he was
taught to speak by putting a cord about his Neck, and straitning or losening
the same, to advertise him when to open or shut his Mouth, by the Example of
his Teacher. Nor was there any difference found between his Speech and that of
other Men, only that he did not regulate his voice, speaking commonly too high
( vid. Conferences of Virtuosi P.215.) Not long since Fran. Mercur. Helmont,
designing to teach a Deaf man to speak, concluded it would be more easily
practicable if the experiment were made with an Eastern wide-mouthed Language,
which does remarkably expose to the Eye the motions of the Lips, Tongue and
Throat. Accordingly he tried with the Hebrew Tongue; and in a short time his
Dumb Scholar became an excellent Hebrician. Others have lately been as
successful in their attempts to cause Deaf persons to speak and understand the
Europaean Languages. We need not go out of our own Nation, for there we find
living Instances. In the Philosophical Transactions for the Year 1670. Numb.61.
an account is given concerning Mr. Daniel Whaley of North-Hampton in England;
who by an accident lost his Hearing when he was about five years or age; and so
his Speech, not at once, but by degrees in about half a years time. In the Year
1661. The Learned and Ingenious Dr. Wallis of Oxford, undertook to teach the
Deaf Gentleman to speak and write. Nor did the Doctor fail in attaining his
end. For in the space of one year, the Dumb man had read over great part of the
English Bible, and had attained so much skill as to express himself
intelligibly in ordinary affairs, to understand Letters written to him, and to
write Answers to them. And when Foreigners out of curiosity came to visit him,
he was able to pronounce the most difficult words of their Language (even
polish it self) which any could propose unto him. Nor was this the only person
on whom the Doctor she (...) his skill, but he has since done the like for
another (a Gentleman of a very good Family) who did from his Birth want his
Hearing. Likewise Dr. Holder in his late Book about the natural production of
Letters, gives Rules for the teaching of the Deaf and Dumb to speak.

I have the rather mentioned these things; for that there are several others in
this Country who are Deaf and Dumb; whenas if they had an ingenious
Instructor, I am abundantly satisfied that they might be taught to speak, their
Deafness notwithstanding. Nor is this more difficult than it is to learn those
that are blind to write; which though some may think it impossible and
incredible, there is (or at least three years ago there was) a living Instance
to convince them. For in the Weekly Memorials for the Ingenious, lately
published at London (in Page 80.) I find an observable passage which I shall
here cause to be transcribed and inserted. From the Journal des Scavans, set
forth March 25. 1680.

An Extract of a Letter written from Lions, by M. Spon. M. D. etc. concerning a
Remarkable Particular.
Esther Elizabeth van Waldkirk, Daughter of a Merchant of Shaffhausen, residing
at Geneva, aged at present nineteen years, having been blind from two Months
old, by a Distemper falling on her Eyes, nevertheless has been put on to the
study of Learning by her Father, so that she understands perfectly Fr^^^,
High Dutch and Latin; she speaks ordinarily Latin with her Father, French with
her Mother, and High Dutch with the People of that Nation; she has almost the
whole Bible by heart; is well skilled in Philosophy; plays on the Organs and
Violin; and which is wonderful in this condition, she has learned to write, by
an invention of her Fathers, after this manner:

There was cut for her upon a Board, all the Letters of the Alphabet, so deep
as to feel the figures with her fingers, and to follow the traces with a
Pencil, till that she had accustomed her self to make the Characters.
Afterward they made for her a Frame, which holds fast her Paper when she will
write, and which guids her hand to make straight Lines; she writes with a
Pencil rather than with Ink, which might either foul her Paper, or by failing,
might cause her to leave words imperfect. It Is after this manner that she writes
often in Latin to her Friends, as well as in the other two Languages.

But thus much may suffice to be spoken about Mutes, and the possibility of
their being taught intelligibly to express themselves, though their deafness
should still remain. I now proceed unto things of another nature: And the next
Remarkable which we shall take notice of, is, concerning one now in Hull in
New England ( viz. Lieutenant Collier) who about sixteen years ago, being
sensible of pain in his throat, made use of the common Remedies in that case,
but to little effect. At last the pain about those parts became very extreme,
especially when he drank any Beer, nor was he able to swallow without much
difficulty, so that he lived upon Water and liquid Substances. After he had
been for some time in this misery, a Stone appeared under his Tongue, which
though visible to the Eye, continued there for some days before it was taken
out; and at last of it self fell into his mouth, (and so into his hands)
leaving an hole behind it at the Roof of his Tongue. This Stone I have by me,
whilst I write this, only some part of it is broken away; that which remains,
weighs twelve Grains. The person concerned, affirms, that it was first of a
yellowish Color, but now it is white, not being an inch in length, in shape
somewhat resembling a Man's Tongue. But that which made the matter the more
strange, was, that when he had occasion to void Urin, he was in as much pain as
if the Stone had been in his Bladder or Kidney; for when his Urin passed from
him, he was usually put into a Sweat with pain and anguish; the reason whereof
I shall leave unto the more curious Inquisitors into Nature to determine. There
are Lapideous Humors in the Bodies of men, occasioned sometimes by Colds,
sometimes by ill Diet which are apt to become Stones. It is related by the late
German Curiosi, that in the year 1655. a Person of quality in Dantzick was much
afflicted with a painful Tumor in his Tongue, a skilful Surgeon perceiving a
Stone there, cut it out, upon which the Patient recovered, the Stone being as
big as a small Olive. The like happened to another in the Year 1662. Again in the
Year 1678. a Gentlewoman in Grunberg, having been for several Years in the
Spring and in the Fall afflicted with a pain in her tongue, at last the pain
became intolerable, until a Stone as big as a a Filbord. Nut came out of her
Tongue, upon which she had ease. In the Philosophical Transactions for the Year
1672. Page 4062. an account is given of a Man in England who had a Stone
breeding under his Tongue, occasioned by his suffering much cold in a Winter
Sea-Voyage. Not long after his Landing, he found an hard lump in the place
where the Stone was generated. There were eight years between the time of the
Stones first breeding and its being taken away. Upon a fresh cold-taking he
suffered much pain, but when his cold was over his pain ceased. At last it
caused a swelling about his throat, especially at the first draught of Beer at
Meals. The last Summer of his affliction, the Stone caused him to be
vertiginous; and some days, before its excision, such an a^^^dance of Rheum
and Spittle flowed out of his his Mouth, as would presently wet all the Bed
about him. The Stone weiged but seven Grains, being much of the shape of our
ordinary Horse-beans. This Stone was by judicious Observators judged to be one
of those Tumors called Atheroma, and therefore the Name they would have it
called by, is Lapis Atheromatis. Stones have been taken out of the Joints of
many Gouty persons, some cold Imposthumes arising in their joints before.
Sennertus, Platerus, Bartholinus, Skenckius, and other learned Men have
observed that Humane Bodies are subject to putrification in every part of them,
and many notable Instances to this purpose are mentioned in the Philosophical
Transactions at London; and by the Curiosi in foreign Countries. I presume it
will not be unacceptable unto such as have not those Books, for me to relate
some Examples out of them to our present purpose. There was then, a Man who
being troubled with a Catarrh and obstruction of Urin, when a Vein was opened
there came four Stones out of it. Again a person that was much af^licted with a
Distillation of Rhume. And another that was continually employed in preparing
Lime: Small stones bred in their Lungs, many of which (as big as Peace) were
Coughed up. A Stone as big as a Gooses Egg was found adhaering to the Liver of
the Countess of Nadasti. One that died by a violent pain in his head, there was
found a Stone therein between the Dura and the Pia Matter. A Woman that died by
Nephretick Pains, the Physician found her left Kidney to be filled with large
Stones, as for the right Kidney the substance of it was converted into a
perfect Stone. In the same year there was an Ox near Padua, in Italy, which
could by no means be made fat; but was observed to be strangely stupid, and to
hold down his head after an unusual manner; they that killed him, found that
his Brains were petrified, being as hard as Marble. The like happened to another
Ox in Su^^^a. Nor are Humane Bodies wholly free from the like Petrification;
for Anatomists of good credit, affirm that they have known several dissected by
them, whose Brains were in part petrified. Nay the heart it self is not
exempted from this Misery. There were three Stones found in the Heart of the
Emperor Maximiltan II. It is no less strange that Bones should be generated in
the Lungs, Heart, and other Bowels. Nothing in nature seems more mysterious
than that which happened to the Brother of the illustrious Caspar Horwath, a
Baron in the Kingdom of Hungaria, who having been for some years Consumptive,
after his Death the Physicians opened him, and found in the midst of his heart
(which was very much dried) a Bone like an Almond, perfectly expressing the
genuine Effigies of the dead Gentleman, representing his very Beard, and all
the features of his face of exactly, as that it was not possible for any Artist
to have drawn a Picture more like the Person, than Nature had performed in this
Bone ( vide Germ. Ephem. An. 1671. Observe.40. P.72.) Moreover, credible
Histories Report, that in Africa, the Bodies of Men (and of other Animals) have
been turned into perfect Stones. Nor is that much less prodigious which
Albosius reports concerning a Tailors Wife (her Name was Columba Chatry) who
having conceived with Child, the usual time for Delivery being come, was in
great pain, and other symptoms of Birth appeared, yet she was never Delivered,
but lived twenty eight years in much misery, still retaining her Burden. After
her Death, the Physicians found that the Child within her was turned into a
Stone, vid. Sennert.Pract. Med. Lib.4. Part 2. Cap.8. De Lythepaedia. Thuanus
has another Instance like unto this. And within a few years there happened a
thing as prodigious and astonishing (though without any Lapidification) as any
of the former Relations. For in the Year 1652. the Wife of John Puget at
Tolouse in France, being with Child and come to her full time, was in
travailing pains, but no Child followed. For the space of twenty years she
perceived the Child to stir, with many troublesome symptoms accompanying; but
for the six last years of her life, she perceived it not to move; falling sick
she requested a Surgeon to open her after she was dead; that being done, a
Child was found in her Body, neither putrified nor yet petrified. All the
inward parts of the Child were discolored with a blackishness, except the
heart, which was red, and without any issuing blood. This Infant weighed eight
pound Averd^^po^se. The Mother died, June 18. 1673. being about the sixty
fourth year of her Age. I should hardly give credit to a Story so stupendous
and incredible, were it not mentioned in the Philosophical transactions ( No.1
^9. P. 979. as a thing most undoubtedly true. But to conclude the Discourse we
are upon, I shall only add here, that it is not so strange for Stones to breed
in all parts of the Bodies of Men, as for Plants, and diverse sorts of Animals
to be formed therein: Yet many Authors have arrested to this. And a late Writer
affirms that there was not long since a Woman who having drunk Stagnating Water
out of a Pond where Frogs used to keep, grew Cachectical, and swelled so as
that she was thought to be Hydropical. One Evening walking near the Ponds where
the Frogs crooked, she perceived Frogs to croke in her Belly. Acquainting a
Physician, he gave her a strong Catbartick, whereupon she cast up two living
Frogs pretty large, green on their back and yellow under their bellies, and
voided three dead by siege, with a great deal of greenish Serum, after which
she was well disposed. Again in the Year 1680. A Man living near Lions in
France, voided a Worm seven Else long, scaly like a Serpent, and hairy. See the
Weekly Memorials for the Ingenious, P. 67,82,100.

CHAP. X.
Of Remarkable Tempests in New England. A Remark upon the Hurricane, Anno.
1635. A Remarkable accident by a sudden freezing of Rain in the Year 1659. A
Strange Whirlwind in Cambridge 1680. Another in New Haven Colony 1682. Another
at, Springfield. Some parallel Instances. Of Earthquakes in this Country. Land
wonderfully removed. Parallel Stories. Of Remarkable Floods this year, not only
in New England, but in other parts of the World. An account of a prodigious
Flood in France five years ago, with conjectures concerning the natural reason
of it.

OTher Remarkables besides those already mentioned, have happened in this
Country, many of which I cannot here insert, as not having received a full and
clear account concerning them. Nevertheless, such particulars as I have by good
and credible hands been informed of, I shall further add. And let it be here
Recorded, that we have seen diverse Tempests in New England, which deserve to
have a Remark set upon them, in respect of some notable Circumstances wherewith
they have been attended. I have not heard of any Storm more dismal than the
great Hurricane which was in August 1635. the fury whereof threw down (either
breaking them off by the bole or plucking them up by the roots) thousands of
great Trees in the Woods. Of this some account is given by Mr. Thacher, in the
first Chapter of our present Collection. And I must confess, I have peculiar
reason to commemorate that solemn providence, inasmuch as my Father and Mother,
and four of my Brethren were then in a Vessel upon the Coast of New England,
being at Anchor amongst the Rocks at the Isles of Sholes when the Storm began;
but their Cables broke, and the Ship was driving directly upon a mighty Rock,
so that all their lives were given up for lost, but then in an instant of time,
God turned the Wind about, which carried them from the Rock o^ Death before
their eyes: This memorable providence is mentioned in my Fathers Life, both in
that Edition published in this Country, Page 21,22. And also in that published
by Mr. Clark in his last Volumn of Live Page 131. Wherefore I shall not here
further enlarge upon it. In the Year 1659 near the Town of Concord in
New England, there happened that which is somewhat rare and therefore to be
reckoned amongst Remarkable Accidents. In the Month of February, it having
rained a great part of the day, at night it froze extremely, so as that many
Limbs were broken off from many Trees by the weight of the Ice, caused by the
sudden friezing of the Rain upon the Boughs. It was somewhat formidable to hear
the crackings made a good part of the night, by the falling of so much Wood
(thousands of Cords) as was by that means occasioned. Of later years several
places in this Country have been visited with strange and awful Tempests. That
was very Remarkable which happened in Cambridge in New England, July 8. 1680. The
persons who were Witnesses of that very amazing Providence have declared what
themselves observed about it. The History whereof I shall here insert, a Worthy
Person having furnished me with the following Narrative, Samuel Stone of
Cambridge in New England does declare and testify, that July 8. 1680. about
two of clock in the afternoon, he being with his young Son in the Field, the
Wind then Southerly, he observed a Cloud in the Northwest in opposition to the
Wind, which caused a singing noise in the Air, and the wine increased, till the
Whirlwind came, which began in the Meadow near where he (...) though then it
was not so violent as it proved afterward, as it passed by him it sucked up
and whirled about the Hay that was with the compass of it: it passed from him
toward his House over an Hill, ^earing down several Trees as it went along;
and coming to his Barn carried off a considerable part of the Roof (about
twenty four foot one way, and thirty the other, fell near the Dwelling House
where People were, yet could not its fall be heard by them (yet it was so great
that it was heard by some a mile off) by reason of the great rushing noise of
the Wind. Afterward as it pressed toward Matthew Bridge's House, it tore down
some Trees and Indian Corn, and there rose up into the Air for the space of a
quarter of a Mile; afterward it came down upon the Earth in a more violent
manner; the effects whereof he saw not, but it may be known by the following
Relation.

Matthew Bridge who was an Eyewitness of what happened, Declares that he
observed a thick Cloud coming along his Fathers Field before his house, as to
appearance very black; in the inside of the Cloud as it passed over him, there
seemed to be a light Pillar as he judged about eight or ten Foot diameter,
which seemed to him like a Screw or solid Body. Its motion was continually
circular, which turned about the rest of the Cloud. It passed along upon the
Ground, tearing all before it, Bushes by the roots, yea the Earth it self,
removing old Trees as they lay along on the Earth, and Stones of a great
magnitude, some of which could not be found again: great Trees were twisted and
torn down, and carried a distance from the place where they were; Branches of
Trees, containing about a Load of Wood, were blown from their Bodies, and
carried forty yards or more. The Cloud it self was filled with Stones, Bushes,
Boughs, and other things that it had taken up from the Earth, so that the top
and sides of the Cloud seemed like a green Wood. After it went from him, it
went a mile and half before it scattered, bearing down the Trees before it
above a Mile in breadth; passing through a thick Swamp of Spruse, Pine, and
other young Trees (which was about half a mile through) it laid all flat to the
ground, yet the Trees being young, are since risen up: it was observable as it
passed through a new planted Orchard, it not only pulled up some of the young
Trees by the roots, but broke off some of them in the bodies, about two or
three foot high, as if they had been shot off not hurting the Stocks. Moreover,
there was such a great noise made by the Storm, that other considerable noises
at the same time, as falling of very great Trees very near one, could not be
heard. The above said Matthew. Bridge, and a Boy with him endeavored to run to
the House, but were prevented by the Storm, so that they were necessitated to
ly flat upon the Ground behind some Bushes, and this thick Cloud and Pillar
passed so near them as almost to touch their feet, and with its force bent the
Bushes down over them, and yet their lives were preserved. John Robbins a
Servant Man was suddenly slain by this Storm, his Body being much bruised, and
many Bones broken by the violence thereof. Thus concerning that.

The last year was attended with sundry Remarkable Tempests in several parts of
this Country. One of which happened in NewHaven Colony, June 10.1682. Concerning
which I have received from a good hand the following account. This Storm began
about 2. h. P. M. and continued two hours. It reached Stratford, Milford,
Fairfield, NewHaven, and it was very violent in every one of these places,
especially Milford, where three Barns were blown down by it, and one House new
built, that was forty foot in length, well enclosed, was moved from the
Foundation at one corner, near two foot and an half; but the greatest strength
of the Storm was about six miles above Stratford, as is evident by the great
Havoc, that is there made, for the compass of half a mile in breadth, scarce a
Tree left standing, which is not shaken by the Storm; the strongest Oaks are
torn up by the roots, sometwo foot, some three foot and more over; young
Saplins that were not so big as a Man's middle, were broken off in the midst:
This Storm came out of the West, and the Wind did before the end somewhat vere
toward the North; it was attended with a violent Rain: the very noise of the
Wind in the Woods, was such, as that those that were in it could not hear the
fall of a Tree a few Rods from them. Great Limbs of Trees were carried like
Feathers in the Air an incredible distance from the Trees they were broken
from: Many that were at work in the Woods were in great danger, and had no way
to preserve themselves but by running into open Plains, where there were no
Trees. The strength of the Storm passed along East and by South, over Stratford
River, and between Milford and New Haven, and there it passed away into the
Sound toward Long Island: Many thousands of Trees were blown down both above
and below the place before specified, but in the compass of that half mile, the
greatest strength of the Storm was; for here almost there was an universal
Destruction of all the Trees, leaving the place upon Hills so naked that very
few Trees are found standing. Thus of that Tempest.

Also, on June 26. 1682. there were the most amazing Lightnings that have been
known in New England, a great part of the night being thereby made as light as
the Day. In some places grievous Hail fell with the Lightning, breaking the
Windows of some Houses. But at Springfield it was most dreadful, where great
pieces of Ice, some seven, some nine inches about, fell down from the Clouds
with such violence that the Shingles upon some Houses were broken thereby, and
holes beat into the Ground, that a man might put his hand in. Several acres of
Corn (both Wheat and Indian) were beat down and destroyed by the Hail. Yet this
Hail-storm (though terrible) was not comparable to that which happened three
years ago in another part of the World, viz. at the Town of Blois in France,
where the People were by the amazing fury of a prodigious Tempests affrighted
out of their sleep, and forced to rise out of their Beds that they might save
their lives. Several Houses, and two (Churches) Meeting Houses, were beat down
to the ground. This Tempest was likewise accompanied with a most prodigious
Hail, many thousand stones being found as big as a Man's fist. This unusual
Artillery of Heaven, broke all the Slates wherewith the Houses were covered,
and the Glass-windows, all over the Town, as if they had been beaten in a
Mortar. Without the Town eight whole Parishes with the Fields adjacent were
wholly ruined by that Hail, in such a terrible manner, that it seemed as if no
Corn had been sown, or Vines planted there. Four other Parishes were much
endamaged, multitudes of Chimneys beaten down, so that the damage thereby, with
the breaking of the Windows and Tyles, were valued to be above two hundred
thousand Crowns; and the harm in the Vineyards, and Cornfieldsd invaluable. The
Divine Providence was very much seen, in that Man, Woman nor Child were killed
in this fearful Desolation. The Reader may see a more full Relation of this
prodigious Hail-storm in Mr. Burton's surprising Miracles of Nature, Page
180,181. As for those sudden Gusts wherewith part of Cambridge, and several
Towns near New Haven in New England were Alarmed, the like happened at a place in
England, fourteen years ago; the account whereof may be seen in the
Philosophical Transactions Numb.17. Page 2156. which I shall here insert. It is
that which follows, October. 30. 1669. betwixt five and six of the Clock in the
Evening, the Wind Westerly, at Ashley in North-Hamptonshire, happened a
formidable Hurricane, scarce bearing sixty yards in (...) breadth, and spending
it self in about seven minutes of time. Its first discerned assault was upon a
MilkMaid, taking her Pail and Hat from off her Head; and carrying it many
scores of yards from her, where it lay undiscovered some days. Next, it
stormed the Yard of one Sprigge, dwelling in Westthorp (a name of one part of
the Town) where it blew a Wagonbody off of the Axel-trees, breaking the Wheels
and Axel-trees in pieces, and blowing three of the Wheels so shattered over a
Wall. The Wagon stood somewhat cross to the passage of the Wind. Another Wagon
of Mr. Salisburies marched with great speed upon its Wheels against the side of
his House to the astonishment of the Inhabitants. A branch of an Ash-tree of
that bigness that two lusty Men could scarce lift it, blew over Mr. Salisburies
House without hurting it, and yet this Branch was torn from a Tree, an hundred
yards distant from that House. A Slate was found upon a Window of the house of
Samuel Templer Esqr. which very much bent an Iron Bar in it; and yet it is
certain, that the nearest place, the slate was at first forced from, was near
two hundred yards: Not to take notice of its stripping of several Houses; one
thing is remarkable, which is, that at Mr. Maidwells Senior, it forced open a
Door, breaking the Latch, and thence marching through the Entry, and forcing
open the Dairy Door, it overturned the Milkvessels, and blew out three Panes or
Lights in the Window; next it mounted the Chambers, and blew out nine Lights
more: from thence it proceeded to the Parsonage, whos^ Roof it more than
Decimated; thence crosses the narrow Street, and forcibly drives (...) Man
headlong into the Doors of Tho. Brigges. Then it passed with a cursory salute
at Thomas Marstones, down to Mr. George Wignils, atleast a Furlongs distance
from Marstons, and two Furlongs from Sprigges, where it played notorious
Exploits, blowing a large Hovel of Peace from its Supporters, and settling in
cleaverly upon the ground, without any considerable damage to the Thatch. Here
it blew a Gate Post, fixed two foot and an half in the ground, out of the
Earth, and carried it into the Fields, many yards from its first abode.

Thus much concerning Remarkable Tempests.

Earthquakes deserve to be mentioned amongst Remarkable Providence, since
Aristotle himself could say; that the Man is stupid and unreasonable who is not
affected with them. This part of the World has not been altogether free from
such tremendous accidents; albeit, through the gracious providence of God)
there never was yet any harm done amongst us thereby, so far as I have heard.
The Year 1638. was attended with a considerable Earthquake. There are who
affirm that they heard a strange kind of noise before the Earth began to
tremble. Another Earthquake was observed in some parts of New England, Anno
Domini 1658. Also in in the Year 1662. on the 26, 27, and 28 of January, the
Earth was shaken at least six times in the space of three days. I remember
that upon the first approach of the Earthquake, the things on the Shelves in
the House began to move. Many People ran out of their Houses with fear and
amazement: but no House fell, nor was any damage sustained stained. There was
another Earthquakes April 3. 1668. We in Boston were sensible of it, but some
other parts of the Country were more terribly shaken. The Indians say that the
Earthquake this year, did stop the course of a considerable River. It is also
reported, that amongst the French in Nova Scotia, there happened an Earthquake
which rent an huge Rock asunder to the center, wherein was a vast hollow of an
immeasurable depth. Concerning Earthquakes which have lately happened in remoter
parts of the World, I shall not here insert any thing, having mentioned them in
my Discourse of Comets, Printed the last year. Only therein I have not taken
notice of that memorable Earthquake, in France May 12. 1682. having received
Information concerning it more lately. Such Readers as are inquisitive into
things of this nature, may see that Earthquake described and discoursed on, in
the Weekly Memorials for the Ingenious, Page 125, etc. Remarkable was that
which happened A. D. 1670. at a place called Kenebunck, in the Province of Main
in New England, where not far from the River side a piece of Clay Ground, was
thrown up over the top of high Oaks that grew between it and the River, into
the River, stopping the course thereof, and leaving an hole forty yards square,
wherein were thousands of clay Bullets, like Musket Bullets. It is also
remarkable, that the like to this happened at Casco (twenty miles to the Eastward
of the other place) much about the same time: Whether the removal of this
ground did proceed from an Earthquake, or by the eruption of Mineral Vapors,
or from some other cause, may be disputed. They that would give a probable
conjecture concerning the natural cause, must first know whether a great
Drought, or much Rain, or both successively, did not proceed, of which I am not
informed. The like Memorable accidents have happened in several places in
England, both in the former, and in this present age; which it may be twill be
pleasing and edifying to some Readers for me here to commemorate. To proceed.
The like to what has been related, fell out 1571. in Hereford-shire; Marcley
Hill, in the East part of the Shire; with a roaring noise, removed it self from
the place where it stood, and for three days together traveled from its old
^eat. It began first to take its Journey, February 17. being Saturday, at six
of the clock at night, and by seven of the clock next Morning, it had gone
forty paces, carrying with it Sheep in their Cotes, Hedge Rows, and Trees,
whereof some were overturned, and some that stood upon the Plain are firmly
growing upon the Hill, those that were East were turned West, and those in the
West were set in the East. In this Remove it overthrew Kinnaston Chapel, and
turned two Highways near an hundred yards from their old paths. The Ground
that thus removed was about twenty six Acres, which opening it self with Rocks
and all, bore the Earth before it for four hundred yards space, without any
stay, leaving Pasturage in place of the Tillage, and the Tillage overspread the
Pasturage. Lastly overwhelming its lower parts, it mounted to an Hill of twelve
Fathom high, and there rested, after three days Travel. Again on the third of
January, A. D. 1582. at Hermitage in Dorset-shire, a place of ground of three
Acres, removed from its old place (as is testified by Stow in his Summary) and
was carried over another Closure where Alders and Willows grew, the space of
forty Rod or Perches, and stopped the Highway that led to Corn, and the
Hedges that it was enclosed with, enclose it still, and the Trees stand bolt
upright, and the place where this Ground was before, is left like a great Pit.
Also on the fourth of August 1585. at Metingham in Kent, after a very violent
Tempest of Thunder and Rain, the Ground suddenly began to sink, and three great
Elms growing upon it, were carried so deep into the Earth, that no part of them
could any more be seen. The Hole left is in compass eighty yards, and a Line of
fifty Fathom plummed into it finds no bottom. Also December 18. 1596. a mile
and half from Westram Southward (which is not many miles from Motingam) two
Closes lying together, separated, with an Hedge of Hollow Ashes; there was
found a part thereof twelve Pearches long, to be sunk six foot and and an half
deep; the next morning fifteen foot more; the third morning eighty foot more at
the least, and so daily that great Trench of Ground containing in length about
eighty Pearches, and in breadth twenty eight, began with the Trees and Hedges
on it, to lose it self from the rest of the Ground lying round about it, and
withal to move and shoot forward day and night for eleven days. The Ground of
two Water-pits, the one six foot deep of Water, the other twelve at the least,
and about four Pearches over in breadth, having sundry Tuffs of Aldens and
Ashes growing in the Bottoms, with a great Rock of Stone under them, were not
only removed out of their places, and carried toward the South, at least four
Pearches a pieces, but (...) mounted aloft, and become Hills, with the^ (...),
Flags, and black Mud upon the (...) of them, higher than the face of the Water
which they had forsaken) by three foot, and in the place from which they are
removed; other ground which lay higher is descended, receiving the Water which
lies upon it. Moreover, in one peace of the plain Field, there is a great hole
made by l^king of the Earth to the depth of thirty foot at the least, being in
breadth in some places two Pearches over, and in length five or six Pearches.
Also there an Hedge thirty Pearches long, carried Southwad with his Trees,
seven Pearches at the least; and sundry other sinkings there be in diverse
places, one of sixty Foot, another of forty seven, and another of thirty four
foot, by means of which confusion is come to pass, that where the highest Hills
were, there be the deepest Dales, and the lowest Dales are become the highest
Ground. The whole measure of breaking, was at the least nine Acres. One
Instance more I find to the like purpose in Mr. Childrey his Britannia
Baconica, page.131. where speaking of the natural Rarities of Cheshire, he thus
writes, July 1. 1657. about 3. h. in the Parish of Bukley, was heard a very
great noise like Thunder afar off, which was much wondered at, because the sky
was clear, and no appearance of a Cloud. Shortly after a Neighbor comes to me
(says the Author of this Relation) and told me I should see a very strange
thing, if I would go with him, so coming into a Field, called the Lay-field, we
found a very great Bank of Earth which had many tall Oaks growing on it, quite
sunk under the ground, Trees and all. At first we durst not go near it, because
the Earth for near twenty yards round about is exceeding much rent, and seems
ready to fall in; but since that time my self and some others by Ropes have
ventured to see the bottom, I mean to go to the brink, so as to discern the
visible bottom, which is Water, and conceived to be about thirty yards from us,
under which is sunk all the Earth about it for sixteen yards round at least;
three tall Oaks, a very tall Awber, and certain other small Trees, and not a
sprigg of them to be seen above water: four or five Oaks more are expected to
fall every moment and a great quantity of Land is like to fall, indeed never
^easing more or less, and when any considerable Clod falls, its much like the
report of a Canon. We can discern the Ground hollow above the Water a very
great depth, but how far hollow, or how far deep is not to be found out by Man.
Some of the water was drawn out of this Pit with a Bucket, and they found it to
be as salt as Seawater; whence some imagine that there are certain large
passages there, into which the Sea flows under ground, but I rather think, that
this Salt Water is no more but that which issues from those Salt Springs about
Nantwich, and other places in this Shire. But of this no more at present.

Some Remarkable Land-floods, have likewise happened in New, England. Nor is that
which came to pass this present year to be here wholly passed over in silence.
In the Spring time the great River at Connecticot uses to overflow, but this
year it did so after Midsummer, and that twice: For July 20. 1683. A
considerable Flood unexpectedly arose, which proved detrimental to many in that
Colony. But on August 13. a second and a more dreadful Flood came. The Waters
were then observed to rise twenty six foot above their usual Boundaries. The
Grass in the Meadows, also the English Grain was carried away before it. The
Indian Corn by the long continuance of the Waters is spoiled: so that the four
River Towns viz. Windsor, Hartford, Weathersfield, MiddleTown, are extreme
sufferers. They write from thence, that some who had hundreds of Bushels of
Corn in the Morning, at night had not one Peck left for their Families to live
upon. There is an awful intimation of Divine Displeasure Remarkable in this
matter; inasmnch as August 8. a day of public Humiliation with Fasting and
Prayer, was attended in that Colony, partly on the account of Gods hand against
them in the former Flood; the next week after which, the hand of God was
stretched out over them again, in the same way, after a more terrible manner
then at first. It is also Remarkable that so many places should suffer by
inundations as this year it has been. For at the very same time when the Flood
happened at Connecticot, there was an Hurricane in Virgima attended with a great
exundation of the Rivers there, so as that their Tobacco and their Indian Corn
is very much dammfied Moreover, we have received Information this Summer, that
the mighty River Danow (the biggest in Europe) has overflowed its Banks, by
means whereof many have lost their lives. Also near Aix in France, there lately
happened an unusual Flood, whereby much harm was done; and had the Waters
continued rising but one hour longer, the City had probably been destroyed
thereby. There was likewise a sudden and extraordinary Flood in Jamai^o, which
drowned many (both Men and Beast) and was very detrimental to some Plantations
there. They that came lately from thence, assure us that the Waters in some
places arose an hundred and fifty foot. Such mighty Streams did the Heavens
suddenly power down upon them. Thus does the great God Who sits King upon the
Floods for ever, make the World see how many ways he has to punish them, when
it shall seem good unto him. Many such things are with him. There are who think
that the last Comet, and those more rare Conjunctions of the Superior Planets,
happening this Year, have had a natural influence into the mentioned Inundations.
Concerning the Flood at Connecticot, as for the more immediate natural cause,
some impute it to the great Rain which preceded. Others did imagine that some
more than usual Cataracts did fall amongst the Mountains, there having been
more Rain then what now fell, sometimes when no such Flood has followed. It is
not impossible, but that the Wind might be a secondary cause of this Calamity;
Judicious Observators write concerning the River Dee in Cheshire in England,
that though much Rain do fall, it rises but little, but if the South Wind beat
vehemently upon it, then it swells and overflows the Grounds adjoining
extremely; the reason of which is, that the River being broad toward the Sea,
when the Rain falls it has a quick and easy passage, but the South Wind
brings the Sea in, and does somewhat stop the free passage of the River into
the Sea. Whether there might not be some such natural reason of the great Flood
in Connecticot at this time; the ingenious upon the place, who know best how
things are there circumstanced may consider. With us in Boston it was then at
first an Euroclydon; but in the afternoon the Wind became Southerly, when it
blew with the greatest fierceness. If it were so at Connecticot, it seems very
probable that the fury of the wind gave a check to the free passage of the
River, which caused the sudden overflowing of the Waters. It has moreover been
by some observed, that the breaking forth of subterraneous Waters has caused
very prodigious Floods. Since the days of Noah, when the Fountains of the
great Deep were opened, no History mentions a more surprising and amazing
Inundation than that which happened five years ago at Gascoyn in France)
proceeding (as it is probably judged) from the irruption of Waters out of the
Earth. Concerning which Remarkable accident, a judicious account is given in
the late Philosophical Collections, published by Mr. Robert Hook, Page 9. There
being but one of these Books in the Country; the Ingenious will not blame me,
if I here insert what is there Related, which is as follows;

In the beginning of the Month of July, 1678. after some gentle rainy days
which had not swelled the Waters of the Garonne more than usual; one night this
River swelled all at once so mightily, that all the Bridges and Mills above
Tolouse were carried away by it. In the Plains which were below this Town, the
Inhabitants who had built in places, which by long Experience they had found
safe enough from any former Inundation, were by this surprised, some were
drowned together with their Cattle; others had not saved themselves but by
climbing of Trees, and getting to the tops of Houses; and some others which
were looking after their Cattle in the Field, warned by the noise which this
horrible and furious Torrent of Water (rolling toward them with a swiftness
like that of the Sea (in Britain he means) made at a distance, could not escape
without being overtaken, though they fled with much precipitation: this
nevertheless did not last many hours with this violence. At the same time
Exactly, the two Rivers only of Adour and Gave, which fall from the Pyraenean
Hills, as well as the Geronne, and some other small Rivers of Gascoyn, which
have their Source in the plain, as the Gimone, the Save and the Ratt,
overflowed after the same manner, and caused the same Devastations. But this
Accident happened not at all to the Aude, the Ariege, or the Arise, which come
from the Mountains of Toix, only that they had more of the same then those of
the Conseraut, the Coming, the Bigorre. Those who have heard talk of those
Inundations at a distance, were not at all astonished at it, believing it to
proceed from the violent Rains of some Tempests which had suddenly filled these
Rivers, or that they had caused a sudden Thaw of the Snow of the Pyraeneans,
which had swelled the Rivers that were near.

Monsieur Martel of Montabaun, Advocate of the Parliament, an Inquisitive and
Learned Man has searched after this cause of this Deluge (by the order of
Monsieur Foucault Intendant de Justice en la generalite de montaban, one not
less seeing and understanding in ingenious Sciences, than expert and exact in
the performance of his charge and employment) understanding that this
overflowing could not be produced by either of the forementioned causes, and
being assured that it must have had one more extraordinary than all these.

And first he grounded his thoughts upon the report of the People of the place
who were witnesses of this Prodigy. And above all of those who being in the
highest Valleys of the Pyraeneans at the very Source, had either seen or known
all circumstances, for they all agreed, that it had rained indeed but that the
Rain was neither so great, nor lasted so long as to swell the Rivers to that
excess, or to melt the Snow off the Mountains. But the nature of these Waters,
and the manner of their flowing from the Mountains, confirmed him perfectly in
his Sentiments. For, 1. The Inhabitants of the Lower Pyraeneans observed, that
the Waters overflowed with violence from the Entrails of the Mountains, about
which there were opened several Channels, which forming so many furious
Torrents tore up the trees, the Earth and great Rocks in such narrow places
where they found not a passage large enough. The Water which also spouted from
all the sides of the Mountain in innumerable Jets, which lasted all the time of
the greatest overflowing, had the taste of Minerals.

2. In some of these passages the Waters were stinking (as when one stirs the
mud at the bottom of Mineral Water) in such sort that the Cattle refused to
drink of it, which was more particularly taken notice at Lombaz, in the
overflowing of the Save, (which is one of the Rivers) where the Horses were
eight hours thirsty before they would endure to drink it.

3. The Bishop of Lombez having a desire to cleanse his Gardens, which the Save
passing through by many Channels by this overflowing, had filled with much Sand
and Mud; those which entered them felt an itching like to that which one feels
when one Bathes in Salt Water, or washes one self with some strong Lixivial:
these Waters have caused the same kind of itching risings in the skin. This
last Observation is not less strong then both the others to prove, that this
overflowing was not either caused by the Rains, or by the meltings of the
Snow, because this itching could not be produced by either of the said Waters,
which are not at all of this nature, but by some Mineral juice, either
Vitriolic or Aluminous which the Waters had dissolved in the Bowels of the
Mountains, and had carried along with it in passing through those numerous
Crannies. And it is for this reason that Monsieur Martel believes he had found
out the true cause of this overflowing to be nothing else but the subterraneous
Waters; for if the Heavens have not supplied his prodigious quantity of Waters,
neither by the Rain, nor the melting of the Snow: it cannot come else where
then from the Bowels of the Earth, from whence passing through diverse Channels,
it had contracted and carried along with it that stinking and pungent quality.

But thus much concerning late Remarkable Floods.

CHAP. XI.
Concerning Remarkable Judgments. Quakers judicially plagued with spiritual
Judgments. Of several sad Instances in LongIsland. And in Plymouth Colony. That
some of the Quakers are really possessed with Infernal Spirits. Proved by a
late wonderful Example of one at Balsham near Cambridge in England. Of several
who imprecated vengeance upon themselves. The woeful end of Drunkards. And of
those that have designed evil against the Churches of Christ in New England.

THose memorable Judgments which the Hand of Heaven had executed upon
notorious Sinners, are to be reckoned amongst Remarkable Providence. Lubricus
bic locus and difficilis. He undertakes a difficult province that shall relate
all that might be spoken on such a Subject, both in that it cannot but be
gravaminous to surviving Relations, when such things are published, also in
that men are apt to misapply the unsearchable Judgments of God, which are a
great deep, as Job's Friends did; and wicked Papists have done the like; with
respect to the untimely death of famous Zuinglius. We may not judge of Men
merely by outward accidents which befall them in this World, since all things
happen alike unto all, and no man knows either love or hatred by all that is
before them. We have seen amongst our selves, that the Lords faithful Servants
have sometimes been the Subjects of very dismal dispensations. There happened a
most awful providence at Farmington in Connecticot Colony, Dec. 14. 1666. When
the House of Sergeant John Heart taking fire in the night, no man knows how,
(only it is conjectured that it might be occasioned by an Oven) he and his
Wife, and six Children were all burned to death before the Neighbors Knew any
thing of it, so that his whole Family had been extinguished by the fatal Flames
of that unhappy night, had not one of his Children been providentially from
home at that time. This Heart was esteemed a choice Christian, and his Wife also
a good Woman. Such things sometimes fall upon those that are dear unto God, to
intimate, if this be done to the green tree, what shall be done to the dry,
that is fit for nothing but the fire. Nevertheless, a Judgment may be so
circumstanced, as that the displeasure of Heaven is plainly written upon it, in
legible Characters. On which account it is said, that the wrath of God is
revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of Men,
Rom.1.18. Sundry Learned Men have published whole Volumns profitable to be
read, on this Subject, e. g. Goulartius his Historical Collections. (...) in
his Historical Theater; which is enlarged by L^nicerus. Chassalion his
memorable Histories of the Judgments of God. And amongst our English Writers,
D. Beard in his Theater of Gods Judgments, with Dr. Taylor's Additions; and
Mr. Clark in his two Volumns of Examples, have said enough to convince Atheists
that there is a God, and that there is a Judgment. Yea, the divine providence
in Remarkable Punishments inflicted upon very wicked men has been so
conspicuous and glorious, as that the Gentiles of old could not but take notice
of it. The Poet could say, Raro antecedentem scelestum deseruit pede paena
claudo. And whereas Epicures did object that evil men sometimes escape
punishment a long time; Plutarch (whose works Beza esteemed to be amongst the
most excellent of Humane Writings) has a notable Treatise, the design whereof
is to vindicate divine Justice in this matter. Many Remarkable Examples to our
present purpose, have happened in New England, and more than I shall at present
take notice of. All wise men that are acquainted therewith, observe the
blasting rebukes of providence upon the late Singing and Dancing Quakers, in
signal Instances, two or three of which may be here Recorded, that so others
may hear and fear and do no more so wickedly.

The first instance, shall be that which concerns the unhappy man that was
Murdered in Long Island, of which a good hand in those parts, in a Letter
bearing Date, December. 12. 1681. writes as follows. There went down about a
Month since three mad Quakers, called Thomas Case's Crew, one man named
Denham, belonging to Newer-snicks, and two Women with him belonging to
Oyster-Bay; these went down to South-hold, where they meet with Samuel Banks of
Fairfield, the most Blasphemous Villain, that ever was known in there parts.
These joining together with some other Inhabitants of Southhold, of the same
spirit; there went into their company a young Merchant, named Thomas Harris,
who was somewhat inclining to the Quakers before; (he belonged to Boston) they
all got about him, and fell a Dancing and Singing, according to their
Diabolical manner. After some time, the said Harris began to act like them, and
to Dance, and sing, and to speak of extraordinary raptures of joy; and to cry
out upon all others as Devils, that were not of their Religion; which also they
do frequently: when the said Harris manifested these signs of Conversion, as
they accounted it; they solemnly accepted of him as one of their company; and
Banks or Denham (for I have forgotten which of the two) gave him this promise,
that (...) forward his Tongue should be as the Pen of a ready Writer, to
declare the praises of their Lord, After this, the young man who was sober and
composed before, ran up and down, Singing Joy, and calling such Devils as
should say any thing in way of opposition: and said his Father was a Devil that
begat him. Quickly after he went from the Town of South-hold, to a Farm
belonging to that Town, to the house of a Quaker of the same spirit, and went
to bed before the rest of the Family, and when a young man of the same house
went to go to bed to him, he told him that he must get up, and go to South-hold
that night, where he had left Banks and the rest; the young man endeavored to
persuade him to lie still till day, but he would not, but gat up, and went
away; after some time he was missed, and enquiry made for him, but he could not
be heard of, only his Hat, and Gloves, and Neck-cloth was found in the Road
from the Farm to the Town. And two days after, Banks looking into a Bible,
suddenly shut it again, crying out, his friend Harris was dead; the next day he
was found by the Sea side, about a quarter of a mile from the place, where his
hat and other things were found, but out of the road, with three holes like
stabs in his throat, and no Tongue in his Head, nor the least sign thereof, but
all was clear to his Neckbone within, his mouth close shut, one of his Eyes
hanging down upon his cheek out of his head, the other sunk so deep in his head
that at first it seemed quite out, but was whole there. And Mr. Joshua Hobart,
who was one of them to view his dead Body, told me that there was no sign of
any Tongue left in his Mouth, such was the end of that Tongue which had the
promise of being as the Pen of a ready Writer. Further the night after he was
buried, Captain young (who is high Sheriff and chiefly concerned in looking
after the business) as he told me himself, being in bed, in the dead of the
night, was awakened by the voice of this Harris, calling to his Window very
loud, ^^quiring him to see that justice was done him; This voice came three
times in that night; the next night when he was asleep, it came into his house,
close to his Bedside, and called very loud, asking him if he heard him, and
awaked him. Thus concerning that Tragical Story.

An intelligent and credible person living upon that Island, in a Letter, Dated
September 4. 1683. adds as follows; There was about four years since, by some
of the same crew, another attempt made amongst us, which was also attended with
the like providence, though not so fatal an issue; There was a young Woman, a
Daughter of a Quaker among us, who was howled into their Society, as Harris
was, and quickly fell to railing on others, and then to raving, being in a
dreadful condition, so that several persons of their Gang watched with her, and
she was made wonderful strong to outstrive them, and to break away from them.
One of their own party newly in favor with (...), told me that he was by in
the night when they watched with her, and in the very darkness of the night,
they heard a very doleful noise, like the crying of a young Child in the yard
of field near the house, which filled the Auditors with some fearful
Apprehensions, which when the young Woman heard, she violently brake from her
Attendance, saying, the Lord calls me, and I must go, so in the dark she got
from them, to the cry-ward as they supposed, and it was a good space of time
before they could find her, and then she was as one affrighted, and bereaved of
understanding, and continued so a space of time, sometimes ridiculous to
behold, sometimes very awful, till such time as Justice Wood of Huntington, by
the use of means recovered her, which her Quaking Friends nothwithstanding
their brags could not do; so that I heard her Husband say, that he was
convinced that the Devil was among them. This Providence was at that time
fearful among us, yet since, both that Woman and her Husband are railing
Quakers, and do Hum and Revile as the rest of them, though several forsook
their Society upon this account. Thus He:

That which was perpetrated by this woeful Generation of Quakers, no longer
since than this last Summer in Plymouth Colony, is horrid to be related. Yet
inasmuch as the publication of it, will make appear unto all Mankind, that
Quakers are under the strong delusions of Satan; I think my self bound to
acquaint the World, that not many Months ago, a Man passing under the name of
Jonathan Dunen (alias Singleterry) a Singing Quaker, drew away the Wife of one
of Marshfield to follow him; Also one Mary Ross falling into their company, was
quickly possessed with the Devil, playing such Frentick and Diabolical tricks,
as the like has seldom been known or heard of. For she made her self naked,
burning all her Clothes; and with infinite Blasphemy said that she was Christ,
and gave names to her Apostles, calling Dunen by the name of Peter, another by
the name of Thomas, declaring that she would be dead for three days, and then
rise again; and accordingly seemed to die; and while she was pretendedly dead,
her Apostle Dunen gave out, that they should see glorious things after her
Resurrection. But that which she then did, was, she commanded Dunen to
Sacrifice a Dog. The Man and the two Women Quakers Danced naked together,
having nothing but their shirts on. The Constable brought them before the
Magistrates in Plymouth, where Ross uttered such prodigious Blasphemy as is not
fit to be mentioned, Dunen fell down like a dead Man upon the floor, and so lay
for about an hour, and then came to himself. The Magistrates demanding the
reason of his strange actings, his Answer was, that Mary Ross bid him, and he
had no power to resist. Thus when Men will not receive the Truth in the love of
it, the righteous Judgment of God sends upon them the efficacy of Error, that
they shall believe a lie. That the Quakers are some of them undoubtedly
possessed with Evil and Infernal Spirits, and acted in a more than ordinary
manner by the inmates of Hell, is evident, not only from the related Instances,
but by other awful Examples which might be mentioned. They are indeed to be
pitied, in that they themselves know not that an Evil Spirit does possess and
act them. Yet others should from that consideration dread to come among such
Creatures, lest happily the Righteous God suffer Satan to take possession of them
also. Memorable and marvelous is that Relation published the last year, by Dr.
Henry More, in his addition to Mr. Glanvils Collections, Page 58. etc. wherein
a true and faithful account is given of a Man whose Name is Robert Churchman,
living at Balsham in Cambridge-shire, who was for some time inveigled in
Quakerisme, and then an Infernal Spirit spoke in him, pretending to be an Angel
of Light. Inasmuch as there is (so far as I have heard) but one of those Books
in this Country; I suppose it will be a service for the Truth, and may (if the
Lord please to add his blessing) tend to reclaim some from the error of their
way, and to deterr those from Quakerisme who have through the temptations of
Satan any inclinations thereunto, if that notable History should be more
divulged; I shall therefore here insert it. And thus it was, Dr. Templar (the
Minister in Balsham) perceiving that Robert Churchman was in danger of being
poisoned and seduced by the papers which the Quakers had been dispersing in
that place, desired him, that when any of their Books came to his hands, he
might have the perusal of them. Which being granted, he suggested that it would
be very convenient that the person who had given him that Book should be
present when they considered it together. This also was consented to. When the
Quaker came, a special subject of the Discourse was, Whether the Scripture is
to be owned as a Rule: This the Quaker denied, asserting that the Rule was
within them. Hereupon Dr. Templar desired Churchman to take notice, that the
Quakers did not own the Scriptures to be their Rule, which before this
Conference he would not believe concerning them. The next time he met with his
Brother Thomas Churchman, he acquainted him with the Conference which had been
in Dr. Templars House, and said for his part he would not be of that Religion
which did disown the Scripture to be the Rule. Not long after, the Wife of the
forementioned Quaker coming to his House to visit his Wife, he met her at the
door, and told her she should not come in, intimating that her visit would make
division betwixt them. After some Parley the Quakers Wife spoke unto him in
these words, Thou will not believe unless thou see a sign, and thou may see
some such. Within a few nights after, Robert Churchman had a violent Storm upon
the room where he lay, when it was very calm in all other parts of the Town,
and a voice within him, as he was in Bed, spoke to him, and bid him Sing
Praises, Sing Praises; telling him, that he should see the Glory of the New
Jerusalem; about which time a glimmering Light appeared all about the room.
Toward the morning the Voice commanded him to go out of his Bed naked, with his
Wife and Children. They all standing upon the Floor, the Spirit making use of
his Tongue, bid them to lie down and put their Mouths in the dust. which they
did accordingly. It likewise commanded them to go and call his Brother and
Sister, that they might see the New-Jerusalem, to whom he went naked about half
a mile.

When he had delivered his Message, that which spoke within him to denounce
wrath against them, and declare that Fire and Brimstone would fall upon them,
as it did upon Sodom and Gomorrah, if they did not obey; and so he returned to
his own house. Where upon the Floor of a low room, he stoodabout three or four
hours. All that while he was acted in a very unusual manner, sometimes the
Spirit within forced him to Sing, sometimes to Bark like a Dog. When his
Brother and Sister who followed him were very importunate with him to resist
it, it bid him to kill them, making use of these words, These my Enemies which
would not that I should Reign over them, bring them and slay them before my
face. It made him to utter with great readiness; many places of Scripture,
which he had no knowledge of before. The drift of what was spoken, was to
persuade him to comply with the Quakers, and it named some which lived in the
Neighboring Towns. About three or four hours being thus spent, he came to
himself, and was able to give a perfect account of what had befallen him.

Several nights after, the same trouble returned upon him. His Wife was
tortured with extraordinary pains; the Children which lay in the room,
complained that their Mo^thes were stopped with Wool as they were in Bed. The
disturbance was so great, that he had thoughts of leaving his House for a time,
and made it his desire to be at Dr. Templars; who prevailed with him not to be
so sudden in his removal, but to make some further Trial. It pleased God upon a
continuation with him in Prayer every day in the house, that he was at last
perfectly free from all molestation. The Quakers hearing of his condition, gave
it out, that the power of God would come upon him again, and that the Wound was
but skinned over by the Priest. Which made Dr. Templar the more importunate
with him to keep (...) to the Public Worship of God, and to have nothing to do
with them or their Writings. Which direction he followed till November 1661.
and then perusing one of their Books, a little after upon the tenth day of that
Month his troubles returned. A voice within him began to speak to him after
the former manner. The first Sentence which it uttered was, Cease thou from
Man, whose breath is in his Nostrils, for wherein is he to be accounted. The
design which he discerned it did aim at, was to take him off from comeing to
the Church (where he had been that day) and from hearing the Word of God. It
suggested several other Scriptures in order to the persuading of him to a
compliance with the Quakers, and told him, that it would strive with him as the
Angel did with Jacob, until the breaking of the Day, at which time it left him.
The two next nights it gave him the same molestation, saying, it must be with
him as it was with David, who gave no sleep to his eyes, nor slumber to his
eyelids, until he found a place for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God
of Jacob. Upon Wednesday at night he was very peremptory in his resisting of
it. When it began to solicit him, he replied, that he saw it was a Spirit of
delusion, which he would not obey. Upon which the Spirit denounced a Curse
against him in these words, Go ye Cursed into everlasting fire, and so left him
with a very great heat in his Body. After this, he was in his own apprehension
in a very comfortable condition, and while he was considering what had happened,
a voice within him spoke to him, saying, That the Spirit which was before upon
him was a Spirit of Delusion, but now the true Spirit of God was come into him.
It acquainted him, that the Doctrine of the Trinity was true, and that God had
an Elect People, and that those whom the Father Elected the Son has Redeemed,
and when Christ Redeemeth, the Holy Ghost Sanctifies, and told him that the
Minister of the Town would further instruct him about the truth of these
things. Upon Thursday morning about break of day, it set him upon his knees as
he was in bed, and bid him Farewell. The same day it came upon him in the field
as he was going to, and coming from the Market, and pressed upon him to believe
that it was the good Spirit which he was acted with, which he still doubted of.
One night that week amongst many Arguments which it used to that purpose, it
told him if he would not believe without a sign, he might have what sign he
would. Upon that Robert Churchman desired, if it was a good Spirit, that a
Wier-Candlestick which stood upon the Cup-board might be turned into Brass,
which the Spirit said he would do. Presently there was a very unsavory smell
in the Room, like that of the snuff of a Candle newly put out; but nothing else
was done toward the fulfilling of the promise. Upon the Lords Day following,
he then attending the public Worship of God, it came upon him. When the
Chapters were named, he turned to them in his Bible, but was not able to read.
When the Pslam was Sung, he could not pronounce a syllable. Upon Monday morning
his Speech was wholly taken away from him. When the Minister in that place came
to, him and asked him how it was with him, he moved his head toward him, but
was not able to speak; the Minister waited an hour or two in the Room, hoping
that his Speech might have returned unto him, and that he might have gained
from him some account of his condition. But finding no alteration, he desired
those who were present to join with him in Prayer. As they were Praying
Churchman's Body was with much violence thrown out of Bed, and then with great
vehemence he called to the Minister Dr. Templar to hold his tongue. When Prayer
was done, his Tongue was bound as before, till at last he broke out into these
words: Thine is the Kingdom, Thine is the Kingdom; which he repeated (as was
judged) above an hundred times. Sometimes he was forced into extreme Laughter,
sometimes into Singing, his hands were usually employed in beating his Breast.
All of them who stood by, could discern unusual heavings in his Body. This
Distemper did continue toward the morning of the next day, and then the voice
within him signified to him that it would leave him, bidding him get upon his
Knees in order to that end, which he did, and then presently he had a perfect
command of himself.

When Dr. Templar came to him, he gave a sober account of all the passages of
the day before, having a distinct remembrance of what the Spirit forced him to
do, and what was spoken to him by those that stood by. In particular he told
the Doctor that he was compelled to give him that disturbance in Prayer,
beforementioned; the Spirit using his Limbs and Tongue, as it pleased,
contrary to the inclination of his own mind.

Upon the Thursday following, the Spirit began to rage after its former manner,
as Dr. Templar was at Prayer with him, it was very discernable how it wrought
upon his Body, forced him to grate his Teeth, and draw his Mouth awry. He told
the Minister after he had done, that it bid him to denounce woe against him. It
pleased God upon continuance in prayer with him, at last to release him of all
his trouble, and so far to make it advantageous to him and to his Wife, and
some others, which were too much biased with the Principles of the Quakers,
that now they have a perfect dislike of that way, and do diligently attend upon
(...) public Worship of God.

Thus concerning this strange but true Relation. We may by this judge whose
Servants the singing Quakers are; and what Spirit does powerfully breath in,
and act those miserable and deluded Enthusiasts.

But I shall say no more to the Quakers at present; only p^ay that such of them
as have not Sinn^d unto Death, may have their eyes opened, and (if possible) be
delivered out of the snares of Satan, by whom they are taken Captive at his
will.

It has been by many observed, that Men addicted to horrid Cursings and
Execrations, have pulled down the imprecated vengeance of Heaven upon
themselves. Sundry very awful Examples of this kind have lately happened: I shall
here mention one or two.

The hand of God was very Remarkable, in that which came to pass in the
Narraganset Country in New England, not many weeks since. For I have good
Information, that on August 28. 1683. A Man there ( viz. Samuel Wilson) having
caused his Dog to mischief his Neighbors Cattle, was blamed for his so doing.
He denied the fact with Imprecations, wishing that he might never stir from
that place ^f he had so done. His Neighbor being troubled at his denying the
truth, reproved him, and told him he did very ill to deny what his Conscience
knew to be truth. The Atheist thereupon used the Name of God in his
Imprecations; saving, He wished to God he might never stir out of that place,
if be had done that which he was charged with. The words were scarce out of his
mouth before he sunk down dead, and never stirred more; a Son in Law of his
standing by and catching him as he fell to the ground.

A thing not unlike to this happened (though not in New England yet) in America,
about a year ago. For in September 1682. A man at the Isle of Providence
belonging to a Vessel whereof one Wollery was Master, being charged with some
deceit in a matter that had been committed to him, in order to his own
Vindication, horridly wished that the Devil might put out his eyes, if he had
done as was suspected concerning him. That very night a Rhume fell into his
Eyes, so as that within a few days he became sta^k blind. His company being
astonished at the Divine hand which thus conspicuously and signally appeared;
put him ashore at Providence, and left him there. A Physician being desired to
undertake his Cure, hearing how he came to lose his sight, refused to meddle
with him. This account I lately received from credible persons, who knew and
have often seen the Man whom the Devil (according to his own wicked wish) made
blind, through the dreadful and righteous judgment of God.

Moreover, that worse than brutish sin of Drunkenness, has been witnessed
against from Heaven by severe and signal Judgments. It was a sign of the
fearful Wrath of God, upon that notorious Drunkard, at a place called S^atucket
in Long Island; who as he was in Drink, fell into the Fire (the People in the
House then being in Bed and asleep) and so continued for some considerable
time, until he received his Deaths wound. At his first awakening he roared out
Fire! Fire! as if it had been one in Hell, to the great astonishment of all
that heard him. One in the House flung a pail of Water on him to quench his
Clothes, but that added to his torment; so he continued yelling after an
hideous manner, Fire! Fire! and within a day or two died in great misery. And
though this Drunkard died by fire, it is Remarkable that many of those who have
loved drink, have died by water, and that at the very time when their
understandings have been drowned with Drink. It is an awful consiration, that
there have been at several times above forty persons in this Land, whom death
has found in that woeful plight, so that their immortal Souls have gone out of
Drunken Bodies, to appear before God the Judge of all.

That Remarkable Judgment has first or last fallen upon those who have sought
the hurt of the People of God in New England, is so notorious, as that it is
become the observation of every Man. This Israel in the Wilderness has eat up
the Nations his Enemies, he has broke their Bones, and pierced them through
with his Arrows. Some Adversaries have escaped longer unpunished than others;
but then their ends have been of all the most woeful, and tragical at last. I
shall instance only in what has lately come to pass, with respect unto the
Heathen who rose up against us, thinking to swallow us up quick, when their
Wrath was kindled against us. Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us a prey
to their Teeth. The Chieftains amongst them were all cut off, either by Sword
or Sickness in the War time, excepting those in the Eastern parts, whose
Ringleaders outlived their fellows; but now God has met with them. There were
in special two of those Indians, who shed much innocent Blood, viz. Simon and
Squando. As for bloody Simon, who was wont to boast of the Mischiefs he had
done, and how he had treacherously shot and killed such and such Englishmen,
he died miserably the last Winter, Another Indian discharging a Gun happened to
shoot Simon, so as to break his Arm. After which he lived two years, but in
extremity of pain, so as that the Indians when enquired of, how Simon did;
their usual Answer was Worse then Dead. He used all means that Earth and Hell
(for he betook himself to Powaws) could afford him for his recovery, but in
vain. Thus was the wickedness of that Murderer at last returned upon his own
head.

Concerning Squando, the Sachem of the Indians at Saco; the Story of him is
upon sundry accounts Remarkable. Many years ago he was sick, and near unto
death, after which he said, that one pretending to be the English-mans God,
appeared to him in form of an English Minister; and discoursed with him,
requiring him to leave off his drinking of Rum, and religiously to observe the
Sabbath day, and to deal justly amongst Men, withal promising him that if he
did so, then at death his Soul should go upwards to an happy place; but if he
did not obey these commandments, at death his Soul should go downwards, and be
for ever miserable. But this pretended God said nothing to him about Jesus
Christ. However, this Apparition so wrought upon Squando, as that he left his
Drunkenness, and became a strict observer of the Sabbath day; Yea, so as that
he always kept it as a day of Fast, and would hear the English Ministers
Preach, and was very just in his dealing. But in the time of the late Indian
War, he was a principal Actor in the bloody Tragedies in that part of the
Country. The last year the pretended English-mans God, appeared to him again,
as before, in the form of a Minister, requiring him to kill himself, and
promising him that if he did obey, he should live again the next day, and never
die more. Squando acquainted his Wife, and some other Indians with this new
Apparition, They most earnestly advised him not to follow the murde^o^s Counsel
which the Spectre had given. Nevertheless, he since has Hanged himself, and so
is gone to his own place. This was the and of the Man that disturbed the Peace
of New England.

CHAP. XII.
An Account of some Remarkables at Norwich in New England: Special Answers of
Prayer made in that place. That People marvelously preserved. The scandalous
miscarriage of one so overruled by Providence, as to be an occasion of the
Conversion of several others. A further account of some personal Deliverances
in Norwich. Concerning sudden Deaths which have happened in New England.

THere is lately come to my hand an account of some Remarkables, which have
happened at Norwich in New England, drawn up by Mr. Fitch, the Judicious and
eminently Faithful Pastor of the Church in that place; which that others may be
encouraged to follow his Example, in observing, and recording the special Works
of Divine Providence, I shall here insert, as I received it, and so hasten to
finish this Essay. It is that which follows.

Remarkable Providence at Norwich.
1. Many times the Heavens have been shut up but God has answered our Prayers
in sending Rain, and sometimes so speedily and so plentifully after our seeking
the Lord by Fasting and Prayer, that the Heathen, now for more than twenty
years upon occasion of want of Rain, will speak to us to call upon the Name of
the Lord our God; one especial Instance of this kind I have already given, and
its upon Record, in the History of the War with the Indians in New England.

2. Many among us have been in more than ordinary hazard by Rattle-Snakes, some
have set their feet upon them, some have been bitten by them upon the skin, and
one as he was stooping down to drink at a Spring of Water, spied a Rattle-Snake
within two foot of his head rising up against him; thus manifold ways in
danger by this Venomous Creature, and yet none of us have suffered any harm,
but only one was bitten in the finger, and in a short time perfectly healed.

3. In the time of the Wars with the Indians, we were not only preserved from
the Heathen in the midst of the Heathen, but by the Lords making some of them
to be a Wall of Defense unto us. And thus we were saved by a Destroying means.

And at this time the Providence of God was very remarkable in preserving many
of our People, in one of our Garrisons, who were driven to Garrison several
Houses, and the House of which now I speak, did contain about sixty persons;
and in this House one of the Soldiers taking a Gun Laden with Bullets into
his hand, as he stood in a lower Room, the Lock being half bent, and he holding
the Gun right upwards, the Gun was Discharged, though many People were in the
Chamber, yet none of them suffered any harm, because Providence did guide the
Shot into the Summer, that piece of Timber which is the support of the Chamber.

Also one in the same House, looking with a Candle under a Bed for something he
wanted, fired some Flax, which filled the Room with Flame and Smoke, and two
small Children lay sleeping in this peril, but were preserved from the fire, or
any harm by the throng of People in the Room, at length one of the Children was
taken up by one of the Men with a purpose of throwing it out of the Chamber
Window, but at that very moment there is was such an abatement of the Flame, and
hope that the worst of the danger was past, that he held the Child in his Arms;
and yet presently after the fire brake out again in the uppermost Room in the
House, nigh to a Barrel of Gunpowder: but some were guided, strengthened and
succeeded in their endeavor, to the extinguishing the fire; so that the Lives,
and Limbs, and Goods of all these was preserved by the good hand of God, who
does wonderfully when we know not what to do.

4. One of the Children of the Church grown up, (though not in full Communion)
was left to fall into a most notorious abominable practice, which did occasion
the Church to meet and humble their Souls by Fasting and Prayer, and at this
time in the Sermon and Prayer, It was Declared, that the Lord had determined
either to bring our Children nearer to him, and not to suffer them to live out
of full communion with his Church, or else he would in his Anger leave them to
such Abominations as shall cut them off from his Church; And since this time,
many young People have by the grace of the Lord been prepared for full
Communion, and have taken hold of the Covenant, confessing, that they have felt
the impression of that Word upon that abashing occasion spoken: And thus the
fall of one has been the rising of many. Where sin abounds, the Lord can make
Grace to superabound.

Concerning some Personal Deliverances.
There was a Young Man endeavoring to subdue a young Horse; and a Rope at one
end of it was fastened about the Horses neck, but the Horse running with great
speed, the other end of the Rope caught the Foot of this Young Man, as in a
snare, and was so entangled therein, that he was drawn ten Rods upon his back
in a very rough and uneven place of Land, he being utterly unable to free
himself, and none at, hand that could help him; and thus it being come to this
Extremity, the Horse of himself stood still, so long, and no longer time, than
that the Young Man did clear his foot out of the Rope; and thus was Delivered
out of the Danger, and suffered not a broken Bone, nor any considerable bruise
or harm. there was another Young Man, who sat upon a plough-Beam, and suddenly
his Cattle moving his Plough turned, and one of his Legs was entangled within
the Plough, and the Plough-Irons pressing hard against some part of his Body,
but could not free himself; and the more he called to the Cattle, the more
speedily they moved, and thus was in danger of being torn in pieces; but in
this extremity it was not long before the Cattle of themselves stood still.

There was another Young Man, who did fall about ten foot from some part of the
Mill Timber into deep Waters, and a place of many Rocks, a Stream very violent,
and he was carried about eleven Rod down the Stream, where there was a great
piece of Ice, and while he was in this confounded and amazed Posture, his hand
was guided to take hold of that Ice, and there to hold until one who saw him
fall, did adventure upon that Ice, and drew him out of the Waters, and thus
they were both delivered.

There was a very aged Man among us, who riding in his Cart over a River, and
when the Cattle were coming out of the River, he endeavored to come out of the
Cart, but he did fall down so nigh to the Wheel, that it began to press hard
against his Breast, and he only speaking to the Cattle they stood still, and
ceased moving till he was removed out of the danger, otherwise, if they had
moved a few inches more, he had been pressed to death.

Thus far is Mr. Fitch's Narrative. Had all others been as diligent in
observing the Works of God, as this Worthy Person has, the account of
New-Englands Remarkables would have been more-full and complete. But other
things must be left for another attempt of this kind. I shall only add at
present, That there have been many sudden Deaths in this Country, which should
not pass without some Remark. For when such Strokes are multiplied, there is
undoubtedly a speaking voice of Providence therein. And so it has been with us
in New England this last year, and most of all the last Summer. To my
observation in August last, within the space of three of four weeks, there were
twelve sudden Deaths (and it may be others have observed more than I did) some
of them being in respect of sundry Circumstances exceeding awful. Let me only
add here, that sudden Death is not always a Judgment unto those who are taken
out of an evil World: It may be a mercy to them, and a warning unto others, as
the sudden Death of the Prophet Ezekiels Wife was. Many of whom the World was
not worthy, have been so removed out of it. Moses died suddenly. And so have
some excellent persons in this Country done. Governor Eaton at NewHaven; and
Governor Haines at Hartford Died in their sleep without being sick. That
Excellent Man of God Mr. Norton, as he was walking in his House in this Boston,
was taken with a Syncope, fell down Dead and never spoke more. The like has
happened to other Servants of God in other parts of the World. Famous Mr. Vines,
on a Lords Day after he had Preached and Administered the Sacrament, went to Bed
well, and went to Heaven that night. Nor is there any rule or reason for
Christians to pray absolutely against sudden Death. Some Holy Men have with
submission to the Will of the most High, desired and prayed for such a Death.
So did Mr. Capel, and God gave him his desire; for on September 21. 1656.
having Preached twice that Day, and performed Religious Duties with his Family,
he went to Bed and Died immediately. The like is reported by Dr. Fuller, in his
Church History, concerning that Angelical Man Mr. Brightman, who would often
pray, (if God saw fit) that he might die rather a sudden than a lingering Death,
and so it came to pass. For as he was Traveling in the Coach with Sr. John
Osborne, and reading of a Book (for he would lose no time) he was taken with a
Fainting Fit, and though instantly taken out in the Arms of one there present,
and all means possible used for his Recovery, he there Died, August, 24. 1607.
The Learned and Pious Wolfius (not the Divine who has written Commentaries on
several parts of the Scriptures; but he that published Lectionum Memorabilium
and Reconditarum Centenarios) On May 23. 1600. being in usual Health, was,
after he had Dined, surprised with a sudden illness, whereof he Died within a
few hours. That Holy Man Jacobus Faber, who did and suffered great things for
the Name of Christ, went suddenly into the silent Grave: On a Day when some
Friends came to visit him, after he had courteously entertained them, he laid
himself down upon his Bed to take some Repose; and no sooner shut his Eyes, but
his Heaven-born Soul took its flight into the World of Souls.

The Man who being in Christ, shall always be doing something for God, may bid
Death welcome when ever it shall come, be it never so soon, never so suddenly.

ERRATA.
PAge 91. Line 17. for Lat. 48. read Lat. 38. p.105.l.5.r. his pseudodexia. p.
168.l.15. for those r. these. p. 172.l.15. for so r. see. p.173. l. ult. r.
Horstius. p. 200.l.22. dele were. p.204. l. ult. r. goodly. p. 254.l. ult. for
any r. away. p. 263.l.8.r. Serrarius. p.269. l. ult. before if add 5 P. 273.l.
9.r. Stephen. p. 276.l.35. for that is r. is that, p. 289.l.7. after Instance
should have been a full point. p. 298.l.24.r. Dactylogy. p. 299.l.20. for
butter. r. bitter. p. 324.l.13. for proceed. r. precede. p. 341.l.3.r. Thomas.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
OF Remarkable. Sea-Deliverances. Mr. Anthony Thacher 's Relation, concerning
his and his Wives being marvelously preserved alive, when all the Ships Company
perished. The wonderful preservation of Major Gibbons and his Company. Several
other Remarkable Sea-deliverances mentioned by Mr. Janeway, wherein New England
Men were concerned. Mr. Grafton' s preservation. A Vessel lately coming from
Bristol for New England saved out of great distress at Sea. Some providentially
met with by a New England Vessel in an open Boat, many Leagues off from any
shore, strangely preserved. An account of a Remarkable Sea-deliverance which
happened this year. Another like unto it above twenty years ago. Page. I.

CHAP. II.
A further Account of some other Remarkable Preservations. Of a Child that had
part of her Brains struck out and yet lived and did well. Remarkable
Deliverances which some in Windsor had experience of. Several in the late
Indian War. The Relation of a Captive. Skipper How Is memorable Preservation.
Several Examples somewhat parallel, wherein others in other parts of the World
were concerned. Page. 32.

CHAP. III.
Of Remarkables about Thunder and Lightning. One at Salisbury in New England
struck dead thereby. Several at Marshfield. One at North-Hampton. The Captain
of the Castle in Boston. Some Remarkables about Lightning in Roxborough,
Wenham, Marble-head, Cambridge, Hampton: And in several Vessels at Sea. Some
late parallel Instances. Of several in the last Century. Scripture Examples of
Men slain by Lightning. Page 72.

CHAP. IV.
Some Philosophical Meditations. Concerning Antipathies and Sympathies. Of the
Lodestone. Of the nature and wonderful effects of Lightning. That
Thunderstorms are often caused by Satan; and sometimes by good Angels. Thunder
is the voice of God and therefore to be dreaded. All places in the habitable
World are subject to it more or less. No Amulets can preserve Men from being
hurt thereby. The miserable estate of wicked Men upon this account, and the
happiness of the Righteous, who may be above all disquieting fears, with
respect unto such terrible Accidents. P. 99.

CHAP. V.
Concerning things Praeternatural, which have happened in New England. A
Remarkable Relation about Ann Cole of Hartford. Concerning several Witches in
that Colony. Of the Possessed Maid at Groton. An account of the House in
Newbery lately troubled with a Demon. A parallel Story of an House at Ted
worth in England. Concerning another in Hartford, and of one in Portsmouth in
New England lately disquieted by Evil Spirits. An account of the Woman at Kitry
molested with Apparitons, and sometimes tormented by invisible Agents. Page 135.

CHAP. VI.
That there are Demons. And possessed persons. Signs of such. Some Maniacks
are Daemoniacks. Notwithstanding many fabulous Stories about Witch crafts, that
there are Witches proved by three Arguments. That Houses are sometimes troubled
by Evil Spirits. Witchcraft often the cause of it. Sometimes by the Devil
without Witchcraft; ordered by providence as a punishment for sin. The
disturbance in Walton' s house further considered; with a parallel Story. That
the things related in the preceding Chapter were undoubtedly preter-natural and
Diabolical. Page 168.

CHAP. VII.
Concerning Apparitions. That they are not so frequent in places where the
Gospel preva^leth^ as in the dark corners of the Earth. That good Angels do
sometimes visibly appear. Confirmed by several Histories. That Cacodaemons
oftentimes pretend to be good Angels. That Satan may appear in the likeness of
Holy men; proved by notable Instances. Concerning, the appearance of persons
deceased. The procuring cause thereof is usually some sin committed. Some late
Remarkable Examples. Of Men's covenanting to appear after their Death. It is an
heavy Judgment when places are infested with such doleful Specter. Page 202.

CHAP. VIII.
Several Cases of Conscience considered. That it is not lawful to make use of
Herbs or Plants to drive away Evil Spirits. Nor of Words or Characters. An
Objection answered. Whether it be lawful for Persons Bewitched to burn things,
or to nail Horse-shoes before their doors, or to stop Urin in Bottles, or the
like in order to the recovery of Health. The negative proved by several
Arguments. Whether it be lawful to try Witches by casting them into the Water.
Several reasons evincing the vanity of that way of probation. Some other
Superstitions witnessed against. Page 248.

CHAP. IX.
A strange Relation of a Woman in Weymouth in New England that has been Dumb
and Deaf ever since she was three years old, who nevertheless has a competent
understanding in the mysteries of Religion; and is admitted to partake of the
Sacrament. Some parallel Instances. Of ways to teach Deaf persons to speak. Of
a Man in Hull in New England under whose Tongue a Stone bred. Concerning that
petrification, which Humane Bodies are subject to. That diverse sorts of Animals
have sometimes been formed in the Bodies of Men. Page 289.

CHAP. X.
Concerning some Remarkable Tempests in New England. A Remark upon the
Hurricane, Anno. 1635. An observable Accident by a sudden freezing of Rain in
the Year 1659. A strange Whirlwind in Cambridge, A. D. 1680. Another at
New Haven the last year. An Hail-storm at Springfield. Some parallel Instances.
Of Earthquakes in this Country. Land wonderfully removed. Parallel Stories.
Of remarkable Floods this year, not only in New England but in other parts of
the World. An account of a prodigious Flood in France five years ago, with
conjectures concerning the natural reason of it. P. 311.

CHAP. XI.
Concerning some Remarkable Judgments. Quakers judicially plagued with
Spiritual Judgments. Of several sad Instances in Long Island; And in Plymouth
Colony. That some of the Quakers are really possessed with Infernal Spirits.
Proved by a late wonderful and astonishing Example of one in Balsham in
Cambridge-shire. Of several that have imprecated Vengeance upon themselves. The
woeful end of Drunkards. And of those that have designed evil against the
Churches of Christ in New England. Page 358.

CHAP. XII.
An Account of some Remarkables at Norwich in New England. Special Answers of
Prayer made in that place. That People marvelously preserved The scandalous
miscarriage of one so overruled by providence as to become an occasion of the
Conversion of several. A further Account of some personal Deliverances in
Norwich. Concerning sudden Deaths which have happened in New England. Page 363.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
SOme Sermons concerning the Works of Divine Providence, and on several other
Subjects, preached by the Author of this Book about Remarkable Providence; are
designed to be shortly Published.


