Practical Truths Tending to Promote the Power of Godliness: Wherein Several
Important DUTIES, are Urged, and the Evil of diverse common SINS, is Evinced.
Delivered in Sundry SERMONS.

BY INCREASE MATHER, Teacher of a Church at Boston in New England.

Joh 13. 17. If ye know these things, Happy are ye, if ye do them. Phil. 3. 1.
To write the same things to you, to me indeed is not grievous: but for you it
is safe. 2 Pet. 1. 13. Yea, I think it meet as long as I am in this Tabernacle,
to stir you up, by putting you in remembrance. Ver.15 Moreover, I will
endeavor that you may be able after my decease, to have these things always
in remembrance. BOSTON In NEW ENGLAND Printed by Samuel Green upon Assignment
of Samuel Sewall. 1682.

THE CONTENTS
I. THat to Pray unto God, is as the Duty of every Man, so the Practice of
every godly Man. II. That Men ought to Pray unto the Lord for the Pardon of
their Sins, and the Salvation of their Souls, in a Time wherein He may be
found. III. That the true Fearers of God, will be constant in the Pactice of
Family Prayer* IV. That Sincere Christians, will Pray in Secret Day and Night
without Ceasing. V. That Baptized Persons are under Sacred and awful
obligations. VI. That the Lord's Supper is an Ordinance which Believers are
under an Indispensible Obligation to Observe. VII. That it is the Property of a
Sincere Godly Man, Not to Sit with Vain Persons. VIII. That Sleeping at Sermons
is a great, and a dangerous Evil.
TO THE SECOND CHURCH and CONGREGATION at BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND.
Most Dearly Beloved!
Concerning the Reasons inducing to the Publication of these Sermons, besides
the desires of many among your selves (who have readily undertaken for the
charge of this Impression) and of others also, in remote corners of this
wilderness (whose judgment I value) that have importuned me to write on some
of these Subjects: together with the gracious success which God was pleased to
give unto sundry of them when first Preached; I must confess, that the
consideration of the Subjects themselves here treated upon, was principal in
moving me thereunto. It i^ not easy to (...) in overmuch inculcating that
great duty of PRATER, in the constant, and conscionable practice whereof, so
much of Religion does consist. And I must say, that if any amongst you shall
omit what God requires of you in that respect, either in your Families or in
your Closets both the words that have been spoken to you in the Congregation,
full many a time, and this Publication also, will witness against you at the
last day And as for that Sacred Ordinance of the Lords Supper, there are some
truly godly ones, that upon one pretense or other, wrong the Name of Christ,
and their own Souls also, by living in the neglect of so great an Institution.
And there are more that don't endeavor to prepare themselves for it. Yea, it
is to be feared that amongst those that do come unto, there are many who eat
and drink unworthily at the Lords Table. Partly for that they do not so clearly
understand, the Nature, Meaning, and Proper Design of those Holy Mysteries, as
ought to be* But chiefly for want of that Habitual, or (if not so) Actual
preparation which is necessary when persons draw so near unto God, as in that
solemn and sacred Ordinance, they do. So that insisting on such a Subject may
not seem unprofitable, or unseasonable. I know that many worthy Ministers of
Christ, have written thereon, as of late, Mr. Do^little* Mr. Buroughs, Mr.
Vines; and amongst them of the former Age Mr. Dod, Mr. Hildersam, Mr. Rogers,
Mr. Dyke, have been famous, and done worthily in their Discourses about the
Lords Supper, as well as in their other works which praise them in the Gates.
And (...) notwithstanding the accuracy attending the Sermons of some in these
days) I acknowledge my self to be an Admirer of the Solidity, and Spiritual
Wisdom appearing in the Books of those that lived in the Age before us. But
there are not many of you, that have the Treatises mentioned in your Hands or
Houses. Or, if you have, it is not impossible but that the Lord may bless these
Sermons also (such as they are) unto your Spiritual Edification. As for the
other Subjects here discoursed on, they have been rarely (some of them not at
all, so far as I have understood) handled by others in their Sermons; and yet I
am mistaken, if there be not special cause to insist thereon in this place, and
at this time.

I shall not in this Epistle, leave any words of more peculiar Advice with you,
having done that already, in another Dedication to your selves, written ten
years ago, when I did not think of living until this day. All that I have to
add at present, is to encourage you in well-doing. And if I (who, you will all
say, have not been wont to flatter you) take notice of some virtues, wherein
the the Lord has caused you to excel, and shine as lights unto others, I trust
I shall therein, follow the holy Example of the Lord Jesus Christ, who does not
only reprove the failings, but take notice of the Graces in His Churches,
before all the world. Let me then say, that there are several things wherein
you have (through the Grace of Christ) been exemplary, and wherein the Lord
has owned you, unto mine, and other men's admiration. Let God in Christ Jesus
alone have all the glory!

One thing wherein you have set a good Example, is, in that four years ago, you
set apart a day for no other cause but only that so you might, by Fasting and
Prayer, cry unto the Lord, for converting Grace to be poured down upon the
souls of our poor Children. You were told for your encouragement (in the Sermon
which was then Preached) that within the space of seven years before that near
upon fourscore persons had presented themselves, and declared before the Church
what God had done for their Souls. Let me now add, that since your agreement to
keep that day of Fasting and Prayer, there have appeared upwards of seventy
more (the most of them of the Rising Generation) who have publicly expressed
the Experiences which they have had of the work of God upon them, in convincing
them of their misery by nature, and in helping them to come unto Jesus Christ,
and to close with him according to the terms of the Gospel. And besides all
th^se, there is a considerable number of young persons, belonging to this
Congregation, with whom I have had occasion, personally to treat, and
concerning whom I am persuaded God has begun a good work in them, and will
finish it until the day of Christ. This is a great answer of Prayer! And many
among your selves have been so much affected with it, as to importune me that
there might be a Day set apart publicly to praise(...) Lord for the great
things that he has done for us, and for our Children. Some peculiar
considerations, have made me less willing to comply with your desires in that
matter. Nevertheless, I thought it my duty, in all humility, thus publicly to
take notice of the Grace of God toward us, that so His Name may have the glory
of it, both whilst I am alive, and after I am dead: And that your selves and
others may be encouraged to pray; yea, to set days apart, to Fast and Pray,
until the Spirit from on High ^e poured down upon the Souls of Children.

Another thing, wherein the Lord has enabled you to set a good Example, is, in
that you were (though not the first, yet) among the first, that did above two
years ago, solemnly renew their Covenant, to walk with God as the Gospel
requires. And as you did then visibly, and unanimously own the Lord, so has
he since the same day, visibly owned you, more then formerly, not only in
giving you to see some special answers of Prayer; But in that God has since
that time, within the compass of less then two years, added to your number
above threescore Souls. O that God would help us ever to keep Covenant with
him; that so he may not be provoked to do us hurt, after he has done us good.

I must also mention one thing more, wherein you have been exemplary, and that
is, your love, and respect to those who have been over you in the Lord. I many
times think, there is not a Congregation in New England (...) unhappy then your
selves, in respect of a weak (...) sinful, and unworthy Teacher* No^ a Minister
in New England more happy then my self, in re^spect of a loving, and obedient
People.

I cannot forget how you fasted and prayed my life, when I was sick thirteen
years ago. And again, when I was brought near unto the Grave by bodily
infirmities but two years past. I^ these Sermons (which were all Preached since
that) or any other endeavors of mine, have been blessed for spiritual good to
any of you, I hope you shall not repent of those Prayers, either now or at the
last day.

I may truly say that concerning you, which I know not whether any other
Minister in the Land can say of his People (it is possible some of them may say
as much, though I am sure all cannot) viz. That I have not (to my remembrance)
for these many years, made any proposal to you, but the generality of you have
readily (except only in one thing) hearkened unto me. The reason of which, has
not been, that I have been sparing to put you upon things, which I believed
would be pleasing in the sight of God; nor has it been for any wisdom that I
have more then any living, and therefore it must needs proceed from that
gracious inclination, wherewith the Lord has endowed you.

Indeed, there is one thing, that I have often urged upon you, but could not
obtain your consent, and concurrence with me. I have often times desired you to
look after some settled and constant help for me, in the work of the Ministry,
and have proposed several to you for that end; but you did not see cause to
comply with my Motion therein: but instead of that, you have set your eyes and
hearts upon one, whom I, it is true, (only from relative considerations) was very
backward to consent unto his improvement, in the same Congregation with my
self: Yet have I no reason to find fault with you in this matter; but rather to
thank you for your love, since the person whom you have urgently, and
unanimously desired is my Son, who has labored in the work of the Gospel
among you these two years. I would pray you not to take it ill, that I have
been so slow in concurring with your desires respecting such an one,
considering that my averseness (which many of you seemed to be troubled at)
proceeded not from want of love to your selves, who have so many waves obliged
me, that I cannot think my Son, or any thing that is mine, too good or too dear
for you; and therefore upon the continued unanimity of your call, I have been
passive therein. And I am really sensible of your affection manifested toward
my self in the great love, and respect you have showed to one so (no man in
this world more) nearly related to me.

When I was, the last year, upon the doleful breach made on the College, by
the death of New-Englands SAMUEL, solicited to remove from you, in order to
attending that which is indeed a great Service (but I cannot say, a greater
then what God has here advantaged me with, if I have an heart to improve my
opportunities where I am) in another place, the sense of the kindnesses, I have
received from you, has made such an impression upon my Spirit, as that I never
had the least inclination to leave you, without your own free consent thereunto.

If I knew how to requite your love, I would do it! I have no other way to
manifest my longings after you all, but by Prayers day and night for you, and
by Writing as well as by public Ministrations, and personal instructions (so
far as time and strength will permit) to endeavor that I may promote the
spiritual, and eternal welfare of you and yours. It ha^s been my constant wish,
(...) I might live and do good after I am dead* I trust I shall by these
Sermons (as well as others formerly published) be speaking to you after I am in
my Grave; and to your Children also, yea, to the Children that are yet to be
born.

The Lord grant that both Speaker and Hearers* Writer and Readers, may rejoice
together in the day of Christ, in that they have not labored in vain! and
whilst I am living with you, let not one Soul amongst you, that fears God,
forget or neglect one day or night, to pray for me in particular, Who am

Your loving (though unworthy) Teacher: INCREASE MATHER.
Boston in New England, 19 day of 5. Month, (vulgo July. 1682.
Advertisement.
THere is intended to be Published, a Collection of some Illustrious
Providence, being expressive of many remarkable Events, which have hap^ed in
New England.

ERRATA.
PAge 54. line 28. for of read in. p. 94. l* 9. r false-Teachers. p. 112. l 17.
r Apostatising p 143. l 25. for particularly r practically. p 16^ l 22. for the
r thus. p 185. l 2. r your being. p 192. l 14. for that r what. p 203. l 15.
for that r the.

The Godly Man is a Praying Man:
Psalm. 32. 6. For this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee, in a time
wherein thou may be found.
THis Psalm is called Maschil of David. And it is the first Psalm which bears
that Inscription: possibly there was an Holy Song, used among the Hebrews of
old* that di^ begin with that word Maschil, and was therefore known by that
name, whose Meter was observed in composing and singing this Psalm Likewise by
that Title, the scope and main ^esign of David therein seems to be intimated.
For Maschil signifies instruction or understanding. And that was David's design
in this (as in the other Psalms which bear the same ^^le) to instruct men, and
(...) them to understand some useful mysterious Truths, which were not obvious
unto, or considered by every one. There are two Doctrines which the Prophet
does here instruct men in. One is concerning the difference between Righteous
and Wicked men, the happiness of the one, and the misery of the other, ver. 10.
The other Doctrine is that which the Psalm begins with, viz. That they are
blessed Men whose sins are forgiven, ver. 1,2. And it is worthy our
observation, that David having propounded this Doctrine, he does explain,
confirm, and apply it. 1. This Doctrine is explained by showing who they are
that have their sins forgiven, viz. They that make a sincere confession of
them, ver. 2. In whose spirit there is no guile. h. e. one that is sincere and
plain hearted in confessing his iniquity. If men hide and excuse sin, that's
from guile and hypocrisi^^ in the heart* so when they make a free and full
confession of it before the Lord, and before men too, as God shall call
thereunto, that's a good evidence of sincerity, even of one in whose spirit
there is no reigning guile. 2. This Doctrine is confirmed by Instancing and
producing David's own experience. He declares that whilst he (...) his sin, he
was in a case most miserable, but when he was brought unto a free and full
confession, God forgive him, (...) 3,4,5. And elsewhere we read, that when
(...) made an humble, penitent acknowledgement of his vils, the Prophet Nathan
told him, that God had put away his sin, 2 Samuel 12,13. 3. He makes application
of the Doctrine thus explained and confirmed, by an useful inference therefrom,
in the 6. verse. The Use which he makes of it, is plainly this, That Men should
be much in Prayer to God, and that every godly man will be so. For this (says
David) h. e. because of this: since it is so, that they are blessed whose sins
are forgiven, and since it is so, that I upon a sincere confession of my sin,
have found pardoning mercy with the Lord, every godly man will from my
experience be encouraged to pray unto him.

In the Words before us, we have,

1. The Duty which should be done, viz. Prayer unto God.

2. The persons that will practice this Duty, every one that is Godly.

3. The time when every man is concerned, to attend unto this Duty: viz. In a
time wherein the Lord may be found.

There are especially two Doctrines which these words afford unto us,

Doct. 1. That to be much in Prayer unto God, is, as the duty of every Man, so
the practice of every Godly Man.

Doct 2. That Men ought not only to Pray unto God for pardon and Salvation, but
they should be sure to do this, in the time wherein He may be found.

Doct. 1. That to be much in Prayer unto God, is, as the Duty of every Man, so
the practice of every Godly Man.

In order to the further prosecuting and clearing this Doctrine, there are
three things to be enquired into. 1. What Prayer is? 2. Who are concerned in
the performance of this Duty? 3 The Reasons why every Godly M^n does and will
Pray?

Q. 1. What is Prayer? Ans. Prayer is a making known the desires of our hearts
before God, in the Name of Jesus Christ, concerning things agreeable unto his
will.

In this description of Prayer, there are four Particulars contained, which
express the nature of it; and may be spoken unto under so many distinct
Propositions.

Prop. 1. Prayer is a making known our hearts desire before the Lord, Rom 10.
1. My hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be saved.
Prayer does not consist so much in words and outward expressions (though those
are also sometimes necessary) as in hearty desires, which the Lord alone is
witness of, Isai. 26. 8 9. In the way of thy Judgments O Lord have we (...)
thee. [the desire of^our soul] is toward thy Name, [with my Soul have I
desired thee] in the (...) ^ea, with my spirit will I seek thee early. The
Lords people there, make solemn profession that they (...) continue praying to
God, and were resolved that they would do so still, ^oth day and night
continually, notwithstanding all the judgments he had had experience of, they
would not thereby be discouraged from praying and humble seeking to him Hence
Prayer is expressed by that of lifting up the heart, Lam. 3. 4^. Let us lift up
our heart with our hands unto God in the Heavens. And it is called a pouring out
of the heart* Psalm 62.8. Pour out your heart before him. And a lifting up of
the soul unto God, Psalm 25. 1. and a pouring out of the soul before him, 1 Samuel
1. 15 all which expressions, show, that in true Prayer the heart and the
affections thereof are deeply engaged. Words without the heart, may be (...)
Prayer by men* but not by the Lord, Psalm. 17 1. Therefore also, it is denoted
by that of sighings and g^oanings which are the work and motions of the heart,
known unto the Lord alone Romans 8.26. Moreover, it is the will of God, that Men
should manifest the desires of their hearts before him, Phil.4.6. Let your
requests by made known unto God. The Lord expects that men should humbly
declare before him what their desires are, by words and other signs (...) are
expressive (...) the inward workings of the mi^d Not but that God knows what
Men would have before they express it: yea* what they will desire, ^ong before
any such motions arise in their hearts. He under stands their thoughts afar
off, that is to say long before those thoughts come into their hearts, He
knows that they will be there. Psalm. 139. 2. Nevertheless the Lord will have
Men to speak out their hearts to him, thereby to (...) their humility and
sincerity in his ^ight. And in this, the duty of Prayer differs from that of
hearing the word. They are both of them moral Duties required by the same
Commandment* only in hearing the Word. God makes known his mind and will to
us, but in Prayer we make known our minds and humble desires before him.

Prop. 2. God is the only Object of Prayer. T his is intimated in the Text,
since it is said, unto thee, h e unto thee O Lord, and unto thee alone shall
the godly man pray. Daniel and the three Worthies would rather expose
themselves to the worst miseries, that the malice and rage of their enemies
could bring upon them, then be guilty of such Idolatry, as to pray unto any
other God besides the Lord. He is the only Object of all religious Service,
Psalm. 76. 11. Bring presents to him that ought to ^e feared. When Men pray to
God, then they fear him, and bring a present to him; and such presents are due
to the Lord alone, Mat. 4. 10 Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only
thou shall serve. Prayer is a special part of that religious service which Men
owe (...) God, therefore he only is to be prayed unto. Prayer is a spiritual
Sacrifice, 1 Pet. 2.5. Now Sacrifice may not be offe^e^ unto any besides the
only true God, Exodus 22. 20 Faith and Prayer are conjoined as having the same
object* Romans 10.14. How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed?
Men may believe in him, whom they may c^ll upon or pray unto. They may trust in
the object of Prayer, but God is the only object of Faith, Jer. 17.5. Cursed be
the man that trusts in man. Hence the Lord is styled the Prayer-hearing God.
Psalm. 65.2. That Is one of his glorious titles and incommunicable properties. He
alone is able to hear the Prayers of all men. The hearer of Prayer, must needs
be (...) and omnipresent. No finite being is able to hear millions praying to
him at the same time, and these (some of them) ten thousand miles distant from
one another. Nor can any one else answer Prayer. The chief things which we are
to pray for, viz. Grace, the pardon of Sin, the eternal Salvation of our Souls,
the Lord alone is able to bestow those blessings upon us. The Object of Prayer
must needs be omnipotent as well as omnipresent. Therefore He whose Name alone
is Jehovah, is the only object of Prayer.

Prop. 3. Prayer is to be presented before God, in the alone Name of Jesus
Christ. Men having sinned, they must not have to do with God, but in and
through the Mediator. As Joseph (...) unto his Brethren, Genesis 43. 5. You shall
not see my face except your Brother be with you; so does the Lord say unto
sinners, you shall not see my face except you come in the Name of Jesus Christ.
Both prayers and praises, both petitions and thanksgivings for mercy, are to be
offered unto God in the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, Heb. 13, 15. Joh. 14. 13.
14. For it is through him, that we find any acceptance with the holy and
glorious God. If our persons are accepted or if our prayers and services are
so, it is upon Christ's account, Ephesians. 1 6. 1 Pet. 2 5. Now there are several
things employed in praying, through the Name of Christ.

1. That in Prayer we are to look immediately upon Christ, and so unto God,
Rev. 8. 4. The smoke of the Incense which came with the prayers of Saints,
ascended up before God out of the Angels hands. The Lord Jesus Christ is the
Angel of the everlasting Covenant; we are to put our prayers into his hands*
that so they may become as Incense before the Lord. Of old if a man had a
Sacrifice to offer, he might not bring it to God immediately, but by the
Priest. Lev. 17.3.4. Thus must we come unto God by Jesus Christ, bringing our
Spiritual Sacrifices unto him, that he may present them to the Father, Heb. 7.
25. Christ the Mediator, is the next object of divine Worship, God the ultimate
object thereof.

2. When in Prayer, we act Faith upon the merit and mediation of the Lord
Jesus, then do we pray in his Name. The Lords Servants of old, were to pray,
looking toward the Temple or Tabernacle, 1 King. 8. 47, 48* Psalm. 138. 2. Jon.
2.4. because that was a type of Christ; so that by looking thereunto, they
testified their hopes of acceptance through his merit and mediation. We must
bear wholly upon Christ's Interest* for access and success before the throne of
Grace, Ephesians. 3.2.

3. In these days of the New Testament, praying in Christ's Name* implies a
seeking for mercy on account of the satisfaction which Christ has already made
unto divine Justice. Christ told his Disciples they had as yet asked nothing in
his Name, Joh. 16.24. that is to say on the account of his death and
satisfaction thereby made unto divine Justice. For the Saints of God, always
expected answers of Prayer on Christ's account, and so prayed in his Name before
he came into the world. The Prophet Daniel prayed that God would hear him for
the Lords ^ake, ^an. 9.17. But in the times of the Old Testament mercy was
prayed and ^oped for, because of that which Christ should do hereafter, whenas
in the times of the Gospel we pray for audience on the account of what Christ
has already done. This is implied in praying in his Name.

And thus to do is essential unto prayer: yea, thus does every one that is
godly pray. As for Pagans that pray unto God without any Mediator; and Papists
that pray unto him through other Mediators besides Christ; that make Saints and
Angels their Mediators, thereby turning Christ out of his office, so far as is
in in them to do; their prayers are as ^o prayers: yea when they offer Incense
it is an abomination to the Lord.

Prop. 4. As for the matter of prayer, it is to be for things agreeable to the
Will of God, 1 John 5. 14. The holy Incense appointed under the Law* (which
signified Prayer, Mal. 1. 11.) was to be made exactly according to divine
prescription, Exodus, 30. 34, 35. so must prayer be, as to the matter of it.
Whatever is promised in the covenant of grace, is fit matter for prayer: even
temporal blessings, so far as the Lord has promised to bestow them, but
especially spiritual and eternal blessings, (they being the chief things spoken
of in the Covenant) are to be prayed for. And above all, we are to pray that
God may have glory, and that the Kingdom and Interest of the Lord Jesus Christ
may be advanced. All this we see in that Rule or Platform of Prayer, (commonly
called the Lords Prayer) which the Lord Christ has given to his Disciples for
their direction and imitation. To present unlawful desires before God. is a
great transgression of the Rule of prayer. It is to offer a dead polluted thing
upon the Lords ^ltar: yet we find that sometimes godly men have offended this
way. So did the Sons of Zebedee, when imagining that Christ would have a
pompous temporal dominion, they prayed for great enjoyments in the world. What
warrant had they from any word of God, to come before the Lord with such a
request as that was? so when persons under deep affliction do out of the
impatiency of their Spirits, pray and wish for Death, that's an unlawful desire:
thus did godly Job, sometimes miss it in his prayers, Chap. 6, 7, 8. O (says
he) that I might have my request! and that God would grant me this thing that I
long for, even that it would please God to destroy me, that he would let loose
his hand and cut me off. So Jonah, He was afraid that some would look upon him
as a false Prophet; and rather then undergo a little disgrace from men; in a
sullen pang of discontent, he beseeches God to take away his life from him,
Chap. 4. 3. God delights not in such requests as these are. They are not as
Incense before him.

Thus have we done with the first thing propounded to be spoken unto, namely,
what prayer is!

We came to the second enquiry, viz. Who are concerned in the performance of
this duty?

Ans. To pray unto the Lord is every man's duty: though to pray aright, is only
the godly man's practice, yet it is that which all men are bound unto, as
appears:

1. In that Prayer is a part of Natural, Moral Worship. There are two sorts of
Worship due to God, viz. Natural and Instituted worship. As for Instituted
worship, it depends wholly upon the will of God, and therefore only some men,
and in some ages are obliged to attend thereto, according as God shall please
to reveal of his will unto them. Natural worship is that which if a man does
understand any thing concerning the nature of the blessed and glorious God, he
cannot but know that such worship is due unto him. Hence all men, and that in
all ages are concerned therein. And of this sort is prayer: hence not only Men
but holy Angels pray unto the Lord. Yea the Saints in glory pray, and will do
so, for ever. They praise God,and that's one sort of prayer, Rev. 5. 11, 13.

2. Prayer is a duty required in the first Commandment: although the public
stated dispensation of the duty is enjoined in the second Commandment,
nevertheless, when in the first Commandment it is said, thou shall have the
Lord to be thy God, part of the meaning is, thou shall worship him, and pray to
him. As all men are bound by virtue of that Commandment to love the Lord, and
to fear him, so are they no less bound to pray unto him; that being one way
whereby they express both their love unto, and their fear of his great Name.

3. If we consider the several sorts of men that are in the World, we shall see
that Prayer is every man's duty. All men are divided into these two sorts, godly
and ungodly; regenerate and unregenerate. Both these ought to pray unto the
Lord. As for godly men, the Text speaks expressly. And the Lord Jesus Christ
taught his Disciples both that they ought, and how they ought to pray. And as
for unregenerate men, they are not exempted from their obligation unto this
duty, though they be unable to perform it aright. The unconverted are bound to
pray that converting grace may be given to them. Christ tells the Woman of
Samaria, whilst unconverted, that she should ask for living water, Joh. 4. 10.
Those that have not as yet a new heart, are bid to pray that the Lord would
bestow it on them, Ezekiel. 36. 37. such as never yet found God, but are out of
his favor, are commanded to seek his face and favor, Isai. 5^. 6, 7. The whole
Nation of the Jews. (wherein were few godly men comparatively) are commanded to
pray in the most solemn manner, Zeph. 2. 1. Simon Magus when in the gall of
bitterness and under the bond of iniquity, was by the Apostle called upon to
pray for the par^on of his sins, Act 8. 22. Are not ungodly men bound to
repent? Where the Gospel is Preached, they are so, Act. 17. 30. And therefore
to pray: For confession of Sin, and begging for mercy, is one thing in
Repentance and in Prayer. And the Lord out of his infinite goodness, does
sometimes so far hear unregenerate men praying and crying unto him, as to
deliver them from temporal judgments, thereby to encourage them to seek unto
him for greater mercies: as we see in Rehoboam* in Ahab, and in the Ninivites.
If prayer were not their duty, the Lord would not so far manifest respect to
them, as to bestow a temporal Reward, or remove temporal judgments from them
upon their praying to him. It is objected by some, that the prayers of the
wicked, are an abomination, and how then is prayer their duty? ought they to do
that which is an abomination? Ans. It is indeed most true, that a corrupt tree
cannot bring forth good fruit. All the actions of ungodly men are abominable in
the Lords sight* as proceeding from them, who are his enemies* Hag. 2. 14. but
will any man therefore say, that such men must be altogether idle, and attend
no duty, neither of their general, nor of their particular callings. The
plowing of the wicked is sin. Must he now abuse ^use the Scripture, and say
that his plough shall (...) his reading the Scriptures, or hearing the Word
preached to him, is as much as (...) in the Lords sight, as his praying. For
without Faith it is impossible to please God. Must he then neither read nor
hear the Word* God forbid that Men should to wrest the Scripture unto their own
destruction. The reason why the prayers of an ungodly man are an abomination,
is not because prayer is not his duty, but because he does not so perform that
his duty as he should do.

We come now unto the third thing proposed to be enquired into, viz. the
Reasons why every godly man does and will pray.

Reas. 1. Because godly men have the spirit of God, 1 John 3. 24. Hereby we
know that he abides in us, by the spirit which he has given us. Every true
Believer has received the spirit: Romans 8. 9. If any man have not the spirit of
Christ, he is none of his. The Soul of a godly man is become the everlasting
habitation of the spirit of God. Now the holy Spirit, when he dwells in the
heart, does incline unto prayer, he causes the grate the (...) of prayer to be
in the Soul. Hence is that expression in the Scripture, of a spirit of prayer,
Zech. 12. 10. when a man has an habitual inclination unto prayer, wrought in
his heart by the holy Spirit of God; then has he the spirit of prayer. And the
holy Spirit does enable every one is godly to pray. He helps them with matter,
and helps them by stirring up affections, and fervency therein: Romans 8. 26.
Likewise the Spirit helps our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray
for as we ought, but the spirit it self makes intercession for us with
Gro^nings which cannot be uttered.

Reas. 2. Every godly man is sensible of his wants and miseries. They that feel
their wants will cry for relief: so do all that are godly. Therefore are they
called the Humble, Psalm. 10. 17. The humble man is sensible of his own
emptiness and nothingness, and that he needs continual supplies of Grace from
God by Jesus Christ. The more grace every man has, the more does he feel his
want of grace, and that sets him a praying for it. He that has the grace of
knowledge is sensible of his ignorance, and therefore prays for more wisdom,
Jam. 1. 5. He that has the grace of Faith is sensible of his unbelief, and
therefore prays against it: Mar. 9. 24. The Apostles having faith, were
sensible that they stood in need of more, and of much Faith, and that made them
pray, Lord, increase our Faith, Luke 17. 5. he that has the grace of
Repentance, is sensible of the hardness of his own heart, and therefore prays
against it, Isai, 63. 17.

Reas 3. Every Godly man has Faith. The Godly man, and the true Believer on
Christ are the same. Now by his Faith, he does see and apprehend these things
which set him a praying. He sees that in God which does encourage him to pray
unto him. By Faith be sees that the Lord is able to supply all the necessities
of his poor creatures, and to help them whatever their distresses may be, 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. Also by his Faith he sees that God is willing as well as able
to save those that seek unto him. That he is a God full of mercy, ready to
forgive those that unfeignedly repent of their sins, and that is a mavelous
encouragement unto Prayer, as is in the Context intimated. I confessed my sin
(says David) and then the Lord forgave mine iniquity; and therefore every
godly man that shall hear of this, will be encouraged to pray unto so gracious
a God. He that does not believe will not pray Romans 10. 14. But he that does
believe will pray, Psalm. 116 10. I believed, therefore have I spoken. He
believed that God would save him, and that caused him to speak and pour out his
heart in Prayer before the Lord.

Reas. 4. Every godly man does love the Lord, Jam. 2. 5. Hence he delights in
communion with him. A man will be free to unbosome himself, and to open his
heart unto a dear and faithful friend, whom he loves and delights in. Thus the
Saints of God love him dearly, and therefore they cannot live without Prayer
unto him. If they be kept from communion with God in that way, though but for a
few hours, they think the time long until they can have an opportunity of holy
converse with him again. David loved the Lord; therefore would he call upon him
as long as (...) had a day to live, Psalm. 1. 6. 1, 2.

Use 1. For Conviction and Awakening unto prayerless Sin^ers. O that there were
no many such. But alas! that which was (...) injuriously charged upon Joh, when
E^phiz said to him, thou restr^inest prayer before God, may be truly and sadly
charged upon many poor creatures. Are there not some, that are grown unto men
and women's estates, that hardly ever prayed in their lives? how lamentable is
their condition! Now that such may be convinced of their sin and misery, lay to
heart a few Considerations.

1. Thou that art prayerless, art amongst the Ungodly. For my Text says, That
every one that is godly will pray; they then that live without Prayer, are
ungodly ones. There is not a spark of Grace in thy soul. Nay, thou art not so
much as in the way thou have not taken the first step toward Conversion. For,
when the Lord comes to convert a Soul, one of the first things, is, He sets
him a Praying; as we see (...) Paul, whilst he was in the pang of the
new birth, it was said concerning him, Behold he prays, Act. ^0. 11. As for
thee a sinful wretch, behold thou prayest not. The Lord looks down from
heaven upon thee, from day to day, behold he sees thee sinning, but does not
see thee praying? then thou art far from any Conversion? Thou art amongst the
number of the ungodly; and what a case then is thy soul in? and what (...) in
the Judgment that is to come? Psalm. 1. 5. The ungodly shall not stand in the
Judgment, nor sinners in the Congregation of the Righteous.

2. Thou art guilty of Atheism^. Prayerless Creatures are no better then
Atheists. At leastwise thou art a practical Atheist. Thou live as if thou
had no Soul to save; and as if there were no God to serve. If thou believe
indeed that there is a God then why do thou not pray unto him? Psalm. 10 4.
The wicked will not seek after God: God is not in all his thoughts. All his
thoughts, all his wishes are O hat there were no God. There is not a prayerless
creature in the World, but he wishes there were no God. And he says plainly
and practically; the Lord shall not be his God. By living in the neglect of
Prayer thou have rejected the Lord, and said, He shall be no God over thee. And
will thou persist in this neglect? Then hear thy Doom and tremble at it, Psalm
9.(...) The wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the Nations that forget
God. They that forget Prayer forget God, and therefore being amongst the
wicked, they must be turned down into Hall.

3. There is not the least hope of thy Salvation, as long as thou continuest
thus in a careless neglect of God, and of thy own Soul. It is very true, that
men may practice the duty of Prayer after a sort, and for all that not be
saved. The Pharisees would pray after a formal manner; yet Christ said to his
Disciples. Except your righteousness shall exceed that of the Scribes and
Pharisees ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mal. 5. 20.
But it is no less true, that If men do not pray, they shall not be saved. Can
the workers of Iniquity be saved? will not the Lord Jesus say unto all such at
the last day. Depart from me. Now the Scripture says, The workers of iniquity
call not upon the Lord, Psalm. 14.4.

4. You will be most inexcusable before the Lord. For you cannot plead
ignorance. You cannot say, Lord, I was never told that it was my duty to pray.
Will not the Minister of God that has been speaking in his Name, stand forth
and witness against you at the last day, that you have been called upon, and
earnestly told of your duty, full many a time? yea, and do you not go with
convinced Consciences, that you ought to pray unto the Lord? And yet will you
not do it? what will you say for your selves* or, how will you be able to stand
in the day of the Lords pleading with you?

Use 2. Of Exhortation unto all, but especially unto those that are ^razy, to
be much in the practice of this duty of Prayer unto God. In the prosecution of
this Use, we shall 1. Lay down some Motives to persuade. 2. Mention some Rules
to direct in the due performance of this duty.

For Motives: Con^d 1. That every man's Religion is according unto what his
Prayers are. Godliness implies Religion. 1 Timothy 3. 16. Great is the Mystery of
godliness, i. e. of Religion. Where there is no Prayer, there is no true
Religion. They are Healthen People that do not call upon the true God, Psalm.
79.6. Prayerless men are not worthy of the name of Christians, Act. 9. 14. 1
Cor 1.2. They that are only formal in Prayer, are no better then Formalists in
Religion, as the Jews were who would draw nigh unto God with their lips when
their hearts were far from him, Mat. 15.8. 2 Timothy 3.5. And the truly Religious
are a generation of sincere seekers of the face of God, Psalm. 24.6. Hence the
work of Conversion is in the Scripture expressed by that of men's being set a
praying in good earnest. Zech. 12.10. and 8.21.22. And they that are eminent in
godliness will be much in Prayer, as we see in Jacob, David, Daniel Paul, al of
them men that had much grace, and they were abundant in Prayer unto God.

Consider 2. How necessary a duty Prayer is. There is nothing more inculcated
in the Scripture then this great duty. It is a greater. Duty then many others
which yet may not be omitted. Hence the Apostle speaks, as 1 Timothy, 2, 1. I
Exhort that [first of all] Supplications, prayers, etc. (...) q. d. above other
things I commend this duty to you. The Apostle seem^^ to give the preference to
Prayer. Yea it is an (...); such a duty as that though men should forbid us the
practice of it and that upon the severest, penalties; it (...) nevertheless to
be attended. Therefore the Prophet Daniel chose (...) to endanger his life then
to neglect his duty toward God is this respect, Dan. 6.10. And it is necessary
as a means for the obt^ining of good. Saving good and mercy is not to be
expected but in a way of Prayer, Romans 10. 13. For whosoever shall call upon the
Name of the Lord shall be saved. If men would have Salvation, they must pray
for it. If they would have pardoning mercy they must pray for it. Therefore
Peter said to Simon Magus, Pray God, if perhaps the thoughts of thine heart may
be forgiven, Act. 8. 22. All promised mercies come to the Lords people upon
their praying to him. God delights to bestow his Blessings in that way. He has
engaged in his holy and gracious Covenant to (...) Temporal, Spiritual and
Eternal Blessings; but that notwithstanding, Thus says the Lord God, I will
yet for this be enquired of by the house of Israel to do it for them, E^ek 36
37. yea, Prayer is necessary in order to a sanctified enjoyment of temporal
blessings, 1 Timothy 4. 4. 5. Every creature of God is good, and nothing to be
refused if it be received with thanksgiving, for it is sanctified by the (...)
and Prayer. Food, Raiment. Health whatever temporal mercies we may (...) of,
(...) sanctified unto any that enjoy them, (...) they be received with
thanksgiving (...) Prayer. We therefore read in the Gospel that our Lord Jesus
Christ, when he was upon Earth, would not suffer men to eat a (...) without
Praying over it, or desiring a (...) God upon it, Mat. 14 19, 20.

(...) 3 That to pray unto God is our privilege as well as our duty. It is our
honor and our happiness, that we may do so For when we pray, we come into the
Lords presence; and that (...) to be admitted into the gracious presence of the
Majesty of Heaven.

We than approach into his Courts, Psalm. 96 8. In Prayer, (...) a ^arawing nigh
unto God: (...) men come nigh unto God, i. e. pray unto him, before the Flood
comes unto them as the Psalmise here speaks. And it is our happiness that we
may do so, Psalm. 7. 28. It is good for me to draw near to God. It is no only in
it self good but its good for me, says David; much for my benefit that I may
have access unto his glorious Majesty. In Prayer, we have communion with God.
Yea, godly men have sometimes intimacy of communion with God, and with Jesus
Christ, in that duty of Prayer. Now that is a great privilege; a singular
honor and favor. The praying Believer may say with the Spouse, Cant. 1.4. The
King has brought me into his chambers. What a gracious favor is it, that the
King of Heaven should admit us into his presence Chamber, and there let us
converse and be humbly familiar with him. Prayer is an Heavenly work, Lam.
3.41. Let us lift up our heart with our hands unto God in the Heavens. By that
especially there is a blessed enter course maintained between Heaven and Earth,
God and Men. Is it not an happy thing to drive a Trade for Heaven? so do
praying Saints do every day. Nay, it is part of the work of Heaven. The Saints
and Angels there, are always praying i. e. always praising God. The Host of
Heaven does worship him, Neh. 9.6. The multitude of the Heavenly Host are
praising God, saying. Glory to God in the highest, Luke 2. 13, 14. Is it not
our honor and happiness, that whilst on Earth, we may be employed in the same
work with the Angels of Heaven, and Saints in glory? Moreover, hereby God is
glorified, when his Servants and Suppliants come and present humble Petitions
before the Lord that sits upon (...) of Grace ready to receive them, they give
unto him the glory that is due unto his Name, Psalm. 29.1, 2. Now we are not
capable of greater happiness than this is, actively to honor God or to be made
use of as instruments of glory unto his Name.

Consider 4. That men (especially they that are godly) have great encouragement
to be act his work; to be much in the practice of this great duty. There is
great reason for them to hope that they shall not lose their labor. He has
not said to the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain. Many things might be
mentioned here, the conideration whereof is a mavelous encouragement and
inducement unto prayer: e* g. The gracious nature of the blessed God. When poor
Creatures cry unto him, he will hear: for he is gracious. He is infinitely
gracious and thence ready to forgive those that have been the greatest rebels
against him, if they confess their iniquity, and humbly pray and seek unto him
for mercy Benhadads servants were encouraged in their supplication, because
they had heard, that the Kings of Israel were merciful Kings. We know that the
God and King of Heaven is a merciful God, and shall we not then pray unto him?
He is a sin-pardoning God, and that consideration should move us unto Prayer.
It is the very motive which the Psalmist in this Context makes use of, to
excite every one that is godly to pray. So in Psalm. 86. 4,5. Unto thee O Lord
do I lift up my Soul, for thou art ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy
unto all them that call upon thee, give car O Lord unto my Prayer. As for the
Apostate Angels, they do not pray unto God, because he never proclaimed his
mercy to them, they have no hopes of a pardon if they should pray for it, never
so earnestly; but it is otherwise with the Children of men. The Lord from
Heaven declares unto them, that though their sins have been never so many, and
never so great if they do in a way of Repentance seek unto him he will
abundantly pardon them. Isai. 55. 67.

Again, that consideration of a Mediator for sinners; (that the Son of God is
become their Mediator) is a glorious encouragement unto Prayer. To this purpose
does the Apostle speak 1 Timothy 2.1. with ver. 5. Let prayers be made for all
men, for there is one Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus. There
is a Mediator (says he) ^or all sorts of men, and therefore pray for all sorts
of men. And this consideration is elsewhere improved by the same Apostle as an
encouragement unto prayer In Heb. 4.14. Seeing, that we have a great High
Priest, that is passed into the Heavens. Jesus the Son of God; it is added in
ver. 16. Let us therefore come boldly to the Throne of grace. Since we have
such an one as the Son of God to be our Mediator in Heaven, therefore let us
with humble boldness ply the Throne of grace continually. Christ the Mediator
has satisfied divine justice for the sins of Believers: And he does intercede
with God for them, that their Souls may be saved, and their Prayers heard.
While the Priest executing his Office did burn Incense, being entered into the
Temple of the Lord, the people were praying without, Luke 1.9, 10. Thus while
Believers are praying on Earth, Christ is interceding in Heaven for them.
Moreover, as for godly men, they are the Favorites of Heaven, therefore they
should be much in Prayer. The Lords ear is open to their cry, Psalm. 34 15. even
as the ears of a Prince are open to the requests of his special Favorites, The
godly man has the King of Heavens (...) he is willing to hear the Petitions of
such as those are He (...) hearing them pray to him. (...) the upright is h^s
delight, (...) A broken hearted prayer is (...) Yea, it (...) ravisheth he
hear, (...) Believer does pour out the (...) faith before him. What wonderful
expressions are in the Canticles to this purpose? Chap. 2 4. Let me see thy
countenance, let me hear thy voice for (...) is thy voice, and again, Chap. 4.
ver. 9. Thou ^ast ravished my heart with one of thine eyes. The voice of
Prayer, if there be an eye of Faith looking up to God in Jesus Christ how
sweet, how ravishing is it to the Lords heart?

There are also precious and glorious promises belonging to such; which should
encourage unto Prayer. The Lord has promised, that if they ask they shall
receive. Yea, though they beg for the greatest favors they shall obtain them:
if they open their mouths wide, he will fill them. What a sweet promise is
that, Joh. 16 23,24. Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my Name, he will give it
you, ask and ye shall receive that your joy may be full.

Cousid. 5. The Lords Servants, have ever found him to be a Prayer hearing God.
Psalm. 65. 2. O thou that hear Prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come. All
flesh, Believers, in all ages have experienced the truth of this. Unto which of
the Saints can you turn you but they will every one say, this is truth may Soul
knows it right well, God has been as ready to hear as they have been to pray
for mercy. Thus Daniel found it, that whiles he was speaking and praying, and
presenting his Supplication before the Lord his God; an Angel was sent from
Heaven, who informed him, that from the beginning of his supplication, he was
accepted. Chap 9.20. 23. Yea, the Lord is more ready to give, then his Children
are to ask; and therefore does many times, bestow whose blessings upon them,
which they intend to pray for, before they have an opportunity actually to seek
his face, Isai. 65.24. Before they call I will answer, and whilst they are yet
speaking I will hear. We read much concerning this in the Scripture; how God
has had respect to the Prayers of his People. And humane as well as divine
Story abounds with instances to this purpose, as I have elsewhere noted. And
may not we our selves set our Seals to this truth? where is the godly man, but
may do so? May we not say after Jacob, Genesis 35.3. God answered me in the day of
my distress? and after David, 2 Samuel.22.7. In my distress I called upon the
Lord, and cried to my God, and he did hear my voice out of his Temple, and my
cry did enter into his Ears. And as for those public solemn Prayers which have
been poured out before the Lord, have not our eyes seen, that it has not been
in vain. In times of Drought, we have sought the Lord; and he has sometimes
sent a plentiful Rain, on the very day when his People were earnestly praying
before him for that mercy. In the late War with the Heathen amongst whom we
live, what great things has the Lord done for us, in answer to Prayer? That
mortal Contagion wherewith so many Families were afflicted but two years ago,
Prayer has prevailed with the Lord to remove it, and to heal this Land. Let us
then resolve with David; (surely every godly praying soul has cause to say, as
he did,) Psa. 116.1,2. I love the Lord because he has heard my voice and my
supplications, because he has inclined his ear unto me, therefore will I call
upon him as long as I shall live.

Wherefore, Consider 6. The great things that may be done by Prayer. This is
the way for a man to be and to do, as Soul said of David, 1 Samuel 26. 25. Thou
shall both do great things; and shall also still prevail. How came it to pass,
that David did great things; and that he did still prevail? the reason of it
was is being a man that was much in Pray (...) He gave himself to prayer, Psalm.
109.4 This is (...) the best way for a man to prosper in his undertaking, ever
follow them with constant and (...) Prayer. It is reported concerning Dr.
Preston that (...) some said he was esteemed a great Politicians he cause he
usually (...) reason the designs he took in hand with good success: his Reply
was, That is not the reason my matters succeeding well but I work by an Engine,
which the world think not of, i. e. by Prayer. When I undertake business (...)
follow it with earnest Prayer to God and he makes into become successful. And
indeed Prayer is a marvelous Engine. Godly men may hereby bring ^outstrange
changes in the World Yea, they may undermine (as David did by one Prayer the
deep and hellish counsels of Achitophels. Nay, they may even do and have what
they will, that is not contrary to the will of God. One said of Luther, Iste
vir poquit quo ^cunque v^lu^t. That man could by his Prayers obtain from God
any thing that he desired. It is a wonderful expression which we find, Rev.
116. where it is said concerning the two Proph^^^ They can (...) the Earth with
all Plagues (...) often as they will. And how do they smite the Earth but by
sending Prayer to Heaven? And what mercy can there be thought of, but the godly
man, may by prayer obtain it? he may in that way procure mercies (spiritual as
well as temporal) for his own soul Yea, and (...) for his Family; grace and
everlasting salvation for his Children. An holy man once, after (...) are
communion with God in secret prayer, could say to a familiar friend of his; I
have this day obtained mercy of God for my self and for all mine. And as for
those, that give themselves unto prayer, God uses to bless them much in their
Children. They and their offspring with them are known to be the blessed of the
Lord. Yet more; godly men may by prayer obtain mercy or the Land wherein they
live. A whole Town and Country fares the better for the sake of a few praying
ones, that are therein, who day and night are plying the Throne of Grace. The
innocent by lifting up pure hands of prayer believers the Island, as Eliphaz.
speaks, Joh. 22.30. Yea, sometimes, a whole Country fares the better for one
wrestler with God, as all the land of Israel did, for the prayers of one
Elijah, though he was a man subject to like passions as we are. Jam. 5. 17. 18.
Yea, and a few godly men, may by their prayers procure and hasten judgment,
upon those that are the subjects of Imprecation, that is to say, upon the
implacable enemies of God, and of his Servants. We may see for this that
Scripture, Rev. 16. 1, I heard a great voice out of the Temple, saying, to the
seven Angels, go your ways, and pour out the vials of the wrath of God upon
the earth. Now the Temple was the place of prayer. It is prayer that pulls down
confounding vials of vengeance upon the Antichristian generation. And woe to
that man who ever ^e be, that shall have many prayers of Gods Servants engaged
against him. I tell you nay the Lord tells you, that though God may seem to
forbear him long, vengeance shall come upon him speedily. And the true reason
of all this which has been spoken, is, because the omnipotent God himself is
overcome by prayer? And then what cannot godly praying ones do, if omnipotency
himself be over come by them? Thus do we read concerning Jacob, that by his
strength he had power with God; yea, when he wept and made supplication to him,
he had power over the Angel and prevailed, (...) over the increated Angel of
the everlasting Covenant, the Eternal Son of God, that Angel, who is the Lord
of Hosts, the Lord is his memorial, Hos. 12. 3,4,5. In a word prayer does as it
were hold the Lords hands, when he is ready to strike his people, who have by
their sins provoked him. Therefore the Lord said to Moses Let me alone that I
may consume them, Exodus 32.10. A mavelous expression! it is as if the Lord
had said, I would fain be at his people, and strike them a blow that should
kill them suddenly, because they have suddenly departed from me; but thou Moses
by thy Prayers do hold my hands, that I cannot tell how to smite them, until
thou art (...) therefore let (...) me alone. And Prayer does as it were jogg
his Almighty Arm, and cause him to awake unto Judgment against the Adversaries
of his people when before prayers and cries went up to Heaven the Lord seemed
as if he were asleep or unconcerned with the sorrows and distresses of his
Servants Hence is that, Isai. 51. 9. Awake, awake, put on strength O arm of the
Lord, awake as in the anti^nt days, in the generations of old. The cry of
prayer, especially when many of his Servants, ^o at the same time, and with the
same heart cry unto him; it awakens the Lord so that he stirs up himself,
and his glorious Arm does great things in answer unto those prayers and cries.

Consider, 7. The present times. The day we live in, is such as calls upon
every one that is godly to pray. Never more need of prayer then at this time. I
may say this day as one of the Martyrs said, when he was going to die. Pray,
pray, pray, never more need then now. Clouds and Thunders, Storms and Tempests,
are ready to crack and break upon a sinful and miserable world, and will you
not pray? shall we be worse then the old ungodly world? When they saw that the
flood was indeed a coming did they not pray think you? Behold! we may see it at
this day. The floods of great waters, are coming and hastening upon the world;
yea, upon this generation; and shall we not pray? did not they cry An Ark an
Ark! that we perish not in the flood? and wilt not thou then cry, a Christ, a
Christ! to save my poor soul, that I perish not in the deep and dark waters of
infinite wrath. Other considerations have been mentioned to quicken and
encourage the godly, but this should Awaken the ungodly unto prayer also.

Quest What shall be done that so the Lord may accept of us, if we pray unto
him?

Ans. 1. If a man would have his prayers find audience and acceptance in
Heaven, then he must look to his state. God does not respect first the prayer,
and then the person, but first the person and then the prayer. He that is as to
his state a true Believer, and so in Christ, his prayers are acceptable before
the Lord. Why did Abels offering find acceptance with the Lord, rather then
Cains? it was because Abel had Faith, but Cain had none, and without that, it
is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6. If a man be as to his spiritual state
a truly godly man, then God hears his prayer, as my Text does intimate. If he
be sincere, then he may be sure that God will respect his prayer, Heb. 10.22.
Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of Faith. If there be a
true, i. e. a sincere heart in the sight of God, a man may draw near to him in
prayer, with the assurance of Faith for gracious acceptance God hears not
sinners: but sincere worshippers, and such as do his will, them he hears.
Joh. 9.31. If there be no sin which a man does love of live in, then his
Prayers are pleasing and precious before the Lord, otherwise they are not so:
therefore David speaks as in Psalm. 66.20. If I regard iniquity in my heart,
the Lord will not hear me.

2. He that would have his prayers acceptable, must look to his walking. He
must be careful to walk closely with God; and take heed of offending him by
giving way to sin, left the Lord turn a deaf ear upon all his prayers. After
that Saul had sinned, and departed from God, his enquiries after the Lord were
not regarded, 1 Samuel 28.6. When Saul enquired of the Lord, the Lord answered
him not. And not only a Saul, but one that is as to his state a godly man, may
by his loose and careless walking, provoke the Lord to frown upon his prayers.
Hence the Church complains, that as a just fruit of their transgressing against
the Lord, He had covered himself with a cloud that their prayer should not pass
through, Lam. 3.42,44. God clouds his face from his own Children, that they see
no answer to their prayers, and many times some Sin o^ other which they have
been guilty of, is the cause of it. Wherefore, if at any time through
temptation, a godly man shall fall into sin, so as to break his peace with God,
let him be sure to renew his repentance and let not inquiry be found with him;
so will the Lord hear his prayer. It enquiry be in thine hand out it far (...)
dwell in thy Tabernacle. If thou (...) any sin thy self, or if there be an
(...) thy Family, repent of it; and (...) is a n^^s, then will God hea^thy
prayer. Joh. 1 13, 14. If thou shall repent of former backsh^^ings and
endeavor to walk in all well pleasing before the Lord for the time to come,
Then shall then call and the Lord shall answer; thou shall cry, and he shall
say, here I am, at hand ready to help thee, Isai. 58. 9.

3. Let us look to the manner as well as to the matter of our prayers. He that
would find Acceptance with God, must (...) well to the frame of his heart in
prayer. Let him (...) one hand, have a care, that had (...) no offer strange
fire before the Lord, 1 Timothy 2 8 (...) pray every where, living up holy (...)
wrath. And yet let him not on the other hand give way to deadness and form^^^ty
in (...). To be servent in Prayer is the (...) prevail. If we put (...) to
(...) of Prayer, it will find acceptance in Heaven. J^^ 5 16 The effectual
servent prayer of a righteous (...) much. Elijah prayed earnestly, and God
heard (...) O then let us wrestle in Prayer. The^ are we the seed of Jacob, and
shall not seek the Lords face in (...)

4. If a man would have the Lord hear his Prayer then ^t him persevere therein.
Ephesians. 6.18. Praying always watching thereunto, with all perseverance. Alas! if
men have prayed once or twice, or a few names, and no answer ^^meth, they are
apt to be discouraged, and to think that they shall never be heard; but say not
so. It may be God delays to answer thy prayer at present, because be (...) to
hear thee praying, or that so he may try thy Faith and Patience. Remember the
Woman of Canaan, the Lord seemed not to (...) her prayers for a while; that he
might see whether she would be put off with a d^nial; but when she continued
praying still; a blessed an^ (...) last. Who Knows, but that it may be to
with thee? If God put it into thy hear to resolve has thou will never leave
praying for such a mercy, until thou have obtained, that is a sign that he
intends to bestow that mercy on thee at last.

5. Pray in time. As the Psalmist here speaks, let every one pray unto the
Lord, in a time wherein he may be found.

Men cannot pray too soon; but they may pray when it is too late. And O that
prayerless creatures would think sadly of that. The sooner you come to God, the
sooner and the better are you like to speed. If thou would seek unto God
betimes, and make thy supplication unto the Almighty surely he would now awake
for thee, Joh 8.5.6. O then, Up every Soul and be doing. And that before floods
of great water come: before the black waves of death are upon thee; yea, before
the waters of great affliction overtake then. And if thou do sincerely
constantly, fervently seek unto God now in the time of thy prosperity, thou
may be sure, and in his Name be it spoto thee God will remember thee in the
day of Adversity.

And this brings to the second Doctrine, which is,

That men ought, not only to pray unto God for the pardon of their sins, and
the salvation of their Souls, but they should be sure to do this in the time
wherein the Lord may be found.

In the Doctrine I handling of this Truth, two thing may be enquired into: 1.
What is implied in this expression of finding the Lord 2. When is the time
wherein he may be found.

Q. 1. What is implied in this expression of finding the Lord?

A. 1. The expression does intimate, that God may as to his gracious presence
be absent from men, even gone from them, so as that they cannot find him, or
obtein a gracious meeting with him. Indeed as to his essential presence he is
always and every where to be found. We cannot look any where but God is there,
Psalm. 139.7. Whither shall I flee from thy presence; If I ascend up into Heaven
behold thou art there, if I make my bed in Hell, behold thou art there; If I
take the wings of the morning (if I were able to fly as swift as the Sun beams
from East to West) and dwell in the uttermost parts of the Sea, even there
shall thy band lead me, So hat as to his power and essential presence, God is
no where excluded, all plates being comprehended under that ^^^raeration of
Heaven Heb. ^word4 and Sea. Thus then he is near to every one. As Paul said to
the Athenians, Act. 17.27. That they should seek the Lord, if happily they might
feel after him and find him, though he be not far from any of us. But as to his
gracious presence, he is far from some; indeed from all Christ less sinners.
They are afar off, until made nigh by the blood of Christ, Ephesians. 21 13. And
therefore it is that they are in a perishing estate, Psalm. 73.27. For ^o, they
that are far from thee shall perish. Yea, and sometimes the Lord does withdraw
his gracious presence from his own Children, so as that they seek him, but
cannot find him, Cant. 5.6. My Beloved had withdrawn himself; I sought him, but
I could not find him, I called him, but he gave me no answer.

2. Finding God, does imply the obtaining his favor together with the special
fruits and effects thereof. Pray unto him in a time wherein he may be found,
that is to say, in a time wherein his favor may be obtained. In this sense the
Phrase is of (...) in the Scripture, Hos. 5. 8. They shall go with their
stocks, and with their heras to sick the Lord; but they shall not find him.
Meening that they should not by all their Sacrifices, obtain the Lord, favor.
The day will come when the enemies of Christ shall be glad of his favor but
they shall not find to therefore he says, Jah. 7. 34. Ye shall sick me and
shall not find me. Also, the special effects and fruits of divine favor are
employed in this Finding the Lord. e.g. Audience of prayer, is a sign of the
Lord favor, 1 Job. 5 15. when the Lord accepts of men's Prayers, then he is
sound of them. There is a time wherein God will hear men, if they pray unto
him; That is a finding time: and there is time when the Lord becomes
inexorable, that all prayers and cries will be in vain, Then finding time is
past and gone. The pardon of sin is an effect of Gods favor. Wherefore they
whose sins are forgiven, do find the Lord: And of that is the Psalmist speaking
in this context. Yea, life and the enjoyment of all desirable good, proceeds
from the avour of God. Psai. 30 5 In his favor is life. And therefore is
finding the Lord, the obtaining of life and happiness is employed, Prove. 8 35.
whose finds me, fiadeth life, and shall obtein favor of the Lord.

Quest. 2. When may the Lord be found?

Ans. 1. Life time is finding time. There are some, that their finding time
does continue as long as they themselves are in this world. The Lord is pleased
all that time to be making offers of grace and salvation to them, Isai. 65.2. I
have spread out my hands all the day long, i.e. presented gracious tenders of
mercy and life, unto a rebellious people. But when death has overtaken a
sinner, his finding time is gone. Men cannot pray as to their bodies, when once
the grave has opened its mouth and swallowed them up, Eccles. (...).10. There
is no work in the grave whither thou go. There is no work then as to any
man's particular, nor yet as to his general calling, Psalm. 6 5. In death there
is no remembrance of thee, in the grave who shall give thee thanks. It is the
place of silence. And if poor damned creatures should cry to the Lord, as to
their woeful souls after death, should they then cry unto him with tears of
blood, except before death they obtein and interest in his favor through Jesus
Christ; it will be in vain. The Lord will then have no more regard unto them,
then Abraham had to Dives, when he cried and said, Father Abraham, have mercy
on me, I am tormented in this flame, and yet could not by all His doleful
prayers and cries, ob^tein so much as one drop of water, to cool his torments,
Luke 16.25.

2. The time wherein the means of grace is vouchsafed and continued. This
finding time which I am speaking of, is the same with the day for men to know
the things of their peace, Now such a day do they enjoy that have the Gospel
and the means of grace vouchsafed to them. If thou had known in this thy day
the things that belong unto thy peace, Luke 19. 42. Whilst Christ and his
Messengers were treating with them, about the great and everlasting
concernments of their souls, that was their day. This finding time is the
accepted time, and the day of Salvation, 2 Cor.6.2. Now when the Gospel is
Preached, that's a day for men to look after their Salvation, and a time wherein
God will accept of them if they pray unto him, as they should do. It is a fit
season for men to be at work whilst the light shines upon them. So should we
be at work about our Salvation, whilst we have the light of the Gospel afforded
unto us for that end. The Gospel is compared unto light, Ephesians. 5. 8. Walk as
Children of the light. h. c. as becomes the Gospel. Hence Christ said to the
Jews, Joh. 12 35. Yet a little while is the Light with you, walk whilst you
have the light, left darkness come upon you; intimating not only that the Lord
himself would depart from them, but that the Gospel, and means of grace should
be removed from that people. The light of the Gospel shows men the way to
find the Lord. Yea, the Lord is near then. He comes in the Gospel and offers
himself to them, saying, Behold me! behold me! if they will but turn their eyes
and look after him. Wherefore the A postle tells the Ephesians that Christ
came, (i.e. in the chariot of the Gospel) and preached peace to them, Ephesians.
2.17. This then, is the time to find the Lord in. To this purpose does the
Prophet Isaiah speak (Chap. 55. 6.) saying, Seek the Lord while he may be
found, call ye upon him while he is near: q. d. Now is the time when the Lord
is rear unto you: even now whilst God is sending his Messengers to reprove and
exhort you; now the Lord is near to you, therefore now is a finding time, and
should be a praying time. The Lord is then at the very door: Rev. 3.20. Behold
I stand of the door and knock. While the Sermon is Preaching Christ is standing
at the door of thy heart, knocking there; so that there is a blessed
opportunity to find him, and to enjoy him for ever.

3. Times of the Spirits striving. There are some seasons when the Holy Spirit
does move upon the hearts of men in a more peculiar manner. Convictions of sin
and misery are the strivings of Gods Spirit, Joh. 16.8. He shall convince the
World of sin. Sometimes a man's Conscience is convinced that he lives in the
practice of such an evil, or in the omission of such a duty; suppose Prayer in
his Family, or in secret; for which neglects his own heart condemns him; Now
these troubles and convictions are from the holy Spirit, especially if
convictions rise so high, as to cause terrors and trembling of heart; as it was
with Foelix, Act 24.25. who trembled as he heard Paul preaching concerning
Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come. He was convicted in his own
Conscience, that he had (...) guilty of much unrighteousness and intemperance,
and that therefore without Repentance, and Faith in Christ; in the judgment to
come, a sentence of eternal death must be past upon him. Now was the Spirit of
God, moving upon his heart. And therefore then was his (...) to have prayed,
and to have found mercy with God. So when good purposes, and strong affections
are raised in the hearts of men and women, the holy Spirit is striving with
them; (...) was with. Agrippa, when he was almost persuaded to be a Christian,
Act. 26.28. There are who have at times, serious and affectionate thoughts of
forsaking all for Christ, they could even find in their hearts to forsake their
sins, and old companions in sin, and to close with Christ upon the Terms of the
Gospel; Gods Spirit is mightily striving with such a Soul: And never did poor
creature pray unto God with his whole heart, whilst the Holy Spirit continued
striving, but the Lord was found of him. Finding time in the same with the day
of grace; and as long as the Spirit continues striving, the day of Grace is
not done. Therefore if God by the secret motions of his Spirit, say unto the
(...) of the children of men, Seek ye my face, it highly concerns every such
Soul to answer again, Thy face Lord, will I seek. Psalm. 27. 8.

4. The time of prosperity. Even before the floods of great water come: The
miserable Jews are ruined because they knew not the time of their visitation.
Luke 19 44. As long as the offers of Grace lasted; and whilst they enjoyed
days of external peace, that was the time of their visitation, and the day for
them to have known the things of their peace. Had they prayed then, as they
should have done, they might have been happy for ever. Men will be most likely
to be sincere in their praying to God, if they do so in the time of their
prosperity, and therefore most like to find him then. There are some, that when
trouble is upon them, they will pour out a Prayer, yet the Lord accepts not of
them, because they do it not with a sincere heart. Hos. 7.14. They have not
cried unto me with their hearts, they howled upon their beds, they assemble
themselves for Corn and Wine, and they rebel against me. When Drought, and
Caterpillars, and Famine was upon them, they would pray; and if the Judgment
were removed, they would sin, and rebel as bad as ever; so that their Souls
were not right in the sight of God, and therefore he did not accept of them,
but compares their Prayers to Howlings, thereby to signify how odious and
abominable they were in the ears of the Holy God of Truth. Wherefore, the Lord
calls upon men, that if they would find mercy, or prevent misery from coming
upon themselves they pray unto him, before the day of adversity come upon them,
Jer. 13.16. Give glory to the Lord your God before he cause darkness before
your feet stumble upon the dark Mountains. As yet (says the Prophet you have a
day of prosperity, pray before that Sun be set upon you. Give glory to God by
confessing your sins, and humble seeking his face and favor, before your
enemies come, and drive you away before them over the dark mountains of Israel,
into a long-lasting Captivity. And this had been the way to have prevented
their Captivity.

5. The time wherein the Lord is threatening to bring heavy judgments upon men,
is a finding, and should be a praying time. The time that is between the
Sentence and the Execution. When the Lord writes over men a Sentence of Death,
and is awfully threatening to execute his fore judgments upon them, those
threatenings are conditional: sc. It they do not pray as they should do. But if
they do pray in earnest, before the day of Execution comes, it is possible they
may find mercy and salvation with the Lord, Jer. 36. 3, 7. It may be the house
of Judah will hear all the evil which I purpose to do unto them. It may be they
will present their supplication before the Lord, that I may forgive their sin.
When God by his word, or by his works, is threatening judgment, there is for
all that. A may be of mercy, in case he be humbly prayed unto. It may be a
Finding, and therefore should be a Praying time: Zeph. 2.1. 2,3. Gather your
selves together before the decree bring forth, before the day of the Lords
anger come upon you; seek ye the Lord, it may be ye shall be hid in the day of
the Lords anger. The Lords declared end in his threatenings, is, that so men
might be awakened to pray unto him, before it be too late. Therefore the great
design of the Prophets was to call upon the People to seek unto the Lord for
mercy before his judgments came down from Heaven upon them, Hos. 10.12. It is
time to seek the Lord. This was the great voice of the Prophets, Since God is
threatening to bring such and such judgments, it is high time for you to seek
the Lord; that threatened evils may be diverted, and the mercy of Heaven
obtained.

6. The time of Youth. Firstfruits are acceptable unto God, Genesis 4.4. There is
a great and solemn Commandment of God, requiring young men to pray unto him,
Eccles. 12. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy Youth. And a most
gracious promise to encourage them, Prove. 8.17. They that seek me early shall
find me. They that pray whilst they are young, seek the Lord early, and may
therefore hope that they shall find him. Hence David said unto his Son Solomon,
1 Chronicles 28.9. Know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect
heart, and a willing mind: If thou (who art a young man) seek him, he will be
found of thee. There are instances in the Scripture, of many, that have prayed
unto God in the time of their youth, and he has been found of them. And there
is not so much as one Example to be produced in all the book of God, concerning
one that did in the days of his youth, set himself to seek the Lord, that did
not find acceptance with him. As for praying young men, I tell you truly, the
God of Heaven does wonderfully delight in them.

7. The present time is finding time. Now is the accepted time, therefore all
the holy Prophets did earnestly urge those unto whom they spoke in the Name of
the Lord, unto present Repentance, and seeking the face of God, without any
further delay, Jer. 25.4 5. The Lord has sent unto you all his Servants the
Prophets, they said, Turn ye again, [now] every one from his evil way. They did
not say, if you will pray tomorrow, you may neglect God and your own Souls to
day. N^, but now turn unto him. Psa. 95 7. To day if you will hear his voice;
Then you may hope to find acceptance with him, but if thou do harden thy
heart against the voice of God, one day longer, if thou do neglect Prayer,
but one day longer, it may be the Lord will never hear thy voice, nor hearken
to thy Prayer throughout the days of Eternity.

Use I. It is matter of bleeding Lamentation, that Praying time, and Finding
time is so much neglected, and by so many. O that my head were a fountain of
Tears, that I might weep day and night in secret places because of this thing
What shall I say! Alas! if we look over all the particulars mentioned, we may
mourn before the Lord to think how miserable Creatures are neglecting and
sinning away their day of grace for ever. Are there not many (Oh! how many)
that their whole life time has been misimproved? they live to no end as to
soul-saving purposes. They live as if there were no other life but this; as if
they had no souls to save, or should never enter upon Eternity. They spend
their days in mirth and madness, and after that they go to the dead. Are there
not some that have lived it may be twenty years, and yet never prayed in
earnest for the pardon of their sins, and the salvation of their Souls, in all
their lives? Alas for such poor creatures, their case is lamentable! And are
there not many, who regard not the offers of Christ in the Gospel? How often
would the Lord Jesus have saved them, but they would not be saved by him? how
many Sermons have been lost upon them? thou have heard it may be a thousand
Sermons, and all in vain? this is a lamentable sign, that the Lord intends to
cast thee off for ever; yea, that thou art nigh unto cursing, Jer. 6.29,30.
Heb. 6. 7 8. And this will be the sting of Hell, when a forlorn creature shall
think with himself for ever, I might have had Christ, and mercy and pardon, and
salvation: I heard Sermons about these things; and all was freely offered to me
in the Gospel, but I regarded it not, until it was too late. And are there not
some that have sinned away the blessed strivings of the Spirit of God from
their Souls? It may be thou have had sorrowful convictions and awakenings of
Conscience when time was. Yea, so as to make known the anguish of thy Soul unto
this or that servant of God, begging for the help of Prayers: and are all these
troubles of spirit come to nothing? If ever poor creature had the black tokens
of eternal death upon him, thou art such an one. Do thou not know, that the,
Woman whose Traveling pains leave her, and return not; will die most
certainly? have thou seemed to be in the pangs of the new birth; but have thy
throws of Conscience left thee. O tremble lest the Lord say unto thee, as Ezekiel.
24. 13. Because I purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be
purged any more. It had been better for thee never to have been born, then that
thou should live to provoke the Lord so to speak, and so to resolve against
thee. And are there not many, who neglect God in the time of their prosperity?
whilst they enjoy days of peace, and health, and strength. God calls upon
them to repent and pray, and believe but they let their golden season slip away
without improving it to seek the Lord until they find him. Like him whom the
Lord (...) of, Jer. 22. 21. I spoke unto thee (...) but thou (...) I will not
hear. And are there not man, who never mind the (...) warnings of God; They
regard not the works of the Lord nor the operation of his hands. The Lord
gives them awful warning by a fearful slight in Heaven, but they regard it
not. The Lord gives warning by Judgments in other lands, the report whereof
we hear. When God did cut off the Narions, and make their Towns desolate, he
said of Jerusalem, Surely thou will fear me, and receive instruction, Zeph.
3.6,7. We hear of a City that was in great part destroyed by a sudden
Earthquake, not many Months ago. We hear of a sweeping Plague in diverse
places in Europe; which though afar off the Lord gives us warning thereby.
Yea, and so he does by safe rumors amongst our selves. When there was a false
report raised the other day, as if the Plague were brought near unto us; how
were people amazed? God has an holy hand in such Rumors; and he would have men
make this use of it, to pray unto him that such judgments may be prevented:
And the Lord has given warning by many sudden deaths of late. how many have
there been within this twelvemoneth, that when God sent the Messenger of Heath
unto them, they had not so much as an hours time to pray in? O the hardness of
the stupid and stony hearts of men, that do not pray for all this? And is not
the time of youth a time wherein God is forgotten? Are there not young men that
seldom pray to God? This is for a Lamentation. For it is possible that the
Time of your youth will be your only finding time. There are many who die in
youth, and if they were such as did not Pray, their Souls are gathered amongst
the Unclean, even with the souls of those Sodomites, who are now suffering the
vengeance of eternal fire, Job. 36. 14. As for those that live under the
Gospel, (though we may not limit God, who calls home his Elect, some at one
age, and some at another, yet) commonly at is so; that if they do not find God
in youth, they never find him. Think sadly of it, in the fear of God; you that
are thirty, it may be forty years old, and yet in a natural estate to this day.
And do not many neglect the present opportunity of seeking the face of God in
Jesus Christ? like Felix, who said to the Apostle, Go thy way for this time,
when I have a convenient season, I will call for thee, Act 24.25. But alas! he
never saw ( for ought that does appear) such another opportunity as that was.
Foolish creatures neglect the present time, and by that means their Souls drop
into Hell e're they are aware, and then they make a most doleful and eternal
lamentation; O the seasons of Grace, and hopes of mercy which once we had, are
left and gone for ever. Men delay their duty, thinking with themselves
hereafter we will pray. And because of this one thing, millions of immortal
Souls are in Hell, where the bars of the Pit, and the gates of Death are
everlastingly shut upon them.

Use 2. As you love your Souls, or as you desire Salvation, let finding time,
be praying time. Do but consider two things.

1. As yet you have a Finding time. Be that known to every Soul before the Lord
this day? Say Not; I would pray, but I doubt my time to find the Lord is past
and gone As yet thou have (...) day of grace. Behold now is an accepted Time,
^ow is a day of Salvation. Thy body is on this side the Grave, and thy soul on
this side Hell; therefore it is possible thou may find the Lord. I have
somewhere read of a child that was in danger of being devoured by a wild
Beast; but he cried to some that were near to come in and rescue him, saying
Help! help! I am yet alive, I am yet alive; so I say to thee, help for thy soul
is not too late, for thou art yet alive; and therefore pray and cry to God for
help, as one that does believe that thou have an eternal life, and an immortal
soul lying at the stake. God is once more offering Salvation to thee. To you
that hear the Gospel this day, is the word of Salvation sent, Act. 13.26.

Consider 2. Thy finding time may soon be gone. It will not last always, Genesis
6.3. God says, My spirit shall not always strive. It may be after this Sermon
is ended, He Will never strive with thy rebellious heart more; and then thy
Finding time is gone. Prayer will come too late then. (...) man that had been
guilty of great back sliding from God, when any word of comfort was applied
unto him, cried out, All too late now if it was said to him, you must make sure
(...) an interest in Christ, he would answer, all too (...) if any did exhort
him to pray for the pardone (...) sins, he would make the same Reply, All (...)
late. So it will be with thee, if thou neglect Prayer (...) Finding time be
expired and (...) Remember that Scripture, Luke 13.24,25. (...) to enter in at
the strait Gate, for many will seek (...) enter in, and shall not be able. How
comes that to pass? truly because hey seek when it is too late. After the
Master of the house has shut the door they begin to stand without and to
knock, saying, Lord, Lord open to us. But the door of mercy is not opened to
them. Had you come and knocked sooner, you had found mercy, the strait Gate of
life had been opened to you. But now knocking, calling, praying, crying (...)
be in vain. On consider of it, thou poor (...) creature: within a little time
thy Soul will (...) out of thy body. And if thou have not obtained an interest
of Christ, and in the favor of God through Christ, before that hour come upon
(...) the floods of great waters, will over whelm the The waves of death will
swallow thee up; thy Soul will be thrown into the dead Sea, amidst the roaring
floods of Fire and Brimstone which are there forever. Then will Finding time be
gone, and Prayer come too late.

Now then pray unto God in a time wherein he may be found, and do it with thy
whole heart; remembering that Scripture for thy encouragement, Jer. 29 12, 13.
You shall go and pray unto me and I will hearken unto you, ye shall seek me and
find me, when you search for me with all your heart.

The True Fearers of God will Practice Family Prayer.
ACTS 10. 2. One that feared God with all his House -- And Prayed always.
IN this Chapter, we have an account of the great acceptance which Cornelius
his Prayers found with God; together with the gracious effects following
thereupon. In the two first verses Cornelius is described. 1. From the City
where he dwelt. viz. Cesarea 2. From his Calling, he was a Soldier; and no
common Soldier, but a Centurion. 3. From the Nation which he did belong unto;
he was an Italian, a Commander belonging to the Italian Band. And indeed
Cornelius is a Roman Name. 4 He is described from his Religion, in this verse,
he was a devout man, h. e. He was though a Roman, and so a Gentile by nature,
yet no mere Heathen in respect of his Religion, but a Proselyte. Elsewhere
proselyte's are styled Devout Persons, Act. 17. 4. We read of Devout Greeks,
that is such as were Proselytes to the Jewish Religion. Hence also, Cornelius
is described to be one that feared God, h. e. that did worship the only true
God. Thus Act. 13. 26. Children of the stock of Abraham, and whosoever amongst
you fears God; meaning such as though they were not (as the Jews are)
descended from Abraham, nevertheless worshipped the God of Abraham as the Jews
did: These Fearers of God are in verse 43. called Religious Proselytes. There
were two sorts of Proselytes amongst the Jews of old.

1. Some that were styled Proselytes of the Covenant, those were circumcised,
and also admitted to all privileges in the Church of Israel; no difference
being made either as to Civil or Church communion between them, and those that
were natural Israelites.

2. Those that were styled Proselytes of the Gate. These did own the God of
Israel to be the only true God; and hoped for Salvation by the Messiah; and did
endeavor to frame their lives according to the holy Rules of the Moral Law;
Cornelius was a Proselyte of this, and not of the former sort. And hence Peter
was unwilling to converse with him, until such time as God by a vision
commanded him so to do. The truth of Cornelius his Religion is in this verse
intimated by two things.

1. In that he was careful, not only to pray unto God himself alone, but that
his Family should do so too. He did worship God with all his House, h. e. with
his whole Family. The house is frequently in the Scripture put for the Family,
Genesis 7. 1. and 30.30. Exodus 12 3.

2. In that he did thus always. He did not only pray with his Family once or so,
but always? That is to say, always in the due and stated seasons for that duty:
the meaning is not as though Cornelius did spend his time in nothing else but
Prayer and Religious Exercises, but that he was constant in his Attendance unto
that duty, in the seasons apponted for that end.

The Doctrine which the Words do therefore afford unto us, is,

That the true Fearers of God will be constant in the practice of that duty of
Family Prayer.

In order to the clearing of this Truth, there are three things to be enquired
into.

1. How it does appear that Family Prayer is a duty?

2. What is implied in being constant therein, or in doing thus always?

3. The Reasons why they that truly fear God do thus practice.

Q. 1. Ho does it appear that Family Prayer is a Duty?

Ans. 1. The Scripture does enjoin this. God in his word, commands men to pray
with all Prayer, Ephesians. 6. 18. Not only Prayer in closets, and in solemn
Assemblies, but in Families, is comprehended under that expression of A ll
Prayer. Nor can a man be said to pray with all prayer, except he does practice
public, secret and Family Prayer. And in the Scripture, Husbands and Wives are
required to live lovingly together, that their prayers be not hindered. 1. Pet.
3. 7. what prayers? surely Family Prayers. They that are contending and
quarrelling one with another, are very unfit to go to prayer together:
Therefore Husband and Wife should live in love that so they may not be
indisposed to pray together in their Family. Again, the Scripture declares,
that Men should take care that their Families as well as themselves serve God.
Fathers are to bring up their Children, in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord, Ephesians. 6. 4. which they cannot do except they pray with them, and by
example as well as precept, let them see that God ought to be worshipped and
prayed unto. Thus Joshua was resolved to do, Chap. 24. ver. 15. As for me and
my house, we will serve the Lord. Joshua did exhort the Children of Israel,
that they should all of them in their Houses serve God, which does imply Prayer
unto him; inasmuch as prayerless Families can not be said, to be God-serving,
God-fearing Families.

2. As there are Scripture Precepts requiring this duty, so there are Scripture
Examples, which God has caused to be recorded in his Word, for our instruction
and imitation. We find that the Lord Christ, who has left himself for an
example in this as well as in other things, for us to follow; did pray with his
Family, Luke 9.18. As he was alone praying, his Disciples (who were his Family)
were with him. And when Christ did keep the Passover with his domestic
Disciples alone, it is certain that he prayed with them, Mat. 26. 18. etc.
David also, was wont to worship God with his Family. And was resolved to
continue in that practice all his days. Hence he could say, as Psalm. 101. 2. I
will walk within my house with a perfect heart. And we read concerning him,
that after he had been attending the worship of God in public, he returned to
bless his house, 1 Chronicles. 16.43. so that he did not think it enough to worship
God in a public solemn Assembly amongst his People, but when he comes home,
he prays with his Family, that the blessing of God might be there.

3. Of old there were not only Public, but Private Family-Sacrifices. Jonathan
relates concerning David, that he said to him, our Family has a Sacrifice in
the City, and my Brother commanded me to be there, 1 Samuel 20. 29. which
undoubtedly were not without Family Prayers. And although Sacrifices in a
legal, literal sense are ceased, in these days of the Gospel; Christ by that
one offering of himself, having put an end thereto yet spiritual Sacrifices
must be offered up still, 1 Pet. 2. 5. Ye are a spiritual house; an holy
Priesthood, to offer up spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable unto God by Jesus
Christ. When Christians offer up prayers and praises unto the Lord, these are
spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable unto God through Jesus Christ. And indeed
every Believer is a spiritual Priest. Jesus Christ has made us Priests unto
God and his Father, Rev. 1. 6. And inasmuch as he is a Priest in his own
Family, therefore he ought to offer up spiritual Sacrifices there. Every Master
of a Family is a Prophet in his own Family, because he ought to instruct them
in the things of God: and a King there, inasmuch as he ought to govern his
Family according to the rules of the word of God, and a Priest also, for that
he ought to offer up Spiritual Sacrifices therein.

4. The very light of nature teaches men that Family Prayer is a duty. Hence
the Gentiles that had no Scripture to direct them, yet have made conscience of
Family worship. They had their Penates, household gods, whom they did adore.
Yea, Mahometans at this day, worship their God not only in public Assemblies,
but in their Families. So that men who call themselves Christians, and yet
acknowledge no God in their Families are in that thing worse then Infidels.
Many Heathen People, nay Turks will at the day of Judgment rise up against
such pretended Christians; and condemn them.

Q. 2. What is implied in a man's Praying [alway] with his Family?

Ans. This Praying always implies frequency in that duty. Family Prayer should
be attended daily. In that sense the Phrase is sometimes used in the Scripture.
As when it is said, that Mephibosheth did eat ( continually, or as the Hebrew
word Tamid signifies) always at the Kings Table; the meaning is, that it was
his daily custom so to do. Thus Cornelius with his house prayed always; Family
prayer was daily observed in that house. Families need daily supplies of mercy.
And there are Family occasions to be attended every day, which Masters in
Families are concerned to look up to God, that his blessing may be thereon: And
there are daily mercies which they ought to bless God for. Yea, it is good to
practice this duty more than once every day, h. e. in the morning and in the
evening (...). It is a good thing to praise the Lord, and show forth his loving
kindness in the morning, and every evening, Psalm. 92. 1, 2. The continual
offering under the Law was that whereby prayer was typified: and that was to be
both at morning and at the even, Exodus 29.38. Number. 28.3,4. So should it be as
to Family Prayer. And therefore is is very observable, that the Apostle
speaking to Masters in Families, uses that expression, continue in prayer,
Col.4.2. In which words he does evidently allude unto the continual offering
under the Law, which was to be attended daily, both at morning and at even; you
(says he) that are Masters of Families, forget not the continual offering of
Prayer, which you ought to present before the Lord. It is as if he had said,
pray constantly morning and evening in your Families. Therefore,

2. This expression implies perseverance. Men should not only begin to
practice this duty, but they ought to hold on therein, all their days, Christ
has taught us, that men ought always to pray and not to faint, Luke 18. 1. And
we are bid to pray without ceasing, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18. As there ought to be
perseverance in attending unto the public Worship of God, on the times
appointed for that end; as Hezekiah professes that he had taken up a
resolution to Praise God all the days of his life in the house of the Lord,
Isai. 38. 20. So should men praise the Lord, and pray to him, all the days of
their lives in their own houses. There ought to be perseverance in all prayer,
and therefore Christians are to continue all their days in the practice of
private or family, as well as in public and in closet prayer: So may they be
said to do as Cornelius did, even to pray always, Ephesians. 6. 18.

Q. 3. Whence is it that the true Fearers of God do thus?

Reas. 1. Because they that truly fear God respect the honor of his Name. They
cannot but desire that God might be honored every where, and more especially
in their own Families. Now prayer honors God. Hence is that expression, Mat 15
8. they honor me with their lips: when men pray unto God with their lips, they
honor him therewith: and when they pray with their hearts, as well as their
lips, they honor him with both. As when they neglect this so great a duty,
they withhold that honor from God, which is due unto him from his creatures,
Isai. 43.23. thou have not honored me with thy Sacrifices So does the Lord say
to Masters of Families, that pray not with their houses, thou have not honored
me with thy prayers. But (...) for those that call upon his Name, their prayers
and praises glorify him. When men own the Lord to be the God of their Families
they put honor upon him. And so it is when Family worship is duly upheld.

Reas. 2. They that truly fear God, are desirous that the interest of Religion
should be upheld and promoted. One that is truly Religious himself can not but
desire that others may be so too. Paul being himself a real Christian,
earnestly wished that others were in that respect as he was. When Agrippa said
to him; thou almost perswadest me to be a Christian, he replied, I would to
God, that not only thou, but also all that hear me this day, were both almost
and altogether such as I am, except these Bonds, Act, 26. 28, 29. so it is (and
cannot but be) where there is true grace. Especially they are desirous that
those who are related to them; and are of the same Family with them, may be
acquainted with the good ways of the Lord. Therefore they will make
Conscience, not only to pray for them, but to pray with them; since thereby
Religion and the Fear of God will be promoted. And to have Religion in Families
is the way to have it elsewhere. Families are the Nurseries of all societies.
If Religion should not be upheld there, it would fall to the ground every where.

Use 1. For Reprehension. And there are many that fall under just and sad
Reproof from this Doctrine.

1. It condemns those that live in the total neglect of this duty of Family
prayer. And what is like to come on prayerless Families at lasts Let Prayerless
Fathers, and prayerless Masters hear the word of the Lord, and tremble at it O
that you would consider, how you expose not only your selves but Families, to
the vengeance of Heaven. How often have you been put in mind of that awful
Scripture, Jer. 10.25. Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen that know thee not.
what is that to us? some one will be ready to say; we are no Heathen, we are all
Christians: but mark what follows: and upon the Families that call not upon thy
Name. Not only prosessed Heathen, but Families that live like Heathen with out
any prayer, the cury of the (...) will come pouring down from Heaven up (...)
them. Hence are temporal judgments upon (...) many times. The Lord kills
Children (...) death because Parents do not shewch man example of Religion to
pray with them (...) and as well as for them in secret. Yea the Souls of your
poor Children are ruined by his sin of yours. And O how sad will it be when God
shall require the blood of the Souls of Children at the hands of their
prayerless Fathers; and the blood of the souls of servants at the hands of
their prayerless Masters. Think with your selves what answer you will make
before Jesus Christ the Son of God at the last and great day. If thy Children
shall be thine accusers before the Lord then; if any of them shall stand before
the Lord Jesus in the day when he shall judge the World, and say, Lord, there
is the man that was my Father, I never heard him pray in all my life, and that
made me live in the neglect of God also; or if thy Servants shall any of them
say, Lord, there is the man that was my Master, I lived in his house so many
months (...) never heard him praying unto God all that (...), what answer will thou then make for thy self? you shall not be able to Plead ignorance. For I
will then call Heaven and Earth to record again you, that you were often told
of your duty in this particular. And yet I hear some say, that there are many
prayerloss families in his greate^ own. The thing is lamentable if it be so.
What, for men that call themselves Christians, to have no prayer in their
families? for men that live under the light of the Gospel, to live without
Prayer in their families! for men that live in New England, and that have lived
in Boston; not so much as to pray in their families! Such have known to do
good, and yet have not done it; therefore sin and guilt and wrath most fearful
does abide them. And this word reaches Masters of Vessels, that never pray
with their Ships Company, who are their Family, with whom they ought to worship
God continually.

2. This reproves those that do not pray in their Families Allway. There are
some that pray in their families: but when is it? once in a week perhaps. It
may be on the Sabbath day, they will pray in their families; and serve God
therein no more all the days of the week after. Is this to pray always when
there are such wide and woeful gaps in prayer? It is thy duty to serve God all
the days of thy life, Luke 1. 75. do thou serve God all thy days, when thou
do serve him, and pray to him, but one day in seven God will not be put off
so. When once thou shall see the day where in thy family shall stand in no need
of Gods blessing; neglect Prayer in thy family for that day; but till then
willingly omit it not under any pretense whatsoever.

And are there not some, that time was when they would worship God with their
families; but they are fallen away, and have cast off the practice that is
good? O foolish creatures, you did run well, but who has driven you back?
Remember the word that was spoken by the Lord Jesus, Luke 9.62. No man having
put his hand to the Plough, and looking back, is fit for the Kingdom of God.
Did thou begin to pray with thy family? This was to set thy hand to the Lords
plough: woe to thee if thou drawest it back again.

3. This reproves those who do that in families which is quite contrary unto
praying and serving God therein. Are there not families in this place, wherein
there is Drinking to excess, Gaming, Wantonness, uncleanness? Indeed, when such
deeds of darkness are brought to slight, they are put to shame amongst us; and
it is a great mercy to the Land, that open profaneness and wickedness is
punished, but the Lord sees what is done in private Houses. He knows who
they are, that assemble themselves by (...) in the Harlots House, Jer. 5 7. And
are there not families in the which instead of Prayer, there is Cursing,
Swearing, Sabbath breaking; and the like Transgressions that provoke the
glorious eyes of the Holy Majesty o^ Heaven? Let the Masters of such Families
look to themselves. For the Sabbath breaking and other profanenesses that are
indulged in their Families, will be charged upon them, who ought to rule their
Houses better, Exodus 20.10.

Use 2. Of Enhortation: To be constant in the practice of this necessary duty.
They that are so, their labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. If they be
sincere therein, special mercy will follow: we see it in this example of
Cornelius. He worshipped God with his House, and prayed always; and what special
notice did the Lord take of him? those prayers (...) not lost. And sometimes
when outward Judgments come God shows peculiar mercy to praying Families. I
remember I have read of a Town in Switzerland, that was destroyed with an
Earthquake, excepting only one house, where it so fell out, that at the time
when the Earth quake happened, the master of the house was at prayer with his
Family. But especially spiritual blessings, are wont to follow upon the sincere
attendance unto this duty. If there be a praying Father, it is to be hoped that
there will be praying Children: and if there be a praying Master, it is to be
hoped there will be praying Servants. And is not that a blessed thing for a man
to have the Children and Servants o^ his own family praying for him
continually? Thus do we read concerning Abraham's Servant, Genesis 24. 12. He said,
O Lord God of my Master Abraham, I pray thee send me good speed this day, and
show kindness unto my Master Abraham. How came Elitzer to be a praying Servant?
doubtless, he observed that his Master (...) much in prayer; and such an
Example might well be followed.

I shall only answer two or three Objections in a few words, and conclude.

Object. 1. Some one may say, I have not time to pray in my Family. My business
and worldly occasions are such as I cannot attend Prayer.

Ans. No man shall fare the worse as to his outward estate, because he does
make conscience to set some time apart daily to serve God; no man's Family shall
be the poorer, but rather the richer for that. O that you would remember and
consider more on that Scripture, Mat. 6.33. Seckye first the Kingdom of God,
and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added to you. And it is
certain^ better to want time for otherthings, then to take no time to pray in
Yea, a man should rather deny himself a little of his natural rest and sleep,
then to live an ungodly, prayerless life. Nor is it needful, or indeed
convenient, that Family duties should be ordinarily long and tedious; and
therefore the objection is a vain excuse. There are other in the world, that
have as much business upon their hands as thou have, who nevertheless can find
time to pray in their closets and in their families too. Had not David as
little time to spare, and as much business to attend as any man can ordinarily
pretend unto; yet he always found time to pray in^ Let thy Conscience speak;
can thou not find time for other things that are of less concernment? Thou
can find time it may be no fit in (...) Tavern and there to discourse, the
Lord (...) about what. If that time which is spent in vain, unprofitable
discourse, were spent in Communion with God, it would be happy for thee. Can
thou find time for vain discourse, and yet not find time for prayer? and can
thou then think that God will ever find a time to save thy poor soul? deceive
not thy self, thou must be another man, or that time will never come.

Object. 2. I am ashamed to pray in my Family?

Ans. What a shamed to own God, and the Lord Jesus Christ I do thou not know
that that the way for a man to lose his Soul for ever? see else what the Lord
Jesus has spoken, Mark 8^ 3 last verses. what shall it profit a man if he
again the Whole world and lose his own Soul, or what shall a man give in
exchange for his Soul: whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me, and of my
words, in this adulterous and sinful generations, of him also shall the Son of
Man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his Father, with the Holy Angels.
If thou art ashamed of prayer, thou art ashamed to own the ways of Christ: and
then what will become of thy precious and immortal Soul?

Object. 3. I would pray in my Family, but I cannot, I have not the gift of
utterance and expression?

Ans. 1. It is better for thee to make use of a form then not to pray at all. I
confess, I look upon it as sinful to make use of those Forms of Prayer which
are taken out of the Popes Mass Book, because in so doing men put too much
honor upon an Idol. It is also true that the imposition of Forms of Prayer is
unwarrantable; yet all use of Forms is not prohibited in the Scripture, witness
the Form of Blessing therein expressed. Learned and Judicious Mr. Cartwright
does from Lu. 24. 35. conjecture, that ordinarily Christ used the same words in
his Blessing at Meal times, with his Domestic Disciples. Now there is no man
of ordinary understanding, but he may attain unto a Form of Prayer; and he had
better make use of that, then to live without any worship of God at all in his
Family. But I am far from persuading you to take up with Forms. Therefore,

2. Practice, and that will make you able. As in other things practice makes
men ready and able; so it is in respect of the gift of prayer. Some that when
they began first to Pray, were able to make but poor work of it, by frequent
practice have attained unto an excellent gift in Prayer. And there are some who
complain they cannot Pray, whenas it is because they do not practice. If they
would set upon practice, God would be with them. And O that I could prevail
with those of you, that make this Objection against praying in your Families;
to go home and make trial. I am persuaded that if you would but try, and set
upon the practice of Family Prayer in earnest, the Lord God would be with you.

3. Labor for the true fear of God in your hearts. No Man that truly fears
God, but he can Pray in some measure, as you heard from Psalm. 32.6. Every one
that is godly shall Pray. Grace will make a man sensible of his Spiritual
wants, and that will set him a praying. They that see themselves perishing will
cry to God for Salvation. So is it with the Godly man. Yea, where there is true
grace, there will be family Prayer. The Lord says He will pour upon the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of Grace, and then Families, Families,
would pray and mourn apart, Zech. 12.10.

4. Be much in Secret Prayer: go into thy Closet, there beg for grace, yea,
pray for the spirit of Prayer. That the Lord would be Pleased to give his Holy
Spirit unto you, and thereby enable you to pray. And by praying in thy Closet,
thou will be made able to pray with thy Family. So may thou become like to
Cornelius, who seared God with all his house and prayed always.

The Sincere Servants of God will make Conscience of Secret Prayer.
2 TIMOTHY 1. 3. Without erasing I have remembrance of thee in my Prayers day and
night.
THe Apostle Paul in this verse does intimate two things.

1 His own sincerity in serving God. He freely confesses himself to be the
Lords Servant God whom I serve. And there are two expressions, both which may
denote his sincertity therein. One, is that of his serving God from his
foreFathers. He served the same God, and after the same manner that his
forefathers had done. As for his immediate forefathers they were Jews and
Pharisees; and time was when he had served God as they had taught him: but
those words may have respect to more remote Fathers, viz. The holy Patriarchs,
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, etc. Another expression denoting the Apostles
sincerity, is, that of his serving God with a pure Conscience, which implies
that he was ever careful to act according to the light of his conscience; so
indeed he was before his conversion unto Christ, Act. 23. 1. It implies also,
that his heart was purified by faith in the Lord Jesus. For only they have a
pure conscience in the sight of God, who are purged from the guilt of sin, in
the blood of Christ. It implies moreover an holy conversation; a due respect
both to first and second Table duties: Men's Consciences are wont to be
according to their actions: evil actions will pollute the Conscience: yea, the
expression imports inward as well as outward serving God, Romans 1.9.

2. The Apostle in this verse, intimates his love and affection unto Timothy.
Both in that he did give thanks to God for him. So the verse begins, I thank
God, namely for Timothy, partly in that Timothy had such a great respect for
paul; and it is matter of thankfulness unto God, when he gives a man a great
interest in the hearts of others who fear the Lord, though in gifts his
inferiors. He says in the next verse, I am mindful of thy tears. Probably in
those words, he may have respect unto the tears which Timothy shed, at his
parting with the Apostle, when he removed from Ephesus: and he did bless God
for the grace which he saw in Timothy; that there was Faith unfeigned in him,
which dwelt first in his Grandmother Lois, and in his Mother E^nice verse 5. We
should bless God for the grace we see in others, and especially in young men.
Paul was now aged, and hastening out of the world; but he thanked God, when he
saw that Timothy a young man did inherit the graces of his godly predecessors.
And he must needs rejoice the more to see how Religion and the fear of God was
propagated from generation to generation, even to the third generation.

Again, he testified his affection toward Timothy, by being abundant in prayer
for him. We find that this Apostle does begin another Epistle after the same
manner signifying his affection to those he wrote unto, by declaring how he did
give thanks and pray on their behalf, Romans 1.8,0. The Prayers here referred
unto, must of necessity be understood of his secret Prayers. For we cannot in
reason suppose that he did always remember Timothy in public, but in his
secret addresses to the Throne of Grace; which shows that he was constant and
conscionable in the practice of that sort of Prayer,

From which consideration the Doctrine is,

That the sircere Servants of God, will make conscience to pract^se that duty
of secret Prayer, day and night without ceasing.

There are three things that may here be enquired into.

1. How it does appear that the sincere Servants of God, will make conscience
of practicing that duty of Secret Prayer?

2. What is implied in this expression of praying day and night without ceasing?

3. The Reasons why man, especially sincer^ Christians should practice this
duty?

Q. 1. How does it appear that the sincere Servants of God will make consciencc
of Practicing that duty of Secret Prayer?

Ans. 1. The many Instances recorded in the Scripture, concerning the faithful
Servants of God, who have conscientiously practiced this duty, are an evidence
of the truth of this Doctrine.

As to the great and essential duties of Relion, all that truly fear God,
Practice alike: as the Apostle does here intimate, when he says, I serve God
from my forefathers: A true Servant of God, will follow the pious example of
those that have gone before him walking in the same way of holiness, which they
have done, Prove. ^20. Heb. 6.12.. Now concerning this duty of secret Prayer, we
find many Examples (both in the Old Testament, and in the New) of the Lords
Servants, who have thus practiced; and that as to all sorts of men, Superiors,
inferiors, Fathers, Children, Masters, Servants, who have had the fear of God
planted in their hearts, thus did Abraham Genesis 18. 23. and Eliezer, Abraham's
godly Servant, Genesis 24. 12. And Isaac his gracious Son; It is noted of him,
ver. 63. That he went one to meditate; or (as the Hebrew word Lasuach may be
read,) to pray. The word signifies hoth to pray and to meditate, and it is no
improbable but that Isaac did at that time, nothing but what was his daily
custom to do, even retire himself from all company, for secret prayer and
meditation. And the like we read concerning Jacob, that he did wrestle with the
Lord in secret Prayer, Genesis 32. 24. They are not the spiritual seed of Jacob
that never do thus. I might mention Hezekiah, Damid, Jeremiah, Peter, and many
other holy Servants of God, of whom we read in the Scripture, that they did
practice this duty. Yea, we have the greatest example that ever was, set before
us for our imitation in this particular, that is Christ's own example; of whom
it is said, that He departed into a solitary place and there prayed, Mark 1.35.
That He went apart to pray, Mat. 14. 23. That he withdrew himself and prayed,
Luk.5. 16. And as the Lord Jesus Christ said, respecting another duty, I have
given you an example that ye should do as I have done, Joh. 13. 15. so does he
say as to this duty of Secret Prayer: I have given you an example, and caused
it to be entered upon everlasting Record, that so you that are my Disciples may
in this follow me; and truly the sincere Disciples of Christ, will make
conscience, so to walk (...) walked, 1 John 2. 6. They will strive to write
after the blessed Copy, which their Master Christ has set before them.

2. The truth is further evident, in that every sincere Servant of God does
make Conscience of obeying all his Commandments, Psalm. 119. 6. Then shall I not
be ashamed when I have respect unto all thy precepts. Now the Lord has
commanded men that they should worship him, not only in public, and in
Families, but in secret also, Ephesians. 6.18. Pray with all Prayer: we have formerly
showed, that secret prayer is in that precept enjoined, as well as public and
family Prayer. And when the Lord in his word faith to men, Commune with your
hearts, Psalm. 4. 4. those two great duties, wherein much of Religion does
consist, viz. self examination, and secret Prayer are implied. Yes, this duty
is most expressly commanded by the Lord Jesus Christ, who says When thou
prayest enter into thy closet, and when thou have shut the door pray to thy
Father which sees in secret. Matthew. 6.6. The sincere man does not live in the
commission of any known sin, nor in the w^lful omission of any known duty.
Surely then, not in the omission of so great and known and plainly commanded
duty as this of secret prayer, is:

3. He that is sincere does in special aim at approving himself in the sight of
God. Hence is that expression of Godly sincerity. 2 Cor. 1. 12. because the
sincere man does especially desire (...) have Gods approbation. And therefore
he abstains from secret sins. as (...) did; v^a he dare not so much as in his
thoughts give (...) that, which he knows sinful, because (...) that the eye
of Go^f upon him and does therefore study to approve him (...) unto men but
unto God. Hence also he practices secret duties which the Lord love is witness
of. This we see in Nathaniel, that Israelite indeed in whom there was no
reigning guile Job. 1.47 48. when that sincere (...) was alone under the
Fig Tree, no doubt Praying there: the Son of God who has eyes like a flame of
Fire saw him, and did highly approve of his sincerity, of which the spirit that
breathed in his secret prayers was a great discovery.

4. They that are sincere do in a peculiar manner delight in those duties
wherein the greatest intimacy with God is to be enjoyed.

That's one difference between an Hypocrite and a sincere child of God. An
hypocrite will rest in the external performance of duty, though he has no
communion with God therein, whenas one that is sincere does aim at that in duty
and therefore the more intimacy of communion with God, is to be enjoyed, the
more careful is he not to neglect such a duty. Now this is true concerning
Secret Prayer. Did Abraham, did Jacab, did Moses, did Daniel and other servants
of the Lord, whom we read of in the Scripture, ever meet with more of God, then
when they were in secret, pouring out their hearts before him? Intimate friends
when they are alone, can speak more freely, and have a fuller communion then
when others are by: so it is here, A Believer can not so freely express himself
before the Lord as to many particulars when others are by, as he can when there
is none present but God and he. In secret places, he can speak his whole heart;
and pour out his soul into the bosom of God, and of Jesus Christ

Q. 2. What is implied in this expressions, of praying day and night without
ceasing?

Ans. 1. It implies constancy in the Practice of this duty. Thus when it is
said, Pray without ceasing. 1 Thessalonians 5.17. i. e. don't begin to practice the
duty, and afterward leave off; but hold out all your days therein. It is the
same with that, Ephesians. 6. 18. Praying with all perseverance, So that Phrase of
night and day, intends the same thing, Rev. 7 15. They serve him day and night
in his Temple, h. e. continually and without intermission. Thus Isai. 62.6. The
watchmen of Jerusalem shall not hold their peace day nor night, h.e. they shall
hold on in their duty. Time you know is divided into day and night. If then a
man shall continue to serve God, both by night and by day, then he does serve
him always.

2. It implies Frequency. Those words without ceasing, some read without
intermission: Not but that the duty of Prayer may and must be intermitted, as
to actual performance, that so other duties as to our general or particular
calling may be attended, but the spirit of the duty should not be intermitted,
Christians must be careful that they never lose that: There ought to be an
habitual inclination, and readiness to attend the duty of prayer, whenever
called thereunto: Also, there should be a frequency therein, as to actual
performance. And when it is said, that a man should pray in secret, day and
night, that implies, that he should do so very often, Psalm. 1. 2. 1 Thessalonians. 3.
10. Indeed, secret Prayer should be every man's daily practice. Therefore when
Christ bid his Disciples pray in secret, he bids them say, Give us this day,
etc. Mat^ 6.6, 11. from whence we may infer that secret Prayer should be a
Christians daily practice. It is not determined in the Scripture, how often
every man must pray in secret: Only that he ought to do thus daily. We find
that Daniels constant course was to pray by himself three times every day, Dan.
6. 10. And David says, that he did praise God seven times a day, h. e. often
times, Psalm. 119. 164. And there is great reason that men should offer prayers
and praises before God in secret, at least once every day, and once every
night; so may they be said to pray without ceasing night and day.

We come now to enquire into the reasons of this Doctrine.

Reas. 1. From the consideration of the omnipresence of God. He sees and bears
what is done not only in public Assemblies, and in Families, but in closets,
Jer. 23. 24. Can any side himself in secret places, that I shall not see him,
says the Lord do not I fill Heaven and Earth? This reason is urged as an
Argument for secret Prayer, even because our Heavenly Father sees in secret,
Mat 6. 6. If men do not practice this duty, it argues great Athelsme and that
they do not really, and with their whole hearts, believe the omnipresence of
God; so by the practice hereof, they testify that they have the seen of this
Truth upon their hearts; therefore should they pray in secret.

Reas 2. Because there are many requests fit and necessary to be mentioned
before the Lord in secret, that may not be expressed before other, e. g.
Requests concerning a man's particular wants, which may press him, and oppress
him: and concerning his ecret sins which he has been guilty of before the
Lord. It God by his providence has kept a man's sins from the knowledge of the
world he would sin grievously in divulging his own secret sins, and yet as ever
he does desire the pardon of them, or the salvation of his soul, he must
confess and bewail them before God in in secret places: in which respect,
secret prayer is necessary. Again, a child of God may be molested with the
prevalency of some particular corruption or temptation, which it is no meet to
speak of before others yet it concerns him to cry unto God day and right for
power against it. There are also requests which may respect particular persons,
whose cases and circumstances may be such as others should not know of; upon
which account also prayer in secret is necessary. There are some that a man may
have special reason to pray for them in his secret addresses to the Throne of
grace; as Paul for Timothy. There are also some that we ought to pray against
them, viz. special and implacable Enemies of the Lords name and People, whom^^
may no be convenient to mention whilst others are in hearing, but we should put
he Lord in mind of them, and those arrows which are shot out of closets, will
at last fall upon them, and smite them down into the pit.

Reaf. 3. Equity requires this from the Lords Servants. He brings them into
his chambers, Cant. 14. The King has brought me into his Chambers. Therefore
they ought to bring him into their chambers. There is a secret providence of
God at work for them continually, Psa. 31. 20. Thou shall hide them in the
secret of thy presence, thou shall keep them secretly in a pavilion. Shall the
Lord hide his Servants in these chambers of safets whith he has prepared for
them? and shall not they pray unto him and praise him in their secret Chambers?
yea, and as for sincere Believers, the Lord has provided chambers for them in
his house, even in the Palace Royal of Heaven, there to praise his Name for
ever more. Therefore in the mean time they should praise him, and pray unto him
day and night in their Chambers here. The Lord said unto the Prophet Zechariah.
If thou will keep my charge, I will give thee places to walk amongst these that
stand by. Zech. 3. 7. Intimating that the faithful Servants of God, shall one
day walk in the Galleries of Heaven, amongst the Holy Angels hat are there. It
is but reason then, that they should bring the Lord into their Closets here
upon earth.

Use 1. Of Reprehension:

1. To them that neglect Secret Prayer. Are there not many whose Consciences
are smiting them whilst the Word of the Lord is speaking to them. How many
Children, and young ones that never go alone to pray! You children did you this
day go, and the last night go alone to pray? yea, and there are elder ones,
that the chambers they lodge in. will witness against them at the last day, for
living in he neglect of secret Prayer before the Lord. They are many times
alone whole nights together, but as it is said of the wicked, God is not in all
their thoughts. Well, be assured, if ever God intend mercy to thy soul, he will
make thee get alone to pray, and to pour out thy Soul in his presence. For (as
I have formerly showed in Conversion, that's one of the first things, a poor
sinner begins to be in earnest in his Secret Prayer and cries to Heaven. As it
was said of Paul, w^liest in the pangs of the new birth, Act. 9 11. Behold he
prays, so if the Lord convert and save thy soul. behold! thou will pray in
secret.

2. This Reproof belongs to them also, who are not freenent and constant in the
practice at this duty, Alas! I know there have been many that the Word of the
Lord has met with them; they have been Sermon sick, and then they would pray
in secret; but they have not done thus without, ceasing. Their convictions have
died, and they became as prayerless as ever in their lives before Or it may be,
some distressing affliction or other, has brought them upon their knees before
the Lord. Like those in Isai 26. 16. Lord, in trouble they visited, thee, they
poured out a prayer, when thy chastening, was upon them. Ah! Lord God, has it
not been thus, with many a soul that hears me this day? but their distresses
being removed, they continue not in secret prayer, Oh consider what the
Scripture says, Heb. 10 38. If any draw back my Soul shall have no pleasure in
him. To begin a course of Prayer. and then to leave off again is to araw back.
Will the Lord take pleasure in such? He has said, he will not. And yet I wish
there be not Professors of Religion. Church members, whose consciences do (or
may) accuse them for inconstancy in the performance of this great duty of
secret prayer. If thou art such an one, thou have on thee one of the sad marks
of an Hypocrite: for it is said of the Hypocrite will he always call upon God?
Job 27. 10^ wonder how such men, and women, can think that they elong to God,
or that they have a real in erest in heaven, who can find in their hearts to
live without secret communion with him: especially considering, that the
Scripture tell them, that he that shall allow him. (...) in the wilful breach
of the least Command, meet, shall not be admitted, nor accounted of in the
Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5 19. Where then will they appear, who live in the
neglect of to great a Commandment as this of secret prayer is?

3. This Reprovein those that instead of Praying is secret are sinning in
secret. The Apostle says, it is a shame to speak of those things which are
come of some is secret. Ephesians. 5. 12. How do wretched sinners bless themselves,
if they (...) out of the fight of men: especially as to hat iniquity of which
it is said, that the abhorred of the Lord shall fall into it, They commit
Adultery and other sorts of unclean abominations in secret places; or they live
in secret self pollution which is commonly the young man's sin; an evil
condemned in the Scripture under the name of uncleanness, and sometimes under
the Name of Effeminateness; and the word of the Lord says, that whoever lives
in it, shall certainly excluded out of the Kingdom of Heaven. Intend of
mourning grand bleeding in secret places that over thou last been guilty (...)
this sin, do then till (...)? then wo^to thy soul. There are ^wo^hings which
^lam suit thou do not remember as thou should (...) co.

1. Thou do (...) not remember that the all seeing eye of an infinite God
loo^eth upon thee. If a child of seven years old sawthee, thou (...) be afraid
and ashamed to commit that sin; and would thou do it, if thou ciest behold
God looking on thee?

2. Neither do thou remember the day of Judgment For then every secret thing
whether it be good or whether it be evil will be brought to light. Ecc^^^. 12.
14. If thou did believe that all the world should one day hear of that secret
sin of thine, would thou commit it? certainly if men considered this they
would sin in secret less, and pray in secret more.

Use 2. Of Exhortation, to follow the Apostles Example, by being much in the
Practice of this duty of secret Prayer.

Do but consider, the good and benefit which will follow Whoever is sincere
therein shall find that his secret prayers have not been lost labor. A man may
thereby obtain mercy for his own soul: even grace and spiritual blessings.
Solomon's wisdom was given to him as an answer unto his secret prayers. Comfort
and assurance of Gods favor may in this way be obtained: you that complain,
you have not assurance of your salvation, consider of it. There have been those
(I could tell you of mavelous instances to this purpose) that when they have
been upon their knees in secret, the holy Spirit has broke in upon their Souls
with everlasting consolation. Yea, a man by secret Prayer may obtain mercy for
his Family. The lives of all Jacobs children were spared, in answer to their
Fathers prayers in secret. Nay more, one righteous man by prayer in secret may
be a means to divert Judgment, and to obtain mercy, for the whole town, and
Land where he dwells. How far did Abraham by his prayers in secret prevail for
Sodom; and Moses for Israel? And what mercy did Elijah and Amo^ obtain for the
whole Land by their secret prayers?

And truly they are the persons who are like to experience special mercy in the
evil day. They that pray much in secret, and that mourn continually in secret
places, because of the sins of the times, shall experience if not temporal
(that which is better) spiritual preservations in a day of general calamity,
Ezekiel. 9. 4. Jer. 13. 17.

For Direction here.

1. Be very particular in secret Prayer.

Men should i^ secret before the Lord, often bewail every sin they have been
guilty of, whilst in a f^ate of unregeneracy. As to the kind of sin, that is,
though it may be the acts of sin have been so (...), as it is not possible to
mention them all particularly) And if after conversion they fall into evils,
for which Conscience (...) them, they should particularly acknowledge those
sins in their secret addresses unto the throne of Grace, begging for the pardon
of them. Particular plagues of heart should be mourned for in secret: so there
are particular (...) to be prayed for; and particular friends (near Relations
especially) which ought to be remembered in secret prayers day and right without
ceasing. Personal and particular concerns are to be enlarged upon in closet
prayer especially.

2. Take heed of resting in the external performance of this duty. Do not think
that you must needs be saved, merely because you pray in secret. You
especially, who are the Children of godly Parents, and have ever practiced this
duty, because of the frequent Exhortations, and Examples which have been set
before you. Oh rest not here, without experiencing a work of true Faith and
Regeneration in your Souls. Remember, that though a man cannot be sincere, if
he live in the neglect of so great a duty, yet he may continue in the practice
of it, after a formal manner (as Paul before his conversion did, Phil. 3. 6.
Luke 18. 14, and for all that, remain in a state of Hypocrisy. Nor indeed is
there an^^cuty, but an Hypocrite may attend it without ceasing, as to the
external part of the duty. Wherefore, beware of taking up with that.

3. Labor after intimacy of Communion with God therein. Its true, we must
remember out distance, considering that God is in Heaven, and (...) on Earth.
He is an infinite Majesty, and we are poor inconsiderable dust-heaps; and
therefore may not forget that we are dust and ashes, when we take upon us to
speak unto the Lord of heaven and earth. Nevertheless he allows us to be
humbly familiar with his divine Majesty. An holy man upon his deathbed could
say, If the (...) of this chamber could speak, they would testify how often I
have met with God here; and how familiar he has been with my ^oul. Oh labor
after that, to know by blessed experience, what it is to have intimate
communion with God in closets, and to be familiar with the Lord Jesus there.

4. Practice other duties in secret, which are an help to Prayer. e. g.
Self-examination is a great help unto secret prayer. When a man upon
examination and serious reflections upon himself, sees what his defects have
been and are, and withal perceives want God has done for his soul, he must
needs thereby be quickened in his calling upon the Name of the Lord. And read
the Scriptures daily in secret; and having so done, meditate and ponder upon
what you have read; and then fall upon your knees before the Lord, and pour out
your very hearts in his presence: And know for your encouragement, that your
secret prayers shall one day be rewarded openly Mat. 6.6. When you come to die,
you will not repent of the time that has been thus spent nor at the last day
when the Lord Jesus will openly before all the World speak of the secret
Prayers (as well as secret Alms deeds) of his servants. O how glorious will it
be, when Christ shall say (as sometimes to Nathaniel) I saw thee every day and
night upon thy knees in thy closet; I bestowed mercy on others out of respect
to thy prayers, and brought about great changes in the world, in answer
thereunto? Blessed is that Servant whom the Lord shall find thus doing.

Baptized Persons are under Sacred and Awful Obligation to the Lord.
GAL. 3. 27. For as many of you, as have been Baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ.
THe Apostle having declared that men are justified only by Faith in Christ,
and not by the works of the Law, he does ob^iate and answer some objections
which certain self teachers who troubled the Churches in Galatia, after Paul's
departure from amongst them; would be ready to make: one of which was, that
then the Law was an useless thing; and that if life could not be obtained
thereby, it was given in vain to the children of Israel. He therefore shows,
that the Law was of great use. 1. To convince of sin, ver. 19. 2. To lead unto
Christ ver. 24. The moral Law does convince of sin; and so help men to a sight
of their need of a Savior: but especially, the Ceremonial Law, was a
Schoolmaster to lead unto Christ. All the Ceremonies did one way or other point
at Christ. Every Sacrifice told the Jews that they deserved Death; and that if
ever they were saved from eternal death it must be by the Blood of Christ.

Having cleared the Truth, and given a satisfactory Answer unto Objections
proposed; he proceeds further to confirm his Assertion, that the Ceremonial Law
is abrogated, and that Believers are not now bound to observe it. And this he
proves from the consideration of their Adoption, ver. 20. It is true, that Old
Testament Believers, though under the Law, were nevertheless the Children of
God. But they were like Children in minority, who are under Schoolmasters; when
as now Believers are like Children come to Adult age, that need the help of
(...) School master no longer, A Child in minority, though his Fathers Heir, is
under Tutors and Governors; but Children grown up to Man's estate are not so.
Thus the Church before the coming of Christ was in its minority, and therefore
might be under such a severe and grievous Schoolmaster as the Law was: But now
the Church being come to greater perfection, is not so. Believers under the
Gospel are to be esteemed as the Adopted Children of God; and that not as
Children under age, but fit for the enjoyment (...) privileges. And that is
evinced in the verse from the consideration of that Baptism into the N^n^ of
Christ, which his Serva (...) Subjects of they that (...) corpor^ted into
Christ and made one with him; must needs be the Children of God. So are you
(says the Apostle) witness your Baptism. Men may be said to put (...) Christ.

1. When they have an interest in him and in his glorious Righteousness, as a
garment to adorn their Souls.

2. When they imitate his graces, have received his Spirit, and follow his
Example. Not that all Baptized persons do thus really; but they are all under
the deepest and most sacred and solemn obligation so to do. They professedly
put on Christ. They are under engagement by their Baptism to look after
Salvation from Christ, and to obey him in all things, to follow him as the
Captain of their Salvation.

The Doctrine which may therefore he insisted on from these Words is;

That Baptism does bring those that are Baptized under Sacred, and most Awful
Obligations to the Lord.

There are two things that may be enquired into for the clearing of this
Doctrine:

1. How in does appear that Baptized persons are under sacred and awful
Obligations to the Lord?

2. What those Obligations are; or, what things Baptism does oblige the
Subjects of it unto?

Q. How does is appear that Baptized persons are under Obligations to the Lord?

Ans. 1. The truth of this Doctrine is evident, in that Baptism is a sign and
seal of that Covenant which God has through Jesus Christ, graciously
established with the children of men.

It has seemed good to the wisdom of God, to appoint some visible signs, to
be for tokens and intimations of the Covenant which is between himself and his
people. When he made a Covenant with Abraham, he did institute that ordinance
of Circumcision, to be for a sign of the Covenant? Genesis 17. 11. Hence we read
of the Covenant of Circumcision, Act. 7.8. because the Subjects of that
Ordinance, did by their submission thereunto; declare and testify that they
became the words Covenant servants. The NewTestament has only two Seals or
Sacraments annexed to it; the first of which is Baptism. Hence the Apostle in
1 Pot. 3, 21. speaking of Baptism, he speaks also of the Answer of a good
Conscience, which expression alludeth unto Stipulation or Covenanting with God,
implying that in Baptism, men do come under a sacred Obligation to be the
Lords. When it is propounded to a man, will thou promise to be the servant of
God, and of Jesus Christ? if he answers again* I will be so and does make this
promise in sincerity, that's the answer of a good Concience, and then his
Baptism does (as a sign and seal of the Covenant) save him. The Covenant alone
binds unto duty: but when sealed, that adds to the Obligation. The bond is
made the stronger thereby.

2. Baptism is an holy Privilege. That which only some have a right unto;
viz. Those that are amongst the number of the Lords visible people. Baptism
does of right belong unto all and only such. To Christ's Disciples, Joh. 4. 1.
To Believers, or such as do visibly belong unto Jesus Christ, as his sheep, or
as his lambs, Mark 16. 16. It is the mark and livery whereby Christ's Servants
are distinguished from those that worship other Gods. We know that amongst men,
the Servants belonging (...) great personages, use to wear such a Livery, (...)
they are known to be the Servants (...) a Master. And the Lord Christ has
commanded that Baptism shall be the Livery, whereby his Servants shall be
distinguished from others in the world. Now privileges are always attended
with obligations unto duty. Inasmuch then, as Baptism is an holy privilege, it
leaves a drop Obligation upon the souls of those who are made the Subjects of
it, that they approve themselves in all respects as becomes the Lords Servants
to do.

3. Glorious things are signified and sealed by Baptism. e.g. Union with
Christ. As that expression in the Text, of being Baptized into Christ does
import, our incorporation into Christ's mystical body, is signified by Baptism.
There is an external Union with Christ, which all the Lords visible Covenant
people are concerned in. Hence we read of branches in him, which do not beat
fruit, Joh. 15. 2^. Men and women who are Members of the visible, but not of
the invisible Church and body of Christ, are such; and (...) external union and
relation unto the Lord Christ is by Baptism sealed unto all who are by divine
institution the subjects of that ordinance. There is also, a real saving union
with him, which is sealed to the true believer in Baptism. As surely as he
has been Baptized, so certain is it, that he is become one with Christ. Also,
communion with Christ in respect of his death and resurrection, is thereby
signified and sealed, as the Apostle shows, Romans 6.3,4. Know ye not that so
many of (...), as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his
death, therefore we are buried with him, by baptism into death: that like as
Christ was raised from the dead, by the glory of the Father, even so we should
walk in newness of life. When water is put upon the person Baptized, that's a
sign of his communion with Christ in respect of His death and burial, and when
he is brought from under the water again, that's a sign of his Communion with
Christ in respect of his Resurrection. And hence, Baptism does signify un^o
Believers that Communion which they have with Christ in respect of all the
saving benefits procured by his death, and by his resurrection, 1 Pet. 3. 21.
Baptism does save us, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ; it is unto us a
Sacrament, signifying that we are saved through the resurrection of Jesus
Christ. Justification by the righteousness of Christ is held forth thereby. And
so indeed Circumcision did declare what Justification was to be obtained
through Faith in the Righteousness of Christ. For which cause the Scripture
says that it was a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, Romans 4. 11. The
remission of sins is signified by baptism, Mark 1. 4. Act. 2. 38. Therefore
Ananias said unto Paul Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins Act. 22.
16. Baptism does intimate, that the guilt of sin is washed away by the blood
of Jesus Christ. Sanctification is likewise signified thereby. It is therefore
said that the Lord did sanctify and cleanse his Church with the washing of
water, Ephesians. 5. 26. When the body is subjected unto water in Baptism, those
pure waters of the Spirit of Grace, wherewith the souls of Gods Elect are
sprinkled and washed from the filth of sin, are thereby signified. Yea, and
Glorification is thereby assured unto the true Believer in Christ, that he is
admitted into the number of Gods adopted Children; and therefore is become an
Heir of that Kingdom which does belong unto the children of God. All these
mysteries are signified and sealed unto sincere Christians positively by their
Baptism; and unto all that are baptized conditionally, (...) in case they do
repent and believe. Now if such glorious things are signified and sealed by
Baptism, the Souls of men must needs be brought under a deep, and holy
Obligation unto the Lord thereby.

4. The dreadful Name of God, is put upon those that are Baptized. Therefore
they are said to be Baptized, not only in, but ((...) To onoma) into the Name
of the Father, and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, Mat. 28. 19. because the
Name of the only true God, who is Father Son, and Spirit; is put upon them.
Which expression, does imply, that baptized persons are adopted into Gods
Family; and that therefore they are bound to walk worthy of that great and holy
Name which is put upon them. Men are also baptized into the Name of the Lord
Jesus Christ, Act. 8 16. and 15. 5. according to the Hebrew style, to be
Baptized into the Name of another, is to become wholly devoted unto his
service; and to yield ones self in all things to his direction. Thus Baptized
persons, are devoted and dedicated unto the peculiar service of God, and of
Jesus Christ, who is become their Lord; and therefore they are under engagement
to acquit themselves accordingly. The consecration of God being upon them, they
must needs ^e under great Obligations unto Duty.

We come therefore unto the second enquiry, viz. What things Baptism does
oblige the Subjects of it unto?

Ans. 1. Baptism does oblige unto Faith in God, and in Jesus Christ.

The subjects of it, are bound to believe in that only true God, into whose
alone Name they have been baptized. It does oblige not only unto an Historical
Faith, or to believe that every word of God is true; but unto a Faith of
adherence and dependence upon God for life and Salvation; and this as to every
one of the persons in the Sacred Trinity, according to their distinct personal
Relations. We are (as a judicious and excellent Preacher well expresses)
obliged by our Baptism to depend upon God the father, as the Fountain of all
our good, and alsufficient happiness, and to rest upon the Son of God, as our
Redeemer, expecting life and salvation through his merit and mediation, and to
believe in God the Holy Ghost, as our Sanctifier, Comforter and Guide in the
way to Glory.

2. All Baptized Persons are obliged by their Baptism, to make an open
Profession of the Name of God in Christ, though exposed to never such hazards
and outward miseries on account thereof. It obliges us, not to be ashamed of
our Religion, and holy profession; but to be willing that the whole world
should see and know, that we are the servants of the only true God, and of his
Son Jesus Christ. It is noted concerning the Lords Sealed ones, that they had
the Fathers Name written in their Foreheads, Rev. 14. 1. Those are thereby
intended, who make a bold and open profession of the Name, and pure Worship of
God, during the reign of Antichrist; notwithstanding their being exposed to
dangers and sufferings on that account. It is not enough for men to believe
that there is one God distinguished into three persons; or that Jesus Christ is
the Son of God; but they must openly confess the Name of this God in Christ,
owning themselves to be his Servants, whatever the event of such a profession,
as to sufferings in the world, may be. Now by Baptism men do thus. Hence it is
said, Mark 16. 16. He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, h. e. he
that does both inwardly and sincerely believe on Christ, and that shall by his
submitting to Baptism, declare before all the World, that he is a Believer on
Christ, is one unto whom the Gospel does promise Salvation. And indeed, in
those times of persecution, if a man did subject himself to that Institution of
Christ, it was a great sign of his being a true Believer, inasmuch as he did
thereby expose himself to all sorts of dangers and miseries from the world, for
Christ's sake. For then, if a man did consent to be Baptized into the Name of
Christ; immediately his Estate, Liberty, Life, and all was in danger to be
taken from him.

3. Baptized persons, are bound to renounce, disown, and forsake those things
which would keep them from serving God and the Lord Jesus Christ. e. g. They
are under solemn engagement to renounce all Idols; to serve them no longer; for
that's inconsistent with being the Lords servant. The Gentiles before their
Conversion, did service unto them which by nature are no Gods, Gal. 4 8. but
when they had submitted unto Baptism, they were under the strongest obligation
that could be, never to serve I^ols any more nor to worship any one, besides
that God who is Father, Son and Spirit. And they are bound to forsake the
service of sin, and not to live under the domination thereof, Romans 6.2,3. Shall
we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? so many of us as were
baptized, etc. The Apostle does not affirm, that it is impossible for men that
are in respect of their Baptism professedly dead unto sin, to live therein;
but that it is very unsuitable for them so to do; and that they are under the
greatest and most sacred obligations to the contrary. And hence another Apostle
speaks, as 2 Pet. 1. 9. He has forgotten that he was purged from his old
sins. Which words may well allude unto baptism, importing that men by
subjecting thereunto, profess and engage unto God, that they will forsake their
sins and former evil ways, and walk no more therein, Also the baptized person
does renounce the World, so far as it stands in opposition to Christ. He is
under engagement not to be (in spiritual respects and as to matters of Faith
and Soul concernments) the servant of any man in the world, 1 Cor. 7 23. And
therefore he may not call himself after the name of this or that Sect master,
as Papists are wont to do, who call themselves, Scotists, or Thomists, or
Dominicans, or Franciscans, etc. This is directly against the Scripture, and
against that obligation which Baptism brings men under, by reason whereof
baptized persons, are, only after the Name of Christ, to call themselves
Christians. Had the Corinthians, called themselves Paulites, or Petrites, or
Apollonists, after the Names of those famous Ministers of Christ, they had
greatly sinned against their baptism, 1 Cor. 1. 13. Yea, and the baptized
person is bound to forsake all vain, worldly Compassions, so far as society
with them, is an hindrance to communion with God. And to renounce the things of
the world also, se. when they stand in opposition to, or competition with the
things of Christ. If a man after he is baptized shall set his heart
inordinately upon Earthly vanities, he breaks his baptismal vow and covenant
with God, Mat. 6.24.

4. Baptized ones, are under obligation to approve themselves, holy persons.
They are bound to live a sanctified life. If they have been washed with holy
water of Baptism, that signifies to them that now they must approve
themselves, as those that have the consecration of God upon them ought to do,
in all holy conversation and godliness, Ephesians. 5. 26. They are now bound to live,
as becomes the Servants of such an Holy Lord, as God is, and as Christ is, for
to do. There are two things in Sanctification; unto both which Baptism does in
the most solemn manner oblige those that are the Subjects of it.

1. To mortify sin. The baptized person has vowed the death of sin, and that
he will never be reconciled to that Enemy, but will maintain war with the
Amalikites for ever. As Christ has died for sin, so the person that is
baptized into his Name, is under a most sacred Obligation, to endeavor to be
continually dying to sin, Romans 6. 3.

2. Another thing in Sanctification, is Vivification, or the living a new life
to the honor of God. Thus the baptized person, is under the most solemn
engagement unto new obedience, to walk in newness of life. As Christ rose out
of his Grave, and lives for ever to the glory of the Father, so baptized
persons are under engagement, to rise more and more out of the grave of sin,
and to live such a life as that God may have glory from them, Romans 6.4,5. In
Baptism, there is an intimation, that the subjects of it, are professedly and
visibly new creatures; and that therefore they are bound to live like new
creatures, Tit. 3. 5. Hence in the primitive times, baptized persons had the
name of Regenerate ones given to them, because they were under obligation not
to live to themselves, or to the world, but unto God and unto Jesus Christ.
They are bound to live a new and another kind of life, then that which
unregenerate sinners are acquainted with. Hence is that expression in the
Scripture of baptizing unto Repentance, Mat. 3. 11 because the subjects of that
ordinance are bound to repent, h. e. to forsake the ways of sin, and to walk
in the contrary ways of holiness.

5. Baptized persons are under obligation to observe all the holy Institutions
of the Lord Jesus. As the subjects of circumcision, were bound to observe all
Mosaical Laws and Ceremonies, Gal. 5. 3. So are baptized ones to attend unto
all the Institutions of Christ. When the Lord says unto his Ministers, Baptize
persons, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I command you, Mat.
28.19,20. That plainly shows, that such are by virtue of their baptism,
under a religious obligation, to observe whatever the Lord has commanded. Yea,
and that expression of being baptized into his Name, does imply no less.
Therefore whatever has the Name of Christ upon it, is to be duly respected,
and so have all his institutions. And if any of these be rejected or neglected,
the Name and Authority of Christ, is so far disowned, which is a direct
violation of that which baptism requires.

6. B aptisme does oblige Christians unto unity amongst themselves. It is a
Seal of that spiritual union which believers have, both with Christ, and also
through Christ, one with another, 1 Cor. 12.13. We are all baptized into one
body. It does declare the Subjects of it, to be servants belonging to the same
Master: and that therefore they ought to be at unity amongst themselves. Hence
the Apostle uses that Argument to persuade Christians to endeavor to keep the
unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, because there is one baptism, Ephesians.
4. 5. They are all baptized into one and the same Name, dedicated and devoted
to be the Servants of one and the same Lord Jesus. Therefore bound to be and
continue one amongst themselves; and to beware how they make a Schism in the
body, or amongst the members of Christ.

7. Baptism does oblige men unto constancy in the way of obedience. It is an
everlasting bond. A mark of the Lord, which leaves an eternal obligation unto
duty upon the Souls of men. The Covenant is perpetual, Jer. 50. 5. Let us join
our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant, which shall not be forgotten.
The Covenant is everlasting, Isai. 24.5. They have broken the everlasting
Covenant, i. e. that Covenant which ought never to have been broken by them.
Therefore Baptism confirming the Covenant, carries with it the force of an
everlasting obligation. The person that is baptized, is bound to serve God not
for a while only, but for ever. He is bound to hold fast the profession of his
Faith without wavering. He is bound to practice (as well as to profess) the
thing that good is, all his days. He is bound to continue in his observing of
divine Institutions, he is under obligation to be constant in his love to
Saints, and to the Truths, and Worship, and Ordinances of God, even to the end
of his days.

Use. 1. Here is matter of Conviction and Awakening unto those that rest in
external baptism, without coming up to that which they are obliged unto.

Alas! there are many that do thus: yea, as for the generality of baptized
persons, this is sadly true concerning them. How few are there, that ever had
serious thoughts with themselves, about this matter? If they and their Children
may be baptized, they look no further, as if that were all that the Lord
requires of them. And hence it is, that many who are unholy and profane,
having no right to baptism in sight of God nor of men, neither for themselves
nor for their Children, are very desirous to have that ordinance administered to
them; it is partly for that they suppose the reproach of Egypt will then be
rolled away from them: it being esteemed a dishonorable thing to be
un-baptised, where the name of a Christian is in credit with the world, but
chiefly, because they are not aware of that dreadful Obligation which their
Souls are brought under by baptism; and the astonishing curse of Heaven, that
will at last most certainly come up on them, if they violate their baptismal
Vow and Engagement unto the Lord.

I desire and solemnly charge such persons as in the fear of God, to consider
of two things.

1. That external baptism alone will not save them. Will you say of your
baptism, as the Israelites said of the Ark? It shall save us, 1 Samuel 4. 3. O
deceive not your own Souls. The Apostle having said, baptism now saves us,
that no one might mistake his meaning, he adds, not the putting away the filth
of the flesh, not (says he) a meet external washing of the body, but there
must be the answer of a good Conscience, you must make Conscience, to answer
the Obligation, which baptism has brought you under, or it will be no sign of
Salvation to your Souls, 1 Pet.3. 21. you shall be as far off from Salvation as
if you had never been baptized, if you rest there 1 Cor. 7. 19. Circumcision is
nothing but the keeping of the Commandments of God. So baptism is nothing if
there be not that care to keep the Commandments of God, which baptism obliges
unto. Romans 2. 25. For Circumcision verily profits if thou keep the Law, but
if thou be a breaker of the Law, thy Circumcision is made uncircumcision. So I
say, thy baptism will profit thee, if thou do remember the awful obligation;
which thy Soul is brought under thereby; but if thou shall be unmindful of thy
engagement to be the Lords, thy baptism is made no baptism, as to any
spiritual and eternal benefit, to be from thence expected. Is it not said,
concerning the Children of Israel, that they were all baptized in the Cloud,
and yet with many of them God was not well pleased, 1 Cor. 10. 2, 5. Outward
baptism alone, will make no man, woman, nor child, acceptable unto God.

2. Baptism will be so far from saving, as that it will tend to the
aggravation of their eternal condemnation at the last day, that do not remember
how they have thereby been engaged to be the Lords.

They have ^rophaned the Covenant, and taken the dreadful Name of God in vain;
therefore he will not hold them guiltless. They will one day wish that they had
never been baptized, Eccles. 5.5. better it is that thou should not vow,
then that thou should vow and not pay. So it were better for thee not to be
baptized, then that thou should be baptized, and yet not be mindful of that
baptismal vow which thy Soul is under; for thou will receive the greater
damnation. The water of baptism will be turned into blood: Think awfully on
that Scripture, Jer. ^. 25.26. behold the days come says the Lord, that I
will punish the circumcised with the uncircumcised: Egypt, and Judah, and Edom.
etc for all those Nations are uncircumcised, and all the house of Israel are
uncircumcised in heart. Even so, God will punish not only Heathen, and Jews,
and Turks, and Indians; for all these are unbaptised, but also professed
Christian, yea, protestant people, for these are generally unbaptised in heart;
their heart is not washed from their filthiness. It shall be easier for Sodom
and Gomorrha at the day of Judgment, then for impenitent baptized persons.
Consider this you that are unbaptised in heart. Your baptism will rise up in
Judgment against you at the last day. It is reported concerning a man whose
name was Elpidophorus that after his baptism Apostasing from the truth and
ways of God; the Minister who had administered that Ordinance to him showed him
the vestment, wherein he had been baptized, saying this shall accuse thee at
the last day: so I say to thee, the place where thou wast baptized, and the
Minister of God, that baptized thee, will be a witness against thee at the last
day, if thou do not live and practice according to that sacred obligation
which thy soul is under.

Use. 2. Let those that have been baptized into Christ; be exhorted in the Name
of the Lord this day, to improve their baptism.

Consider, they are blessed that do thus. They that answer the obligation which
by being made subject unto such an Ordinance of Christ, they are brought under,
shall have all the grace and good which is signified thereby, most certainly
performed to them. All that is contained in that comprehensive word, Salvation,
shall be vouchsafed to them, 1 Pet. 3. 24. As sure as they have been baptized,
so surely shall they be saved with an everlasting Salvation. They that have the
inward as well as outward Baptism, have really put on Christ, who will be a
blessed Garment, to hide them nakedness, and cover their shame, a glorious
Robe, to adorn their Souls with. The Wedding Garment, the righteousness of
Justification and of Sanctification is theirs.

Q. How should Baptism be improved? unto what ends should we make use of our
Christian Baptism?

Ans. In general unto all those ends which the Lord has appointed it for. We
are to improve our Baptism for our help and furtherance in those things, which
that Ordinance does put us in mind of. Concerning the obligations, which
Christians are brought under thereby, we have already spoken. Let me here add.

1. That Baptism should be improved unto ^^^feigned Humillation in the Lords
sight. For it puts us in mind of our natural defilement by sin. That our Souls
need to be washed, in the Blood, and by the Spirit of Christ. And when we see
Baptism administered unto any; we should humbly, and with an holy shame reflect
upon our selves, in that we have lived no more according to that baptismal
Engagement to be the Lords, and his only, which we should most frequently
remember and consider, that so we might thereby be restrained from sin, and
quickened unto duty.

2. Baptism should be improved unto thankfulness and admiration at the grace
of God in Christ Jesus. How wonderful, is that Grace, that such as we are,
should be of the Lords Family? That the mark appertaining to his sheep should
be set upon us; and that out Children with us, have been solemnly owned as
visibly belonging to God and to Jesus Christ, having the mark of his lambs on
them! That Christ should put in for our Children in the first place, and by
commanding his mark to be set upon them, bring them under engagement to be the
Lords, before ever the Devil has had any opportunity to tempt them unto sin. O
we should admire this Grace of God.

3. We should improve our baptism as an help against Temptation. If tempted
unto any wickedness, we should remember that we are Baptized into Christ, and
therefore may not sin against him. I have read of a godly person, that when
tempted unto that which was evil in the fight of God, would reply and repel the
Temptation, by saying, Nay, Satan, I may not, I dare not do this thing, because
I have been baptized into the Name of Christ. If we be at any time tempted to
despair of Gods mercy; we should then think of our baptism. Luther says, that
when he was molested with temptations of that nature, he used to consider with
himself Baptizatus sum and credo in crucifixum, I am baptized, and I believe in
him that was crucified, so would the temptation vanish. In drowning times, when
our souls are ready to sink under discouragements, we should remember and
improve our baptism considering that thereby our rising from under the waters
of affliction, (as well as the Resurrection of our bodies out of the grave) is
signified and sealed, 1 Pet. 3 20, 21. Therefore:

4. Baptism should be improved as an encouragement unto Faith and Prayer.
Believers should from the consideration thereof, take heart; and not only pray,
but Believe sin to death; and that they shall be made more and more holy, and
enabled to live to God, inasmuch as Communion with Christ, in respect of his
death and resurrection, has been sealed and confirmed to them in baptism. Go
before the Lord in secret, and say, Lord, has not Christ dyed that so his
servants might die to sin: and is he not risen, that they might live unto God?
Has not communion with him in respect of the benefits procured by his death
and resurrection been sealed by my baptism? O then, let we become more and
more dead unto sin, but alive unto God, through Jesus Christ.

And baptism, should be improved as an encouragement unto Parents to believe
as well as Pray for their Children, that God will circumcise their hearts,
making them partakers of the washing of Regeneration that as water has been
poured on their bodies in the Name of Christ so converting grace shall be
poured down from Heaven upon their Souls. And Children who have been baptized
into Christ, should from that consideration, be encouraged to pray for Grace.
Children hearken to this word. O let not your baptism ly by you, as a useless
thing: Go to the Lord, and say, Lord, thou art a God in Covenant with my
Father, and with my Mother, and with me also; have not thou promised to give a
new heart to the house of Israel; and to sprinkle thy Holy Spirit on them? Am
not I of the house of Israel? has not this promise been sealed to me in my
Baptism? O then give me a new heart. And if you thus seek unto him earnestly
and sincerely; the Lord will be found of you.

The Lords Supper is an Ordinance Which Believers are under an indispensable
Obligation to Observe.
1 COR. 11. 25. This do ye.
IN this Context, the Apostle takes notice of some abuses and profanations,
which the Corinthians were guilty of, with respect unto that sacred Ordinance
of the Lords Supper. And in order to a Reformation thereof, he puts them in
mind of, and endeavors to reduce them unto the Primitive Institution.

In this, with the two preceding verses, the Apostle declares what Christ did
and said; at the time when he first insti^uted, and administered the Lords
Supper; as also the principal end for which that Ordinance was ordained, so, to
be a commemoration of the death of Christ, and so of the Redemption purchased
thereby.

In the word, before us to insist on, we have,

1. The duty commanded. This do, h. e. the bread being according to Christ
Institution, blessed and broken, take and eat thereof; and the cup being also
consecrated, take and drink thereof; This is that which is to be done: in other
words; it is as much as if it were said, see that you religiously observe and
celebrate the Lords Supper, according to divine Institution.

2. We have the persons, immediately concerned in this command: Ye, h. e. you
that are the Disciples of Christ, you that are Believers, and able to discern
the Lords Body.

Doct. That the Lords Supper is an Ordinance, which Believers are under an
indispensible Obligation to observe.

There are three things which may here be enquired into. 1. What the Lords
Supper is? 2. Who are meet subjects to partake of that Ordianance. 3. The
Reason why Believers should do this.

Q. 1. What is the Lords Supper?

And The Lords Supper is the last Sacrament of the New Testament.

There are three particulars contained in this Proposition, which may be
distinctly spoken unto and evinced.

1. That the Lords Supper is a sacrament.

2. A Sacrament of the New Testament.

3. The last Sacrament thereof.

1. It is a Sacrament. When spiritual ^nystories are represented by outward
signs (...) a Sacrament: so it is here. In every Sacrament there is an outward
and and an inward pant* a carnal and a spiritual part, something that is
visible and sensible, and something that is not apprehended by the outward
offenses, which only the soul feeth, and an eye of Faith looks upon; or the
outward sign and the thing signified. If inward (...) be signified by outward
signs, that's a Sacrament. Thus in the Ordinance of the Lords Supper, there are
outward Elements and Sacramental Actions, all which have a spiritual
significancy with them.

1. Bread and Wine are the outward Elements which by the sacred appointment of
the Lord Jesus Christ are to be made use of, in that holy institution of his;
as is expressly declared in this Context. So in the Gospel we read how Christ
blessed Bread, etc. Mat. 26. 26. And the Cup, ver. 27, 28. this (...) h. e. the
wine (...) cup. That it was Wine and nothing else which that sacred cup
contained, is evident form verse 29. where it was called the fruit of the Vine.
Now as for the Bread, which the Lord Christ, has charged his Disciples to seed
upon in this Ordinance, thereby his Body is signified, so did the Lord himself
declare at the time when he commanded this service to be religiously attended.
This is my Body h. e. it is so Sacramentally. It is necessary that we should
know and believe, that the words are figurative and not to be taken in a proper
sense; as if the Bread were Christ's real Body, or as if Bread were real Flesh,
which is impossible. Figures are frequently used in Sacramental phrases in the
Scripture; the sign being called by the Name of the thing signified thereby. It
is said of Circumcision this is my Covenant, h.e. a sign thereof, Genesis 17.10.
And the Lamb is called the Lords Passover, ^xod. 12 10. And the Apostle
speaking of that rock whose waters followed the Children of Israel, says, that
r^^k was Christ; meaning that Christ was thereby signified, 1 Cor. 10. 4. so is
the Bread in the Sacrament called the Body of Christ, because that is signified
hereby. As for the Wine. which the Lord Christ has charged his Disciples to
drink of in remembrance of him, his blood is signified thereby. And there is,
it many respects an apt resemblance between the sign and the thing signified;
more especially as to the Wine made in the Land of Canaan, which is called the
blood of the Grape. Deuteronomy. 32. 14. because of its red color, resembling blood.

And the Lord Jesus Christ, has showed his wonderful wisdom and goodness, in
ch^sing such common Elements, which may easily be obtained, so far as the
necessity of such an Ordinance does require. Had the Lord appointed a rare and
sumptuous Feast to be frequently observed, unto the honor of his Name; and as
a memorial and means of Communion with himself many of his poor Members must
needs have gone without it; but it is not so now. and there is an aptness in
these Elements, to signify that which they are intended for. Bread, which does
strengthen and nourish the body, does aptly set forth that spiritual
nourishment which we have from Christ. And Wine which does refresh the Spirits
of men, if fitly made use of, to put in mind, of that refreshing which the
Souls of Believers find in the blood of Christ.

2. Those Sacramental Actions, which the Lord has commanded his Servants to
observe, in partaking at his Table, have also a spiritual significancy with
them. These are implied in the Text, being comprehended under this expression,
Do this, h. e. as you must make use of such Elements, so of such Sacramental
Actions, as are of the Lords Institution. There is not any Action relating to
this Ordinance, but has a spiritual mystery in it. The Sacramental actions
are. 1. Taking. 2. Blessing. 3. Breaking. 4. Giving. 5. Receiving. 6. Eating
and Drinking.

1. Taking, as here ver. 23. Christ took bread, and he took the cup. That
Sacramental action, signifies to us, that the Son of God has taken our nature
into personal union with himself, Heb 2.14. It puts us in mind of that great
mystery of godliness God manifest in the flesh. Even the incarnation of the Son
of God, and the personal Union of the Humane Nature with the Divine.

2. Blessing, Mat. 26.26. Jesus took bread and blessed it. He also blessed the
Cup. Therefore the Apostle speaks, as 1 Cor. 10.16. The Cup of blessing which
we bless. Thereby the consecration of the Elements, is intimated. They are to
be solemnly set apart, from a common unto a sacred and Religious use. Thus has
Christ been consecrated and set a part unto the work and office of a Mediator,
Heb. 7.28. God has set him apart thereunto, Psalm. 4.3. And Christ has set
himself apart for that service. Therefore he speaks, as in Joh. 17. 19. For
their sakes I sanctify my self. As a Sacrifice was set apart from a common
use; and consecrated to the Lords use; so did Christ sanctify himself; and
became a sacrifice unto divine Justice, for his peoples sake.

3. Breaking the bread. Mark 14 22. Jesus took bread and blessed it, and brake
it. Hence the Apostle speaks, as 1 Cor. 10. 16. the bread which we break is
it not the Communion of the body of Christ. The Antichristian Church (and some
others also) do greatly sin against the Institution of Christ, in omitting that
rise of breaking the bread, in this Ordinance. For it is so essential unto the
regular administration of it, as that the whole ordinance is sometimes in the
Scripture, denominated from that action, Act. 20. 7. and 2.42. Thereby is
signified, that Christ hat^ been broken for the sins of his people; the Lord
therefore said. This is my body which was broken for you. He was wounded for
out transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities, it pleased the Lord to
bruise him and to put him to grief, ^sai. 53. 5. ^0. He was bruised to death
upon the Cross* yea, and his very Soul was broken with the sense of the wrath
of God, due for the sins of his people: therefore did he say, my Soul is
sorrowful unto the death. The breaking of the bread in the Sacrament puts us in
mind of those sufferings which the Body ( i. e. the Humane Nature) of Christ
was subject unto.

4. Giving, That Sacramental action is mentioned by the Evangelists, though it
be not expressed by the Apostle in this Context. Christ gave the blessed bread,
and the blessed cup to his Disciples. Thereby is signified, the Lords giving
himself to and for his Church. So it is expressed and explained, Luke 22. 19.
He gave to them Saying, this is my body which is given for you, Also this
giving declares that God has given Christ to and for his people. In and by
this Ordinance, the Lord speaks unto the Believer after this manner; Thou
feast bread provided for thee, even so have I provided a Savior for thy Soul.
Behold! I have sent Christ to thee, says the Lord. Take my Son for thy
Savior. I give him freely to thee. Take Christ for thy own, and let thy Soul
now take everlasting hold on him. Therefore,

5. Receiving, is another Sacramental Action. Christ said Take, this is my
body. And this taking is implied in the Text, when it is said, this do, part of
the meaning is, receive the Bread and receive the Cup, as Christ has
commanded, And thereby our receiving of Christ is signified: that we are to
take him, for our Lord and Savior; yea, and to be renewing our closure with
him by Faith, that so our Souls may take yet stronger hold of him. At the
moment when the hand takes the bread, the heart should again receive Christ.
And this Ordinance does signify to the worthy receiver, that as surely as he
does take bread into his hand and mouth, so certainly does he take Christ into
his Soul, to become one with him*

6. Eating and Drinking are also Sacramental Actions to be attended at the
Lords Table. Eating of that bread, signifies our feeding upon a crucified
Christ, by Faith, Joh. 6. 54. Whose eats my flesh has eternal life. Those
words of Christ were spoken before the Lords Supper was Instituted, and
therefore must not be restrained unto Sacramental eating. A man may feed upon
Christ Sacramentally, and yet not have eternal life; but if when he feeds upon
Christ Sacramentally, he does at the same time feed upon him spiritually by
Faith, he has eternal life. And not only eating of the bread but drinking of
the cup is a Sacramental action.

The Papists have slain and murdered thousands for maintaining this Truth, and
hearing witness against their Sacrilege in depriving the Lords People of the
cup; but it is admirable to consider, that the Lord Christ, when he Instituted
this Ordinance, did expressly say, Drink ye all of it, Mat. 26. 27. The Lord did
not say, when he give the bread, Eat ye all of it, (though he intended that all
should eat) but drink ye all; because the Spirit of Christ did foresee; that
some would arise in after times denying the cup to all Partakers. Hereby is
signified, that Believers do by Faith drink down the blood of Christ, whereby
their Souls are cleansed from the guilt of sin, 1 Cor. 10. 10. The cup of
blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? Is not
our Communion wit^ Christ in respect of the saving benefits purchased by his
blood, signified and confirmed when we drink of that blessed cup? it is so. And
that we all drink of the same holy Spirit. The Apostle has respect unto that
drinking at the Lords Table, which is of divine Institution when he says, We
have been all made to drink into one Spirit. 1 Cor. 13. 13. Intimating that our
Communion with Christ in respect of his holy Spirit, is signified, when we all
partake of the same blessed cup. Thus we see, that the Lords Supper is a
Sacrament.

2. It is a Sacrament of the New Testament. For,

1. The Covenant which God (...) graciously made with Believers on Christ, is
hereby confirmed. The wisdom of God has seen meet to appoint signs and seals
for the confirmation of the Covenant that is between himself, and the children
of men. Under the first Covenant that of works, made with Adam in Paradise,
there were Sacraments appointed for the confirmation of it. The Tree of Life,
was a Sacrament unto Adam, signifying to him, he should have life, if he kept
the Covenant; and the True of Knowledge of good and evil, did seal death unto
him in case he should break that Covenant. And the Covenant of Grace, has
under all its various manners of Administration had Seals and Sacraments
annexed to it. Sacrifices of old were Sacramental signs for confirming the
Covenant, Exodus 24 8. Psalm. 50. 5. My saints that have made a Covenant with me
by Sacrifice. So was Circumcision, Act. 7.8. And after that the Passover, in
the room whereof the Lords Slipper is Instituted. Therefore Christ did
institute this Ordinance, at the time of the Passover, yea and at the last
Passover, which was celebrated by him; thereby signifying that this Ordinance
of the Lords Supper, was to succeed and come in the room of that of the
Passover. By this then the Covenant between God and his People is in the most
solemn manner confirmed and assented unto. It is so on our part. When we come
to this Ordinance we do as it were take an Oath of Fidelity unto God, and to
the Lord Jesus Christ, which indeed is the meaning of the word Sacrament. It is
orginally a Military word. Among the Romans, Soldiers did take an Oath of
Fidelity to their General; which Oath they called the Sacrament. With them have
you taken the Sacrament? was as much as to say, have you taken the Oath of
Fidelity to your General? Such as had taken that Oath, were said to be Militi^
Sacrati: they were under solemn engagement to be loyal to their General, and to
persist in his service to the death. Thus, when we come to the Lords Supper, we
do thereby profess and promise, to endeavor in all things to approve our
selves the faithful servants of God, and to follow the Lord Jesus the Captain
of our Salvation, and to oppose his Enemies (Sin, Satan, and the World) unto
the death. The Lord also, does confirm the Covenant on his part. He says from
Heaven, to the worthy Receiver, I am and will be thy God for ever, and thy
guide unto the death. God says, I am thy Father, Christ says, am thy
Redeemer, the Holy Spirit says, I am thy Sanctifier, and will be thy
everlasting Comforter. Thus the Covenant is mutually confirmed.

Hence 2. The Believers Right unto, and interest in those Blessings which only
the new covenant makes mention of, is signified and sealed in this Ordinance.
Christ with his saving benefits is a new covenant blessing. The first covenant
said nothing of a Savior: it is the covenant of Grace only, that reveals him
to the miserable children of men. And Indeed Christ is the substance of the new
covenant: Hence is he called the Covenant, Isaf. 4 5.6. not only in that he is
the great Patentee in that Royal Character of the new covenant; the original
Grant is to him; but also, because he is the sum and substance thereof. Have
Christ, and have All, Col. 3. 11. But now Christ is exhibited in this Ordinance
of the Supper; and the Believers right unto and everlasting interest in the
Lord Jesus, is sealed and confirmed to him, when he does partake therein. The
Lord says to him, as truly As thou do take the holy bread in thy hands and
eat it, the blessed cup and drink of it, so truly is Christ with all his merits
righteousness and salvation thine. Eat him and thou shall live by him, Joh. 6.
57. Remission mission of sins, is a new covenant blessing, Jer. 32. 31,34. And
it is exhibited and sealed to the worthy Receiver, in and by this Ordinance,
Therefore when Christ did first Institute it, some of the words which he spoke
were these, This is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for
the Remission of sins, Mat. 26. 28. As verily as a man does receive the bread
and the cup, (if he be a worthy Communicant) so verily does the Lord say to him
from Heaven, all thy sins are forgiven, though they have been many and great
they are all washed away in the blood of Christ. I have pardoned them all says
the Lord. When a Believer has been at the Sacrament; he has the pardon of all
his Transgressions confirmed to him under the Seal of Heaven.

3. The Covenant of Grace as under its last and best way of Administration, is
confirmed by this Ordinance of the Lords Supper. It does declare, that all the
good promised in the covenant is already obtained for the Believer. Hence the
Covenant, in the days of the Gospel is called the New Testament, because it is
now under its last and so newest way of administration. Having been ratified by
the death and blood of Christ the Testator, no more alterations can be made in
it. Hence is that expression of the blood of the everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13.
20. The Covenant of Grace, not only as to the substance of it (for so it was
always) but as to its way and manner of administration, is become everlasting,
and unchangeable, because confirmed by the blood of Christ. So then, in doing
this we commemorate the work of Redemption as a accomplished and finished. The
Sacraments of the Old Testament, signified that Redemption was to be obtained
only by Jesus Christ; the Passover, and all the Sacrifices declared no less,
but that this Redemption was future. When as the Lords Supper holds forth the
coming of Christ to accomplish the work of Redemption, as a thing past and
done. It shows that Christ is come, and that he has paid the price of our
Redemption; that his blood is shed, Mark 14. 24. This is my blood of the
New Testament which [is] shed for many. Christ's blood was not actually shed, at
the time when those words were spoken, yet inasmuch as the design of this
ordinance is to signify that Christ has already shed his blood, it is spoken
in the present Tense. By doing this, we profess that we do believe that Christ
who is now indeed alive, and behold he lives for ever more, was dead, 1 Cor.
11. 26. As often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup. ye show the Lords
death until he come. And the Lord Jesus Christ says, to the worthy Receiver, I
have died for thee, I have satisfied the Justice of God for thy sins, I have
ransomed thy life and soul from everlasting destruct on.

3. The Lords Supper is not only a Sacrament of the New Testament (as has been
evinced) but the last Sacrament thereof, There are only two Sacraments of the
New Testament, viz. Baptism and the Lords Supper: We read in the Gospel, that
when Christ was crucified, one of the Soldiers with a spear pierced his side,
and forthwith came thereout blood and water, Joh. 19. 34. so there is the
Sacrament of Water and of Blood. Thus some interpret that difficult Scripture,
1 Job. 5. 8. There are three that bear witness on Earth, the Spirit, Water, i.
e. Baptism, and Blood, i. e. the Lords Supper, and these three agree in one.
The Lord by his spirit in his word also, by the Sacraments of the
New Testament, declares and testifies that Jesus Christ is the Son of God,
there are those three witnesses which agree in one as concurring in their
Testimony concerning Christ's person and coming. Baptism is an Evangelical
Sacrament as well as the Lords Supper, but that is the first, and this the last
Sacrament of the Gospel. And thence none ought to partake thereof, but such as
have been first Baptized. As in respect of the Sacraments of the Old Testament,
none but such as were circumcised might be admitted to the Passover, Exodus
12.48. thus we read concerning the three thousand converts, they were first
Baptized, and then received into fellowship, in breaking of bread, etc. Act.
2.41,42. Hence also the Lords Supper is a very solemn Ordinance, and ought to
be much regarded by those that would approve themselves like Christians. It is
the last Sacrament that ever was instituted, or that ever shall be, whilst the
World endures. It was Instituted at the last Supper that ever Christ did eat
with his Disciples, just before his death; for the next day his blood was shed
upon the Cross; so that the Lord Christ has bequeathed this Ordinance, as a
dying Legacy and Memorial unto his Church. Therefore it ought to be observed
with great Religion.

Having showed what the Lords Supper is; and spoken many things with as much
succinctness as we could, concerning the nature, and proper design of this holy
Institution of the Lord Jesus; we proceed unto the second Enquiry, viz.

Who are the true subjects of this Ordinance, or, who are fit to partake at the
Lords Table?

Ans. None but gracious holy persons are meet for such an holy communion. Psalm.
24. 3,4. Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord, and who shall stand in his
holy place? (...) that has clean hands and a pure heart, who has not lift up
his soul to vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. Men must be holy in heart and life,
or they are not fit to stand in the Lords Temple, and to partake of the holy
things which are there to be enjoyed. Except men have experienced a work of
Regeneration in their souls, they are not meet subjects of this holy Ordinance.
It is therefore mentioned as a great evil, and that which is against the
express and solemn charge of the Lord: when unregenerate persons are
entertained in the ^ords sanctuary, to participate in those holy enjoyments,
Ezekiel. 44.7.9. Ye have brought into my sanctuary strangers, uncircumcised in
heart, when ye offer my bread and the blood. No stranger uncircumcised in
heart, shall enter into my sanctuary. They whose natures were never changed by
converting grace are the uncircumcised in heart; and therefore if they eat of
Holy bread, or drink of Holy blood, they profane it. Christ inviteth none to
eat and drink at his table, but such as are his Friends, Cant. 5. 1. Eat O
Friends, drink O Beloved. Now men and women whilst in a natural and
unconverted estate, are not his Friends, but in a state of enmity against him.
We read concerning the Prodigal, that he was made alive before he was brought
to feed upon that which was prepared at his Fathers table, Luk 15. 24, 25. So
should Christians have a principle of spiritual life in their souls be ore they
come to the Lords Table. Men do not invite dead, but living persons to come and
sup with them. And shall we think that the Lord Jesus will or can approve of
dead Guests at his Supper? they ought to have Grace whereby they may be able to
feed upon Christ in the Sacrament. If the question were, Whom ought the Church
to admit unto such a privilege? the Answer must be those that are visibly
godly; and whom in charity we are bound to think, that they are able to discern
the Lords body, and to ^red upon Christ for the nourishment of their Souls: men
cannot see the hearts or make an infallible judgment who are fit for such
Communion in the sight of God; and therefore must acts according to what is
visible and apparent, proceeding by the Rules of Rational charity: but when the
Question is, who ought to come? the Answer is, None but such as are truly
Godly. And if any shall venture upon the Lords Table whilst in their sins, or
in a slate of hypocrisy at the peril of their souls shall it be. It is noted
in the parable concerning the Supper, that when the King came in to see the
Guests, and saw a man which had not on a Wedding Garment, he said to him,
Friend, how c^mest (...) in ^it her, Mat. 22. 11, 12 q. d. thou art a bold
intruder, more bold then welcome, and should not have dared to come in
hither, will out the wedding garment, without Faith and Holiness.

To speak a little more fully and particularly here, in order to profitable
partaking at the Lords Table, it is requisite that they who come and sit down
there should be qualified.

1. With Faith. The Rule which the Apostle gives, is, Let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup, 1 Cor. 11.
28. therefore if he be destitute of that which is the matter of
self-examination, or the thing which he is to examine about, he should not
presume to eat of that bread, or to drink of that c^p. Now the principal thing
which a man should examine himself about, is, whether he has Faith or us.
There must be an hungring after Christ; The soul must stand affected toward
Christ, as an hungry man does toward ^ood. Hungrings after Christ, are the
work of Faith, in the believing soul. Without this the Ordinance will be
unprofitable. It is said, Joh. 6 63. It is the Spirit that quickens, the
flesh profits nothing. So outward eating profits nothing, except there be a
spiritual eating by Faith. Except when the body feeds upon the outward
Elements, the soul does at the same time feed upon Christ by Faith,
participating at the Lords Supper will not be for the better, but for the worse.

2. It is necessary that comers unto the Lords Table, should have the grace of
Knowledge. They must in some measure know and understand all the great saving
Truths of the Gospel, the belief whereof is necessary in order to the obtaining
eternal life. There is a knowledge which is only a common grace of the holy
Spirit. They that know that there is a God, and that Christ is the Son of God,
and that he must be submitted unto as Lord and Savior, have experienced a
common work of Gods Spirit inlightning of them. No man can say that Jesus is
the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor 12. 3. This knowledge is indeed
necessary, in order to a worthy partaking at the Lords Table, but it is not
sufficient. There is moreover, a saving knowledge which is a special grace of
the holy Spirit, peculiar to the Elect of God, h. e. when a man knows the
truths of the Gospel, so as to feel the transforming sanctifying power of them
in his own Soul, Joh. 17. 3. This we fitly call the grace of knowledge; and the
Scripture calls i^ Grace, 2 Pet. 3. 18. gr^w in Grace. And when does a
Christian do so? truly, when he grow^ (as in the next words the Apostle adds)
in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. There is then the grace
of sanctified knowledge. And that is requisite, in order to a profitable
partaking at the Lords Table. If a man has not knowledge to discern the Lords
body, he will eat and drink damnation to himself, 2 Cor. 11.29. He must be able
to put a difference between Sacramental Bread, and common Bread; and must be
instructed in the nature and end of such an Institution. Also, he must know and
be sensible of this, that in partaking of the Lords Table, men have to do with
a Christ, that was dead and crucified for the sins of his people, and must have
his heart affected accordingly. This is implied in discerning the Lords body.
Except a man is able to discern Christ in the Sacraments, not only Doctrinally,
but Spiritually, he is not duly qualified to partake thereof. Therefore,

3. They that come to this Ordinance should bring holy affections along with
them, e. g. they ought to come with godly sorrow for sin. The Children of
Israel were to eat the Passover, with better herbs, Exodus 12.8. so they that
partake of the Gospel Passover, should have a deep sense of the bitterness of
sin, seeding upon the bitter herbs of sorrow for sin, which has caused the
blood of Christ to be shed, his body to be broken, and his Soul to be poured
out. Also, the grace, the sanctified affliction of Love, is necessary in order
to a profitable partaking at the Lords Table. There must be love to Christ,
love to his Ordinances, love to his Saints: especially, those that are of the
same particular Church, and sit down together at the same Table of the Lord,
had need look well to themselves in this respect. Hence, when Christ preached
his Sacrament Sermon, he insisted much on the doctrine of Christian love, by
many and mighty Arguments, pressing his Disciples to love one another. When the
Jews kept the Passover, they might not save any Leaven in their Houses: a
dreadful curse fell upon the man, that should knowingly suffer Leaven to be in
his house at such a time. So when Christians celebrate the Lords Supper, if the
Leaven of sinful prejudices one against another, be not duly purged out of
their hearts, they expose themselves unto the holy wrath of a jealous God, 1
Cor. 5. 8. Let us keep the Feast, not with old heaven, neither with the leaven
of malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.
If Christians be not careful about this matter, the Lord will not own and
accept of them, when they come before him. Mat. 5. 23, 24. Nay, their partaking
at this Table, will be as no partaking at all. The Apostle therefore writing to
the Church at Corinth, says, that inasmuch as there were divisions amongst
them when they came together, they did not eat the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11. 18,
20. meaning that they did not eat the Lords Supper as they should do. The
Sch^smes and Heartburnings, which were amongst them, caused the Ordinance to
become unprofitable and ineffectual for the good of their Souls. Yea more men's
partaking hereof, will do them hurt and not good, if the grace of love be
wanting (...) not prevailing in them. Therefore in verse 17. Paul tells the
Corinthians, that (...) coming together, viz. to eat the Lords Supper, was not
for the better but for the worse. Not coming in love, they were the worse for
coming.

Thus have we showed both what the Lords Supper is, and who are fit to partake
thereof, Except men and women be qualified as has been expressed, though they
should presum^ to approach the Table of the Lord, they do not keep his
Ordinance; but they shall bear sin for it, and die if they profane it. L^v. 22.
9.

We come now to enquire into the Reasons of this Doctrine: Why should Believers
do this?

Ans. Reas. 1. Because this Ordinance being Christ's Institution; the
observation of it, tends to the honor of his Name. It is his Institution, and
is therefore called the Lords Supper. A Supper from the time when it was
Instituted, viz. in the right, and the Lords Supper, from the Author and
Institutor (...) it, which was the Lord Christ. As the first day of the week is
called the Lords Day, Rev. 1. 10. because it is the Day which the Lord Christ
has sanctified, and commanded that it should be observed in commemoration of
his Resurrection, so is this Ordinance the Lords Supper, because the Lord has
appointed the observation of it, as a solemn memorial of his Death. Nor indeed
could any one besides the Lord himself be the Author of such an Ordinance. Men
have no power to appoint Sacraments. It belongs to him to appoint the outward
sign who can give the inward grace that is signified thereby and that the Lord
alone can do, Now being a Divine Institution, the observation of it does, (as
all Divine Institutions do) tend to the honor of the Name of him who has said
Do this. Hereby the Lords Name and memory is upheld amongst his People in the
World; and therefore the next words are, in remembrance of me. Especially the
remembrance of Christ's Death; and so of the saving benefits procured thereby,
is continued, by means of this sacred Ordinance, ver. 26. As often as ye eat this
Bread, and drink this Cup. (...) do show the Lords death till he come.
Therefore his people ought religiously to observe it.

Reas. 2. Because in duly observing this holy Institution, Believers have
Communion with the Lord Jesus Christ.

The very Names, which the Scripture describes it by, declare this. As that of
the Lords Supper, mentioned in this Context, ver. 20., They that Sup together
hold Communion one with another: yea, intimacy of Communion is denoted by that
expression, Rev. 3.20. And the Lords Table, 1 Cor. 10 2^. The Master of the
Feast holds Communion with his Guests; when they (...) and eat together at the
same Table. In this Sacred Ordinance, Believers have Communion with Christ in
respect of his Spirit, 1 Cor. 12,13 And in respect of ^is person and death and
all his Redeeming benefits, 1 Cor. 10 16 The Resurrection of their bodies unto
everlasting life, is sealed to Believers. by their partaking at this Ordinance,
Job. ^. 54. Whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and
I will raise him up at the last day. If thou art a true Believer, then as sure
as thy ^ody does feed upon this Bread, it shall be raised from Death unto
eternal life. And our Communion or partaking with Christ in re^pect of his
Kingdom, is sealed in this Ordinance. Therefore did the Lord say, when he gave
the Cup to his Disciples, I will not drink henceforth of the fruit of the Vine,
until that day when I drink it new with you in my Fathers King dome. Mat. 26.
29. Our Reigning with Christ is thereby signified and confirmed unto us: both
our reigning with him on Earth, during the glorious transactions of the great
Day of Judgment: the Saints sitting together with Christ upon Thrones of
Glory, to judge the World, is here in a lively manner represented; and also
their Reigning with him in Heaven to all Eternity. When Believers drink at his
Table the Lord says to them, You shall one day drink of those Rivers of
Pleasure, which are at my right hand for evermore. The Sacrament is as it were
a Map. and lively Representation of Heaven. ^on in Heaven there are none but
Saints, separated from the World, holding Communion with Christ, wondering at
his Glory, ravished with the sense of his love in that he died to redeem them;
and is it not so at the Lords Supper: therefore Believers should do this.

Reas. 3. Believers should do this, that so their Souls may grow in Grace.

It is not enough for us to make sure of our being in Christ, but we must see
that we grow in him. We must labor for more of Christ in our Souls, and for
more conformity to him in our lives; to walk ^n this world, as he walked, and
to grow up unto more intimacy of Communion with him (...) lay to day, Ephesians. 4.
15. Col. 2, 6, 7. No (...) Lords Supper is appointed for that end. Children by
eating and the Lords blessing upon their meat, grow until they come unto their
perfect stature, as to natural growth: And so is it with Gods Children in
spiritual respects. The best food, and that which is most strengthening and
nourishing to their Souls, is in this Ordinance presented before them. Even
that which is meat indeed, and drink indeed. Joh. 6. 55. It is true that the
Word of God is a means of growth in Grace. As new born Babes grow when they
have good and wholesome Milk to nourish them, so do regenerate Souls grow by
frequent feeding upon the sincere Milk of the Word of God, 1 Pet. 2.2. The same
is in a most peculiar manner true, with respect unto this Ordinance of the
Lords Supper. No man ever did partake of it as he should do, but he had the
more Grace for it; more of the Spirit of the Lord Jesus given to him, more
strength in his Soul, more power to resist and overcome temptation. They that
have Grace; yea, they that have most Grace, need a great deal more still,
therefore should Believers do this, that so they may have yet more Grace.

Use 1. Hence great is their sin, who give themselves a dispensation to live in
the neglect of this Ordinance.

The Lord Christ, says expressly do this, but there are many in the World, who
call themselves Christians, and know what Christ has given in charge to his
Disciples, concerning this thing; and yet they never did it in all their lives.
Certainly, such do not approve themselves the friends of Christ, so much as
they ought to do, Job. 15. 14. Ye are my Friends, if you do what ever I command
you. Here is a great Commandment of Christ, but thou do it not. How then do
thou approve thy self his Friend? God blessed the Rechabites, when they kept
the Commandment of Jonadab their Father, in their abstaining from Wine, Jer.
35. 6. But if thou will disobey the Commandment of the Lord Jesus, by refusing
to make use of Bread and Wine for a Religious and, notwithstanding his most
solemn charge, requiring thee to do this: how can thou expect that God will
bless thee. Little do men think how they provoke the Lord by a willing and
continued neglect of so great and sacred an Institution. Is not this
particularly to say that there are Commandments of Christ, and one great duty
of Christian Religion, which is not worth the observing? and if thou art one
that have been Baptized into the Name of the Lord Jesus, thou art bound to
observe all things, whatsoever he has commanded, Mat. 28. 19, 20. And
therefore by neglecting to prepare thy self for, and so to come unto this
Ordinance, thou live in the continual breach of thy vow made to God in
Baptism; and will not the Lord find a time to make thee know thy breach of
Covenant? Remember what you have heard concerning that awful Obligation, which
Baptism brings the Souls of men and women under. Does it not strike terror
into thy Conscience, in that thou have lived so many years unmindful of the
Vows of God, which thy soul has entered into? Men by sins of Omission, may
provoke the Lord exceedingly. So it will appear at the last day, when the Son
of God will judge and Sentence them to death, not only because they have
committed evil, but because they have neglected to do good. Yea, Omissions, not
only of Moral Duties, such as Prayer, hearing the Word, Meditation, etc. but of
Instituted Worship, are many times the reason why the Lord does manifest his
great displeasure against those who are in Covenant with him. Think on that
Scripture, Exodus 5. 3. Let us Sacrifice to the Lord our God: (and Sacrificing
was a duty not of Moral, but of Instituted Worship) left he fall upon us with
Pestilence or with the Sword. Has (...) God fallen upon us of late years, with
a Pestilentious Disease, and with the Sword? And is not this one thing that
has provoked him so to do; in that there are such multitudes or men and women,
who content themselves to live without any commemoration of the Sacrifice of
the NewTestamen, according to divine Institution? Believe it verily, for it is
a Truth, that godly men and women may by omissions of this nature, provoke the
Lord, to bring great afflictions upon themselves and Families. When Jacob
neglected to build an Altar unto God, did not the Lord follow him, with
distressing sorrows in his Family, Genesis 35. 1. When Moses neglected to
circumcise his Child, the Lord (...) him and sought to kill him, Exodus 4. 24.
And yet will thou notwithstanding all that has been spoken to thee from the
Word of God about this matter, content thy self to live from year to year, not
only without Baptism for thy children but without the Lords Supper for the
good of thine own Soul? beware thou, lest some killing Judgment from the Lord,
do ere long come upon thee or thine, for this sin. Or, (which would be sad
indeed) how if God should be provoked to take away his Ordinances, not only
from you, but from others also for your sake, because you have disregarded and
despised such mercies? Know also, that by not observing the Lords Supper, you
become guilty of breaking the second Commandment, by which men are required,
not only to reject, all humane Inventions, in the Worship of God; but also to
observe all Divine Institutions. And the Lord, is a jealous God in visiting for
the breaches of that Commandment. It is dangerous for any to be found guilty
thereof, but most of all for a place or people so circumstanced as we are. It
was in a more peculiar manner, with respect unto the second Commandment, that
our Fathers came into this Wilderness. If therefore the Children that have been
born and brought up in the Churches in New England, shall live in the neglect
of Divine Institutions, their sin is highly aggravated, and the jealousy of
God will smoke against them. One thing more, let me add here; As for such as
care not, whither they enjoy this Ordinance of the Lords Supper, or no; how
unlike are they unto those blessed Martyrs of Jesus, who lived above an hundred
years ago, and laid down their lives, that so they might hear witness to the
truth of Christ, respecting this Institution of his? And (as one well speaks)
if God should be provoked to suffer Popery once more to prevail, that men must
either observe this Ordinance, in such a way as the Pope Commands, and so be
damned for their Idolatry: or else suffer death, for their opposing Antichrist,
they will then have sad reflections in their own Consciences, concerning their
neglect in this matter. But some one will be ready to say. I am not fit to
partake of the Lords Supper, else I would come?

Ans. 1. If thou art in thy sins, thou art not a sit Guest to sit down at the
Lords Table. If thou art a profane person, thou have nothing to do, to meddle
with the Seal of Gods holy Covenant Psalm. 50. 16. or, if thou art in a natural
unconverted Estate, this Ordinance belongs not to thee; you have heard, that
holy things are for holy persons. If men with profane hands or hearts shall eat
thereof, they endanger their Souls. There is an awful Scripture to this
purpose, L V. 720. The soul that eats of the flesh of the Sacrifice of
Peace Offerings, (and so does be do that partaketh at the Lords Table) having
his uncleanness upon him, that soul shall be cut off.

2. If thou art not fit to have communion with Christ at his Table here, thou
are not fit for Communion with him in Heaven. If indeed thou art in a state of
Unfitness for the Lords Supper, thy case is lamentable. What, to live under the
Gospel for so long a time, and yet to remain in a Christless estate? how can
thou sleep one night in thy present condition, if thou know that to be thy
case? for if death should find thee out of Christ, it had been better for thee,
that thou had never been born.

3. A man may be a fit subject to partake at the Lords Supper, and yet himself
not know that he is so. True Believers, are many times full of doubts and fears
concerning their spiritual estates. A child of light, may walk in darkness and
have no light, Isai. 50 10. And in that case it concerns men both diligently to
try themselves and also to put themselves upon the trial of others, whether
they be not duly qualified to partake of the Lords Supper. It is not necessary
that a man or woman should have Assurance before they come to this Ordinance
since partaking thereof is a blessed means for the ob^ining of Assurance. How
many Believers are there, that never had Assurance until they came to the Lords
Table, and then God manifested himself to them, shedding abroad his love into
their hearts by the Holy Ghost, wailest they have been there?

Use 2. If to observe this Ordinance be an indispensible duty, we are then to
be Exhorted, that we do this, even as the Lord commands both with respect unto
the matter, and the manner of the duty.

Consider 1. The good and benefit which will follow, if we do this, after such
a manner as ought to be.

There is a signal excellency, in this Ordinance, as the time when it was
Instituted by Christ, does evince; it was in the night when he was betrayed; at
the time when he had all the powers of darkness to encounter with. Therefore
surely there is some peculiar excellency in this Ordinance and great benefit
will redound to the Souls of those that partake of it aright. Sometimes
Believers do fersibly experience good thereby at the very time of Receiving;
even inward (...), and soul ravishing joys of the Holy Ghost. The Lord makes
them joyful in his true of Prayer. Isai 567. That their Souls go away filled
with great joy, as the Lords people went (...) the Pass^over in Hezekiahs time,
2 Chronicles. 30 ^6 or, that which is better then comfort follows upon a due
partaking at the Lords Table, (...) more Grade and Holiness. In this Ordinance
of the Gospel (in a more especial manner) Believers, beholding as in a Glass
the glory of the Lord are changed into the same Image, from glory to glory, 2
Cor. 3. 18. even from one degree of glorious grace unto another. For the Holy
Spirit to come as a Sanctifier, is more desirable then for him to come as a
Comforter. but he many times comes as both, to the souls of his Servants, when
they sanctify his Name by appreaching to his Table with due preparation of
heart. Or, if the benefit of the Ordinance be not, (as sometimes it is not)
perceived at the time of the Administration, yet afterward, it will appear.

Consider 2. The great evil, that is in eating and drinking unworthily at the
Lords Table.

There is evil of sin therein. Yea, two of the most fearful sins that can be
thought of, do unworthy partakers become guilty of in the sight of God. One is,
that sin of taking the Lords Name in vain: a sin which leaves a deep stain,
and guilt upon the Soul, therefore in the third Commandment, the Lord says
that he will not hold him guiltless that shall take his Name in vain, implying
that such sinners are guilty creatures indeed before the Lord. The Lords Name
is in a peculiar manner upon this Ordinance of his; and therefore they that
profane it, are fearfully guilty in his sight. And another sin which they stand
charged with, is, that of Murder, and the most guilty Murder that ever was, or
can be; I Cor. 11. 27. Whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of
the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. It is a
dreadful thing for a man to have the guilt of blood lying upon his Soul, though
it should be the blood of the meanest person in the world; but what then is it
to be guilty of the blood of the Lord; To be guilty of Murdering and Shedding
the blood of the Son of God, and the Lord of glory. He that offers contempt to
the Kings seal, is justly charged with Treason; so is he that does profane that
which is the sign of the body and blood of Christ, justly charged with Murder,
forasmuch as by such a practice, he does justify those that have killed the
Prince of life. And therefore great evil of punishment, will (without
Repentance) most certainly follow, I Cor. 11. 29. He that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself. There is a Temporal damnation
which the holy God does inflict upon men for this si^, in respect of outward
Judgments which befell them ver. 30. for this cause, namely because of their
unworthy unprepared coming to the Table of the Lord, many are weak and sickly
among you, and many sleep. Probably (as some conceive) God sent the Plague
amongst the Corinthians, for this very sin, in that though they did partake of
the Lords Supper, they did it not with that seriousness and preparation which
the Rule requires. They did not manifest due respect to the body of the Lord,
and therefore he punished them with Diseases and Death upon their own bodies.
Chruch-desol^ting plagues are the fruit of this iniquity. The Lord Jesus (who
holds the stars in his right hand) does sometimes suddenly remove the lights
which be has set up in his Candlesticks so as that there shall be no steward
of God to dispense the Mysteries of the Kingdom, because men by coming to his
Ordinances with a careless and common frame of Spirit have provoked him so to
deal with them. Yea, this sin has been the procuring cause of many of those
overturning judgments which have befallen the Churches of God in the World. It
was a weigthy and a solemn word, which the Godly, Learned Paraus spoke to a
Generation of loose Protestants in Heidelberg, I wonder not (says he) at the
War in Germany, when I consider the Sacrament profanations which you are guilty
of.

Consider 3. That true Believers may be guilty in this matter.

They may eat and drink unworthily at the Lords Table. For there is not only an
unworthiness in respect of state, which hypocrites and unregenerate persons are
subject unto; but an unworthiness in respect of actual indisposition, and
present unpreparedness, for such an holy and near approach before the Lord. A
sincere Servant of God, that makes Conscience to prepare his heart to seek the
Lord; sometimes is not cleansed, according to the purification which is
required of those that enter into the Sanctuary, 2 Chronicles 30. 19. And on that
account, they may be exposed unto severe outward Judgments. So did the
Corinthians find it. Such of them as shall not be condemned to the second
death, with the Reprobate World at the last day, were judged and chastened of
the Lord, in respect of great outward Afflictions; yea, death as to their
bodies because they (...) drink at the Lords Table, with an unworthy and
unsuitable frame of spirit. I Cor. 11. 32. For this cause also, true Believers
are (...) exercised with it ward as well as outward troubles; with miserable
darkness in their own Souls concerning their spiritual and eternal estates. Did
they come with hearts duly prepared into the Lords Sanctuary, great Joy would
follow, 2 Chronicles. 30.26.

For Direction here:

1. Let Christians watch against those things, which of given way unto, will
render this Ordinance unprofitable to their Souls.

e. g. Watch against worldly-engagements and entanglements. These cause the
Word to become unfruitful, Mat. 13. 22. And Sacraments to become unprofitable.
When Christians let loose their hearts upon the World, the life of Religion is
lost; and they become ^ormal flight and unprofitable in their attendance upon
the most solemn duties. Watch also againt scandalous sins. For these will make
a man utterly unfit for the present, to approach unto the holy Table of the
Lord. Underth Law, if any one happened to touch a dead body, and so to become
ceremonially unclean, he might not at that time, eat the Passover; but was to
forbear until the next Month, Numb. 9. 6, 10. 11. So if a man has fallen into
a scandalous sin, whereby he is become morally unclean he ought not to eat the
Lords Supper until such time as he has renewed his Repentance and made his
peace with God. Moreover, Christians are to watch against lesser evils. Yea,
against such things as unregenerate men seldom take notice of. It may be,
there have been proud thoughts stirring in thy heard; or it may be thy Spirit
has been distempered with passion in the week past; and if thou have not taken
notice of it, to be humbled for it, the Lord may be provoked to withdraw his
presence and blessing from his own Ordinances; and then thy Soul will not be
bettered thereby.

2. Every time that a Christian comes to the Lords Supper, he ought to
practice that great duty of Self-examination.

For this that Scripture is plain 1 Cor. 11128. Let a man examine himself, and
so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup. And this a man ought to
do, not only once, before his first coming to this Ordinance, but constantly as
often as he shall eat that Bread or drink that Cup. The Apostle speaks to those
that had been at the Lords Supper many a time, whom nevertheless he calls upon,
to practice this duty of Self-examination, as they should have opportunity for
Sacramental eating and drinking. A Christian, every time that he is to come to
the Lords Supper, should examine himself concerning his own spiritual estate,
whether he be in Christ or no. He should examine whether he has true Faith,
having received Christ in his person as the only desirable one, and in all his
Offices, as Prophet, Priest, and King, and whether he has true Repentance, and
has turned from all sin, unto God, with his whole heart. And whether he has a
sincere love to God, and to Jesus Christ, and to his Saints, and to his holy
waves. He should examine himself concerning his growth in grace. Am I more
humble more ^oly, more weaned from the World, more meek and self-denying, then
I was, when I first believed? yea, moreover, he should examine himself
concerning his present actual fitness to sit down and partake at the Lords
Table. What sinful failing he has been guilty of, since he was last at a
Sacrament, and whether his heart be now in a spiritual frame, fit for so near
an approach unto the Holy God.

3. Exercise Grace in the time of Receiving.

A man that is asleep is a living man, yet he is not sit to eat and drink until
he be awake, so must true Believers stir up and awake their Graces, or they are
not fit to eat and drink at the Lords Table. Sometimes the godly do (in a great
measure) lose the benefit of this Ordinance, because they do not exercisegrace
at the time of Receiving as they ought to do. Therefore he sure then to
exercise Faith. As thou do receive the Bread, and receive the Cup, let thy
Soul at the same moment, put forth a renewed act of Faith in closing with, and
taking hold on the Lord Jesus Christ: By an act of Faith appropriate Christ to
thy self; and his blood with the merit and efficacy of it to thy Soul in
particular, believing that thy Sins shall be pardoned, and the Plagues of thy
heart mortified thereby. Also, the Grace of Repentance should be exercised at
the time of Receiving. Whenever we look upon a Crucified Savior, our hearts
within us, should mourn and bleed, because our sins have pierced him. Zech.
12.10. And indeed, if it be not so, we discern not the Lords Body. The
Corinthians came with a light frame of Spirit to the Lords Supper; therefore
are they charged with not discerning the Lords Body. Had they been aware of a
broken and a bleeding Christ before them; another manner of spirit would have
been seen in them. If a Child be vain and merry when his Father lies dead in
the room before him, we say, he discerns not, what an object is before him.
So if men do not bring a broken heart, to a broken Christ; it is a sign that
they discern not the Lords Body. Tears of Evangelical Repentance, become
Christians when partaking at the Lords Supper.

4. Let us remember to be exceeding thankful unto God in Jesus Christ.

The Lord appointed an hymn of praise to be sung when he did institute this
Ordinance, instructing us that we should bless God for this Ordinance, and for
the glorious things which are held forth thereby. For in the Lords Supper, we
have the most lively representation, and demonstration of the love of Christ
that can be. We may therein see and feel what Christ has done for us, and how
he has loved us. As the Apostle speaks 1 John (...). 1. That Which me have
heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our
hands have handled of the word of life. So is it in the Sacrament, the Lord
puts eternal life into our hands there, and lets us look upon Jesus Christ, who
is in that Ordinance of the Gospel evidently set forth and crucified before our
eyes; there we see him upon the Cross, bleeding and dying for our sins, and to
save our Souls. And the Lord God Almighty, deals with us, as with Children,
inasmuch as he sets us at his Table, and seeds us with Royal and Heavenly
Dainties. Shall the Lord of Hosts, bring us into the holy Mountain of his
Church, and there make a Feast for us, of fat things full of Marrow and of
Wines on the lees well refined; and shall not our Souls be thankful to him, and
bless his Name for ever? In this Ordinance, Believers have intimacy of
communion with God, and with Jesus Christ. Truly, our fellowship therein, is
with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ. One may wonder, that such as we
are, may be familiar with the King of Glory. When Peter saw that Christ was God
as well as Man, he fell down at Jesus knees, saying, Lord, depart from me, I am
a sinful man, Luk 5 8, So might the Lord say, to the best of us all, thou art a
sinful man. therefore get thee away from me, but he says, (as Joseph sometimes
spoke to his Brethren) come near to me I pray you. Come and be familiar with
me. There are two Ordinances especially, wherein we may have familiar communion
with the Lord Jesus: one is that of Secret Prayer and the other is that of the
Lords Supper. And shall we not t^en be exceeding thankful? Moreover, the
communion which we have with Christ in his Supper, is a pledge of everlasting
Communion with him in Heaven. Whereas he (...) satisfy our souls with the
fatness of his house here, that's a (...) that he will make us drink of the
River of his pleasure, in another and a better world. The Lord Jesus will one
day bring all his Servants into his Banqueting house, where his Ba^ner over
them shall be love. And his causing them to sit down at his Table n^w, is an
in(...) from Heaven, that they shall be where he is, there to be sold his
Glory, where their Souls shall feast upon his love, and drink Rivers of Joys
at his right hand; the blessedness whereof no heart can conceive, nor tongue
express. Shall we not then bless God for such an Ordinance? especially (...)
Christ has manifested himself to our Souls therein; a little of Christ is
worth a great deal of thanks.

O then treasure up Experiences of the presence of Christ with you in the
Sacrament: and say after David, Psalm. 103 I, 2, 3, 4. Bless the Lord, O my
Soul, and all that is within me bless his holy Name, bless the Lord O my Soul,
and forget not all his benefits, who forgiveth all thine iniquities, and who
heals all thy Diseases, who redeemeth thy life from destruction, who Crowns
thee with loving kindness and tender mercies.

It is the Property of a Sincere Godly Man, Not to Sit with Vain Persons.
PSALM. 26. 4. I have not Sat with vain Persons.
THe Prophet David, being sensible of those us just Reproaches and Slanders,
which Saul and his Servants had taken up against him, he Appeals to God
concerning his (...)ocency, desiring that the Lord would (...) his Judge and
his Examiner. And that is the scope and sum of the ^wo first verses of this
Psalm. Having asserted h^s integrity, he produces sundry arguments as
evidences thereof. 1. His having the Image of God upon him in respect of mercy
and truth, argued his sincerity in the Lords sight. Ver.3. For thy loving
kindness is before mine eyes, and I have walked in thy Truth. Out of respect to
the honor of God, he had showed kindness to those that were unworthy of it
following the Lord example therein; and he had approved himself true and
faithful in all his ways. 2. He proves his sincerity in that he had declined
the society of sinners. 3. In that he was one who did (...) Conscience to
prepare for, and that delighted in the Worship of God. He was where (...) would
be, when attending upon the Lord in the (...) of his Worship, especially as to
public Worship, and those holy Ordinances which are of Divine Institution.
Delight wherein (...) a great sign of true Grace. ver. 6. 7, 8.

The words at present to be insisted on, fall under the second Reason, whereby
the Psalmist endeavors to evince his integrity.

And the Doctrine from them is,

That it is the Property of a Sincere Godly man, not to fit with vain Persons.

There are three things, which may here be enquired into.

1. What is implied in sitting with vain Persons?

2. Who are those vain Persons that godly men will not sit with?

3. The Reasons of the Doctrine, or whence it is, that sincere godly men, will
not sit with vain Persons.

Q. 1. What is implied in sitting with vain Persons?

Ans. We must know 1. Negatively, That the words do not intimate, as if all
communion with ungodly men were unlawful. For, occasionlly to show kindness and
civil respect unto such is lawful, yea, and in some cases a duty. We are so
show all gentleness toward all men, Tit. 3. 2. Acts of charity, are to be
extended toward all Corts of men. Though we are especially to do good to the
household of Faith, yet not to them only, but as we have opportunity, to the
others also. Which is implied in that precept Honor all men. And the Apostle
Exhorts Christians to add Charity and Brotherly kindness, The Object of charity
is more general and extensive, then that of Brotherly kindness. We are so
extend acts of charity not only to such as are Brethren, but to Enemies. Yea,
and some Religious communion may be held with those that are vain Persons.
Though we are to exclude them from partaking in Instituted, yet not from
joining with us in Duties of Moral Worship. We may suffer them, to joy (...) us
in hearing the Word. We may pray with those that are vain and carnal. The
Apostle Paul prayed with all these that failed in the Vessel with him, being in
number two hundred, and three score and sixteen Souls, and yet but few of them
that had any true Religion or fear of God in their hearts, Act. 27. 35. 37. so
that all Communion with vain persons is not forbidden nor implied in declining
to fit with (...).

2. To speak positively in Answer to the enquiry before us.

1. Sitting with Vain Persons, implies unnecessary Communion with them.

Sometimes Communion with such is necessary. A man may be providentially
compelled unto it. So was Joseph when in the Land of Egypt: and David whilst
amongst the Philistims; yea, and in Saul's Court, where it may be, there was not
one godly man, besides himself and Jonathan. Nehemiah when he lived amongst the
Persians Daniel and the three Worthies with him, when they lived in the Court
of Babylon, were providentially put upon Communion with vain persons, as to
civil Conversation, though they would not communicate with them in their
false-worship, or vain Religion. Likewise, a man's particular calling may
necessitate him sometimes to converse with vain persons. Therefore the
Scripture does allow more Communion and civil converse with Idolaters and
profane persons, then with those that are under Church censure for suandalous
evils; because if Christians should be forbidden all society or commerce with
worldly and wicked men, they must go out of the world. I Cor. 5 9, 10, 11. And
not only the concerns of a Christians particular Calling, may necessitate him
to be in company with vain persons. But the necessity of such persons
themselves may call for it. They may stand in need of relief and charity as to
their bodies, or of instruction for their souls, in which cases, and for which
ends, it is very lawful to be in their company. But when no necessity, neither
of providence nor of precept does call to be with them, the case is otherwise:
we ought then to decline their company. Therefore,

2. Sitting with vain persons implies Familiarity with them.

When a man declineth familiar society with all ungodly men, then he may be
said, not to sit with vain persons. Thus it was with David, he would not make
such his Familiars, or companions. Therefore in another place, he says, I am
accompanion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep thy Percepts,
Psalm. 1 19. 63. Not vain Persons, but the fearers of God, were the men that he
would be familiar with. And when the Prophet Jeremy, says, I sat not in the
assembly of the mockers, chap. 15. ver. 17. his meaning is, that he had not
familiarity with such as those were. If a Professor of Religion, shall make a
vain person the man of his counsil, or enter into adeague of special
friendship, with such an one, he does exceedingly sin against God. It is noted
in the Scripture, as Jehoshaphats great failing, that he was too intimate with
Ahab, for which the Prophet Jekn, did faithfully reprove him, And the Lord did
sorely afflict him for it, by his providence so ordering, as that Jehoshaphats
^^e was endangered, because he had sat with so vain and vile a person as Akab.
more then he should have done; and besides that, the Lord to show his
displeasure, let loose many Enemies upon him, whereby he and the whole Kingdom
was brought into distress. And when he became guilty of the same error again by
joining himself with Ahaziah the King of Israel, who did very wickedly. Eliezer
prophesied against him, that blasting strokes of God would follow him, for that
very sin; and so it came to pass, 2 Chronicles. 20. 36, 37. To be occasionally civil
and courteous unto a wicked man may be both lawful and laudible, but to be
Familiar with him, or to make a companion of him, is always sinful, and good
is never wont to come of it.

3. Sitting with vain persons implies delight in their Company.

The sincerest man in the world, may be forced into the company of vile and
vicious persons, but he takes little delight in being amongst them. He is out
of his Element when in such Company, as not being amongst those with whom his
delight is. They will discover such a Spirit, speak such words, do such actions
as are very displeasing to a gracious Soul; therefore if he could help it, he
would not be much amongst them. Lot was vexed with the filthy conversation of
the wicked, for that Righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing,
vexed his righteous Soul from day to day, with their unlawful deeds 2 Pet. 2.
7, 8. We ought not to love such with a Love of complacency or Delight.
Therefore when Jehoshaphat did seem to delight in wicked Ahabs company, is was
said to him, by the Prophet, should thou help the ungodly, and love them that
hate the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2. Indeed a love of pity, is to be manifested
toward such persons. When here was a civil moral man, but one still in his
natural unconverted estate, that came running to Christ, and kneeled down
before him, with that Question, What shall I do that I may inherit eternal
life, withal professing, that he had from his youth been very careful to
observe the Commandments of God; it is said, that Jesus beholding him loved
him, M^r. 10 21. h. e. he pitied him, Bowels of love in the compassionate heart
of Jesus, were moved toward him, to see a man that should perform such duties,
and take such pains to obtain eternal life, and yet lose his Soul for ever,
because he was not built upon a right Foundation. But although, a love of pity
is to be exercised toward such yet not a love of delight in communion with
them. They were other kind of persons, whom David took Delight to be among,
Psalm. 126. 3. The Saints that are in the Earth in whom is all my delight. His
delight was in the communion of Saints, and not in followship with sinners. And
that's a good sign of sincerity, when there is an unfeigned love to the
Brethren, as on the other hand, it is a bad sign, when a man loves to fit and
discourse with vain persons, and never thinks the time long enough whilst he
is in their company.

4. When a man does join counsil with vain persons, so as to approve of their
ways, and partake with them in their evil deeds, then he may be said to set
with them.

To fit with them, is to do as they do, to hear^ ken to their advice, and to
follow their example. Thus the expression is elsewhere used in the Scripture,
as in Psalm. 1. ver. 1 Blessed is the man that walks not in the counsil of the
ungodly, nor stands in the way of sinners, nor fitteth in the sent of the
scornful, the meaning is, that the man is blessed who does not hearken to them,
nor follow their example. And David declares his resolution not to join in
counsil with sinners, or to do as they would have him, when he says, I will
not fit with the wicked, Psalm. 26. 5. And hence this fitting with vain persons,
is in the next words, expressed by that of going in with dissemblers. Now to
enter in with another, is to tread in his steps, and to follow his example. The
children of Israel were charged not to enter in with the Nations amongst whom
they lived, i. e. not to follow or imitate them Josh. 23. 7. Eli^^ said (...)
Job, be go^th in company with the workers of ini(...) (...) walks with wicked
min, because he (...) mistake some of Jobs words, thinking that be had said,
that (...) man as good not serve God, as serve him; and so to speak would be to
do as the workers of Iniquity do; and this is called a going (...) company with
them, Job 34. 8. 9. David did not go in with dissemblers, inasmuch as he
followed not their Example, nor sit with vain persons since he heartened not
unto their evil counsils. There were some that advised him to kill Saul, and to
take personal revenge, for the injuries which he had suffered, but he would not
sit with them, when they had Consults of that nature.

We come now unto the second Enquiry. viz. Who are these vain persons that
godly men will not sit with?

Ans. 1. Men may be called vain, in respect of their Opinions.

The Idolaters are vain persons. An Idol is nothing in the world. It has no
other deity belonging to it, besides what is in the vain imagination of the
Idolater. Idols are called Vanities. The vanities of the Gentiles (i. e. their
Idols) cannot give rain. When men Idolize any thing, they will never find that
in it, which they hoped for. They will find their Idols vain, and themselves
vain in their expectations of great matters from them, Jer. 3. 23. Truly in
vain is salvation hoped for from the hills, and from the multitude of the
mountains, h. e. from those Idols which the (...) were wont to serve upon
hills. and upon many mountains. Now it is against the Rule to have familiarity
or unnecessary correspondence with Idolaters. The Lord said a most strict (...)
on his people concerning this thing charging them to beware of ent^ing into
consecracie what these Idolaters they lived amongst. A (...) the New Testament
it is said, what com^^ion (...) has sight with darkness? what agreement has
the Temple of God with Idols? Come out from amongst them, and be ye separate
says the Lord, 2 Cor. 6 17. We may not have at all to do with such in their
Idolatrous worship, and as little as may be as to (...) communion. So
concerning t^^ose that hold any Fundamental Error in Religion, Henericks (truly
so called) are vain persons. And we ought not to have communion with such but
if they persist in their Error, we should decline their Society, Tit. 3 10. A
man that is an Heretic, after the first and second Admonition reject. The Rule
forbids Christians to vouchsafe so much as common, civil entertainment unto
such persons, 2 John 10. If there come any unto you, and bring not this
Doctrine receive him not into your house, neither bid him, God speed. Have as
little to do with all such persons as may be.

2. Persons may be vain in respect of their words.

There are some that are full of unprofitable words. All their discourses are
frothy and unsavory. You shall never hear a gracious word proceed out of their
mouths or any discourse that shall tend unto spiritual edification. This
argues a vain person. Much more is it true, that those evil communications
which corrupt good manners, and which a moral and modest Heathen would be
ashamed of, profane and filthy speeches, argue a vain and a vile person. And
such as give bad counsil. Persons that will perswide others to sin against God,
deserve the Name of vain persons. Therefore when Jobs wife, gave him such
desperate counsil as that, Job 1. 9. Curse God and aye, probably supposing that
if he should curse God, he would quickly die for it, and so be out of his
misery, Job calls her a foolish woman, a vain person for giving such wicked
advice as that was. There is no good but much hurt that comes by following
sinful suggestions. Therefore evil Counselors, (...) make it their design to
(...) others into the ways of Error, either (...) to judgment or practice, are
the vain persons whom my Text, does in a more peculiar manner refer unto.

3. Persons may be vain in respect of their practices.

There are that follow vain courses. Sinful practices are such. For there is
nothing to be got by sin, but only shame and misery, Romans 6. 21 What fruit haa
you in those things whereof you are now ashamed? Sin is good for nothing
neither for body, nor soul, nor name, nor estate, but baneful unto those that
shall practice it, in all these respects. Vain persons may flatter themselves
in their iniquity, foolishly imagining, that they shall enjoy pleasures, or
worldly gain by taking sinful and indirect courses to obtain their desires; but
in the conclusion, they will meet with a miserable frustration; seeing they
have embraced a shadow instead of substance. He that gains by practicing
iniquity, when he shall compare his losses with his gains, will certainly find
he has lost, that which is ten thousand times better then all that he has
gained. It may be he has gained a little of the World, but he has lost his
precious Soul, which is more worth then all this World. It may be he has
gained the love and good will of a vain Companion, but he has lost the favor
of God, in whose favor there is life, and whose lovingkindness is better then
the life it self. They then that follow unrighteous practices, Play the foot,
as Saul was forced to confess he did, and they become vain, Psalm. 62. 10.
Become not vain in Robbery. Hence, all Profane Sinners are no other then vain
persons. Swearers, Sabbath Breakers. Drunkards, and such like. David was
resolved to have as little to do with such persons as might be, Psalm. 101. 4. I
will not know a wicked person. And the word of God says, have no fellowship
with such, Ephesians. 5. 11. Do not come among them says another Scripture, Prove.
23. 20. Be not amongst Wine-bibbers, amongst riotous caters of flesh. Sit not
with such vain persons.

4. All unregenerate men are vain persons.

For their hearts and thoughts are taken up mostly about vain things. All their
cares and utmost endeavors, are about that which is vanity of vanities. The
lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and pride of life; worldly profits,
pleasures, preserments, are the things, which the natural man does most of all
desire and seek after: Hence they that are only civil moral men, but still in
an irregenerate state; yea, more, they that are Formalists in Religion, but
strangers to the power thereof, are amongst the vain persons which my Text
speaks of. And godly men should not make such their intimates, they should
not sit with, and be one heart with those whom they can not but judge to be
poor, vain, carnal creatures still. The Apostle shows, that in the last
days, there will be men that shall have a form of godliness without the power
of it, from such (says he) turn away, 2 Timothy 3. 5. And it is a sign, that men
have little experience of the power of godliness themselves, when they choose
those that are formal, sapless, unsavory creatures to be their greatest
intimates and Familiars.

We come then unto the third Particular, viz.

To enquire into the Reasons of this Doctrine, whence is it that a sincere
godly man, will not sit with vain persons?

Ans. Reas. 1. Because godly men have their natures changed.

They have another nature in them, then what once they had, 2 Pet. 1. 4. Te are
made partakers of the divine nature. Every man until his Soul is renewed by the
power and grace of the Sanctifying Spirit of God, has only a corrupt nature in
him, but the godly man is become the subject of a divine and holy nature.
Therefore he is said to have a new heart given to him, Ezekiel. 36. 26. And to
have a new spirit put within him, ibid. And to be made a new Creature, 2 Cor.
5. 17. To be new born 1 Pet. 2. 2. True conversion, implies not only a
mavelous change, as to a man's outward actions, causing him to walk in new
ways, which once he was a stranger unto, but as to his nature, and inward
disposition and inclinations. Therefore the work of Conversion is often in the
Scripture set forth by such things as intimate a change of nature, e. g. by
that of making a wilderness to become a fruitful field, Isai, 32. 15: The
nature of the soil is changed, when of barren it does become fruitful; so is
it with the truly converted man. And for the same reason it is said, that
instead of the thorn shall come up the fin-tree, and instead of the (...) shall
come up the myrtle tree, Isai. 55. 13. The brier and see myrtle tree, are
plants of very differing natures: but when a sinner is converted a brier is
turned into a myrtle tree. Yea, then the Lion shall eat straw li^e the Ox. (as
the Scripture speaks) and the Wolf is become like a Lamb, Isai. 11. 6, 7. Now
the nature being changed, there must needs follow a change as to the company
which such persons will delight to associate themselves with. Every creature
chooses to be with those that are of the same nature and kind. Doves will be
with Doves, and not amongst Ravens; sheep will be with sheep, and not amongst
swine. So will sincere godly men (who are in the Scripture in respect of the
innocence of their nature compared to Doves, and to sheep) choose to be with
such as are godly, and not with the wicked, who are resembled unto Ravens and
Swine. Inasmuch as a sincere Convert, has his nature changed, the inward
desires and delights of his heart are not as once they were. He delights both
in those things, and in those persons which once he had no delight in. As for
an unregenerate man, his heart does not cordially close with one that has much
of the Image of God upon him. The righteous is an abomination to the wicked.
But when grace has changed his nature, then the more godly any are, the more
does he love and delight in them. And having experienced a change of nature,
his heart is taken off from those evils which are most natural unto men; and
this sin of affecting vain company is so.

Real. 2. Sincere Godly men have had experience of, and found blessed sweetness
in another, and a better kind of fellowship.

And thence, they cannot relish communion with vain persons. One that has
tasted the sweetness that is in holy fellowship, cannot but distaste and dislike
sinful fellowship. And this is true concerning the sincere professor of
Religion. He has had experience of the communion of Saints, and has found
that to be edifying to his Soul Yea, he knows what it is, to have Communion
with God and with Jesus Christ, through the Spirit, 1 John 1. 3. Truly our
fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. And therefore he
cannot but disrelish the worlds fellowship. The Servant of God prizeth
communion with him. His heart finds wonderful contentment therein; he says, It
is good for me to be here. And when he has experienced soul ravishing communion
with God and with Jesus Christ, he cannot but say to the workers of Iniquity
(as David did Psalm. 6. 8.) Depart from me, I desire your fellowship no more. He
has found such sweetness in holy communion with the blessed God, as that he
cannot approve of any thing that would break or hinder communion with him. But
fellowship with vain persons will do so. A godly man shall find by experience;
that if his heart be brought into never so holy and spiritual a frame a little
occasional communion with vain persons. will put it out of frame again.
Therefore he is not willing to sit with such as those are.

Reas. 3. Godly men are loath to lose precious time.

They are willing to do as the Apostle does hort. Ephesians. 5. 16. Redeem the time.
They know that they have but a little time to be (...) world; but a little time
to leave and (...) God, and make sure (...) these (...) in. Therefore they are
loath to (...) their precious hours to the lusts of men or to lose any part of
their time. Whereas that time which is spent in sitting with vain persons is
misspent and lost; and a miserable account is like to be given of it at the last
day. The holy spirit of God has made his Servants sensible that it will be with
them to eternity according as they improve their moment (...) If they spend
their time well so as to be always doing good, they shall at the day of
Judgment become the Subjects of an exceeding and eternal weight of glory. They
that know ^his, it is not to be wondered at, if they are unwilling to lose
precious time in sitting with vain persons.

Use 1. This may inform us of the great evil Which is in that iniquity of
sinful company keeping.

Familiar society with vain persons, is certainly a great sin. The evil of it
appears, from several considerations.

1. In that it is not the spot of Gods Children.

Though a godly man under temptation may be carried away with this iniquity for
a time yet grace will recover him cut of it. They that shall continue to
associate themselves with vain Companions, it may be said of them, as Deuteronomy. 3
(...) 5. They have corrupted themselves, their spot is not the spot of His
children it is not wont to be so, with those that are indeed the regenerate
Children of God. Ever observe it, that upon true conversion there is a
wonderful change in men as to the company which they delight in. We see it in
Paul. who were his Companions with whom he did associate himself before his
conversion? they were men of a malignant spirit: such as would scoff at the
power of Godliness. But how was it after this Conversion? Then he essays to
join himself to the Disciples, Act. 9. 26. The men he once hated and mocked at,
are now become most dear unto him. He prizeth communion with those most, whom
in the time of his Ignorance and unregeneracy, he had most despised. And there
is no one thing, that is a greater discovery of the hearts and spirits of men,
then the company which they (...) fly delight in. A profane man, loves to be
with those that are profane. One that is only a moral man, will be willing to
have such as are only so, for his most intimate companions. But a truly godly
man, delights most in godly company. They then (whoever they be) that make vain
persons their Familiars and greatest intimates, have cause to suspect, and give
others reason to suspect their sincerity

2. Sinful company keeping is a Soul ruining inequity.

Therefore the wise man says, Beware of it, (...) thou get a snare to thy
soul, Prove. 22. 25. O the bloody desolation of Souls, which has been the
effect of this woeful sin. Every man has a Soul within him, which is more worth
then the whole world. But thousands and millions there have been and are, that
by keeping company with vain persons, have had their precious Souls lost, and
destroyed, and damned for ever. The Scripture therefore says, that a companion
of fools shall be destroyed, Prove. 13. 20. He that is a companion of vain
persons, is in the broad way, which leads to destruction, and many there be
that go therein. It is a lamentable thing; yea, that which deserves to be
bewailed with the briniest tears of blood; that many hopeful young men, have by
falling in with bad company lost their souls and salvation. Time was, when they
carried it well, but they met with vain companions, and these have been the
eternal ruin of their souls. For thereby they have learned ways of
wickedness, which before they were not guilty of. They have learned to become
Idle, Unclean, Swearers, Self-polluters, Adulterers; for the which sins, Woe
unto their Souls. Mind what God in his word says to thee, Prove. 22. 24 25 Make
us friendship with a furious man, thou shall not go with him, lest thou learn
his ways. Thus God says to thee (and at the peril of thy Soul shall it be, if
thou will not obey him go not with a Drunkard lest thou learn (...) his ways;
go not with an Unclean person, less thou leave his ways, and thy soul within
thee mourn at last. But (...) and alas! for many a poor creature, that evil to
expanions have been his Counsel etc, into that his temporal and his eternal
mine. It (...) concerning Ahaziah that they of the house of A^^^ were his
Counselors after his Fathers death. (...) his distraction, 2 Chronicles. 22. 4. He
(...) had a wicked Father, but there is many a young man, born of godly
Parents, that upon the death or absence of his Father, has salier into
acquaintance and familiarity with vain persons, whose counsils he has
followed, to the everlasting destruction both of his body and soul. The Devil
has not a greater or more fearful and fatal Engine to destroy Souls by, then
this of drawing them into bad company. As long as they continue amongst such,
he is sure of them. Therefore men are called upon in the Scripture, as they
desire salvation, to beware of familiar society with wicked ones, Act. 2 40.
Save your selves from this unto ward Generation. Do you desire the salvation of
your Souls? then renounce communion with an evil Generation of men, who are
Enemies to the holy ways of God. (...) conclude this particular with the words
of Moses to the children of Israel Numb. 16. 26. He spoke unto the
Congregation, saying, deport I^ pray you from the ^ents of these wicked men,
lost you be consumed in all their sins. So let me say this day, If you have any
love to, or desire of the salvation of your souls, I pray you, and (...) you
for your souls take, that you would dep^^t from the Tents of wicked men. Sit no
longer with vain persons (...) be consuthed in all their sins. The mouth of
(...) may swallow you up also if Judgment find you in their company.

For 3. It is such an evil as does hither the conversion of Souls.

Alash (...) many that their Souls have miscarried for ever, when others had
hopes concerning them as if they had been in the pangs of the new birth; and
this evil has been the cause of it. Some that have been under great awakenings
of Conscience; God has met with them in a Sermon the Arrows of the Almighty
have been within them; that they have thought with themselves they would
forsake their sins, and become new Creatures; but they have gone into loose and
vain company, and so lost all those convictions, yea and provoked God so, as
that he has said, his Spirit should strive no more with them. This is that,
which keeps poor Creatures from coming up to the terms of the Gospel; that they
do not sincerely (...) with Jesus Christ when called upon to make sure of an
interest in him. Alas! they know not how to part with their vain Companions. If
they might have Christ and sit with vain persons. too they would be Christians:
but that can never be. What says the Scripture, Ephesians. 5. 14. Arises (...) the
dead, and Christ shall give thee light, Arise soul, come away from thy dead
companions if thou would save Christ to give thee the light of Salvation. But
occuse distracted sinners will remain amongst the Graves, and lodges the
Monuments, and take pleasure in being amongst their dead and rotten Companions,
they will not hearken to the call of Christ. Christ says to the sinner, let
the dead bury their dead, follow thou me. But his heart is so strangely
besotted with love to his vain Companions, as that the calls of Christ in the
Gospel, are not regarded. We see Men and Women sometimes, under mighty
impressions from the Word and Spirit of God; there are many such in this place
at this day. Would you know whether it be like to prove a saving work or no?
Then mark this one thing; Are such persons got clear of their old vain
Companions? if so, they are like to do well: for wisdom says, Forsake the
foolish and live, Prove (...). (...) If the Lord Jesus help thee, quite to
forsake thy former Companions, in sin and vanity, whom thou did once delight
in, and to endeavor after acquaintance with those that fear God, it is a sign
that thou shall live; For then the greatest snare in the World is broken: there
is not a greater snare in the way to Conversion, and so in the way to
Salvation, then that of vain Company; therefore if the Lord help thee to break
through that spare of the fowler, there is great hope, that thou shall escape
with the life of thy soul, and be delivered from those snares of death and
hell, which Satan seeks to take thee alive in.

4. Sinful Company-keeping will be bitterness in the latter and.

It may be in his life. Many a foolish creature, has been through: to great
poverty, shame and misery by this means. His Estate wasted, his Credit lost,
his ^ealth impaired, his Friends and Relations (as well as himself) brought
into disgrace; and all by his following the company of vain persons. To this
purpose does the Scripture speak, Prove. 28. 7. He that is a companion of
riotous men, shameth his Father: and in verse 19. it is said, He that follows
after vain persons, that have poverty enough. And the dismal experience of
multitudes does sadly confirm the Truth hereof. How few are there, amongst
those that by Debaucheries have been brought from a flourishing state into a
condition most wretch (...) and rueful, (and many such instances these lose
sinful days have afforded) but if they be asked the reason, will tell you, it
was evil Company that did it? Or, however, this sin is like to prove bitter,
upon a Death bed. Oh! that young men would consider of it, and hearken to the
Word of the Lord this day. Shall I tell you what some young men in this place,
have said upon deathbeds: when they have felt their Souls going out of their
bodies, and lanching into the infinite Ocean of Eternity. There have been some,
that when I have seen them dying, and in great anguish of spirit, I have
enquired of them what sin it was that die then most of all trouble them; and
the Answer has been, with a bitter and a doleful ery, O that sin of Company
keeping! That's the evil that most of (...) troubles me now I am dying; that's
it that has do (...) many other sins, whereby my Soul has been ruined. Young
men, think of it, and let it make you tremble to fall into bad company. And
know you for certain, that without Repentance, your Companykeeping, will be
bitterness after death for ever. For they that have been Companions in sinning
in this World are like to be Companions in suffering, in another World for
ever. Was it not said to Jozabel, I will cast her into a bed, and th^^ that
commit adultory with her, into great tribulation, Rev. 2. 22. They that have
had their (...) meetings, their riotings, their drinking bouts, their
chambering and wantonness together, except they repent of their deeds shall be
cast together into be^^of great and everlasting Tribulation Now they are for a
short life's and a merry, but they must (...) like Dragons for it, when God
shall break them together, in the place of Dragons, and cover their Souls with
the shadow of eternal death.

Use 2. Hence men, especially professors of ^^^ligion, should beware of sitting
with vain persons.

It is very sad, that there should be so much need for an Exhortation of this
nature as indeed there is: Alas! that as to the company which men keep there is
little difference to be observed between some Professors and the profane. Time
was when it was otherwise; Men might have Been known by their company as well
as by any thing else. But how is it at this day? Are there not some Church
Members that if a man would speak with them he must look for them in some
Tavern or in frame public house, and there the shall find them amongst vain
persons, mispending their precious time. Be astonished at this Oye Heavens.

Consider 1. You expose your selves unto great danger, by maintaining
unnecessary companionship with vain persons.

You may please your selves with vain imaginations nations, that such persons
shall receive good by being amongst them. But it is far more likely that you
will receive hurt by them, then that they shall receive good by you. Can a man
touch pitch and norbe defiled? Can he have unnecessary communion with vain and
vicious persons, and yet his Conscience not be polluted? Remember what Solomon
says, Prove. 6 27. 28. Can a man take fire in his bosom and his clothes not be
burnt? can one go upon hot coals and his feet not be burnt? Thou ta^est (...)
into thy bosom, when thou maket a vain person thy Companion; and burning is
like to follow upon it. When God in his word does prohibit this or that
iniquity, therein is implied that men must abstain from the Temptation leading
thereunto, and therefore that they should beware of vain company, as they would
not fall into sin, such company being a great and dangerous Temptation unto
many sins. Be not so profane as to plead Christ's holy example in eating with
Publicans and Sinners, as an encouragement to sit with vain persons. The Holy
Son of God had no sin inherent in him, nor could he sin or be over come with
any Temptation. When Satan came, he found nothing in him to fasten a temptation
upon. But how much otherwise is it with thee? Tinder is not more subject to
take fire, then thy corrupt heart is apt to be tainted, when the infectious
sparks of temptation are flying about thee. There is danger also, in being
amongst vain Companions left their sine should become thine. Men should make
great Conscience of that Rule, 1 Timothy 5. 22. Neither be partaker of other men's
sins, keep thy self pure. When thou fittest with vain persons, thou will hear
them speak like themselves. vainly, and instead of reproving it, it they be
thou will but laugh at it. So will thou become a partaker of their sins: And if
so, how can thou expect not to partake in their punishments? Come away then
from amongst them, that ye be not partakers of their sins, and that ye receive
not of their plagues, Rev. 18. 4. Did not Abeziab lose his life, because he was
found in company with wicked Jotam: Nay, I will suppose thee to be a godly man,
one in whom good things are found; but thy godliness will not secure or save
thee from temporal judgments, if thou are more intimate and familiar with vain
persons, then does become thy Religion and holy profession. Remember what the
Prophet said to Johoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 10. 2. should thou love those that bate
the Lord; therefore wrath from the Lord is upon thee. So I say, should thou
sit with vain persons? should thou frequent their houses? should thou choose
to travel abroad with such companions? Therefore wrath from the Lord is upon
thee.

Consider 2. You would not be with s^^k company hereafter.

You would not choose to be amongst such in the other world. You would be loath
to go where their souls shall go at the hour of death. David having said that
he neither did nor would sit with the wicked, might well pray as in the ninth
verse of this Psalm, Gather not my soul with sinners. Since I loved not their
company here, when I die let not my soul be gathered to that Hell where they
must go. It is reported concerning Dr. Preston, that when he was dying, he had
that expression. I am persuaded God will not now send we to be amongst wicked
men, for be know^^h, I did not delight in their company whilst in this World.
Men at death are gathered to their people. They change their place but not
their company. A godly man, when he goes out of this World is gathered to his
People, his Soul goes to be with the Souls of those that he most of all
delighted to be with here. And when a wicked man dies, be goes to his People,
his Soul is then gathered with sinners, he is carried away to be amongst the
Spirits that are in Prison. If you would not be amongst them after death, do
not choose to be amongst them now. And ^ou would not be found amongst such
company at the day of Judgment. When vain companions, shall all stand at the
left hand of Jesus Christ the Son of God and Judge of the World, at the last
and great day, you would be loath to be seen amongst them then. And will you sit
with them now? Know you not, that when you choose your Companions, you choose for
Eternity. The persons that now you are most familiar with you are like to be
with them throughout the days of Eternity.

By way of Direction here:

1. If you be at any time called to be in company with vain persons be sure to
demean your selves as becomes those that profess Godlinest.

Set an Example of gravity and holiness before them, that they may (...) have
any occasion to say. These Professors or Religion, these Churchmembers, are
like one of us. Have no fellowship with their sin and vanity, but reprove them
rather, Ephesians. 5. 11. And then you will find, that they will care as little for
your company, as you do for theirs, Prove. 20. 27. An unjust man is an
abomination to the Just, and he that is upright in the way is an abomination to
the wicked.

2. Get acquaintance with Jesus Christ:

Be familiar with him: yea, let your conversation be such, as that it may
appear. that you have been with Jesus. And if you have been with him, you will
not desire vain-fellowship. Christ says, be that comes to me shall never
thirst, Joh. 6. 35. He will find that sweetness in Christ as shall take his
heart off from other Objects, what he shall thirst after the world, and after
worldly vain Companions no more.

O therefore let us endeavor after more acquaintance with God, and with Jesus
Christ, whom to know is life Eternal.

Sleeping at Sermons is a Great and a Dangerous Evil.
ACTS 20. 9. And there sat in a Window a certain Young Man named Enrichus,
being fallen into a deep sleep: and as Paul was long Preaching, be sunk down
with sleep, and fell down from the third Loft, and was taken up deed.
IN this Context, the Evangelist, gives an account of a solemn Church meeting,
which was attended by those Christians, who in the Apostles days lived at
Troas. Concerning which o^vers things are noted.

1. The day of the week, when those Christians did assemble themselves
together, I was upon the first Day of the Week, ver. 7. Inasmuch as Christ rose
from the Dead, upon the first Day, that is become the Christian Sabbath. One
specialty whereby Christians are distinguished from Jews, is in that Jews
observe the Seventh, but Christians the first Day as a Sabbath. It was foretold
by the Prophets in the Old Testament; that in the times of the Gospel there
should be a change as to the Day to be observed for solemn Worship. Thus
Ezekiel foresaw that under the Gospel, the Lord would accept of the holy
offerings presented unto him by his People, not upon the Seventh (is it was in
the Jewish Church) but upon the eighth Day intimating a change, as to the day
of Worship, from the seventh Day, unto that which follows next after it, Chap.
43. verse. 27. And David Prophesied, that the day of Christ's Resurrection, (
viz. the first day of the week) should become the Day wherein the Church would
praise the Lord, or that it would become an holy day, wherein the Worship of
God should be solemnize from time to time, Psalm. 118. 24, And Paul declares
expressly, that inasmuch as Christ has finished the work of Redemption, and is
entered into his rest, there remains the Keeping of a Sabbath, or another day
of holy (...), distinct from that of the seventh Day, which was observed by the
Jews, Heb. 4.4,9,10. And we find in the Scripture, that Churches did by the
Apostles direction, religiously observe the first Day of the week, 1 Cor. 16.
1. Justin Martyr, and other ancient Writers, show that in the Primitive Times,
Christians kept the first day of the Week as their Sabbath; and so has it been
in the Christian Church in all ages thereof. The work of Redemption is greater
then that of Creation. Upon which account, if the seventh day was set apart to
commemorate the work of Creation, it is not to be wondered at, if the Lord
Christ has appointed the first day of the Week to be kept holy unto himself in
commemoration of the work of Redemption.

2. The Evangelist declares for that end it was the Disciples at Iro^s, met
together on the day mentioned. It was not for Civil but for Religious Ends and
Purposes, nor indeed may Christians (excepting when present and indubitable
necessity, shall call for a dispensation) meet together on that day of the
week, to attend any other work, but such as are of an holy nature. One thing
then which these Disciples came together for, was, to break, Bread, (...) to
eat the Lords Supper. The breaking of the Consecrated Bread, is a Sacramental
Action, whereby the sufferings of Christ are signified; and is therefore by a
Synecdoche put for that whole Ordinance, which is appointed to show forth the
Lords Death until he come. Moreover, these Disciples at Troas, met upon the
Lords Day, that so they might hear the Word Preached, us well as partake at the
Table of the Lord. And because the Apostle Paul, was the next day to depart
from them, and it may be never more to speak unto them, in the Name of the
Lord; he continued long in his Sermon, even until midnight.

3. Here is noted the particular place where these Christians met, ver. 8.
There were many lights in the upper Chamber, where they (...)red together.
Christians had not in those days, the liberty of public Meeting houses,
because the higher Powers then were enemies to the Truth. Therefore the
Disciples were glad to meet in private Houses, there to solemnize the Worship
of God, according to his own holy Institution. And because of their
Persecutors, they did assemble themselves together in the night time, when
others were asleep, and would be less apt to observe them. And there were many
lights in the room, that so if their Adversaries should happen to come upon
them, they might have no occasion from the time of their being assembled
together, to reproach them, as if they met to practice the deeds of darkness.
Notwithstanding this circumspection, we find in the Apologies of some of the
Amtients, that the Enemies of the Church, did take occasion to traduce and
slander them, as if they did convene for wicked ends and purposes: but when
they did manage matters, with such Christian Prudence as these Disciples did,
there was no occasion given; only maliciously taken.

4. Here is recorded a Remarkable providence which happened on the day, and in
the place mentioned, wherein a certain young man, named Entychus, was
concerned. To declare which, is the scope of this verse, wherein we have
expressed.

1. The evil which Entychus, was guilty of, in brief, he slept at a Sermon.
Yea, and he did not only flamber but gave way unto Temptation, so far, as to
fall into a deep sleep.

2. Here is noted the evil which befell him. An awful rebuke of divine
providence, did at the very time when Entychus was sleeping and so sinning
under the dispensation of the Word, overtake him. Being asleep, he fell down
from the loft where he sat, and was killed (...) the fall, (...) was taken up
dead. His Breath, Life, and Soul was struck out of his body; only the Lord was
pleased miraculously to restore him unto life again. He was suddenly surprised
with sleep; and he was in danger of being surprised with a sudden sleep of
death, for it. And this is Recorded in the Scripture, that so others; yea all
Christians in after Generations, who should hear of it, might beware of doing
as Eutychus did, that they might take heed of sleeping, when they should be
hearkening to that word, which is spoken of them, in the Name of the Lord.

The Doctrine, which may therefore at present be insisted on, is,

That Sleeping at Sermons is a Great and Dangerous Evil.

In the prosecution of this Doctrine, I shall only attend two things.

1. To Prove. 2. To Apply the Truth.

Q. How does it appear, that sleeping at Sermoni is a great Evil?

Ans. 1. In that there is sin therein.

Sin is the greatest of Evils. Nor ought any sin to be accounted a little evil.
But when men sleep at Sermons, they sin against God: for such a practice is
contrary unto Scripture Precept. If men will do as the Scripture requires,
when the word of God is spoken, they must attend and incline their Ears unto
what is said, Prove. 4. 20. Yea, they ought to give earnest heed thereunto, Heb.
2.1. They then, who instead of heeding and hearkening unto what is spoken,
shall sleep away the Sermon; transgress against the Rules of Scripture. And we
read of those in Scripture who have hearkened to the Word of God with great
attention, whose commendable example is Recorded for our Imitation. When (...)
brought the Law before the Congregation of men and women, and stood upon a
Pulpit of wood, which they had made for the purpose; the ears of all the (...)
to the Book of the Law, Neh 8. ^. And it is noted concerning some of Christ's
(...), that they were attentive to hear him, (...). 19. 48. They kept their
ears, and so their (...) the Sermon was Preaching. And (...) is, that sleeping
under Sermons is a breach of the third Commandment, which (...) respect the
manner of Worship, requiring the greatest Devotion and attention in the service
of God. (...) Praying, and sleepy Hearing is a taking of his Holy Name in vain.
His Word is called his Name. When the Gospel is evil spoken of, his Name is
said to be plasphemed, 1 Timothy 6. 1. They that show no more respect unto his
Word, then to sleep at it, are guilty of despising his Name. The Lord said to
the Jewish Priests, ye despise my Name, and when they asked wherein have we
despised thy Name, it was replied; in that you say, the Table of the Lord is
contemptible, Mal. 1. 6, 7. So may it be said to Sleepers at Sermons, you (...)
despised Gods Name: if you ask wherein? The (...) is, in thou by sleeping at
Sermons, (...) practically say, that the Word of the Lord is contemptible.

2. Sleeping at Sermons does proceed from evil (...).

That's another thing that does evince the evil (...). Things are according to
the causes which they arise from. Now Satan is the external cause of this evil.
Interpreters observe, that Satan had a bloody and (...) causing Eutychus to
^all into a profound sleep, when the Apostle was in his Sermon, hoping thereby
both to occasion ruin to the Sermonsleeper, and to cause a great disturbance
in the solemn Worship of God. Nor did that Enemy to the good of Souls
altogether fail in attaining some part of his end. Only God according to his
infinite power and wisdom, made this fall of Eutychus to be an occasion of
glory to his own Name, both in respect of the Miracle which then was wrought,
and in that his awful stroke upon Eutychus, must needs make others afraid to do
as he did, so that his sleeping has been a means to prevent many an one (...)
sleeping at Sermons, which was the thing that the Lord intended, when he
permitted Satan so far to prevail as he did; But the Devil had another end; he
knows that when the Word of God is faithfully dispensed, in case men attend
unto what is spoken, good is like to come unto their Souls thereby; and that's
the thing that the Devil is afraid of; and therefore he uses all means he can
possibly, to cause the good seed of the Word which is sown, to become
unfruitful. And one unhappy way, whereby he does accomplish it, is by causing
them to sleep at Sermons. Hence in the Parable concerning the Sower, it is
said, of the Seed which fell by the way side, that the fowls of the Air came
and devourea it up, Mark 4. 4. what is meant by these (...) of the Air? you have
it expounded in ver. 15. where it is said, Satan comes immediately, and takes
away the Word that was sown. How does Satan rob men of the benefit, which they
might receive by the Word of God? he has diverse cunning and cursed Artifices,
whereby he can accomplish his design. One (and he has none greater or more
effectual) is to prejudice the minds of men against the Truth, or against the
Dispensers of it. God complains of the false Prophets (who were the Devils
Factors) that they did steal the Lords words every one from his Neighbor, Jer.
23. 30. because they labored to prejudice their neighbors against the true
and faithful Prophets of God, and so robbed their Souls of that precious
treasure and benefit which the word would have afforded to them. It is never
so, but Satan has a deep hand therein. And another Artifice which he uses, to
deprive men of that good, which they might receive by hearing the Word is, that
he causes them to sleep at Sermons. And from thence it comes to pass, that
men are most sleepy at Sermon time. Before the Sermon began, they were not
drowsy, and after the Sermon is ended, they are not so; but just at that
season, when they are called to attend unto the word of God, they are apt to
drowse and sleep. This is as Satan would have it. He had rather have men
wakeful at any time, than at Sermon time. And as for the internal cause, of
men's sleeping at Sermons; it is from that Infirmity which they are subject
unto, and miserably attended with. In some, it proceeds much from Natural
Infirmity. Some are naturally of more wakeful, and others of more sleepy
tempers and dispositions. And old age does naturally incline men unto infirmity
in this as well as in many other respects. But especially, this evil proceeds
from that sinful and moral Infirmity, which men are woefully subject unto. Hence
it was, that the Disciples slept when they should have been fervently praying
to God, Mat. 26.40,41. Jesus comes to the Disciples, and finds them asleep,
and says to Peter, what, could you not watch with me one hour. The spirit
indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak. There was in the Disciples of Christ,
spirit as well as flesh; so far as they were made spiritual, they were willing
to have watched with Christ; and had newly manifested their willingness, by
professing their readiness to die for his sake; but because of a carnal
unregenerate part, which as that time prevailed, they, slept when Christ bid
them watch. It was because of their Flesh, their infirmity both natural and
moral, that they slept when they should have been watching and praying, and the
same is true, if men sleep when they should be watching and hearing. Had not
men sin and corruption in their hearts, it is certain, that they would not
sleep at Sermons.

3. There are evil effects which follow upon men's sleeping when they should be
hearkening to the Word of God.

We shall show this in some Particulars, all which tend to evince the truth of
the Doctrine.

1. One evil effect which follows upon sleeping at Sermons is, That Men's
hearing the Word, is thereby (...) unacceptable to the Lord.

The great thing which should be aimed at in every duty, is that we may find
acceptance with God, in what we do. And therefore to look well to the manner of
performance. For that is necessary in order to the obtaining of divine
acceptance, Luke 8. 18. Take heed how you hear. It is not enough for men to
pray, or to come together to hear the word preached, etc. but every one had
need consider, after what manner do I pray, after what manner do I hear? If
they take not heed how they hear, so as to approve themselves to God in respect
of the manner as well as the matter of duty, they will not find acceptance with
him, Mal. 1. 8. If you offer the blind for sacrifice is it not evil: offer it
now to thy Governor, will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person? Thus
when a man does offer a sleeping prayer before the Lord, or a sleeping
attendance upon duty in respect of hearing the Word, Is it not evil? does he
not offer the blind? will the Lord accept of it, or be pleased with such
services wherein there is no life of devotion? His hearing will be so far from
pleasing God, as that it will become a provocation, if he does willingly set
himself to sleep at Sermon time. If an Earthly Prince, should send his
Ambassadors, to treat (...) any about matters of high concernment, and they
should manifest no more regard unto what is said, then to fall asleep, whilst
the Message is in delivering; would it not provoke? The Ministers of God are in
Scripture styled his Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5. 20. We are Ambassadors for Christ,
as though God aid beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye
reconciled to God.

These Ambassadors for Christ, are sent to treat with men about matters of the
greatest concernment that possibly can be; yea, to propose unto them in the
Name of that God whose they are, and whom they serve, terms of Peace, and
Reconciliation; and they do it in Sermons, in that way, they treat with men
about the everlasting concernments of their precious and immortal Souls. Now to
sleep at the very time when these Messages are delivered, is so far practically
to contemn the Word, and must needs be displeasing unto him whose word it is,
and in whose name delivered.

2. Another evil which does follow upon sleeping at Sermons, is, That it does
cause the Word Preached to become unprofitable, nay, hurtful to the souls of
men.

It is a sad thing, when Men shall receive the Grace, (i. e. the Word of God,)
in vain, 2 Cor. 6. 1. yet so do they do, who indulge themselves in sleeping at
Sermons. If it be so, as the Apostle speaks in another case, then is our
preaching vain, Suppose the Truths delivered be never so precious, if people
are asleep, it is to them, as if no Word were spoken, excepting that they must
give a dreadful account for that which they might have heard for their Souls
good; but would not when called of God thereunto. A Minister of Christ had as
good speak to the Seats, and Pillars, and Walls of the House, as to men that
are (like him whom my Text speaks of) in a profound sleep. Nay, there is
danger that the Word will then (through their own default) become hurtful to
their Souls. It was said to the Corinthians, 1 Epistle Chap. 11. ver.17 You
come together not for the better, but for the worse If Christians come
together, to eat the Lords Supper, but mind not after what manner, their coming
together is for the worse. And if they come together under pretense of hearing
the Word preached, but set themselves to sleep, instead of reverend attention
unto what is spoken, they come together for the worse. It were better not to
come, then to come only to sleep, As the Apostle there speaks, ver. 22, Have
ye not Houses to eat and drink in, or despise ye the Church of God, So I say,
have you not Houses to sleep in, that you must come and openly despise an
Ordinance of God?

3. Another evil effect of sleeping at Sermons, is, that it makes men leave a
guilty Conscience.

Sin does so, especially known sin, and in a most peculiar manner breaches of
the third Commandment, the Lord having said, that he will not hold those
guiltless that take his Name in vain; but all this is true of those that sleep
at Sermons. Hence except their hearts are strangely obdurated in the ways of
sin, they feel checks of Conscience for this evil. Men have that in their own
breasts which tells them that they should not do so, when they give way to
temptation, and fall a sleep under that solemn dispensation of the Word of God,
spoken to them in his Name. And when the Lord awakens Conscience, there are
great troubles of spirit for this sin. It has been so with some of the Elect
of God at their first Conversion. God has made it a sad and a terrible thought
unto them, to consider, how many Sermons they have lost, and sinned, and slept
away; how they have turned a deaf car upon the Messages which the Lord has
seat from Heaven to them.

4. Men are hereby exposed unto Judgment.

Guilt binds the sinner over unto the righteous judgment of God. Temporal
Judgments are many times inflicted for this sin, and that not only on the
profane ungodly world, but on the Lords own servants. As this instance in my
Text does make to appear. Indeed we read of but one godly man in the Scripture,
( viz. Eutychus the man whom my Text mentions) that did sleep at a Sermon, and
what a memorable and awful death had he like to have suffered, because of this
his sin? and yet a great deal more might be said to excuse him, then most of
those that use to sleep at Sermons, can plead for themselves. For Paul's Sermon,
at that time was very long; and it was not in the day but in the night; yea, at
midnight, when men are naturally more inclined to sleep; yet when Eutychus thus
circumstanced, gave way to temptation, so as to fall asleep, when he should
have been hearkening to the word of God, he must be smitten with a sudden and a
deadly blow; that as Jonathan said, 1 Samuel 14.43. I did but taste a little
Honey, and lo, I must die. So this man, did but take a little sleep, a short
nap whilst the Sermon was Preaching, and lo! he must die for it. And as for
those that have been notorious sleepers at Sermons, indulging themselves in
that iniquity, God oftentimes cuts them off, by sudden and awful strokes of his
hand. Yea, and spiritual judgments are the bitter fruit of this sin. For this
cause, the Lord in righteous Judgment does blast his word to the Souls of men,
that they are never converted nor saved thereby, but they become like unto
Ezekiels Marshes and Miry places, they are given unto salt and shall not be
healed, Ezekiel. 47.11. They are smitten with that curse of spiritual and
perpetual barrenness of soul. When men are so profane as to set themselves to
sleep at Sermons, the Holy God is so provoked at them for the contempt of his
Word, as to resolve and swear against them, that they shall never be converted,
or receive any saving benefit thereby. And when this becomes a general
prevailing iniquity amongst a professing people, the Lord is sometimes provoked
to take away his Word from them. He calls home his Ambassadors, and brings a
Famine of his word. When mercies slighted, God knows how to raise the price
of them, and to make men know the worth of them, by the want thereof. When the
Jews were grown weary of Sabbaths and of Sermons, which were Preached to them,
both on the weekly Sabbath, and at their New Moons, that which followed, was,
the Lord sent upon them a Famine, not a famine of bread, (but more dreadful
even a spiritual famine) of hearing the Word of the Lord, Amos 8.5.11. The Lord
may well say, if you have no more respect unto my word, then to sit and sleep
under it; you shall hear Sermons few enough, until you have learned to hear
with better attention; and know that inasmuch as you have slept Sermons away,
you have also sinned them away.

4. Sleeping at Sermons is an evil sign,

For, 1. It argues great inconsiderateness and (...) mind fullness of those
things which men ought to consider of.

It is an evidence that men are not aware (...) those things, which they ought
to remember, whenever they come to hear the Word of God dispensed in his Name.
Its a sign that they do not consider of the dreadful place and presence which
they are in. We may say of a solemn Church-Assemby as Jacob speaks concerning
that place where the Lord appeared to him, Genesis 28. 17. He was afraid, and
said, how dreadful is this place, this is none other but the House of God.
There is a special presence of God in ChurchAssemblies, which makes such
places to be holy, and therefore dreadful. Its true, that in these days, one
house is as holy as another. But it is also true, that in whatever house God is
worshipped, during the time of worship, there is a special presence of the Lord
there, and therefore during the time of worship, the place in holy. Hence
reverence in Behavior is required of men whilst in such places. It was said
to Moses, Put off thy shoes from off thy feet, h. e. show reverence as to thy
outward behavior, (for putting off the shoe was, and is at this day amongst
the Eastern Nations, like putting off the hat with us) for the place whereon
thou stand is holy ground; namely, because of a special presence of God
which was in that place at that time, Exodus 3. 5. So there is in Church
Assemblies: if men are so irreverend there as to fall asleep, and it may be to
put themselves into sleeping postures, it is a sign that they consider not
this. The presence of Holy Angels is awful. Yet such a presence, there, in
Church Assemblies. Hence the House of God is said to be the Gate of Heaven, Gen
28. 17. In old time, Princes kept their Courts in the Gates of the City, and
there they had their Ministers and Servants to attend them. Thus the Lord does
as it were sit upon his Throne, in Church Assemblies, and there are Holy Angels
attending him in those Gates of Heaven. The Apostle therefore Exhorts men and
women to behave themselves with all due reverence and circumspection, in the
solemn worship of God, because of the Angels, 1 Cor. 11. 10. Angels come down
from Heaven, into our solemn Assemblies, and observe not only how Ministers
Preach, but how People hear; who attends, and who does not attend, who sleeps
and who keeps awake. When People sleep at Sermons, it is a sign that they
consider not of this as they ought to do. Yea, it is a sign that they consider
not with whom they have to do in Sermons. It is said, that the Word of God it
quick and powerful, and that all things are naked unto the eyes of him with
whom we have to do, Heb. 4.12,13. so that in hearing the Word, men have to do
with the All seeing God. If they sleep under it, that's a sign they remember not
this. Did any of you hear an Farthly Monarch speaking to you, the consideration
of the greatness and authority of the Speaker would keep you awake. And would
men sleep, if they knew that the Majesty of Heaven is speaking to them?

2. When Men sleep at Sermons, it is a sign that they have not that love to,
and delight in the Word of God, which they ought to have.

It is noted of the Primitive Christians that they received his word gladly,
Act. 2.41. There is not so much of that spirit as should be in those that sleep
when they should hear. This argues that men do not (with David) prize the word
above all riches, and that it is not the delight and the rejoicing of their
hearts. They can keep awake easily enough, when they hear that which they love
and delight to hear. A vain and wicked creature, if he hears frothy and foolish
Discourse, is not sleepy nor weary, because his carnal, unsanctified heart
delights therein. Let the same person hear Sermons, or any serious and
profitable matter discoursed of, and he is quickly asleep. This is a sure and a
sad sign, that he takes but little delight therein.

We come now to Apply this Truth:

And the first Use may be by way of Instruction or Information.

Instr. 1. We may here take notice that the nature of man is woefully corrupted
and deprived, else they would not be so apt to sleep when the precious Truths
of God are dispensed in his Name, Yea, and men are more apt to sleep then, than
(...) another time. Some woeful Creatures, have been so wicked as to profess
they have gone to hear Sermons on purpose, that so they might sleep, finding
themselves at such times much disposed that way. This argues as Satan's malice,
so the great corruption and depravation of the nature of men, whence it is that
they are inclined unto evil, and indisposed to the thing that good is. Yea,
some will sit and sleep under the best Preaching in the World. When Paul was
alive, there was not a better Preacher upon the Earth then he. Austin had three
wishes: one was, that (if the Lord has seen meet) he might see Christ in the
flesh: his second wish was, that he might have seen Paul in the Pulpit; but
notwithstanding Paul's being so excellent a Preacher, there were some that could
sit and sleep under his Ministry. When Soul-melting Sermons are Preached about
Christ the Savior, about the pardon of sin, about the glory of Heaven, there
we some that will sleep under them, When soul awakening Sermons are Preached,
enough to make rocks to rend and to bleed; when the word falls down from Heaven
like Thunder, the voice of the Lord therein being very powerful and full of
Majesty, able to break the Cedars of Labanon, and to make the wilderness to
shake; yet some will sit and sleep under it; such is the woeful corruption and
desperate hardness of the hearts of the Children of men.

Instr. 2. Hence see, that there is great danger in those things which men are
apt to look upon as little sins yea as no sins at all.

As for sleeping at Sermons, some look upon it as no sin; others account it a
(...) a sin not worth taking notice of or the troubling themselves about. But
my Text shows that danger and death is in it. We have solemn Instances in the
Scripture, concerning those that have lost their lives, because they have been
guilty of such miscarriages, as carnal reason will say are but little sins.
When there was a man that gathered a few sticks upon the Sabbath day, he was
put to death for it; and yet men would be apt to think his sin was not (though
indeed it was) very great. Men account i^ a small matter to add something of
their own to the worship of God: but when Nadab and Ahibu did so, there went
out fire from the Lord, and consumed them to death. When Uzzah a good man; did
with a pious intention, touch the Ark, (which he being no Priest should not
have done) God smote him for his Error, that he dyed by the Ark of God. Behold!
the severity of God, and let us tremble at it. Common sins, which almost every
one is guilty of, are accounted small iniquities; but there is exceeding danger
in following a multitude to do evil. Sins of Omission are esteemed small, but
men's Souls may be thrown into the fire and burned for ever, not only for
bearing evil fruit, but because they do not bring forth good fruit, Mat. 3. 10.
At the last day the Son of God will pronounce a Sentence of eternal death upon
thousands of Millions, because they have omitted these and those duties which
he required and expected from them. Sinful words are looked upon as small evils
by many. How common is it for persons to say, What shall we be made offenders
for a word? abusing that Scripture which reproves those that make others
offenders for speaking good and faithful words. But does not the Scripture say,
by thy words thou shall be condemned, Mat. 12.37. Corrupt communications,
obscene discourses, unclean lascivious speeches, discover the persons that
delight in them to be amongst the number of those that shall (without
Repentance) be condemned at the day of Judgment, yet there are some that make
light of them. Thus concerning those words which some call Petty Oaths; some
are so profanely ignorant as to think, that they may Swe^^ by their Faith and
Truth, and that there is no great hurt or danger in it. But there is danger of
no less then Damnation for these seemingly little sins, if men shall a^low
themselves therein, notwithstanding the Commandment of God to the contrary. See
the word of the Lord to this purpose, Jam. 5. 12. But above all things Swear
not, (i. e. vainly, or except duly called thereunto) neither by Heaven, neither
by the Earth, neither by any other Oath, therefore not by your Faith or Troth,
lost you fall into condemnation.

Again, sinful thoughts are esteemed small evils, but I must tell you, that
vain thoughts, and much more vile unclean thoughts, if indulged and delighted
in, may hinder the Salvation of a man's Soul. Witness that Scripture, Jer. 4.14.
O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou mayist be saved* how
long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? so that there is more then a
little danger, in those evils, which men account little sins.

Inst. 3. If sleeping at Sermons be such an evil as has been evinced, there is
then cause to fear, that the Lord has been contending with his People in this
Land, by awful Judgments, partly on the account of this iniquity.

The late Synod, who convened on purpose, to enquire into the causes of the
Lords controversy with New England, have mentioned this amongst many other
provoking evils. And there is great reason to think, that, that holy God who
will not hold the takers of his Name in vain guiltless, has been not a little
displeased for this sin, Inasmuch as it is a common evil. I doubt it may be
said, that there are many such offenders in almost every Congregation
throughout the Land. I must confess to my exceeding joy, that there are as few
sleepers at Sermons, in this Congregation, as in any that I have observed in
the Country; yet there are some and too many. It is a sin, which Professors
and Church Members (as well as others) are guilty of; and it is past doubt, that
it has been for their sins in a more peculiar manner, even for the provoking
of his Sons, and of his Daughters; that God has sent the Sword, Fire, and
Death amongst us. This is a sin, which is not punished by men, but therefore
the Lord himself will visit for it. And truly some of those awful Judgments,
which we have sadly experienced, seem to have a special respect unto this sin.
Those fearful and amazing voices in the Heavens, even Thundrings and
Lightnings, which have caused many amongst us to be horribly afraid; and some
have (like Eutychus) been taken up dead, the Thunder of God having killed them
in a moment; has not the Lord sent them usually upon the very day when Sermons
are wont to be Preached, or upon the next day thereto; as if the Lord should
say, if you will slight and sleep at my word, (...) make you to hear that which
shall awake you with a witness. And does not God threaten with a Famine of his
word? How many bereaved Congregations are there? and some that have been a long
time without the Ministerial dispensation of the Word and Sacraments. Well may
it be so, if People when they enjoyed a faithful Ministry, showed no more
respect and reverence toward God speaking to them therein, then to sit and
sleep under it.

Instr. 4. If sleeping at Sermons be a great evil, then their iniquity is
exceeding great in the sight of God, who do that in Sermon time, which is worse
then sleeping.

e. g. To Play at Sermon time, as wicked children who have no grace nor fear of
God in their hearts, will sometimes do. If you do thus on the Sabbath day, you
break the third and the fourth Commandment both at once, and then how guilty!
how guilty! are you in the sight of the holy Lord God, who is in this dreadful
place, but you are not aware of it. So for persons to sit Laughing in the
presence of God, when his Word is spoken to them in his Name, their sin and
profaness is exceeding great before the Lord. What do thou think will become
of thy immortal soul? do thou think that God will have mercy on thee. Repent
of this thy wickedness, or I do most solemnly declare unto thee in his Name,
God will not have mercy on thee. He that made thee, will show thee no favor.
The Lord says, he will look unto those that are of a conceive Spirit, who
tremble at his Ward, Isai. 66. 2. Thou then, that are so far from trembling at
the Word of the Lord, as to Laugh when it is spoken to thee; the infinite
Majesty, who has Heaven for his Throne, and the Earth for his Footstool, will
not look upon thee; he abhort to see or to look upon such a profane wretch as
thou (...): But inasmuch as thou do laugh at his Word now, repent speedily,
or the time draws on, when distress and anguish will take hold on thy Soul,
and then God will laugh at thy calamity, and moth when thy fear comes. And
therefore hear and fear now, and do no more so wickedly. Remember the words of
the Lord Jesus, Luke 6. 26. Woe to you that laugh now, for you shall mourn and
weep. So I say, woe to you that laugh at Sermons now, for you shall mourn, and
never laugh more. When will thou say? even when thy soul shall be with Dives;
crying out, world without end. I am tormented in this flame. And O think how
the Devils will taunt and mock at thee, and say, why don't you laugh now?
Remember you heard such a Minister of God Breach, he brought you the glad
tidings of eternal Salvation vation, and the sad news of everlasting
destruction, but you laughed when you heard him speaking after the most solemn
and earnest manner; is it a laughing matter now think you? were they not the
great Truths of God, that were spoken in his Name? Then will tears of Blood
trickle down thy dry and damned cheeks for ever and ever, because thou may
not be so happy as to hear one Sermon, or to have one offer of Grace more,
throughout the never-ending days of Eternity.

Use 2. If sleeping at Sermon be so great an evil as has been said, then let
those that have been guilty, of this evil, be exhorted to be humbled for what is
past, and to beware of it for time to come.

Consider 1. Men must give an account another day for every Sermon.

If it be true, (as it cannot but be true, because the mouth of him who is
Truth it self has spoken it) that of every idle word which man shall speak,
they must give account thereof at the day of Judgment, Mat. 12. 36. Certainly
they must give an account concerning every Sermon which they heart. Sleeping at
a Sermon is a greater sin, thou speaking an idle word. Therefore if men must be
called to an account for idle words, much more for this. All those Talents,
which the Lord does entrust any with, they must be accountable for them another
day: Now Gospel Sermons, are amongst the most precious Talents, which any in
this World have conferred on them. But what a sad account will be given
concerning those Sermons which have been slept away? As light as thou make of
it now, it may be Conscience will roar for it upon a Death bed. Not many years
ago, there was a young man, than being wont to come to hear the Word in this
Congregation, when he was upon his sickbed, which proved his deathbed, he
desired to speak with me, and when I came to him, he had this expression, O
Sir, sometimes whilst Sermons have been Preaching: I have set my self to sleep
on purpose, and do you think it is possible, that one that has done so, should
ever find mercy with God. And if this be a trouble on a deathbed, will not the
thought of it, be a terror at the last and great day? verily there is many a
Soul, that will find this to be a dismal thought at the day of Judgment, when
he shall remember so many Sermons I might have heard for my everlasting
benefit, but I slighted and slept them away.

Therefore,

Consider 2. That if men allow themselves in this evil, their souls are in
danger to perish.

Its true, that a godly man may be subject unto this, as well as unto other
infirmities; but he does nor allow himself therein. If he be inclined to sleep,
when he should be hearing the Word, he mourns under it, as his burden. If
indeed thou have grace in thy soul, then in case thy head has been heavy at
Sermon-time, thy heart will be heavy for it afterward. But when persons
indulge themselves in this iniquity, when they compose and settle themselves to
sleep, their state is dangerous, and their souls like to perish. Their spot is
not the spot of Gods Children. How was the Lord provoked at them who despised
Manna. And their sins is no less who offer contempt to the Manna of the Gospel;
as Sermon sleepers, who indulge themselves in this their iniquity, do.

Some it may be will say, but how shall we help it?

Ans. 1. As helps against this evil, there are some things that men should
remember to observe before they come to hear the Word. Beware of excessive
toiling and moiling in the World, because that does incline to sleepiness. And
remember to be temperate in all things. When men overcharge themselves with
meat and drink, and then come to hear the Word Preached, no wonder if they fall
asleep, when they should be hearing for their Souls benefit. And if you find
your selves inclined to this evil, remember so pray much against it before you
come to hear. I doubt common sleepers at Sermons, remember not this. Did they
pray earnestly against this infirmity the Lord would give them power and
victory over it. You must be watchful in order unto prayer, and you must pray
that you may become watchful.

2. At the time of Hearing, some things are to be done as helps against this
Evil.

Strive against it when first you begin to drowse, shake off a sleepy frame.
Stir up your selves to hear the Word, as well as to call upon the Name of God,
Isai. 64.7. If sitting be an occasion of sleeping, rather stand up, then sit
and sleep and sin. And keep alive those thoughts in your hearts, which will be
a means to prevent sleeping. e. g. The awful thoughts of the special presence
of God. When Jacob slept as in his Journey toward Padan Aran, Genesis 28. 16. he
awaked out of his sleep and said, surely the Lord is in this place, and I knew
it not: it is as if he had said, had I been aware that God was in this place I
would not have composed my self to sleep in his presence. Jacob had more grace,
then to set himself to sleep in the special presence of God. Surely, if men did
know that God is in ChurchAssemblies, they would not set themselves to sleep
there. Remember when you hear Sermons Preached, that God himself is speaking
(...) you, in the way of his Ordinance, though by mortal men like unto your
selves. The Treasure is from Heaven, though the Vessel that brings it, be an
earthen vessel. You should therefore receive the Word of God, which you hear,
not as the word of men, but as the word of God, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. I remember I
have read concerning that great Emperor Constanti^^, that sometimes when he
heard Sermons Preached, he did rise up out of his Royal Seat, and would give
that reason for it, because (said he) the men that speaks comes in the Name
of God, and delivers the messages of God. Nay, when Eglon the Prince of Moab,
heard Ehud say, I have a Message from God unto thee; he arose out of his Seat.
Men would be more like to stand trembling, then to sit sleeping, if they did
believe and think of this, Again, if thou do find thy self inclined to sleep
under the hearing of the Word, think how Satan is busy about thee, thou may
be sure he is near at hand, if thou growest sleepy as a Sermon, and will thou
give way to his Temptations? Yea, think with thy self, if I should sleep now, I
should sin; There was a man that could say, he had not slept a wink at a
Sermon, for more then twenty years together, and could give this Reason of it,
Because (said he) if I begin to be sleepy, that thought comes into my heart,
if I should now sleep, I should sin against God, and that I dare not do.

Oh consider what has been spoken. And learn to hear the Word of God, with
utmost attention of mind, and intention of heart. So your souls shall live.

Tibi Domine

