A SERMON PREACHED UPON Ezekiel. 22. 30, 31.

Occasioned by the Death of the much honored JOHN LEVERET Esquire Governor of the
Colony of the Mattachusets. N. E.

By S. W. Teacher of the South Church in Boston.

BOSTON; Printed by John Foster, in the Year 1679.

EZEKIEL. XXII. XXX. XXXI. And I sought for a man among them, that should make up
the hedge, and stand in the gap before me for the land, that I should not
destroy it, but I found none: Therefore have I poured out mine indignation upon
them, I have consumed them with the fire of my wrath; their own way have I
recompensed upon their heads, faith the Lord God.
THE Prophet Ezekiel was one of the first Captivity under Nebuchadnezer,
carried to Chaldea with King Jehojakin: He prophesied therefore in the most
degenerate times of that people: and hence the most of his Prophesies are
convictive, and comminatory; and such is this Chapter before us. Here we shall
see God listing as a Judge upon an apostatized and guilty people. The matter of
the Chapter consists of a particular enumeration of their grievous sins, and
denunciation of Judgment against them for that reason. This is delivered in
three distinct Prophesies; one from the beginning to v. 17. The second from
thenee to v. 23. The last from v. 23. to the end. Our Text falls within the
third Prophesye, the scope of which is to declare and vindicate the righteous
Judgment of God against Judah and Jerusalem: and there are two parts in it.

1. The Ground or moving cause of the controversy which God had with them, in
three Particulars.

1. Their unreclaimableness under former Judgments, allegorically expressed,
ver. 24. Thou art a land that is not cleansed, nor rained upon in the day of
indignation. q. d. Though Judgments have fallen on you, yet they have not been
as a water that has washed away your iniquityes, but you remain filthy still.
Judgments did not effect or bring about their Repentance.

2. The prevalency of sin in all orders of men, with an enumeration (...) the
most prevailing abominations; in the Prophets, ver. 25. 28. in the Priests,
ver. 26. in the Prince, ver. 27. in the body of the People, ver. 29. Apostasy
was become universal.

3. That there were none to stand between God and them to avert, or turn away
his just indignation, and hold his hands, and stay the course of his wrath that
it might not seize and ruin them, ver. 30.

II. The Judgment it self, which is declared as an Effect from these (...),
and by them vindicated to be just and equal, ver. 31. our Translation reads it
in the preter Tense' as of a thing which was past, and God here clears up to be
righteous: and then it must bear respect to Jehoiakins Captivity: Iun. Trem.
and Pisc. read it in the future, and then it must refer to the desolation
under Zedekiah, which soon after fell out. In the Hebr. the first Verb is in
the future, the other two in the preter; but the one is used frequently for the
other in Prophetical Scriptures, God often speaks of what he will do, as if it
were already done, because of the certainty of it.

The words of our Text render us the next and immediate Reason of Judahs
destruction, viz. there were none found in it to turn away the wrath of God
from it, no not one: the words clearly hold out unto us these three things.

1. Gods great lenity toward a people guilty of deepest Apostasy, (...) man
might have held his hand, he looked but for one.

2. Judahs sad and deplorable condition, when they wanted this man: times were
grown sadly degenerate indeed, that there was (...) that appeared to stand in
the gap.

3. The equity of Gods proceedings against a sinning people, when they have
never a healer of breaches, none to stop gaps.

I sought, [baquash] The word signifies the seeking of a thing with great
diligence, to look for a thing studiously, and with earnest endeavor, the
Septuagint usually translate it by a word that signifies an extraordinary
seeking after anything.

Gap, [perez] the word signifies a breach that is made in a Wall by battery,
etc. The Metaphors may be explained in the Sequel.

Doct. When Apostasy has opened a breach to let in misery, and God seeks for,
but cannot find a man to make it up, it is a sad presage of great Calamity.
When sin has made way for Gods wrath, and there is none to interpose, this is
an evil Omen of great misery. In the Explication we may consider,

1. What is meant by the Hedge? 2. What is meant by the Gap in the hedge, and
how it is made? 3. What it is to make up the Hedge, and stand in the Gap? 4.
Who is the man that may do this? 5. When it is that God seeks a man, and can
find none? 6. The ground and Reason of the Doctrine.

1. What is meant by this Hedge?

Answ. An Hedge is properly a sort of Fence which is set about an Enclosure,
for its safety and defense: the ends unto which it servs are chiefly own, viz.
that it may be kept in the owners Propriety, and not lie common; also to keep
out damage by Beasts which might other ways get in and do mischief. This Hedge
then of which our Text speaks, is the gracious promise and Providence whereby
God affords divine protection unto a people that are in visible Covenant with
him. Critics observe that the word [ gadar] signifies a wall of stone that is
laid up without lime or mortar, such as is made about orchards or Fields: it is
translated by a more general word, as Fence, Psalm. 62. 3. You are as a
tottering Fence, and a wall, Numb. 22. 24. A wall being on the one side, etc.
the Church is Gods ^^neyard, and he hedgeth it in.

1. By his Promise or Covenant, whereby he looks upon it as his propriety, he
takes it (as it were) out of the worlds common, and fenceth it off: when a
people are in Covenant with God, he looks upon them as his own, and he
promises or engages to them his favor, provided they keep Covenant with him:
now this hedge of the Covenant distinguishes between the Church and the world,
and therefore we shall find that the people of God in visible Covenant are said
to be a people separated, 1 King. 8. 53. Thou did separate them from all
people of the Earth to be thine Inheritance: and they are commanded to keep
themselves separate, 2 Cor. 6. 17. Come out from amongst them, and be ye
separate.

2. By his providential care of them, looking after them, watching over them
for good, defending them and keeping off evil from them the Pillars of Cloud
and fire in the Wilderness, which stood over the Camp of Israel, were Emblems
of this protecting providence, and when God planted his Vineyard, i. e. his
Church in the Land of Canaan, it is said, he fenced it, Isai. 5. 2. and what is
this Fence, but his vigilant and powerful defense? So it is expounded, Chap.
27. 3. I will keep it night and day: it is a care of Providence that none shall
do it any harm, either keeping in, and restraining of wicked men, (who are like
the Beasts of the Wilderness) from attempting of any thing against it; or else
defeating of them in their attempts, that they shall not break their way
through, to lay it waste.

2. What is the Gap in the hedge, and how it is made?

Answ. A Gap is properly a breach which is made in a wall or Fence, whereby it
is laid open, or exposed unto Inroads. Now this Gap which is under
consideration, is a way that is opened to let in the Judgments of God upon a
people, which could find no way in as long as the Hedge was kept up, and this is
done when God is by the sins of his people provoked to profane his Covenant,
and suspend his protecting providence which was their safety, so that either
man may be said to make a Gap, or else it may be said of God that he does it.

1. Man is said to make the Gap when he pollutes Gods holy Covenant: a people
in visible Covenant stand upon their good behavior, as they carry it so they
may expect it shall go with them; Isai. 1. 19, 20. If ye be willing and
obedient ye shall eat the fruit of the Land, etc. God has promised that as
long as they do well, it shall go well with them: hence therefore when a people
depart from the Rules of obedience, and violate their Oath given unto God, then
they give God advantage to do them harm; they clear him of his Oath and
Promise: nay because every visible Church is a spot of Emanuels Land, which he
has taken up for himself, and fenced in for his own use, therefore Apostasy
makes it a polluted Land, and this is greatly provoking to a holy God: now
therefore God is no longer held under obligation to protect and take any
further care for them; and that is a very great Gap, when a people through
provocation, lay themselves (...) and open to divine displeasure.

2. God may be said to make a Gap, when he makes a way for his wrath, according
to that expression, Psalm. 78. 50. he made a way to his anger: and that is then
done, when he removes out of the way those things which he had before used as
instrumental causes of their safety, and security, viz.

1. When he takes away wise, pious, and zealous Rulers, and gives them foolish
and wicked ones in their Room. Godly and faithful Governors are a defense,
they keep off Judgments, by keeping of things in order; by maintaining the
honor of God, they maintain the peace and prosperity of a people: whiles Joash
does well, in the days of Jehojadah, Israel prospers: such therefore are
pronounced to be a blessing, and the want of them is declared to be a woe; Ec.
10. 16, 17. good Rulers do obviate Apostasy, and punish sin; whereas wicked
Princes do encourage it by impunity, and evil Example: and thus you shall find
God made a Gap in Judah, by taking away men of place and worth from among them,
Isai. 3. 2, 3.

2. When God leaves good Rulers to themselves, and to act their own corruptions:
either to a frigid neglect in their zeal for God, and foolish indulgence
toward ways of wickedness, thus Eli's neglect to punish his sons for their
horrible crimes, made a gaping breach upon Israel, 1 Samuel 2. 30. 3. II. or to
some great fall, whereby Gods name is highly dishonored, thus David by his
sinful numbering of the people, opened a way to the devouring plague: so true is
that Maxim, -- Delirant reges, plectuntur Achivi, Rulers sins make way for the
peoples sufferings. David by the matter of Uriah, brought a Sword upon his
house, and all Israel is laid open by it: Hezekiah's pride and ingratitude
brings wrath upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 32. 25.

3. When God does Judicially give up a people to sin, and this is usually a
consequent of some former Apostacyes, of which they would not be convinced, for
which they were not humbled: for sin is the great gap-maker, and therefore when
their hearts are hardened, and they are left to their lusts, then there is a
door set wide open to ruin, Psalm. 81. 11, 12. Israel would none of me, so I
gave them up to their own hearts lusts; and this made gaps on all sides, Hos.
4. 17. let him alone: q^d he will make himself naked enough, he will throw down
all his defense.

4. When God takes off those chains of fear which were a restraint to Enemies,
and causes them to be Adversaries to his People. When Jacob traveled through
Canaan; God put a fear into the Inhabitants of the Land, that they durst not
pursue after him, this was a Fence to Jacob, it was his security: but when God
puts courage into the hearts of their Enemies, and stirs them up to engage
themselves, and make combinations against his People, this makes a gap: thus
God is said to stir up Adversaries against Solomon, when he went after strange
Gods.

5. When he takes away the Spirits and Courage from his People, and fills them
with panick fears: when their heart faints, and Spirit dies in them, when they
are made to be afraid of a shadow, to start at a fancy, and flee when none
pursues, these are miseries menaced against a backsliding People. Lev. 26. 17,
36. magnanimity and resolution in a people is a defense, it renders them
formidable; but when once their Courage is gone, there is a breach, an inlet
to sorrows, it renders a people a scorn and reproach to their Neighbors, and
every one will have a snap at them.

6. When he leaves them to a Spirit of division, and contention among
themselves; especially when this grows up to an alienation of their hearts one
from another, Hos. 10. 2. their heart is divided, now shall they be found
faulty: divisions are rents, and lay open the nakedness of any People: they
expose themselves an easy prey to any devourers, whiles they are busy in
devouring one another a divided people are out of joint, weak and contemptible:
well might there be searchings of heart for Reubens divisions.

3. What is it to make up the hedge and stand in the Gap?

A. These two Phrases note a double work incumbent on such,

1. To make up the hedge intimates a taking away the provoking cause, which
being removed, according to the tenor of the Covenant of Gods free grace, the
breach which a people have made upon themselves by their sin, is repaired: and
this is done when they are brought to a true and through reformation and
repentance; for God has given in his word and promise, that he will accept of
this at their hands: as Sin made a breach, so Repentance makes it up again: yea
and by this means also are the breaches that God has made repaired, because
Gods anger being now turned away from his people, he is reconciled to them
again in Jesus Christ, and now he calls in his Judgments, and puts forth anew
his care for his peoples defense and preservation. Jer. 42. 12. And hence, when
there are such as are careful to use the means of Reformation, and do
powerfully put them in execution, and prosecute them with zeal and resolution
to effect, in this way the hedge is made up, and its breaches repaired.

2. To stand in the Gap notes an act, or continued acts of zeal, and it is done
when there are such as thrust themselves in between a sinning people, and a
provoked God, and do their utmost to stand in the way of Judgments and stop
them: when there are those, who though they cannot do what they would in
Reformation, yet do the utmost they can both with God, and with a revolting
people; both intercede with God, and bear a due testimony against sin. Thus
Aaron when a flood of misery was broke in, throws himself in the midst of it
and makes an atonement. Numb. 16. 47, 48. He took incense, and stood between
the living and the dead, and the plague was stayed: when they hold Gods hand,
so that he cannot do what he otherwise would, as long as they are there. Sodom
would not burn so long as Lot was in it, but as soon as he was out it proved but
tinder to the sparks of divine indignation. As also when they execute the
punishment upon those that are the procuring cause of these Judgments, thus the
Levites by their integrity and impartiality turned away wrath from the people,
when they appeared on the Lords side, and slew every man his brother, Ex^^. 32.
26. thus Phinehas his zeal, when he slew Zimri and Cosbi, those impudent
sinners, was greatly acceptable unto God, and stayed his anger, which was (...)
against his people. Numb. 25. 11, 12. these are those Worthies that have power
with God himself that blunt the edge of his fury, and turn by the stroke of his
revenge, that it cannot light where else it would.

4. Who is the man that may do this?

Answ. Out of question there were at this time many pious, truly godly, and
sincere ones in Judeab, and they were such as God took special notice of, such
as mourned for the iniquity and abominations of the times and places, and God
had special mercy for them: the destroying Angel must suspend doing Execution,
till these had a mark set upon them for deliverance, Ezekiel. 9. begin. but every
good, man is not a man that can make up the breach; though every Christian
ought in his place, to do his utmost that it may be made up. But the man that
may accomplish such a business as this is, must be a man of these endowments
and qualifications.

1. He must be a leading man, i. e. a man in Authority, one that is a Ruler
among his people, a man of power, and influence: a work of Reformation is set
about in vain, and to no purpose, if Rulers do not lead in it: private men do
but in vain urge and persuade Reformation, if mean while Superiors do
countenance or so much as connive at sin: men that are in place of power have
very great advantages in their hands, if they have but a heart, to do much for
a peoples welfare, which private men have no opportunity of doing: their
command has authority, their very Example carries the force of a Law with it:
and hence it is the Scripture does lay so much weight upon this, the having of
good or bad Rulers over a People.

2. He must be a godly man; for although it is not to be denied, that God does
often make use of merely moral men, to be very serviceable and beneficial to
his People; yet this is also to be considered, that in times of great and
epidemical degeneracy, when the body of a people, and all orders have corrupted
themselves, he that will hazard himself in so difficult and unthankful a work
as that of making up the breach, and will do it effectually, had need to be
soundly principled: there are so many Temptations in it, and so strong to bias
and turn him out of this course, that if true grace balance not, self Interest
will hazard to prevail: except a man do both know and believe that God will
own, stand by, and graciously reward him, he will find no other encouragement,
but all Arguments to move him to desist, And therefore we shall find that when
God promises unto Israel a blessing in a King, he engages to give them a man
after his own heart, 1 Samuel 13. 14.

3. He must be a public spirited man, such an one as Nehemiah was, Neb. 2. 10
It grieved them exceedingly that there was a man come to seek the welfare of
the Children of Israel: such as have the common good of the people lying upon
their hearts, men that are studious for Jerusalems peace, and prefer it before
their own best joy; they must not be Gallio like spirited, that care not how
things go; nor men that only take care to secure their own Cabin, while the
Ship is sinking: but such whose life is bound up in the Tranquillity of their
People.

4. He must be a man of a Skilful, discerning, and observing Spirit; one that
does consider, and can understand the times and seasons, and what Israel ought
to do. It is not enough to be verst in general Maxims of State, but to know
how to deal in the very change of a peoples manners: How else shall they know
what is their own proper duty incumbent on them, and the particular work which
belongs to their Generation, to be serviceable to God and his people in: for,
as the times vary, so has God various works for his Servants to do, the
neglect of which may bring a great deal of misery: it was therefore Issachars
commendation that they understood the Times.

5. He must be a man of great zeal for the glory of God: one that counts it his
best policy to be true and faithful to the Interest of Jesus Christ: the Worlds
Politicians are afraid to do this or that, lest it should have had Events,
should not be resented, or they suffer reproach, etc. I do not deny, but
believe, that it is a point of Christian prudence in any Rulers, to know what
cannot be done at present, and not throw themselves upon unavoidable hazards,
when they may better use other ways to accomplish their duty. David knew when
the Military sword was too long for the Civil, and the sons of Zerviah were too
strong for him, and (...) Joab till Solomon's reign, then to suffer Justice for
his murder. But when men think it is rather their interest to please men then
to be true to God, and Sense will go no further then what may gratify men's
corruptions, (...) do more than the spirits of an apostate people are willing
to bear, will rather connive at sin, then lose the love of sinners, these are
not men for the Gap, they will never be acknowledged by God to be among the
number of those that make up the hedge: No, he must be a man of Phinehas his
spirit, let him be what he will, if he be a troubler of Israel, he will not
fear or spare him.

6. He must be a man of Courage and undaunted resolution, he must be like
Jeremiah, a man made up of brass and iron: Ier. 1, 18. I have made thee an iron
Pillar, and brazen wall against this People. He must be such an one as
Nehemiah, that was not daunted by, nor deserted his work because of the
Threatenings of his Enemies, but stood upon the credit of his Religion, and God,
Neb. 6. 11. Shall such a man as I flee? he that makes up breaches in times of
great Apostacies shall said it to flesh and blood a discouraging work, he shall
have his heart and hands full; a backsliden people are not easily reformed; he
that endeavors to do it shall be reproached, stigmatized by reviling tongues,
for a Persecutor and a bloody man, as ( Numb. 16. 41. 2 Samuel 16. 7, 8.) Moses
and David: if he punish sin it is cruelty, if he curb in encroaching errors it
is Tyranny, and he shall hear (...) on every side, and he had need therefore to
be resolute.

7. He must be a man of a tender heart, one that is affected with every Token
if Gods anger that discovers itself in his word and works: such a man was
Josiah, and God bestowed a blessing upon him for it, 2 Chronicles. 34. 27, because
thy heart was (...), etc. when he heard the book of the Law read, and knew that
wrath was (...) against Judah, it humbled him, and drove him to God: there is
many times a stupid Spirit that regards not, takes no notice of the wrath of
God, Isai. 42. 25 he set him on fire round about, yet he knew it not, it burned
him, yet he laid it not to heart: such a Spirit will obstruct this work of
healing the breaches of a people.

8. He must be a man of vigor and activity: one that will himself set about
the work, and see to the effectual doing of it, it is not enough to enact
Orders, or give them a civil Sanction, but care must be taken that they be put
in Execution, else they are but a mock of Reformation, sin is not frighted away
with words; it is a great business to make up the breach, and therefore it
requires a vigilant and diligent man to do it: one that will be up and doing.

9. He must be a man of a fervent Spirit of Prayer: the most of the work in
making up the breach is to be done with God; when he puts into the Gap, he must
have a deep Interest in Gods love, how else shall he prevail to stay his hand,
and stop his wrath, yea, all his wisdom, Counsel, Courage, Success, must first
be gained in Heaven: he must be such a man as Moses and David were, men that
could put in with God for the People: hence, when God intended good days for
Jerusalem, he promises them watchmen that shall nor hold their peace, or give
him rest, till he establish, and make Jerusalem a praise in the Earth, Isai,
62. 6, 7. In a word, when all these qualifications do not meet in a man, he is
not completely accomplished for this work, he may truly belong to God, and he
may also do something, but he is not the man that God looks for, nor can he be
truly called a Repairer of breaches.

5. When is it that God seeks for a man, and can find none?

Answ. The phrase is an improper kind of Speech, uttered according to the
manner of men, who seek in order to finding a thing: but God sees all things
with one sight: but the intention of it is, to represent before us the patience
of God, in delaying the full Execution of his wrath, and when Judgment has
begun, he waits to see what those Preludia of sorrows will effect upon a
people, and whither they will awaken men that are in Authority to set their
shoulders to this (...): Gods beginning lighter strokes upon a revolting
people, are probationary, to see if there be any sparks of such a Spirit to be
found in those that are Rulers, or whither there be an absolute security and
sottishness fallen upon them: and when God does this; though he may see and
find many mourners in Zion, and such as tremble at his word yet these do it in
secret, they save their own Souls, but the breaches are not made up by them;
sin rules and reigns abroad notwithstanding, and meets no check nor restraint:
In sum, when Rulers in Commonwealth and Church are not such men, there are
none at all, it exceeds the advantage of men in a private Capacity to be so; so
that when these men are all, either degenerate, or discouraged from their work,
and do not attend it sedulously, there is none to do this business, and we may
be sure the Hedge will not grow up spontaneously, or of its own accord: an
apostate people will not reform of themselves, but must be quickened and led to
it, if therefore they are thus neglected, breaches will no doubt grow wider
every day, and new breaches will be daily made, by renewed provocations the Gap
will be laid wide open, and any devouring plagues may come in.

6. For the clearing up the ground or reason of the Doctrine, we may take these
Assertions.

1. That which God expects of a people whom he takes to be a vineyard of his
own, is, that they should bring forth fruit to his glory. Isa. 43. 21. This
people have I formed [i. e. again molded into a people, or Civil and Church
polity] for my self, they shall show forth my praise. And Cap. 5. 2. He looked
that his Vineyard should yield grapes. God expects a Covenant people should be
an holy people; he therefore when he had told Israel what he had done for them,
also declares what it was that he expected from them. Deuteronomy. 7.11, 8.12, 10.12:

2. When a People instead of bringing forth fruits of holiness, fructify and
abound in wickedness, they frustrate Gods just expectations: they are like a
field, though sown with good grain, yet yields nothing but briars and thorns
and thistles, like a garden plentiful only in weeds, though sown with herbs,
like a Vineyard of wild sower grapes, what advantage has the owner by such
fruits? It answers not his cost of fencing and dressing. See for this Isa. 5. 3.

3. Hence the Apostasy of a Covenant people must needs be a grievous
provocation: if the husbandman had taken no pains, and laid out no cost upon
his field, it were not much to find it fruitless, but for a fig tree in a
vineyard that is under fence and manuring, to be fruitless, this is matter of
just displeasure, the husbandman past a deserved sentence, Luke 13. 7. Cut it
down, why cumbers it the ground. God speaks of such a thing as if he were
amused at it, or could not tell what to make of such a thing as that, Jer. 2.
21. that a noble plant should so degenerate.

4. If now the Fence begin to tumble down, and spoilers to come upon them, if
Judgments break in on all sides, its a righteous dispensation, and their
apostasy and wickedness made the breach meritoriously; for God did it, and
therefore because they had provoked him. Isa. 42. 24. Who gave Jacob for a
spoil? etc. The Lord against whom they have sinned. What man would be so
imprudent to be at cost and care, to keep up the fence about, and manure a
field, that yieided him no fruit or income?

5. When God has purpose of favor and good will to a declining people, though
he do make Inrodes upon them, yet he raises up Instruments fitted and prepare
for the making up of what is amiss, and standing between him and the people
that he may not destroy them: thus we shall find, that when Saul's Apostasy had
almost wasted Israel, he raised up David to be helpful to repair and restore
them again: when Abaz's wicked reign had corrupted, and near ruined the
Kingdom, of Judah, he gives him Hezekiah, that great Reformer, and eminent man
in the Gap, for a successor thus after Manasseh and Ammen, succeeded godly and
zeaous Josiah: and there is great Reason for this way, for the general
Reformation of a corrupted people is a great work, and cannot ordinarily be
carried on without the eminent zeal and forwardness of Leaders.

6. Hence when there are no such, it is a sign that there is no amendment like
to be; and what must the consequent of such a case be, but ruin and
desolation. God discovers much of his own mind and purpose by this matter, and
where he spirits me to the proper work of declining times, he may wait a while
in patience, and procrastinate his wrath, but if there be no remedy, if there
be none to heal the round, what remains but amputation? a hopeless people are
cast in Law, they are plants that do but burden the Earth they grow on, and
what are they fit for but burning?

Use 1. For Information of our Judgments in three Particulars.

1. That pious and zealous Rulers are a very great blessing. I know that the
corruption of the hearts of men is licentious, and every lust desires to enjoy
its liberty, and hence such as will indulge men's humors, are most pleasing, and
will (...) content to the carnal heart; but this proceeds from men's ignorance
and wicked ness: such Rulers as these, are in a word of sober Truth, the only
men; they have a deep Interest in God, he owns their zeal, and the people shall
fare the letter for them; and they are strongly set for the good of the people
amongst whom they live; they are indeed the alone men that seek the welfare of
their Country: it is therefore a great wickedness for any to repine against,
and a great duty to bless God for such: if there be any breach made, these are
they that will be diligent to make it up; if there be any Judgment coming,
these be they that will adventure into the Gap, and shut it out, they are,
under God, the happiness of a people; and the want of them declares any people
miserable, both Hiram, and the Queen of Sheba could see and did acknowledge
that, that God therefore those Solomon to be King, because he loved Israel, 3
Chron. 2. 11. 1 King. 10. 9.

2. That whatsoever may tend to the prevention or removal of the Judgments of
God, is a part of the duty incumbent upon Rulers. All things that may tend to
the making up of the Hedge, and stopping of the Gap, come properly under their
cognizance: and hence it follows, that whatsoever sin is a provocation to God,
and may be an occasion of wrath against a people, they both have Authority, and
it lies upon them in duty to suppress it: hence men deal injuriously, and at
against themselves also, who would confine their Authority to matters only of
the second Table; unless we can say that Athiesme, Heresy, despising Gods
Ordinances, cursing, swearing, abusing Gods blessed Name, and profanation of
his holy Sabbaths, are no provoking sins, nor such as open a door to let in the
anger of God; against which the whole current of Scripture does plentifully
bear witness: or shall we be so foolish as to think, that when God has set up
all orders of men for his own glory, and has in particular appointed Rulers to
rule for God that they not only may, but ought to be regardless of those things
which do more immediately concern this glory of his? or shall we think that if
they let Judgment come at these breaches, and put not forth their authority to
stop them, they shall not be charged for the neglect of a duty necessary for
the peace and prosperity of their people?

3. That the death of such men, who when they lived were diligent in such a
work as this, viz. to make up the breach, and stand in the Gap, especially at
such a time when there is much of this work to do, is matter of deep humbling
and lamentation. The loss of one such man, in a time wherein iniquity does
abound, may be so sadly circumstanced, as that it may be the occasion of the
ruin and desolation of a people: Sad changes many times are the product of
such a providence. what was it that occasioned this doleful condition of Judah
mentioned in our texts why, good Josiah was gone, that great stickler for God,
and mender of Jerusalem hedge: the people were bad enough in his time, but he
suppressed open wickedness destroyed idolatry, maintained and enlarged Religion,
and it was well with Judah in his days. But when once he was removed out of
the way, though they still had a King, Zedekiah, yet he did nothing in the gap,
except it were to make it wider: wickedness and profaness might sit in the
gate, and ride in the streets unpunished now Desolation comes. Godly and
zealous Rulers are Pillars, they hold up the earths foundations that it does
not fall. Psalm 75, 3. One such man then ought not to dye without the tears of
all Israel: there were bitter Lamentations made for Josiah when he was dead, as
we shall find, 2. Chron. 35. 24. 25. And there was good reason for it, for when
he dyed good days died with him; when his Sun sat, the Sun of Judahs
prosperity sat too; he goes out of the gap into his grave, and the Boar of the
wilderness presently breaks in, and lays waste the vineyard of Gods own
planting: they were dismal days that followed that eclipse. I know there are
times when a child may lead a people, whiles piety is prevalent among them, and
the fear of God lies upon them: But when wickedness is exalted, and sin gets
head, when men's corruptions grow powerful, he must be a man indeed, one of a
thousand, singularly spirited by God, that is able to mange affairs for Gods
glory, and a peoples Tranquillity, and therefore when such men dye; that loss is
not easily repaired: it is breach upon breach. For sin to break in, and zealous
opposers of sin and suppressors of iniquity to be taken out of the way, God is
then angry indeed, and to lament the loss of such, is but to lament our own
loss.

Use II. For Exhortation, in several particulars.

1. It may call us into the dust and mourning at remembrance or consideration
of the displeasure of God which is out against us upon this account, in the
loss of so many, and at such a juncture of time, that might have been truly
styled men that stood in the Gap, The present solemn stroke of divine
displeasure in the death or that honorable Personage, whom I lament, not only
for private respects (which claim it) but as he was a man publicly both great
and good, pointed me to this present discourse, and the thoughts of it bring to
mind reiterated strokes of the same nature so lately inflicted; and Indeed the
voice of providence is loud, the Lord. God has spoken, who can but prophecy:
and I would endeavor (God helping) to put you into true mourning, let me
therefore entreat you to put on these considerations.

1. Who they were whom we have lost: I know it is one part of the infelicity of
divided times, that few men dye universally lamented, how useful soever they
have been in their Generations? because of prejudices which are the natural
fruits of such seasons: but if prejudice may be commanded to hold its tongue,
and Truth may be admitted to speak, and due allowance of Charity granted to men
laboring in their clay Tabernacle with a body of death, which the best of men
have always needed to cloak their imperfections, (and a David without it,
would have past an harsh censure) they were men of singular worth and eminency:
what shall I say more? they were men ready to set their hands to repair out
Edge, and hazard themselves to stand in the Gap: men willing to sacrifice their
lives for the public weal and safety of this people; men precious in the sight
of God, and deserving to be registered in the Rolls, and founded by Trumpet of
Peace, and for whom was prepared an Immortal, and never fading Crown of glory.

2. The season when they were taken away, good or evil are much aggravated by
the time in which they happen: when good men are taken away in an evil day it
doubles the misery, and such is the present case, it is a time where in there
was never more need of them: God accomplisheth his works in the world
ordinarily by Instruments; and if they are removed, must not the work lie
undone? it in time in which many evils are broken in upon us, when Judgments
are making their Inrodes with violence show many fore breaches are there to be
seen in our Hedge? what great desolation has the Sword made among us? this
has been a sad Inundation: how low has the sickness brought us? what a breach
has been made upon our quiet by the secret plots and contrivances of Enemies
abroad against us? heart divisions among us are rents exposing us, not a little
to be made a prey to others: errors and heresies have made a great Gap, and
what miseryes may come in at that Gap we have reason to dread: wantonness,
pride, and profaneness have gained a general liking, and how broke they in, but
at some great hole in the wall? here was a great work to do, to repair all
these breaches, and now that such as should have done it, are so many of them
removed, this should be for a lamentation.

3. How much are we weakened by this loss: faithful and zealous Rulers are the
Chariots and Horsemen, i. e. the defense and safeguard of Israel. The people
made that an Argument to diswade David from going any more into the battle,
because they counted him worth ten thousand of them: we lose many in one, when
any such are taken away: such wounds are like the cutting off the hands of a
people, yea, stopping their breath, we have so many the fewer intercessors for
us at the throne of grace; yea, every work must go on slowly, when principal
workmen are called off from their work: David accounted himself weak by the
loss of (...) but they are better men then he, whom we have lost: and if they
be not greatly missed, especially at this day, it is no Argument of our
happiness, but if our senceless stupidity under our great misery.

4. What are the prognostics of this loss: we may say as the prophet; had not
the Lord left us a remnant, we had been as Sodom, and like to Gomorrah. The
Lord be blessed that we have a Remnant of worthy Patriots, whose fidelity and
godly zeal has born witness that they are men for the Gap: and were not this
our hope under God, we were indeed a very miserable people, But let us know,
that such Concussions in State are Ominous, and forebode undesireable changes:
In evil times, when those that should withstand the evil of them, are taken
from it, it faith that God has more evil to bring upon a people, and intends
not to be hindered in his work. The Plucking up of Pillars, is in order to the
pulling down of the house: when God removes such, it is to make the way plain
for his Judgments; they lay as Mounds and bulwarks in the way to send them of:
and we may think what we will of such Changes: and may perhaps inwardly rejoice
and he well contented that such, and such are gone, nay, may be ready to say,
as some have not spared to do when they were alive, that they were the
troublers of Israel, that their zeal against sin has brought Gods Judgments
upon the Lord and if more of them were gone the same way, it would be well:
nay, we may lift at them, to lay them aside, as men that cannot serve the turn
of the time because they cannot temporize: and bespatter their names with
odious and slanderous (...). Yet let me assure you in a word of truth, that
you need not make such last to be tid of them, God is doing the work fast
enough, and there needs but a few more to be laid aside by thy folly (O N- E)
or laid up in the grace by Gods displeasure against thee, and the widegaps
which thy sin, and Gods wrath have made in thee will be left empty, and stand
open and defenseless; and what Seas of misery will follow; the Lord grant thou
may not by experience know, but have the grace to prevent. But let me tell
you, The unlamented death of righteous Rulers, is as sure a presage of Calamity
coming as any I know: and when God looks into the Gap, and sees none standing
there, thou shall then know to thy cost, what those were worth, whom thou have
now not only despised, but hated. God grant we may now humble our selves under
his mighty hand, else methinks I foresee the day when we shall have opportunity
to be wail our own madness, and New England shall sit solitary, and say, I once
had choice blessings, had I but known the worth of them: I once had skillful
Rulers, that knew how to search and heal my wounds, that could step in and
intercede for me with God, and were not afraid to resist the evil that was
growing upon me; that would confront profaness, and suppress abomination; then
did I enjoy good hopes; but now all, sluices are pulled up, and floodgates are
set open, and wide way for all manner of mischief, and miseries, to bring
ruin, and utter desolation upon me, is made in me: O doleful unhappy day!
when there is none to afford me any relief or succor. I am sick, and there is
no Physician, wounded, and no Chyrurgeon, broken with breach upon breach, and
there is no repairer,

2. It directs us what to pray for, if we desire the healing and prosperit, of
the land, i. e. That God would be pleased when he looks for men in the Gap, to
find some there; and to that end, that he would both continue such to us, and
not proceed to take all away; that he would increase their courage and
resolution, and give them all encouragement; and also that he would from time
to time pour out of his Spirit upon such as shall stand up to bear rule, that
they may have a Moses's, a Phinehas's, a David's, an Hezekiab's, a Josiah's
heart: Our sorrows may be many and great; but whiles we have such, we are not
hopeless. God does not give up a people till the whole head be sick and whole
heart saint. It was Moses his prayer when he was to dye, that God would bestow
a man upon his people Israel, Numb. 27. 16, 17. We should pray down zeal for
the glory of God, and courage in confronting of sin into our Rulers, instead of
endeavoring to rail and revile them out of it. Know therefore, that there is
as much of your prosperity and welfare wrapped up in this, as in any second
cause, and you cannot pray aright for the peace of Jerusalem, except you pray
for this: For that people that has not such men to go in and out before them,
cannot be an happy, but needs must be a miserable people, and without defense.

3. It may direct you what manner of men to make choice of to hear rule over
their Brethren, i. e. Such as are most likely to make up the hedge, and stand
in gap; to drive out sin, and to keep out wrath; men spirited for Reformation.
I speak as to a people that are free; and it is a choice blessing to the people
of God not they may have men of their own choice; and will be an aggravation of
their so and sorrows, if (having such a liberty) they abuse it to
licentiousness. The Lord, the God that searches hearts, knows what manner of
spirit is active in the (...) of us at this time; how our spirits are divided,
and we bandied into factions each studying and contriving how to advance the
interest of their own particular designs and promote their own cause; and what
shall become of the common (...) at God, and of Religion in the mean while?
Men's great enquiry is, whither such and such be of their part, but there is
little enquiring, How stand they for God and for Godliness, how they are
spirited against sin and Apostasy.

Well, let us remember it is in a great measure in our own hands to fortify,
or (...) our selves: and in nothing more can we show our folly, or wisdom then
in this, among works that are of public concernment. I desire to be far from
being stickler and busy body matters of State, but only as a well wisher to
the peace prosperity of our Jerusalem, I would crave of all faithful ones,
prudently and deliberately to consider the times, and use Christian wisdom in
seeking to settle God amongst us, that the breaches of the Land may be made up.
We are a sick people, the symptoms are visible and manifest, and if we do
indeed consult our own health, it ought to be our care to seek the chiefest and
ablest Physicians: and (...) will have Mountebanks take you in hand, that will
heal the wounds slightly, thank yourselves if they break out again with more
rancor then ever.

4. Be exhorted each one of us in our place and station to do our utmost to
repair and make up the wall that is so broken down. That our fence is tottering
and in many places open, is a thing obvious, he must shut his eyes that does
not see it: God who is our alone defense, is in a great measure withdrawn form
us; and woe to us if he (...) quite depart away, whole Cataracts of misery will
soon break in upon us; there are enough waiting to make a prey of us; the
mouths of devouring Beasts as open upon us: it is time then to seek the
munition of Rocks. There is never an one of us but may (if God grant us grace)
so something toward this happy work: it is sin in the bowels of the Land that
has caused these Earthquakes that have shaken our walls: get this out, and
God will come in, and dwell with was in times of old: I would submissively
entreat men of power and Influence to any with them that Counsel of Jehoshaphat
to his Judges, 2 Chronicles. 19. 8. 11, etc is Argument enough to encourage to
resolution in pursuit of the most hazardous duty, to believe that God will be
with the good. God never deserted his own cause, nor those that were faithful
in it; New England is not without its Experiences in this matter, and for our
selves, let it be our endeavor to strengthen the hands, and encourage the
hearts of our faithful Rulers: let what they do for God and for the welfare of
this people, please us: they were good times, when that good David did pleased
his people. Don't undertake the Patronage of sin be not Attourneys and pleaders
for wickedness: be willing to be reformed: hearken to the Convictions and
faithful warnings that are given you in the Ministry: seek after peace and
holiness: mourn for the sin you cannot restrain and reform your own ways that
are not good: purge your hearts and Families; love and pray for the peace of
Jerusalem: thus shall the breaches in New England Hedge be made up; and the
Lord when he seeks for men in the Gaps, shall find them filled, and will take
pleasure in his people: our Israel shall dwell safely, and we fell see our
Jerusalem a quiet habitation: the Lord shall restore our Rulers as at the
first, as our Judges as in the beginning: there shall be no breaking in, nor
going out, nor complaining in our Streets; for the Lord will go before us, and
the God of Israel will be our (...).

FINIS.

