A PUBLIC TRIAL OF THE Quakers IN BARMUDAS Upon the first Day of May, 1678.

First, The Charge against them was openly read, containing these Particulars:
As

1. That a Quakers pretended Savior within him, is not the true Christ, but
the False Christ, the Devil.

2. That the main end of the Quakers Meetings in these Islands, is to make the
Lords Christ, His Holy Spirit, His Angels, and Apostles, all Liars and False
Witnesses of God.

3. That the Prim-Principles of a Quaker, are the same Held and Professed by
the Beasts, which Paul fought with at Ephesus.

Secondly, The whole Charge being Proved by the Testimony of the Holy
Scriptures: was found by the Sheriff, and Justices of Peace, a true and just
Charge.

Thirdly, Being found Guilty, they are here Sentenced, and brought forth unto
the deserved Execution of the Press.

BY SAMSON BOND late Preacher of the Gospel in Barmudas.

Hos. 5. 2. The Revolter is profound to make slaughter. Prove. 21. 24. Proud and
haughty scorner is his Name. BOSTON IN NEW ENGLAND: Printed by Samuel Green,
upon Assignment of Samuel Sewall: 1682.

THE PREFACE TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
B Eing lately informed, that the Quakers had left a Paper (with a Gentleman in
these Islands) intimating a challenge to the Ministers here, viz. Whether the
Ministers God, or the Quakers* God, were the true God; little notice was taken
of this their Folly: in a short time afterward, a Justice of the Peace
acquainted me, that a Quaker brought him a Letter, and would have him deliver
it unto me, but he refused to receive it from him: And some few days after
this, an honest Neighbor told me, that the Quakers had reported up and down
the Country, sc. That I would as soon take a Bear by the Tooth, as Dispute
with them: and withal, that thereby the Leading Quakers did confirm and
increase their party: Hereupon I sent unto them (a Synagogue of Libertines) the
Charge in the Title Page asserted, [Being Answers to three short Questions.]
And in the Paper (which was sent the 15 th. day of April 1678.) they were
informed, that I would be ready to prove (from the Holy Scriptures) the charge
against them: upon the modest motion of any one or more Quakers in these
Islands, ( on any Lecture-day in Devon ^hier-Tribe Church) in order to a
Regular and Peaceable Disputation, for the investigation of the Truth of the
true God; which Paper the Quakers received and accepted. And according to the
general Directions therein given, they came (the first day of May following, to
the place assigned, (but without giving me any special notice of it,) Then
Francis Eastlack, a Teacher amongst them, moved for a performance of my
promise, in reference to the Change (which he called a Challenge) under my hand
against them: I forthwith told him, that I was ready (by Christ's help) to do
it: howbeit, by the way (as I told them) I thought it fit to ^ignifie unto
them, sc. That as they had accepted the Paper which I had sent to them, so they
had thereby bound themselves to all the terms and conditions therein expressed:
as Namely. 1. That the Disputation is to be Regular; that is to say, I am (in
the first place) to prove the whole Charge, without any interruption from any
one of you; That then any one or more of you may (without interruptions from
me) answer my Arguments, or give your Assent. 2. That the Disputation is to be
peaceable; that is to say, one person only (at a time) is to Answer; That the
Disputation may not end (as usually such kind of Disputes have done) in an
unprofitable Confusion, but to the satisfaction of the numerous, and judiciou^
Hearers: And that at the end of all, They may judge (according to the
Scriptures of Truth) between you and me: Let me here pray the Reader to take
notice, that not any thing said by me ( touching the Regular and Peaceable
Disputation) was gain said by any of them, whose silence was (by all the
Hearers) taken for their full consent: yet, notwithstanding; herein, they
declared themselves most unfaithful, for they frequently interrupted me, more
especially, by casting in impertinent objections, ere I had half answered this
or that Scripture, which some one or other or them had proposed; thereby in
design (as I thought) to obstruct the special matter, ready to be uttered for
the satisfaction of the Attentive Hearers; which urged me (as I must confess)
unadvisedly to say, that what I had, and should then have declared, I would
cause to be Printed that full returns might be given to the objections made,
and Scriptures wrested by them: saying, If I could not he heard I would be
read: here withal, I cannot deny, but that I have in the returns inserted
sundry things from judicious Authors (for confirmation) or further explication
which I might not then have alleged, though I had not met with any
interruption at all: And forasmuch as some of them have (as I am informed)
since said, that their business was not managed aright by them, and that some
things were forgotten to be spoken: not only these but all other things which
might seem for their advantage, I have (in their due places) set down and
answered; upon the whole I do assure the Reader, I should not have given my
self this trouble; had they not (by their manifold interruptions) provoked me
to make that inconsiderate open promise as above: concerning which many of the
Hearers have since been my frequent Remembrancers; and probably others may be
ready (on default of performance) to reflect slanderously upon me, whose
reviling rudeness is but too well known:

And so Farewell, SAMSON BOND.
This ensuing Discourse had been Printed sooner, had not Mr. John Foster (the
Printer) been disenabled by a tedious sickness, of which he Died.



ERRATA.
Page 18. line 19. read doubled. p. 38. l. 40. r. assert. p. 51. l. 13. for
believed, read belied the Letter. p. 81. l. 11. r. free. p. 85. l. 11. for
person r. reason. p. 100 l. 24. r. either.

The First Part of the Charge; is THat a Quakers pretended Savior within him,
is not the true Christ, but the false Christ, the Devil.
Which was proved by four Apostolical Arguments.

Arg. 1. Because, Jesus Christ of Nazareth a Man approved of God among the
People, was and is the true Christ, and our only Savior: which is frequently
testified in the Acts of the Apostles: as in

Act 2. v r. 22, 23 36. Ye Men of Israel, hear these words, Jesus of Nazareth a
Man approved of God among you, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have
Crucified and Slain: Let all the House of Israel know assuredly, that God has
made that same Jesus, whom ye have Crucified both Lord and Christ.

Acts. 4. 10,11,12. Be it known unto you all, and unto all the people of
Israel, that by the Name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye Crucified, whom
God raised from the dead, even by him, does this Man stand here before you
whole: this is the Stone, which was set at naught of your builders, which is
become the head of the corner; neither is there Salvation in any other; for
there is none other Name ( sc. then the Name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth) under
Heaven given among Men, whereby we must be saved.

Acts 10 38,39,40 42,43. God anointed Jesus of Nazareth, with the Holy Ghost,
and with power: Whom they ( Jews) flew and hanged on a Tree: Him God raised up
the third day, and showed him openly: And he commanded us, to Preach unto the
People, and to testify that it is he which was ordained of God, to be the
judge of quick and dead: To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his
Name whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of sins.

From these Texts of Scripture, the 1 st. Argument did arise: To wit,

If Jesus Christ of Nazareth a Man approved of God among the People of Israel,
be the true Christ and only Savior, then a Quakers pretended Savior within
him, is not the true Christ:

But Jesus Christ of Nazareth, a Man approved of God among the People, was and
is the true Christ and our only Savior; therefore, a Quakers pretended Savior
within him, is not the true, but false Christ.

Arg. 2. Because the Saints of God (by the direction of his Spirit) have
always acknowledged the Man Jesus Christ, to be their true and only Savior:
as in

Luke 2. 25,26,27,28,29,30,31. And behold, there was a Man in Jerusalem, whose
Name was Simeon, and it was revealed unto him by the Holy Ghost, that he should
not see death, before he had seen the Lords Christ; and he came by Spirit into
the Temple; and when the Parents brought in the Child Jesus; then he took him
up in his Arms, and blessed God, and said, Lord, now let thou thy Servant
depart in peace, according to thy word; for mine eyes have seen thy Salvation,
which thou have prepared before the face of all people, etc.

Joh. 20.27,28. Then said Jesus unto Thomas, reach hither thy finger, and
behold my hands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side, and be
not faithless, but believing: and Thomas answered and said unto him (by the
spirit of Faith) my Lord and my God.

Joh. 4 42. And said unto the Woman, now we believe, not because of thy saying,
for we have heard him (the Man Christ, ver. 29.) our selves, and we know that
this is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the World.

From these Scriptures the Second Argument was Formed, sc.

If the Saints of God have (by the Holy Spirits direction) always
acknowledged, the Man Jesus Christ, to be the true Christ, and only Savior:
then a Quakers pretended Savior within him, is not the true Christ.

But the Saints of God have (by the Spirits direction) always acknowled the
Man Jesus Christ, for their true and only Savior. Therefore a Quakers
pretended Savior within him, is not the true but false Christ.

Arg. 3. Because the true Christ and our only Savior, did at once (without us)
in and by his one crucified body on the Cross, finish and complete the work and
office of a Savior: as in

Heb. 10. 12,14. By the which will we are Sanctified, ( that is, Saved) through
the Offering of the Body of Jesus Christ once for all: And this man alter he
had offered one Sacrifice for sins, ^or ever sat down on the right hand of
God; for by one offering he has perfected for ever them that are Sanctified.

Heb. 2. 14. Forasmuch then as the Children are partakers of flesh and blood,
he ( Jesus, ver. 9.) also himself likewise took part of the same, that through
death, he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the Devil.

1. Pet. 3. 24. Who his own (...) our sins, in his own body on the tree, and in
1 Pet. 3.18. For Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just for the
unjust (that he might (...) us to God) being put to Death in the flesh, but
quickened by the spirit.

Ephesians. 2. 15. 16. Having abolished in his flesh the enmity, -- having slain the
enmity in himself on the Cross, so making peace: and in Chap. 5. 2. As Christ
has given himself for us, an offering, and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet
smelling favor.

Heb. 9.26. But now once in the end of the World, has he appeared to put away
sin, by the Sacrifice of himself: and in Col. 1. 22. In the body of his flesh
through death, to present you holy, and unblameable, and unreprovable^n his
sight.

From these Scriptures the third Argument resulted. viz.

If the true Christ, and our only Savior, did at once (without us) in and by
his one crucified body on the Cross, finish and perfect the work and office of
a Savior; then a Quakers pretended Savior within him, is not the true Christ.

But the true Christ, and one only Savior, did at once (without us) in and by
his one crucified Body on the Cross, finish and perfect the whole work and
office of a Savior: Therefore a Quakers pretended Savior within him, is not
the true, but the false Christ.

4 th. Argument: Because, the true Christ, and our only Savior is in Heaven
above us: As in

Luke 24. 46,48,50,51. And Jesus said unto them (his Apostles) thus it was
written, and thus it beh^ved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the
third day. And ye are witnesses of these things. And led them out as far as
Bethany. And he lift up his hands and blessed them: And it came to pass, while
he blessed them, he was parted from them and carried up into Heaven.

Mark 6. 19 So then after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received up
into heaven, and sa^e on the right hand of God.

Act. 1. 11. 'Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing into Heaven, this same
Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner, as
ye have seen him go into heaven.

Act. 3. 13,21. 'The God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob, the God of our
Fathers has glorified his Son Jesus. Whom the heavens must receive until the
times of restitution of all things.

Heb. 9.24. 'For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, --
but into heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us.

Act. 7 55 56. 'But he ( Stephen) being full of the Holy Ghost, looking up
steadfastly into heaven, and saw the Glory of God, and Jesus standing at the
right hand of God: -- And said, Behold I see the heavens opened, and the Son of
man standing on the right hand of God.

From these Scriptures the fourth Argument was formed: sc.

If the true Christ, and our only Savior be in Heaven above us, then a Quakers
pretended Savior within him, is not the true Christ.

But the true Christ, and our only Savior is in Heaven above us. Therefore, a
Quakers pretended Savior within him, is not the true but the false Christ.

Lastly, That by the false Christ, we are to understand the Devil, is plainly
proved, by comparing, Mat. 24. ver. 24. with Rev. 12,9. in the first Text, the
true Christ calls the false Christ a Deceiver, if it were possible, shall
deceive the very Elect; implying, that the false Christ is the greatest
Deceiver: And in the other Text, this great Deceiver, which deceive^ the whole
World, is called the old Serpent, the Devil, and Satan.

Here hence this Argument arose, (...), ^e that is the great and principal
Deceiver, is the Devil, ( Rev* 12. 9.) but the false Christ is this Deceiver (
Mat. 24 24.) Ergo, the false Christ is the Devil: The Conclusion ought not to
be denied; to deny it here, were to deny the Scriptures of God, from whence it
is plainly collected as above.

Having thus proved the first Part, I proceeded to the second Part of the
charge: To wit,

That the main end of the Quakers Meetings in these Islands, is to make the
Lords Christ, his holy Spirit, his Angels, and Apostles all, by art, and false
Witnesses of God.

Being about to prove this, as I had done the former part of the charge: F.
E^^stlack interrupted me, pretending to make some Answer to the foregoing
Arguments: I told him, that by mutual consent (as in the Preface is Declared)
the whole charge against them, was first to be proved by me, before any Answer
should be returned by him, o^ any other of his Friends; Therefore, I requested
him, that as he had any regard either to Truth or Honesty, that he would
forbear his interruptions; that I might proceed (according agreement as above)
to prove the second part of the charge: but his Sepulcher being opened, he
refused to shut it: whereupon I spoke to the Assembly, saying, I must let him
take his own way, ^o prevent greater confusion: howbeit instead of Answering (
as he pretended the abovementioned) Arguments, or any of them: He first
impertinently runs out, into a bare Repetition of, some words in the former
part of the first Chapter of the Evangelist John, sc. from the 1 st. verse to
the end of the 12 th. verse, which shall be mentioned and considered in their
due places: let me note by the way, his after straggling inferences from those
verses: To wit, That God the Word, took Flesh of the Virgin Mary, and in that
Flesh suffered Death for all men, (which he put a special Remark upon, by
repeating it twice) it was well observed, that he made no mention of Christ's
Resurrection, but further said, sc. The Word which is God, is Christ; the true
Light, which was manifest in the flesh, and as in him, so in every man that
comes into the World, as manifest in them, which quoth he) is witnessed by
John* and withal added, whosoever shall Preach any other Gospel is accursed;
and after he had multiplied words to the same end and purpose alone as above;
the ingenious Auditors began to mutter at his impertinences, and jumbled
confusions: Thereupon I called to him, and said, Master I slay (so he is
commonly called, as before notch, viz. I slay) either answer the Arguments which
have proved the first part of the charge, (as you pretended, to Mask your
interrupting of me, or take some Answer to what you have said: His first Reply
was, the Scripture ^aith, Call no man Master, I told him the Scripture says,
sc. Mat. 23. 10 Neither be ye called Masters, for one is your Master even
Christ; which is not to be understood in your unmannerly sense: likewise I told
him that he had no cause to quarrel the word [ Master] for you affirm the
Master, ( even Christ) is within you Quakers, making your selves the greatest
Masters; so that herein are fulfilled among you, the word of our Lord
concerning Deceivers, namely, that false Christ's shall arise, and many shall
say, I am Christ, and shall deceive many, Mat. 24.5. Further more I said unto
him, sc. Thou art the Master of an Assembly, to wit of the Synagogue of
Libertines: which opposed and persecuted the faith of Blessed Stephen, for
believing in Jesus Christ of Nazareth, to be the true Christ and only Savior,
Act. 6. 8,9,14,59. At this he grew impatient, rebuking me, saying, Thou did
promise not to interrupt me; I replied, that I did not interrupt, but help him,
sc. to remember that my promise was, not to interrupt him or any of his party,
whilst he or any of them, were answering the Arguments urged by me, (as it may
appear in the prefixed Preface: But he said, that he did not value the
Arguments, for they proved nothing, (thus, he that was a party, made himself
the determin^ting Judge,) and then with a throat stretched voice, returned to
his former discourse, That the Word is Christ, the true Light in the Flesh,
sent to save men from sin and death, whose death and sufferings with the effect
thereof, we do own and witness, according to the Scriptures, as inwardly
received within us: yet speaking other whiles of the death, satisfaction and
sufferings of Christ, the true Light, as done within us, for us: to which (said
he) the Scripture testifies repeating these words, But the righteousness which
is of Faith, speaks on this wise, say not in thy heart, who shall ascend into
Heaven; (that is to (...) Christ down from above) or who shall descend into the
deep, (that is to bring up Christ again from the dead) But what says it; the
word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that is the word of
faith which we Preach: After he had rehearsed these (or most of these) words,
he forthwith inferrd, that the word of Faith, was Christ, the true light
within, and then confidently affirmed, that to preach any other Gospel, sc. (
then Christ within to be the Savior) is to be accursed; which invited him to
reflect on me, declaring that I had not in any thing, which was by me said
(meaning in the Arguments above) made any mention of Christ, as God, and with
that saying he ended ( as it is called, his present Dispute.

Forthwith I made some returns, which I have now put into some better method,
which was then much hindered by their confused interruptions But before I lay
down those more orderly returns, let me request the Reader to understand, that
I have filed off much of the Rust and Ruggedness of his expressions, which
often wearied the Christian Hearers: For it was not only his, but also his
Fellow* Disputants course all along, here and there to steal, and strangely to
disorder, (^ay to dismember) Scripture words, out of the Evangelists, and the
Apostles, thereby endeavoring to cover themselves from being discovered; not
plninsy, nor honestly mentioning either Chapters or Verses, ( William Bullock
once excepted) though often called upon, but all in vain: they would speak
Scripture words (after their usual manner) darkly and confusedly, thereby the
more easily to deceive those with whom the Scriptures have any credit; I shall
( at present) decline any further observation of this their dangerous and
designful practice; and proceed to the above signified Method: And

1. As touching the first Chapter of the Evangelist John (with which he began
as above) It treats of the God*head of the Son alone (the eternal-Word) from
the first verse to the end of the fifth verse: and then of the person of Christ
( God-man) from thence to the end of the Chapter, some of these verses (for
satisfaction sake) I shall touch a little in their order.

First, Of the Eternal Word, the Godhead of the Son, (as in ver. 1,2,3) In the
Beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God; the
same was in the beginning with God; all things were made by him, and without
him was not any thing made that was made. These verses denote to us, that its
only the Godhead of* the Son, that did Create.

ver. 14. The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, i.e. whole Christ, God
man in one person; as such, he created nothing, only as God, so he created all
things.

As the Evangelist here, so does Paul to the Colossians (chap. 1. 16.) speak
distinctly of the Godhead of the Son alone, and also distinctly of him as
personal Christ, viz.

By him were all things created, that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth,
visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones or Dominions, or
Principalilities or Powers; all things were created by him, and for him: and he
is before all things, and by him all things consist, (ver. 17) So he is the
Creator. Again, ver. 18, 19. Paul speaks distinctly also of Christ, as Christ:
for so (as noted before) he is no Creator, because (so considered) he is in
part a Creature: howbeit, as Christ he is the Head and Savior, ( Ephesians. 5*
23.) of the Body, the Church:

Who is the beginning, and first born from the dead, that in all things he
(Christ God-man) might have pre-eminence: for it pleased the Father that in him
should all fullness dwell, (and ver. 20.) Having made peace through the blood of
his cross: and in the body of his flesh through Death, to present you holy and
unblameable, and unreprovable in his fight, (ver. 22.) If ye continue in the
Faith (that is in the Faith of the peace made through the blood of his Cross,
and body of his flesh through death) Grounded and Rooted, etc.

This Distribution (both by the Evangelist and Apostle) was not understood by
this Disputant Eastlack: for in all his foregoing Discourse, his design was to
make the Hearers believe, that the Eternal Word, the Godhead of the Son (as
distinct from the Manhood of Christ) is the true Christ, and only Savior; and
consequently, a Quakers pretended Savior within him is the true, not the false
Christ: And hereunto agrees his words so frequently repeated by him, viz. God
was manifest in the flesh, (that is, as ^o their darkened understanding) i^ all
man kind of flesh; which gross Error shall be (in its proper place) considered:
in the next place, this Disputants more lax and general expressions shall
receive some Answers.

1. I do acknowledge with him, that the [ Word] took flesh of the Virgin, and
that he suffered without the Gates o^ Jerusalem; howbeit, as it comes from a
Teaching Quaker, it is undoubtedly no other, then a deceitful shifting of the
matter in question: yet I am ready to grant, that F. E. and his Partners may
believe, that there was such a man, who (as Histories mention) took flesh, and
was born of the Virgin Mary, and suffered death without the Gates of Jerusalem,
about sixteen hundred years ago: Alas, how many Turks and Jews are there that
know and believe all this; yet they do no more believe Jesus of Nazareth, to be
the true Christ, and only Savior, then a Teaching, Seducing Quaker does: Nay,
such a Quaker attributes no more soul saving Merit to the holy Body of Jesus
Christ, then to the body of a Turk or a Jew: Therefore its not safe to put any
other construction upon his acknowledgement above, then a deceitful shifting
the business in hand, that he might thereby the more easily hoodwink the
Hearer; for his Discourse had no other tendency, then to make us believe, that
the true Christ and Savior was only in (not at all of) the body of Christ's
flesh.

2. I do again acknowledge with him, sc. That the effects of Christ's death and
sufferings, are to be inwardly witnessed, as received within us: And if so,
then there must be a cause of these effects inwardly received; as previous and
anticedent to them, to wit, The death and sufferings of the one Man Jesus
Christ (as in the third Argument) which is therefore necessarily finished, and
perfected already by the one crucified body of Jesus of Nazareth, upon the
Cross (without us) for us; which in right reason must needs be, before the
effects thereof could be revealed in us, and so inwardly witnessed; though this
were the thing I argued for, yet it was strongly opposed by them all, (as may
afterward appear) making those effects within them, the true Christ, and their
only Savior.

Now I proceed to the Texts of Scripture repeated by F.E. which shall be
considered in order as he uttered them.

John 1. 9. That was the true Light, which lighteneth every man that comes
into the World: This Scripture he more especially insisted on, to prove Christ
to be that true Light, and that Light to be the only Savior, which (as he
said) is in every man, that comes into the world: whence he Argued, that a
Quakers pretended Savior within him, is the true, and not the false Christ.

Answ. Its true that by [ Light] in that place of Scripture, the true Christ,
and our only Savior, is meant, ^ohn 1. 29. and although i^ (...) likewise
true, (in a true sense) that every man that comes into the world, is
enlightened by Christ ( i.e. with reason) the Son of God, as he is the Eternal
Word that made the World: yet, the Evangelist has not in that Text assorted,
that there is a Light (or enlightening) in every Man, as he comes into the
World, which is the true Christ; and our only Savior* so that, thou have
plainly and openly belied that holy Man ^ohn, in saying of him as above, that
be so witnessed; Namely, that the Light, (or inlighting) in every Man, as he
comes into the World* is the true Christ, and Man's only Savior: for, this
Evangelist witnesses otherwise, as (in ver. 30. 29.) he evidently affirms the
Light (in ver.9.) to be the Man Jesus, and as such, he never was (nor can be)
in any man* so witnesses the Witness* bearer, whom we are to believe, before a
Seducing Quaker.

2. Thou ( F. E) did in thy Discourse effectually affirm Christ to be the
Light, and the Light in every Man to be the Christ, implying thereby, sc. what
might be truly spoken of the one, might be also so spoken of the other: here
hence then it must follow, that the Light within a Quaker, was born in
Bethlehem, laid in a Manger, hanged upon a Tree, and gave up the Ghost; all
these were truly and properly spoken of the true Christ ( who is the Light of
the World: Now, what can be more absurd and false, then to affirm these things
of the Light, in every man that comes into the World by natural Generation.

3. It being an Enlightening which is communicated (as in ver: 9.) to every man
that comes into the World (which comprehends both Elect, and Reprobate) But the
true Christ is not in Reprobates (2 Cor, 13. 5.) Therefore the true Christ is
not (as in your ^ence) in every man that comes into the World, and consequently
not in Teaching, Seducing Quakers.

Text 2 d. 1 Timothy 3.16. Great i^ the mystery of godliness, God was manifest in
the flesh. Hence, he ( F.E.) inferred that the Godhead only, as manifest in the
flesh, is the true Christ and only Savior; and withal he effectually said,
that the Light in every man that comes into the World, (as it is manifest in
every man) in the same Christ ( (...) the Godhead) and as in the body of
Christ's flesh, so in the body of every man's flesh ( i.e. God manifest in the
flesh, sc. flesh indefinitely) And so by a consequence of his own Blaspheming,
a Quakers pretended Savior within him, is the true, not the false Christ.

Answ. Nothing can be more evident, then that this Disputant would have had the
Hearers to believe, that the Godhead (as distinct from Christ's being a man) is
the true Christ and only Savior: Surely this is new Divinity; which is
differing and quite another Gospel, then that of the Apostles as in ( Mat. 16.
16.) Thou (not the Godhead alone in thee. But thou (the son of Man, ver. 1^.)
art the Son of the living God.

Again, after Christ's Ascension and Glorification in Heaven above, (...)
Apostles confess him, in these words, ( Act 12. 36.) Let all the house of (...)
know assuredly, that God has made that same (...) (not the Godhead only
manifest in Jesus, but) that (...) ^^sus, whom (...) Lord and Christ: consider
I pray, did the ^ews ever cruci^^e your feigned Godhead-light within: I could
heartily wish, that all ye would feelingly lay to heart, what our blessed Lord
says in this case, ( Luke 12. 8,9.) Whosoever shall confess me (not the
Godhead only in me, but me) before Men, him shall the Son of Man also confess
before the Angels of God: But he that denies me (the Son of Man) shall be
denied before the Angels of God: Thus the Holy Apostles confessed before men;
the Son of man ( Jesus of Nazareth) to be the true Christ, and their only
Savior, and in the Faith thereof, they both lived and died.

F. E. Let me ask thee this question: sc. If the Godhead of the Son (considered
as distinct from his being a Man) be the true Christ and Savior; how, or to
whom was he manifested? its impossible to imagine, that the Godhead (which is
invisible and incomprehensible) can be manifested to the external senses of
men; But the true Christ, and our only Savior, was thus Manifested; as it is
witnessed by Christ's faithful Apostles ( sc. in 1 ^oh. chap. 1. ver. 1,2,3.)
there, speaking of the Lord Jesus Christ, personally God man, they declare;
That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen,
which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the word of life.

Note here, that the blessed Apostles testify, that they had heard and seen
Jesus Christ (the true and only Savior) looking upon him, and handled him, by
being in his Company: But as for your Idol ( light Christ) it was never
visible, but ever invisible; for ye say, it is within only, so that (ca^l it
what ye will) you, nor any man else, can say what it is, except a Whimsey.

Moreover, let it be considered, how these words ( God was manifested in the
flesh) are explained by the Lord Christ himself, ( Joh. 2. 11.) This beginning
of Miracles did jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested forth his glory (that
is, his Godhead to Faith) By this Miracle (of turning water into wine) the
glory of the Godhead was manifested in the body of his Flesh: that is to say,
the Lord Christ did by that (and other Miracles which he wrought in the sight
of the Beholders) make it manifest, that he was true God, and true man in one
person: (which is so great a Mystery, that neither Saints nor Angels are able
to comprehend it) this is indeed the genuine sense of that Scripture, (sc.
Great is the Mystery. God was manifest in the flesh] And to force it to speak
otherwise, is a most wretched and sinful wresting of the Text; but the
Disputant being as bold as blind, added as aforesaid; viz. That to Preach any
other Gospel, is to be accursed; meaning to preach otherwise, then that the
Godhead only in the flesh, (all mankind flesh) to be the true Christ, and only
Savior is to be accursed; these words were (being his third Text of Scripture)
repeated by him; shall now be considered, whether wrested or no.

Text 3 d. Gal. 1. 8,9. If any Man Preach any other Gospel unto you, then that
which we have Preached unto you, and ye have received, let him be accursed.

Ans. I pray thee Frances, what was the Name of that Apostle, who preached the
Godhead (as distinct from Christ's Manhood) to be the true Christ, and only
Savior (...), thou poor, ^illy man, was there ever (or will there ever be)
remission of sins Preached by the Spirit; but by and through the one Man Jesus
Christ; the Apostle Paul Heb. 10. 29. says (in effect) to Preach otherwise, is
to despite the Spirit of Grace, even the Doctrine of the Spirit, Romans 5. 15.
Much more the Grace of God, and the gift by Grace, which is by one Man Jesus
Christ, has abounded unto many: I shall let this pass a little, and proceed to
a consideration of the Text it self.

And for our so doing this Question does necessarily ari^^:

Quest. What was the Gospel that Paul Preached?

Answ. He Preached the Faith ( i.e. the Gospel of Faith) which once he
destroyed and persecuted, Gal. 1. 23. Now, the Faith which Paul once persecuted
was, the Faith of believing in Jesus of Nazareth the man approved of God among
the people, Act. 2. 22. to be the true Christ and our only Savior; then by
good consequence the Gospel which the Apostle Preached, was to believe in the
Name Jesus Christ of Nazareth, to be the true Christ, and our only Savior (and
Justifier in the sight of God, without the works of Law in or by us.)

To clear this Answer yet a little further, let Paul's own Confession be
observed, Act. 22. 4. And I Persecuted this way (namely, of believing in Jesus
of Nazareth, to be the true Christ and only Savior) unto the Death, binding
annd delivering into the Prisons both Men and Women, ver. 7. And I heard a
voice, saying unto me, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? ver. 8. And I
answered, who art thou Lord? and he said unto me, I am Jesus of Nazareth (not
the Godhead only in Jesus of Nazareth) whom then Persecutest: Furthermore, at
ver. 14. And he ( Ananias) said the God of our Fathers has chosen thee ( Paul)
that thou should know his will, and see that just one, and should hear
the voice of his mouth ver. 15. For thou shall be a witness unto all men, of
what thou have seen and heard.

And accordingly the Apostle did bear open and abundant witness to that just
one, (even Jesus of Nazareth to be the true Christ and our only Savior) This
great Truth is yet further evident, in the 13 th. Chapter of the Acts, ver. 23.
Of this Man's ( David's) Send, has God according to his promise raised unto
Israel, a Savior Jesus; him (ver. 27. They ( sc. The Rulers in ^erusalem)
condemned, ver. 28 and flew, and took him down from the tree, and ver. 29, laid
him in a Sepulcher: But ver. 30. God raised him from the dead; and he was ver.
31. seen many days of them, that came up with him, from Galilee to Jerusalem,
who are his witnesses to the People; That through this [Man] (not the Godhead
only in the Man) is preached unto you the forgiveness o^ sins; and by him (this
Man) all that Believe are justified from all things, ver. 38. 39.

Against the blessed Doctrine of the Gospel, the unbelieving Jews were (as ye
Teaching Quakers are) filled with envy, and spoke against those things, which
were spoken by Paul* contradicting and Blaspheming, ver. 45: hereupon, ver. 46.
Paul and Barnabas waned hold, and said, Seeing ye put [ It] ( sc. Faith in the
Man Jesus Christ of Nazareth, slain and raised from the dead) from you, and
judge (O, Seducing Quakers read and tremble) your selves unworthy of
everlasting life.

Here hence, it is most plain, that the Apostles Preached Faith in Jesus of
Nazareth a Man (not the Godhead only in the Man) approved of God among the
People, to be the true Christ and our only Savior; But never did they (not any
of the Apostles of God) Preach Faith only in the Godhead (distinct from Christ's
Manhood) to be the true Christ, and only Savior; against this New coi^ea
Doctrine, not only the Apostles, but the Holy Ghost himself bears express
witness, as in Act. 5. 30,31,32. The God of our Fathers raisea up Jesus, whom
ye slew and hanged upon a tree, him has God exalted with his right hand to be
a Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance and forgiveness of Sine, and we
(the Apostles) are his witnesses of these things, and so is also the Holy Ghost.

The whole is, If any Man Preach any other Gospel, then what the Apostle
Preached, he is accursed; But ye (Teaching and Seducing Quakers) do plainly
Preach another Gospel; therefore ye that Preach it, and they that receive it,
are accursed, by the Testimony of Gods own Spirit, Gal. 1. 8, (...). And
consequently thou F. E. have wrested that (as other) Text of Scripture, which
(without Repentance) will be to thy destruction, 2 Pet. 3. 16.

The words of the fourth Scripture (which he repeated with more then ordinary
state and confidence) comes next to be considered:

4 th Text. Romans 10. 6,7,8. But the righteousness which is of Faith, speaks
on this wise, say not in thy heart* who shall ascend into Heaven) that is to
bring Christ down from above) or, who shall descend into the deep; that is to
bring up Christ again from the dead: But what says it, The Word is nigh thee,
even in thy mouth, and in thy heart that i^, the word of Faith, which we Preach.

Answ. 1. Though the fifth and ninth verses, does essentially appertain to the
verses above, yet he made no mention of either of them; their omission being
for his turn.

2. I do not apprehend how those verses do answer the Arguments (or any one of
them) which proved a Quakers pretended Savior within him, to be the false
Christ, the Devil; nor how they prove their pretended Savior within to be the
true Christ.

3. For the right understanding of the above repeated 6,7,8, verses we must
(first of all) take in the 5 th. verse, for Moses describes the righteousness
which is of the Law, that the man that does these things, shall live by them,
Lev. 16. 5. so that, in these Verses, the Apostle Paul compare the
righteousness of the Law and the righteousness of Faith together: and thereby
shows that the righteousness of the Law is not only uncertain, but also Romans 8.
3 impossible; but the righteousness of Faith, is both certain and possible: For
1. It does forbid all doubting about eternal life, because Christ is ascended
up into Heaven for us, in our room and stead. 2. It forbids all fear of being
tormented in Hell; because Christ being risen from the dead, has overcome
eternal death for us, in our place and stead (being our surety) which is as
much, as if Paul had said, The righteousness of Faith, fetches a remedy
against doubts of Salvation, for that Christ is personally ascended up into
Heaven, and has taken possession of it, in our Names, and there he makes
intercession for us; ( Heb. 6. 20. Chap. 7. 25.) and if so, (as truly so it is)
we must then de^y Christ Ascension (which is to bring him down from above) if
we doubt or question in our hearts how to be saved:

And as the righteousness of Faith, is a remedy against Doubts of Salvation:
So, is it also against fears of Condemnation: For, if Christ have dyed, and be
raised from [ the deep] the Grave, then has he thereby gotten the Victory over
Sin, Death Hell, and Satan: therefore to fear condemnation, what is it else,
but to deny Christ death, or descertion into the Deep; and so, to bring him
back again to the Cross and Grave.

Moreover, the Apostle Paul in these verses gives us a plain (...) of what
Moses had elegantly propounded by a figure, in D^ut. 30. 11,12,13,14. from
whence we are taught, that both Moses and Paul presupposed a two old pressure
upon the Spirits of sinners, as 1. How they may (...) into Heaven: And 2. How
they may avoid Hell, these two Moses and Paul ((...) of God) do stew, to be
taken away by the righteousness of Faith; the find is removed, because we
believe the Acce^tion of Christ into Heaven or us: and the (...) also because
we believe Christ's Resurrection from the dead for us; whereby the Lord Christ
demonstrated his victory over hell, death, etc. in our room and names. It may
hence be safely argued, that both Moses and Paul do conclude, that if any man
seeks justification by the righteousness of the Law, (as most Quakers do) he
must needs be in continual fear of Hell, and despair of Heaven: But be that
(through Free grace) believes that the Lord Christ is risen from the dead,
ascended up into heaven for him, in his place and stead, is freed from both.

The sum of all, is this: Namely, That Jesus Christ rose from the dead, for us,
and ascended up into heaven for us: and before either. (which must be implied)
lived and died for us: But, he that believes not the Descention, and the
Ascension of the Lord Jesus Christ for him, but seeks Justification by the
works of the Law; he does (in effect) deny the Resurrection, and Ascension of
Jesus Christ; which to do, were (as much as in him lies) to bring Christ down
from above, and likewise to bring him up again from the deep. Now tell me
Frances, whither these verses sc. the 6 th. and 7 th. so triumphingly repeated
by thee, do not plainly prove, the true Christ, and our only Savior to be in
heaven above us: surely nothing can be more clearly proved, and consequently
(by the Scriptures alleged by thee) A Quakers pretended Savior within him, is
not the true but the false Christ:

2. As the righteousness of Faith is certain, from the 6 th. and 7 th: Verses,
so it is possible from the 8 th. verse which comes now (in like manner) under
consideration.

Ver. 8. But what says [It^] (meaning, the righteousness of Faith) the Word is
nigh thee, even in thy, mouth, and in thy heart, that is the Word of Faith
which we Preach.

Ver. 9. That if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall
believe in thine heart, that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall ^e
saved.

Answ. Touching the 8 th. verse, there are some Queries, which require
Solutions.

Qu. 1 What is means by Righteousness of Faith?

Sol. 1. By Righteousness, is meant, that righteousness which obtains
acceptance, justification and salvation with God, which is the righteousness
alone of the Lord Jesus of Nazareth, which he wrought out in his own personal
Obedience and Sufferings (1600 years since) upon the Cross. 2. By the
Righteousness of Faith, is meant a right believing in the alone righteousness
of this Jesus of Nazareth for acceptance, justification, and salvation with God.

Qu. 2. What, by the word Faith?

Sol. We are to understand, an Evangelical (not legal) word: for, it is a word
of Faith, the same with the righteousness of Faith above defined, and which
agrees with the Apostles Explication, ver. 8. That is (says he) the Word of
Faith which we Preach; now the Apostles Preached no other word of Faith, then
the righteousness of Faith before expressed, (and confirmed by the four
Arguments) besides, there are other Scriptures of infallible truth, evidencing
the same: as Romans 1. ver. 1. Separate unto the Gospel of Christ, ver. 3.
Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, ver. 4. Declared to be the Son of God
with power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the
dead: Likewise in Chap 4. 25. Who was delivered, (i.e. to death) for our
offenses, and was raised up again for our Justification: And in 1 Cor. 15. 1. I
declare unto you, the Gospel which I Preached unto you: What was that Gospel,
the Apostle tells us? ver. 3. how that Christ died for our sins, according to
the Scriptures. ver. 4. And that he was buried, and that he rose again the
third day according to the Scriptures, the last mentioned Scriptures do
illustrate the righteousness o^ Faith, and word of Faith preached (in the
abovesaid verses 6. 8.) and therefore cannot possibly be understood for a
Quakers pretended Savior within him (as this Disputant F. E. would make us
believe.)

Qu. 3. How is this Preached Word (or righteousness) of Faith, said to be nigh,
even in the mouth, and in the heart.

Sol. Its resolved by the Apostle in ver. 9,10. That if thou shall confess with
thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe is thine heart, that God has
raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. That is to say; the Word of
Faith preached, is nigh in our mouths: when we confess before men, sc. That we
believe that that righteousness, whereby we are accepted of God, justified and
saved, is the only righteousness of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, which he wrought
out in his personal Obedience, and sufferings upon the Cross (without us) for
us: And it is nigh in our hearts, when this confession proceeds from a right
persuasion ingra^ted an planted in our hearts by the spirit of Faith, as its
testified by Paul, ver. 10. For (says he) with the heart man believes unto
righteousness, ( i.e. unto the righteousness of Faith in Jesus Christ of
Nazareth) ver 6. And with the mouth Confession ( sc. of the fame righteousness)
is made unto Salvation. Thus according to the command of Jesus Christ of
Nazareth, John 5. 39. I have (as ye may see) searched the Scriptures of God,
for the Solution here asserted, but where do ye, Teaching Quakers, search for
your Gospel word of Faith: surely, not in the Scriptures of Truth without, but
at your Oracle (that Idol Light*tender part) within, which ye falsely call the
Everlasting Gospel, and Eternal Word, which, (as ye affirm) was never made
flesh, contrary to Joh. 1 ver. 14. O th^^ Idol light-within, let me tell thee,
though many Antichrists have done villanously, (...) thou in villainies (...)
them all: For as Jerusalem once justified (...) so, thou Light within, d^st
justify the vilest Antichrists, that are this day in the World; for where does
that Teaching Quaker dwell? what is his Name? who does in his heart believe,
and with his mouth confess that the righteousness whereby he is accepted of
God, justified in his sight, and saved, is the righteousness alone of Jesus
Christ of Nazareth, which he wrought out in his own and only personal
obedience, and sufferings in the World, sixteen hundred years ago: or, that
does believe and confess, that God, (of his free Grace and Mercy) gives Faith
in this righteousness of Jesus Christ, which is by his Father imputed or
reckoned to Believers for their justification before God: or, do believe and
confess that in this reckoning or imputation there is a reality; undoubtedly,
there is nothing more inconsistent (with the Faith and Confession) of Teaching
Quakers, then these most evident Gospel Principles of infallible Truth; and
therefore they are (as I may safely avouch) the greatest Antichrists (of this
age) on Earth, and ordained to the greatest condemnation. Jude ver. 3,4. I do
now proceed to consider his fifth Scripture, alleged, to prove a Quakers
pretended Savior within him, to be the true, not the false Christ.

Text 5. ^wordd^ 2 Cor. 1.(...).5. Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus
Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates.

Ans. 1. By the way, This Text of Scripture, lays the Axe to the root of your
new coined Religion, and wounds it to death: which may be thus ^^gued; I^ the
light which is (by natural Generation) in Reprobates coming into the World, be
not the true Christ, then the light that is in every man which comes into the
World (by natural Generation) is not the true Christ:

But the light which is by natural Generation in Reprobates, is not the true
Christ, as above, Ergo, the light that is in every man, which comes, into the
world, (is not according to your selves) the true Christ.

2. I Answered, That this Text of Scripture understand, not the person of
Christ (as such ^e is the true Christ, and our only Savior) but the work of
the Spirit of Faith, whereof personal Christ is the Author: for here the
Apostle frames an Argument, to prove the mighty work (or effect) of the Spirit
in his Corinthians, as he had before affirmed to be in them, ver. 3. Since ye
seek a proof of Christ speaking in me, which to youward (...) not weak (i e. in
operation) but is [Mighty] in you.

Now, in what sense Christ was in Paul speaking, in that same sense was Christ
in the Corinthians: But Christ spoke in Paul only by the might (or power) of
his Spirit, is mighty in you, sc. Christ's speaking in Paul to the Corinthians,
was [Mighty] (an effect of the Spirit) in them This matter may appear somewhat
clearer, (...) we consider the same Apostle to the Galatians, Gal. 2.8. For he
(the Holy Ghost) that wrought effectually in Peter to the Apostleship of the
Circumcision, the same was mighty in me toward the Gentiles: (such were the
Corinthians) The phrases (of effectual working in Peter, and was mighty in
Paul) do only signify the effectual operation of Christ's Spirit in both the
Apostles: so that Paul affirming, as in ver. 3 above, that Christ was mighty in
the Corinthians: its as much as if he had said, Christ has effectually wrought
by his Spirit, the mighty work of Faith in you ( Corinthians) by my Ministry;
which the Apostles makes to be the proof of Christ speaking in him, which in
the 5 th. verse above, he refers (as it were) to their own experience: saying,
Examine your selves, prove your own selves, whether ye be in the Faith) that
is, believing in Christ, the object apprehended by Faith) Know ye not your
ownselves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates.

Qu. How is that Jesus Christ in you?

Answ. To wit, by Faith, as in the former part of the same verse, which is a
clear Interpretation of the latter part, sc. Christ in you; again, its not
rational to imagine that Christ in the 5 th. verse, could be otherwise in the
Corinthians, then he was in the foregoing 3 d. verse, by reason of their
dependence each on the other: now, in the 3 d. verse Christ was in the
Corinthians only, by the mighty work of the Spirit of Faith; for even so, the
word [Mighty] does furthermore import, as in Ephesians. 1. 19. Who believe according
to the working of his [Mighty] power: but no work or effect of the Spirit, how
Mighty or powerful soever in us, either i^, or can be Christ personal, the true
and only Savior.

To explain these Words (Christ in you) a little more; we must take good
notice, that there are three things expressed by the Name of Jesus Christ.

1. Christ personal: Col. 2. 8,9. Not after Christ, for in him dwel^eth all the
fullness of the Godhead bodily (or personally: 2 Cor. 2. 10. In the person of
Christ: and Mat. 27.24. I am innocent of the blood of this just Person. so the
Man Jesus Christ, who spoke by the inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3.16.

2. Christ's, Mystical, 1 Cor. 12. 12. So also is Christ ( i.e. the Church)
ca^^'d the body of Christ ver. 27. which body of Christ, is the Church, Col. 1.
24. Which is Christ Mystical as above.

3. Christ Operation, Col. 2. 12 compared with Ephesians: 3. 17. Through the Faith of
the operation of God: That Christ may dwell in your hearts by Faith: Forasmuch
as Faith is the operation of God (in Christ) its therefore called Christ
operative, in which sense only, Christ is said to be (in u^.) As the Sun is in
the eye by its beams; so, Jesus Christ (as the author, or first efficient) is
in us by the operated Graces of his Spirit; hence it necessarily follows, that
Christ personal (the only Savior) is not in us; nor Christ mystical (the
Church) is in us: this is so plain, that there is no need of evidence, for, as
Christ personal is the Head saving, so Christ Mystical is the Body saved, Ephesians.
5. 23. therefore neither the one, nor the other can be said to be in us: Then,

3. Its Christ Operative only, that is in the Saints, it is true, that Christ
personal in the first efficiency of gracious operations in the heart, which (in
Scripture) are sometime called Christ in you: the cause being put for the
effect, by a Meto^imy: a word (as I said to F. E.) which thou understandest no
more then the hour (...) hats before me; to which he readily replied, saying
(...) abhor Hour glasses, (...) and Cushen^; I told him, that Preaching in a
Pulpit, was a warranted practice, Neh. 8. 4. And Ezra the Scribe stood upon a
Pulpit of wood, which they had made for the purpose.

But (quoth he) Ezra had not a G^shen: I ask^ him how he knew that? to which he
made no answer, but whither the holy (...), had, or had not a Cushen, his
Familiar (the (...) wo^me ^igh^ within (...) ^id him to say confidently (though
blindly) that Ezra had no Cushen:

I shall here take up an expression which I had almost forgotten, which this
Disputant F. E. doubted in his discourse; namely, ( that the Word took flesh of
the Virgin, and in that flesh died for all m^ns) though this N^tion pleased him
so well, as to make a deliberate repetition of it: yea, he did not pretend
Scripture for its confirmation, and therefore I could not assuredly know,
whether he said it, as an Arminian, or as a Quaker: But I am apt to think, that
he spoke it in imitation of his Friends, because of the word [ In.] And [ In]
that flesh died for all men; in that flesh, run, Quaker*like, this being some
part of their New Divinity. That God (...) Christ to save all men from sin and
death (as he F. E. said) whose Sufferings, Sacrifice, Mediation, Intercession
and Offices (or words to this effect) we do own, and witness as inwardly
wrought and performed in us, and for us: And there is (as they further aver) a
Divine Elect Seed in the Saints, which is the true Christ (still the Idol-light
within) and suffers, under sin in them, and is to be raised of a justification
and righteousness of the Elect Seed within; so that, according to their
Divinity, Christ's bodily sufferings in and by the flesh, which he took of the
Virgin, signifies nothing for our Justification in the sight of God: whereas
these are new, self devised imaginations, whereof no mention is made in the
inspired Scriptures of Truth:

I grant, that some Scriptures are by them pretended for evidence (which
perhaps are some of the things (as in the Preface) said by them to have been
forgotten) sc. Amos 2. 13. Behold, I a^ pressed under you, as a cart i^
pressed, and in Genesis 6. ver. 6. It repented the Lord that he made Man on the
earth, and it grieved him at the heart, and Gal. 3. 16. To Abraham and to his
seed were the promises made, and to seeds as of many, but as of one, and to thy
seed, which is Christ, (this say they) is to be understood of an Elect seed
within) also in Heb. 6. ver. 6. Seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of
God afresh.

Answ. As to the two first Texts (sc. Amos 2. 13. and Genesis 6.6.) It is a well
known Truth, that God is unchangeable; and as God is in himself unchangeably
the same, so this cannot be spoken properly of him, nor is it thus to be
understood; as if God in those wicked men repented, or was pressed down in
them: neither is it so expressed in Scripture: But God is said to be griev^^
for, and pressed down under the abominations of the wicked; because, when
through his Prophets and Ministers being rejected, in them so sent forth by
him, he is said (in the Texts above) to be grieved for, and pressed down under
their wickedness: this interpretation, agrees with the testimony of Stephen (
Act. 7. 5^ 52.) where their persecuting the Prophets, their betraying and
mu^t^ering the just one, and rejecting the Testimony of his chosen Witnesses,
is called a resisting the Holy Ghost; As for the third Text above, sc. Gal 3.
16. This Scripture only affirms: That Christ, as he is the seed of Abraham, is
the one eminent seed to whom the promise belongs: what the promise was, the
Apostle sets down ver. 8. in thee shall all Nations he blessed; This promise
is, Act. 3. 25 mentioned by Peter, as spoken of that Jesus whom the Jews
delivered up in the presence of Pilate; and not otherwise is it to be found in
Scripture, that Jesus Christ is called the Seed to whom the promise belongs:
for this is that Seed of the Woman, which God promised, Genesis 3. 15 and in the
fullness of time) as God promised) sent forth made of a Woman, Gal. 4. ver. 4.
This is the personal seed* Christ, which was never in any man: But your
Quaker^smes of Anti scriptural Divinity; to wit, the Light in Man, to be the
Elect-seed, the suffering Christ under sin within; these, and such notions, are
hatched only in your own distempered brains: for, which of all the Saints of
old, ever spoke or wrote such Divinity? did the Saints of old build upon any
other Foundation then the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the
chief Corner stone, Ephesians.2.20 which is set at naught by such builders, as
Teaching Quakers are: consider, was there ever any other Elect seed, called the
true Christ, our only Savior, but that which God revealed to Adam-fallen* Genesis
3. 15.: and surely, in vain was that divine Revelation from the Father, if the
Light within Adam (as the Quakers pra^e) would have shown it to him. Again,

That your Light within, cannot be the promised Seed of the Woman (the bruised
heel) for as such, the Seed is a Creature: but the Light within (which ye call
the Elect seed) is according to the Teaching Quakers, the everlasting Gospel,
and eternal word, as such it is increate, and (...) is God the Promiser, not
the promised Seed.

Moreover, the Seed preached and promised to Abraham, was that one Eminent
Seed, in whom all Nations should be blessed, as above! which seed the same
Apostle calls, in 2 Cor. 2. 10 the Person of Christ: but your Elect Seed within
is not (by your own acknowledgment) a personal Christ, or Seed: O when will ye
( blind leaders of the blind) blush and tremble at your accursed Gospel within,
which the Lord has cursed with a reiterated curse (as in Gal. 1.8,9. before
explained) as for the fourth Text above, sc.

Heb. 6. ver. 6. The Apostle does not (in this place) say: They that crucify
the Son of God [In] themselves, but [To] themselves: that is to say, They who
have been enlightened by the Holy Ghost, if such fall away, they crucify the
efficacy of his death to themselves: and in so doing, it is impossible to renew
them again to repentance, because rejecting the Son of God ( Jesus of Nazareth)
who is the only propitiatory Sacrifice for the remission of sins; there
remains to them, no more Sacrifice for sin, and so no remission: now, (O ye
Teaching Quakers especially) are not ye of that fort of notorious sinners,
meant in that Text ( Heb. 6.6,7. which is by you often used in defense of your
cause: let me pa^ly a little with you, have not you heretofore made (...) me
profession or Jesus Christ of Nazareth, to have been the true Christ, and your
only Savior? and are ye not now Apostatised, and fallen away from this your
profession of Faith? if so, ye then are in the number of those sinners, that
commit the great sin, called as above, a crucifying of the Son of God afresh,
and a putting him to open shame: that is to say, ye (as much as in you li^th)
do it now, that Christ the Son of God is in Heaven glorified, and were the Lord
Jesus Christ of Nazareth here upon Earth again, ye most certain^y would do your
utmost to Crucify him again: for, that malicious Spirit possesses such
wretched Sinners (as ye Quakers cannot truly deny your selves to be) which
possessed those Jews who were the very Betrayers and Murderers of our Lord
Jesus Christ: Oh, its most manifest, that ye are of that sort of sinners, who
by their sinning are said, to have trodden under foot the Son of God, and have
counted the blood of the Covenant, wherewith ye were sanctified (i.e.
externally, or as to the opinion once of m^n) an unholy (common or vile) thing,
Heb 10. 29.

That I may clear this great thing yet a little more: let me crave leave to ask
(of you Quakers) one serious Question: viz. have not ye heretofore professed
(as ^n Act. 20 21.) repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ: though this cannot be gainsaid with any truth: yet how apparent is it,
that ye are wilfully gone back from this Faith and Repentance? Consider now I
pray you, your declared (...) Heb. 10. 26. For, if we sin wilfully after we
have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for
sin: That is, for wilful sinners against received light of knowledge, casting
off the Sacrifice of that one crucified Christ upon the Cross, with which they
once seemed to close; God will never provide them another Sacrifice for sin;
undoubtedly, ye are (at present of those Apostates, which do not only refuse to
choose that Grace of the Gospel (which abounds to many by the one Man Jesus
Christ Rom 5. 15, but ye refuse it after a seeming choice of it; and are
therefore said (in the close of the 29 th. verse, above) to have done despite
to the spirit of Grace: why, the same verse tells us, because the Son of God is
trodden under foot, the same Apostle further tells us, why, Heb. 6. ver. 6. as
aforesaid, they crucified to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to
an open shame, i.e. by being ashamed of the true Christ, and turning away from
him, (as ye are and do) This, Oh this, is to put the blessed Son of God to a^
open shame: and even this is to do despig^^ to the spirit of Grace: and shall
they who despite the spirit of Grace, ever find the benefit of Gospel Grace?

The sum of all is this, That the Scriptures of Truth, do plainly charge the
generality of Quakers, with the guilt of the sin against the holy Ghost:
because they have sinned wilfully after a profession openly made of Faith in
the Lord Christ (born of the Virgin Mary in the City of Dav^^, Luk 2. 11. to be
the true Christ, and their only Savior: and therefore as Apostates of old, so
do ye now crucify (not in, but) to your selves the Son of God afresh, and put
him to an open shame: Oh, that the Lord (I do heartily wish it) would bring
these repeated plain dealings effectually home to your hearts; remembering from
whence ye are fallen, and repent, and do the first works, Rev 25. 9.

Lastly, As it is above noted: In what sense this Disputant F. E. intended the
fore-asserted Notions ( sc. that the Word took flesh, and in that flesh dyed
for all men) I could not certainly determine, nor could (as I am persuaded) he
himself: as it may appear, by the Answer he then made to a Question, which I
put unto him: To wit,

Quest. Whether he ( F. E.) did believe, that Jesus Christ of Nazareth, the Man
approved of God among the People: and whom the Jews, flew, and God raised from
the dead, and also received up into Heaven, were the true Christ, and his only
Savior?

He forthwith Answered; That he did believe it: Capt. Bascomb then called to
him saying Thou will deny it again tomorrow: and withal I likewise told him,
that by this his open confession of the true Faith, he had openly declared
himself to be a Christian, and no Quaker: and I furthermore said to him, that
he had (by that Gospel confession of Faith) manifestly contradicted what he had
contended for in his present Discourse (called Disputation) and that he had
also thereby confirmed the first part of the charge against them, namely, That
a Quakers pretended Savior within him, was not the true Christ, but the false
Christ.

And at the same time Nathaniel Bethel spoke to him; saying, Francis, you were
(not long since) of another Faith, or of another Opinion; for you told my Wife,
That if she did believe in any other Christ, then in that Christ which was
within her, she would be damned; But Francis (Jesuit* like) openly denied,
that he had spoken any such Words to his Wife; thereupon Nathaniel Bethel
replied to him (in the face of the Congregation) that he would depose, what he
had declared to be a truth.

Since that time, I have been informed of the occasion, which invited these
words from the sad Quaker: it was thus, discoursing of the old Brigham (a man
of the fifth-Monarchy persuasion) who said, he hoped to live to see Jesus
Christ on the Earth, and to shake (...) hand; th^n F. E. said, But he ( sc.
Brigham) should be first sure that Jesus Christ had a hand: Bethels Wife then
told him, that Christ had now a hand: for I do (said the) Believe that Christ
has now the same body in Heaven, which he had when he was upon the Earth: at
this expression of her Faith, this frank Quaker was offended, and could not
forbear, but in plain terms, old her, that she was a Blaspheme^ (or, had spoken
Blasphemy) and withal he further said unto her as above, To wit, That if she
believed in any other Christ, then in that Christ which was within her, she
would be damned: (...) Quakerisme, dig'd out of the bottomless Pit, from whence
thou have received thy Ordination to be a Teaching, Seducing, and Lying Quaker:
For Francis, thou know both this Man and his Wife, to be persons of good
Name, credit, and of honest reputation in this Country, and therefore worthy to
be believed, before thy self: Oh that the Lord would give thee grace to repent
of thy evident wickedness, and grievous God provoking Blasphemy, (proceeding
from the false Christ within ^he:) which undoubtedly thou have wretchedly
aggravated, by making (as much as in thee lay) this faithful witness, an open
liar: and that (as most of the Christian Hearers judged) contrary to the
Testimony of the tender part (thy Light Christ Conscience) within: Oh, that I
could prevailingly advise thee, to think how deservedly the deadful words of
the holy Apostle, Act. 13. 45, may be charged on thee, viz. They (the Jews)
were filled with envy, and spoke against those things which were spoken by
Paul, contradicting and blaspheming: For,

1 The manner of thy words (as above) plainly declare, that then were filled
with envy.

2. The matter of her words, was the same with the thing spoken by (...), not
only in ver. 37, 38. but also in chap. 3. 13. 21. The God of our Fathers has
glorified his Son Jesus, whom the Heaven must receive, until the times of
restitution of all things; so that thou were not only filled with envy, but
with blasphemous contradictions; now Francis, this being thy case truly stated,
have thou not indeed cause to repent over thy false-Christ that has (as above)
filled thy heart with envy, and thy tongue with Blasphemy, against the the
truth of God believed and confessed by that good Woman above. By the way, I may
not omit (Capt Bascombes motion made unto me (upon the confession of F. E. his
Faith above etc. That Jesus of Nazareth was received up into Heaven: to ask him
where Heaven was; (it seems the Captain knew, that the Teaching Quakers had
Jesuitical equivocations, and mental reserves) accordingly I asks him, where
Heaven was; but he made me no Answer thereupon, his tender headed* iniquity
Brother, William Harriot said, Heaven was where it should be: I demanded of him
where that was? he replied (like himself) Heaven was there where God would have
it to be: by these impertinent ^illy shifts, the intelligent Hearers perceived,
that they were basely afraid to stand to their Quakerisme Principles: its well
known, that at other times they have confidently avouched (as their
Scripture-wresting-Gui^s teach) that Heaven (as well as Hell) is within them;
for which that Text especially is pretended, Luke 17. 21. For behold the
Kingdom of God is within you ( sc. the Pharisees, ver. 20) whereas by Kingdom
of God in that place, our Savior understands the Gospel of God Preached as
Mark 1. 14. Jesus came into Galilee* Preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of
God: and in Luke 10. 11. Be ye sure of this, that the Kingdom of God is come
nigh unto you: likewise Mat.21.43. Therefore said Jesus unto the Pharisees, the
Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation bringing for^th
the fruits thereof: and ver. 45. When the chief Priests and Pharisees had heard
his Parables* they perceived that he spoke of them: These Scriptures do plainly
show, that by kingdom of God, in Luke 17. 21. Christ does not mean, the
Kingdom of glory in Heaven, but the Kingdom of the Gospel Preached by
himself, and his Apostles on Earth; to which he answered nothing.

In the next place, F. E. does (as I suppose) expect some Answer to his
reflection on me (at the end of his tedious Discourse afo^e signified) sc. That
I had not in any thing, which was said by (...) (he meant in the four
Arguments, proving the first part of the charge) made any mention of Christ as
God to be the Savior.

Answ. Bold Man* who art thou, that teach the Apostles of Jesus Christ, (yea
the Holy Ghost himself) how to speak, who were the faithful Witnesses, that
proved all which was said by me in those four Arguments; and that I might
prevent (which I foresaw) such carpings, I barely repeated the Apostles express
words, mentioning (in a manner) no more, then what is plainly asserted by them?
what do thou then, but (under color of reflecting on me) reflect upon the
holy Apostles themselves? Alas, poor Man! had it not been more honesty in thee,
to have thus charged the Apostles, then me; who wrested not, but only repeated
the Apostles words, for the confirmation of the alleged Arguments; thou
should have clamoured against the Apostles, thus, there is not a word by
them mentioned of Christ, as God, to be the Savior; and would thou not
(had thou thus done) have been as bold, as blind Bayard: Its most evident,
that the Apostles preached Christ, as Man [Not but that he was and is also God]
to be believed in for the remission of sins, both to the Jews, and to the
Gentiles: so that, thy quarrelsome reflection on me, is (in effect) a manifest
denying the Testimony of the Apostles, jointly testifying of the Man Jesus
Christ of Nazareth, to be the only Lamb of God, that takes away the (...) of
the World, (reconciled-world, 2 Cor. 5. 19.) for, there is no other Man, Name,
or Thing ever in Scripture, called the Lamb of God, which takes away sin; but
the one Man Jesus Christ, and so it is Recorded by Christ's witness bearer, Joh.
1. 29, 30.

One would now think, that the very mentioning of these things, were enough to
refute them, with whom the Scriptures of God, have any credit: But what shall I
say unto thee Francis; I would (in true love only to thy distressed Soul)
advise thee to search (as in John (...). 39.) the Scriptures: for I find thee
very ignorant of the truth, as testified in them; and hence asserting new
notions, which thou have received from other men, which tend to the darkening
and denying of the unanimous Testimony of all the holy Men of old, ^o the true
Savior Jesus of Nazareth, and to Salvation through Faith in him; and that thou
may be delivered from the dangerous snare of the false Christ (the
Idol-light^ within) is the hearty desire of him, whom (for his Faith in, and to
the truth) thou have opposed.

William Bullock was the next Disputant: to prove, That a Quakers pretended
Savior within him, is not the false but the true Christ.

And thus he Argued: saying, That which may be known of God, is manifest in
them, and then stopped: Therefore, I prayed him, to tell us, where those words
repeated above were to be found? he readily told me, sc. in Romans chap. 1. ver.
19. Because that which may be known of God, is manifest in them; for God has
showed it unto them: this was the only Proof named by them: I further demanded
of him, what he inferred from this Text of Scripture? but because he looked as
if he understood not, what was meant by that demand: I requested him to frame
some Argument from the Text alleged by him, to prove the matter in hand; but
all in vain ( (...) being as great a Monster to him, as Jesus Christ of
Nazareth) Thereupon, I did declare, That the Apostle did not there understand
the word [ God] to signify Christ, God Man: and as for the phrase [ in them]
it is interpreted [ (...) them] as in the very next words in the ^ame verse,
sc. For God has showed it to them: likewise Paul does tell us, both how and
where God showed them, this, as in ver. 20 For the invisible things of him from
the creation of the world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things
that are made, even his eternal power and godhead: which Godhead alone, is not
to be understood for God-man, Christ the only Savior: in a word, The mind of
the Spirit, in these two 19, 2^. verses, sc. is no more but this: namely, that
the eternal power and Godhead was manifested in ( i.e. shown to) the Gentiles
(unconverted) by the things that are made (or created) from the creation of the
World: this being the true state of the Text above, how they could prove the
thing, to wit, That a Quakers pretended Savior within him, is the true, not
the false Christ for which they were brought: surely, none but young and old
Bullocks (or such as are of that kind) can understand; I expected some reply
from this Disputant to the substance above asserted; but (...) of a reply, he
urged another Proof (this was their manner even all along, that thereby they
might (...) their weakness and insufficiencies for returns) saying, The flesh
profi^eth nothing, it is the Spirit that quickens.

Upon his inversion of the order of the words; I desired him, to ^^me the
Chapter, and verse, where the words (as he had spoken them) might be found, but
he did it not: I then named both, viz Joh. chap. 6. ver. ^3. It is the spirit
that quickens; the flesh profits nothing. He again refusing to frame an
Argument: Therefore to the Text.

(...) Answered 1. If these words were to be understood in this sense ( sc.)
That the Lord Christ (on the account of his body of flesh) profits nothing to
Salvation, but its the quickening spirit within, that is the only Savior) Then,
what interpretation would thou put upon Christ's words, in the ^ame Chapter,
ver. 53. foregoing, Then Jesus said unto them, verily verily, I say unto you,
except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, ye have no life
(i.e. Spirit, ver. 63. ult.) in you; or will thou make Christ (who is the
wisdom of God, 1 ( Cor. 1. 30.) guilty of contradiction, and so a Liar, to
which he replied nothing, save that he had spoken Scripture; which necessarily
engaged me to reconcile those Scriptures to the understanding of the hearers;
which, I endeavored thus*

Joh. 6. 63. It is the spirit that quickens (i.e. the soul of man, naturally
dead in sins, Ephesians. 2. 1, (...).) the words exclude all endowments,
qualifications, or excellencies in the natural man, from this soul quickening
work; hereunto agrees the words of our Savior, in the end of the 63 d. verse
above: The words that I spoke unto you, they are spirit, and they are life:
that is to say, the spirit of faith, is the souls life, or special quickening:
so that the latter part of the verse, is both a verification and explication of
the former part ( sc. It is the spirit that quickens) This is likewise
confirmed by the Apostle Paul, Gal. 3. 11. and long before, by the Prophet
Habakkuk, Chap. 2. 4. the just shall live by faith; Faith is the vital
principal, and fountain of life in the Soul: it is the uniting grace, it knits
us to personal Christ glorified in Heaven above, from whose fullness, Joh. 1.
16. we receive grace for grace (i.e. Grace for graces sake) And therefore his
flesh profits right Believers; the whole (as to this particular) is, though
the spirit be a dead-souls quickener, yet it is not the quickened souls Savior.

But this Disputant still avers, that the Scripture says, Christ's flesh
profits nothing: Therefore for further satisfaction, touching these words;
sc. Christ's flesh profits nothing, let this Question be propounded:

Quest. In what sense may Christ's flesh be said not to profit, or profits
nothing?

Sol. 1. Christ's flesh profits an unbeliever nothing: as it is noted by our
Savior, in the very next verse, ver. 64. But there are (says he) some of you
that believed not, intending such of them, as did not by Faith (the believing
souls-mouth) eat his flesh, and drink his blood: which, in ver. 55. Christ
says, is me at indeed, and drink indeed: also in Heb. 4. 2. For unto us was
the Gospel Preached, as well as unto the^^, but the Word preached did not
profit them, not being mixed with Faith, in them that heard it: what the Gospel
preached was; has been before frequently declared, more especially from Act.
5. 30, 31. That the same Jesus whom the Jews slew, and hanged on a Tree (this
was the body of Christ's flesh) God raised up from the dead, and exalted to be a
Prince, and a Savior, to give repentance, and remission of sins. This was the
Gospel word, that was preached, which profited not either Jews or Gentiles,
that did not by the mouth of Faith, eat the flesh* and drink the blood of Jesus
Christ, the only Savior: Hence, I did infer; That the Quakers being such non
eating, non drinking Unbelievers, Christ's flesh profits them nothing
(therefore fit to be insisted on by this Disputant.)

2. Christ's flesh profits nothing; If it be taken in that sense, in which the
Jews apprehended the eating of it; and that was, with their natural mouths, as
it appears from ver. 52. They (the Jews) strove amongst themselves, saying, how
can this man give us his flesh to eat? (for they knew of no eating, but as they
did eat their bodily food) yea, Christ's Disciples (such as for the present
followed him) said, ver. 63. this is a hard saying, who can hear it: Hereupon
Christ does explain himself to them all, in these words [ The flesh profits
nothing, ver. 63. above] thereby giving them to understand, that he meant not
of eating his flesh with their natural mouths, as they did eat their daily
bread, for (as if Christ had said) should ye so eat some of my natural flesh,
or so drink some of my blood, it would profit you nothing: the reason of it, is
assigned by the Apostle Paul, because Christ's flesh and blood, is New Testament
Blood, 1 Cor. 11. 25. in which all the promises of God are, 2 Cor. 1. 20 here
hence, it is safely inferred, That the true Object of Faith, is, the
New Testament promises in Christ bodily; in which respect, Christ's flesh is
profitable to all right Believers on him, for their Justification,
Resurrection, and Glorification, as in ver. 54, Whose eats (with a
Soul-believing Mouth) my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I
will raise him up at the last day: But if we separate the promises of God, from
Christ's flesh, or his flesh from the promises, then his flesh profits no
more, then if it were eaten with a man's natural Mouth* which (according to our
blessed Savior) profits nothing, or would not profit the Soul at all:

Upon the whole it was concluded, that W. Bullocks second (as his first)
Scripture, fell short of the mark; that is of proving a Quakers pretended
Savior within him, to be the true, not the false Christ.

The next Speaker was Patience Bullock:

1. She propounded a Question to me: Quest. Whether Christ could have saved us,
without his being God?

I Answered, Though Christ could not save us, unless he were God, as well as
Man: yet the Godhead of the Son (only as such) does not save us from the curse
of the Law, because the Godhead alone could not fulfill that righteousness
(active and passive) which the Law required; it is true, we read of the
righteousness of God. 2 Cor. 5 21. yet, it is not to be understood for the
essential righteousness of God, but for a righteousness answerable unto the Law
performed by the manhood of Christ, to which the Godhead gave both efficacy and
excellency, Heb. 9. 14. and thereby the righteousness answerable to the
holiness and justice of the Law, performed by the Man hood (soul and body) of
Jesus Christ, was made Meritorious and Satisfactory for sin; as the Apostle
signifies, Heb. 9. 14. How much more shall the blood (i.e. Sufferings of
Christ, who (or which suffering Christ) through the eternal Spirit (i. e.
Godhead of the Son) offered himself ( sc. a Sacrifice) without spot to God (the
Father) hence I did affirm, that Jesus Christ (as man) is our only Material
Savior; and so good old Simion (if he may be believed (...) assures us, from
the direction of Gods Spirit, That the Man child the Lord Christ, then born of
the Virgin Mary whom Simion took (...) his arms, was the Salvation of God (
i.e. whom God had exalted to be the only Savior Act. 5. (...).) and the holy
Apostles preached (as before note^) the Man Jesus Christ of Nazareth, to be
believed in for the remission of sins: herewithal^ named that Text (...)
Scripture, in the 1 Timothy 2. 5. 6 There is one Mediator between God and Man, the
Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due
time. The Apostle does ^o: (as I said) here assert, the Man Jesus Christ, to
exclude the God head, or (...) nature, from him the Mediator, and ^^ansom^^r,
but emphatically to demonstrate that nature, in which he mediates, and gave
himself a ransom; for though the ransom was paid by him who was and is God,
or had a divine Nature: yet, it was paid in the Man hood, or humane nature
only, that is to say, Christ's humane Nature only was the matter of our ransom,
although the divine Nature gave worth and value to it: whence I did infer (but
with much reverence) that the Manhood of the Son of God, is the only material
cause of our Salvation: and by necessary consequence, the Man hood, or Humane
Nature of Christ, was, and is, our only material Savior; which I had no sooner
said: (...) F. E. called on the people to take notice, That I had declared the
Man hood of Christ to be the only Savior: to which, some of the Hearers
forthwith replied, that I did say, to wit, that the Manhood of Christ is our
only material Savior: which (as I suppose) he understood not, and therefore ^e
said no more: howbeit, I expected some reply from Mrs. Patience Bullock (no
small Prophetess in their Li^r^ine Synagogue) but instead of a Reply, she puts
forth another Question: sc.

Quest. 2. Whether we could be saved by Christ, without the operation of the
Spirit in us?

I Answered: Although it were granted* sc. That we could not be saved, without
the operations of the Spirit in us: yet, this would be nothing to the business
before us: that is, it does not prove a Quakers-pretended Savior within him,
to be the true, not the false Christ: forasmuch as the operations of the Spirit
in us, are not Christ, God-man, therefore not our Savior: again, I told her,
let it be granted, that we cannot be saved without the effects and operations
of the spirit in us: yet here-hence it will not follow, that we are saved for,
or by these effects and operations of the Spirit in us: so that the (...)
Questions were (by the judicious hearers) plainly discerned, to lay aside the
material Savior; and to insinuate a Spirit, and its operations (still the
Idol-light) within, to be the true Christ and only Savior; thereupon, I denied
the Spirits operations in us, to be the previous, procuring cause or ground of
redemption, justification, and salvation with God; and that it is one thing to
affirm that we cannot be saved without the efficacies of the spirit in us, as
evidential, and another thing to be saved for, or by these operations in us, as
causal; to which she made no return:

Let me here add, what her last Question has since brought to my remembrance;
namely, somewhat (touching this Question) the men of Rome, have commonly
expressed: the Apostle (say they) excludes from justification, works which we
our selves do meaning, Tit. 3. 5. Not by works of righteousness that we have
done, and Rom 11. (...). If it be by works, then were grace no more grace,)
that is (as they wrongly gloss) works done by our own strength, without the
help of the Grace of God, not these works we do by the aid of the spirit within
us, which is the same with that of the carnal Prophetess above, only it is
expressed in plainer words, so that in truth, her Question is but a sly design,
to renew again the old Papish trick, to elude the genuine force of such Texts,
as above asserted: and in good earnest, a Quakers light within, is but the Pope
without:

By the way, in reference to her last question, let two things be seriously
considered:

1. That Carnal Gospellers do but deceive their own souls, by resting in a bare
literal, or historical assent, that the Man Jesus Christ of Nazareth is the
true Christ, and our only Savior, while they are in no degree partakers of the
divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. i.e. of the effectual graces of Christ's spirit, sc.
a living ^aith, a lively hope love unfeigned, true repentance, etc. but are
slighters, and professed rejectors of them.

2. As Carnal Gospellers do thus deceive themselves; so do Anti Gospellars (as
Quakers) no less (yea, much more) put a ^heat upon their own Souls, by their
idle pretenses, viz that the Graces, effects and operations of the spirit
within them, makes the true Christ, and their only Savior from sins: Alas,
poor deluded ones, this is to testify, that the effects of Christ's death
sufferings, redemption* and righteousness do constitute the true Christ, and
Man's only Savior: which effects and operations (say ye) being followed in all
righteousness, will bring you to Salvation: now, what is all this? but in plain
English, to be brought to salvation, by the obedience of works: Oh let every
g^od Christian tremble to think of the dreadful consequence of this your God
provoking Doctrine; for, it is a manifest renouncing of the righteousness and
obedience of the Son of God* Jesus Christ of Nazareth whom God the Father has
exalted to be the only Savior to give remission of sins and salvation to all,
that rightly believe on him, as is abundantly fore^^^^*

Next to Mrs Bullock, the Champion Francis, starts up, who (who((...) of God
had silenced is (...) labourer in the work of the (...) Christ) repeats some
words in the New Testament; But ye are washed, him ye are (...), but ye are
justifies by the spirit of God.

Answ. 1. I requested him to show me where^ might find those words; he replied,
that the words which he had spoken were Scripture: But (I said) thou (...) that
Scripture, as the Text it self made it to appear, which is in the (...) Cor
6.11. And such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but
ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God.

2. Note here, that the (...) words which concern Justification [ sc. In the
Name of the Lord Jesus] were omitted the more craftily to abuse our judgments,
that we might believe justification in the sight of God, is a work of the
spirit in us, and consequently, that a Quakers pretended Savior was within him.

I pray thee Frances, how does this accord with the confession of thy faith,
contained in thy Answer to my Question above: surely Captain Bascomb might have
told thee, that thou would deny that thy confession of the Faith not only
by, but before tomorrow, by this all men may see what a blind Guide he is: to be
at once (almost on a breath) guilty of such gross contradiction, and yet
insensible of it.

3. My special Answer was, that [ Spirit] in the last clause of that verse, is
to be referred to sanctification, as it is in all other New Testament
Scriptures, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 2. etc. and to be sanctified is mostly
attributed to the spirits efficiency; and as to the Text above, it is, as if
the order of the words had been thus* But ye are sanctified by the spirit of
our God, but ye are justified by the Name of the Lord Jesus: I know* that the
Teaching, Seducing Quakers, do convert the transposition in the Text, into a
confusion, by confounding justification and sanctification: whereas the
transposition in that Text, does no more confound justification and
sanctification, then the transposition in Mat. 7. 6. confounds Swine and Dogs:
Give not (says Christ) that which is holy to Dogs, neither cast your P^ar^
before Swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rent
you. Though turn again, and rent you, be in the last clause of the verse, yet
it is to be referred to the Dogs, not to he Swine: for as Swine do trample
under their fee^, so Dogs do fly upon a man, renting and tearing him down: This
instance plainly shows that the transposition in 1 Cor. 6. 11. above, does not
hinder the joining of sanctification to the Spirit, nor justification to the
Name of the Lord Jesus alone it being according to the tenor of the whole
New Testament*

And instead of a Reply, Francis tells us of his experimental interest in that
Text: saying, that he was washed and justified in himself from his sins; and at
length he told us, how; to wit, in some measure: Hereup^^ (...) demanded, what
the sins in particular were, from which he was in himself washed and justified
in some measure? whether it were from The^^* or Drunkenness, Oaths, or
Adultery? he replied, I am not to tell the^: the^ more seriously I requested
the Assembly, to take notice of his want of knowledge in the Scriptures;
inasmuch, as that he makes justification from sin, not only a work within him,
but to be daily wrought in himself by measure, or degrees, which assertion of
his, is directly contrary to the mani^ol^ Scriptures of truth which proved the
third Argument, to wit, that our justification from sins, was at once finished
and perfected (without us) on the Cross, by the offering of the one body of
Jesus Christ once for all; and so already do^e by Jesus Christ, and in being,
in him our ^ead: nevertheless i^ was readily granted by me, sc. that all things
relating to our washing and justification from sins, by that one sacrifice of
the body of Christ, as above; is to be believed in for the remission of sins,
and for the making of that blessed work (so already finished) effectual in us
it is to be received and wrought, not at once, but by degrees and in measure by
the working and operation of the Spirit of God in us, until Mortality be
swallowed up of life; hereunto agrees the words of the Apostle Paul, 1 Timothy 2.
5, 6. The man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified
in due time; [ Gave] referring to the time past, the work of ransom being
already done, and perfected. [ To be testified] i.e. by the spirit of Faith (2
Cor 4. 13. and by its effects in the hearts of Believers, [ ^^ndue time] i.e.
in Gods appointed time: so then when the spirit says, as above sc. That the
Man Jesus Christ gave himself a ransom [ For all] i e. for all them, by whom
the ransomer is believed on^ and in whom the virtue and effects of the ransom
are by the spirit influenced and wrought: these things are, according to the
Scriptures, given by the inspiration of God, (2 Timothy 3. 16.) whereas this
Doctor's new Divinity (to wit, That he is in himself washed and justified from
his sins, in some measure) It is most false and dangerous Doctrine: for it does
clearly deny, that the M^ssias, Jesus Christ of Nazareth, has at once by his
own crucified body (without us) on the Cross, finished Transgression, and made
an and of sin all which (and much more) is the joint Testimony of the Prophets
and Apostles concerning the Man Jesus Christ, and the work of ransom effected
by him for sinners, while ungodly, unjust and enemies to God. Romans 5. (...).

Note, that this truth, does fully answer the Quakers cavil, about this matter:
how i^ sin (say they) finished without a Man, while no good is wrought within
him: and seeing (as they further say) Christ works all things in us by his
Spirit, how then can all things be fin^shed by Christ without us, before any
good is wrought by him in us?

Answ. It is most necessarily presupposed, that all things were finished by the
Man Jesus Christ (as above explained) for satisfaction to his Fathers justice
for sin, before we could receive that satisfaction by Faith, or its effects by
the spirit within us: Now, its most certain, that before Faith (with its fruits
and effects) was wrought in us by the spirit: we were unbelievers, ungodly,
unjust, and enemies to God in our minds by wicked works, Col. 1. 21. then
according to right reason; if the one had not been first wrought by Jesus
Christ without us, it had been altogether impossible for the other to have been
wrought in us, or received by Faith, and so witnessed unto by us; consider once
more, if the Man Jesus Christ had not first given himself a ransom for our
sins, we could not have received it by Faith, nor could it have been Testified
or witnessed unto, by us: Moreover, let it be well observed, that all the
righteousness of Sanctification that is in us from Christ, is but a fruit of
that righteousness of Justification, which Jesus Christ of Nazareth wrought out
by his own personal obedience and sufferings upon the Crosses yea, all the
graces and operations of the spirit wrought in us, were thereby merited and
purchased for us.

Therefore Francis, your being in yourself washed and justified from your sins,
in some measure; is, plainly to deny that one Propitiatory Sacrifice, of the
one crucified body of the true Man Jesus Christ, which can be no other then a
wretched design, to blot out of our hear^s the blessed Name and Remembrance of
that one great propitiation once offered for sins, together with the
redemption, righteousness and reconciliation to God, as already (in Christ our
head and surety) purchased and perfected for us until, no other righteousness
or redemption be known, but that of obedience to the Light (that unbloody
Redeemer) which is (ye say) in every man that comes into the World: and thus,
so much obedience to the Idol-light within, so much redemption, washing
justifying and no more. (Here hence Francis, comes (thus in some measure in thy
self) this is the voice of your Law-working spirit within: teaching^ that he
that does these things shall live by them; The Pope without is become a Quakers
Light within: I have now done with the enlargements upon his affirmation, to
wit, That he was [ In some measure] washed and justified in himself from his
sins: The next Apparition is of

William Bullock again: And he tells us, the Law of the spirit of life in
Christ Jesus, has made us free from sin.

Answ. 1. I prayed him to tell me, where I might find those words (...) by him;
he had (...) taught his Answer, (...) It is Scripture^ (...) I told him, that
he had (according to (...) Quakers practice) mangled and abu^^d that holy Text
of Scripture, intended by him; Namely,

Rom 8. 2. For the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made me free
from the Law of sin and death;

But he repeated [ (...)] or [ M^] and free from sin: for, free from the law of
sin and left out the word [ Death.]

2. I desired him, to frame his Argument, to prove the matter controverted sc.
That a Quakers pretended Savior within him, is the (...), not the ^alse
Christ: But no Argument from the Text (nor any thing like it) was alleged by
him, long ^a^^ing perhaps, made him so empty.

Therefore 3. I said, That it is the Law of the Spirit of life (not in a Quaker
but) in Christ Jesus and that there is not (nor ever was) any other Jesus
Christ a Savior from sin, but the Holy Child Jesus, born of Mary in Bethlehem,
the City of David, Luke 2. 4, 11. which Savior i^ not to be found in any
Quaker; and therefore this place of Scripture pretended by thee, falls short of
maintaining your cause, as it respects the first part of the charge: which did
appear on a due examination of the Text it self, in this manner: to wit.

Exam. By the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, we are to understand, the Spirit
which the Father gave him (as the Son of Man ^ without measure, Joh. (...). 34.
Joh. 1^. 6. Now, from this fullness of Spiritual Life in Christ, Paul received
such a degree of it, as made him free from the Law (i.e. from the reign and
dominion) of sin, and from Death, Romans 6. 12. 14 (i.e. from the power of
natural death) Note, that the Spirit in the Text above is set down two waves:

1. By the Subject in whom it is; that is, in the Manhood of Christ's Person,
(...)

2. By the Effect, it is a spirit of life; if this life be not ( from Christ's
fullness) conveyed into us, we are but dead men, spiritually dead in sins, Ephesians
2. 1. But when the spirit of (...) (from Christ's unmeasurable fullness) is
derived to us, then we feel its law (or power) weakening and abolishing the Law
( i.e.) the strength and Authority) of sin in as; and thereby sin has now, no
reigning, domineering power in or over us, nor can i^ condemn our persons: and
thus, we are freed from the Law of sin and death.

Note. Not so freed, as if we were simply delivered from both or either of
these as that we cannot afterward sin and ^^e: but the meaning is, sin cannot
(...), or exercise a command now ever us, nor can it (...), nor can the natural
^e^th hurt us: now tell me William, whether (...) be ought in this third Text
of Scripture alleged by thee, that does in the least (though never so much
strained) prove this first part of the charge against you, to be false; for the
mind of the Apostle therein i^ plain and evident, viz. that the law of the
Spirit of life inherent in us, has only a virtue to eat down the Law (or
commanding power) of present ^ins, and to destroy the power of our natural
death: what (I pray thee) is in all this, to prove a Quakers pretended Savior
within him, etc. surely William, either thou art very silly thy self, or thou
did think thy hearers to be so:

After him steps F. E. again, and said, the Scripture says of Christ, I in
thee, and thou in me: but he could not tell us, where to find the Scripture,
that said those words of Christ.

Answ. That I did not remember any such Scripture, for manner, and form; as
spoken by him: to wit, I in the, and thou in me; but this Parret must prate as
he has been taught; howbeit, if it might be supposed (not granted) that Christ
had said to any particular person, [ I in thee, and thou in me:] It must needs
follow, that the person of Christ was without (not within) him, to whom he then
spoke; and the person of Christ, being the Believers only Savior: this
allegation, could not concern the charge before us.

It Is true, we read in Joh 17 23: I in them, and thou in me, that they ^ay ^e
made perfect in me: i.e. in oneness of affection; for so it is interpreted, in
the last clause of the same verse, sc. and have loved them as thou have loved
me; also in Joh. 14. 20. and you in me, and I in you: these words do only
signify the reciprocal love, that shall be fully experienced between Christ
and his members, at the glorious resurrection of the just, as it is implied in
the former part of that verse: At that day (namely of Christ's second coming in
glory, ver. 18.) ye shall (sc. at that day) know that I am in my Father ( i.e.
in his love) and you in me (i.e. in my love) and I in you (i.e. in your love,
ver. 2^.) Now Francis if thou do mean, either of these Scriptures, thou will
be still at a loss; for it was the man Jesus Christ, which spoke to his
Disciples and it is very strange, that thou will produce a Christ for evidence,
in whom you do not believe: its a sign, that thou art almost spent; I do not
remember that he made any reply to ought said by me, as above: but as a mark
for their nakedness he urged another Scripture (not naming where, as to the
chapter or verse) to wit Christ says of himself, I am Alpha and Omega:

Rev. 1. 1. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending says the Lord,
which is, and which was, and which is to come. The Almighty, after the reciting
of this Scripture, I expected an Argument to be drawn from thence by the
Disputant, to prove the thing for which he brought it; But it seems Franks
Seducers could never make him capable of formal Argumentations, which defect,
constrained me to insist upon the explication (herein more fully and distinctly
enlarged) of those Texts of Scripture, which (for the most part) were only
repeated by the titular Disputants, and that many times after their own most
presumptuous mode and manner, adding or diminishing contrary to Gods command,
Deuteronomy. 4. 2. But I proceed to the Text it self:

Ans. The place of Scripture above, sc. Rev. 1. 8. consists of three parts.
First part, I am Alpha and Omega, in these words Christ's creating power is
Metaphorically expressed, being the first and last letters in the Greek
Alphabet; which (by a figurative speech) are applied to any beginning and end;
and are here interpreted, by the next words, namely, the Beginning and the
Ending: which Phrases, do signify unto us Christ's divine Nature, eternal
Power, and Godhead, as in Joh. 1. ver. 1. In the beginning was the Word, and
the Word was God, (sc. God the Son) and in Col. 1. 16. All things were created
by him (his dear Son, ver. 13.) and for him (sc. for his glory, as the ultimate
end, Romans 11. 36.) this therefore is the meaning of [ I am Alpha and Omega]
that is, Christ is the efficient cause of all things, and the end also, whither
all things are referred: that he has at first created all things, and that for
his own glory alone.

Second part, Says the Lord, which words, denote Christ the faithful promiser,
for all the promises of God are in him, 2 Cor. 1. 20. in him, i.e. in the man
hood of Christ's person, Col. 2 9. hereunto agrees the title [ Lord*] which is
mostly appropriated to Christ's humane nature, as before his Birth, Luke 1. 43.
And whence is this to me, that the Mother of my Lord, should come to me; and on
the day of his birth, Chap. 2. ver. 11. For to you is born this day, a Savior,
which is Christ the Lord: and afterward, Joh. 13. ver. 13, 14. Ye call me
Master, and Lord, for so I am: If I th^n your Lord and Master, have washed your
feet: Also, after his resurrection, Luke 24. 3 4. saying, The Lord has risen
indeed, and has oppeared to Simon, ver 39. Behold my hands and my feet, that
it is I my self, (meaning, your Lord and Master) and likewise after his
ascension, Act. 22. 8. And I answered, who art thou Lord? and he said unto me,
I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom thou persecutest: to these many more might be
added, to evidence that by [ Lord] in the Text above, the manhood of Christ's
person is to be understood, at least not to be excluded: For in ver. 11. Christ
says, I am Alpha and Omega, the first, and the last, here Alpha and Omega, are
explained by the terms [ Of the first and the last] that is to say, the Lord
Christ is the first, to wit subsisting in the beginning with God, and equal
with the Father: and the last, having taken the form of a Servant, i.e. of the
meanest man, and so last in reputation, Phil. 2. 6, 7.

Third part; Which is, and which was and which (...) to come, the Almighty: by
the distribution of the threefold time, is meant (as Aretas, and Bright man on
the 4 th. verse) the trinity of person^ which is, or I am, (as in the first
part) are here of the same import, and do refer to the Fat^^r (...) 3 14. and
which was, to the Son, Joh. 1. ver. 1. And which is come, to the Holy Ghost
John. 108, 13.

The Almighty; This last word of the verse, denotes the omnipotency, eternal
^ssence and Godhead of Christ's person: the sum of both ( sc. 1. 11.) verses
above, (...) reveal unto us only two things.

1. The unto of the two Natures in the person of Christ; namely, that (...) was
and is true God, and true man in one person.

2. The Trinity of persons, in the unity of Essence.

Now Francis, do thou think, that either of these things (containing the
true sense, of the Texts alleged by thee) will prove your cause, That a
Quakers pretended Savior within him, is the true Christ: surely, thou can
not be so brutish as to think so, but rather the contrary, sc. That it is the
false Christ the Devil: this Conclusion made Patience (an impatient) Bullock,
she being unable to forbear any longer, calls to me, What (quoth she) do thou
make our Christ within us, to be the Devil?

To her I made Answer: saying, that I did solemnly, and with much reverence (as
in the presence of God, to whom I must shortly be accountable for my words)
declare, that I do most assuredly know, that a Quakers pretended Christ within
him, is the false Christ, the Devil, whom ye ignorantly believe in, and
worship, and with whom ye will be damned in Hell, if ye repent not; to this
most serious Declaration, she made no reply at all:

But F. E. forthwith replied, saying, Thou have no warrant from the Scripture,
thus to speak: I told him, that I had sufficient warrant from the Scriptures,
to make good what I had (in the fear of God) declared: and fort with I alleged
the words of Jesus Christ of Nazareth himself, Joh. 8 24. I said therefore unto
you, that ye shall die in your sins, this Scripture silenced him likewise, and
thereupon I told hi^, that the true Christ had stopped his mouth.

Let me here add some other Scriptures, for some further warrant, as Joh. 3. 18
He that believes not (sc. on the Son of God, sent into the World, ver. 17.) is
condemned already, that is, he is as sure to be damned, as if he was actually
in Hell: and in ver. 36. He that believes not on the Son ( sc. born of Mary,
Luke 1. 35) shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him: likewise
in Luke 19. 14. And his Citizens hated him, ( sc, the Son of Man, the Savior,
ver. 10) and sent a message after him, saying, we will not have this Man to
reign over us: let it be here well Noted, that the true Christ calls those
Citizens his Enemies, and such Enemies as he would destroy, ver. 27. But those
mine Enemies, which would not that I (the Son of Man, ver. 10. above) should
reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me: in Mark also, Chap. 16.
ver. 16. He that believes not (sc. on Jesus risen from the dead, ver. 9.)
shall be damned.

Now Frank, did not thou speak under the Power of Satan, when thou did so
openly and confidently affirm, that I had no warrant to speak as I did, when I
spoke to thy Fellow Laborer in the work of the false Christ?

The next Bolt was shot by William Bullock, and he tells us, The Light makes
manifest; lifting up his voice louder and louder, crying out, tell me, tell me,
the true, and real meaning of those words; the Light makes manifest: I surely
thought, that his lewd Lowing, and Bellowing, was to prevent my asking of him,
where those words might be found in the Scriptures; which I did forbear to ask,
because I knew his Answer, ( sc. it is Scripture.)

Answ. 1. I told him, that he was at his old trade of mangling the Scriptures:
and then showed him wherein; namely, that it was not the Light madeth manifest;
but whatsoever does make manifest, is Light: which the (...) to appear, in Ephesians.
5. ^3. But all things that are reproved, are made manifest by the Light: for,
whatsoever does make manifest is light.

2. By Light, here; we are to understand, a Sin reproving-light: inasmuch as
the latter part, does interpret the former part of the verse, sc. But all
things that are reproved, are made manifest by the Light, ( i.e. by the Light
of Scripture) whence Paul argues thus: for whatsoever does make manifest (in a
way of Reproof) is light ( sc. Scriptural light as before) for* the ^^^tten
Scriptures are frequently described by Light, Psalm. 119. 105. Thy Word is a
Light unto my path, Isai 8. 20. To the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak
not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them: Here the
written Word (such, was the Law and Testimony) is the only manifesting, and so
determining light, either for reprehension, or satisfaction (in cases of error
and doubts) and the reason of it, is assigned by the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3. 16. All
Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for Reproof, for
Instruction (or manifestation and hereunto agrees the words of our Lord and
Savior, Joh. 3. 26, 21. For every one that does evil hates the Light, neither
comes to the Light, lest his deeds should be [reproved:] But he that does
truth, comes to the Light, that his ^eeds man be made manifest.

1. B y Light (in these verses) Christ understands the Doctrinal light
(contained in the written Scripture of the New Testament) which was preached by
him, and his Apostles: hence it is, that the Lord Christ, Joh. 8. 12. and his
Apostles, Mat. 5. 14. are called the light of the World.

2. That this Light, does reprove, ver. 20. and manifest, ver. 21. well then
William, thy demand is granted thee; namely, that the true and real meaning of
the Text (intended by thee) is this: to wit, That the light of Scripture, does
make reproved evils manifest, or evils manifest, which are to be reproved: this
being the true and real meaning, how does it prove the thing designed? sc. That
the light within thee, is the true, not the false Christ: I hope, then art not
such a Bullock, as to think i^ the true Christ. Now forasmuch as that I have
the advantage of more liberty (without interruption) to enlarge, I will show
thee ( W. B.) two things (from the Light, in the Text recited by thee, as
above.)

First. That the Light o^ Scripture, does make some of a Quakers evils manifest.

Secondly, That it does reprove those their evils.

For he first, sc. That the Light of Scripture, does manifest some of a Quakers
evils. As 1. The evil of Antichristianisme, 2 John ver. 7. For many Deceivers
are entered into the World, who confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, this is a deceiver and an Antichrist.

Observe by the way, when ever this Text of Scripture is mentioned against the
Quakers; they presently frame a pretense, whereby they would seem to go off
with some credit; telling us, that we make a man of straw, and then knock him
down: for who is it (say they) of us, that does deny Jesus Christ is come in
the flesh; we do (say they) confess that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh,
that he suffered, and died in the flesh:

Answ. This is such a pitiful shift, nay, such a deceitful covering, that the
weakest eye may look through it; they well kn^w, how unable they are to deal
with the Arguments, which are in the inspired Scriptures of God, against the
feigned-light Christ within them, have therefore made the hole above, to creep
out at: but this their juggle, is no other then what has been already
discovered: namely, That it was not the visible body of Christ's flesh, which
was or is Christ the Savior, but the Christ in that appearing body of his
flesh; and as the Christ was in this his flesh, so he is in every man's flesh,
that comes into the World. And hence it is, that a Teaching Quaker, when he is
prattling of the Idol-light within, he lays his hand upon his breast; saying
Jesus Christ is manifest in this flesh: (meaning in his real flesh: but Christ's
flesh was only in show and appearance.) This their folly brings to mind, what
Mr. Hamorth^ (a converted Quaker) does asseat in his Epistle to John Crook, a
Teaching Quaker, Being ( says he) lately in discourse with some Quakers, who
held, th^^ it was the Light within, that was crucified without the Gates of
Jerusalem: And in the same Epistle, he further says, I can never forget James
Nayler, whom I saw suffer, and what was the fruit of that Spirit by which he
was acted, was he not strangely lifted up in Pride, to make himself the
Messiah, and take divine Worship to himself: For (says he) John Bolton told
me, that he stood by and saw three Women, one after another, fall down and
worship him, and one of them in her bowings, had these words: to wit, Thy Name
is no more James, but I Am: And James Nayler told John Bolton, that if he
worshipped his body, he should refuse it; but if that within him he would
accept it: Hereunto agrees William Harriots Doctrine (at the time of the
Disputation) we a^ (quoth he) deny the out side Christ, to be the true Christ
and Savior; so then, according to this Doctors Divinity: there is another
Christ, namely an inside Christ, which he does worship and believe in, for his
Salvation from sin and wrath; But I shall tell him more of my mind, in its due
place.

I now return to some further consideration, of what they have above affirmed;
which is, that they do not deny (but confess) that Jesus Christ is considered
as distinct from the flesh: and therefore (according to a Quaker* Faith) the
true Christ and Savior is within the flesh: that is, (as to their sense) in
the flesh, of every man that comes into the World, and therefore (as they say)
they are neither Deceivers nor Antichrists: To clear this Smoaky co^t:

I Answer, These words [ In the flesh] though they are frequently inserted in
the Scriptures of Truth, yet do never signify a thing distinct from the flesh,
but always the flesh it self, as it may appear by manifold instance (referring
to man kind flesh, consisting of Soul and Body, the true or whole man) Genesis 17.
24, 25. Abraham a ^^^shmael, circumcised in the flesh, i. e. the flesh it self
was circumcised, Romans 2. 28. outward in the flesh, i.e. the outside flesh, 1
Cor. 7. 28. Such shall have trouble in the flesh, i.e. their bodies of flesh
shall have trouble: furthermore, the Apostle puts this matter beyond all
Dispute, Psalm. 1. 22. But if I live in the flesh, i.e. to abide in the flesh,
ver. 24. which he explains in ver. 25. I know, that I shall abide and continue
with you all, i.e. I ( Paul, true man, consisting of Soul and body) know that I
shall abide with you; wherein it is most plain that ^his Phrasiologie (in the
flesh) does not denote a thing distinct from the flesh, but the very mankind
flesh it self. For here, by Paul's being in the flesh, he understands his whole
man: Howbeit, let me improve these last verses a little more, by propounding
thence a Question.

Quest. What is it to confess that Paul is come in the flesh?

Answ. It is to confess, that Paul is come true man, consisting of Soul and
body (as above, ver. 25.) And consequently, not to confess that Paul is come
true man, is to deny him come in the flesh*

But, to say that Paul is come in the flesh; does signify sc. Paul is to ^e
considered as distinct from his body of Flesh: And so to be in the flesh of
every man that comes into the world, would be an interpretation, not only
contrary to the Scripture, above, but so absurd and irrational, as becoming
none but seduced, seducing Quakers: from whence I may safely infer. That
whosoever does not confess that Jesus Christ is come true man, consisting of
Soul and Body, does deny that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh; But Teaching,
Seducing Quakers, do not confess that Jesus Christ is come true man, consisting
of Soul and Body: Ergo, they do deny that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh:
And by good consequence from the whole they cannot deny (unless they will deny
truth in God) themselves to be Deceivers and Antichrists Moreover the same
Apostle John, puts a Question, 1 John 2. 22. Who is a liar? and then Answers it:
But he that denies that Jesus is the Christ; and sor^ wi^h adds, he is
Antichrist: w^ll then, according to the Scripture of truth, he that denies
that Jesus is the Christ, is a liar and an Antichrist: But a Teaching Quaker
does (...) Jesus, to be the Christ: Ergo, a Teaching Quaker is (by the spirits
Testimony) a Liar and an Antichrist: The Proposition, being the words of that
Scripture, ver. 22. may not be gain said: the Assumption I do prove t^us; The
Jesus intended by the Apostle, is Jesus born of Mary* (who is called Christ,
Mat. 1. 16.) the Jesus of Nazareth a man approved of God among the Jesus, Act.
2. 23. But a Teaching Quaker does deny Jesus of Nazareth (born of Mary) a man
approved of God among the Jews, to be the Christ, and therefore the Conclusion
is undeniable: sc. That a Teaching Quaker does deny that Jesus is the Christ:
And as this is undeniable, so is the other; namely That a Teaching Quaker is a
Liar and an Antichrist: which is further evidenced, 1 John 4. 3. And every
Spirit that con^esseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of
God, and this is that spirit of Antichrist: (in the flesh, here is put for the
flesh it self) as in Scriptures aforementioned: ^ow to deny Christ's Manhood to
be a Savior, is to deny Jesus to be the Christ.

Secondly, As the Light of Scripture does manifest. Teaching (...) (especially)
to be Liars, Deceivers and Antichrists, (yea the (...) Antichrist) so it does
also reprove them.

1. Because, as such they are of the Dragon and Beast, making War with the
(...), Rev. 13 9. 10. The Man Jesus, Joh. 1. 29. 30. and the (...) delivered to
the Saints.

2. As such, they are Contradicters and Blasphemers of the Truth, which the
holy men of God spoke, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. 21. For
instance, Joh. 1. 14. And the Word, (God, ver. 1.) was made flesh [Flesh] i.e.
true man: for he dwelt among us, (the Jews) and we beheld the Glory of him,
(this dweller among us) concerning whom, the Witness bearer (sent of God, ver.
6) have Record, that he was a true man, ver 30. thereby witnessing, That Jesus
Christ was true Man, as well as true God, and both in his one person: which
Article of our Christian Faith, is denied by most Teaching Quakers. Another
Instance we have Tim 3. 16 God was manifest in the flesh, i e. Mankind flesh,
or true and whole Man; for so the Phrase (in the Flesh) cannotates, as it has
been already cleared from the Scriptures of God: so that, [ God was manifest in
the flesh] does not teach us, that God is to be considered as distinct from ^he
flesh; but that God was manifest flesh, real mankind flesh, and thereby the
Godhead and the Manhood were united in the one person of Christ, and made
manifest to the Apostles bodily senses, of seeing, hearing, and feeling, 1 John,
chap. 1. ver. 1, 2.

Likewise Paul, Act 63. 38. Through this Man is preached unto you the
forgiveness of sins: through (or by ver. 39.) This Man, viz. The man Jesus of
Nazareth, who by the wicked hands of the Jews, was slain, and hanged on a tree:
and then, by God the Father raised from the dead the third day, and exalted to
be a Savior to give remission of sins, Act. 2. 22. Chap. 5. 29, 30. through [
This Man] is preached the forgiveness of sins as above: For so has the Lord
commanded us, ver. 47. at which commanded Preaching the wicked Jews were filled
with envy, and spoke (as Teaching Quakers do) against those things spoken by
Paul (as above) contradicting and blaspheming ver. 45. So much for your first
evil manifested and reproved by the Light of divine Scripture, though there are
many professed evils among Quakers, which the Light of holy Scripture does
manifest and reprove: yet, I shall now make mention but of one more, because I
would not be too voluminous:

The Second Evil: is, The professed perfection of a Quakers seeming Sanctity,
consisting in [ Thou and Thee] thereby denying all reverential respects to any
sort of men, of what rank or quality soever.

For method sake: we will in the first place, hear what they have to say for
themselves, touching this matter.

1. They are apt to say* (because they have often said it) that [ Thou, and
You] are of distinct significations in Scripture, and likewise [ Thee and You]
the one signifying a Singular, the other a Plural.

Answ. These terms of ( thou, thee and you) are not always in Scripture of
distinct significations: as it appears, Lev. 19. 12. Ye (or you) shall not
Swear by my Name falsely, neither shall thou profane the Name of thy God: In
this Scripture, Ye (or You) and Thou, are of the same signification: and in
Jer. 3. 12. Return then, backsliding Israel, and I will not cause my anger to
fall upon you: here likewise, thou and you, are of the same signification:
again, in Luke 17. 21. the Kingdom of God is within you; you, here does (in
your sense) signify each particular Quaker.

2. Nor are these words ( see thee and you) always in Scripture of distinct
significations, as in Deuteronomy. 28. 9. herein, thee, (a singular) and holy People
(a plural) are of the same signification, so in Isai. 26. 20. here People and
thou are of the same import: To these Scriptures (would it not render me
tedious to the Reader) I might add many more, to gainsay this their trifling
Assertion: for you and thou are often in Scripture and reason convertitable
terms, for instance, thou in the Decalogue is indefinitely understood.

2. They are ready to affirm, sc. To salute a single person, under the notion [
You] is both improper, and irrational, for it were to confound singular, and
plural in point of right reason.

Answ. Its neither: for, its not improper nor irrational, to say to a single
man, This Youth is your Son; for you are his Father, which to say, is as proper
and rational, as to say, thou art his Father, and the reason is, because ( you
and your) are of the same nature: inasmuch as the one is derived from the
other: Now as [ Your] is applicable to one as to many, so is ( You) likewise.
Again it is both proper and rational to tell a single person, This house is
your house, for you have a good Title to it; which is as proper and rational,
as to say, thou have a good Title to the house; and consequently it is not only
irrational to affirm, that this does always confound the terms of ( thou and
you.) Its Diabolical to (...) (a^ the Quakers do) [ thou and thee] making it
the daily fuel, for your levilling inflamed-pride.

3. They say for themselves; That holy men (in the Scriptures) did use the
words ( thou and thee) not only one to another, but to God himself:

Answ. This is granted; howbeit I pray, can any of you Quakers produce me one
holy Man (in Scripture expressed) which used these words ( thou and thee) that
he might thereby take occasion to deny (as ye wickedly do) all reverential
respects to any sort of men of what rank or quality soever: sure I am, ye
cannot produce me one such man* for this brutish kind of practice, is contrary
to the manifold Precepts and Presidents also, in the Scriptures of truth, as
afterward shall plainly appear. Indeed, we Christians do acknowledge, that
holy men (in Scripture) did use the words ( thou and thee) not only one to
another, but to God himself, for two eminent Reasons:

1. That they might thereby be kept to the unity of the Godhead; for although
Jehovah is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, yet he is not three Gods, but one,
therefore holy men holding their minds to the unity of the essence; Thou and
Thee, were (and are) most proper and necessary to preserve their minds from a
plurality of Gods: But this ground cannot be pleaded by a Quaker, who denies a
Trinity in Unity, and so, he denies the only true God.

2. Reas. Holy men used these words ( thou and thee) to God, and one to
another, as occasionally they were by Holy Spirit, drawn out to either of these
words ( sc. thou or thee) for all Scripture is given by inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3. 16. and in 2 Pet. 1. 21. Holy men of God spoke as they were moved by
the Holy Ghost; so then, its plain that Holy men (in Scripture) spoke these
words ( thou and thee)to God, and one to another; but it was then, when they
were moved thereunto by the Holy Ghost: but I pray, do ye Quakers never use
those words ( thou and thee) but then when ye are occasionally drawn out, or
moved by the Holy Ghost to either: if any of you, should be so notoriously
vile, as to father the use of those words ( thou and thee) upon the Spirit,
would not the Holy Ghost tell thee, that thou art of thy Father the Devil, who
is a liar from the beginning.

Again, Although holy men frequently used those words, as above; yet they never
thereby took occasion to deny, but ever used reverential respects to all sorts
of persons, according to their rank and quality: as for instance, Abraham, Genesis
18. 1, 2, 3. as he sat in the Tent-door, he lift up his eyes and looked, and
^o, three men (Angels unawares) stood by him, and when he saw them, he ran to
meet them from the Tent door, and bowed himself to the ground, and said my
Lord: And David, 1 S^m. 20. 41. rose out of his place, and fell on his face to
the ground, and bowed himself three times to Jonathan: Again, in the 1 Samuel 25.
23, 25. Abigail saw David, and fell before him, on her face, and bowed her self
to the ground, and called him Lord, Likewise Ruth, Chap. 2. 10. She fell on her
face, and bowed her self to the ground to Boaz: And in ver 4. Boaz courteously
said to the Reapers, the Lord be with you; and they (in reverential respects)
to him. Answered, the Lord bless thee. Furthermore, we read of reverential
respects, between Abraham, and his Idolatrous Neighbors, Genesis 23. 7. Abraham
stood up, and bowed himself to the People of the Land, even to the children of
H^th, and ver. 8. he communed with them saying, if it be your mind: And ver. 5.
the children of Heth answered Abraham, saying, hear us my Lord: thou art a
Prince of God amongst us. And Solomon also. 1 King. 2. 19. arose from his
Throne, and bowed himself to his Mother; and Joseph, Genesis 28. 12. bowed himself
to his Father Jacob, with his face toward the ground* And in the 2 Pet. 3. 6.
Sarah obeyed Abraham, and called him Lord: unto these Presidents, many more
might be alleged. Thus we see, though these holy persons often used ( thou and
thee) yet they ever used reverential respects to all sorts of men, and that
according to Gods express command, as Lev 9. 32. Thou shall rise up before the
(...) head, and honor the face of the old man and fear thy God, I am the Lord.
Thus Moses by Gods own inspiration: but his (...) Quakers do not: therefore he
Light of this Scripture reproves you, as no Fearers of God: And (...). 20. 12.
Honor thy Father and thy Mother, which is also recited by the Apostle, Ephesians. 6
2. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, which is the first Commandment with
promise; Note this Commandment comprehends not only Natural Parents. Heb 12. 9
the Fathers or our flesh, but the Fathers of our Country as civil Magistrates
and Rulers, Isai, 49. 23. yea, likewise Spiritual Fathers, as Gospel Ministers
are phrased by Paul, 1 Cor. 4. 15. we read, that in our Saviors time, there
were some proud Professors, who inclined much toward this Principle and
practice of a Quaker, (but not in so bad a sense) Mark 7. 10 ye (says Christ)
suffer him no more to do ought for his Father and Mother, making the Word of
God (the commandment above) of none effect; and indeed as much more do the
Quakers) Paul also, by the same inspiration of God, Romans 13. 7. Render
therefore to all (meaning higher Powers and Rulers, ver. 1, 2.) their dues,
honor to whom honor: and the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. 17. Honor all men,
especially in places of honor) fear God, honor the King, as Supreme and
Governor, sent by him. Moreover, I Tim. 5. 3. Honor Widows, that are Widows
indeed; and in ver. 17. Let the Elders that Rule well, be counted worthy of
denble honor, especially they that labor in the Word and Doctrine. These
Precepts are given by the inspiration of God, and consequently are obligatory
on Conscience, to be performed in that useful, commendable, and necessary duty
of reverential respects before declared: and which has been (in conscience of
Gods strict, and indispensible command (obeyed by the holy Presidents above.

Secondly, As the light of Scripture has manifested this your second evil
also; even so likewise the Light of Scripture does reprove it.

1. It reproves you, a, such who want the fear of God, as above, Lev. 19. 32.
and as such, who harden their hearts against, not only the many Precepts above,
to bind the Conscience, but the many Presidents to evidence the practice; Now,
as both are manifest, reprovers of you, so I wish they might make you not only
ashamed of your sneaking surley, dumb, and scurvy carriage toward Christians:
but also convince you, that this kind of Behavior, is not in the written
Scripture without, but from the pretended unwritten Scripture (that Idol-light)
within: proudly contemning the sacred Oracles of God, above asserted. And which
is thus further argued: what can the Saints (in all places and Countries) be
more sensible of, then that the generality of Quakers, do purposely use those
words ( thou and thee) to deny all reverential respects to any sort of men, of
what rank and quality soever: that by that means, they may intrude themselves
to be equal with any of what rank or sort soever: nay, thereby to advance
themselves, above all men, under the notion of a seeming perfection, which is a
manifest product of their (God and Man) provoking pride: according to that of
the Psalmist, Psalm. 123. 4. Our soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning,
and contempt of the proud: and how is the Prophecy fulfilled in you, Isai. 3.
5. The child shall behave himself proudly against the ancient, and the base
against the Honorable: and observe ye well the words of the Lord Christ, Mark
7. 23. Deceit, Blasphemy, Pride, Foolishness: of these four links, has Satan
made your Chain of darkness; which is most evident, from a due consideration of
the foregoing truths: Oh, how suitable is the Prophets Vision to a Quakers
condition, Obad. 1. ver. 1, 2. Behold, I have made thee small, then art greatly
despised, the pride of thy heart has deceived thee, etc. From the whole be ye
advised.

1. To cease from making your Idolized Thou and Thee, (the spring of your
seurvy and surly deportment) with their mask, to wit, that holy men (in
Scripture recorded) did often use ( thou and thee) one to another, and to God
himself: Now, what is your design herein? can it be ought else, then to put a
cheat on the judgments of some ignorant creatures: as thus, Oh surely (say
they) the Quakers do make Conscience of the Scripture for their warrant and
authority; thus poor ignorant ones are deluded by your equivocations: though
its most certain, that the Scripture no there commands a Quaker to ( thou or
thee) any man, much less Christian Rulers, Governors and Magistrates, (yet
these things the unmannerly Quakers will do) But the Scripture does command all
men to pray for Rulers, Governors and Magistrates, to submit unto them, and to
give the honor which is due to them, as Fathers of the Country, (1 Timothy 2. 1,
2. 1 Pet. 2. 23. Isai. 49. 23) (yet these things they will not do) so that in a
word of truth, the professed perfection of a seemingly sanctified Quaker, is a
conscience of obeying his proud lusts, and disobeying Gods inspired Laws.

2. Cease from calling the reverential Presid^n^s above, the corruptions that
are in the World through Lust: for this is to make the fore expressed precepts
of God, and the Practices of his eminent Saints, guilty of these corruptions:
but its no new thing, for a Quaker boldly to B^aspheme.

3. Cease from wresting the Holy Scriptures: especially that of Christ himself,
John 5. 44. How can ye believe, which receive honor one of another. The other
part of the verse (giving light to these words) is usually omitted by them, sc.
and seek not the honor that comes from God only.

Quest. What is that Honor which comes from God only?

Answ. The 23 d. verse tells us. All men should honor the Son, even as they
honor the Father; he that honors not the Son, honors not the Father
which has sent him, (meaning, to fulfill all righteousness Mat. 3. 15.) Its
then clear, that the Son of God, is the honor intended above; if any ask, who
is this Son of God? the good Angel tells us, Luke 1. 3 5. That holy thing,
which shall be born of thee. (Mary ver 34.) shall be called the Son of God: so
then the Man Jesus Christ, is the honor that comes from God only; which
honor the Jews (like the Quakers) received not, as this Son of God told them
ver. 43. I am come in my Fathers Name, and ye receive me not (sc. by Faith,)
hence Christ infers, ver. 44. above, How can ye believe, which receive Honor
one of another, and seek not the Honor which comes from God only.

Now the Honor which the Pharisees received one of another was the Doctrine of
Justification, and Eternal Life, by the works and righteousness of the Law,
fulfilled in and by the Son of God alone: which righteousness of the Son, is
the justifying and saving honor that comes from God only, to right Believers:
will it hence follow, because the proud Pharisees took divine honor to
themselves, and there by received honor one of another; therefore civil honor
ought not to be given one to another: let me tell you, ye Quakers could not
have brought a Scripture more full against your selves: for, under Heaven,
there are not a People to be found, that receive more honor one of another,
then the men of your Sect do: For y^ affirm, and boldly teach, That he who made
Heaven and Eearth, Angels, Principalities and Powers, that has a Name above
every Name that is named: King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the Prince and only
Savior, that gives repentance, and remission of sins, is in each of your vile
bodies. Its not to be wondered at, that ye are so possessed with the infernal
Spirit of superlative pride against Jesus of Nazareth, the man approved of God,
and all true Believers on, and lovers of him. So much for some further
satisfaction to William Bullock, and his Light making manifest: The next to him
was.

F. E. He makes another motion, on the behalf of his Cliant (the false Christ,
and pretended Savior within him) to wit, The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses
us from all sin. The Text intended by him, is in the 1 John 1. 7. And the Blood
of Jesus Christ his Son [His son he left out] cleanses us from all sin

Answ. Nor, does this Text of Scripture, prove the thing for which it is
brought: For, 1. Jesus Christ the Son of God, in this 7 th. verse* is that Word
of Life which the Apostles ver. 1, 2 had heard and seen with their eyes, and
looked upon, and with their hands had handled; who could be no other than the
Man Jesus Christ, which to prove, they bring in the operations of three of
their five senses: Now, this Man Jesus Christ the Son of God, as such, he
cannot be in a Quaker.

2. By the Blood of this Son of God, is meant the grievous sufferings, pains,
and tortures, which he endured on the Cross to the death; and therefore called
the blood of the Cross, Col. 1. 20. as the Man Jesus Christ, cannot be in a
Quaker, so consequently, his bloody sufferings cannot be in a Quaker.

3. I at this blood of Christ cleanses (meaning all right Believers on it)
from all sin, i.e. from all the pains, and eternal sufferings due to the nature
of sin: for (cleansing) here, is the same with washing, in Romans 1. 5 And from
Jesus Christ, the faithful Witness, that loved us and washed us from our sins
in his own blood, i. e. in the sufferings of the Manhood of his person: for the
former part of the verse, concerns Christ's Propetical Office: and the latter
part, his Priestly Office, which referred to Christ's humane Nature: and for
that ^ea on, the cleansing, or washing cannot be within, but without us, sc. in
Heaven, Heb. 10. 19. Having therefore Brethren boldness to enter into the
Holiest, by the blood of Jesus: So then, to be cleansed from all sin by Christ's
blood, is to be acquitted and justified in the sight of God, from all the
deserved miseries of sin, as Romans 5. 8. 9. But God commends his love toward
us; in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us: much more then being
now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath, through him: And the
same Apostle tells us, Col. 1 21, 22. Yet now has he reconciled; in the body
of his flesh through death, (or through the death of his body of flesh, Heb. 10
20.) To present you holy, and unblamable, and unreprovable in his sight, (not
in our selves) for, Rom.4. 5. He justifies the ungodly; Abraham was justified
in the righteousness of Christ's person when he had some ungodliness in his own
person: a Believer is complete in Christ bodily, Col 2 8, 9, 10. when he has
some incompleatness in his own body. In a word, these things do clear this
Truth, Namely, To be cleansed from all sin by the blood of Jesus Christ, is to
be understood, for a cleansing from all the guilt, and passive fruits and
effects of sin: but not for a cleansing (as in your self) from all the movings,
and actings of sin in or by us while in this World which the following verses
make most plain: for even they which are by the blood of Jesus Christ, cleansed
from all sin ver. 7. 8. They have sin, and in ver 9 ought to confess their sin:
Now Francis, upon the whole it does appear, that the Patterns cut out by thee,
do still come short of the measure; which plainly argues, thou art not (as yet)
thy Crafts master; yea this was manifested, by thy Answer to this Question; to
wit.

Quest, Whether the Saints was cleansed from all sin by the water of
regeneration, or by the blood of justification*

Thy Answer was, by the Water; which gave occasion to sundry persons to laugh
at him: But he endeavored to compose them; saying, it is no laughing matter,
but indeed matter of melting pity, that thy seduced Synagogue of Libertines,
should be led by ^o blind a Seducer. The next after F: E. was William Bullock
again; alleging, But a Body have thou prepared me: which he repeated again and
again, and then most earnestly called upon me, tell me, what is meant by [ Me]
for whom that body was prepared? and what that body prepared was? the same was
as eagerly required by Francis East lack and William Harriot: The place of
Scripture intended by them, was Heb. 10. 5. But a Body have thou prepared me.

I Answered: By [ Thou] God the Father is meant: by [ Me] the God head of the
Son: by a Body prepared, ^he Man hood united to the Godhead of the Son. And
her unto agrees the former part of the 5 th. verse, Wherefore when he (Christ
God-man) comes into the world, he says, Sacrifice and offering thou would
not (or did not desire) and therefore were refused by God: it being
impossible, that they should purge sin. ver. 4. For it is impossible that the
blood of Bulls, and of Goat, should take away sin: But a body have thou
prepared me: (meaning, to receive and do his Fathers will, in taking sin away,
Joh. 1. 29.) God the Son having now taken, and put on the body of flesh,
prepared for him as above; he now undertakes the great work of satisfying Gods
Justice for sin; (and so to take away sin) saying, ver.7. Lo I come to do thy
will, O God. And why? he tells us, [ In the volume of the Book it is written of
me] i. e. in the Record of thy Decree, from everlasting is clear for it, that I
am he, whom thou (O Father) have instituted and ordained to do thy will, for
the taking away of sin:

For ver. 10. By the which will, we are sanctified (or saved) through the
offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all: So then the body offered in
the 10 th verse, was the body prepared in the 5 th verse: But the body of Jesus
Christ offered, was a real mankind body, as the Spirit of Truth witnesses.
Ver. 12. But this [Man] after he had offered one 'Sacrifice for sin, for ever
sat down on the right hand of God: here hence it is manifest. that the very
offering of the body of Jesus Christ, could not have saved us, but by the will
and ordination of the Father, who prepared that body* for Christ's hanging and
dying on the Cro^^e had not delivered us from the pains of the eternal death,
unless it had been written in the volume of the book: Its most sure, all that
our Lord Christ did, or suffered ^in his Soul and Body (for us, had not
satisfied the justice of God for sin ^t God had not appointed, that Christ his
son (made of a Woman Gal. 4. 4.) should be sent forth, to come into the World,
to do and suffer those things for the satisfying his justice; to the taking
away of sin; upon the whole, I did infer, that the true Christ, and our only
Savior, must necessarily be, both without and above us: Here I made some
pause, to invite a Reply; but they were silent, at which I much marvelled
ina^much as sundry of the leading Quakers, had imprinted so many corrupt
g^osses on those words, it may be ^was forgotten, as the preface no^es [ But a
body have thou prepared me. ] As thus,

The Body prepared (say they) was prepared in Heaven, and brough^ (...) Christ
into the Virgins Womb, which body, they call a Mystical (...) Spiritual*
Heavenly body of Flesh and Blood: and (...) that the Mystical, Invisible Body
(still the Idol light Christ within) is the true and only Savior: Whose Birth,
Death, Resurrection, and Glorification is only Mystical and Invisible.

Hence, (as I suppose) it is, that George Fox (in his Folio Book, entitled the
Great Mystery, page 71.) asserts; That Christ's Nature is not humane, which
(says he) is earthly, the nature of the first Adam.

Answ. I would gladly know of this Fox, whether [Humane] does not rather
signify, a Man kind nature, consisting of Soul and Body: Its true we read (1
Cor. 15. 47. compare Genesis 2. 7.) the first Adam was of the earth earthly, in
regard of his body (not his soul) which God formed out of the Earth. But the
word humane, comprehends both Soul and Body, which is much more then Earthly,
or Earth, Simply, litteral-material Earth.

Again, whereas he adds, the second man is from Heaven; To which I Answer:

The second Adam (or Man) is the Lord from heaven as above.

1. Because Christ's Man kind nature was conceived in Mary, by the power of the
Highest overshadowing her. Luke 1. 35.

2. The true Christ is styled the Second Man, because the first Man, was his
figure, Romans 5. 14 likewise in the Geneologie, Mat. 1. Christ is said also, to
be partaker of the same flesh and blood, that the children were partakers of
Heb. 2. 14; but the flesh and blood, which the Children were partakers of, were
real, visible, humane (or mankind) flesh and blood (not Mystical, I visible
flesh and blood.)

Besides, this Title, ( sc. The Son of Man) is frequently attributed to Jesus
Christ, in the New Testament, as in Mat. 8. 20. The Foxes have holes, but the
Son of man has not where to lay his head: also in Mat. 10. 23. and 11. 19. and
12. 8 etc. The Lords Christ is called the Son of Man, which is to show the
truth of his humane-mankind Nature, it being lineally descended from David,
according to the flesh, and therefore Christ is styled the Son of David* ( Luke
20. 41) Moreover, he has appellation (of the Son of Man) in reference to his
participation with our humane Nature, in all things which concern created
nature, as its stated by the Apostle, in Heb. 2. 17. and in Chap. 4 15) In all
things it behoved him (Christ) to be made like unto his Brethren: and he was
tempted in all points like as we are, yet without sin: surely he that is in all
things like man, except sin, is rightly called the Son of Man: for, sin is not
at all the Form, but all the Deformity of Man: The issue is, that the Fox has
concealed his craft, putting no difference between the terms. sc. Hum^ne and
Humane: he knew full well, that the Fox's craft would be soon discovered should
he admit the Lords Christ to have a humane Nature, or a body as is common to
Mankind: and therefore (in Page 71. above) he quarrels the word [ Humane] and
querieth, where does the Scripture speak of Humane* where is it written, (quoth
he) that we may search for it? Rep. Though we have not the Word, yet having the
Thing, it might satisfy all, with whom the light of ^eason has any (...).

Once more; Christ the Second Man, is said to be Lord from Heaven, because, he
is to restore the heavenly life, which was lost by the first man Adam: who was
also said to be Earthly, by reason of Transgression; and Christ is also said to
be from Heaven, by reason of Restoration. By the first man's fall, all mankind
were deprived of all heavenly and spiritual graces: By the second Man from
Heaven, the Elect of God have those Graces (in some measure) restored: As
Calvin in his Exposition, on the (47th. ver. above) Paul does not (says he)
speak of the substance of the second Man's body, but of the habit of Graces, and
heavenly gifts of the Spirit of Christ: And on the same verse, he affirms, that
the Manichies were the first knaves, which invented that Heresy, Namely That
Christ brought from Heaven an invisible body of flesh and blood into the Womb
of the Virgin. And undoubtedly the Quakers have drunk this poison originally
from them, by whom the Devil (according to Calvin) first set it abroach; which
as it was, so still it is, a design from Hell to beget not only a denial, but
an utter blotting out of the very Name and remembrance (as before) of the true
Jesus Christ, and to set up a Spiritual Christ, a Mystical, Invisible, Heavenly
King Jesus: and all this only to advance the Idol-light within, and the more
easily to deceive poor ignorant and unstable persons; which has been, and
still is, their straggling Trade; I have yet one thing more to mention
concerning this Fox; which is, in his Book above, Page 135. to wit, That Thomas
Moor had said, that Christ was absent from us while we are in this mortal body;
which (said the Fox) is contrary to the Apostle, who says, The life of Jesus,
is [Mark, is] manifested in their [Mark, their] mortal flesh: but ^e (Fox-like)
quotes not any place of Scripture; the Text of Scripture abused by him, is in 2
Cor. 5. 11. Eor we which live, are always delivered unto death, for Jesus sake,
that the life also of Jesus might (not is, but) be made manifest in (not their,
but) our mortal flesh.

Note, the Fox says, The life of Jesus (is manifested) making it present: but
Paul says, that the life of Jesus (might be made manifest) making it future:
nay, he has not only believed the Letter, but the Sense also of the Text,
which may appear partly by the former part of this 11 th. verse, and partly by
the subsequent verses: in the former part of the verse, thus, For we which
live, are always delivered unto death, for Jesus sake, i. e. we have (sc. for
the testimony of Jesus) Death (that is sufferings to death as in the subsequent
verses 9, 10.) continually before err eyes; that we might be prepared for the
fellowship of the glorious resurrection; when there will be a full
manifestation made of the glorious life of Jesus in our mortal flesh: this may
yet further appear, in ver. 12. so then, death works in us, i. e. our daily
sufferings (from the cruel hands of unbelieving men) for our Faith in, and
Testimony for Jesus; and as it works in us, so it ( sc. the strokes which are
deadly to our bodies) works, ver. 17 for us: And what work they? the 17 th.
verse Answers, For our light Affliction, which is but for a moment; works
for us, a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory; But how do they work
it? Answ. Not by way of merit or earning (our striving to blood, cannot oblige
God) but by way of preparation to the resurrection, in ver. 14. Knowing that he
which raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise us up also by Jesus. Then that
glorious life of Jesus, shall be manifest in our mortal flesh: the sum of all
is this; to wit, That the Lord sends afflictions, yea, death it self (which to
the Saints, is the last and greatest affliction) not only to cleanse their
souls, but to fashion and prepare their bodies, as vessels to hold the
exceeding weight of glory: Now let any sober Saint judge, whether Thomas Moor,
or George Fox has contradicted the Apostle; surely that Fox which endeavors
(as much as in him lies) to ch^ak the Lamb of God, will be ready to wrest the
mind of the Apostle. This Fox, is seconded by Quaker Penington: sc. That the
body prepared. Heb. 10. 5. above, was a Mystical Invisible body of flesh and
blood: for, in his Book, called Mysteries of the Kingdom, he says, That the
external blood of Christ cannot cleanse the Conscience; for the blood of Bulls
and Goats could not do if no more can his blood, (putting no more worth or
virtue in the blood of Christ, than in the blood of Beasts,) the consideration
of this insufferable Blasphemy, did so provoke the Spirit of Mr. Francis Duke
(a Man eminent for Meekness and Modesty) that in his answer to one John
Chandler (a Teaching Quaker) for the like expressions from him, page 67. he
plainly tells this Chandler, That he and fellow-leading Friends [ are a Pack of
such Villains, as base as ever the Earth ^ore] as for Penington, he declares in
his Book above, That the heavenly body of flesh and blood, which Christ brought
with him from heaven (meaning into the Virgin) and dwelt in the Garment of his
body a while, and now is in every Saint, ( sc, Quaker Saints:) his mind herein,
in shortly this: sc. That a Man's wearing Garment, is not his body; so the
visible material body of Jesus Christ, (which he calls the Garment of his body)
is not the Savior Christ: but as the natural body of a Man is within his
Garment, even so the true Christ, was within the Garment of his external body:
whence, its most evident, that this Seducing Teacher does not confess (with the
Apostles) That Jesus Christ of Nazareth, the Man approved of God, and by him
exalted to be a Savior, is the true Christ, Act. 5. 31. Let me add a little
more of Peningtons Divinity, in the same Book, Page 25. What nature (says he)
must these Sacrifices be of, which cleanse heavenly things ( sc. Souls) whither
of necessity, they must be heavenly; if so, then whither it was the flesh and
blood of the vail, or the flesh and blood within the vail: whither it was the
flesh and blood of the outward earthly nature, or the flesh and blood of the
inward spiritual nature: whither it was he flesh and blood which Christ took of
the first Adams nature, or that of the second Adams nature?

Ans. In the three sold Querie above: two things are asserted, (neither of
them, are mentioned in the Scripture of truth.)

1. That the Lord Christ had a two sold Body of flesh and blood: the one
internal and invisible, the other, external and visible: and thence concludes,
that it is not the external, visible, earthly body, but the internal,
invisible, heavenly body, which cleanses Souls (which he names heavenly
things.)

2. That there is an inward spiritual nature ( still the Idol-light within)
which has mystical flesh and blood, besides the outward earthy nature: the one
he calls the flesh and blood of the vail; the other, the flesh and blood within
the vail: All which, he seems to ground upon the Apostles words, Heb. 10. 19,
20. Having therefore Brethrin boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood
of Jesus; by a new and living way, which he has conescrated for us through the
vail, that is to say, his flesh.

Note here; The Apostle does not make any mention of two distinct natures: not
of two sorts of flesh and blood, ( sc. visible and invisible) nor in the least,
of two distinct vails: Now, that his juggling cheat may be discovered, let the
Apostles mind be duly considered (...) whose meaning is, to wit, That
Believers may draw near to God, through the vail of Christ's personal flesh and
blood: for, we Christians believe (according to the Scriptures of God) that as
the High Priest entered into the holy place with the blood of the Sacrifice, so
the true Christ, by his own blood entered in once, into the holy place, into
heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us. Heb. 9. 12. 24.
the whole is, That the body of Christ's flesh and blood, entering into Heaven
(the holiest) is that new and living way consecrated for right Believers to
draw near to God, for justification through Faith in the one only vail of
Christ's flesh glorified in Heaven above: which precious Truths, are worth
nothing, in the account of a Quaker.

F^r^heamore, let it be noted, that the word [ Vail] in an allusion to the
Temple, where the vail hid the glory of the Sanct^^m Sanctorum, and gave
entrance to it: even so Christ's incarnation did (as it were) rebate the edge of
the divine glory and brightness, that Believers may come and converse with it,
without terror: for some further illustration, I shall here add, sc. That
Christ is the true Jacobs Ladder, Joh. 1. 51. the bottom of which touches
Earth, there is his Humanity (or vail of flesh and blood) and the top reaches
Heaven, there is his Divinity: so that we may climb this Ladder, and have
communion with God, i. e. climbing ^p in hope by the Manhood (or vail) of
Christ, we have social access to the Godhead.

By the way observe, That this Foxt Penington does not allege any of the holy
man of old, that ever preached or writ such kind of Divinity, as he has done
in his legerdemain above; whereby sundry unstable Consciences have been
deceived: I have often heard some of them to affirm, That the Quakers do
believe in Christ's body of flesh and blood, and that be d^d for sin, and rose
again, and that he is Man's only Savior: howbeit they do but ^ickedly
equivocate: for they do not mean that the body of flesh and blood life and
death, etc. of Jesus of Nazareth conceived in, and born of the blessed Virgin
Mart, has purchased justification in the sight of God, and Salvation from sin:
but they deceitfully mean, sc. the new coined invisible flesh and blood of the
heavenly Mystical Christ, (still the Idol-light within) that died within and
there rose to a righteousness and justification, which is a brat hatched only in
their addle brains, from whence also, it is, they ^each a Mystical Bethlehem
within, where Christ was born, that he suffered and died without Jerusalem,
that is (say they) Mystical Jerusalem within: O ye Quakers judge whither these
are not strong and damnable delusions. So much also, for some further
satisfaction to William Bullock, F. (...). and W. H. concerning those words,
But a body thou have prepared me, Heb. 10. 5. which was the last Text of
Scripture proposed by them, in reference to the first part of the Charge as
above:

I now proceed to the Second part; To wit, That the main end of the Quakers
Meetings in these Islands, is, to make the Lord Christ, his Holy Spirit, his
Angels and Apostles, all Liars and false witnesses of God.
As I was about to prove the second part of the Charge against them, Francis
East lack interrupted me, saying, Thou never were in our Meetings how then
can thou know what we teach in them?

I Replied, It Is true, I bless the Lord, I never were, nor as I hope (through
the mercy of God) never shall be (as one of you) in any of your Meetings:
notwithstanding, I know what you Teach, and mainly aim at in your Meetings, for
ye are G. Foxes Disciples, and ye have learned his Doctrine: and as I was about
to read some of it, they grew impatient, and by no means would have it read;
thereupon I did forbear, but I have here inserted it: to wit, G. Fox in his
Book entitled the Mystery Page 49, 50. has these words, Ye scorn me, the
light in you, they have disobeyed it, and called it a natural light: and ye
have said, that I the light am not able to save those that believe in me:
Furthermore, Page 54. That if ye would believe, and wait on me the light: I
will purge out all your iniquity, and forgive all your Trespasses, and I shall
change your natures, if you hearken to me, and obey the light within: These are
the words I would read, but being hindered, I told them what they taught in
their Meetings: to wit,

That the pretended Light in them, is their true Christ, Teacher, Rule, and
Guide, to be heard, believed in, walked up unto, and obeyed, as the only
Savior, to give remission of sins, and Salvation with God: to which F. E.
forth with replied, That he would for this, lay down his life: and to confirm
him therein, W. Harriot then said, we deny the out side Christ to be our
Savior: Then I requested the Hearers to take good notice: sc. they have
plainly granted, that the end of their Meeting to be, for to Teach a denial of
Jesus of Nazareth, the Man approved of God, ( Act. 2. 22) to be the true
Christ, and our only Savior: which Teaching, is to make the Lord Christ, his
Holy Spirit, his Angels, and Apostles all Liars, and False witnesses of God:
which I proved in their particular order, from the Scriptures of God. As*

1. That this their Teaching, does (as much as in them lies) make the Lords
Christ a liar: for we read Joh. 9. 35, 36, 37. Do thou (says Christ to the
Man that was born blind) Believe on the Son of God; he answered and said, who
is the Lord, that I might believe on him? And Jesus said unto him, thou have
both seen him, and it is be that talks with thee.

Note, If our Lord spoke truth here; then he, whom this man both saw and talked
with (with his bodily eyes and tongue) was the Messiah, the Christ and Savior,
the Son of God: and in Joh. 4. 25, 26. The Woman said unto him, I knew that
Messiah (our Savior) comes, which is called Christ: when he is come, he will
tell us all things: Jesus says unto her, I that speak unto thee am he.

Here observe, the Lord Jesus Christ, as of purpose to rebuke this lying Spirit
(of a Qaukers Mystical' Invisible Flesh and Blood, their Internal saving
Christ) does testify of himself, that he, who was both seen and heard, by the
bodily eyes and ears of the Woman, with whom he conversed, was the Messiah, the
true Christ, and Teacher of all things: And in Mark 14. 61, 62. Again the High
Priest asked him, and said unto him, art thou the Christ, the Son of the
Blessed? and Jesus said, I am: here likewise the Lord Jesus testified of
himself, that he on whom the High Priest looked, and to whom he spoke) was the
Christ, the Son of the blessed.

Moreover, Mat. 16. 13 to 18. the Lord Jesus proposes two questions to his
Disciples. First, What Opinion others had of him, ver. 13. Whom do men say,
that I the Son of Man am? and they said, ver. 14. Some say thou art John the
Baptist, some Elias, and others Jeremias, or one of the Prophets: when Christ
heard of those various apprehensions which wereabroad concerning him: he
presently asked his Disciples a second Question, ver. 15. But whom say ye, that
I (the Son of Man. ver. 13) am? Peter (in the Name, and as the mouth of the
rest) gives Answer, ver. 16. Thou ar^ Christ, the Son of the living God: Christ
was so highly satisfied with this Answer, that first, he pronoun^eth him
blessed, ver. 17. and secondly declares, that this confession, is the rock upon
which the Church is built: and withal Christ assures his Disciples, that
against this Rock (the join confession, sc. That Jesus the Son of man, is the
Christ the Son of the living God, the Gates of hell shall never prevail: O ye
Teaching Quakers, is not this enough to open the eyes of your blind Idol
within. Again, how has our Lord himself, said of himself (even since his being
ascended and glorified) Act. 22. 8. I am Jesus of Nazareth, whereby is plainly
affirmed, the now present glorified existence of the Man Jesus Christ of
Nazareth, and hereunto agrees that which he foretold of himself, Mat. 24. 30.
And they shall see the Son of Man, coming in the clouds of Heaven, with power
and great glory: the whole is this, is Jesus of Nazareth (whom they wickedly
call the out side Christ) be not the true Christ and our only Savior; then he
is (according to a Quakers inside Christ) a Liar in all the words uttered by
him above: but let God be true, and his Enemies Liars; such Liars are Teaching
Seancing Quakers; yea, accursed Liars, Gal. 1 8, 9. as above.

2. That this Teaching in their Meetings, does (as much as in them lies) make
the holy Spirit of Christ Liar: for we read in the 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11. the
Prophets, searching what or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ, which was
in them (...) signify, when it testified before hand the sufferings of Christ,
and the glory (Salvation Grace, ver. 10.) that should follow: and in Acts 5.
30, 31, 32 the Holy Ghost does witness that God raised up the same Jesus whom
the Jews slew, and exalted him to be a Prince and a Savior: Likewise, Luke 2
26, 27, 28, 30. That the Holy Ghost revealed to just and de out Someon, that
the Child Jesus, which he took up in his arms, and saw with his bodily eyes was
the Lords Christ and Salvation, prepared before the face of all people. And
Paul also (by the inspiration of the Spirit) assures us. Romans 5. 15. That the
Grace of God, and gift by Grace, which by one man Jesus Christ, has abounded
to many: this one Man, is no other then Jesus of Nazareth, the man approved of
God (not in, but) among the Jews, who with their wicked hands, did take, and
him they crucified and slew, Act. 2. 22, 23 The sum is this, If the Man Jesus
Christ of Nazareth, whom the Jews slew, and hanged on a tree, and God raised
from the dead the third day, and exalted to be the only Savior (be a Spiritual
inside Christ, a Heavenly Man of Mystical, Invisible flesh and blood) then the
holy spirit of Truth must be a Liar; which to affirm (as Quakers in effect do)
is horrid Blasphemy.

3. They do in their Meetings and aims make the Angels of Christ Liars, as it
appears by the Evangelists, Mat. 1. 20, 21. Behold the Angel of the Lord
appeared to Joseph, saying, Fear not to take unto the Mary thy Wife, for that
which is conceived in her, is of the Holy Ghost; and she shall bring forth a
Son, and thou shall call his Name Jesus, for he shall save his people from
their sins. And in Luke 1. 30, 31, 32. And the Angel said unto her, fear not
Mary, for thou have found favor with God, and behold thou shall conceive is
thy womb, and bring forth a Son, and shall call his Name Jesus, and he shall be
great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest: and again on his Birth day,
Luke 2. 10, 11. And the Angel said unto them (the Shepherds) fear not; for,
behold I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people; for
to you is born this day, in the City of David, a Savior which is Christ the
Lord, and ver. 13, 14, 15. Suddenly there was the Angel a multitude of the
Heavenly Host, praising God and saying, Glory to God in the Highest, and on
Earth peace, good will toward men. And immediately upon this blessed Remark on
the Babe, ver. 12. wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a Manger; the Angels
went away from the Shepherds into Heaven: whence I do in^er; sc. if the Lords
Christ conceived in the Womb of Mary, and born of her in the City of David, be
not the true Christ and our only Savior (but a mystical, unconceived, and
unborn Christ) then the glorious Angels of God, must be liars in all the
expressions which they declared to Joseph. Mary, and the Shepherds: but most
sure I am, that every good Christian will rather believe the Elect Angels of
God, the^ Apostate men or Angels.

4. They do in their meetings and aims, make the Apostles of Christ Liars and
false witnesses of God: for the Apostles have with one mind and mouth, often
witnessed this truth, to wit, That Jesus the Son of Man, is the Christ the Son
of the living God, Mat. 16. from ver 13. to ver. 18. as above) particulary,
ver. 17. Blessed art thou Simon Bar^jona, flesh and blood (that is, me^r man)
has not revealed this to thee, but my Father which is in Heaven; as if the
Lord Christ had said, all men are flesh and blood, so dull sighted and blind,
that they could never have perceived this truth, by any study or observation,
it comes only by gift and revelation; and in Joh. 6.69. we (the Apostles that
then looked upon the person of Christ, conversing with him) Believe, and are
sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God; and of whom, the
Apostles further testify, 1 John 4. 14. And we have seen and do testify, that
the Father sent his Son to be the Savior of the World. Furthermore, We are (
say they) witnesses of these things, Namely, That the God of our Fathers raised
up Jesus from the dead, and exalted him to be a Savior, Act. 5.32. We also
read in Acts 10. from ver. 38. to ver 43.) That God anointed Jesus of Nazareth
with the Holy Ghost, and with power, whom they slew and hanged on a tree; hi^
God raised up the third day, and showed him openly, even to us, who did eat and
drink with him, after he rose from the Dead^: and we (the Apostlss) are
witnesses of these things, and he commanded us to Preach unto the people, and
to Testify that it is he, which is ordained of God, to be judge of quick and
Dead. When I had thus proved the second part of the charge also, I then called
to the Disputants for their Answer, or Assent.

But they ^etook themselves to their former practice, of repeating some Texts
of Scripture, to beget Believers in their new invented-Mystical, Invisible
Christ, their Spiritual heavenly Man, of internal and eternal Flesh, Blood and
Bones, their everlasting Gospel, their tender part, that Idol light within.

William Harriot, was (as to the second part of the Charge) the first Champion
that stood up in defense of their meetings above; saying, That Paul traveled
in birth, till Christ was formed in the Gallatians.

I demanded of him, where those words might be found? he told me, they were in
the Bible: his Answer being like himself) an impertinent Simpleton) enforced me
(as at other times) to name this place of Scripture intended by him: sc. Gal.
4.19. My little Children, of whom I travel in birth again until Christ be
formed in you: To which I Answered:

1. If when Paul writ to the Galatians, Christ was to be formed in them, then
the light that is in every man (a Quakers rotten Principle) by natural
Generation, is not the true Christ: but according to this Disputant) when Paul
was traveling in birth for the Galatians, Christ was not formed in them,
Therefore, the Light that is in every man that comes into the World, is not the
true Christ. Though this poor deluded, soft and fair, had so deeply lasht
himself, yet he felt it not.

2. That Christ formed in a Saint, is Christ framed and wrought in him by the
spirit of Faith, as the same Apostle explains it to the Galatians, Chap. 5.
ver. 5. For we through the Spirit, wait for the hope of righteousness by Faith,
so that a work of the Spirit of Grace in the heart, is Christ operated and
formed in the heart, as before illustrated.

3. The Apostle his traveling in birth, etc. is an Allegory: for the Apostles
were instead of Fathers: As the natural Father begets the bodily form, so the
Apostles begot the spiritual form of the mind, which is Faith, or confidence of
heart, laying hold upon the righteousness of that one man Jesus Christ alone,
Romans 5. 15. above, to be made righteous in the sight of God, ver. 19. For as by
one man's Disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one ( sc.
the one Man Jesus Christ, ver. 15.) shall many be made righteous, ( sc. in the
sight of God, ver. 21.) here William Harriot interrupted me, saying, we are not
come here to hear thee Preach: As I was about to take up his Bolt, I was
hindered by William Wilkinson, who called to me, Friend, hear Friend; I replied,
I am none of thy Friend, for I am an Enemy to the Devil and all his Works,
Christ (quoth he) called him Friend, who was without the Wedding Garment: I
then asked him, who made his Wedding Garments? Now, that which invited this
Queston, was a confident report that he had (at once) two Wives, and in the
time of his pretended distraction, he called the one his Spiritual Wife, and
the other his Fleshly Wife: Surely had this felonious Quaker been really but
half so Lunatic, as he seigned himself, it would have rendered him incapable of
receiving this crafty and knave like distinction from the Master of his
Religion, and Maker of his Wedding Clothes, face't with dissembling Madness:
but letting this pass, I shall add a little more to the alleged Text above,
Gal. 4.19. herein Paul does reprove the false Apostles, who had abolished the
professed form of Christ in the Galatians, and withal devised another form,
Gal. 6.13. But they desire to have Circumcised, that they may glory in your
flesh: thus the Seducing Teaching Quakers, have learnt their ignorant
Disciples, to glory in their own flesh; whereas the blessed Apostle, like a
true Gospel Father, traveled in birth ( i.e. spiritually pained and troubled)
till Christ was formed, namely, by a through work of Faith in their hearts;
that they might truly believe in the righteousness of the Law fulfilled by
Jesus Christ of Nazareth alone; without Circumcision, or any other work of the
Law wrought, is or by themselves, as causal of justification in the sight of
God; this being the true mind of the holy Spirit: it cannot therefore be any
advantage to their cause; nor does it in the least justify the bold and open
wickedness of thee ( O William Harriot) who did reflect. Blasphemous contempt
upon the glorified Manhood of the just and holy one, existing in Heaven above:
[calling him the outside Christ.] When Jesus Christ of Nazareth was in this
World, he was (as Man) so far approved of God, that he commanded all the Elect
Angels to worship him. Heb. 1.6. but with condemned thee ( W. H.) a contemned
out side Christ, no Savior, no true Christ.

W. Harriot, I will ask one Question of thee, which if thou can soberly
Answer, I do assure thee, it shall be seriously considered: the Queston is
this; to wit,

Why should thou not be whipped by the Christian Magistrate, for this thy
notorious and open Blasphemy? [ viz. For Nick-naming the Lords Christ, and our
only Savior, an out side Christ, (an unscriptural phrase) and no Savior.] the
reason of this Question is, Because, we read that our blessed Lord Jesus Christ
whipped sundry persons (honester then thy self, and for a lesser offense) as in
Joh. 2.13, to 17. And Jesus went up to Jerusalem, and found in the Temple those
that sold Oxen and Sheep, and Doves, and the Changers of Money sitting: And
when they had made a scourge of small Cords, he drove them all out of the
Temple, and said unto them, make not my Fathers house a house of Merchandise.

Do thou now consider, if our Lord Jesus Christ made (at Jerusalem) a whip of
small Cords, and with it did whip the people, for abusing the Temple, which was
but a Type or Figure of the humane or mankind nature of Jesus Christ; which is
testified in ver. 19, 21. Destroy this Temple, and in three Days I will raise
it up: But he spoke of the Temple of his Body; in which all his Fathers true
Worship was to terminate, as it appears (by comparing some Scriptures,) the 1
Kings 8. 30, 44, 48. And hearken thou to the supplication of thy Servant, and
of thy People Israel when they shall pray toward this Temple, ( i. e. toward
the Temple in Jerusalem; for the words were ^^^cred by Solomon at the
Dedication of the Temple: and in the faith hereof. Daniel prayed, Chap 6.^0.
His Windows being open in his Chamber toward Jerusalem: and this it was (in
those days) with every true Believer, in all foreign parts of the word, they
did worship the Father (in (...) Son) with their faces toward the Temple in
Jerusalem: yea, Jonah in ^he ^^lly of the Fish, Chap. 2.4. Yet I will look
again toward thy holy Temple.

Now, if in the judgment of Jesus Christ, the people deserved to be Whipped ^or
abusing but the shadow of Christ's Manhood, how much more do thou ( O Will.
H.) deserve whipping (as well as thy late rother James Naylir) that have abused
he Holy substance, the Temple of Christ's blessed body: this is a for higher
offense: it is so Great in respect of men, that it destroys not only their
peace in this World, but that eternal peace for the World to come: indeed, ye
present your selves a peaceable People, calm Saints, and (as you style your
selves) the me^k Lambs of God: but I can assure your that the persons which
Jesus Christ whipped out of the Temple, were far more peaceable then your selves:
for they were but externally uncivil toward the Temple, a shadow or figure
only of the Body of Christ's flesh; but thou, art Blasphemously rude: yea, ye
make it your professed Religion, to derogate from the true humane substance of
the Lords Christ: and (with a brazen forehead, and feared Conscience) vilifying
the holy thing born of Mary, called the Son of God: what greater violence can
be offered to a true Christians peace: Paul exhorts Christians. 1 Timothy 2.2. To
pray for Kings, and for all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all Godliness and Honesty: which Christian Prayers, the
Magistrates are bound (in Conscience) to Answer in their practice, which they
cannot do, so long as such Peace breakers and open Transgressors: 1. Of
Godliness (in respect of Gospel Ordinances. 2. Of Honesty (in respect of
Allegiance) are tolerated by them: howbeit, I do not thus speak in respect of
the poor ignorant Seduced Quakers (the generality of that Sect, being such in
these Islands) but to thy self, and all such Soul Seducers: Now W. Harriot, if
the Christian Magistrate should follow our Lord and Saviors Example herein:
don't thou cry our Persecution, if thou do, the Scourge which Christ made of
small Cords; will tell thee, that thou art mistaken, it being a correcting of
the Nocent, no persecuting of the Innocent: and for thy better satisfaction in
this weighty matter, do thou consider, what he was that made that Scourge of
small Cords (and withal made such good use of it) and thou will find, that he
was, sc.

1. A Prince that had Magistracy and Ministry, radically resident in himself,
as the Son of Man.

2. Though it were so: yet he always refused to act as a Magistrate, except it
were in this one particular case, of whipping or scourging the abusers of the
Temple, in the holy City of Jerusalem.

Quest. Why should a lawful Magistrate scruple to follow Christ's Example, upon
such open D^riders and Blasphemous Contemners of him, whom God has exalted to
be a Prince, and our only Savior, rendering him most vile [sc. An outside
Christ no Savior?] to the proud and ignorant (the Materials of this Synagogue)
yea, hereby increasing the number of those which break the peace, both of God,
and the King, in regard of Godliness and Honesty, as above? So much for the
Question propounded*

The next Prater was, William Wilkinson: he repeats some of the Apostles words,
Col. 1. 27. Christ in you, the hope of Glory: which Text they wrest, by forcing
this sense upon it, viz. That Christ in us, is our present glory, and glorious
Savior: I Answered,

1. This enforced sense, does destroy the true nature of the Word [ Hope] for,
it only quickens a Believer to the lively expectation of the promised glory,
Tit. 1.2. In hope of eternal Life (or glory) which God has promised: Likewise,
Gal. 5. ver.5. For we through the Spirit wait, for the hope of righteousness by
Faith: well then, the office of hope, is, to look at some good to come, as Romans
8.25. If we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it:
which shows us, that this Grace of Hope, is not exercised about things present
(as Quakers falsely gloss) but only about something future, for it is a waiting
Grace.

2. As the forced sense above, does destroy the nature of the Word [ Hope] so
it does the genuine nature of the phrase [ Glory] which signifies Eternal Life,
( Tit. 1.2. above) which is in reversion, or expectation, as the Apostle
witnesses, 1 Pet. 5.1. I who am a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and
also a partaker (sc. by Faith) of the Glory that shall be revealed.

3. If the entire Clause in the Scripture above alleged, Col. 1. 27. be duly
considered, it will plainly show us, that the sense before imposed by them, is
antiscriptural; for the whole clause in the Verse runs thus, [ which is, Christ
in you the hope of Glory.] which is (they usually leave out) refers to the
former part of the verse; namely, The riches of the Glory of the Gentiles:
which Riches, Christ in you the Hope of Glory. Note that it was the person of
Christ, which was the Riches of the Glory of the Gentiles, as well as of the
people Israel, Luke 2. 32. again, the Lords Christ, is called the Riches of
glory, and the unsearchable Riches among the Gentiles; who is, said, ver. 17.
to dwell in the heart by Faith: so that the mind of Paul, in Col. 1. 27. is
explained in Ephesians.3. 17. that is to say, Christ in you (by Faith) is the hope of
Glory to be revealed, 1 Pet: (...). 1. though it be Christ in you, the Hope,
yet not the Merit of Glory; And therefore by Christ in you the hope of glory,
we are not to understand either present Glory, ^r our glorious Savior to be in
us: Hereupon F. Eastlack, shoots this bolt: to wit, that the Deity was within
him, (meaning. that the Deity only, was the true Christ and his Savior;) to
which I Replied, that the essential general presence of the Deity, was in Cats
and Dogs, as well as in him; and therefore if the presence of the Deity only,
were the Savior, it might be so in these, as well as in him: forthwith, he
cried out, saying, Thou have spoken Blasphemy: I told him, that I had not
spoken Blasphemy, but good Divinity; and then proved it to be so, by the
Testimony of the holy Apostle, Act. 17. 24. God that made the world, and all
things; herein, he gives ver. 15. to all, life, and breath, and all things:
here hence I inferred, That as the Deity was not included in anything, or
creature; so nor was it excluded: To which F. E. returned, saying, I thought
(quoth he) that thou had meant otherwise: this Answer was like himself.

But for as much as some of the Quakers have (as I am informed) since affirmed,
sc. that F. E. did me no wrong, in charging me with Blasphemy, as above: I
shall therefore endeavor some further satisfaction in in this matter: As from
the Prophet Jeremiah, Chap 23. ver. 23,24. Am I a God at hand, says the Lord,
and not a God afar off: can any bide himself in secret places, that I should
not see him? says the Lord, do not I first Heaven and Earth? says the Lord.

All these Questions, are resolved into this one Position; namely, that the
Deity is omnipresent, in all things every where. The Divine Being fills all
things and places: for, though he be not circumscribed by any thing that is
made, nor limited to any place; yet it is not excluded from any place, creature
or thing. This (says Mr. Carils on ler. 23. above) is a Mystery which indeed
we are not able to comprehend by reason, but we must take it down by Faith,
which gives credit to the Word of God, and persuades the heart, that the report
therein made is a Truth. But if any ask, how the Deity may be said to be every
where, and in every thing, and creature that is made?

I Answer, This Mysterious and astonishing Question, with Augustine, (Epist.
55. ad Dard*) who affirms. That the Deity is wholly every where, and in every
thing; for the Godhead cannot be divided or parted: That it is whole within all
things, and whole without all things, no where included no where excluded,
containing all things, contained of nothing yet not at all mingled with the
nature of these things, no^ defiled with their pollutions.

There is a Truth in all these Assertions, for the Deity is infinite and
indivisible, and therefore wheresoever the Deity is, he is all and altogether,
filling all places, creatures and thing in heaven, hell, sea, and earth; as
Psalm. 139 7,8 Job. 11 8,9. Isai. 43.2. And therefore their Teacher, F.E. has
not only wronged me, but much more the God of Truth, and which was implied by
himself, when he said as above, to wit [I thought thou (...) meant otherwise:]
But before the making good this Assertion (sc. That I had not spoken Blasphemy)
I discoursed the words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 139 7,8. Whether shall I go from
thy presence? David was so far from imagining that any such place could be
found, that in the very next words he concludes God to be every where, by an
innumeration of all places: saying, If I ascend up into Heaven, thou art there,
if I make my b^d in Hell, thou art there, if I take the wings of the morning,
and dwell in the outermost parts of the Sea, even there shall thy hand lead me,
and thy right hand shall hold me: that is, there shall find thee efficaciously
present with me. Here W. Wilkinson interrupted me, saying, We own Gods presence
in heaven and bell: (now, forasmuch as I well knew, the Ledger demains of
Seducing Quakers, denying any special or distinct place, of heaven or hell, but
what was within themselves) I asked him, whither his God (whose presence he
owned in hell) were saved or damned in hell? to which he made no reply
presently, but being often urged, at last he said, I will not tell th^^: and
afterward he answered, I leave it to thee: this Answer was no other than a
filly shift, to hide his Equivocations, least they should have been unmasked,
and then confuted by the Scriptures of truth; this undoubtedly was the ground
of his silence which is the more remarkable, because this Wilkinson is one of
their baffling and prating Quakers: But I pass this, and proceed to the second
Scripture repeated by him, to wit,

2 Cor. 5. 16 Though we have known Christ, after the flesh, yet now hence forth
know we him no more? I Answered, that the word [ Flesh] is not here taken for
the humane or mankind nature of Christ.

1. Because ver. 15. The Saints are exhorted to magnify the body of Christ's
flesh, sc. That they which ^ive, should not live to themselves, but to him that
died for them, and rose again: Now it was the Body of Christ's flesh, which died
and rose again from the dead; and therefore the Apostle does not (^n this
Scripture) deny the knowled^e o^ Christ after the flesh: but he does deny to
k^ow ( i. e. in a special manner to love) them who pretend to be Saints, yet
^eck their own interest, more then Christ's:

Hence, 2. Paul infers; yea, Though we have known Christ after the flesh, i. e.
after worldly greatness and honor, creature Pomp and Dignity: in which sense [
Flesh] is understood in ( 1 Cor. 1.^6.) Not many wise men after the flesh, not
many Noble, not many Mighty (sc. after the flesh) are called: in this sense, is
[ Flesh] in the alleged Text above, to be understood; as if the Apostle had
said, while we were unbelieving Pharisees, we expected the Mesias to come in
external state, earthly Glory and Majesty: but being now converted to the Faith
of Christ, we have laid aside those fleshly thoughts, and apprehensions of
Christ, after which, we know him no more: this is (as I said) the mind of Paul,
in reference to Christ after the Flesh (in the Text of Scripture above) it does
not therefore advantage their cause, of an Idol light within, their pretended
Christ and only Savior: I did expect some return from W. W. but he made none.

Then F. Eastlack said, The Scripture says, It is Christ in you (meaning
therefore we are not to know Christ after the Flesh) I told him, that I had
more then once made Replies to those words, which had (as I hoped) given full
satisfaction to the Christian Hearers; but this poor man, being almost spent,
said again, the Scripture says, It is Christ in you: which a little moved me,
and thereupon I demanded of him, sc. If the true Christ and only Savior be in
thee, in what part of thy body is he residing? that is to say, whether in thy
ly Legs, Brains or Bowels? he had his Answer ready, sc. This is an Ishmael; and
his Brother Blasphemer W. H seconded him, Yes (quoth he) He is an Ishmaelite:
to which, (being now without interruptions) I make this return, That I am,
content to be called [ Ishmael] as it signifies [ Heard of God] as (I hope) I
am, in bearing witness to the Grace of God, and Gift by Grace, which abounds
(to all believing Christians) through the one Man Jesus Christ: and withal let
me tell you Quakers, Though ye are not in Name, yet in Nature, Disposition and
Practice ye are the true Ishmaels; as it does appear by the Spirit of Christ, (
Gal. 4.22. to the end.) wherein, all such as stand under the Covenant of works
(as Quakers do) are typified by Ishmael, for in this History (as spiritually
applied by the holy Apostle) we have these particulars noted: (1.) Sarah, notes
Jerusalem above. (2.) Isaac all the true seed of God by promise in Christ
through Faith. (3.) Hagar, the literal Covenant of God, abused by all false
Teachers. (4.) Ishmael. All Hypocrites and Bond-Children hereby brought forth
in the Church, mocking and persecuting the Children of promise (under the
Covenant of Grace) etc. As its more particularly asserted in ver. 29. But as
then, he that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that was born after the
Spirit, even so it is now.

Here the Apostle reports to us, a great Example of unholy scorn; sc Ishmael
persecuting Isaac; Moses tells us the manner how, and the weapon where with,
Ishmael did not li^t up his hand against Isaac (as Cain did against Abel) but
his tongue: he mocked him, Genesis 21.9. reproachful mocking, is one of Satan's
choice Engines to wound the blessed Gospel at the very heart: even so it is now
(says Paul there) and we may now say, even so it is now; that is, they that
are born after the Fesh, do persecute them that are born after the Spirit (or
of God, Joh. (...). 13.) who are Believers in the Name of Jesus of Nazareth,
(ver. 12 comp. 45.) Its but too well known how the Quakers (who glory in their
own Flesh Gal. 6. 13 and in that respect, born after the Flesh) do with most
unholy scorn, mock them that are born after the Spirit, sc. after the Spirit of
Faith in the Lord Jesus of Nazareth, reproachfully saying: O, you believe in a
humane, earthly Christ in an outside Christ, a Christ in Name, Show and
appearance only; no real Christ, no real Savior: surely, these kind of
sayings, must needs be bitter mockings, sarcastical Jearings, and most
Blasphemous Scorning of the holy and just one, born of Mary the Son of the
Highest, which in ver. 29. above, the Apostle calls Persecution: for it plainly
notes a contemptuous and malignant carriage against Jesus of Nazareth the Man
approved of God among the People, Act 2. 22. in short, the whole is this: to
wit, Let any rational Saint judge whether the Earth does (or can) bear, greater
persecutors of the Man Jesus Christ of Nazareth, than these Scoffing, Quaffing
Quakers, and consequently are the Ishmaels both in having, and acting the very
nature, and disposition of Ishmael; but I shall likewise pass this, and return
to the third Scripture, which William Wilkinson repeated, viz. 1 Cor. 6. 11.
But ye are wash^d, but ye are justified by the Spirit of God:

Answ. I told him, 1. That he had profanely dismembered that Sacred ^^x of
Scripture, as his Brother F. E. had done before him, leaving ou^ the Name of
the Lord Jesus, (a Name too hard for them to bear.)

2. That I had already showed the mind of the Apostle, touching those words:
and that it would be a disingenious act, to weary the judicious Hearers with
needless repetitions: but he continued clamouro^s, querying; Why they might not
be washed, and justified by the Spirit now, as well as others heretofore?

I replied, That the Spirit as such, never justified any Saint from sin in the
sight of God: much less such a one as he was, who never had the Spirit of God
in him; he forth with required me to prove that; to wit, That he has not the
Spirit of God in him which I proved by 3 Arguments.

1. d^g. Was taken from 1 John 5.8. Where are three that bear witness in Earth,
the Spirit, and the Water, and the Blood, and these three agree in me:

But the Spirit that is in thee, does not agree with the water of Baptism^, nor
blood of the Supper: (for thou have renounced both the Sacraments) therefore
the Spirit of God is not in thee.

[Note: though I thus Argued; yet it was not to exclude other implicated
respects in this Text of Scripture.]

To which he Replied, saying, That he had both Baptism, and the Lords Supper
within him: But I proved the contrary, thus; Baptism and the Lords Supper are
visible signs, of the invisible efficacy of Christ's one Crucified Body; but
the visible signs* (namely washing with water in (or unto) the Name of the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and the Bread and Wine, broken, and given, and
poured forth) are not within thee; therefore the Sacraments of Baptism, and
the Supper of the Lord are not within thee: To this he made no Reply.

By the way, let the Reader observe, to wit, That the Teaching, Seducing
Quakers do usually affirm, the true Church Officers, and Ordinances of Worship,
are in God; and that the Deity is in them: therefore all these are invisibly in
them: being (as they prate) immediately made by the Spirit ( still the
Idol-light within) whence they conclude that Baptism and the Lords Supper are
within them: though their assertions herein, be frequently and most plainly
contradicted by themselves: For they maintain and keep up visible Meetings,
Officers, Light worship, and Worshippers: and thus by their constant, visible
practice they clearly confute themselves, living in contradiction to their own
fanciful Principles and being self confuted, they are self-condemned: How great
is this darkness.

Again, here hence it is, That they acknowledge no other Baptism, then of the
Holy Ghost, and of Fire (which makes many of them (as its supposed) so hot, two
Wives) calling it their internal warmth, and spiritual refreshment: nor no
other Lords Supper, than their daily Feasts of fat things, which (as they dare
say) feed them with heavenly joys, glories, and unspeakable delights: often
attended with a dissembled kind of canting-hummings within: a new kind of charm
to seduce the itching ear, and soft head, with unscriptural novelties: so much
for their internal and invisible Sacraments. I pass to the second Argument.

2. Arg. Was taken from Romans 8.16. The Spirit it self bears witness with our
Spirit, that we are the Children of God.

But this holy Spirit does not bear witness with thy Spirit, that thou art a
Child of God: Therefore, the Spirit of God is not in thee.

He denied the Assumption; which I proved, The Holy Spirit Witnesses them only
to be Gods Children, which do believe Jesus Christ of Nazareth to be the true
Christ, and their only Savior, Gal. 3.26.

But thou do not believe on Jesus of Nazareth to be the true Christ, and thy
only Savior; Therefore, the Holy Spirit does not bear witness with thy Spirit,
that thou art a child of God, and consequently thou have not the Spirit of God
within thee: To which he made me no Return at all; so that his staring silence,
gave open consent to the concluded Truth above.

The 3 d. Argument was thus formed: sc. He that makes God the Father a Liar,
has not the Spirit of God in him: but thou make God the Father a Liar: This
Minor he confidently denied, but I proved it, thus:

He that believes not the Record, which God gives of his Son, makes him a
Liar, 1 John 5. 10. But thou believe not the Record, that God gave of his Son.
Therefore, thou make God the Father a Liar:

He denied the Minor Proposition; For (as he said) he believed the Record that
God gave of his Son: But I proved the contrary, thus,

The Record that God gives of his Son, is this, sc. That Jesus Christ (as Man)
is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the World, Joh. 1. 29,30. with
34 verse.

But thou do not believe the Record, Namely, That Jesus Christ (as Man) is
the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the World; Therefore thou did
not believe the Record, that God gave of his Son: consequently, thou make God
a Liar, and such Blasphemers have not the Spirit of God in them: here again the
Lord stopped his Mouth, that he had not a word to say for himself.

As I was thus Arguing this Truth, ( sc. That the Spirit of God, was not in
this Disputant W. Wilkinson) I observed (and O let it never be forgotten) a
very old Quaker (M. Henry Smith) standing upon a Form (o^ some such thing) and
looked earnestly and sadly upon me, my very heart being moved toward this poor
Seduced Old Man: I forthwith called to him: saying my Soul is grieved for thee,
Oh do but consider, what will shortly become of thy unbelieving Soul, which
has professedly forsaken the true Christ and only Savior from sin and the
wrath to come, Act. 2. 22 chap. 5.31 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. Even Jesus of Nazareth a
Man approved of God among the People, and by him exalted to be a Prince and
Savior, to give Repentance and remission of sins. O with what horror and
astonishment, will thou (...) long look the Lamb of God in the face, when he
shall charge thee with a^ open denying, yea with renouncing of him before man,
an^ with (perhaps) a causing many others likewise to do the same, its high time
for to bet^ink thy self, what Answer thou will give to the Lord Christ for this
thy dreadful and accursed Apost^sie, when God shall take away thy Soul: Oh,
that thou would seriously think on blessed Stephen, (a Man full of the Holy
Ghost) when he saw the heavens above opened, and Jesus the Son of M^n standing
there, he called on him, and said, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit, Act. 7.
55,56,59. But alas poor Old Man! on whom will thou call, to receive thy almost
despairing Spirit? thou art not of blessed Stephens Faith, who lived, and died
in the Faith of Jesus of Nazareth, the true Christ, and his only Savior: O
thou poor sinner, that art deluded into another Faith, how d^st thou think to
escape the damnation of hell?

As I were thus speaking to him, the Lord undoubtedly took hold on his heart;
for though he were a Man of parts, yet he made no reply of anything, which (in
real tenderness to his Soul) I had spoken above: but immediately he st^pt down,
in a trembling posture, with tears in his eyes, went out of the Church: (...)
next morning he came to my house, (pretending a troubled Spirit) and after some
conference with him, he went civily, away, and (as I hoped) somewhat satisfied:
But this visible and invisible hand shaking of God, was soon after forgot by
him: and he (according to the divine method of just and secret Judgments) more
settled in his long Runs of whoring from God; which has caused me to send a
few lines more after Quakers.

1. That ye would be persuaded, wisely to consider that Text of Scripture, in
Rev. 6. 15, etc. which concerns all sorts of Unbelievers, ver. 16,17. Calling
to the Mountains and Rocks, fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that
^itteth on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: for the great day of his
wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand?

O thou deluded one! will it not amaze thee? when thou shall look up and see,
and say; Lo, yonder is Jesus of Nazareth the Man approved of God, that I would
not have to rule over me, yonder he is indeed: Oh, yonder he comes, he comes!
Alas, alas! what shall I do, that am in my sins of impenitency and unbelief,
and have no share in him? Look, Oh look, what a glorious train does attend him:
woe is me, Oh woe is me! this Lamb of God (whom poor deluded I, called an out
side Christ, no Savior) Behold he comes lika a Lion, tearing in pieces, and
none to deliver: will not this be a dreadful, most dreadful day to thee indeed,
dying in thy Aposta^ie: I do therefore entreat you, to ponder seriously on this
weighty matter, concerning Jesus Christ of Nazareth, the Son of Mary; that he
is now in a present glorified and bodily existence in the third Heaven above,
and that he now has (though denied by Socinians and Quakers) in the Heavens
above, true flesh and blood, the nature and properties of a true mankind body;
which Mr. Doolittle plainly proves, by propounding (in the Young-man's
Instructor) four Questions.

1. Quest. Had not Christ a real humane, mankind body, when he arose out of the
Grave; forasmuch as he showed the prints of the nails in his hands and feet to
Thomas, Joh.20.27, surely, this cannot be denied with any color of reason.

2. Quest. Did he not ascend with the same body, or had he not the same body
when he was parted from his Disciples; forasmuch as they saw the same body, go
up, that talked with them, Act. 1.9,10,11. No man can deny this, with whom the
Scriptures of truth, have either Authority or Credit.

3. Quest. Can you say, that Christ put off his body, after he was taken out of
sight before he came into heaven; or if you should say it, does any Scripture
favor you herein? neither Socinian, Quaker, or any other to this day, ever
produced (nor can) any such Scripture: For Stephen saw Christ's humane body
since in Heaven above. Act. 7.55,56.

4. Quest. Or can you tell, that Christ put off his body, since he came to
Heaven, and Stephen saw him there: I am (said he) most sure, that you can tell
no such thing; for the testimony of the holy Angels is against it, for they did
assure the Disciples, that the same Jesus that they saw ascend, should be so
seen to come again, Act.1.9,10,11.

And will not these four things, put you out of doubt, sc. that Christ has the
same body now, that he had upon the earth: Oh, how great is the ground of a
true Christians comfort, that the same person that died for us, is thus sat
down at the right hand of God: aad that there we have the same Jesus
interc^eding for us in heaven: on the other side is it not matter of dread and
terror to the wicked (both in practice and judgment) that still continue to
oppose an exal^ed Christ, and prefer their base Lusts and Errors before this
glorious Lord Jesus.

The second part of the charge being fully ended, W. Wilkinson called on me, to
make Good the third part of the Charge. viz.

That the Prime Pinciples of a Quaker, are the same which were held and
professed by the Beasts, that Paul fought with at Ephesus.

Which I thus Argued:

It appears by the manifold Arguments, which the Apostle Paul used toward the
Corinthians, 1 Cor Chap. ^5* to prove the Resurrection of Christ's body from the
dead, and the bodies of the Saints by him: now their Principles were these to
wit,

1. That the body of Christ was not raised from the dead (and consequently he
is not Jesus, a Savior)

2. That no Man's body shall be raised from the dead, (and consequently, Christ
shall not be the riser of the dead.)

The first of these the Apostle confutes, in Chap. above, ver. 3,4. For I
declared unto you first of all, that which I received: how that Christ died for
our sins, according to the Scriptures: And that he was buried, and that he rose
again the third day, according to the Scriptures.

And the second likewise, in ver. 13,14,15. etc. But if there be no
Resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not risen; And if Christ be not risen,
we are found false witnesses of God, because we have testified of God, that he
raised up Christ, whom he raised not up, if so be that the dead rise not.

Here hence Paul infers, ver. 32. If after the manner of men, I have fought
with Beasts at Ephesus, what advantageth it me, if the dead rise not; let us
eat and drink, for tomorrow we die.

As if the Apostle he I said, fit must be with our Bodies, as with Beasts after
Death, then it would be best for us to Live as Beasts in our Time of Life;
intimating that there resolves and desires is to live in Brutish lust and
pleasures, these are the most predominate motives that persuaded them to deny
and oppose the Resurrection of the dead; which opposition I charged upon the
Quakers then present: To which,

William Wilkinson replied, saying Show us an express Scripture which says,
That the Beasts which Paul fought with at Ephesus, denied the Resurrection of
the Dead.

I answered, 1. It was plainly employed in that Text of Scripture: and it does
evidently concenter therein: Besides, in reason, there is nothing that could be
the ground or occasion of this Fight (or violent contention) between Paul and
these Brutish disputants, but the Doctrine of the Resurrection.

2. I gave him the liberty to put his own interpretation upon the words (in
verse. 32. above) To which he made no reply at all. Let me here add, It is more
then probable, that the Beasts Paul fought with at Ephesus, were the same
persons (or of the same beastly persuasion) which, in other places opposed
Paul's Doctrines, of Faith in Jesus, and the Resurrection of the Dead. As in
Athens, Act. 17. 18. Then certain Philosophers of the Epicurians (whom Calvin
on the Text calls Beasts) encountered him; and some said, What will this babbler
say; othersome, He seems to be setter forth of strange gods, because he
preaches unto them Jesus and the Resurrection; at which some mocked, verse. 23.

And in the beginning of this 19. Chap. (verse. 1,2,3.) We read, that Paul went
into the Synagogue of the Jews in Thessalonia, and three Sabbath days reasoned
with the Jews out of the Scripture, Opening and alleging, that Christ must
needs have suffered, and risen again from the dead: And that this Jesus whom I
preach unto you is Christ

But what was the issue; the 4. verse tells us, sc: Some of the Jews believed of
the devout Greek, a great multitude and of the chief Women, not a few: but the
(5. verse) inform^ ^s, That othersome of the hearers believed not; moved with
envy, took unto them certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a
Company, and set all the City on an uproar (against Paul, because he preached
Jesus and the Resurrection) Therefore (10.) The Brethren immediately sent away
Paul by (...) unto Burea, who coming thither, went into the synagogue of the
Jews (and preached the same Doctrine, v. 12)

But when the Jews (verse. 13.) of Thessalonia (i.e. the lewd followers of the
baser sort of the Jews. verse. 5*) had knowledge that the Word of God was
preached of Paul at Berea, they came thither also, and stirred up the People,
then immediately the Brethren sent Paul away (verse. 14.) and they that conducted
him, brought him to Athens (verse. 15.) In the next Chapter (^h. 18 1.) we read,
That Paul departed from Athens, and come to Corinth: And he (verse. 4.) reasoned
in the synagogue very Sabbath. and perswa^^d the Jews and Greeks (namely to
believe in Jesus and the Resurrection, as in all places before expressed) but
when he was hero also opposed ( verse. 6.) He departed thence, and sail^d into
Syria (verse. 18.) and became to Ephesus (verse. 19) and entered into the
synagogue, and reasoned with the (...) Though some perhaps might believe his
Doctrines, because it is said ( ver. 20) He was desired to tarry a longer time
with them: Yet it is very probable that he was there opposed by some others,
(as at (...) above) either at this, or some other time: And according to his
first Epistle to the Corinthians, gives them an account of it (ch.15. 32.)
Now, if the Beasts therein mentioned, were not the same individual person, yet
they were specifically the same ( i.e. of the same Malignant quality and rotten
judgment) with those lewd fellows of the baser (or more brutish) sort; which
in Act. 17.5, etc. above so strongly denied and opposed, Jesus of Nazareth to
be the true Christ and only Savior with the Resurrection of the dead, upon the
whole: ye Teaching, Seducing Quakers may run and read in the Scriptures of God,
what lewd and base fellows have been (according to the testimony of the holy
Spirit of truth) your Predecessors, and of your brutish Principles: sc.

1. Denying Jesus Christ of Nazareth to be the true Christ, and our only
Savior.

2. Denying the Resurrection of the dead. As to the last of these, F. Eastlack
said. We do not deny the Resurrection of the dead I demanded of him, whether
they did believe, that the same body that dies shall rise a (...). He readily
Replied, saying, We do not beli^ve the resurrection of the same body that dies:
how then (said I) do you grant the resurrection of the dead? if the same body
that died shall not rise again: Is not this, plainly to deny, what ye grant:
for, if it be another body that is raised from the dead, then its not the same
body that died: nay, it must be a raising of a body from the dead, that never
died: these absurdities must unavoidably follow: Nay furthermore, if it be not
the resurrection of the same body that died.

It cannot be called a Resurrection, but a new Creation, which is altogether
(in effect) to deny the resurrection of the dead; and so a plain self
contradiction.

Next W. Bullock appeared telling us, that the same body which dies, shall not
rise again, alle^ging these words: It is sown a natural body, it is raised a
spiritual body.

I Replied, 1. That the Words repeated by him, were in, 1 Cor. 15. 44. and
withal, the Apostle says not, that the body shall be raised a Spirit, but
Spiritual; as Christ's body of flesh and bones, after the Resurrection, was
Spiritual, but not a Spirit: for Christ assured his Disciples, that his body
was not changed into a Spirit; Behold and see, for a Spirit has not flesh and
bones, as ye see me have, Luke 24. 39. It is the same true and real body which
is presented to you, saying, It is I my self. Now, as it was with Christ's body
raised from the dead, so it shall be with our body (as to the substantial
sameness) after the Resurrection, inasmuch as the Resurrection of Christ's body
is made a pledge of our Resurrection, 1 Cor. 5. 14. And God has both raised up
the Lord, and will also raise up us by his own power. Again, But now is Christ
risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that slept, 1 Cor. 15.
20.

2. It is raised a Spiritual Body, because then the body shall have no need of
natural helps, of which a natural body stands in need of, as sleep, meat,
raiment, but a spiritual body needs them not, this is the judgment of all
orthodox Authors: Christ told the Sadduces (who said there is not Resurrection)
That after the Resurrection, Mat. 22.39. They neither Marry nor are given in
Marriage, but are as the Angels in Heaven* Christ does not say, that they shall
be Angels, or that their bodies shall be changed into the nature of Angels: but
as Angels (or Angelical) in respect of qualifications; in like manner the body
shall be raised spiritual, but not a Spirit.

Francis Eastlack stood up again, and boldly said, That the Scripture says, it
shall not be the same body at the Resurrection; and forthwith called to me for
the Bible which was in my hand, he turned to the 1. Cor. Chap. 5. and read the
36,37,38. verses.

Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened except it dye* and that
which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be but bare grain; but
God gives it a body as it has pleased him, and to every seed his own body.

I Answered, That the last words [ sc. To every seed his own body] do show,
that it is the same body for substance, which was sown; but not for qualities:

F. Eastlack Replied, saying, The Scripture says, it is not the same body, but
thou sayeft it is the same body; I told him, what I had said, the same Texts of
Scripture do (in effect (say, sc. Though it be not same body for Qualities, yet
it is the same body for Substance: as a piece of Plate of the old fashion,
being call into a mould of the newest fashion, is the same for substance, but
not for qualities: Wool died in a Scarlet color, is the same wool for
substance as it was before, but not for qualities: and withal I told him, if he
would not admit of a distinction, how then could he reconcile these Scriptures
to his understanding viz. God repents and he repents not: God tempts no man,
yet God tempted Abraham: Reprove a Fool in his folly, and reprove not a fool in
his folly: I and my Father are one, and the Father is greater then I, to which
he made no Answer, nor quarell'd Distinctions any more.

As for the similitude of Corn and Grain, mentioned in the verses above, I
shall answer with Reverend Mr. Caril: It is (says he) very true, that the Corn
or Grain which is sowed, does not arise again in that manner, or after that
quality or likeness in which it was cast into the ground: we sow bare Seed, but
when it comes up again it comes with a stalk, and an ear, and shoots up in much
greeness and beauty: there is a great difference between a grain of wheat in
the bushel, and a flourishing stem, or ear of Corn in the field: God gives it
another body in the growing up, but yet it is still a body, and there is the
same nature in it still, and the same substance of the grain remains still;
only there is an addition of beauty and greenness when it is risen and grown
up: so the Body that is cast into the Ground, is like a [ bare] grain: it is
cast in a bare (or naked) body, but when it shall be raised again, the body
shall have many beautiful and glorious additions: so that in the Resurrection
there will be an adding of somewhat to that which was before; the Corn grows
up, with somewhat that it bad not, but it does not lose any thing that it had:
it is still a garin of wheat and be^ter, so the body laid down in the Grave, is
raised, not the same in all things, but better in many things added: Now the
excellent endowments and qualifications added to the body, cannot work a loss
or an annihilation of the frame or disposition of corporial parts and members,
so much for Mr. Caril, upon the 1 Cor. 15. 36,37,38 verses.

I shall now consider the last Text of Scripture, which was by F. E. repeated,
to wit:

1. Cor. 15. 30. That flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God;
Therefore, the same body that dies shall not rise again.

I Answered 1. That the S^cintans (your Brethren and fellow Adversaries of the
truth) do urge this Text of Scripture, to confirm their assertions against
Christ and the Resurrection of the same body; to wit. that Christ has not now
flesh and blood, nor the nature and properties of a true Mankind body; this
has been before propounded and confuted: again (they say, as ye do) How can the
body arise of flesh, when the Apostle says, Flesh and blood cannot inherit the
Kingdom of God; if no flesh shall inherit the Kingdom of God, how can it be
affirmed that the same true flesh shall be raised to enter upon that
inheritance (perhaps this improvement he had forgot.

2. These inferences are not only defective, but contrary to the true Nature of
a Resurrection, which denotes a taking up of that which was laid down: It must
hence follow, sc: If the same body that dies be not raised up, but another kind
of body, it cannot be a Resurrection, as above; Moreover, if a^ the
Resurrection it be not the same* but another body, then, that body which
actively an^ passively honored God in this world, shall not (according to
Divine Promise, Col. 3. 4.) be glorified with Christ in the World to come, but
another body shall be there glorified, which never did or suffered any thing
for God's honor, and to which God never made any Promise: yea, that body which
wickedly sinned, lived and dye^^ final impenitency and unbelief: Shall not
(according to D^^ine ^reat^ing, M^tt.^5. 41.) be for ever tormented: but
another bo^y shall which ^ever sinner (nor was ever threatened) be eternally
dammed in hell with (...) Devil and his Angels: These inavoidable consequents
are no less than high blasphemies against the Justice, Truth, and Righteousness
of God Himself, especially in that Scripture o^ sacred truth (2 Cor. 5. 10) ^e
must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, that every one (sc: the
same whole man) may receive the things done in his body, according to that he
has done, whether good or bad: And the Lord Christ assures us ( John. 5.
28,29) The hour is coming, in the which all that are in the Graves (Are there
any other bodies in the Graves then the same bodies which were put into them)
shall hear His voice,

And shall come forth, they that have done good, unto the Resurrection of Life,
and they that have done evil, unto the Resurrection of Damnation, thus (in
Matt. 25. 46) also Proved.

3. That by Flesh and Blood (in that place of Scripture above) is not meant the
substance of Flesh and Blood; the parts of a Man's body (as now it is) But it
is to be understood of the sinful qualities of Man's Nature (that are to be
done away) as in other places, Romans 7. 18,24. Chap. 8. 1,6,7. Gal. 5 17,19,24
Flesh does signify; ot of natural Flesh and Blood, of which the body is now
composed and made up; as such, it is corruptable, and cannot enter into the
Kindome of Heaven; and thus Paul expounds it, as in the latter clause of the
same 50. verse. Neither does corruption inherit incorruption: That is,
corruptable Flesh and blood (or flesh and blood that has the Seed and
Principles of Corruption) shall never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: such
flesh and blood is unfit to wear the Crown of Glory; as our Souls must be
changed, before they can be fit for Glory, so also must our Bodies from their
natural estate, to a spiritual: for at the Resurrection, our bodies shall not
be raised natural, corruptable bodies; but spiritual, incorruptable bodies, and
as such they will be fit for Glory in the Kingdom of Heaven; as its
illustrated, ver. 52. And the Dead shall be raised incorruptable, and we shall
be changed: but how? the next verse, sc. 53. tells us, This corruptable must
put on incorruption: Note [ This] Mortal must put on immortality: well then,
though the body of Man be now natural, corruptable, and mortal flesh and blood
(and as such unfit for the Kingdom of Heaven:) But in the Resurrection the
body will not be so; for it will then be spiritual, incorruptable, immortal
flesh and blood, and being so qualified, it will be (...) to inherit the
Kingdom of God.

Having thus Answered, I expected some return; but they were all silent:
Thereupon Capt. John Hubb^rt Sherrif, with the Justices of Peace, (as
Represente^s of the Christian part of the Assembly) came forth toward me, and
openly declared, That they were fully satisfied with my Proofs and Answers. The
Quakers being thus regularly found Guilty of the whole charge; the vast
Assembly was forthwith peaceably dismissed.

READER;
I Have been earnestly Requested by some of the Lords People in these Islands,
to make some Replies to three or four Erroneous Principles (not Discussed in
the Disputation) Held and Professed by most Quakers: To wit, 1. That there is a
state of perfect freedom from sin in this Life. 2. That the matter contained
in the Scriptures, is not (1.) The Word of God. (2.) Nor the infallible
standing Rule of Faith, and Life. 3. That the Soul in Man is God in part, and
so Infallible. 4. The denying of the Trinity: sc. three persons in one Deity.


These corrupt Principles maintained by most Teaching Quakers, I have (on
Request as above) considered, and made some Replies to each particular
distinctly, as in their order before expressed.

1. Principle. That there is a state of perfect freedom from sin, in this
Life; Alleging that the Scriptures do testify the same: as Job 1. ver.
1,8,22. Psalm. 37, ver. 37. and 39. 1. and 119. 5. Mat. 5. 48. Romans 6. 18. and
8. 4. and 2. 15. Phil. 3. 15. Ephesians. 3. 19. Luke 1. 6.

That I might herein give some satisfaction, I have considered the
abovementioned Scriptures, one after another in their asserted Order.

The first Scripture, Job 1. ver. 1,8,22. There was a Man whose Name was Job,
and that man was perfect.

Reply to the 1 st. verse. By Perfect here, we are not to understand a Legal
perfection, such as Adams before the Fall; though it be contended for by the
Teaching Quakers, and affirmed by them, as possibly attainable, yea, actually
attained by many of their Friends in this Life: but the Spirit does not in any
one of these verses, express (no, nor intend) Job^ perfection from all sin in
this life: nor did Job so understand it, witness his own confessions, Chap. 9.
20. If I justify my self, my own mouth shall condemn me: if I say. I am
perfect, it shall also prove me perverse; That is to say, if I justify my
self, by the actings and expressions of my life, my Mouth would condemn me: so,
if I say, I am perfect in the thinkings and secret motions of my heart, it
would prove me perverse ( Cavil in locum) and in Chap. 10. 6. Thou inquire
after my Iniquity, and searchest after my sin: likewise in Chap. 42. 6.
Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes: but to put the word
Perfect, in ver. 1. out of all doubt, it is explained in the 8 th. vese above,
There was none like him in the Earth, a perfect and an upright man: which
referred to that Generation in which (...) lived. So we read of Noah, Genesis 6.
9, That he was a just man and perfect in his Generations: in like manner
consider Job in the time and age wherein he lived; there was none like hi in
the Earth for Godliness and uprightness: hence for any man to infer, that
either Noah or Job were were perfect from all sin in this life, would be a
miserable perverting of the places of Scripture: they being only perfect
comparatively, i. e. in comparison of all other men, which lived in their Ages,
and Generations.

And as for the 22 d. verse. In all this Job sinned not.

Reply. These words are not to be taken in a Quakers sense (as if Job had been
at any time without sin in this world) for, in the 11 th verse. he ( Job will
curse thee to thy face: Satan was confident that Job would Blaspheme, by
cursing God to his face: this Satan did promise to himself, and did undertake
with God; which plainly interprets the words, sc. In all this Job ^inned not:
that is such a sin, (in thought or word) as to Curse God: he was not
transported by passion or impatiency, to Reproach or Curse the Living God, but
gave him Glory* saying, ver. 21. The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away,
blessed be the Name of the Lord; As to the phrase perfect above.

Obj. If any of you say, as some Teaching Quakers have said: sc. That it was in
the time of Jobs affliction, when he said; If I say that I am perfect, it will
prove me perverse; but after his deliverance he was perfect without sin?

Ans. This is wholly false: for the character given of Job, viz. a perfect man,
was before his affliction; for Gods commending of him (as perfect and upright)
was the occasion of the Devils desiring leave of God to afflict him, and of
Gods grant, ver. 12. that his Word might be found true: upon the whole, observe
in Job, Chap. 25. ver. 4. How then can Man be justified with God, or can he be
clean, that is born of a Woman. This Question, carries a strong denial, viz.
it cannot possibly be, or it is impossible to be: as if Job had said, do but
acknowledge that any one is born ordinarily of a Woman, and we may conclude him
to be sinful and unclean, with (or in the sight of) God.

Second Scripture, Psalm. 37. ver.37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the
upright.

Rep. Upright, in the latter clause, does interpret, perfect, in the former, so
then the perfect man, is the upright or sincere hearted man; we read in Jacobs
character, Genesis 25. 27. and Jacob was a plain man; this phrase plain man here,
is the same wite perfect man in the Text above: a plain man and a perfect man
(in a Scriptural account) are convertible terms, 1 Chronicles. 29.9, 27. and do
signify, a man that has not a heart and a heart, or a double minded man, Jam.
1. 8. not a compound man, speaking one thing and meaning another: It is also
the same word, that is given to Noah, Genesis 6. 9. He was perfect in his
Generation, or he was found, upright, plain hearted with God: And it is that
God spoke to Abraham, Genesis 17. 1. Walk before me and be thou perfect; or ^ound,
upright, plain, in thy walking before me: now, though Job, Noah, Jacob,
Abraham, are said to be perfect; yet it is not to be found in the Scriptures,
that God ever said of all, or any one of them (or of any other mere Saint) they
were perfect without sin in this world: but the contrary is (as may afterwares
appear) often found in Holy Writ: forasmuch as it is sincerity (or the Law
written in the heart, Psalm. 40. 8.) which is the only Gospel Perfection.

Third Scripture, Psalm. 39. 1. I said, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin
not with my tongue: compare with Jam. 3. 2. If any man offend not in word, the
same is a perfect man.

Reply, Though David heedfully endeavored circumspection; not to offend with
his tongue, yet he sinned with it, Psalm. 116. 11. I said in my haste all men
are Liars: yea frequently did he offend with his tongue, in and about the
matter of Uriah the Hittite.

2. Might it be supposed, that David sinned not with his tongue, yet he might
sin in thought; although, it be most true, which the Apostle James speaks
above, sc. If any man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man.

Reply, 1. Those words, Jam. 3. 2. in their litteral sense; denote a suppos^ton
[ If] any man offend not in word, that is, (as Dr. Manton in ^oc: says) If
there be such a man, who never spoke a word untruly, nor unseasonably, nor
uncharitably; a man whose words were always without vanity, and folly, without
ob^enity* rash Oaths, and Passion, speaking only known truths: if there be
such a man, who at all times avoids the evils of the tongue, I will (as if the
Apostle should say) make bold to call him a perfect man, such another as is not
to be found among Mortals.

And thus Moses (by way of supposition) said unto the Children of Israel, Lev.
18. 5. which [If] a man do, he shall live in them: here Moses proposes an
unlikely, yea, an impossible practice, under the word [ If] which if a man do
(But where is the Man, that can do the law of God, as exactly as he commands it
to be done) implying, there is not such a man to be found in the World, so here,
If a Man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man, but such a non offender
is not to be found, and consequently not a Man of a perfect tongue.

2. Some take the word [ Perfect] for Upright, Sincere; that is to say, if a
man offend not in word, he is perfect or upright, sincere without ^gu^le: those
that are so are expressed by the Term perfect, as in Psalm. 37. ^37. before
noted: so in 1 Chronicles. 29. 9. With a perfect heart they offered willingly to the
Lord, compare ver. 17. In the uprightness of my heart, I have willingly
offered: Again, we read in (1 Chronicles. 12. 38. All these ( sc. an hundred and
twenty thousand, ver. 37.) men of War, came with a perfect heart to Hebren^
surely he must have a Legion within him, that would interpret perfect, here,
(referring to the hundred and twenty thousand men of War above) for a perfect
freedom from sin.

4 th, Scripture, Psalm. 119. 1. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, ver. 3.
they do no Iniquity.

Reply, The sixth verse following, explains the two foregoing verses ( sc. 1,
3. above) Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect to all thy
Commandments: hence, ver. 5. The Prophet Wishes, O, that my ways were directed
to keep thy Statutes: furthermore he strongly affirms, Psalm. 39. 5. Verily,
verily Man at his best estate, is altogether vanity: Therefore he cries out,
Psalm. 143. 2. Enter not into j^dgement with thy Servant, for in sky sight shall
no man living be justified: Now, if to be undefiled, and to do no iniquity: be
to be understood in a Quakers sense; that is to say, strictly for an absolute
freedom from all sin in heart and life: then David had excluded himself out of
a blessed estate.

5 th. Scripture, Mat. 5. 48. Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father
which is in Heaven is perfect.

Reply, The charge is only to be [ As] perfect, not [ So] perfect let it be
observed here, that [ As] is only a note of likeness, or quality; in which
respect, the meanest Saint upon Earth, is like his Father in Heaven. i. e. as
to the likeness of Quality: for he has of the same pure and perfect nature,
being made partaker of the divine nature, 2 P^t. 1 4. And Paul exhorts the
Philippians, Chap. 2. 5. Let this mind be in you, which was in Christ: the
meanest Saint has the same mind in reference to his new nature, that is in God
himself: that is, he is like to God, who beg^tteth all his Children in his own
likeness, Ephesians. 4. 24.

But in regard of the likeness of Equality, thus no man is like the Father or
the Son, in the degrees of these perfect or pure Qualities: the most pure Saint
is not Equal to God the Father, in this or that, or the other, which is
infinitely pure and perfect in him; this interpretation is only proper to the
Text of Scripture above, which speaks not of a perfection from sin: though the
Father be perfect from all sin; yet the Evangelist has not asserted it in this
place: and therefore deductions of freedom from sin (in he Saints of God in
this life) cannot from thence be drawn not rationally argued:

The sixth Scripture. Romans 6. 8 Being then made free from sin.

Reply. To be made free from sin, may not be understood of a freedom from a
Being of sin in this life, but only of a freedom from the Reign and Dominion
of Sin: As the Apostle explains it, in ver. 12. Let not sin reign in your
mortal (...), and in ver 14. Sin shall not have dominion over you* that is, ^e
shall not be the Servants of sin, as it is implied in ver. 22. and so to be
(...) from sin, is to be free from a voluntary subjection (in will or work) to
the commanding motions of corrupt and sinful nature, ver. 16. Its most certain
it cannot be understood of a freedom from sin simply and absolutely, for in
Chap. 14. 10. 7. The same Apostle charge sin, both upon the weaker and
stronger Saints: why do thou judge thy Brother, (this judging, was the sin of
the weaker Christians: or why do thou set at thy Brother. (this setting at
naught the weaker Brother) was the sin of the stranger Christians: well then,
there can be no state of perfect freedom from sin in this life: As the same
Apostle in the same Chapter has inserted, ver. 7. For he that is dead is free
from sin.

The seventh Scripture, Rom.8. 4. That the righteousness of the Law, might be
fulfilled in us.

Reply, [ In us] That is, in our nature in general ( Heb. 2. 14. not in our
particular persons, Rom.8. 3. I have given a large return to the sense of this
place of Scripture, in the dispute (pa's 15, 16, etc. where I do refer the
Reader.

The eighth Scripture, Rom.2.14,15. For when the Gentiles which have not the
Law, do by nature the things contained in the Law, these having not the Law,
are a Law unto themselves: which show the work of the Law written in their
Hearts, and their Conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts (...)
while accusing, or else excusing one another^.

Reply, ^here is naturally in all men (as such) a light of direction* two
manner of ways.

1. By the Law written in their hearts; (for which the Apostle is here
express,) for when the Gentiles (meaning the unconverted Gentiles) which have
not the Law, do by nature (or Natural Light) the things contained in the Law,
these having not the Law (formally published or Preached to them) are a Law
unto themselves which show the work of the Law written in their hearts, their
conscience also bearing witness etc. And as all have a light of direction, from
the Law written in their hearts, or in the Book of natural Conscience, So also,

2. They have a light of Direction, from the Law of Creation, or from that
which is written of God, in the Book of the Creature: And Paul makes this
light, the ground of the righteousness of God, in that dreadful revelation of
his wrath, Chap, 1. 18, against all ungodliness, and unrighteousness: yea, for
this very reason; because, that which may be known of God, is manifest in them,
(or to them ver. 19. For God has showed it to them: the whole is, though all
man have not a light of direction from God so powerful as to change them, and
make them holy (much less perfect without sin) yet they have a Light so clear
and full, as is enough to make them guilty: And when they refuse to follow this
Light of Direction, in the Book of the Creature, Chap. 1 20. in doing what is
right: then follows the second Light, to wit, the Light of conviction: their
natural Consciences troubling them, or (as Paul's phrase is) their thoughts
accusing them, because they have done that which is not ^ight: which plainly
argues the imperfection of sin, and not a perfection from any, (much less from
all) sin, in Men, as Men.

The ninth Scripture, Phil. 3. 15. Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be
thus minded.

Reply, The word Perfect here, may not be taken, for a perfect freedom from
sin: for Paul, ver. 12. says (in effect) that he was not perfect from sin,
which may appear by the 11 th verse If by any means, I might attain unto the
Resurrection of the dead: now, the estate which accompanies the Resurrection
from the dead, excludes all sin, the Saints shall the^ be legally perfect:
this, the Apostle aimed at, ver. 14 and used all means to accomplish, ver. 13.
but he could not attain it, as he does confess in the 12 th verse Not as though
I had already attained, either were already perfect: meaning, with that
perfection from sin which accompanies the Resurrection of the dead: so then
Paul does not only deny himself to be perfect from sin, but withal inferres,
such an estate of perfect freedom not to be attainable in this life, by any
mere Saint; because it attends the Resurrection from the dead; which is
sufficiently evidenced from the foregoing verses (he grants a Gospel, ver. 15.
but denies a legal perfection, ver. 12. if so, then the phrase Perfect* in the
15 th verse above, cannot be understood, (in a Quakers sense) for Paul's being
perfect from sin; we may not affirm that of paul, which he himself effectually
does deny, without manifest wrong to the holy Spirit.

Besides, the ^erm Perfect (let us, as many as be perfect) may be taken (as
learned, judicious Authors have averred) for some ripeness, and growth in
matters of Christianity; as in the Jewish Discipline, there were two sorts of
Learners, Beginners, these did only exercise themselves in the first principles
of religious matters; and while they were but endeavoring Beginners, they were
accounted weak, or imperfect in Christianity; then there were others, that had
made some progress in, and attained to some growth in Christian matters
learned, these were called strong or perfect (in comparison of the Beginners)
Thus, Perfect is to be understood, in the 1 Cor. 2. 6. Howbeit, we speak
wisdom among them that are perfect: meaning, however imperfect weaklings are
taken with enticing words of man's wisdom, ver. 4. accounting the Preaching of
the Cross (Christ crucified) Foolishness; yet, grown mortified Christians will
discern wisdom and sublimity, in the plain preaching of Jesus Christ Crucified;
and this sense, may be accommodated to this place of Scripture, Phil. 3. 15.
above) As many of us as be perfect, i. e. such of us, as are no Beginners, or
Learners, such as try experiments in Religion* But Perfect, such as have made
some towardly progress therein, that have attained to some Gospel strength,
ripeness, or growth in the blessed Doctrine of Faith.

Obj. But if any Teaching, Seducing Quaker, should say, viz. That by the word
Perfect, as it referrs to Saints in this world, it does signify a perfect
freedom from all sin?

Answ. 1. This was the lying Doctrine of the Heretical Catharish's, and now
taught by Seducing Quakers; but no where owned in the Scriptures of truth;
where is that Scripture to be found, which says (...) so many wo^ds. sc. That
this or that Saint was perfect from all sin in this life; when it shall be
shown it will be seriously considered.

2. Solomon makes a challenge to all the World, Prove. 20. 9. Who can say I have
made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin: that is, none can say it truly*
(though some will say it bouldly) that any Saint of God in this lif^, is
absolutely freed from the having of sin, which is evident from the confession
of the most eminent Saints, 1 John 1. 8. If we say that we have no sin, we
deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us.

But to this Scripture the Quaker pretends an Answer, sc. that in v.10. the
same Apostle says* If we say we have not sinned, we make him a Liar: Here
hence, the Teaching Quakers do infe^r saying. it is true, the born of God should
lie, if they did deny themselves to have sinned, before they were in the new
birth, but not after it, alleging, 1 John 3 9. Whatsoever is born of God, does
not commit sin.

Reply, 1. The 10 th verse above, sc. If we say, that we have not sinned, we
make him a Liar: by these words the Apostles intend their having of sin after
(as well as before) the new birth; for, observe the 8 th. verse, If we (that
is, we, who are in the new birth) say that we have no sir, we deceive our
selves, and the truth is not in us: Note ^ere, that the words in this 8 th
verse are expressly of the present time; to wit, if we (not have had) no sin,
etc. which does most plainly prove; that the born of God have sin after (as
well as before) their new birth.

2. As to the words alleged out of the 1 John 3. 9. Whosoever is born of God,
does not commit sin:

Answ. 1. If the words should be understood in the Quakers sense above
asserted: then the new birth would exclude the being of sin, in all the born of
God: for the new birth agrees to them all, to one as well as to another; as the
reason given in the same verse does testify: Because his seed remains in
him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God: now the seed remains in all
the born of God, as well as in any: well then, it must be meant of all Saints,
or none: Now, if the Teaching Quakers should be so stark mad, as to affirm all
Saints to be free from sin, the Scripture above, 1 John 1. 8. will reprove
their madness: for, if we (who are the real Saints, and born of God) say, that
we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us: all men may
see, that these words were spoken of and by such Saints, as had, ver. 3.
fellowship with the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ: and yet they have
certified, sc. if that we say, that we have no sin, etc.

Again, That the words in 1 John 3. 9. cannot be meant of freedom from the
nature and being of sin, in the born of God, but only of the Trade and Custom
of sinning which is explained in the foregoing 8 th verse For the Devil sins
from the beginning, i. e. he has never ceased to sin since he began, it has
ever been his trade or customary way; thus to sin, the born of God cannot, for
the course and custom of sin being broken, there is not now such a free
correspondency between the Soul and Sin, as before Regeneration: this is the
Character of the unregene^ate, They cannot cease to sin, 2 Pet. 2. 14. But so
the born of God sins not, ( i. e. without cessation,) inasmuch as he is
daily pleading (in his prayers) against sin, desiring strength, not only
against, but victory over it: thus it was with Paul, Rom, 7. 24. O wretched man
that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death, sc. from this burden
and bondage of inherent sinful corruption; yea, all this, after he was most
truly the born of God: It is therefore a manifest wresting of the above
mentioned Texts, (sc. 1 John 1. 10. in forcing them to say, that the born of
God sinned, before they were in the new birth, but not after it.

The tenth Scripture, Ephesians. 3. 19. That ye might be filled with all the fullness
of God: which (some say) excludes the being of sin in Saints.

Reply, 1. The phrase [ Fulness] is to be expounded by a distinction, there
being a double fullness; namely, of Parts and Degrees: for the first of these,
we read, Act. 7. 55. But he (Stephen) being full of the Holy Ghost; this
Respects the fullness of parts only, that is, he had something thing of every
Grace, though not a perfection of any Grace; An Infant may be said to be a
perfect man, as it has a perfection or fullness of parts, but not of growth and
degrees.

2. The fullness of God, in respect of Degrees, is to be had only in Heaven
above; And even there, the Apostle intends not equality (but quality) of
fullness: that is, a divine and glorious fullness of or from God: so then the
fullness of God above expressed, is to be understood of a fullness (not on Earth,
but) in Heaven, which is the proper import of that place of Scripture: for, the
Apostle prays, that they [ Might] be filled, etc. And so they should be in
Heaven, but he asserts not, that either they were, or should be so filled in
this life: the person is, because here, we know but in part, 1 Cor. 13. 9, 22.
For now we see through a Glass darkly, but then face to face, now, I know in
part, but then I shall know, even as I am known: Therefore, the fullness of God
above, does not exclude the being of sin in this life.

The eleventh Scripture, Luke 1.6. Walking (sc. Zechari^s and Elizabeth his
Wife, ver.5) in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless: here
the Quakers think they are perfect Saints.

Reply, The word [ Blameless] does not (as the Quakers would have it) signify
[ Sinless] before the Lord, but Rebukeless before men, in this World, no man
can be so blameless, as to be sinless in the sight of God; it is true, we read,
Numb. 23.21. He has not seen iniquity in Jacob, that is, not with an eye of
revenge, but pity: God saw iniquity in Jacob his people, but not so as to
destroy them, which was the unwearied design and desire of Balack the Princes
of Moab, ver. 17. in which sense, the not seeing of iniquity in Jacob, is only
meant.

Indeed, at the glorious second coming of the Lords Christ, then the persons of
the just shall be sinlesly blameless before the Lord, as in 1 Cor. 1. 8. That
ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ: in that day of Christ's
coming in glory,, the Saints shall be found of God in peace, without spot and
blameless, 1 Pet. 3. 4, 14. but not thus in this life; nevertheless, I
willingly grant, that Believers may walk in all the Commandments and Ordinances
of the Lord, blameless, that is to say rebukeless, in regard of Men: this is
verified by the Apostle. Phil. 2. 15. That ye may be blameless, and harmless,
the Sons of God without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse Nation,
among whom ye shine as lights in the World: in which sense alone, Zecharias,
and his Wife Elizabeth, were blameless: for Zecharias was so far from being
perfect without sin, that he was found (at the very time, that the words above
were uttered of him) guilty of the great sin of Unbelief and for it was
punished with dumbness, (...). 1. 20. Behold thou shall ^e dumb, and not able
to speak, until the day that th^se things shall be performed, because thou do
not believe my words.

Obj. Here the Quaker will be apt to say, But there is no sin charged upon
Elizabeth; so that she might be perfect without sin?

Ans. 1. The phrase [ Blameless] (on which the Quaker puts his whole stress)
may refer to an Unbeliever, yea, to a perfect for of Jesus Christ of Nazareth,
Phil. 3.6. Touching the righteousness which is in the Law, Blameless; even
then, when Paul was graceless, he was blameless: this I have only ^oted by way,
that Teaching Quakers may plainly see, that the word [ Blameless] simply in its
own nature, will (...) far from proving perfection of Grace that it will not
prove any truth of Grace.

2. It will not therefore follow that Elizabeth was perfect without sin,
because there is no mention made of her sin; let it be will observed, that in
the 6 th verse above, They are both said to be righteous and blameless, even
then when the best or them both, was guilty of actual (...): now, if the
expressions of Righteous and Blameless, were applicable to Zecharias, when he
was under sin; then the same expressions ( sc. of Righteous and Blameless) will
not argue her to be more free from sin then her Husband, there being the same
reason for the one, as for the other: to deny this, were to destroy the rules
of right reasoning; besides, death took hold of her, as well as of him, which
is the wages of sin, Romans 6. 23.

3. If the Term Blameless, should prove Zecharias and Elizabeth (in their life
time) sinless, or perfect without sin, it would prove the Scriptures of God
sinful, (which to assert were Blasphemy,) for the Holy Scriptures do utterly
deny such a blamelesness, or freedom from sin in Mortals; As in Eccless, 7.
20. For there is not a just man upon the Earth, that does good and sins not:
that is, that sins not in doing good; the Spirit does say simply, that there
is not a just man, that sins not, but a just man that does good, and sins
not: intimating, that in our most religious Actions, there is some mixture of
sin; hence the Prophet, Isai. 64 6. That all our Righteousness is as filthy
rags; Noting to us, that no righteous work of ours is so pure but there is some
taint, and filth of sin cleaving to it, which without a Mediator (in the rigor
of the Law) would be damnable: so then, though the action (as to the matter) be
not sinful yet there is some sin in the Action: this difference is expressed,
Exodus 28 38 where the High Priest, is said, to hear the iniquity of the holy
things; holy things in the matter of them, yet iniquity in the manner of
performing them, Romans 7. 18. How to perform that which is good I find not: here
hence it is, that we read, 1 King. 8.46. If they sin against thee, for there is
no man that sins not: and again, 2 Chronicles.6.36. For there is no man that
sins not: whence the Apostle James, Chap. 3. 2. For in many things me offend
all: he says, We, including himself, though an eminent Saint, and an Apostle
of great holiness; All of us offend in many things, and many of us in all
things: likewise our blessed Lord and only Savior, teaches the choicest of
Gods Children to pray unto their Father in Heaven, for daily and continual
pardon of sin, Mat. 6 12. There is in all true Believers, a cur^ed root of
bitterness, which God does mortify, but not nullify in this World: it is
subdued, but not removed, it is cast down but not cast out* though Grace makes
the combat, yet death only makes the conquest over sin:

I proceed to the Quakers Second Principle; To wit, That the written Scriptures
are not (1) The Word of God. (2.) or the infallible standing Rule of Faith and
Life.

Reply, 1. Whereas they say, The written Scriptures are not the Word of God: if
thereby they mean the Scriptures, as expressed by humane tongues, or as
written, or printed with ink and paper by the art of the Writer, or Printer; if
so considered, we do not affirm the Scriptures to be the Word of God: But as
the Written Scriptures do declare the mind of God to us, so the matter therein
contained, is the declarative Word of God: as in H^b. 1,2. God who at ^unary
times, and in diverse manners, spoke in times past unto the Fathers by the
Prophets, has in these last days spoken to us by his Son.

Qu. What has the Son of God spoken, touching the Scriptures?

Ans. He tells us, that the Scripture is the Word of God, Mark 7. 13. Making
the Word of God of none effect. Here the Son of God, calls the fifth
Commandment (in the written Scriptures) the Word of God, and in John 2.22. They
believed the Scripture, the word which Jesus had said. Also Joh. 10. 34,35. And
Jesus answered them, It is written in your Law, I said, ye are Gods: if he
called them Gods, unto whom the word of God came, and the Scripture cannot be
broken. Note, in these Texts, our Lord and only Savior Jesus Christ the Son of
God affirms that the Word of God, is the Scripture, and that the Scripture is
the Word of God, as being convertible terms; that is, what is truly and
properly spoken of the one* is also spoken of the other* for so it is with all
propositions convertible.

Moreover* 2 Timothy 3. 16. All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, and is
profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, f^r Instruction in
Righteousness: that is, in the Righteousness both of Faith, and Life: And
therefore as the Scripture is the Word of God, so likewise it is the infallible
standing Rule of Faith and Life. it being evidently so: I need not stay, to
show you the excellency of any part of the Scripture, having pointed you at
such an original of the whole, which advises you seriously to consider, what
the Lord speaks to all such as they are: we read, Numb. 15. 30 The Soul that
does ought presumptuously (whether he be born in the Land, or a stranger) the
same reproach^th the Lord: O how highly do you Teaching Quakers reproach the
Lord, when you deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God) that Soul shall be
cut off from the people (...), but mark the ground and reason of it: Because he
has despised the Word of God, ver. 3 1. and has broken his commandments: Note
here, that the Lord concludes his word, and written Commandments to be one and
the same thing, and thereupon the Lord passes this heavy Sentence; That Soul
shall be utterly cut off, his iniquity shall be upon him: i. e. It shall never
be forgiven him, (except God in mercy grant repentance for and from these dead
works,) O ye Quakers, are you not herein, worse then the Egyptian-Heathens: for
they believed the Word spoken to them by Moses, to be the Word of God, Exodus 9.
20. He that feared the Word of the Lord amongst the Servants of pharaoh, made
his Servants and his Cattle to fly into the Houses: howbeit, they will think
themselves either wronged or ^eared, if their Arguments be not considered.

1. Argument, That which is the Word of God, dwells within, Cel. 3. 16. Let the
Word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom: whereas that which you
(meaning Christians) call the word, is the Scripture without.

Reply, 1. Is there any word asserted to be the word of Christ, but the written
word of Truth, whereof Christ is both the Author and Subject, if there be, when
it shall be shown, it will be considered.

2 The very phrase [ Let] the Word of Christ dwell in you, denotes, that the
Apostles words, are an Exhortation to get the Matter contained in the very
Letter of the word of Christ: that it might dwell richly in them getting be
(...) acquaintance with the matter contained in the letter of the word of
Christ, and that richly, sc. still increasing therein, that they might thereby
be the better enabled, in the use of the duties of Teaching, Admonishing, and
Singing of Psalms, in heart and voice, as its expressed and implied in the same
16 th verse.

3. Those duties and services, of Teaching, Admonishing, and Singing of Psalms
which are Spiritual Hymns or Songs, were to be done to the Lord, (as in the
same 16 th verse,) that is, to the glory of the Lord: Now there are no Duties
and holy Services done thus to the Lord, which are not done in obedience to his
Will: but the Lord has no other will (as a Rule of obedience) then his Will
revealed in the written Scriptures: There is nothing that does please God in
any act of Worship, unless he sees himself obeyed: hence, I may safely infer,
that the Quakers Worship cannot be accepted of God, because it is not only
without, but against the revealed Will and Rule of Obedience, This cannot with
any Truth be gainsayed or denied.

1. Arg. The Written Scripture cannot be the Word of God, because it consists
of Words.

Reply, 1. This Argument proves fully, that the Quakers are under the power of
Satan, Act. 26. 11. grossly blind in, and ignorant of the inspired word of
Christ: for in Scripture Language, Word and Words, are of the same
signification: as for instance, Jer. 15. 16. thy Words were found, and thy Word
was unto me: Jer. 36. 1, 2. This Word came: write the Words: Amos 8. 11, 12.
hearing the Words: seek the Word: Numb. 15. 30. the Spirit calls the
Commandments of God, consisting of many Words, the Word of God: and the many
Words, which God Commanded Moses to speak to the Egyptians, Exodus 9. 20. is
there called the Word of the Lord: Likewise our Savior, Joh. 2 22. calls the
Scripture, containing many Words: and so also in, Joh. 10. 35. to these places
of Scripture, many more might (were there any need) be added, showing that Word
in the singular, and Words in the plural, are synonimous and of the same import
in the Holy Scriptures, and therefore the cavil is idle and vain: I pass to the
second part of this Principle, viz. That the written Scriptures are not the
infallible standing Rule of Faith and Life.

2. Reply, This plainly argues an Evil and Unbelieving heart, in the revealed
Truths of God: and distructive (as much as in them lies) to the great end of
Divine Inspirations: For God purposely inspired holy men, not so much for their
own sakes, as for this end; that what they writ and spoke from Gods inspiration
in the Scripture, might be the standing and infallible Rule for Faith and
holiness of Life, in all succeeding Ages and Generations; and for this cause
has Paul recorded, Romans 15. 4. For whatsoever things were written aforetime,
were written for our Learning, that we through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures (...) hope: Note, That we, the Apostle Paul includes himself for
one, that did learn of the Scriptures written before time, as the only
infallible Rule.

And thus was it also taken by our Lord Jesus Christ, Luke 16. 29, 31. Chap.
24. 44. to 47. more especially in the hour of his Temptations, he kept his mind
close to the written Word of God; the Scriptures penned by Moses, Dan^^t. 16.
to repel the Devil; saying, It is written, Mat 4. ver. 4. ver. 7 ver.10. with
this sword of the Spirit, three times (as you see) the Lord Jesus Christ wounds
the Devil; now does the Lords Christ thus honor the written Scriptures: who
are ye then, that dishonor the same: Notwithstanding, we will hear what they
have (by way of Argument) to say for themselves, concerning this matter. Their

1. Argument, The Scripture it self sends us to the Spirit for our Rule, Gal.
5. 16. Therefore the written Scripture is not our rule of Faith and Life.

Reply, The Apostle in this Text exhorts the Galatians to walk in the Spirit, (
sc. of Faith) I have not (as if Paul should have said,) forget my former
discourse concerning Faith, ver. 5. nor do I declare it, in persuading ^ou to
mutual love, ver. 14. and that he might be understood aright, ^he adds. Walk in
the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh: for the spirit of
Faith, 2 Cor. 5. 13. Purifying the heart, Act. 15. 9. does (by that means) not
only resist occasional prejudices, or Lustful desires of revenge but begets
also a composure of offenses, and a healing of injuries, which are apt to arise
from one Saint toward another: hence, the Apostle infers, walk in the Spirit,
that is, (says Calvin in loc.) be ye exercised therein, wrestle in Spirit
against all prejudicial returns of the flesh, following the motions, sayings,
and actings of the Rule of the Spirit, (which is the inspired word: for 2 Pet.
1. 21. Holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost,) and in so
doing (says Calvin) ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh ( i. e. of
corrupt sinful nature) as in the 16 th. ver. above asserted: surely then, the
Spirit, of God does not ^^nd us from the written rule, to a Quakers Spirit
(their Idol Light within) as the only infallible rule of Faith and Life.

2. Arg. The Spirit was before the written Scriptures, and therefore the Spirit
in us, ought to be our Rule for Faith and Life

Reply, We know that Seducing Quakers teach because the Spirit is anticedent to
the Scriptures, therefore none can walk in the Scriptures, till they walk in
the Spirit: the Consequence is as same, as a Teaching Quaker is blind: however,
it is granted, that the Spirit is (...) to the Scripture, in respect of time,
or as to the revelation of the Scripture, howbeit, the Scriptures are before
the Spirit, in respect of aid and assistance, thus the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1. 12.
But unto us they did minister the things which are now reported unto you by
them, that have preached the Gospel unto you, with the Holy Ghost sent down
from Heaven: which Text of Scripture clearly shows, that the Holy Spirit (in
respect of special help and assistance) is subsequent, to the Scriptural Gospel
Preached: this receives further confirmation from the Prophet, Isai. 8. 20. To
the Law and to the testimony (the written word) if they speak not according to
this word, it is because there is no light (or beam of the Spirit) in them;
fairly intimating that the Spirits walk (in a way of aid) is in the paths of
the Scriptures; and consequently no Christians can walk in the Spirit, unless
he first walk in and by the Scriptures: Again Joh. 7 33* He that believes on
me, as the Scripture has said, but this spoke ^e of the Spirit, ver, ^9. ( sc.
of the power and help of the Spirit) a subsequent to the Scriptures, and in
Luke 5. 17. And as he (Christ) was Teaching, the Power, ( sc. the Spirit) of
the Lord was present to heal them: likewise, Joh. 16. 13. When the Spirit of
truth is come, he will guide you into all truth: that is into all Scripture
Truth: so then, though the Spirit be anticedent to Scriptures, in regard of
Revelation, yet (...) respect of aid, help and assistance (which is the matter
in hand) the Spirit is subsequent to the Scriptures, and in this sense the Holy
Scriptures are the infallible standing Rule of Faith and Life, Romans 1. 2. 2 Timothy 3. 15.

3. Argument. That there was a Rule of Faith and Life, long before the
Scriptures were written: Therefore the written Scripture is not the Rule of
Faith and Life.

Reply, This Consequence also is weak and infirm; i^ does not therefore follow,
that the written Scripture is not our Rule, because there was a Rule before the
Scripture was written: For, this is that which we affirm sc. That the matter
contained in the Holy Scriptures, is the only infallible standing Rule of Faith
and Life: which matter now contained in the written Scripture, is the same with
that which, was before the Scriptures were written: for, when God revealed
himself by visions, Dreams, etc. It was ^ill the some Gospel matter, even he
same that is expressed in the written word of the New Testament: There ^ath not
been since the Gospel was Preached to A^am (Genesis 3. 15) any increase of Gospel
truths, in respect of essentials, but only in respect of explications: though
the manner of conveyance is different then and now, yet the matter or Gospel
Doctrines conveyed, is still the same: T^^ true, from (...) to Moses (more
(...) years) the People of God had no (...) written yet they (...) a (...)
given from God to be their Rule^ (...) their Worship would have been (like a
Quaker^) (...) A contrived, or devised Worship to pacific or please God (...)
with had not the Law of Sacrificing, and the like been by God^ institution and
appointment the Lord (...) have rejected it (...) n^w, though Sacrifices ((...)
Christ) were offered before the Law of Sacrificing was written yet not before
the Law of Sacrificing was given: for, i^ was given from the beginning as all
other parts of worship were; being carried (...) by tradition, from the Fathers
to the Children (as in the holy stories of the Patriarchs it does appear) as it
were from hand to hand, till at last the Law was written, and the Scripture
penned by Moses: well then, though the Rule they had before, was not an
institution written, yet it was an institution sent forth, and given by God
himself, which Rule of Faith and Life then given, was (I say again as to the
matter therein contained) the same with the instituted Rule written; now then,
all that ye Teaching Quakers have said, is no more but this, sc. That you deny
this way of written Scripture, to have always been the only way of
Gospel-conveyance; and from thence, ye pretend to advance and extol your
unwritten Scripture, (that Idol-light within) that thereby ye may the more
craftily throw down the Scriptures inspired of God: surely* this Plot cannot be
from the spirit of the true Christ* but from your own (as the Lord knows)
blind, rotten and wicked spirit, which tells you, that you are no fur^her bound
to obey the written Scriptures, then your Light (that false Christ) within,
shall make you willing to obey.

Arg. 4. That the Spirit is not to be tried by the Scriptures, but the
Scriptures are to be tried by the spirit, therefore the spirit (not the
Scriptures) is our standing Rule for Faith and Life.

Reply. The Father of lies, cannot make a greater lie, then that which is
contained in this Argument: for it plainly makes the inspiring Spirit, and the
inspired Scripture to be of different natures; which is contrary to the many
Scriptures of truth before asserted: there is not any Quaker, that has to this
day produced one Text of Scripture to make good this Argument: where is that
place of Scripture to be found, which says, the Scriptures are to be tried by
the spirit? does not the spirit it self require us 1 John 4. 1. not to believe
every spirit, but to try (not the Scriptures, but) the spirits, ( i. e.
spiritual gifts) whether they are of God: And how did the noble Elders at
Berea, try the Spirit by which Paul Preached. The 11 th. verse tells us, It was
by their searching of the Scriptures daily, whether these things were so; it
being an Article of Faith with them, that the written Scriptures were the
Churches standing Rule for Faith and Life: and therefore, ver. 12. Many of them
believed, sc. That Jesus of Nazareth was the true Christ and their only
Savior: surely, the Elders above, trying the spirit by the search of the
Scriptures does sufficiently prove, that the spirits are to be tried by the
Scripture, and not the Scripture by the spirit: the end of Gods inspiring the
Scripture was that it might thereby be enabled to try the spirit; the spirit is
so far from questioning or trying the Scripture* that it ever witnesses for or
against, as the Scripture witnesses being indicted by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.
21. for that end, should the spirit of truth, witness otherwise then according
to the inspired Scripture: (that is to say, if the spirit should witness one
thing to be a truth in the Scripture, and another thing contrary to it in a
man's Conscience) the spirit should be divided against it self, it should be
spirit of contradiction: for instance; the spirit witnesses in the Scripture,
That the true Christ and our only Savior was and is Jesus Christ of Nazareth,
a man approved of God; who was taken by the Jews, slain and hanged upon a Tree,
whom God raised from the dead the third day, and exalted to be a Prince and
Savior: Thus the spirit witnesses in the Scriptures, Act. 2. 22,23. Chap. 5.
30,31,34.

But a Quaker pretends, that the spirit witnesses in his Conscience, that
there is a light within him, which is the true Christ and only Savior; which
is not the Man Jesus of Nazareth, which the Jew: never slew, nor hanged upon a
tree, nor was ever raised by God from a bodily death.

Again, The spirit witnesses in the Scripture: That he is a Righteous man, who
walks in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord, Luke 1. 16.

But a Quaker pretends that the spirit witnesses in his Conscience, that he is
a righteous man, who for sakes all the commanded Ordinances of the Lord.

Now should we Christians be so weak and wicked, as to believe a Quakers
pretended spirit in him, to be the spirit of God (and not of the Devil) should
we not then be guilty of this dreadful Blasphemy: namely, of making the spirit
of God, a spirit divided against it self, a spirit of contradiction (teaching
lies in the Scripture) by witnessing therein the things above, (touching Jesus
Christ, and his Ordinances) to be the truths; and other things contrary to
them, for truths in a Quakers Conscience, or (as he calls it) in his tender
part, this were to take strong and damnable delusions, for sacred and
scriptural inspirations: that inspiration, which is either without the written
word, or against it, is an hellish imposture: indeed, its no marvel, that the
Teaching Quakers would have their spirit within, that Idolized light) to try
the scriptures (not to be tried by them) for if they might herein prevail, (and
withal get into the ^ad^le) they would undoubtedly soon Arraign, ^ry, and
Condemn the inspired Bible of God to Fire and Faggot: this conclusion may
(without breach of charity) be grounded upon the scurrilous pens of some
seducing, Teaching Quakers. whom I might herein, (with their bold expressions)
have declared (having them by me) but I feared the swelling of these
confutations, and the discouragement that might thereby be given to the Reader.

By the way, I say down this Caution: to wit, though the holy and blessed
spirit of God, be above all trial, yet there are spirits (even the spirits i.
e. the spiritual gifts of all men) which must be submitted to trial, whether
they are of God, i. e. of the Book of God, 2 Cor. 34. 14. wherein there is not
any speech or passage, but the infinite wisdom of God has thought fit to be
recorded, as that which has in it somewhat for ou^ instruction even the (...)
of the Fool, which contradicts not only the truth; but the very being of God:
which (...) us this divine truth, That there are ^even (that is all manner of
Abominations in the (...) of Man^ yea, (...) may craw useful instructions from
the words of Judas the Traitor after satan had entered i^ to him and filled his
heart: not only (...) but (...) the words of Satan in his temptations and
proposals unto Christ; (...) more may we from the sayings of Holy man, which
are all material truths, from he inspiration of God and therefore fit to try
the Spirits (or (...) all men as above) which must be submitted to the trial of
the Scripture touch stone.

In the last place, perhaps some Teaching Quakers may say, sc. We own the
written Scripture, as a witness bearer, or (...) of that light which is in Man.

Reply, We deny the written Scripture, to be a witness bearer to your Light
within: for if the Scriptures of God, should bear witness to that gross piece
of foolery (called Light within) it should witness it (...) to be no word of
God: For,

1. Your Idol Light within; says, that the Soul of a Man is part of God, and
no created substance. ( This will be debated in the next Head.

2. That the Light that is in every man, by natural generation, is the true
Christ and only Savior.

3. That the Sacred Oracles of God (the Scriptures of truth) are not the
standing Rule for Faith and Life (but your unwritten Scriptures, that whimsical
Light within you.)

4. That this Light within will bring men to an absolute perfection, a freedom
from all (...) in this life, and to Heaven also.

5. That the Lord Jesus Christ (though God man blessed for ever) is not the Son
of God, the Savior of the World.

6. That the person of Christ is not in Heaven above, that it is Blasphemy to
affirm that he is there.

7. That the Light within Man, is the true Scripture, and Word of God even the
everlasting Word; and therefore long before the written Scriptures: To this
last, I will make some Reply

Reply, Let this be granted, sc. That the Light in Man was long before the
written Scriptures: yet the written Scriptures do declare a truth to us more
ancient then the oldest Quaker, or his Idol light within him: namely, what the
El^hims spoke each to other, saying, Let us make Man in our own Image, Genesis 1.
26 And having made man; it tells us, what God said, sc. Be fruitful and
multiply, ver. 28. And behold I have given you of every Tree bearing fruit,
ver. 29. And God commanded the man, saying, of every Tree of the Garden, etc.
Genesis 2. 16. Moreover the Scriptures tells us of diverse things long before
themselves were written: to wit, that (after the Fall) the Word of God was
manifested to Adam and his wife, and likewise, that God manifested himself to
Cain (by his word) three times, Gen: 3. 8 9. and afterward that the World of
God came to Noah, and so to Abraham, and others.

Now (O ye Teaching, Seducing Quakers) I would ask you this Question: sc. Could
your Light within tell you ought of all this, if the written Scriptures had not
told it first?

And yet, you would fain make us belive; that your Light within is the true
Scripture, and Word of God even the everlasting Word: so that this most
notorious lie, (the whimsie, called Light within) is the new devised ground of
your Faith, and Religious Worship.

Oh, ye poor Soul deluded, and Soul deluding ones: know assuredly, that this
Doctrine of your beloved Idol light in your own addle brains) is directly
contrary to what the Lord Christ said to his Father, concerning his, Apostles,
Joh. 17. 8. I have given them thy words, (word ver. 14.) which thou gave me,
and they have received them, and have known surely, that I came out from thee,
and they have believed that thou did send me.

Note here, that the words which the Father gave to Christ, and Christ to his
Apostles, they believed; and (so believing) Preached them to the World: the
Substance whereof is in their written Gospel, and Epistles: which is to true
Christians, the Word of God, and the ground of their Faith, but ye
(Soul-deceivers) labor to dissolve this ground of our Christian Faith, because
ye would lay a Foundation of your own humane Invention, sc. an un bloody Light
within, which Idolized Light, has no more real blood in it, then there is in
the Transubstantiated Bread of your Popish Brethren; wherein both ye and they
do exactly agree, in one feigned blood less Sacrifice for sin: which is
evidently another Gospel, which stands under the doubted Curse of God, Gal. 1.
8,9. which is further confirmed, Heb. 9. 22. Without shedding of Blood is no
remission. O read and tremble before the irraversible decree of wrath and
vengeance go forth: for without shedding of blood (sc. true humane blood) there
is no remission, as above, and consequently the unavoidable curse of hell and
damnation, does attend a non remission, which leads me to the Quakers third
Principle.

The third Principle, That the Soul of Man is God in part, and therefore
infallible.

Reply, This titular Principle, consists of two parts; which shall be dealt
with distinctly.

1. That the Soul of Man is God in part: Thus James Nayler (in his Book, Love
to the Lost, page 58.) teaching fullness of light (or soul) within, in which
fullness is (meaning the fullness of God in part) and John Tayne (in his Book of
ten Epistles, page 71.) says, the soul of man is God in part, who in page 3.
renders this reason for it, because the Soul is no created substance: and John
Lilborn (a late grand leading Quaker) in his Book of six particulars, page 16.
he affirms, That the Light in man, was the Light in God himself, in whom is no
darkness at all; referring to 1 Timothy 6. 16. Who only has immortality, dwelling
in the light which no man can approach unto, which no man has seen or can see,
to him be honor and power everlasting.

Reply, Although these words, do most plainly exclude any mere man from
possessing God, in his essential nature: yet in page 15. he inferrs, That the
Light which is the infinite essence of God, is the living (or quickening) holy,
tender part of man, the everlasting Word of God, by whom all things were made:
And in page 19. further says* It is the very Principle of true Religion:
consider now, if it be so then it must be such Principle to the Devils, and all
damned creatures: for as creatures the everlasting word made them, and their
Being, Life and Motion is in him; (...) use he that is Being it self, (...) the
bottom of the being of all created Natures, and consequently (according to John
Lilbourn) the Light in man (which he calls the Everlasting Word) by whom all
things are made must be the principle of true Religion in the Devils and damned
(O hellish Divinity and Doctrine) for even they ( sc. the Devils and damned)
live and move, and have their dependence upon the divine nature, or infinite
essence of the Godhead, otherwise they would all fall to nothing by an
annihilation.

Nevertheless, this is in a special manner to be noted. viz. (...) one thing
that the infinite essence thus possesses men, devils and all things (...), and
another thing, for man (or any other creature) to possess the infinite Essence
of God, to his happiness and blessedness: for, so man only possesses God,
according to his revealed will: but through the w^nt of a right understanding
of this special difference above stated, it comes to pass, that this untoward
Generation Dream, the Light within them, to be God in part, and hence infer,
that the Soul is God in part here, and full in God hereafter; for which they do
pretend especially four Texts of Scripture, to wit, Gen 2.7. Eccles. 12. 7.
Act. 17. 27. 28. 2 Pet. 1. 4.

Reply, To the first Scripture, Genesis 2. 7. And the Lord God formed Man of the
dust of the ground, and breathed into his Nosthrils the breath of life, and Man
became a living Soul: hence they argue, that the Soul (in this life) is God in
part.

Reply, 1. It is to be noted; That in the former part of the verse, we have the
Creation of Adams body: The Lord God formed Man, that is he fashioned the
outward and inward part of Adam, straight and upright, with all his outward
limbs and lineaments in their due places, without; an^ Veins, Arteries,
Vent^cles, and Bowels in their due places within.

2. The Creation of Man's Soul is described, i.e. breathed into his nosthrils,
(which Synecdochically denotes the whole Man) the breath of life: Gods order
herein is very observable; sc. after the Lord had formed his body, he gives in
(not himself in, but) from himself the Soul: here is the nature of Gods act [
Breathed] it is spoken after the manner of men for as God has no hands to form
so nor mouth to breathe: so that hereby must be mean* Gods powerful Creation of
his Body, and infusion of his Soul: which God does as easily, as man breathes:
But to the matter in hand;

1. The Divine Being is infinite and indivisible: therefore the Soul of man
cannot be God, either in whole or in part.

2. The words being spoken after the manner of men: that is to say as the
breath of Man, is not man in who^e or in part but only from him; so the Soul
being breathed, is only from God by infusion.

3. The Soul of Man was made after Gods Image, Genesis 1. 26. And God said, let
[Us] make man in our ( sc. the Father, through the Son, by the Spirit) Image,
after our likeness, i.e in our Image, most like to (not the same with) us. It
is an Hebraisme, noting a superlative Image, most like the Trinity in Unity.

This Image or likeness stands in representing God three ways.

1. It is a made Image. 2. It is true Image. 3. It is very near and likely
Image, which appears not only in the spiritual and immortal nature of it, but
in rectitude of Mind, Will, Affections, Members, all pure and righteous,
conformed to Gods will, Ephesians. 4. 24. which evidently proves, that the Soul
cannot be God the Creator, it being made as above, it must be a Creature, and
consequently a created substance, and therefore not (after a Quakers gross and
absurd manner of speaking) God in whole, or in part.

Again, When God breathed into Adams liveless body, he breathed not himself,
because he was there before for, God is in every thing excluded out of nothing,
as before evidenced; whence, it undeniably follows, that into Adam's liveless
body, God breathed not himself, but man's reasonable Soul, which is man's proper
form, and without it, Man is not a Man: So much for the first Scripture.

The second Scripture, Eccles. 12.7. Then shall the dust return to the Earth,
as it was, and the Spirit shall return to God who gave it: Herehence, they
argue, The Soul of Man is God in part, for God is a Spirit.

Reply, 1. Though God be a Spirit, yet every Spirit is not God, An Angel is a
Spirit, Heb. 2,^4, but not God; so, though the Soul be a Spirit yet it (...)
made Spirit as before observed; likewise hereunto agrees, Isai. 57.16. For the
Spirit should fail before me, and the Souls which I have made: Souls are of
Gods making, and therefore a created (not un^^^ated) substance, besides, to
say, that God is a Spirit, and the Soul of Man is a Spirit, therefore the Soul
is part of Gods essence is not only false but a most ^illy i^^ference: for
there is multiplicity of signification in words, and here lies the fallacy:
Spirit, sometimes signify God, Joh. 4.24 and sometimes the wind, ^onah 3.8.
Now, its no good inference thence, therefore God and the Wind are the same:
howbeit, here is some of a Quakers Divinity.

2. The scope and import of the Text it self above, excludes this their
Interpreta^ion. For.

1. When its said, ^he Spirit shall return, it notes, a passing from one place
to another, which cannot be said of the Essence of God: for that being
infinite, fills all places at once.

2. To God that gave it: Now according to the Rules of right reason, the Giver
and the G^fe are distinct.

3. When the Dust (the body) return to the Earth, then the Spirit (the Soul)
shall return to God: that is, to Gods only and alone supposing, either to Weal
or to Woe, for Eternity, according to what it has (...) in the body, whether
it be good or evil, 2 Cor. 5 10. in this sense it is that the Soul returns to
God; which Truth, the Scripture (...) us unto as (...) the finger* in the
examples of Dives and (...) (L^k. (...). and therefore to affirm, the Soul
returns to God, (...) part of God, is (...) and sinful with a witness: for
(...) God de^ective, all the soul returns, making him a finite, not an infinite
God.

The third Scripture, Act. 17. 27. 28. Though he be not far from every one of
us for in him we live, and (...) and have our being.

Reply, I have already and fully granted, that the Essential (...) of God, is
in Heaven and Earth, and all created natures: yet I do herewithal say, though
all created Natures are in his, and his in theirs: but yet (...) is uncreated
nature, and their created natures are ever distinct and different; their^
finite and bounded, his infinite and boundless, not included in, nor excluded
out of any thing; for God is infinitely beyond their beings, lives and motions,
where never any created nature was, nor ever shall be, otherwise he is not God
infinite: furthermore the very Text of Scripture above alleged, confutes their
inference, for it expressly says, God is near to every one of us, and gives
this Reason for it; because in him, we live, move, and have our being: so then
this very expression, sc. That God is but near to us, plainly shows, that he is
not us, nor we him.

The fourth Scripture, 2 Pet 1.4. Whereby are given unto us, exceeding great
and precious promises; that by these, you might be partakers of the divine
Nature: whence the Teaching Quaker does conclude, that the infinite and
indivisible Godhead, is divided into parts: thus senseless are they of the
grossest absurdities.

Reply, 1. This place of Scripture, does only signify, that the participation
of the divine Nature, is by a reception of the promised multiplication of grace
and peace, ver 2. so that the Text asserts no more but this; namely, that they
partake of the divine Nature, who are partakers of the grace and peace
promised: these being divine qualities, are of a divine Nature, called the
Communion of the Holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 13. 14. If this be the genuine and proper
sense of the Text; how far is it from proving the Soul of man to be part of
God; To clear this matter yet a little more, Consider,

2. The Divine Nature may be taken in a twofold sense; as

1. For the essential nature of God, which is, Romans 1. 20. his eternal power
and God head: in this sense, the divine nature is infinite and indivisible; and
as such, no man can partake of it.

2. The Divine Nature, may be taken, for the gifts, graces, and comforts of
spirit, flowing from Christ man (in whom they are without measure, Joh. 3.34)
being daily given from him to his Members: now, it is in this last sense, that
the Apostle Peter speaks of the Divine Nature above; and therefore not to be
understood in a Quakers sense; for the Deity or Godhead, this two fold
signification of the Divine Nature, being hid from the l^st ones; causes them
to call the Soul (still the Idollight) the Deity in part, no created substance:
not discerning the hideous Blasphemies which attends this their Principle; for
if the Soul of man be God in part, then the essence of God would be subject to
change and passion; yea, which is worse, to sin, (for so the Soul of man is in
this life) these Blasphemies are the unavoidable consequences, of the Souls
being God in part: I pass this, and proceed to the second part of the
Principle, to wit, a Quakers infallibility.

Reply. To the second part: a Quakers infallible Spirit within (...); their
spirit of infallibility, or infallible spirit, is grounded upon the Souls being
God in part; but this has been proved to be erroneous and highly Blasphemous:
the other is therefore of the same nature, ( Chips of the some block) yea this
their Principle of infallibility shows us, the rise and original of their
Religion; I have long ^hought their infallible light within, to be no other
then the Pope without: we may not think its for naught that there are so many
exact resemblances between the Idol light, and the Idolatrous Pope: I shall
give you some Instances,

1. The Pope takes upon him the power of Pardoning sin making himself God and
Christ: which power of pardoning sin, the Quaker ascribes to his Light within
^^lling it God and Christ.

2. The Pope affirms, that he Teachings and Rules of direction, being believed
in, and walked up unto, will (...) such Believers and Walkers Perfect, and
bring them to justification and salvation, all which the Quaker does affirm of
the Light within, it being believed in and obeyed.

3. The Pope teaches that his written Scriptures are so far to be obeyed, as
they do agree with the infallible Spirit within him, just so, the Quakers
teach, that they are no further bound to obey the Letter of the Scriptures,
then the infallible, unerring light within, makes them willing to obey.

4. The Pope declares his Apocryphals to be not only of equal verity with, but
to exceed the Scriptures: even so, a Quakers Light within, teaches him to
prefer his Apocryphal Quakerisms, before the written Scriptures.

5. The Pope testifies there is a nigher Doctrine (than the Scripture has) to
feed the Saints and perfect ones (meaning, his Church enlightening Traditions,)
so says the Quakers light within, that it has a higher Doctrine, then the
written Scripture has any, to guide and feed the true Saints.

6. The Pope robs Christ of all his Offices.

1. Of his Kingly Office, in taking part of it to himself, by remitting sins,
and making Laws to bind Conscience, both which a Quakers Light presumes to do,
remitting sin, and binding Conscience by its laws.

2. The Pope robs Christ of his Priestly Office, for he does dispose of it,
giving to a Mass Priest power to offer a daily propitiation Sacrifice: yea,
that every Papist has a piece of it within him, that thereby every one of them
may satisfy the Justice of God for his sins, even by his own Merits within
him: and for Christ's Mediatorship, as some of them do abolish it, so no
Catholic desires the Man Jesus Christ to pray for Him, because each one of
them has so much of the propitiatory Sacrifice daily (...) them, as is
meritorious to satisfy the justice of God for their sins.

Of which robbery (in reference to Christ's Priestly Office) the Quakers are
equally guilty: for, they give to their light (that Mass Priest) with in, a
power to offer Sacrifice propitiatory daily for sin; whereby they daily (in
themselves) satisfy Gods justice for their sins, (...) by their own internal
merits; and as for Christ's Mediatorship, they have quite abolished it: For to
Quaker desires the one Mediator, the Man Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 2.5. to pray for
him.

3. The Pope robs Christ also of his Prophetical Office: for this office, he
assumes to himself: who (without the Scriptures) determines infallibly (by the
pretened assistance of a Spirit of infallible light, locked up in his own
breast) all points of Faith and Life: which kind of Robbery (as to Crists
Prophetical Office) the Quakers have likewise assumed, who by their Light
within (without the Holy Scriptures, or laws of the King thence derived)
pretend to an infallible determination of all points concerning Faith and Life:
here hence, we may safely infer, that a Quakers Light, and Romes Pope are
co^qual Antichrists.

This may further appear; if the Terms and Title heretofore given to the Pope
(as asserted by the R^verend Brightman, Ren. 13. page 135,136) he compared with
those now given to the Light within, by G. Fox in his Folio Book, The great
Mystery etc.

The Terms and Titles which were given to the Pope (and imprinted by Brightman
as above) are these: to wit.

1. Hear (says Brightman) what Barnard says, ( sc. of the Pope) Thou art a
great priest, the Prince of Bishops thou art the Heir of the Apostles, thou art
Abel for thy primacy Noah for thy Government, Abraham for thy patriarch ship
Melchisedech for thy order, Aaron for thy Dignity* Moses for thy Authority
Samuel for thy judgment, Peter for thy Power, Christ for thine anointing, etc.
(Book 2. Consid*

Again, Mark (says Brightman) how the Ambassadors of the Empour of Sicily cry
out to him (the Pope) lying grovelling on the ground: O thou that take away
the sins of the World, have mercy upon us; thou that take away the sins of
the World, grant us peace. As also, what Simon Beginus says, speaking unto
Pope Leo, in the Council of Laterane, S^ss 6. Behold the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah, the Root of David: we have waited for thee ( O most blessed Leo) to be
our Savior: Unto these (says Brightman) we may join Cornelius the Bishop of
Bipentum, who laid open his blackishness, in wondering at the Beast, in the
Council of Trent: with these words, The Pope is come a Light into the World,
and men have loved darkness more then Light, every one that evil does, hates
the Light, and comes not to the Light: Hence Brightman inferrs; O, out upon
you, ye Blasphemous Claw-backs, i^ it not enough for you to (...) the Man of
sin, with the praises of the Saint* unless ye do also heap (...) him, the
praises which ye have robbed Christ of: it would indeed render me too
volumenous to set down herein all the pages lines, and words, imprinted in the
Foxes Book above named, concerning the Terms (...) Titles given by him (and
other such seducing (...)) to the Light within; which are either numerically or
specifically the same, with the Collections above given to the Pope: or if
there be any difference (as to Terms and Titles of Blasphemy) the (...) are the
more horrid, upon the whole, ^et any good Christian judge, whether a Quakers
Light within be not (in good earnest) the (...) without. And so I pass to the
fourth and last Principle aforenamed.

The fourth Principle, to wit, A Quakers denying of the Trinity, or three
persons in one Deity.

Reply, It is by most judicious Christians acknowledged: sc. that three persons
in one Deity, is so great a mystery, that it cannot be found out by natural
reason, and no wonder for there are many things in nature yea, in man himself,
Eccles. 11.5. Thou know not the way of the Spirit, nor how the bones do grow
in the Womb of her that is with child, reason cannot reach the knowledge of
this: Therefore (says Mr. Cavil) (...) not to be "admired, if man be at a loss
about the incomprehensible nature o^ God: Howbeit, it may be to all rational
Saints) sufficient to prove thre^ persons in the Godhead, (though we cannot
fully conceive how this should be:) For, 1. There is but one God, 1 Cor. 8.4,6.
2. In this one God, there are three [ He's] that do Understand, will, and Act,
and these three are so ddistinguished, that the one is not the other: An^' is
Dr. Gouges observation on Deuteronomy. 6.4. Hear O Israel, the Lord our God, is one
Lord; the word [ Lord] is twice in the Text, and (says he) Printed in Capital
Letters, purposely to notify, that the word [ Lord] in the original, is
Jehovah, and so he reads it. Hear O Israel, Jehovah our Elohims, is one
Jehovah: Here is Trinity in Unity.

And we read that the Prophet, Isai 6.8. Heard the voice of the Lord, saying,
who will go for [ Us,] this [ Us] denotes more persons, then one: likewise in
Genesis 1.26. the Elohems spoke each to other, and said, let (us) make Man: surely
then, the Trinity cannot be as some dream, sc. distinctions and relations only:
but real existences in the essence of Jehovah: for distinctions and relations
are such as cannot speak: but the Elohims spoke each to other, as above noted.

Obj. If it be said, the plural number [ Us] takes in all, as well as the
number three?

Answ. It does so; but when God has determined plurality, to three, it is time
then to settl^, and to be certain, that there are no more, which is confirmed,
Mat. 28. ^9 Baptizing in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost: that is, to believe in, obey and worship the Father, in the Son,
and the Holy Ghost: here you see, are three in the divine Nature, that do live
understand will and act; and here, its plainly revealed, that they are so
distinct, that the one cannot be the other.

Indeed the (...) (the Quakers Brethren in this thing) do deny the Holy Ghost
to be a person; and say, It is the power, virtue, and efficacy of God the
Father: If so then the Scripture ab^ve, Mat 28. 19. must be read thus,
Baptizing them in (or unto) the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the
virtue, power, and efficacy of the Father (to be believed in, obeyed and
worshipped) which sounds absurdly, utterly disagreeable to reason: But above
all, it is inconsistent with the Scriptures of truth, as in Joh 1. ^4 And the
Word was ma^c flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory, as the glory
of the only begotten of the Father: and in ver. 18. No man has seen God at any
time, but the only begotten Son, which is in the b^some of the Father, he has
a^c^area him: and in John 14 26. But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost,
whom the Father will send in my Name: These Texts of Holy Scripture do show us,
that the Father begets the Son the Son is begotten of the Father, and the Holy
Ghost proceeds from both: Furthermore, when the Lord Christ was Baptized, Mat.
(...), 15,16,17. the Father was heard and not seen, the Holy Ghost (in the form
of a Dove) seen and not heard: and Christ the Son both seen and heard: the
Father, saying of Christ this is my Son; and the Holy Ghost descending and
lighting upon him, which is a most clear demonstration of their real and
personal dictinction.

Again, in 1 John 5 7. For there are three that bear Record in Heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one: Now if they be
three, then they must be (in some respect) more then one, and not the same;
besides it argues weakness to quarrel the Phrase [ Persons,] for as much as the
[ Person] does Grammatically ( tria necessaria sunt, ut aliquid persona
dicatur) signify, first, second and third, which makes three, this only by the
bye, for illustration rather then evidence: though we do not find this
Phrasiology in the Scriptures, sc. Trinity of Persons: yet this is not a
sufficient ground to deny it; for though we have not the words yet having the
things signified, in and by the words, it ought to satisfy a rational Saint:
as for the things signified, the Texts above, are fair and plain affirming
there are thr^e that bear Record (or witness) now to bear witness, is properly
the office and act of a person, or persons.

Qu. Whether the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, are declared as three
distinct witnesses?

Answ. Yes, that they are so may appear by the testimony of these Scriptures,
Joh. 8.18. I am one that bear witness of my self, and the Father sent me
bears witness of me, and Joh. 15.26. But when the Comforter is come, whom I
will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceeds
from the Father, he shall testify of me: here, we have the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, witnessing; that is to say, the Comforter sent, the Son sending,
and that from the Father, which proves them to be distinct witnesses, and by
good consequence to be distinct persons: herewithal, let it be well observed,
sc. To deny (as Teaching Quakers do) the Trinity of persons, in the unity of
the Godhead; is, in down right terms, to deny that there is a God; for the
Scripture inspired of God, says, These three are one, Therefore to deny the
Trinity, is to deny the Unity; which is Atheistical: so much in Answer to the
requests of some of the Lords people in Barmudas.

With whom I shall now (in a few words) leave my hearty well-wishing advice:
beseeching them (and all the rest of the Lords People there) to be ever mindful
of the Blessed Apostles resolution, Act. 21. 13. I am ready to die for the Name
of the Lord Jesus Christ; a most gracious (as well as noble) resolution and fit
for every good Christians imitation: which is indeed, no l^ss then he standing
against the Gates of Hell, by hearing witness to the holy Truth of God: O let
us rather burn, then bow to that Idol light, which the Romish N^buchaa^zzar
has set up in Teaching Quakers: Oh, let us rather die for the Name of Jesus
Christ of Nazareth, then leave the Mark of the Beast, ^iteer within or on us:
rather let us lose our h^ads from our shoulders, then renounce that saving
head, who is ascended up into the Heavens above: O let us rather effuse our
dearest blood and die glorious Martyrs, then live Apostates from, and die
p^^secutors of Jesus of Nazareth: And for your constant encouragement herein,
let us heartily learn the Apostles inspired Lesson, Romans 8.37. In all these, we
are more then Conquerors, through him that loved us.

FINIS.

