AT A General Court Called by the Honorable GOVERNOR on His Receipt of His
MAJESTY'S Letter, to sit in Boston, July the 9 th. 1684. When they Sat there
was Made and Passed the Law and Order following; And by their Order Printed:
By the Court Edward Rawson Secr'.
THis Court being Informed that great Disorders and Depradations have been
committed by several of His Majesty's Subjects, to the great damage and
prejudice of His Majesty's Allies, and contrary to Treaties of P^ace, and that
good Correspondence which ought to be maintained between Christian Princes and
States, and that several Persons contrary to their Duty and good Allegiance
have and do go from this Colony into foreign Princes Services, and Sail under
their Commissions; For the prevention whereof:

It is Ordered and Enacted by this Court and the Authority thereof, that from
and after the Publication hereof, it shall not be lawful for any person that
now does, or hereafter shall inhabit, come in or belong to this Colony to serve
in America in any Hostile manner under any Foreign Prince, State or Potentate,
or any employed under them against any other Foreign Prince, State or
Potentate in Amity with His Majesty, without special License or Commission
first had from His Majesty, or the Governor and Company of this Colony under
the Colonies Seal, or some of His Majesty's Governors or other lawful
Authority under him elsewhere, for their so doing; And that all and every such
Offender or Offenders being duly convicted, shall suffer the pains of Death:

Provided nevertheless, that this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall
extend to any person or persons which now are, or have been in the Service or
Employment of any Foreign Prince, State or Potentate whatsoever, that shall
return to this Colony, and leave and desert such Service and Employment before
the 25 th. day of March next ensuing.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all and every
person or persons that shall any way knowingly Entertain, Harbor, Counsel,
Trade, or hold any Correspondence by Letter or otherwise with any person or
persons that shall be deemed and adjudged to be Privateers, Pirates or other
Offenders within the constructions of this Act, and that shall not readily
endeavor to the best of his or their power, to Apprehend, or cause to be
Apprehended: such Offender or Offenders, shall be liable to be prosecuted as
Accessaries and Confederates, and suffer such Pains and Penalties as by Law is
in such case provided.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the chief
Commission Officer then present upon the place in any Town or Harbor where
there is no Magistrate or other person invested with like Authority residing
and at hand, are hereby in their several precincts within this Colony required
and empowered upon his or their knowledge or information given, that any
Privateers, Pirates or other persons suspected, to be upon any such unlawful
designs, to grant Warrants to the Constables of the place, to Apprehend and
Sieze every such person or persons, and if need be shall assist the Constable,
and raise and Leavy such a number of well-armed men as he or they shall think
meet for the siezing and apprehending of every such person or persons, and
carrying them before the Governor or some of the Magistrates to be further
examined, and proceeded against as the Law directs.

And in case of any resistance or refusal to yield Obedience to such Authority
and Seizure, it shall be lawful to kill or destroy such person or persons, and
all and every person that shall oppose or resist by strikeing or firing upon
the Officers, or any that are by him commanded for his aid and assistance,
shall be deemed, taken and adjudged Capital Offenders, and be put to death; and
every such Officer that shall omit or neglect his duty therein, being legally
convicted within three months after such his neglect shall forfeit fifty (...)
current Money of this Colony for every such offense for the use of this Colony.

And every person or persons that upon Orders given him or them shall refuse to
repair immediately with his or their Arms well fixed, and Ammunition to such
place or places as shall be appointed by the said Officer, and not readily obey
his Command in the Execution of the premises, shall be liable to pay a fine of
five pounds in Money, or suffer such Corporal Punishment as the Magistrate or
County Court that shall have cognizance thereof shall determine.

IN Answer to the Petition of several Taverners and In-keepers Licensed; This
Court for the encouragement of the Petitioners and others Licensed as the Law
directs, for keeping Houses of public Entertainment; and for their security
against the great injuries to them sustained by the irregular Practices of all
unlicensed persons;

Do Order, that all Tything-men, Grand-jury-men and Constables in their
respective places, diligently inspect all disordered Houses that do contrary to
Law Retail Wine, Ale, Beer, Cider, Liquors, etc. without License, and to
prosecute the wholesome Laws made against all such Disorders: And do further
Order, that one Complaint made by any Licensed person against any that are
unlicensed, for transgressing in that kind, before any Magistrate or County
Court, and being legally convicted thereof, every such Complainant shall have
for his Recompense the one moiety or half part of the fine or fines imposed
upon such Delinquents.

FINIS.

