New-Englands choicest Blessing And the Mercy most to be desired by all that
wish well to this People. Cleared in a SERMON Preached before the COURT of
ELECTION At Boston on May 28. 1679.

By JAMES ALLEN, Teacher to the first gathered Church therein.

BOSTON, Printed by John Foster, 1679.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
THe general acceptance this Discourse found in the time of it, together with
the earnest desire of many that it might be published for their further
benefit, as also the entreaty of the honored Court of Deputies who invited to
the preaching of it (which I acknowledge to the praise of that gracious
guidance and assistance given from the Lord to the unworthy Instrument) has
occasioned the exposing it to public view. The worth of the Author will not
much commend it to any, but that of the Subject may, it being of that absolute
and universal necessity, and excellency, both for the spiritual, as well as
outward happiness (...) this whole people, so also of each particular person;
as the experience of the Generation immediately foregoing abundantly testifies.
You must not expect any curiosity or quaintness, the design of it being to
^difie more then to please, any further than pleasing is a means to
edification, and where there is so good a frame as to be most satisfied with
that by which they may be most spiritually profited. I remember what I have
heard were some of the dying words of that excellent man Dr. Usher, that he
thanked God he had been a plain Preacher, and used that way which the Lord is
wont to accompany with the demonstration of his Spirit: it is by that way of
preaching which the world counts foolishness, that God will save them that
believe. I do not by this aim at my own credit, nor expect it will be
promoted by it; but if I do decrease so Christ may increase, I shall account
it my glory, and the matter of my praise. If Faith and Love to God in Christ,
and to his People (the spring of evangelical obedience, and the way to Gods
Covenant Presence with us) may hereby be furthered, I shall thereby obtain my
design. In the applicatory part, I have rather laid down rules how each should
carry it in their several capacities, then reproved any for miscariages in
them, as judging in the best way to the end: such misdemeanors of public
Persons being more in report then proofs, that never truly represents any man.
Besides, Regular est index sui et obliqui, and wise, if good men will use it as
a glass to discover faults for the rectifying what is amiss, as well as
direction to them in the right way: and where they are not so, it is a means
God blesses for that end, Romans 7.9. when God so commissioneth it, as he did
the commandment to Paul.

My hearty desire is, the gracious presence of God may be with it, to promove
thine and his Peoples happiness, by engaging your ende^vours and prayers that
the Covenant Presence of God may be with you. I am

Yours to serve you in the Lord James Allen.

1 King. 8.57. The Lord our God be with us, as he was with our Fathers, let him
not leave us, nor forsake us.
AFter I had received the invitation and call to this service, I cannot express
the Soul tremblings I had, (indeed sense of my own unfitness at any time to
speak before such an Assembly as this, and upon such an occasion; especially in
a day so circumstanced as this is,) lest you should be disappointed of that,
which you so much need, the best Counsel Heaven can afford. But being satisfied
your desire was the Lords Call, I was so far encouraged as to venture upon it,
in expectation of divine Assistance: And now humbly beg this may be the wish of
this whole Assembly, all the Lords people in it, that God may be with me as he
has been with those who have formerly spoken in his Name, upon the like
occasion; that through the help of your prayers, and the supply of the Spirit
of Jesus Christ, that which is lacking may be supplied, and this service may
turn to your Edification.

THe words read to you, are part of Solomon's blessing of all Israel, who were
assembled at the dedication of the Temple, and was after that solemn Prayer he
had made, for Gods ^avour to them in the variety of Cases, and Emergencies
might be^al them, ver. 55. After all this he stood and blessed all the
Congregation. He blesses them.

1. By declaring them blessed, and acknowledging that favor the Lord had
showed them, ver. 56.

2. By this holy and pathetical wish and desire, as comprehensive of all the
particular mercyes before prayed for, God might so be with that Generation as
with the former, with the end and effect of that desire, ver. 57,58.

3. His further desire and wish for them, that what he had particularly
mentioned (...) his Prayer before, might be accepted of God for them, ver. 59.
and performed: with his design, and end, the advancement of Gods glory, ver. 60

4. His holy Counsel and advice to them, how they should carry it to the Lord,
that they might enjoy the good desired for them, ver. 61. The Text is the
second way by which he blesses them, wishing all that good to them, that truly
will make them blessed, such a presence of God with them, as is comprehensive
of all that follows. We bless others when we do wish and truly desire tha^ for
them which will make them so; especially, when it is not a bare desire, but
with Authority as this was, Solomon being a Prophet as well as a King, and here
acting in an extraordinary way, doing that God commanded should be done by
Aaron and his Sons, Numb. 6.24, to the end To which he promised the ratifying
it, as being done in the way of an Ordinance, and Institution of the Lord. In
the words we have Solomon's wish or desire for Israel.

1. The petition itself, expressed, 1. Affirmatively, that God may be with (...),
amplified and illust^^ted, 1. By the kind of his presence, as our God. 2. The
Degree, as with our Fathers. 2. Negatively, by variety of words to the same
sense, not leave nor forsake us.

2. The Petitioner, that is Solomon, a wise man, their Ruler, acting as a
Prophet, and in the name of all that People.

3. The Persons for whom it is, all the Congregation of Israel. I shall not
spend time in giving you the various readings, or Criticismes about the words;
they are well rendered to comprehend the sense of them.

1. The wish, or that is desir^d, 1. What is meant by the presence of God or
his being with us. 2. Our Fathers. 3. As with them. 4. Not to leave nor
forsake, and why that is added. These must be a little cleared to make way for
the Doctrine.

1. Gods being with them. There is a twofold Presence of God, or he is said to
be with any two ways,

1. By his essential Presence, by which God is always with the creatures*
wherever they are, or whatever their state is, Psalm. 139.7,8. So fills heaven
and earth, Jer. 23.24. Comprehends all things, places, contained of none, none
can hide from the knowledge, nor fly from the power of it.

2. His providential or voluntary Presence, that is either common or special,
1. Common, and that ordinary, or more extraordinary: Ordinary, Act. 17. 18.
Extraordinary, when the Lord raises and enables any that know him not, to do
some notable thing in the world for the service of the Church, Isa. 45.1,2,3,4.
so sometimes as afflictive to his people as ^ebuchadnezzar. 2. Special, and
that is either, 1. A gracious Presence, 2. Glorious, that with Saints and
Angels in heaven; that is the complement of their happiness, Psalm. 16. ult. Its
Gods gracious presence here ^eant with his people on earth as their Covenant
God, that we may call his New Covenant Presence, Let our God be with us. This
gracious Presence imports two things, 1. Conferring all good, his vigilant and
efficacious providence for their good. 2. Delivering and defending from all
evil, both these are Covenant mercies, Genesis 15.1. by which he encourages
Abraham, tells him what he might expect from his being in Covenant with him, to
be his shield and exceeding great reward. And the signs of Gods Presence with
Israel were the Pillar of Fire, and Cloud, the one for day, the other for
night, which was to guide them in the way, and defend them from, and stand
between them and danger. Exodus 14.19,20. In allusion to this, the Psalmist 73.
24. comforts himself in having the Covenant presence of God with him, He shall
guide me by his Counsel, and afterward bring me to his glory. Ps.84.11. he is
said to be a Sun and a shield, which first is expounded to be his free
communication of all good, not witholding it, i.e. powerfully conveying it. And
all know what the benefit of a (...) is, that intimates his withholding all
evil. This is promised to the reforming Jews and converted Gentiles who were
brought into Covenant with God, Isa. 4.5,6.

2. By Fathers are meant godly Rulers and Teachers of the People of God, who
are often so called in Scripture, as well as natural Parents, those in the
generation before them, or long before, with whom God was most eminently
present, Psalm. 44.1,2,3. Of those of old, but especially here is intended those
in the former Generations, for though the Lord was eminently with his people of
old, in Moses and Joshuahs time, and the Judges God raised up extraordinarily
to be their Saviors, yet in no Age was there a more gracious presence of God
then in the Age before Solomon.

3. As with our Fathers, that is, see Isa. 63.12,11. Ps.44.3,4. the presence,
the Church desires, that had been with their Fathers, or such a presence. 1. In
wonder-working, and as gloriously as for them as in the success David had over
all the Enemies of Israel, 1 Chronicles. 11.9.2 Sam. 8.6,14,15. 2. That presence, or
be so with us as with our holy Ancestors, by his gracious communications of
himself to us in the ways of his Ordinances, Psalm. 63.2. filling us with his
glory, even in those signs of his presence as in those best times, ver. 5,6. as
David found it when he fet head the Ark to his place, 2 Samuel 6.12,13.14,15. as
to their Communion with, so right knowledge of the things of Gods house, and
that converting Presence of God there, Isai. 54.13. made David say, Psalm.
84.11. one day there was worth a thousand else where. As also in civil order,
Ezekiel. 48.35. was said of them, so might be of us, this may be the Name, Jehovah
Shammah, the name of our Courts and Churches, be with us as with them in these
respects.

3. In-dwelling presence, such a presence of God in our hearts as was then in
theirs, filling us with his Spirit, strengthening unto duty, 2 Cor. 6.18. As
God promises those that separate from the world, 1 Cor, 15.10. Paul he
acknowledges he had it whence he (...) so much work, and in such a manner, Act
14.1. they so spoke, many did believe, whence was it that those before us were
so powerful, and persuasive, not by excelling in common gifts above many that
come after, but having a fuller presence of God, there was a more full pouring
forth of the Spirit, Zec. 12.8. that which will make the feeble as David, and
David as an Angel of God.

It may be enquired why it is said, as with our Fathers? it seems to be a
limitation of it, when as one generation may need more then another, and
usually in some respects, a succeeding generation to any special reforming
generation, does: And therefore Elisha, 2 King. 2.9. he asks a double portion
of the Spirit of Elijah, not only to what the other Prophets had, but what
Elijah himself had, as being to meet with harder work, a more sinful and
unreformed People.

Answ. As, 1. Imports that kind of presence they had sometimes, the similitude
and not the degree, 1 Pet. 1.15.

2. It does not always limit the measure; a great degree of Gods gracious
presence is here meant, but not just so much is intended, so much as, and as
much more, as the Lord saw good; so much as might carry them as well through
their duty, and work, in their generation, as those in theirs.

3. The People of God are wont to gather upon God, by his grants, that is
vantage ground to Faith, and Prayer, Exodus 33.13,14,15,17,18. upon every grant
Moses gets in with the Lord, and asks yet greater; so it should be here, we
shall be in better frame to ask more, when we have obtained so much, and in
better hope to prevail.

4. Let him not leave us nor forsake us; These are only amplifications, and
show the weight of what he did desire, by abiding on it, not leave to others,
nor to our selves, not quit the care of his People, Jer. 14.9. that he
deprecates on the behalf of the Church, not take away signs of his presence,
nor his own presence from them. Solomon his commendable practice is for our
imitation. Hence the Doctrine from the words is,

Doct* The obtaining and continuance of Gods eminently gracious Covenant
presence with his People ought to be sincerely and mainly desired by those that
truly wish their happiness and prosperity. 1. That it should be. 2. Why it
should be.

Reas. 1. Because it is the best blessing and favor can be desired for them.

1. It ought to be so, it is that they have done, which had the greatest love
to Israel, as Moses, Exodus 33.15. Let thy presence go with us, or carry us not
hence. So David desired for Solomon, and the People under him, 1 Chronicles.
22.11,18. So Solomon he^^ when he blesses Israel, and it was the usual
Salutation among the Jews, Ruth. 2.4.

1. It is the most necessary blessing, nothing else is absolutely necessary but
the presence of God, we may be happy without Creatures, the Israelites found
Clothes, houses, food was not necessary, not the ordinary way of its supply,
God could supply it another way; but this cannot, Luke 10.42. there is one
thing necessary, that is, the gracious presence of God, therefore Moses chooses
the Wilderness with Gods presence, rather then Canaan without him, Exodus 33.15.
Heaven is not desirable without it, Psalm. 73.25.

2. It is the most suitable blessing to the People of God, nothing more
pleasing as well as profitable to them, Psalm. 4.6. therefore the best blessing.

3. It is a sufficient good, you cannot desire a more comprehensive blessing,
this is enough, Genesis 33.11. Jacob when he had obtained it by earnest prayer, he
acknowledges he had all, nothing less will make a people happy, more is
superfluous. It is a saving, and it is a satisfying presence, Jer. 14.8. all
good is in it, it is sufficient for defense against danger, Romans 8.31. Psalm.
27.2.23,4. To support assist, and succeed, in every duty, Hag. 1. 14. Math.
28.20. Genesis 39.2. so that promise intimates thus much, as was made to Joshua,
and applied to the use of every Believer, Heb. 13.5. against fears of Enemies,
or of want, you cannot want providing for, that have God graciously with you,
Psalm.144.15.

4. The most distinguishing favor, Exodus 33.16. our experience proves it.

Reas. 2. The want of it is the greatest evil, so God threatens it, Hos. 9.12.
and the Prophet in the Name of the Lords people, Jer. 14.9. deprecates it, as
the worst that can befall them: though Sword and Famine were threatened, he takes
no notice of them, but endeavors to prevent a greater; Lord do not thou leave
us not forsake us, be not thou a stranger, Deuteronomy. 28. 15. at this gap all other
evils enter, if God forsakes, Ordinances will leave you, any benefit by them,
friends will forsake, all comforts, he carries all with him, they are but his
Attendants, Creatures and other enjoyments are but u^bra Dei, especially, when
all your outward good came with Gods presence, it will leave you if God does;
it is the presence of God, has multiplied you, enriched you, outwardly
sanctified any of you, if he forsakes, these will not stay, no nor the People
of God neither, then Enemies will come, and all misery, such shall say, are not
all these things come upon us, because God is not among us, and Enemies will
know our shadow is removed, Number. 14.14. It was that kept off Enemies from
Israel, they heard the Lord was among them, that encouraged the Psalmist
Enemies, Psalm.71.11. God has forsaken, hence while God is with his People, no
evil will assoil them, therefore as you would see the prosperity, and prevent
the misery of the people of God, desire the gracious presence of God for them.

USE. 1. For Information, See hence who are the best friends of a professing
People: Who are thine O New England that love you best, though they have not,
at least they are not so accounted of by you: Those they are who wish, pray,
endeavor that the gracious presence of God may continue with you, and be with
you as signally as with any of his People in former times, or in the first
times of this People. A praying, zealous, reformed and reforming Magistracy,
Ministry and People, Isa. 62.7,8. that upon your walls give God no rest, that
promo^e and keep up the separation between the precious and the vile, Jer.
15.19. Ezekiel. 22.26.30. These are your gap-men who prevent Gods going away, and
ruin^ coming; but do you not think them the troublers of Israel? Are you not
weary of them, and fain would be rid of them? The old and faithful ones, that
have seen the works of the Lord, do you not with others were in their room,
that you might have more elboe room? Do you not dig pits for their soul, that
pray for yours, for a converting presence of God, that you might be with him as
your fathers were? Jer. 18.20. Thy best days are gone O New England, if their
Prayers should be turned against you. O Sirs, yet you may revive the hopes of
such, if you would prize and value them, the presence of God might be desired
and obtained by them.

2. Then those that desire Gods departure from a People are their worst
enemies: Such as would drive away or remove his gracious presence from you.
Job. 21.14,15. There are such men as would fain be rid of the presence of God.
some such bold sinners, they say it with their mouths, would have no Sabbaths,
nor preaching nor precise walking, would be rid of godly Magistrates,
Ministers, Christians, they have too much of them: all wicked men say it in
their hearts, others in their practices, and wicked works, especially sensual
Sinners, (...) that have fullness of the world, have all their carnal hearts
do wish, they love not the presence of God, its not the way to sinful
pleasure or profit or credit in the world, Mal. 3.14. Isa. 30.10,11,12. will
not endure plain distinguishing, seperating preaching, but must be soothed,
pleased in a sinful way; so would have the holy one to cease from among them,
the sanctif^ing presence of God, that they cannot bear: and what follows? These
are the worst enemies among the people that would take away your God. Judge.
18.24. he thought so of them that took away his dunghill gods, and those means
of worship of his own inventing, how much more reason have you to look upon
them that would take away your glory, the signs of Gods gracious presence, even
his own holy institutions.

3. Hence see how to make a right judgment of the happiness or misery of any
people, it is according to the presence of God among them, his gracious
presence, Exodus 33.19. It is that makes the most noted difference between one
people and another, the same people in one time and in another, according to
the manifestation of his presence, Psalm. 144.15. May it not in this respect be
truly said, former days were better than these, when they had more of Gods
presence then now: but the Wise man reproves the saying so, that former days
were better. Eccles. 7.10.

Answ. The meaning is not, that some days of the Church and people of God are
not more troublesome, and others more prosperous, and that we should not bewail
with godly sorrow the evil of the days we live in, and the sins and judgments
that make them so; you must see they are so, and enquire into the cause, but
the meaning is,

1. That which is blamed is, so to complain of the evil of present time, as
not to take notice of the good in it that the Lord continues, that is folly,
when the Lord has removed many choice and precious ones from the Bench and the
Pulpits, yet we ought to take notice with thankfulness, of the precious ones
there, whom he has le^t, and so much of his presence with them. This was their
sin, N^mb. 14.4,5. Exodus 16.3.

2. Nor should we complain that our Lot is cast in such a day, that is to
murmr at the providence of God, and the holy government of it, who has
appointed the places and times of every person. Act. 17.26.

3. To insist upon a wrong cause, and charge the positive and meritorious evil
upon the times; but ^^is is wise enquiry and judgment, when we see our own and
others sins to be the cause of evil times, and that evil men make evil days. 2 Timothy 3.1,2,3. they are the deserving or meritorions cause.

4. To judge the want of outward things, or presence of outward evils to be the
cause deficient or privative of worse times, that men's trade and estates grow
worse; when the true cause or (...) is the gracious presence of God which is
^^ndred by our sins. Isa. 59. (...) that there should be no spiritual thriving,
and trade with heaven should be on the losing hand. So to see times where less
of God is, to be worse, is wisdom to enquire the cause that it may be mended,
and we may obtain the presence of God with us as in former times.

USE 2. Of Exhortation, To this great Assembly, That you would sincerely desire
the presence of God with this People, as with their Fathers. I am encouraged to
press this upon you, being well pers^aded, I speak to a great many, that love
the prosperity of Jerusalem, and that come to be directed in the way to it.

1. Endeavor it. 2. Earnestly pray for it. I will give you ^at these two
general directions.

1. To endeavor it, do what you can, and lies with you it may be so, true
desires are always followed with suitable endeavors, for they are the issuings
and goings out of the will, to the good it has chosen; there are two main acts
of the will, viz. elicite and imperate, and having chosen it, pursues it by
Commands to every faculty of the Soul, yea, and members of the body. The
understanding that it should inform it self, what is the best way, and then
affections to love or hate, as this good is furthered or hindered, or we in the
obtaining of it. Direction for your endeavor better cannot be given then what
is in 2 Chronicles. 15.2. being from the immediate guidance and inspiration of the
Spirit of God. 1 Chr. 2^.9 The visible gracious presence of God is conditional
with a visible People, see that you fulfill it, performing your Covenant duty to
God in your several Relations you stand in to him and his People: It is not
enough you are not against him in such a day, neutrality will be counted
opposition. Math. 12.30.

Men, Brethren, and Fathers.
1. Endeavor, (I speak to this whole Assembly together) to keep and recover
Gods presence by deep humiliation for, and through Reformation of what is
provoking to the Lord, search out the Achan and judge it. Josh. 7.12. otherwise
the Lord will not be among you, sin and the holy God cannot be together in the
same heart, nor place, were it is allowed, Am. 3.2. if two walk together they
must be agreed, bewail and reform Sensuality, want of first love, lukewarmness
in Religion, Animosities, unbelief, you have been frequently minded of those
sins you all know to be so, find and clear each of you your personal guilt in
any of them. This is Covenant duty with promise of Covenant mercy, Lev. 26.41.

2. Let God have his will, do not cross him, but labor to please him, remember
he is your Sovereign, he will be with you as such an one, therefore you must be
with him as his Subjects: subject to all his Commands, and submit to his
Providence, that is the way to his favor, 1 King. 8.58. it is the effect of,
and way to his gracious presence, to walk as according to his positive, so his
instituted will, Lev. 26.1,2,3, to ve^. 13. then you walk with God when you
obey his will, and he will be with you by fulfilling his promises to you, Math.
28.19,20. Joh. 14.23. Joh. 8.29. and when you submit, to his providence, Dan.
3.17,24.

3. Give him good content, value and highly prize his presence, the Lord is not
wont to leave any till undervalued by them, Psalm. 81.12. when they took not
full content in him, then he gave them up, Hos. 5,15. therefore see you get and
keep up love to his presence, so to the signs of it in his Ordinances, Isai.
52.7,8. value Ministry, and the faithful Ministers, esteem them as choice
Covenant blessings, Jer. 3.15. And godly Rulers, when those that love you rule
over you, 1 King. 10.8.9. be not weary of them, and Sabbaths, but call them
your delight, Isai. 58.8,9,10. maintain an humble sense of your unworthiness of
it, and yet a need of it, Isai. 57.15. ^e thankful for the least discoveries of
it, and yet earnestly desirous of the most, especially value God's Son, I^sal.
2.12.

A Word to the Freemen.
To all concerned in the work of this day, if you are with God in your choosing,
and they are so who are chosen by you as our Fathers were, we may expect the
Lord will be so with his people: our fears or hopes will be furthered as this
day is managed. It is promised as an high Testimony of Gods favor to his
People, Isai. 1.26. when he gives them Judges as at the first, etc. and how
does he give them but in that way of giving you hearts to choose such, (...) is
a fruit of the right managing that other Covenant privilege, the Lord (...)
^etrusted you with, Jer. 30.20. to have our Governors from among our selves.

1. Be not negligent in your choice, this liberty is a Talent, you have this
day another opportunity to use it, do not hide it in a napkin, or in the Earth,
as that unfaithful Servant, Math. 25.24,25. that your worldly business may not
take up that time should be employed in this Service. I have heard it much
complained of, that Freemens meetings are not attended, not half of them appear
upon choice of Deputies in this Town, and other concerns in that nature: and
many that do come, have never prayed for guidance, no^ made enquiries of
things, or persons; but only do as they are led. Is not this to do the work of
the Lord negligently? To be careless of your Oath? And to be accessory to all
the mischief you might have prevented, if it be any otherwise then well, and to
have no part nor share in what good the Lord this way brings about to his
People?

2. Those who are active, see that it be for God, the glory of God, and the
good of his People: be on Gods side, let not private respects sway you in your
Elections, to be for those that are your friends or favorers, be for God, and
he will be with you. If you would be so, then let your choice be guided and
overruled by the word of God, see how men stand af^ected to Religion, and the
common good of this people, 2 Samuel 23.3. He must be just, ruling in the fear of
God. If they had the wisdom of Solomon, Justice of Trajan, etc. they would not
be fit for this People, if they are not pious. Solomon says, wisdom with an
Inheritance is good, that is most true here, or it is good, I mean that he be
an heir of glory, be truly gracious, other qualifications must not be severed
from, but seasoned with the fear of God. It is true, every godly man is not fit
to be a Ruler, and as true, no ungodly man is. They that are not true to God,
can never be so to the main Interest of this his People: All other
qualifications without this will make them but the more dangerous Enemies to
the People of God. Be sure then you choose friends of God, if by them you would
expect a manifestation of his friendship to you. It is true, the best are
subject to infirmities, that may be personal disadvantages, but they will be
faithful to the interest of godliness.

3. When you have chosen them, know that you are with God in a right and
regular carriage to them, and in the way to have him with you and us.

1. If it be a good choice of holy men, bless God for it, and take it as a
pledge and token of his favor to you, and his presence with you, Isai. 1.26.
Ezekiel. ^4.24. If otherwise, there is no Reason to complain of any, but your
selves, therefore you should humble your selves before God as deserving such a
Judgment, and for your sinfulness in choosing it.

2. Follow them with your prayers, God may be with them, as he has been with
those before them, if you would pray more for them, and complain less of them
you would be better People, and would find them more a blessing to you. If
their missing it further your* prayers, that is the best way to rectify their
proceedings, 1 Timothy 2.1,2. whence you were solemnly exhorted to it the last
year, by a faithful Servant of Christ

3. obey them; though this or that form of Government is man's creature, yet
Magistracy is the Lords Ordinance, and their authority in those places is from
God: therefore Romans 13.1,2. Christians were bound for conscience sake to obey
evil ones, when got into place, much more when good, 1 Timothy 6.1. and a further
obligation you have then other people, to ready obedience, they are of your own
choice.

Remember when you choose them, they are men: you choose not Angels, but men of
like infirmity with other good men in this world, therefore expect not too
much, but you ought to think that all will not be done that ought to be. But
also know when you have chosen them, they are gods by office, Psalm. 82.6. and
in the exercise of that to be obeyed, though only in the Lord.

2. A word to those that are, and may be our Rulers, Honored in the Lord, much
may be done by you to obtain and maintain the presence of God with this People:
One faithful man on the Bench, may stop the gap, and prevent Gods going out at
it, or enemies coming in. Ezekiel. 22.30. Psalm. 106.23. I would humbly commend to
you that which is your main duty, in which you ought to walk with God in that
station, and do your part, God may be with you, and so with this People. It is
direction given by divine Oracle, God the Father and the Son by the Spirit
spoke it, 2 Samuel 23.3. A Scripture has been improved profitably among you upon
this occasion, by a worthy Servant of God now with the Lord, as a direction in
the choice of such that may be a blessing to a People, and to them chosen how
to carry it, that the People over whom they are may have the gracious presence
of God among them, and continued with them, not only a promise they should have
such a Ruler, but a precept what they should be, that are Rulers of Israel.
More particularly,

1. The care of the People of God and the things of God is in a great measure
committed to you, as you engage your Authority for the protection and defense
of these; so you are with the Lord, and he will be with you and his People by
your means.

1. For the People of God, these are dear to God, and as the Apple of his Eye,
Zech. 2.8. as he is sensible of the least wrong done to them, so of every
kindness and favor showed to them, you are as the visible covers to these
Eyes, their outward defense under God lies upon you; as it is a special favor
to Gods people to have such as fear the Lord over them, so is it an high honor
to be over such a People, and the Lord further manifests his kindness to
Rulers, when they are spirited and raised up to be Saviors upon Mount Zion; it
is both a manifestation of it, and a sign of more, Zech. 12.5,6,8. when God
will make Jerusalem a burdensome stone to all that heave at them, then shall
their Rulers be encouraged to stand by them, as being strong in having a people
in Covenant with God to stand for, so the God of that Covenant. To these the
Lord promises great success, as fire is to the wood laid upon it in the
Hearth, (...) so shall they be to their Enemies, they shall prevail against
them. Let (...) ^out-casts dwell with you, and your Countenance and Favor be
extended to all, that truly fear the Lord, though in some Circumstances they
may not be of your mind, when they carry it without just offense.

2. Care of the things of God, his worship, that is also incumbent on you as
Rulers, defense of, and encouragement in the practice of godliness, and matters
of worship: I am far from thinking, Magistrates in New Testament times, have
nothing to do with, either the restraining or encouraging outward acts of men
referring to the first Table: The commended Examples in Old Testament times,
that were moral actions are for our Instruction, as well as moral precepts
(where those actions were not extraordinary,) As those about the worship of God
and religious observation of the Sabbath, that then were under divine
Institution as to that time, and mode of Service: There is the same obligation
to the care of the Lords day now, and Institutions of Christ in the
New Testament.

But to wave the dispute of it, what is the duty, is the greatest difficulty,
and made the darker, by the various apprehensions of worthy and excellent men.
I shall not undertake decision of that Case, but shall endeavor to hold forth
so much light for your direction in it, you may be with God, and act in
Integrity and Evangelical Perfection: And know you that the Lord will not
withdraw because of Infirmities, and weaknesses, where there are not wilful
miscarriages of his Servants.

1. Defend them that are the most precious things of this people, and then
liberty to enjoy the Ordinances of God in their purity, you must use your
Authority for their ^efence, not only from open, but secret Enemies; And what
ever tends to the ruin and overthrow of the Churches here established. And as
was well hinted by a worthy person in his Election Sermon; less will undo us
here, (this is but a little Boat) then in greater Kingdoms. I do not think
errors of the mind can be compelled, but by light and Reason, or that any can
be forced to be of another mind; they must be drawn, not driven, that heartily
close with Christ, and embrace Religion.

But if any under pretense of Religion will endeavor the subversion of that is
true, and so esteemed by those in Authority, such endeavors ought to be
prevented by them, and powerfully obviated.

I am persuaded, that all the people of God are agreed in the end, that injury,
at least ruin should be hindered Authoritatively, the greatest doubt is about
the means, what is the best way to overthrow the designs of those that are
Enemies, and fundamentally so to the welfare of this People, and it is high
wisdom, the choice of the fittest means to the end; it is very hard to say
what that is, they can best judge of it that ^ear all the Circumstances of a
Case. That I would humbly commend is, when you cannot all agree upon the way,
use cond^scendency to each other, that you may agree, vi^ uni^a fortior. That
which is done with greatest Concurrence you may expect most of Gods presence
with, and will be most effectual, though in itself it may seem most
contemptible.

2. Let them have your countenance and encouragement, that is by your Example
and Authority maintain and uphold the true worship of God, 2 Chronicles. 17.6,7,8.
Jehoshaphat was commended for his care that all places might have a faithful
teaching Minister, see ver. 9. how the Lord was with them, Neh. 13.11. Nehemiah
he took care that the house of God it might not be forsaken by withdrawing
necessary supports for those that attend the service of God, o^le there must be
to maintain the Lights. They are duties of necessity, not liberty of Justice,
not Charity, so fall under your Cognizance.

2. The matters of men are also your care, and therein you are with God when
there is due execution of Justice, if it be speedy, Impartial as our Fathers
were, such have been in these places that could not by friendship, or flattery,
or bribery be turned out of the way of right Judgment, but have judged for the
Lord, Jer. 22.1^,19. as Josiah was commended for it, and it was we^l with him
and his People, ver. 3,4. Jer. ^.1. and Righteousness exalts a N ation, Prove.
14.34. the contrary evil is its Reproach, Justice says the Philosopher, is all
virtue.

A word to the Reverend E^ders, much may be done by you, Fathers and Brethren,
that the gracious presence of God may be continued with this People. If we be
so with God as those that went before us, he will be with us, as he was with
them. One Jehoj^^ah, of how much use was his Faithfulness to God in the matters
of his worship, 2 King. 12.2.

1. Endeavor the like agreement and union, in promoving the Truths of the
gospel. It was promised to gospel times, Isai. 52.7,8. That those who brought
the glad Tidings of the gospel, should lift up their voice together, and sing
together, this the Apostle, Romans 10.15. applies to the Ministers of the Gospel,
and I believe it had as eminent a fulfilling in those faithful and precious
Elders, that were first planters of the Churhes here, as ever since the
primitive times, in exalting together the reign and government of Christ in his
Church; and (...) some Circumstances they differed, (...) in those things is
the greatest difference among the godly) yet they agreed in the substance, and
manifested it in that Platform of Discipline, which was published as the
Judgment of the Ministers of New England, asserting the Authoritative Rule of
the Elders with the liberty of the Brethren. Though the Judgment of the best,
should not be looked upon as Scripture Canons, nor bind any further, then it is
found agreeing with the Word of God, by which it ought to be tr^ed; yet I think
I may safely say, that is a clearer Judgment of the mind of God in the
Scripture, in that matter, then can be expected in this next generation: I
should rather suspect my own Judgment in the Scriptures, then their a (...)
that Case.

1. Considering ho^ singular^ly they were qualified for that discovery, Ezekiel.
43. 11. though it is true, in improvements of natural light, that may be
^n^reased by industry, and those that stand upon others shoulders, may see
^urther then they did upon whose shoulders they stand; but it is not so in
spiritual things, the further knowledge of which depends upon Rev^lation, Ephesians.
1.17. and the humble the Lord ^^acheth, Psalm. 25.9. Rev. 4.1,2,3. In that
glorious discovery is Gods glorious inthroning himself in the midst of his
Church, affording gracious supplies and protection to them, is manifested to
John when prepared by an heavenly Extas^e, which was the Theater in which he
did he hold it. When we find a Company of men more holy, humble, and diligent,
then those were, something more may be expected*

2. They were free from outward Temptations to please men, having a people
ready to receive what should be made known to them, upon their serious
searching out the mind of God in his word: besides the Conflicts and agitations
from abroad, to put them upon their fuller examination of it by the word of
God; and to weigh it in the balance of the Sanctuary.

3. We shall not find in Scripture, or other Histories of the Church, that the
next Age after any considerable progress in Reformation, did go beyond the
first, but the contrary, Judge. 2.10. there have been gradual declinings till
that light has almost been extinguished; then the Lord has raised a new
spirit of Reformation, to whom he has given and revealed more of his will, and
further knowledge of his truth: Nay we may read of some of the Lords faithful
servants, that their first ways have been the best, 2. Chron. 17.3. So with
Solomon, and our Lord Jesus blames the Ephesian Church for forsaking their
first love* and where love decays light does not increase in practical Truths,
Rev. 2.5. This was New-Englands glory and design, they came not hither^ to
assert the prophetical or Pr^e^^ly office of Christ so much, that were so fully
owned in Old England, but his kingly, to bear witness to those truths
concerning his visible Kingdom, the maintaining of these lies much with you. I
am persuaded, that the truth concerning the Kingdom of Christ, is that word of
Christ's patience, that the Ph^ladelphian Church is commended for Rev. 3.10. and
^ath that gracious presence of Christ promised to it, that they shall be kept
from the hour of temptation coming upon the whole world.

1. It is that Christ suffered for, John 18.37. This cause was written upon his
Cross, Chap. 19.19.

2. His Kingdom is as yet a Kingdom of Patience, therefore the (...)
concerning it must be a word of patience, Rev. 1.9. and they that own it, their
Patience will be exercised.

3. The greatest opposition sinners make, yea such as are professed Christians,
is to the invisible and visible Rule of Christ, Psalm. 2.2. Luke 19.14.

4. It is the last truth to be suffered for, which Suffering ushers in the
Kingdom of his Power, Rev. 11.11,12,15.

2. Endeavor to save this People, pray and preach for their Conversion, not so
much to please as profit them; let it be seperating Preaching, Ier. 15.19. Romans
9.1,2,3. Chap. 10.1.

3. Be faithful to Christ in teaching all, and only what Christ has
commanded. Math. 28.18,20. that is, all that is necessary for their salvation
and edification. Act. 20.27.

4. Be examples to the Flock. 1 Pet. 5,3. of Meekness, Hum^ility, Self-denial
and Sobriety. A more exemplary Ministry the world has not had then
New England, and the Lord was with them, let us not come behind them: Men are
taught more and readier to learn by example then precept: while you are thus
with God, He will not leave not forsake this people.

4. Let me leave a few words of advice with this honored Court, who have
called me to this Service: Honored Sirs, you have given me the opportunity
thus to speak to you, yet my message is from above, I speak to you now under
the influence of a greater authority then yours, or any under heaven. Let me
humbly beseech and advise you, as those I believe seek the welfare of this
people, to do your part that the gracious presence of the Lord may be with us
as in former times.

1. Be courageous for God and his People, our lives and liberties, civil and
sacred, are put into your trust, you may save or destroy us under God; quit you
like Christians, and as former Courts; difficulties may be before you, but
study more what becomes you at this time, then what will become of you: Enquire
what is your duty, and God would have you to do, be sollicitous more to please
God then men, nay, assure your selves men you cannot please, the Lord you may,
Prove. 6.7. and though hard and hazardous work is before you, if the Lord set
you upon it, he will not leave you in it; Hag. 2.4. This is the way to have God
engage with you, when you trust all with him; make the word of God the Rule of
your proceedings, and remember Issues and Events are the Lords, they are
uncertain to us; but if you be sincere for the glory of God, and in the doing
your duty, though in some things you may miss it, God will own you in it, 2 Chronicles. 16.15. And the Issue will certainly be good to you and us.

2. Be unanimous, let your Consultations and results be so as much as may be,
the bundle of Arrows is not so easily broken as one, 2 Cor. 13.11. what he
says of Church society is true of any of the Assemblies of the People of God,
be at peace and the God of peace will be with you, and if with you, so far he
is with us; union is your strength; your dividing is like an Armies breaking
rank when an Enemy is assaulting them. Those that seek the ruin of the whole,
first endeavor it by dividing you, shall Herod and Pilate agree against
Christ, and shall not Christians for him, and that at a time when there is so
general a Conspiracy and consent among the Enemies of the Truth, against all
the Professors of it? Believe not reports of each other, take not up
prejudices, if you have prejudged their persons, you will make no right
Judgment of what they say, press not things wherein there may be different
apprehensions, too hard, nor heighten it by giving the difference too ill a
Name, or too good, too odious, or glorious; if there be lesser Animosities, and
personal, lay them aside, they may not hinder union for public good, two brave
Romans did so. The Agreement of this Court would have an healing influence upon
all other Societies under you, your practice of it would speak more then all
other desires of it, and do more then all other endeavors.

3. Your being with God, will much appear in the Laws you make, to be the Rules
of others walking under you, see that none of them be repugnant to the Laws of
heaven, or unsuitable to the state of this People; if any be so, better show
your authority in nulling them, then neglect or contempt of them should lessen
your authority: What are good, see to it they may be executed: as much of the
wisdom of a people is seen in their making laws, so is their authority in the
due execution of them, and their holiness Deu. 5.8. if you do not make the Laws
speak by executing of them, what men (...) charge on God, may be too truly on
men, Psalm. ^0.21. are like them either in weakness, or wickedness, you either
dare not show your dislike, or have it not.

4. Suffer not Plantations to be without a godly and faithful Minister, not to
set down without Gods Ordinances, which are signs of Gods presence, Exodus
20.24. and means also by which, and in which he is among a People, 2 Chronicles.
15.34. without the true God, when without teaching Priests, and no way of
visible worship. Where persons are not fit ^o judge for themselves who are fit
to administer the holy things of God, provide some way that Heterodox and
ungodly ones may not be encouraged; Tares will sooner grow then wheat.

5. Acquaint your selves with the History of the glorious works of God, for
this people in former times, those manifestations of Gods presence with our
Fathers, and further the knowledge of it among this people: you have been often
minded of it, and though something has been done toward it, by Reverend and
worthy persons, yet those providence and experiences of seasonable and
wonderful supplies, and protections, that have been most remarkable, I have not
yet seen. The full story of this people to this day would be one of the best of
humane Histories, for the time of it, in the world, many things yet may be had
from those that have seen those wonderful works, and Fathers should tell it to
their Children, Psalm. 44.1,2,3. you are our public Fathers, tell it then to
your Children, the knowledge of this by Solomon was the ground of his wish for
the like. It was usual with the People of God in former times that had not the
way you have to communicate remarkable Providence to after Ages, to do it by
erecting Monuments, or putting a name upon the place, Genesis 22.14. so to
preserve the memory of famous Providence, Exodus 17.14,15. so Moses by divine
direction kept a Record of that victory over Amale^, Psalm. 70, etc. many Psalms
there are to call to remembrance, thence it was Bethel had its Name, Genesis
28.19. so that Well, Genesis 16.14. Josh. 4.3,4. God himself gives himself a new
Title upon it, Genesis 22.12. and it is a means of Gods presence and blessing,
Psalm. 78.3,4. that they may set their hope in God.

2. As you should endeavor each in his place, we may have this presence of
God, so pray for it earnestly, Importunately, stirring up your selves to take
hold of God, you may not let him go; be not willing to let go your hold on
him; Argue the Case with humble and holy boldness as Moses, Exodus 33.15. Numb.
14,13,14. Jer. 14.9. say as she, Ruth 1.16. as Jacob, Genesis 32.26. resolve to
take no den^al, ^^gistrates should pray he may be with this people, and the
People he may be with them, with our Courts, our Ministers, in our Churches,
with those that choose, etc. 1 King. 8.58. To stir up your endeavor and desire.

Mo^. 1. Consider, never did you need it more then now, you have more Enemies,
and those more potent, you have fewer friends, and those less powerful, your
work is greater, difficulties more formidable, such Mountains as cannot be
removed by humane might or power, but alone by the Spirit of the Lord, Zec. 4.
7. And divine help, Math. 8.26. What will not men do when the Ship is ready to
sink, and those in it to perish? O therefore awaken Christ with your Cry!

2. Consider how much of that gracious Presence of God seems to be withdrawn
from us, that our Fathers enjoyed, may we not humbly expostulate the case with
our selves, as the Church with God, Isa. 63. 13, 14, 15. Where is he? where is
that wonder-working Providence, whereby he did destroy the enemies of his
people, and lead his People through the greatest ^^reigh^^? that guiding
assisting; succeeding and defending Presence of God? that heart humbling,
converting, sanctifying Presence in Ordinances, when he knocked at the door of
of your hearts in the Ministry of his word, and making way for his own
entertainment? Is he so nigh to us in all we call upon him for? De^t. 4.7. When
before they cried ^e answered them, and heard them while they were speaking to
him, Isa 65.24. When there were such overflowing of Compassions, that he ran to
meet his people, he might fall on their ^ecks and kiss them. Were there not
such happy da^es in New England, and is it so now? O then follow him, let him
not go far away, stop him at the Towns end.

3. Consider, how unwilling the Lord is to leave and forsake a People (...)
has so owned to be his, and done so much for. How many Sta^es has he made
among us, by stilling the tumult of the Heathen, removing Sickness? Does he not
say as Hos 5.15. O New England are you willing to have me still? then seek him
early, Hos. 5.15. His preventing evils from abroad, removing the worst of your
enemies; 1 Samuel 12.22. The argument Samuel uses to further their endeavor to
keep him with them, and recover his presence among them, the glory of his free
mercy and goodness engages him with you, Psalm. 132.11. He ^ath chosen this for
his habitation, He is your God: The argument in my Text, plead it, and improve
it, and remember it is in a Covenant of Grace he is yours: he takes not
advantage of smaller (...), they break not this Relation; if greater ones, Yet
he admits of Repentance. If he seems as if he would be gone, it is but ^o try
your love, and draw out your importunity, see Genesis ^2.26. Exodus 32.10 Luk*
24.28. Genesis 32.9. Nay this will be a sign the Lord will be with us, if we are
unwilling he should leave us.

4. Consider the advantage of having Gods gracious Presence to this present,
and future Generations; if I had the tongue and knowledge of an Angel, I could
not tell you the hal^ to be gotten by this way: This will be light to you in
your darkness, deliverance in dangers, strength in weakness, Psalm. 27.(...).
Supplies in all your wants, Psalm. 23.1. and 46.1. etc. A present, a powerful
help, success in all affairs, Genesis 39.2. it is a full and a sufficient
blessing, this will be your Glory, and a defense upon it, Isa. 4.4,5. This will
heal all our breaches, recover all our losses; restore such a Magistracy to you
as at the first, Isa. 1.26. and such a people to them: Ordinances will be
powerful for Conversion and Reformation. 1 (...). 8.58. hearts shall be
inclined: nay your Children shall be taught of God, and great shall be their
peace, Isa. 54.13. The name of this City shall (...) Jehovah Shammah, Ezekiel. 48.
^lt. Psalm. 67.6,7. Then shall the (...) yield her increase, and God, even our
own God shall bless us. When you shall lay your heads in the dust, you will
have the best Legacy to leave with your Children, that which good old Jacob did
with Joseph, Genesis 48.21. I dye, but God shall be with you* the succeeding
Generation will bless God for you, and call you Blessed, and may then be
encouraged to the same desire and endeavor for their Generation, that God may
be with them as he was with their Fathers, he would not leave nor forsake them;
their hearts may be inclined to walk in all the ways of the Lord for ever.

SOLI DEO GLORIA.
Errata. p.1. l.2. r. in deep. p.3. l. 14. r. which made. p.7. l.34. for in r.
of. l.17. r. it might. p.11. l.5. for is. r. of. p.12. l.19. r. Prove.16.
l.ult.r.Deuteronomy.7.


