A WORD To The AGED.

By Mr. Will. Bridge, sometime Fellow of Emanuel College in Cambridge, and
late preacher of the Word of God at Yarmouth.

I commend this to be reprinted as a profitable and serious discourse. James
Allen.

BOSTON Printed for J. G. in the year, 1679.

CHAP. I:
The OLD MAN'S Weakness.
THERE is no state or condition of men but some grace, goodness, or virtue, may
and can plant upon: as there is no occasion but some sin will grow upon,

Yet there is some grace, or virtue that is most suited unto some condition,
and will grow best upon such a soil: therefore the Apostle John says, I write
unto you Fathers, because ye have known him that is from the beginning. I write
unto you young men, because ye have overcome the wicked one, I write unto you
little children, because ye have known the Father, 1 Epistle Joh. 2. 13. It is
our wisdom therefore to observe what our state and soil is, and to plant our
ground accordingly. Now old age is a dry and barren ground. The state of old
age is a state of weakness and of much infirmity. Solomon calls it the evil
day, Eccl. 12. 1. And evil it is in regard of natural and of moral infirmities.

1. Evil in regard of natural infirmities; for the the Clouds return after the
rain. In the time of youth if a man be sick and that cloud has emptied it self
by some great sickness, he is well again, and a fair day of health is upon him.
But if a man be stricken with years, and a cloud of sickness does arise upon
him, though that cloud has discharged it self by some great distemper, yet he
has still infirmitatis post (...) ^^atem: still it rains in upon him and he
can hardly sit dry in his old Cottage and therefore Solomon says of this evil
day, that then the Clouds return after the rain. Then also the Sun and Moon and
Stars are darkened, that is the reason, memory, fancy, and all those faculties
which do receive and give out our reason, v. 2. Then the keepers of the house
do tremblt, that is the hands and the arms, and the strong men bow themselves,
that is, the thighs and legs, and the grinders cease because they are few; that
is, the teeth, and those that look out of the windows be darkened, that is, the
eyes, v. 3. and the doors are shut in the streets when the sound of the
grinding is low, that is, the lips are shut and kept close lest the meat should
fall out of the mouth through want of teeth, and all the daughters of my sick
are brought low, that is, both the speech and hearing, v. 4. then the
Almena-tree flourishes, that is, the head grows gray and hoary, a Grasshopper
is a burden, for an old man cannot bear the lightest burden, and desire
fails, that is, the appetite unto meat, drink, and the Marriage bed, v.5.
then the silver Cora is loosed, that is, the marrow of the back bone which
runs from the brain through the neck to the bottom of the back, and the
golden bowl is broken, that is, the Soul which is round, yellow, and does
contain and preserve the brain, and the Pitcher is broken at the Fountain, that
is the bladder which did hold the urine, which in old age does insensibly pass
away, and the Wheel is broken at the Cistern, that is, the Lungs are broken off
from their motion of respiration or inspiration by Phlegm from the Stomach, or
the circulation of the blood interrupted and hindered, V. 6. Thus the natural
infirmities of an old Man, are very many, and the day of old age is an evil day
in that respect: yea, upon this account an old man is but half a man, for eyes
has he and sees not, ears has he and hears not.

2. But as the day of old age is an evil day in regard of natural, so is regard
of moral infirmities. For*

1. Then men are apt to be too drowsy and remiss in the things of God.

2. Then are they apt to be too covetous and tenacious for the things of this
world fugientem sequimur Mundum: as wantonness is the young man's vice so
covetousness is the old man's sin.

3. Then are they apt to be too timorous and fearful, we read but of one man
that came to Christ by night out of fear, and he was a rich and old man,
Nicodemus.

4. Then are they apt to be too touchy; Peevish, angry, and froward, for old
age is a continued sickness, and in sickness men are apt to be angry.

5. Then are they also unapt to be taught, and are very unteachable, they think
they know more then others, and that they are not now to learn, Eccles. 4. 13.

6. Then are they hard to be pleased, and as hard to please others.

7. Full of complaints they are of the present times praising the former days
of old, which the old men of those days did as much complain of, as they do of
these.

8. And of all men if they be not good, they are the most impenitent, for by
custom and long continuance in sin they are the most hardened, and so the least
penitent.

9. Apt they are also to think and speak of the sins of their youth with
delight, so to commit them again by thought and word, which they cannot come at
by their action.

10. They are full of suspicions, and very apt to surmise, suspect and fear the
worst, for, experience giving notice of former dangers keep their Souls in
continual Alarm.

Having therefore, and laboring under all these and other infirmities both
natural and moral a threefold work is incumbent upon the aged. First, to
comfort and bear up themselves against their natural infirmities. 2. To
strengthen themselves against their moral infirmities, and to root them out. 3.
To plant that positive grace and goodness in the room thereof which does best
suit with their soil and condition.

CHAP. II.
The OLD MAN'S STAFF.
COmforts against the natural infirmities of old age are very many.

1. Christ himself did bear them, and still as our high Priest does sympathize
with us under them, such did he single out for his care and cure, when he was
here on Earth, Joh. 5, there were many that lay by the Pool of Bethesday, among
the rest there was one that had lien sick and diseased 38 years. A young man
therefore he was not, he would have stepped into the Pool, but others stepped in
before him, and he had no man to help him in. A poor neglected man he was, whom
others minded not. Yet this was the man that Christ came to cure, whom Christ
minded and sought out, and cured, what then, though you be a poor, old,
neglected person, that have lien long under your infirmities, yet Christ has a
cure for you, and what though others regard you not, and mind you not, Christ
has a cure for you. The blind men cried, and their cries put Christ to a stand
for mercy, Math. 20. 31, 32.

2. Though your infirmities be never so many and great, yet you have a peculiar
honor that is twisted with your infirmity, for it is called the Crown of old
age; In times of the old Testament, they were to rise up and to bow before the
Ancient, yea, it is our duty to honor them for this honor is joined and
commanded with the fear of God, Lev. 19. 32. Thou shall rise up before the
hoary head, and honor the face of the old Man, and fear thy God, says the
Lord. The fear of God, and honoring the old Man, is commanded with the same
breath, and linked together in the same sentence.

3. Though you be very aged, yet you may be very good, was not Eli very good?
Yet very aged: was not David very good? yet he was very old when he said, Lord,
now let thou thy Servant depart in peace: was not Anna very good? Yet she
was very aged: who does not know what a good man Paul was? Yet, says he, Paul
the aged, good John was aged John. Possibly, then you may be very good, though
you be very aged, laboring under much infirmity.

4. And though your flesh be weak, yet the Spirit may be willing, the flesh
indeed is weak said Christ, when his Disciples slept through natural infirmity,
for it was late at night, and they were full of grief, but the Spirit is
willing, said he also, and where the Spirit is willing he will pass by the
weakness of the flesh, and accept the willingness of the Spirit.

5. These infirmities of old age are such, as are not the fruit of our own sin
(the more any infirmity is caused by sin, the more afflictive it is; for sin is
the sting of death) I confess indeed they may be sometimes; for the sins of
youth do sometimes bite sore in age. I eat so much of the forbidden fruit (said
a good man) when I was young, that God was sain to give much wormseed to kill
the worm. But the infirmities of old age are generally the decays of nature,
not of grace.

6. They are good warnings of our change approaching, and by them we dye daily,
that at last we may dye graciously and comfortably.

7. And who are those that God does reveal himself unto but to his old friends,
those he will acquaint with his secrets, and make known his mind unto, Job. 12.
12. With the Ancient is wisdom, and in length of days understanding.

8. And though your legs be weak, yet they may be strong enough to carry you to
Heaven, that better Country, which you are now going to, and are very near;
indeed your own present Country is a good Country, but the Country you are now
going to is a better Country, Heb. 11. 6.

1. Better in regard of buildings, whose builder and maker is God, Heb. 11. 10.

2. Better in regard of Inhabitants, where no unclean thing does enter, Rev.

3. Better in regard of quietness, and freedom from trouble, where all tears
shall not only be wiped from our cheeks, but out of our eyes (as the Greek word
bears it, Rev. 7.) insomuch as the eye shall never breed a tear again, nor be
the womb of tears.

4. Better in regard of riches, where you shall have an inheritance
incorruptible, undefiled, that fades not away.

5. Better in regard of pleasure, for says the Psalmist, at thy right hand
there are rivers of pleasures, and that for evermore.

6. Better in regard of largeness, for if the whole Earth be but as a pins head
in comparison of the Heavens, then surely there is room enough in Heaven, for
every one to enjoy a greater Kingdom, then all England does amount unto.

7. Better in regard of self subsistence, here one Country does depend on
another, but Heaven is that Country alone which does depend upon no other
Country.

8. Better in regard of our freedom from needs and necessities. It was
Augustines Prayer. Deliver me, O Lord from my necessities. It is a great mercy
now to have bread to eat when we want it, but it is a greater mercy to have no
need of it. A great mercy it is to have a good bed to lie on, and so to sleep
quietly, but it is a greater mercy to have no need of bed or sleep. This is the
state of that Heavenly Country, where you have not these blessings, but where
you have no need of them.

9. Better also it is in regard of continuance, where every mercy and blessing
grows upon the stalk of Eternity; and if it be good thing to have a Lease of a
good house and Land for one hundred years, what a blessed thing then is it to
have a glorious Mansion and Inheritance lying in the Fields of Eternity? When
you come to a great Palace, and see fair Barns and Stables and outhouses, you
say then, if the out-rooms and Stables be so costly and sumptuous, how costly
and glorious is this Palace within? why? lift up your eyes and behold that
spangled Cannopy of the Heavens, that is over your head. Are not the Sun and
Moon and Stars glorious? Yet these are but the outhouses of Heaven, and if
these out houses be so glorions, how glorious is the Palace within? Yet this is
that Country, that better Conntry, that you are going and drawing nigh unto,
and your passage thither is very short, for no sooner do ye step our of this
World, but (if godly, gracious, and in Christ, you step immediately into that
Country, there is no sleeping of the Soul after death: some have dreamed of
such a sleep, but Solomon tells us that the body upon death goes to the dust,
and the Spirit into him that gave it, Ecclesiastes. Christ said to the Thief,
this day shall thou he with me in Paradise, and the Apostle Paul tells us that
Paradise and the third Heaven are one and the same thing, 2 Cor. 12. Yea, says
paul, I am in a straight betwixt two, not well knowing whether I should desire
to dye for mine own enjoyment, or to live for the Service of the Churches,
Phil. 1. 22, 23, 24. whereas if the Soul did sleep in the Grave with the body,
he needed not to have been in that strait. I desire, said he, to be dissolved,
and to be with Christ; If with Christ presently, How can the Soul sleep with
the body in the dust? But we know, says he, 2 Cor. 5. 1. That if our earthly
house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house
not made with hands, Eternal in the Heavens. What then though your turff house
now be ready to fire into a Fever with every spark of distemper, is there not
enough in that house above to pay for all, surely there is. Why then should ye
not lift up your heads ye old men, and be of good comfort under all your
natural in firmityes.

2. And as for your moral infirmityes, if you would strengthen your self
against them and root out these weeds there.

1. Be sure that you study and think much on Christ crucified, who alone is our
righteousness and our strength. Temptations, or sins blown out by reason or
resolution will easily light again, but quenched in the blood of Christ and
they light no more. When the Israelites was stung with the fiery Serpents, he
did not stand looking on his swollen arm or leg, but on the brazen Serpnt, and so
was cured. Christ life upon the Cross is our brazen Serpent: and he has said,
look unto me O all ye ends of the Earth and be saved.

2, Then by way of consideration think, and think much with your selves, what
an evil thing it is to sin when a man is ready to dye. Thus you leave not your
sin, but your sin you.

3. Be sure that you do not chew the Cud of your former sins by musing on them
with delight, for thereby you justfie your former practice, but rather mourn
over them, for the way to be kept from future sins is to mourn for former, and
the way to be kept from sins of old Age, is to mourn for the sins of our youth.

4. But above all things, (under your study of Christ crucified) be sure that
you strengthen your love to God in Christ, for if the boughs of the Tree be
weak, the way to strengthen them is, not to carry up dung to the boughs, but to
lay the dung to the root, for by strengthening the Root, you strengthen the
branches. Now the Root of all our mortification is love, for love is the cause
of hatred. Ye that love the Lord hate evil. Love to God eats out our love to
sin, as the fear of God eats out our fear of men, and your love to God is
strengthened by the sight of his love to you. For love is the cause of love,
the more we see Gods love to us, the more we love him, and do hate our sins.
Would you therefore take up your sinful weeds by the roots? Then strengthen
your love, and this shall be a Staff in your hand to strengthen and bear you up
under all your infirmities both natural and moral

CHAP. III.
The OLD MAN'S GUIDE.
But there is yet one thing remaining and incumbent on the Aged, and that is,
to plant the positive grace and virtue, which does best suit with his soil and
condition.

Quest. What are those good things therefore that Old men epecially are to do
in their old Age.

Answ. 1. They are full of experience, and therefore should be full of Faith;
For though Gods word only be the ground of our Faith, yet experience is a great
help to Faith. Now there is a Faith of relyance, and a Faith of assurance.
Faith of relyance justifies, Faith of assurance comforts. Old men therefore are
to exercise the Faith of relyance, relying upon Christ's righteousness,
renouncing their own, and to exercise the Faith of assurance; For it is ill
dying with a doubting Soul. As Zeal is the young man's virtue, so Faith is the
old man's grace.

2. Then it is their work and duty to renew their repentance, for they are
shortly to appear before the Lord, and to give an account of all that they have
done in the flesh; and will they appear before him in their filthy rags. Now
though we are only washed from our sins by the blood of Christ unto
Justification, yet we are washed from our filth by the hand of repentance unto
sanctification. For as God promised to wash us with clean water, so he commands
us to wash our selves, Isai. 1. And if a man will not wash and repent at last,
when will he repent? When the leaves are off the trees, we see the birds neasts
in the Trees and bushes. Now in our old age our leaves are off, then therefore
we may see those neasts of sin, and lusts in our hearts and lives, which we saw
not before, and so be sensible and repent of them.

3. Then are they also to be much in reading the Scripture, Meditation, and
Prayer, for by this reading they shall gain knowledge: by meditation upon their
reading they shall add affection to their knowledge, and by Prayer they shall
add devotion unto their affection.

4. And because they are ready to weigh Anchor, and to set sail for the other
World, it will be good for them to observe what is the proper work of this
World, and to be much therein: For every thing is beautiful in the time
thereof. Now is a time for Believing: Heaven is no time for Faith, for in
Heaven we live by sight. Now is a time for repentance, in Heaven there is no
repentance, for there is no sorrow. Now is a time for Patience, in Heaven there
is no Patience under Affliction, for there is no Affliction. Now is a time of
hearing the Word preached, and for Sacraments and Ordinances; there is no
preaching, Sacraments and Ordinances in Heaven. Now is a time to relieve the
Poor, in Heaven there is no room for such charity: It is that Country where no
beggar lies at your door. Now is a time to observe our Relations, in Heaven
there are no such Relations, for they neither marry, nor are given in Marriage,
but are as the Angels. Now therefore, what ever is in the power of your hand to
do, do it with all your might, for in the grave there is no work, nor in Heaven
there is none of this work whether you are going. This therefore, that is to be
done here and cannot be done there, is now to be done especially,

5. Then it is the old man's work and duty to live much in a little time, and to
be more exact and strict in his life then ever, for the nearer the stone comes
to the Center, the faster it moves; the more wisdom any man has, the more
exactly he works. Wisdom and exactness go together. See that you walk exactly,
not as fools, but as wife, says the Apostle. Now gray hairs should be found in
the way of wisdom: and the more frequently a man does work, the more exactly he
may do the same. Now those that are ancient, have, or should have been frequent
in holy duties, they therefore of all men are to live and walk most exactly.
Thus it shall not be said of them, as Seneca says of one, he did not live long,
but he was long.

6. Then are they to knock off from the World, and to use the World as if they
used it not, for the fashion of this World passes away, and the time is short,
therefore their moderation should be known unto all men, for the Lord is at
hand. If a tooth be to be drawn and the gum be cut, the tooth does come out
with ease, but if it be fast set in the gum, and not first loosned from the
gum, it comes out with much difficulty; and what is the reason that many dye
with such difficulty; but because they are so fast set in their worldly gums,
they are not loosned from their relations. Good therefore it is for old men,
who are upon the brink of death to cut their gum, and to loosen themselves from
this world and all their Relations.

7. Then let the old man take heed of all those evils, that may and will stayn
the glory of his old Age. All sins do leave a blot and stain behind them, but
youthful sins do especially stain old age. For the sin is the greater as it is
more contrary to the sinner. It is an evil thing for any man to be unjust, but
worst for a Judge to be so, because there is a special repugnancy betwixt the
sin and the sinner: now there is a special repugnancy betwixt old men and
youthful sins. Give me a young man endued with an old man's virtue, Wisdom.
Give me an old man endued with a young man's grace, Zeal. But I young man
vitiated with an old man's sin, Covetousness or an old man defiled with a young
man's sin, Wantonness are an abomination both to God and man, and are ^ained
deeply and greatly. A certain Lacedemonian being asked Why he suffered his
Beard to grow so long; To the end, said he, that looking on my white hairs I
may be put in mind, not to do any act unbeseeming my hoary whiteness.

8. Then it is their duty also to prepare for death, their great change and
dissolution, it was the complaint of Caesar Borgius, When I lived, I provided
for every thing but death, now I am ready to dye, I am not provided to dye;
Such providers in the world there are very many, but shall I provide for a
Journey and not for this great Journey? This is every man's work, but the old
man's especially. For though the young man's Candle may go out, the old man's will
and shall.

Quest. But what should the old man do that he may be fit to dye?

Resp. God will give dying grace upon dying ground, yet.

1. He must be sure to do the work of this present day, the only way to be fit
for the work of the Morrow, is to do the work of the present day.

2. Then let him examine himself and make his reckonings even with God, that
when he comes to dye, he may have nothing to do but to dye.

3. Then let him resign and give up himself, and will to God afresh. Thus
Christ did as soon as he drew nigh to death. If it be possible, said he, let
this cup pass, yet not my will, but thy will be done, which he did again and
again, at his first approach unto death, and this he did in his last words,
Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit.

4. Let him long after Heaven, and not be afraid to dye, for if he be in
Christ, death it self is his. All things are yours, says the Apostle, life and
death, for ye are Christ's, and who is afraid of his own? The Child is not
afraid of the great Mastiff, but puts his hand into the Dogs mouth, and if you
ask him why so? For he is our own Dog says the Child. Now if a man be in
Christ, this great Mastiff Death is his own and therefore why would he be
afraid thereof? Yea, why should he not be willing to dye? was Eliab unwilling
to go into the fiery Chariot? Is the Child unwilling to ride home, because it
is a trotting horse that he must ride upon? No, what then, though it be an hard
and a sore sickness that you must ride on yet if it carry you home to your
Father, why should you be unwilling to dye? Now the only way to be willing to
die, is to get assurance of our interest in Christ, and of our own Salvation.
For what is the reason that men are unwilling to dye, but because they cannot
tell where they shall land after death. True, (says one, I am lanching forth
into the Ocean of Eternity, but on what shore I shall land God knows? O that I
might live one year more, one month more, yea one hour more, till I had
assurance of Salvation; And when that comes, then the soul having thereby
clasped about and gotten Christ into his arms, cries out and says, Lord, now
let test thou thy Servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy
Salvation.

5. Then also let him fet his house in order, make his Will, and leave his
Legacies to his Children, Friends; and Posterity. Shall Achitophel when he
hanged himself, set his house in order before he dyed, and shall not an ancient
Christian set his house and heart in order, make his Will, and leave his
Legacies unto his Friends and Posterity.

CHAP. IV.
The OLD MAN'S Will and Legacies.
QVest. But what good thing should the old man leave, or give unto his
posterity by his last Will

Reas, 1. Why first, he must be sure to give his Soul unto God while he lives,
for if a man gives his Soul to the world and devil while he lives what right
has he to give it unto God when he dies? If I give away an house or Land while
I live, can I justly give it to another when I dye? and if I give away my Soul
to sin, world, or devil while I live, how can I justly give it unto God when I
dye? it being a Maxim in the common Law, that Vendens candem rem duobus
falsarius est.

2. Then let him leave a good example unto his posterity, a good Example is a
great Legacy; thus a man speaks when he is dead, as Abel does, Heb. 11.

3. And if he would leave some good thing unto his posterity, then let him
leave his experiences, an old man is or should be rich in experience: an
ancient Christian is or should be an experimental Christian, when therefore he
comes to dye, it is his work and duty to leave those experiences unto his
Posterity.

4. Yea, then let him leave some good exhortations and admonitions with and
upon his Posterity, saying, Come, O my Son, or Daughter, or Friend, I am now
going the way of all flesh, when I am gone,

1. Be sure that you fear the Lord and keep his Commandments, for if you keep
Gods Commaddments you shall have the comfort of his promises.

2. Be sure also, O my Son, that you give your first and best unto God, for God
is the first and best of Beings, and if you honor the Lord with your
substance, and with the first fruits of all your increase, then shall your
Barns be filled with plenty, and your presses shall burst forth with new Wine,
Prove. 3. 10. And why? should you not give your first time and best of your All
unto God, who has given his best and only Son unto you. If you serve God while
you are young, God will bless you when you are old! and if you come unto him
when you are young, you may build on it, that he will not forsake you when you
are old, Thus David argued, Psalm. 71. 18. For sake me not, O God, now I am old
and gray headed, Why? ver. 17. thou have taught me from my youth, ver. 5. for
thou art my hope, O Lord God, thou art my trust from my youth. God is engaged
(it seems by this argumentation) to those that are good while they are young,
to show mercy to them when they are old. The hand of a Child may pull up a
plant when it is young and tender, but if it grows to a Tree all the Horses in
the Town cannot pluck it up: so in regard of sin, let your mortification of sin
therefore begin betimes. If the paper be clear and clean you may write any
thing on it, but if other things he scribled on the paper, it is then unfit to
receive any writing or impression: so in regard of the impressions of good upon
the Soul and heart. Let your vivication therefore and holiness begin betimes,
Thus let your first be given unto God.

3. And though you have not so great parts and gifts as others have, yet let
your desires of good be as full as any others, what you want in expression make
up in affection, when nature is wanting in one thing, it supplies it in
another. The blind man has the best memory, and that God which gives you a
heart to desire, will give you your hearts desire, and if your parts be taller
by head and shoulders then others, then expect envy, and pray much for humility.

4. In case you sin at any time (as you will often) then be sure, O my
Children, that you delay not your repentance; for the green wound is most
easily cured. The Thief indeed was converted at the last, but it was as soon as
he was called: some come in at the last hour of the day, but they come when
they are called, now you are called to day, and therefore defer not till the
morrow.

5. Let your company be good, for every man is as the company of his choice is,
Solomon says, Eccl. 12, Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, which
if you please you may read according to the Hebrew, in the days of thy choice
or choices, because in the days of youth, a man makes choice of his Trade or
Calling: then he makes choice of his Religion: then he makes choice of his
Wife, and then he makes choice of his Company. Now then, my Son, have a care of
these choices.

6. And let your discourse be always seasoned with salt, for by your words you
shall be justified, and by your words you shall be condemned at the last day,
says our Savior, for Sermo Index animi, words are the Index of the mind, a
good Soul never dives at the sign of ill speech.

7. And as for the world and the things thereof, though you may pray for much,
yet you must be content with little. The way to have a mercy or blessing is to
be content to go without it, and the way to avoid any evil is to submit to it,
and to remove it, is to bless God over it, as Joh did.

8. Let your Recreation, O my Children, be sparing, for they are but
Condimentum your sauce, and not nutrimentum, your nourishment, your Cordial and
not your diet.

9. Of all Books study the Bible, of all duties be much in prayer, of all
graces exercise faith, of all days observe the Lords day, and of all things in
Heaven or Earth be sure that you get an interest in God by Jesus Christ.

10. And by any means, O my Children and Friends, let brotherly love continue,
for love is the fulfilling of the Law: who can break a faggot where the sticks
are joined together by the common Band? but if the sticks be parted, how easily
are they all broken? and what is the reason that such judicial breaches are
made upon us, but because our pride and want of love does make such sinful
breaches among us. Cyprian tells us that the divisions and dissentions of the
Churches was the cause of the persecution in the primitive times, for, said he,
Those evils had not come to the brethren, if the brethren had been united or
animated into one. But I am sure that our Savior Christ says, By this shall
all men know that ye are my Disciples if you love one another, and John the
Disciple of love says, By this shall you know that you are translated from
death to life because you love the Brethren See therefore that you love the
Brethren, and that because they are Brethren. For possibly a man may love those
that are good, yet not because they are good, for then he would love them
better that are better, and those best that are best: if you love those that
are good it is well, yet this may be from some self concernment, and your love
then will be narrowed and your affections monopolized by some only of your own
persuasion or; relation, but if you love those that are good, because they are
good, this is better, for then you will love all that is good, though of some
different persuasion from you: for, a quatenus ad o^^ia. from all to all, is a
good consequence. Thus therefore, O my Sons, let your love be stated,
continued, and increased, toward men, but above all be sure that you love
Jesus, also for Jesus. Jesus is hardly loved for Jesus, but do you love Christ
for himself, and let the only measure of your love be to know no measure. Thus
let the old man do and dye, and as he lived by Faith, he shall dye in the Faith.

And as Motives unto all these things let the old man consider,

1. That in so doing he shall leave a sweet perfume behind him, and many shall
bless God for him when he is dead.

2. That there is enough in Heaven to pay for all his pains here on Earth.

3. That he is not so weak, but he is strong enough to sin, and shall we be
strong to sin and not to serve.

4. That it may be it was late ere he came into Gods work, and if you played
away the forenoon of your age, will you not work the harder in the afternoon.

5. That God will accept from youth and old age, from youth because it is the
first, and from old age because it is the last, and from much weakness.

6. That Gods promise is very full, for he has promised and said, Thou shall
come to thy grave in a full old age, and as a shock of corn comes in his
season, Job. 5. 26. yea, he has promised that those that are planted in the
house of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God, they shall bring
forth fruit in old Age, they shall be fat and flourishing, Psalm. 92 13, 14.

7. That thus they shall not be afraid to dye, but shall say, with that good
man dying, I have not so lived that I am afraid to dye, but I have so learned
Christ that I am not afraid to dye.

8. Yea, and thus shall his old Age be a good old Age, and he so number his
days (it is not said his years, nor his months, nor his weeks, out days, for
his life is so short, that it is rather to be numbered by days then by years,
or months, or weeks,) that he should apply his heart unto wisdom.

FINIS.

