Severals relating to the FUND Printed for diverse Reasons, as may appear.
THat the way of man is not in himself: it is not in man that walks, to
direct his steps, Is a Truth that all (who are not strangers to themselves)
must acknowledge; and in special the Author of this Subject: If it be
considered,

1 That he had as little skill in, as inclination to, or need of concerning
himself in merchantile Affairs: Nor came he into New England with a thought to
meddle therewith: as is well known to many. 2 That he should concern himself to
promote Trade for others, and that in this Land, a place not designed by the
first Planters, for Commerce; being better acquainted with celestial Dealings,
than the politics of mundane affairs

3 That he should amongst such a People essay to promote a Design not known in
the day thereof (if yet) to (...) in any part of the world (although since in
agitation (...) and then surely strange here, where the name of (...) benefit
thereby, was hardly heard of. 4 That (...) notwithstanding the reproaches cast
upon him, and untruths raised and reported of this Thing, still appear to
justify and promote the same, and encourage those who are satisfied thereof,
and join with him in this his undertaking. The rise of which was as follows.

About the latter end of the year 1649. an intimate Friend of the Author's in
London, Mr. William Potter, who was likewise no Trader, Imparted to him a
Design for the accommodation of Commerce, in the nature of a Bank of money; but
to be founded upon personal Credit; by a considerable number of able Men
Engaging, as the Found thereof, to pass forth Credit; as a medium to enlarge
the Measure of money, that was known to be too little for the Dealings of that
Land: Or by depositing of Goods, in the nature of a Lumber of Merchandise, to
pass out Credit thereon, until sold. As for a Fund to have Land (the only
secure Deposit) the dubious and intricat Titles thereof, put a stop to any
discourse thereabout. And as for a Bank of money, there was in that no certain
Security; woeful experience proving them subject to a rupture.

The Author so resented the Notion of his Friend, (the thing being rational,
and tending much to the benefit of all men where set on foot) that it became
often times when they met, the common subject of their discourse, in a rotation
of Proposals, Objections, and Solutions: Leaving no stone unturned, that might
fit the design to comport with that Place. Mr. Potter likewise had about that
time printed a Book in folio, relating to his design; one whereof he bestowed
on the Author, who (upon the report that was given him of the Labyrinth
New England was in, for want of a Convenience to mete their Trade with) gave it
with good acceptance, to a Kinsman of his that was a Merchant of this Place;
the prosperity whereof he was (...) to, when not likely ever to see It. Whether
by (...) Book, or other accident, any motion thereabout (...) unknown. But
before any thing was brought to (...) seems there was; an account of which
shall in its place be given) the Author was called to Ireland; where he had
more endeavored the promotion of this thing, than barely to hint it; had not
his transient Employ prevented.

In anno 1664. His lot being here cast, he soon saw that with his eye, that did
affect his heart i. e. The Straits many were in; the Time they consumed, and
the Disadvantages they were under, by higling to suit ends: And thereupon
imparted to a publick-spirited Merchant, with what ease, and safety their
Measure might be enlarged: Who likewise being sensible of the need thereof,
desired to have in Writing somewhat about the same. Which being done, It was,
it seems, imparted to diverse, with approbation; and Return made, That somewhat
might be done about it in due season: which the author rested satisfied with;
in that there lay not now at his door, a Thing concealed, that might tend to
the welfare of the Country.

About three years after this (that foregoing being wholly buried) the author
accidentally started this Expedient, among diverse Country Gentlemen, Yeomen and
others; persons not likely to lend an ear to a thing of this nature. Yet so it
happened, that to some one, or more of them, the Notion was of estimation: and
spread abroad, to the occasioning of several Debates among those who were
Considerable, both in Parts and Purse: And stopped not, until the honored
Council heard thereof. But before they took notice of it, One of the
Magistrates Imparted the Design to an experienced Merchant, well Read in the
nature of Banks, To have his judgment concerning this. Who Returned, that this
Bank was so Stated, as left not room for a rational Objection to be made
against it In that those Founded on Money, had only their defect, of a
possibility to break; which this, Fixed on Land, was not capable of. Soon after
this, the Author had notice given, that the Council would send speedily for
him, about this Concern: and was advised to write somewhat about it, for them.
Whereupon he set upon drawing a second Draught, in the dress of a Proposal. The
which, before quite writ out, a Messenger was sent to call him to them. To whom
he presented his (then crude) conceptions, as follows. To which some clauses,
and explanations are added: but is the same for substance, with that on File in
the Records of the General Court.

A Proposal for erecting a FUND of Land; by Authority, or private Persons, in
the nature of a Money-Bank; or Merchandise-Lumber, to pass Credit upon, by
Book-Entries; or Bills of Exchange, for great Payments: and Change-bills for
runi^ng Cash. Wherein is demonstrated, First, the necessity of having a Bank,
to enlarge the Measure of Dealings in this Land, by showing the benefit of
Money, if enough to mete Trade with; and the disadvantages, when it is
otherwise.

Money is that One thing, which, as the medium of Trade, (for so Solomon's
Assertion must necessarily, be understood) answers All things. For where it
is in plenty, no Buyer will be bound to one Person, or Market; nor purchase
Credit at the Grantor's price; nor be necessitated to become Servant to the
Lender, if he have Money to answer his occasions; nor will run the hazard of
Trusting. Hereby also, the frequent complaints that are made, for want of
present pay, are silenced and persons freed from a multitude of carking cares.
It likewise, multiplies Trading; increases Manufacture, and Provisions; for
domestic use, and foreign Returns* abateth Interest; inciteth to the purchasing
of Land, and heighteneth its value; torwards the Improvement both of real, and
personal Estates; promoteth the Settleing of new Plantations, and maritim
Affairs; incourageth heartless Idlers, to Work; redeemeth Time Labor, and
Expense, greatly consumed in higling up and down, to suit Pay to content,
abrogateth the mystery of Trucking, by sinking Barter, and reducing all bought,
and sold, to the English Standard; hinders wrangling and vexatious Suits upon
Debts contracted for want thereof, to the Scandal of a religious people, as
well as the impoverishing of them, and the consuming the time of their
Magistrates, that might be better spent about studying the necessary advantages
of Trade, and forwarding of Manufacture, to the enriching of them. To which end
most civilized Nations set some apart to manage, and is the Loadstone that
draws ^ommodities to the Market, that great convenience of a people.

On the contrary, where Coin is scarce, This Clause, with some other Objections
and Queries, very lately made; shall receiv a full Reply in the next Sheet: if
possible.
all things are dear, and little answers to content, or free from trouble,
and loss. Debts are contracted; dilatory, and shuffeling payments made;
dexterous Traders retire or (which is worse) deal in Money, the medium of
Trade; young beginners are checked; good men laid open to temptations, and
opportunities given to bad ones, that exact from those who must crave Credit,
or cannot make suitable pay. Trade is stinted at home, and forestalled abroad;
Stocks lie dead; Intrigue accounts, and perplexing Suits made; Merchants, and
Shopkeepers, undersell one another; and pitifully help themselves, by beating
down Craftsmen: who again, through necessity, underwork others of their
occupation; or slight over their work; adulterate Manufacture, and hasten
poverty on all. Nor can ever Trade be balanced, or the advantage of Fairs be
enjoyed, where Money is wanting. Which the Cobbler of Agawam, before he
Canonized Pumpion, was not so Simple but understood full well.

Secondly, That Credit passed in Fund, by Book, and Bills, (as before) will
fully supply the defect of Money. Wherein is related, of how little value Coin,
as the Measure of Trade, need be, in it self; what Inconveniences subject to.
The worth a Fund- Bill, or Payment therein, is of* and not of that Hazard.

Although Cash be so useful; yet it is but a ready convenience. Which has,
through mistake, its esteem, not from the use, (which it ought) but Intrinsic
value: which is not essential to a thing, merely good for Exchange; and serving
barely to procure what One wants, that another abounds with: and again, to
fetch for the last, what he stands in need of, where to be spared. And this
(except here were Mines, to transport bullion, for foreign Trade) Bank-bills,
or payments therein, will effect, to all Intents, as well as plenty of Corn;
which, as money, does neither Feed, nor Cloth. Moreover, Treasure, not only
allures an Enemy, and is covetously hoarded up; and so, like dung in a heap,
unprofitable: but is also subject to wear ^^^terating, fires, robberies,
mistakes, and the like contingencies; which, payments in this Bank, or bills
issued thence, are free from: having a Fund, or Deposit in Land; real,
dureable, and of secure value. And for the Change-bills, they may be so
contrived, as to be passed with facility; and without counterfeiting. However,
so as to prevent, or find out, any Cheat: if the Rules of them be observed.

The other two Sections of the Proposal, must be passed to the 2 d. Sheet, page
^. It being needful to make a Digression, to give an account of the publishing
this undertaking sooner, than intended. In the year 74. diverse well-wishers to
the Fund, did think it fit, to have a Narrative of it Printed. In order
whereunto, something was done, in the Method before; i. e. the occasion of the
Subject; and then, the proceedings thereon, to that time: but particular
business did interpose. In the year 78. the author was importuned to the same
thing: which had been done, but that after-thoughts brought him to consider,
that so much having been agitated in Public, about it; and the probation it
had by the Referrees, and honored Council, as to the Theory thereof; the Press
would hardly print it into the practic part: and that the only way was to set
it on foot. For, as Good Wine needs no bush; so it was presumed, that if this
were but in use, the Flavor thereof would invite enou to, and continue them at
it. Which to accomplish, (having by accident, some respit time this year 1681.
and accomodated with Spirit, Purse, and Hand; the ingredients that must center,
as in one, for any considerable undertaking) He did in September, begin to pass
forth Bills, to make an Experiment of that which had passed the Scrutiny of
above 30. years, with approbation; and had rational Grounds to conclude, that
it would work it self up into Credit, with discreet men: because Interest will
not Lie. In 6* months, a considerable number espoused the Design; besides
those that were concerned, in the years, Seventy one, and Seventy two.
Whereupon, it became as a Galley floating upon the stream of opinion, into
which He, and He would thrust an oar. And some that favored not the Design,
did talk to the discountenance of it: and wanting weighty objections, let fly
broad-sides of Pot-gun-pellets, chained with Fallacies and buffoonry, to impede
this undertaking. Upon this, several, now engaged, think it not fit to be
longer silent: but urge the hastening an account of the Design; that the
Reality, Safety, and Benefit thereof, may appear to all prudent, and
unprejudiced men. And this shall be endeavored, as time will permit; though
nor in the mode first intended: Which was, to place all the Rules relating to
the Fund, at the end of the Narrative; and then the Debates that are carried
on, concerning Commerce. Which will now fall in mixed and this Sheet be closed
with some Rules, most needful to be first known, for the directing those in
Company, in their motion. The manner of erecting the Fund, which was March,
30.71. and the carrying it on in private, for many months; and the reason of
putting a stop to it, when bills were just to be issued forth, together with
the Preamble of the Rules, etc. They may come in, in due place.

Payments on Change-bills.
That the Acceptor, who gives Credit to any Change-bill, First, be assured that
the Producer thereof, be the Person named in said bill, or sent by his Order.
Secondly; That he Enter on said bill, 1. the Time 2. his own Name. 3. the Value
he pays. Which, if it be the first Charge, then also to write the Sum, in
words, above the column: If not, then to cast up the Total: which is to be
done at every additional Article, and the bill to be delivered back again.
Thirdly, If he pay the complement of any bill, then, to take it in.

Entries in the Creditors Ledger.
First, the Acceptor must erect an Account in his Ledger, thus, The Fund at
Boston in N. E. Debtor. Contra, Creditor.

Secondly, Enter, 1. the Time, as in the former Rule. 2. thus, To Change-bill
of J. E. adding thereto, the number of the bill, and the Sum delivered. And if
it be in full of the bill, Then to write underneath the Entry, N. B. This bill
taken in. Thirdly, when he has an Account in the Office, he is to write thus,
N. My Account in the Fund Ledger, fol. --

Entries in the Fund-books.
When the Acceptor has given Credit to the value of five pounds, or more: He
may pass the Fund Debit into the Office, and have Credit in his Account there,
as an Acceptor: giving in an Account, as Entr'd in his Ledger, with the
Change-bills taken up by him, and underwritten thus, Place to my Credit in
Fund, fol. -- the Sum of -- being for the foregoing Payments.

To H. S. Per J. N. with the Date.

Pass-bill Forms.
If one Fundor passes Credit to another, it ought to be by a Pass-bill, thus,
Place of my Credit in Fund, fol. -- to Account of D. J. the Sum of -- Directed,
and Signed, as above expressed.

If the Drawer desire a Change-bill, for Pocket-Expence, Then thus, Charge my
account, fol. -- Debtor, five pounds, for a Change-bill. now received, Number,
--

Fund-credit, not to be strained; nor passed, but among Funders.

That no Acceptor give, nor Depositor take more Fund-credit, than they see
their way how to Receive, or Pay the same again, among those in Company with
them: nor Deal in said Credit with any, but those Ented in the Fund-Rowl; which
all concerned* may take a copy of. N. This Rule to be of force but until
persons see it to be their Interest, to accept Fund-pay: and the Credit thereof
pass, without hazard of any prejudicing the same; through willfulness, or
ignorance.

To return, at length, to the proposal, left off page 6.^.15.


