The Duty of a People that have Renewed their Covenant with God.

OPENED and URGED in A SERMON Preached to the second Church in Boston in
New England, March 17. 1679./80. after that Church had explicitly and most
solemnly renewed the Engagement of themselves to God, and one to another.

By SAMUEL VVILLARD, Teacher of a Church in Boston in New England.

Deuteronomy. 29.1. These are the Words of the Covenant which the Lord commanded Moses
to make with the children of Israel, in the land of Moab, beside the Covenant
which he made with them in Horeb.

2 Chronicles. 15.15. And all Judah rejoiced at the Oath; for they had sworn with
all their heart, and sought him with their whole desire; and he was found of
them; and the Lord gave them rest round about.

BOSTON, Printed by John Foster. 1680.

The Duty of a People that have Renewed their Covenant.
Josh. 24.22, 23. And Joshuah said unto the People, ye are Witnesses against
yourselves, that you have chosen you the LORD to serve him; and they said, We
are Witnesses.

ver. 23. Now therefore put away, said he, the strange gods which are among
you, and incline your heart to the LORD God of Israel.


IN this Chapter we have (parallel to what we have this day seen) an History
describing to us a Renewal of the Covenant between God and his People of
Israel, Joshuah, a godly and faithful Governor, standing on Gods part, and
transacting with the People in his Name. In this Transaction I observe,

1. The Circumstances of the Time wherein it was done, which are noted, Chap.
23. viz*

1 It was after such time as God had given his People of Israel rest in the
land of Canaan, v. 1. He had in his Providence given being to his Promise made
to their Fathers's (...) I note. That Gods gracious fulfiling of Covenant with
his People, is an obligation upon them to Renew Covenant with him.

2. It was when Joshuah was now waxed old, v. 1. and was now ready to leave the
world, v. 14. he could not expect to continue much longer among them; whence
observe, That it is the care of Godly and zealous Rulers when they are to be
gone, to leave Religion in as safe and hopeful a way as possibly they can.
Joshuah takes care to leave the People under the strongest tie possible to
continue faithful in the Service of God.

3. It was while the People were yet standing in a good estate, and Religion in
its glory, and not under decays, v. 8. cleave to the Lord your God, as ye have
done to this day. It was one of the best Generations of this People: and then
it instructs us. That there are other occasions of Renewing of Covenant besides
Apostasy: It may be done for keeping out as well as thrusting out Sin, and that
especially in hours of Temptation, when there are Canaanites in the land. And
it may be done to oblige our selves to a grateful acknowledgement of Gods
faithfulness to us, and to be an engaging bond on us to be faithful to Him: as
this was here.

2. The place where this great affair was transacted, noted in this Chapter, v.
1. in Shechem, i. e. in the place where the Sanctuary was set up, it was the
place of public worship, where the Tribes were at that time appointed to hold
their general Solemnityes, as appears v. 26. noting the solemnity of this duty,
that it ought to be performed as in the presence of God.

3. The Subjects engaged in this great work, v. 1. All the Tribes, i. e. the
whole Church* which was then national, or all those who were by the will of God
to transact in those affairs, viz. all the Males of age. There were not only
the Heads of the People, though Joshua sent for them first, as is mentioned in
the former chapter: probably, by them to prepare the People for this work: but
the Congregation were met together in this engagement*

4. The Insinuations and Arguments by which Joshua leads the People to it, viz.

1. A pithy commemoration, or brief rehearsal of Gods merciful Providence
conferred on this People in all their Generations, from the time of Abraham's
being called out of his Country unto that day: from v. 2. to ^4. There is
nothing fitter to win upon an ingenious spirit, then the remembrance of great
and long continued kindnesses.

2. A solemn word of Exhortation drawn from the prementioned Consideration, in
v. 14. Exhortations come with the greatest efficacy, when the heart is
foreprepared for them by engaging the affections.

3. A probationary permission, connected with a serious protestation, v. 15.
All Temptations and trials that are put to men are not sinful. God himself
makes use of them often in Scripture. And this here (as it was intended) draws
from the people a (...) protestation, with a full approbation of the forecited
Arguments, v. 16, 17, 18.

4. Farther to confirm them, and render them the more serious in what they did,
he adds a word of caution, declaring and explaining how awful a thing it was
for sinful man to have to do in a way of Covenant with God, v. 19 20.
Joshuah's scope in this was not in any wise to discourage them in what they
were doing, but only to render them the more solemn and serious in what they
did; it was that he might obviate and prevent any rashness and indeliberation
in this proproceeding, and to let them thoroughly understand the matter they
were about, that so they might not trifle with the Almighty: and the Truth is,
our vain and hypocritical hearts need all incentives to make them serious in
these matters.

5. We have the Transaction it self, or the renewal of Covenant after they were
thus in a good measure prepared for it, where we may observe,

1. The professed settled resolution of the people to stand fast by this
Engagement, upon the most mature deliberation, ver. 21. and this was the very
thing that Joshuah had been laboring in, in all the foregoing process, that he
might bring them to a settled, and if it might be, unmovable conclusion about
it.

2. Joshuahs obtestation, or challenging of them as witnesses against
themselves together with their declared assent unto the Truth of it v. 22.

3. The charge which hereupon he lays upon them, ver. 23. every Covenant
carries along with it a strong bond to duty, and hence this charge is answered
by a solemn engagement on their part, ver. 24, they make a promise that they
will thus do.

4. We have a declaration of this to amount to an entering into Covenant, ver.
25. So Joshua made a Covenant. So, i. e. according to the mode or manner before
expressed, viz. by bringing them to a free profession of their subjection to
God.

5. There is a Register made, and a monument erected of this Engagement ver.
26, 27. Those solemn Transactions that have past between God and his People
ought to be kept on File, to be a witness of his favor, and their duty.

These things being thus issued, now Joshuah has served his Generation, done
the work he had lying on his hand, and so dies.

The order of our Text has been thus displayed, and the parts of it we see are
two.

1. Joshua's obtestation of this People, or his introducing themselves as
witnesses against themselves, together with their ready assent to it: this
People having covenanted and promised, he then plainly expounds to them what
they have done, and they freely confess it: a People transacting in a Covenant
with God, ought to be well informed in that which they do.

2. Joshua's charge given them upon it, the force of which charge is drawn from
the precedent Argument, and strongly argued from thence, now therefore: q. d.
now more then ever it concerns you to be sollicitous about this duty. The words
intimate three things to us, viz.

1. What is done by a People in their Renewing of Covenant? they do
deliberately choose God, and strongly oblige themselves to serve him. The word
in our Text translated Chosen, and the thing it self viz. Choosing, do signify
a careful Election upon good trial and experience we have had of a thing* and
serving the Lord, intends both worshipping and obeying of him, and is therefore
by the Septuagint translated indifferently by ( Latreuein and douleuein)

2. That strong and awful obligation under which men do put themselves by
this Solemnity: they do hereby enter themselves witnesses against themselves:
i e. this act of theirs will be a particular and undeniable evidence against
them, when God shall enter into Judgment with them, if they should after they
have done this, decline from their Profession, and so depart from God.

3. What it is that God expects a People should now do after such a Solemnity,
i e. They must forsake their Sins: this is intimated in the charge given them,
to put away their false gods. Now the object of every Lust is a false god, that
which steals away a man's heart, and is pursued with his most eager desires,
that is an Idol. And they must quicken themselves up to Obedience, they must
endeavor to be more hearty and more active then ever they had been in the
Service of God: for that is to incline their hearts to the Lord God of Israel.

If I should undertake the distinct doctrinal handling of these things, the
time would fail me, and I should commit a trespass upon your Patience: I shall
therefore only improve them at present by way of Exhortation* as they may be
useful to the present occasion

Unto you therefore of this Church and People of God, who (by the help and
grace of God) have put your selves upon a fresh remembrance of your sacred
Covenant, and renewed the solemn engagement of your selves to God, and one to
another* Let me say thus much,

As it is a good and commendable, so it is a great and weighty work you have
bin about, and thereupon calls for much serious after consideration. It is a
great duty incumbent on you to keep this days work in mind, and to apply your
hearts unto it. I know nothing of more weight and solemnity to urge upon your
hearts then what Joshua (directed by the Spirit of God) called upon this People
in our Text to take knowledge of. Remember then,

1. What it is you have been doing this day. The making or renewing of
Covenants ought not to be a rash or precipitate act: a Covenanting People ought
well and thoroughly to acquaint themselves with the matter and nature of their
Covenant: it is good that you should reflect, and ask your own Souls, what is
it that we have been doing? the want of this will lose you the benefit and
fruit of all: review then every Circumstance of it, you have it summarily here
before you. Know then, That you have this day, by a new and voluntary act
chosen you the Lord to serve him: and if you take this in pieces you may see
what a great work you have done. Here are three things you have to ruminate
upon, your act, your object, and the end.

1. Your act, you have chosen, and if you have indeed made this choice, then
you have tasted and seen that God is good, yea, the best good.

Choice is a deliberate act, it is not a thing to be run upon hastily and
rashly, but upon mature Consideration, he that has a choice to make will
Ponder the matter in his mind, first consider before he concludes; this action
of yours does therefore carry in it this profession, that you have entered into
your hearts, and seriously thought of the business, yea,

Choice is a segregating, and a disjunctive act, wheresoever there is a
choosing, there is also a refusing, at least by consequence; for, to render a
thing capable of being chosen, it must be presented and proffered with some
other thing; there must be more things then one to make a choice out of, for
the very act implies diverse objects, amongst which one has the pre-eminence,
in our esteem, and is therefore pitched upon, in which very choosing, the other
are refused. If then you have chosen God, it it certain that you have renounced
sin, and world, and all your vanities, and have now openly acknowledged that
they are not your Gods, that you will never more place your dependence upon
them. If you have chosen God; you have chosen him alone, it is this one God you
have set your hearts upon, so he is propounded, Deuteronomy 6 4. The Lord our God is
one Lord. God never acknowledged himself indeed chosen, by them who would have
him in conjunction with other things. Again.

Choice is a concluding act* it argues that a man is come to a full and final
determination: as long as the mind hangs in suspense, and the resolutions are
wavering there is not choice, if then you have chosen the Lord, you are no
longer halting between two opinions, but are plumply come up to this resolved
conclusion in which you will rest, the Lord he is God. Further,

Choice is a judicious and voluntary act, it is the act of a cause by Counsel,
acting according to the dictates of right reason, and freely resting in the
conclusion; if therefore you have chosen God, you have not been drawn to this
act against your wills, nor against your rational judgment, but here is your
free choice, and that upon a sufficient (...) every of the excellency and
suitableness of the object chosen; you can give a good reason for, and are not
ashamed to stand by your Election: Romans 1.1^. Good and evil, God and the world
have been set before you, if you have chosen God, you approve him as he is
propounded; you have considered what it is that he requires of you, and you do
approve of it, and consent to it, and what it is he promises, and it is well
pleasing to you: this is a judicious choice: yet again,

Choice is a satisfying and contenting act, if a man may but have the liberty
to enjoy his own free Election, he is well pleased, it gives him content, and
if you have indeed chosen God, your Souls are abundantly satisfied in him, and
you would not exchange him again for any other being in Heaven or in Earth,
Psalm. 73.25. you can let others enjoy their vanities and not be envious at
them, but count your selves infinitely more happy in your enjoyment of God.
Moreover,

Choice is an obliging act* it lays a great force upon a man to retain and
prize the thing which he has chosen: for a man to alter his choice when it is
fully and determinately made, condemns him of folly, blindness, and
indiscretion in the choice which he first made: the act it self speaks* either
gross ignorance* or hasty incogitancy; and all this the sinner is forced to
confess when once God opens his eyes, and lets him know what he has done, till
when, he blesses himself in his wise choice, and condemns the People of God of
imprudence, but now acknowledges that he was brutish and ignorant, and had
rated things, not according to their true value, but his own misguided and
deluded apprehensions; and hence it comes to pass that (or this is one reason
why) the work of Conversion is so exceeding difficult, because proud man counts
his honor engaged to stand to his choice and so, rather then confess himself a
fool, will run the hazard of eternal Damnation: Now if choice it self be so
obliging, then a renewed choosing of the same thing or an after asserting of a
former choice* adds yet greater strength to the Obligation. And this is the
very thing that you have been this day doing: you have formerly, a great while
a go, openly professed that you made God your Choice, and renounced all things
for him, this was a great engagement, but what you have now done, is a great
deal more: That which you now tell the world, and declare in the presence of
Angels is, That after you have had the trial of God so many years, and have had
so many occasions to make proof of him* you have found him so good, so
gracious, so glorious an one, and your selves so happy in your choice, that you
have had no cause all this while to repent of it, but having experienced him
every whit as good as his word* and far better then your narrow thoughts and
low hopes could have expected, you are come to give public Testimony to your
full approbation of him after so long a time: thus did this People, they
covenanted at Horeb taking God at his word, and now they renew it, to testify
their ready acknowledgement of his fidelity who had not let one good word, in
which he stood engaged, fall to the ground. Finally.

Choice is an act that puts an honor upon the thing chosen, and reflects
disparagement upon the thing refused, and thus in this Transaction have you set
the Crown on Gods head, and professedly trampled upon all the dunghill vanities
of the world.

2. You are also to consider of the object of your choice, the Lord, Jehovah;
and if you do seriously think who God is, it will yet further tell you what you
have done in choosing of him: I shall only hint in some particulars,

You have chosen a holy God, this Joshuah puts these in mind of, v, 19, and it
is of solemn consideration, he is a God that hates sin, that loathes the Throne
of iniquity, that cannot endure any thing that is contrary to him, or goes
about any way to undermine his glory: if therefore you will have him for your
God, you must renounce all your impure and unholy ways and words, and
thoughts; you must leave off all filthiness either of flesh, or of Spirit.

He is a jealous God. ibid. a God that stands upon his own glory, and will not
part with it, no graven image or Idol shall be sharer or co-partner with him;
you must therefore resolve to be for him, and for no other, if you reject not
all for him, he will not accept you.

He is a God that will by no means clear the guilty, Ex 34 7. thus in our
Context, ver. 19, 20. if now you shall break Covenant and forsake him, and cast
off his fear from you, he will write his displeasure in your blood, those that
shall thus be found guilty before him in the great day and not pardoned in
Christ, shall have no way for escape.

He is an Almighty God, and if you provoke his anger, and stir up his
Jealousy, there is none in the world will ever be able to deliver you out of
his hands; All Nations are to him as the drop of a Bucket, Isai. 40.15.

He is an All-seeing God, his Eyes are a flame of fire: you cannot lodge an
Idol in your hearts, though it be in the most secret and retired room of it,
but he will find it out: he will search you with candles, will make a through
search, and you cannnt avoid him.

Only here is your encouragement, he is a gracious and merciful God too, and
therefore if through frailty or Temptation you should at any time forget your
selves, and fail in the due performance of your duty, if then you do truly
repent and seek his face in Jesus Christ by faith in him, he will receive and
Pardon you, there is forgiveness with him that he may be feared, Psalm. 130.4.
But still, be sure let the solemn consideration of his dread Majesty, be a
constant remembrance unto you, of the incessant and diligent care you ought to
express in holy endeavors to make good this choice of yours, which you have
made of him by Covenant, lest you should stir him up against you, and turn that
to your harm which might have been for your benefit and good.

3. The end of your choice, and that is to serve him: you have not only chosen
the Lord Jesus Christ for your Savior, and high Priest, to expiate the guilt
of your sins with his own blood, and to stand between you and his Fathers
wrath, and make atonement for you, though it would be sad for you if it were
not thus; but you have chosen God also for your King and Sovereign, to worship
him and obey him, the serving of him intends both, Know this, that you have
engaged your selves to do something for God and to be guided in it by his will,
and to that end you have wholly renounced your own wills and lusts, that you
may be altogether at his command, and fully engaged in his service: you are not
therefore now to choose your own way, but he is to lay it out for you, you are
not to be at your own dispose, but he must dispose of you, and you stand
engaged to take all well, whatsoever it be that he shall call you unto, whether
it be active or passive obedience: you are now therefore to study the Lords
will, to be frequent in the Scriptures, searching out the mind of God there,
for your direction; and to attend upon all duties, of praying, hearing,
reading, meditating, practicing: you have now declared, and promised that you
will not rise up against the command, nor call it a hard saying, but will
receive the word at the mouth of the Lord, and his Servants, and will do
accordingly: that you will not murmr at, or rise up against his providential
disposure of you, but if he afflict you, cut you short, and carry you through
diverse trials, and great exercises, you will submit to his hand, and be content
that he shall be your Leader; this is it you have done, and you ought to carry
it in remembrance, and study performance.

2. Think how strong a Tie it is which you have bound your selves in: All our
covenantings with God carry along with them the nature and force of an Oath,
and a Curse: and here will be one more great evidence against you, if after all
this you should depart away from God; by this very act you have put your selves
into the quality of witnesses against your selves: This may seem to be a very
strange expression; but we must observe, that the meaning of it is not
positive, but hypothetical, i. e. you are so, in case you should now fall short
of your engagement. We know that a man's hand and seal to a Covenant, does him
no harm, if he mean honestly, and be faithful to perform it; but yet it will
be, in Courts of Justice, a self evidence against a man, in case he should
afterward prove false and break it. For a man after Vows to forsake God, and
turn out of the good way, this is a double iniquity: If ever God should be so
provoked after this as to enter into Judgment with you, and deal in utmost
rigor and severity, and make your Plagues great and terrible, this days work
will vindicate his cause, and declare him a righteous God to the world: Your
Professions and Protestations will speak terrible things against you in the day
of vengeance: Your Consciences will give in evidence for God, and there will be
no excuse for you, yea this whole Assembly are witnesses of what you have done,
and this should be a very solemn thought upon your hearts.

Obj. But if the case stands thus, then we have brought our selves into a
snare, and it would have been far better if we had never done this.

Ans. It is very certain that every Ordinance of God does a wicked man hurt,
but yet it does a godly man good. And know this assuredly, that if you vow
without purposes to pay; if you come to Covenant with God, and bring an Idol in
your heart; if you promise rashly and indeliberately, and ponder not what it is
you do* it would have been far better for you if you had not done it: But yet
consider withal, that inasmuch as it is one of those ways whereby God does
both engage, and also quicken his people to a faithful discharge of their duty,
and considering also, that such is our backwardness, deadness, and proneness to
forget the duty in which we stand engaged to God, and hereupon need all
incentives to it, it becomes not a snare, but a blessing to the people of God:
we do all of us owe unto the Lord our hearts and lives, it is a Sacrifice which
is his due; but ever when we come to bring and offer them up to him, they (like
the Beasts which of old were offered up in Sacrifice) are ready to start and
run away from the Altar, and must therefore be bound, if ever they be kept.
Psalm. 118.27. Bind the Sacrifice to the horns of the Altar with Cords: now this
covenanting is one of those Cords with which we bind our hearts to, and
endeavor to keep them from starting from the service of God, whereto, by our
professing our selves to be his People, we stand in duty indispensibly obliged:
let none therefore repent of their covenanting, but endeavor the improving it
to high and holy ends: use it as a shield against Temptations and as a spur to
duty. When Satan, or any of his Instruments at any time seek to draw you aside,
and persuade you to join with them in any vain and sinful deed, when they
would have you to associate your selves with them in their lewd and sinful
practices, call this day to remembrance, and say, shall I do this thing, who
have covenanted with God against it? no, my word is past, yea I have sworn
against this disloyalty, I have chosen the Lord, and my hand is to it, I will
not therefore do this abominable thing which his Soul hates. Thus also when
you begin to slacken your hands in duty, and are ready to give way to torpid
neglect, to leave off, or intermit, or be any way slighty in the discharge of
any part of Gods service, now rouse up your selves with the consideration of
this, say, as David did, thy vows are upon me, and shall I alter or go back
from any part of that which I have bound my self in to the Lord. Thus you have
an excellent enclosure to keep you in from wandering and straggling away from
God, you cannot possibly go astray, except you do break over, or through the
hedge of the Covenant; and an awful reclaimer it may be to you, when at any
time you are broken out, and gotten into the world, and wandering among the
vanities and lusts of it, when the regrets and amazing reflections of your own
Consciences shall witness against you, that you are Covenant breakers. You
shall also have this advantage by it, that you shall have it as a perpetual
monitor, gravely and seriously to advise you of and excite you to your duty, if
you do not wilfully or carelessly put it out of your mind.

3 And it is now high time that you do solemnly set your selves to think what
it is you have to do: Covenants are not mere formal and empty Professions, but
they oblige men to the performance of something. Assure your selves, that God
expects, and all that have seen or shall hear of this days work, will expect
that all this ado should not end in few words: that you should not be like the
Nightingale, a voice and nothing else. It is true that every Christian owes a
life to be spent for God, and in his fear and service, and to neglect it will
be great Sin; but still, every degree of our Profession must be answered with
proportionable fruits, or else it will be looked upon as no better then an
empty show, or Pharisaical boast: If, when you have so declared and protested,
you now sit still and do nothing, if all things be as they were, you will fall
under that sharp censure which was given of Israel of old, Psalm. 78.36, 37,
They flattered him with their mouth, and lied to him with their tongues; for
their heart was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his Covenant.
Yea God himself will declare against you, as he did against that hypocritical
Generation, Isa. 29.13. This People honors me with their lips, but their
heart is far away from me. Expect that this will be the enquiry that every one
will make from this day forward, What singular thing is it that this People
do? What fruits and effects has their Covenanting wrought upon them? And if
there be none, it will cast, foul and infamous blot upon your Profession. Now
then up and be doing: date from this day a visible and conspicuous Reformation,
which may be seen and taken notice of by all your observers; that those who
love Zion may rejoice in and boast of you and the mouths of gainsayers may be
stopped, and such as mock at your holy Covenant may be put to silence. That
which is now to be done, the Text commends to you under two Heads.

1. You must put away the strange gods that are among you. And do not think it
strange to be put upon this duty: Idolatry is a sin hardly kept out, and with
great difficulty thrust out of the Church: It might have seemed strange, that
Joshuah should give this in charge to the Tribes at this time, especially since
he professes Cap. 23.8. That they had cleaved unto the Lord their God unto
that day. But still there will be some Idolatry in the best times, and in the
purest Churches. And though I come not as an Accuser, or have any thing to lay
to your charge, yet it is good that every one search his own heart, and make
through work, remembering you are dealing with the heart searching God. And that
there has too much of spiritual Idolatry been found in these Churches, is no
obscure or unknown thing.

There is the Idol of Covetousness, so branded by the word of God, Col. 3.5. so
far prevailing, as to the thrusting out in part, if not altogether* religious
Worship in many Families, either turning Prayer quite out of doors, making them
like heathen Familyes, whose Character is, that they call not upon the Name of
the Lord; or making men's Prayers so formal and dead, as if indeed they prayed
to a dead Idol,

There is the Idol of Drunkenness, by too too many worshipped to such a degree,
that when they awake, they are still with it, and makes them constantly offer up
their morning Sacrifice to god Bacchus in a drunken Drink Offering; and when
(if men walked according to their Profession) we might expect to find them,
either in their Closets pouring out their souls before God, and commending
themselves to his guidance for the day; or with their Families, praying down a
blessing upon them; we must look them up at some Ale house, or Brandy-Shop at
their Tippling Devotions: which unsuitableness and unseasonableness, though they
should not drink themselves down to a reeling and staggering about the Streets,
will yet be charged by God for the sin of Drunkenness.

There is the Idol of Sensuality, when men make their Belly their god, Phil.
3.19 When men indulge their appetites, and pamper a piece of Clay, unto a
neglect of God, and unfitting themselves for his Service.

The Idol of Pride, causing many to go beyond their estate or degree each one
striving to outdoe their neighbors in vanity.

The Idol of vain Curiosity, provoking men to leave the worship and ways of
Gods Institution, and run giddily after new Doctrines and Teachers. These and
many others are apt to draw the hearts of men after them, and are to be put
away. And if there be any of you that have harbored these or any the like
strange gods, its now your work and obligation resolutely to put them away, to
be ashamed of them, and to say of them as Ephraim* Hos. 14.8. What have I to
do any more with Idols? You must bury them as Jacob did those of his Family,
when he went to worship God at Bethel, and resolve to dig them up and worship
them no more. If, after this day, and these Solemnityes, such sins as these,
wherever they have been entertained, be not reformed, and by every one
carefully watched against, God will look upon himself to be contemned, and you
must not think to escape his Judgments.

2. You must now incline your hearts to the Lord God of Israel. The word
[encline] signifies to bow or bend to a thing, as the labourer bends to his
work, and it serves to express industry and diligence: it signifies also to
spread abroad: translated to stretch: Isai. 40.22. and it is the heart that
must be thus engaged and extended, i. e. the Soul and all its faculties, and it
must be to the Lord, i. e. to his service. There is a great deal you have now
to do for God, and you have possibly been remiss, slack, weak in doing of it:
now you must mend your pace, revive your industry, and whatsoever it is that
your hand now finds to do, you must do it with your might: be sure that your
heart be in it, and then God will accept it; nay let your heart be in it, and
then be sure it will not be done negligently, although when you have done your
best it will be done imperfectly; weaknesses and frailties must be expected,
whiles we are laboring under the exercise and oppression of a body of death:
and a Paul himself although he had seen his own heavenly glory, yet the
strength of this will not prevent, but still he cannot do what he would: only,
here is our comfort, that a heart set for God, and a hand seriously employed
for him, is acceptable, he loves and will acknowledge a willing mind. It may be
there are some duties the practice whereof you have quite lost, through
remissness, and the prevalency of worldly temptations, these are now to be
revived and restored with utmost care and diligence, they have been too long
neglected: other duties have it may be been done perfunctorily and to the
halves, by reason of a Spirit of formality, these are to be quickened, and new
life put into them.

And now having obliged your selves under a sacred tie to God, to the
performance of such things which you are not able to perform, by any strength
of yours, but only by the strength of grace; in hope of which assistance you
have thus engaged, it concerns you to be fortifying Faith in him, and placing
an humble relyance upon him, for the continued supplies of his Spirit and
grace. Tremblingly consider your own proneness to dissemble with God, and to
deceive your own Souls; and how ready now more then ever, Satan will be to
assault you with his strong Temptations; and considering how often this people
of Israel covenanted and yet because their heart was not right, they went back
and provoked God to sell them to their oppressing Enemies; be the more
importunate at the Throne of grace, and the more watchful over your own hearts.
And that God, who is tender and pittyful, who knows this frame of yours, and
minds you are but dust, will cover and pass by your many infirmityes.

Now that this Renewal of Covenant may be for Gods glory* and your everlasting
comfort, and the edification of others; the Almighty God strengthen you with
all might in the inner man that you may be able to walk worthy of the Lord unto
all well pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the
knowledge of God, and so made meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of the
Saints in Light.

FINIS.

