THE NECESSITY OF REFORMATION With the Expedients subservient thereunto,
asserted; in Answer to two QVESTIONS I. What are the Evils that have provoked
the Lord to bring his Judgments on New England? II. What is to be done that so
those Evils may be Reformed?


Agreed upon by the ELDERS and MESSENGERS Of the Churches assembled in the
SYNOD At Boston in New England, Sept. 10. 1679.

Mal. 3.7. Even from the days of your Fathers ye are gone away from mine
Ordinances, and have not kept them, Return unto me and I will return unto you,
says the Lord of Host: but ye said, Wherein shall we return?

Rev. 2.4, 5. Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left
thy first love. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and Repent, and
do the first works; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy
Candlestick out of his place, except thou Repent.

BOSTON. Printed by John Foster. In the Year, 1679.

TO THE MUCH HONORED General Court Of the Massachusetts Colony now sitting at
Boston in NEW ENGLAND
Right Worshipful, Worshipful, and much honored in our Lord Jesus!
THE Ways of God toward this his People, have in many respects been like unto
his dealings with Israel of old: It was a great and high undertaking of our
Fathers, when they ventured themselves and their little ones upon the rude
waves of the vast Ocean, that so they might follow the Lord into this Land; a
parallel instance not to be given, except that of our Father Abraham from Vr of
the Chaldees, or that of his Seed from the land of Egypt; the Lord alone did
lead them and there was no strange God with them. In the wilderness have we
dwelt in safety alone, being made the subjects of most peculiar mercies and
privileges. The good will of him that dwelt in the bush has been upon the
head of those that were separated from their Brethren: and the Lord has (by
turning a Wilderness into a fruitful land) brought us into a wealthy place; he
has planted a Vine, having cast out the Heathen, prepared Room for it, and
caused it to take deep rooting, and to fill the land, which has sent out its
boughs unto the Sea, and its branches to the River. If we ask of the days that
are past, and look from the one side of heaven to the other, where can we find
the like to this great thing which the Lord has done? His planting these
heavens, and laying the foundations of this earth, is (if any thing be) to be
reckoned amongst the wonderful works of God which this age has seen. If we
look abroad over the face of the whole earth, where shall we see a place or
people brought to such perfection and considerableness, in so short a time? Our
adversaryes themselves being judges, it has not been so with any of the
outgoings of the Nations. We must then ascribe all these things, as unto the
grace and abundant goodness of the Lord our God, so to his owning a religious
design and interest; such was New-Englands in its primitive constitution. Our
Fathers neither sought for, nor thought of great things for themselves, but did
seek first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things
were added to them. They came not into the wilderness to see a man clothed in
soft raiment. But that we have in too many respects, been forgetting the Errand
upon which the Lord sent us hither; all the world is witness: And therefore we
may not wonder that God has changed the tenor of his Dispensations toward
us, turning to do us hurt, and consuming us after that he has done us good.
If we had continued to be as once we were, the Lord would have continued to do
for us, as once he did. This notwithstanding, we must not deny or disown what
of God is remaining amongst us. There is cause to fear that the same evils for
which the Lord is contending with us, are to be found in other Reformed
Churches, and perhaps in an higher degree, then as yet with us; considering
that these Churches do still (through the grace of Christ) own both the faith
and order of the Gospel, that was professed in the days of our Fathers: and
there are a number of precious souls (a few names that have not defiled their
garments with the sins of the times) we hope in every Congregation: only the
present Generation in New England, as to the body of it, in respect of the
practice and power of Godliness, is far short of those whom God saw meet to
improve in laying the foundation of his Temple here: and our iniquityes admit
of sadder aggravations then can be said of others, because we sin against
greater light, and means, and mercies then ever People (all circumstances
considered) have done; and therefore the Lord is righteous in all the evil that
has befallen us. And it is high time for us to be earnest, as to an impartial
Scrutiny concerning the causes of his holy displeasure against us, together
with the proper Remedies or Scripture expedients, for Reformation, that so the
Lord, who has said, Return unto me, and I will return unto you, may be at
peace with us. Essays respecting this matter have not been altogether wanting,
but hitherto successless in a great degree. Wherefore, it has pleased God so
to dispose, as that your selves, who are the Honored General Court of this
Colony, have called upon all the Churches therein, to send their Elders and
Messengers, that they might meet in form of a Synod, in order to a most serious
enquiry, into the questions here propounded and answered. We cannot but hope
this motion was of God, since (after the Prayers of his People have been
solemnly and abundantly poured out before him that it might be so) evident
Tokens of the Lords gracious Presence in and with that Reverend Assembly, have
been taken notice of; especially in that he was pleased so to enlighten the
minds, and incline the hearts of his Servants, (the Messengers and
Representatives of the Churches) as that there was an unanimity in their Votes
and Determinations, and that not only with reference to the Answers unto those
Questions, but other things then discussed and concluded on. There was at first
some agitation about the matter of a Regular Synod, by reason that some of the
Churches (notwithstanding their Elders desiring them to send other Messengers
also) sent their Elders alone. That which is expressed in the Platform of
Discipline, concerning this particular, was assented unto, viz. that not only
Elders, but other Messengers ought to be delegated by the Churches, and so to
have their Suffrages in such Assemblyes. A Principle which does agree with the
Primitive Pattern, Act. 15.23. And with the practice of the Churches in the
ages next following the Apostles, as is evident from the writings of Cyprian,
and others of the Ancients. And the interest of the People in such Conventions
is strongly asserted and evinced by our Juel, Whitaker, Parker, and others
against Papists and Prelates, who maintain that Laics (as they call them) are
not fit matter for a Synod. This Debate being issued, it was put to Vote,
whether the Assembly did approve of The Platform of Church Discipline; and both
Elders and Brethren did unanimously lift up their hands in the affirmative, not
one appearing when the Vote was propounded in the Negative, but it jointly
passed in these words,

A Synod of the Churches in the Colony of the Massachusetts, being called by the
honored General Court to convene at Boston, the 10. of Sept. 1679. having read
and considered the Platform of Church Discipline, agreed upon by the Synod
assembled at Cambridge, Anno 1648. do unanimously approve of the said
Platform, for the substance of it, desiring that the Churches may continue
steadfast in the order of the Gospel, according to what is therein declared from
the Word of God.

Now blessed be the God of our Fathers, that has inclined our hearts to own
that Cause and those Truths, which they did with so much industry and
faithfulness gather from the Scriptures, and on the account whereof they were
sometimes Confessors, and Sufferers, being Exiles in this Wilderness, where the
Lord was pleased to show them the Pattern of his House, and all the forms
thereof; and we know not what Temptations (for there is an hour of Temptation
coming upon all the world) we may yet meet with; wherefore, the obtaining of
the Vote mentioned (had there been nothing else done) was well worth our coming
together. But besides that, several days were spent, in discoursing upon the
Questions herewith presented; when every Member of the Synod had full liberty
to express himself: after which, some were chosen, to draw up what did appear
to be the mind of the Assembly, and the mind of Christ, in whose name we came
together, and considered of this matter. The Return made by those who had been
appointed unto that Service, was read once and again, each Paragraph being
duly and distinctly weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary, and then, upon
mature deliberation, the whole unanimously voted, as to the substance, end, and
scope thereof. The things here insisted on, have (at least many of them) been
oftentimes mentioned and inculcated by those whom the Lord has set as Watchmen
to the house of Israel, though alas! not with that success which their Souls
have desired. It is not a small matter, nor ought it to seem little in our
eyes, that the Churches have in this way confessed and declared the Truth,
which coming from a Synod as their joint concurring Testimony, will carry more
Authority with it, then if one man only, or many in their single capacityes,
should speak the same things. And undoubtedly, the issue of this undertaking
will be most signal, either as to mercy, or misery. If New England remember
whence she is fallen, and do the first works, there is reason to hope that it
shall be better with us then at our beginnings. But if this, after all other
means in and by which the Lord has been striving to reclaim us, shall be
despised, or become ineffectual, we may dread what is like to follow. It is a
solemn thought, that the Jewish Church had (as the Churches in New England have
this day) an opportunity to Reform (if they would) in Josiah's time, but
because they had no heart unto it, the Lord quickly removed them out of his
sight. What God out of his Sovereignty may do for us, no man can say, but
according to his wonted dispensations, we are a perishing People, if now we
Reform not.

Now the Lord help you his Servants, under whose influence, and by whose
encouragement, this Synod has convened, to promote this matter, both by your
Recommendation of these Conclusions unto the Churches, for their consideration
and acceptance in the Lord, and otherwise according to your respective
Relations and Capacities: and the Lord strengthen your hearts and hands
therein; for much does depend upon your Courage, Prudence, Zeal and Activity.
We do not read in the Scripture, nor in History, of any notable general
Reformation amongst a People, except the Magistrate did help forward the work.
Haggai's and Zachary's Sermons, would never have built the Temple, if
Zerubbabel and Shealtiel (godly Magistrates) had not improved their authority
for that end. Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, and other Reformers, would have
labored in vain, had not the Princes and Senators amongst whom they lived,
promoted the interest of Reformation. Nor was it ever known, that the civil
Authority in any place, did their utmost toward the suppression of growing
Evils, but there was (at least wise for the present) some good effect thereof.
These things are therefore commended to your most serious Consideration; It is
(under God) by you that we enjoy great quietness. The good Lord continue the
present Government, and Governors, under whose shadow (as sometimes the
Remnant of Judah under Gedaliah) we have sat with great delight; and grant that
every one (both Leaders and People) in their proper place and order, may up and
be doing, and that the Lord our God may be with us, as he was with our Fathers.

Now be strong, O Zerubbabel, be strong, O Joshuah, and be strong all ye people
of the land, says the Lord, and work, for I am with you; according to the word
that I covenanted with you, when ye came out of Egypt; so my Spirit remains
amongst you; Fear ye not.

QUEST. I.
WHat are the Evils that have provoked the Lord to bring his Judgments on
New England?

Answ. That sometimes God has had, and pleaded a Controversy with his People,
is clear from the Scripture, Hos. 4.1. and 12.2. Mic 6.1, 2, Where God does
plainly and fully propose, state and plead his Controversy, in all the parts
and Causes of it, wherein he does justify himself, by the Declaration of his
own infinite Mercy, Grace, Goodness, Justice, Righteousness, Truth and
Faithfulness, in all his proceedings with them, And judge his People, charging
them with all those provoking Evils which had been the causes of that
Controversy, and that with the most high, and heavy aggravation of their Sins,
and exaggeration of the guilt and punishment, whence he should have been most
just in pleading out his Controversy with them, unto the utmost extremity of
Justice and Judgment.

That God has a Controversy with his New England People is undeniable, the
Lord having written his displeasure in dismal Characters against us. Though
Personal Afflictions do oftentimes come only or chiefly for Probation yet as
to public Judgments it is not wont to be so; especially when by a continued
Series of Providence, the Lord does appear and plead against his People. 2 Samuel
21.1. As with us it has been from year to year. Would the Lord have whetted
his glitterring Sword, and his hand have taken hold on judgment? Would he have
sent such a mortal Contagion like a Beeson of Destruction in the midst of us?
Would he have said, Sword! go through the Land, and cut off man and Beast? Or
would he have kindled such devouring Fires, and made such fearful Desolations
in the Earth, if he had not been angry? It is not for nothing that the merciful
God, who does not willingly afflict nor grieve the Children of men, has done
all these things unto us; yea and sometimes with a Cloud has covered himself,
that our Prayer should not pass through. And although it is possible that the
Lord may Contend with us partly on the account of secret unobserved Sins; Josh.
7.11, 12. 2 King. 17.9. Psalm. 90.8. In which respect, a deep and most serious
enquiry into the Causes of his Controversy ought to be attended. Nevertheless,
it is sadly evident that there are visible, manifest Evils, which without doubt
the Lord is provoked by. For,

I. There is a great and visible decay of the power of Godliness amongst many
Professors in these Churches. It may be feared, that there is in too many
spiritual and heart Apostasy from God, whence Communion with him in the ways
of his Worship, especially in Secret, is much neglected, and whereby men cease
to know and fear, and love and trust in him; but take up their contentment and
satisfaction in something else. This was the ground and bottom of the Lords
Controversy with his People of old. Psalm. 78.8, 37. and 81.11. Jer. 2.5, 11,
13. And with his People under the New Testament also. Rev. 2.4, 5.

II. The Pride that does abound in New England testifies against us. Hos. 5.5.
Ezekiel. 7.10. Both spiritual Pride, Zeph. 3.11. Whence two great Evils and
Provocations have proceeded and prevailed amongst us.

1. A refusing to subject to Order according to divine appointment. Numb. 16.3.
1 Pet. 5 5.

2. Contention. Prove. 13.10. An evil that is most eminently against the solemn
Charge of the Lord Jesus, Joh. 13.34, 35. And that for which God has by severe
Judgments punished his People, both in former and latter Ages. This Malady
has been very general in the Country: we have therefore cause to fear that the
Wolves which God in his holy Providence has let loose upon us, have been sent
to chastise his Sheep for their dividings and strayings one from another; and
that the Wars and Fightings, which have proceeded from the Lust of Pride in
special, have been punished with the Sword, Jam. 4.1. Job. 19.29.

Yea, and Pride in respect of Apparel has greatly abounded. Servants, and the
poorer sort of People are notoriously guilty in this matter, who (too
generally) go above their estates and degrees, thereby transgressing the Laws
both of God and man, Math. 11.8. Yes, it is a Sin that even the light of
nature, and Laws of civil Nations have condemned. 1 Cor. 11*14. Also, many, not
of the meaner sort, have offended God by strange Apparel, not becoming serious
Christians, especially in these days of affliction and misery, wherein the
Lord calls upon men to put off their Ornaments, Exodus 33.5. Jer 4.30. A Sin
which brings Wrath upon the greatest that shall be found guilty of it, Zeph.
1.8. with Jer. 52.13^ Particularly, the Lord has threatened to visit with Sword
and Sickness, and with loathsome diseases for this very Sin. Isa 3.16.

III. Inasmuch as it was in a more peculiar manner with respect to the second
Commandment, that our Fathers did follow the Lord into this wilderness, whilst
it was a land not sown, we may fear that the breaches of that Commandment are
some part of the Lords Controversy with New England. Church Fellowship, and
other divine Institutions are greatly neglected. Many of the Rising Generation
are not mindful of that which their Baptism does engage them unto, viz. to use
utmost endeavors that they may be fit for, and so partake in, all the holy
Ordinances of the Lord Jesus* Mat. 28.20. There are too many that with profane
Esau slight spiritual privileges. Nor is there so much of Discipline, extended
toward the Children of the Covenant, as we are generally agreed ought to be
done. On the other hand, humane Inventions, and Will Worship have been set up
even in Jerusalem. Men have set up their Thresholds by Gods Threshold, and
their Posts by his Post. Quakers are false Worshippers: and such Anabaptists as
have risen up amongst us, in opposition to the Churches of the Lord Jesus,
receiving into their Society those that have been for scandal delivered unto
Satan, yea, and improving those as Administrators of holy Things, who have been
(as does appear) Justly under Church Censures, do no better then set up an
Altar against the Lords Altar. Wherefore it must needs be provoking to God, if
these things be not duly and fully testified against, by every one in their
several Capacityes respectively. Josh. 22.19. 2 King. 23.13. Ezekiel. 43.8. Psalm.
99.8. Hos. 11.6.

(...). The Holy and glorious Name of God has been polluted and profaned
amongst us, More especially,

1. By Oaths, and Imprecations in ordinary Discourse; Yea, and it is too
common a thing for men in a more solemn way to Swear unnecessary Oaths; whenas
it is a breach of the third Commandment, so to use the blessed Name of God. And
many (if not the most) of those that swear, consider not the Rule of an Oath*:
Jer. 4.2. So that we may justly fear that because of swearing the Land mourns,
Jer. 23.10.

2. There is great profaness, in respect of irreverent behavior in the solemn
Worship of God. It is a frequent thing for men (though not necessitated
thereunto by any infirmity) to sit in prayer time, and some with their heads
almost covered, and to give way to their own sloth and sleepiness, when they
should be serving God with attention and intention, under the solemn
dispensation of his Ordinances. We read but of one man in the Scripture that
slept at a Sermon, and that sin had like to have cost him his life, Act. 20.9.

V. There is much Sabbath breaking; Since there are multitudes that do
profanely absent themselves or theirs from the public worship of God, on his
Holy day, especially in the most populous places of the Land; and many under
pretense of differing apprehensions about the beginning of the Sabbath, do not
keep a seventh part of Time Holy unto the Lord, as the fourth Commandment
requires. Walking abroad, and Traveling* (not merely on the account of
worshipping God in the solemn Assemblyes of his people, or to attend works of
necessity or mercy) being a common practice on the Sabbath day, which is
contrary unto that Rest enjoined by the Commandment. Yea, some that attend
their particular servile callings and employments after the Sabbath is begun,
or before it is ended. Worldly, unsuitable discourses are very common upon the
Lords day, contrary to the Scripture which requires that men should not on
Holy Times find their own pleasure, nor speak their own words, Isai 58.13. Many
that do not take care so to dispatch their worldly businesses, that they may be
free and fit for the duties of the Sabbath, and that do (if not wholly neglect)
after a careless, heartless manner perform the duties that concern the
sanctification of the Sabbath. This brings wrath, Fires, and other Judgments
upon a professing People, Neh 13.17, 18. Jer. 17.27.

VI. As what concerns Familyes and the Government thereof, there is much amiss.
There are many Familyes that do not pray to God constantly morning and
evening, and many more wherein the Scriptures are not daily read, that so the
word of Christ might dwell richly with them. Some (and too many) Houses that
are full of Ignorance and Profaness, and these not duly inspected; for which
cause Wrath may come upon others round about them, as well as upon themselves.
Josh. 22.20. Jer. 5.7. and 10.25. And many Householders who profess Religion,
do not cause all that are within their gates to become subject unto good order
as ought to be. Ex. 20 10. Nay, children and Servants that are not kept in due
subjection; their Masters, and Parents especially, being sinfully indulgent
toward them. This is a sin which brings great Judgments, as we see in Eli's
and David's Family. In this respect, Christians in this Land, have become too
like unto the Indians, and then we need not wonder if the Lord has afflicted
us by them. Sometimes a Sin is discerned by the Instrument that Providence does
punish with. Most of the Evils that abound amongst us, proceed from defects as
to Family Government.

VII. Inordinate Passions. Sinful Heats and Hatreds, and that amongst Church
Members themselves, who abound with evil Surmisings, uncharitable and
unrighteous Censures, Back-bitings, hearing and telling Tales, few that
remember and duly observe the Rule, with an angry countenance to drive away
the Talebearer: Reproachful and reviling Expressions, sometimes to or of one
another. Hence Law suits are frequent, Brother going to Law with Brother, and
provoking and accusing one another in public Courts of Judicature, to the
Scandal of their holy Profession, Isa. 58 4. 1 Cor 6 6, 7. And in managing the
Discipline of Christ, some (and too many) are acted by their Passions and
Prejudices more then by a spirit of Love and Faithfulness toward their
Brothers Soul, which things are, as against the Law of Christ, so dreadful
violations of the Church Covenant, made in the presence of God.

VIII. There is much Intemperance. That heathenish and Idolatrous practice of
Health-drinking is too frequent. That shameful iniquity of sinful Drinking is
become too general a Provocation. Days of Training, and other public
Solemnityes, have been abused in this respect: And not only English but indians
have been debauched, by those that call themselves Christians, who have put
their bottles to them, and made them drunk also, This is a crying Sin, and the
more aggravated in that the first Planters of this Colony did (as is in the
Patent expressed) come into this Land with a design to Convert the Heathen unto
Christ, but if instead of that, they be taught Wickedness, which before they
were never guilty of, the Lord may well punish us by them. Moreover, the Sword,
Sickness, Poverty, and almost all the Judgments which have been upon
New England, are mentioned in the Scripture as the woeful fruit of That Sin.
Isa. 5.11, 12. and 28.1, 2. and 56.9, 12. Prove. 23.21, 29, 30. and 21.17. Hos.
7.5. and 2.8 9. There are more Temptations and occasions unto That Sin,
publicly allowed of, then any necessity does require; the proper end of
Taverns, etc. being for the entertainment of Strangers, which if they were
improved to that end only, a far less number would suffice: But it is a common
practice for Town-dwellers, yea and Church Members, to frequent public Houses,
and there to mispend precious Time, unto the dishonor of the Gospel, and the
scandalizing of others, who are by such examples induced to sin against God. In
which respect, for Church members to be unnecessarily in such Houses, is
sinful, scandalous, and provoking to God. 1 Cor. 8.9 10. Romans 14 21 Math.
17.27. and 18.7.

And there are other heinous breaches of the seventh Commandment. Temptations
thereunto are become too common, viz. such as immodest Apparel, Prove. 7.10
Laying out of hair, Borders, naked Necks and Arms, or, which is more
abominable, naked Breasts, and mixed Dancings, light behavior and expressions,
sinful Company-keeping with light and vain persons, unlawful Gaming* an
abundance of Idleness, which brought ruinating Judgment upon Sodom, and much
more upon Jerusalem. Ezekiel. 16.49. and does sorely threaten New England, unless
effectual Remedies be thoroughly and timously applied.

IX. There is much want of Truth amongst men. Promise-breaking is a common sin,
for which New England does hear ill abroad in the world. And the Lord has
threatened for that transgression to give his People into the hands of their
Enemies, and that their dead bodies should be for meat unto the Fowls of
heaven, and to the Beasts of the earth; which Judgments have been verified
upon us, Jer. 34.18, 20. And false Reports have been too common* yea, walking
with slanders and Reproaches, and that sometimes against the most faithful and
eminent Servants of God. The Lord is not wont to suffer such Iniquity to pass
unpunished. Jer. 9.4, 5. Numb. 16.41.

X. Inordinate affection to the world. Idolatry is a God provoking,
Judgement-procuring sin. And Covetousness is Idolatry. Ephesians. 5.5. There has
been in many professors an insatiable desire after Land, and worldly
Accommodations, yea, so as to forsake Churches and Ordinances, and to live like
Heathen, only that so they might have Elbow-room enough in the world. Farms and
merchandising have been preferred before the things of God. In this respect,
the Interest of New England seems to be changed. We differ from other
outgoings of our Nation, in that it was not any worldly consideration that
brought our Fathers into this wilderness, but Religion, even that so they might
build a Sanctuary unto the Lords Name; Whenas now, Religion is made subservient
unto worldly Interests. Such iniquity causes War to be in the Gates, and
Cities to be burnt up. Judge. 8.5. Math. 22.5, 7. Wherefore, we cannot but
solemnly bear witness against that practice of settling Plantations without any
Ministry amongst them, which is to prefer the world before the Gospel. When Lot
did forsake the Land of Canaan, and the Church which was in Abraham's Family,
that so he might have better worldly Accommodations in Sodom, God fired him out
of all, and he was constrained to leave his goodly pastures, which his heart
(though otherwise a good man) was too much set upon. Moreover, that many are
under the prevailing power of the sin of worldliness is evident,

1. From that oppression which the Land groaneth under. There are some Traders,
who sell their goods at excessive Rates, Day-Labourers and Mechanics are
unreasonable in their demands; Yea, there have been those that have dealt
deceitfully and oppressively toward the Heathen amongst whom we live, whereby
they have been scandalized and prejudiced against the Name of Christ. The
Scripture does frequently threaten Judgments for the sin of oppression, and in
special the oppressing Sword comes as a just punishment for that evil, Ezekiel.
7.11. and 22.15. Prove. 28.8. Isai. 5.7.

2. It is also evident, that men are under the prevailing power of a worldly
Spirit, by their strait-handedness, as to public concernments. God by a
continued series of providence, for many years one after another, has been
blasting the fruits of the Earth, in a great measure; and this year more
abundantly; Now if we search the Scriptures, we shall find, that when the Lord
has been provoked to destroy the fruits of the Earth, either by noxious
Creatures, or by his own immediate hand in blastings or droughts, or excessive
Rains, (all which judgments we have had experience of) it has been mostly for
this sin of strait-handedness with reference unto public and pious concerns,
Hag. 1.9. Mal. 5.8, 9, 11. As when peoples hearts and hands are enlarged upon
these Accounts, God has promised, (and is wont by his faithful providence to
do accordingly) to bless with outward plenty and prosperity* Prove. 3.9.10. Mal.
3.10 1 Cor. 9.6, 8, 10. 2 Chronicles 11.10. So on the other hand, when men withhold
more then is meet, the Lord sends impoverishing judgments upon them, Prove.
11.24.

XI. There has been opposition unto the work of Reformation. Although the Lord
has been calling upon us, not only by the voice of his Servants, but by awful
judgments, that we should return unto him, who has been smiting us, and
notwithstanding all the good Laws that are established for the suppression of
growing evils, yet men will not return every one from his evil way. There has
been great incorrigibleness under lesser judgments; Sin and sinners have many
Advocates. They that have been zealous in bearing witness against the sins of
the Times, have been reproached, and other ways discouraged; which argues an
heart unwilling to Reform. Hence the Lords Controversy is not yet done, but his
hand is stretched out still, Lev. 26 23, 24. Isai 5.12, 13.

XII. A public Spirit is greatly wanting in the most of men. Few that are of
Nehemiah's Spirit, Neh. 5.15. All seek their own, not the things which are
Jesus Christ's; Serving themselves upon Christ, and his holy Ordinances. Matters
appertaining to the Kingdom of God, are either not at all regarded, or not in
the first place. Hence Schools of learning and other public concerns are in a
languishing state. Hence also are unreasonable complaints and murmurings
because of public charges, which is a great sin; and a private self-seeking
Spirit, is one of those evils that renders the last Times perilous, 2 Timothy 3:1.

XIII. There are sins against the Gospel, whereby the Lord has been provoked.
Christ is not prized and embraced in all his Offices and Ordinances as ought to
be. Manna has been loathed, the pleasant Land despised, Psalm. 106.24, Though
the Gospel and Covenant of grace call upon men to repent, yet there are
multitudes that refuse to Repent, when the Lord does vouch safe them time and
means. No sins provoke the Lord more then Impenitency and unbelief Ier. 8.6.
Zech. 7.11, 12, 13. Heb. 3.17, 18. Rev. 2.21, 22. There is great unfruitfulness
under the means of grace, and that brings the most desolating Judgments. Isai.
5.4, 5. Math. 3.10. and 21.43.

Finally; there are several considerations, which seem to evidence, that the
Evils mentioned are the matters of the Lords Controversy.

1. In that (though not as to all) as to most of them they are sins which many
are guilty of,

2. Sins which have been acknowledged before the Lord on days of Humiliation
appointed by Authority, and yet not Reformed.

3. Many of them not punished (and some of them not punishable) by men,
therefore the Lord himself does punish for them.

QUEST. II.
WHat is to be done that so these Evils may be Reformed.

Answ. I. It would tend much to promote the Interest of Reformation, if all
that are in place above others, do as to themselves and Familyes, become every
way exemplary. Moses being to Reform others began with what concerned himself
and his. People are apt to follow the example of those that are above them. 2 Chronicles. 12.1. Gal. 2.14 If then, there be a divided heart, or any other of the
Sins of the times, found in any degree among those (or any of them) that are
Leaders, either as to Civil or Ecclesiastical Order, Reformation there would
have a great and happy influence upon many.

II. Inasmuch as the present standing Generation (both as to Leaders and
People) is for the greater part another Generation, then what was in New
England forty years ago, for us to declare our adherence unto the Faith and
order of the Gospel, according to what is from the Scripture expressed in the
Platform of Discipline, may be likewise a good means both to recover those that
have erred from the Truth, and to prevent Apostasy for the future.

III. It is requisite that persons be not admitted unto Communion in the Lords
Supper without making a personal and public profession of their Faith and
Repentance, either orally, or in some other way, so as shall be to the just
satisfaction of the Church; and that therefore both Elders and Churches be
duly watchful and circumspect in this matter. 1 Cor. 11.28, 29. Act. 2 41,
42. Ezekiel. 44.7, 8, 9.

IIII. In order to Reformation, it is necessary that the Discipline of Christ
in the power of it should be upheld in the Churches. It is evident from Christ's
Epistles to the Churches in the lesser Asia, that the evils and degeneracy then
prevailing amongst Christians, proceeded chiefly from the neglect of
Discipline. It is a known and true observation, that remissness in the exercise
of Discipline, was attended with corruption of manners, and that did provoke
the Lord to give men up to strong delusions in matters of Faith. Discipline is
Christ's Ordinance, both for the prevention of Apostasy in Churches and to
recover them when collapsed. And these New English Churches, are under peculiar
engagements to be faithful unto Christ, and unto his Truth in this matter, by
virtue of the Church Covenant, as also in that the management of Discipline
according to the Scriptures, was the special design of our Fathers in coming
into this wilderness. The degeneracy of the Rising Generation (so much
complained of) is in a great measure to be attributed unto neglects of this
nature. If all Church duty in these respects, were faithfully and dilligently
attended, not only toward Parents, but also toward the Children of the
Church, according to the Rules of Christ, we may hope that the sunk and dying
interest of Religion, will be revived, and a world of sin prevented for the
future; and that Disputes respecting the Subject of Baptism, would be
comfortably issued.

V. It is requisite that utmost endeavors should be used, in order to a full
supply of Officers in the Churches, according to Christ's Institution. The
defect of these Churches on this account is very lamentable, there being in
most of the Churches only one Teaching Officer, for the burden of the whole
Congregation to lie upon. The Lord Christ would not have instituted Pastors,
Teachers, Ruling Elders (nor the Apostles have ordained Elders in every Church)
Act. 14.23. Tit. 1.5.) if he had not seen there was need of them for the good
of his People; and therefore for men to think they can do well enough without
them, is both to break the second Commandment, and to reflect upon the wisdom
of Christ, as if he did appoint unnecessary Officers in his Church. Experience
has evinced, that personal instruction and Discipline, has been an happy
means to Reform degenerated Congregations; yea, and owned by the Lord for the
conversion of many Souls: but where there are great Congregations, it is
impossible for one man, besides his labors in public, fully to attend these
other things of great importance; and necessary to be done in order to an
effectual Reformation of Familyes and Congregations.

VI. It is incumbent on the Magistrate, to take care that these Officers have
due encouragement, and maintenance afforded to them It is high injustice and
oppression, yea, a Sin that cries in the Lords ears for judgment, when wages
is witheld from faithful and diligent Laborers. Jam. 5.4. And if it be so as
to those that labor about carnal things, much more as to those that labor day
and night about the spiritual and eternal welfare of Souls, 1 Cor. 9.11, 13,
14. And the Scripture is express that not only Members of Churches, but all
that are taught in the word, are bound to communicate to him that Teaches, and
that in all good things. Gal. 6.6. Luke 10 7. 1 Timothy 5.17, 18. If therefore
People be unwilling to do what justice and reason calls for, the Magistrate is
to see them do their duty in this matter. Wherefore, Magistrates, and that in
Scriptures referring to the days of the New Testament, are said to be the
Churches nursing Fathers. Isa. 49 23. For that it concerns them to take care
that the Churches be fed with the bread and water of Life. The Magistrate is to
be a keeper of both Tables, which as a Magistrate he cannot be, if he do not
promove the interest of Religion, by all those means which are of the Lords
appointment. And we find in Scripture, that when the Lords Ministers have been
forced to neglect the House of God, and go every one into the field (as too
much of that has been amongst us) because the People did not allow them that
maintenance which was necessary, the Magistrate did look upon himself as
concerned to effect a Reformation. Neh. 13.10.

VII. Due care and faithfulness with respect unto the establishment and
execution of wholesome Laws, would very much promote the interest of
Reformation. If there be no Laws established in the Commonwealth, but what
there is Scripture warrant for, and those Laws so worded, as that they may not
become a snare unto any that are bound to animadvert upon the Violators of
them, and that then they be impartially executed; Profaneness, Heresy, Schism,
Disorders in Familyes, Towns, Churches would be happily prevented and Reformed.
In special it is necessary, that those Laws for Reformation of provoking evils,
enacted and emitted by the General Court in the day of our Calamity, should be
duly considered, lest we become guilty of dissembling and dallying with the
Almighty, and thereby Sin and Wrath be augmented upon us: in particular, those
Laws which respect the Regulation of Houses for public entertainment, that the
number of such Houses do not exceed what is necessary, nor any so entrusted,
but persons of known approved piety and Fidelity, and that Inhabitants be
prohibited drinking in such Houses, and those that shall without License from
Authority sell any sort of strong drink, be exemplarily punished. And if
withal, inferior Officers, Constables and Tithing men, be chosen constantly of
the ablest and most prudent in the place, Authorized and Sworn to a faithful
discharge of their respective Trusts and duly encouraged in their just
informations against any that shall transgress the Laws so established, we may
hope that much of that profaneness which does threaten the ruin of the
uprising Generation will be prevented.

VIII. Solemn and explicit Renewal of Covenant is a Scripture Expedient for
Reformation. We seldom read of any solemn Reformation but it was accomplished
in this way, as the Scripture does abundantly declare and testify. And as the
Judgments which befell the Lords people of old are recorded for our Admonition,
1 Cor. 10.11. So the Course which they did (according to God) observe in order
to Reformation and averting those Judgments, is recorded for our imitation;
And this was an Explicit Renovation of Covenant. And that the Lord does call us
to this work, these considerations seem to evince. 1. If Implicit Renewal of
Covenant be an expedient for Reformation, and to divert impending wrath and
Judgment, then much more an Explicit Renewal is so. But the first of these is
Indubitable. In prayer, and more especially on days of solemn Humiliation
before the Lord, there is an Implicit Renewal of Covenant, and yet the very
dictates of natural Conscience put men upon such duties, when they are
apprehensive of a day of wrath, approaching: If we may not Renew our Covenants
with God, for fear lest men should not be true and faithful in doing what they
promise, then we must not observe days of Fasting and Prayer; which none will
say. 2. When the Church was overrun with Idolatry and Superstitions those whom
the Lord raised up as Reformers, put them upon solemn Renewal of Covenant. So
Asa, Jehojadah, Hezekiah, Josiah. By a parity of Reason, when Churches are
overgrown with worldliness (which is spiritual Idolatry) and other corruptions,
the same course may and should be observed in order to Reformation, Nay, 3. We
find in Scripture, that when corruption in manners (though not in Worship) has
prevailed in the Church, Renovation of Covenant has been the expedient,
whereby Reformation has been attempted, and in some measure attained. The Jews
have dreaded the sin of Idolatry ever since the Babylonian Captivity, Joh.
8.41. But in Ezra's and Nehemiah's time, too much sensuality and Sabbath
breaking, Oppression, Strait-handedness respecting the public Worship of God
(the very same sins that are found with us) were common, prevailing iniquityes.
Therefore did those Reformers put them upon Renewing their Covenant, and
solemnly to promise God, that they would endeavor not to offend by those Evils
as formerly, Ezra. 10.3. Neh 5.12, 13. and 10. per totum. and 13.15. 4. The
things which are mentioned in the Scripture as grounds of Renewing Covenant are
applicable unto us. e. g. The averting of divine wrath is expressed as a
sufficient Reason for attendance unto this duty. 2 Chronicles. 20.10. Ezra. 10.14.
Again, being circumstanced with difficultyes and distresses is mentioned as the
ground of Explicit Renovation of Covenant. Neh. 9.38. Hence the Lords Servants,
when so circumstanced, have been wont to make solemn vows (and that is an
express Covenanting) Genesis 28.20, 21. Judge. 11.30. Numb. 21* 1, 2. Now that
Clouds of wrath are hanging over these Churches, every one sees; And that we
are circumstanced with some distressing difficultyes is sufficiently known.
This consideration alone, might be enough to put us upon more solemn
engagements unto the Lord our God. 5. Men are hereby brought under a stronger
obligation, unto better obedience. There is an Awe of God upon the Consciences
of men when so obliged. As it is in respect of Oaths, they that have any
Conscience in them, when under such Bonds, are afraid to violate them. Some
that are but Legalists and Hypocrites, yet solemn Covenants with God, have such
an Awe upon Conscience, as to enforce them unto an outward Reformation, and
that does divert temporal Judgments. And they that are sincere, will thereby
be engaged unto a more close and holy walking before the Lord, and so become
more eminently blessings unto the Societyes, and places whereto they do belong.
6. This is the way to prevent, (and therefore also to recover out of) Apostasy.
In this respect, although there were no visible degeneracy amongst us, yet this
Renovation of Covenant, might be of singular advantage. There was no public
Idolatry (nor other Transgression) allowed of in the days of Joshua. Judge.
2.7. Josh. 23.8. yet did Joshua persuade the children of Israel, to renew their
Covenant; doubtless, that so he might thereby restrain them from future
Idolatry and Apostasy. Josh. 24.25. Lastly, The Churches which have lately and
solemnly attended this Scripture expedient, for Reformation, have experienced
the presence of God with them, signally owning them therein; How much more
might a blessing be expected, should there be a general concurrence in this
matter?

IX. In Renewing Covenant, it is needful that the sins of the Times should be
engaged against, and Reformation thereof (in the name and by the help of
Christ) promised before the Lord, Ezra 10 3. Neh. 5.12, 13. and Chap.10.

X. It seems to be most conducive unto Edification and Reformation, that in
Renewing Covenant, such things as are clear and indisputable be expressed, that
so all the Churches may agree in Covenanting to promote the Interest of
holiness, and close walking with God.

XI. As an expedient for Reformation, it is good that effectual care should be
taken, respecting Schools of Learning. The interest of Religion and good
Literature have been wont to rise and fall together. We read in the Scripture
of Masters and Scholars, and of Schools and Colleges. 1 Chronicles. 25.8. Mal.
2.12. Act. 19.9. and 22 3. And the most eminent Reformers amongst the Lords
People of old, thought it their concern to erect and uphold them. Was not
Samuel (that great Reformer) President of the College at Najoth, 1 Samuel 19.18,
19. and is thought to be one of the first Founders of Colleges. Did not Elijah
and Elisha, restore the Schools erected in the Land of Israel? And Josiah
(another great Reformer) showed respect to the College at Jerusalem. 2 King.
22.14. Ecclesiastical Story informs, that great care was taken by the Apostles,
and their immediate Successors, for the settling of Schools in all places, where
the Gospel had been preached, that so the interest of Religion might be
preserved, and the Truth propagated to succeeding Generations. It is mentioned
as one of the greatest mercyes that ever God* bestowed upon his People Israel,
that he raised up of their Sons for Prophets, Amos 2.11. which has respect to
their education in Schools of Learning. And we have all cause to bless God that
put it into the hearts of our Fathers to take care concerning this matter. For
these Churches had been in a state most deplorable, if the Lord had not blessed
the College, so as from thence to supply most of the Churches, as at this day.
When New England was poor, and we were but few in number Comparatively, there
was a Spirit to encourage Learning and the College was full of Students, whom
God has made blessings, not only in this, but in other Lands; but it is deeply
to be lamented, that now, when we are become many, and more able then at our
beginnings, that Society and other inferior Schools are in such a low and
languishing State. Wherefore as we desire that Reformation and Religion should
flourish, it concerns us to endeavor, that both the College, and all other
Schools of Learning in every place, be duly inspected and encouraged.

XII. Inasmuch as a thorough and heart Reformation is necessary, in order to
obtaining peace with God, Jer. 3.10. and all outward means will be ineffectual
unto that end, except the Lord pour down his Spirit from on High, it does
therefore concern us to cry mightily unto God, both in ordinary and
extraordinary manner, that he would be pleased to rain down Righteousness upon
us, Isai. 32.15. Hos. 10.12. Ezekiel. 39.29. Luke 11.13. Amen!

FINIS.

