A SERMON WHERE IN IS SHOWED That it is the DUTY and should be the CARE of
Believers on CHRIST, to Live in the Constant Exercise of GRACE.

By Mr. NATHANAEL MATHER Pastor of a Church at Dublin in Ireland.

Joh. 8. 29. -- I do always those things that please him. Romans 8. 14. As many
as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God. Ephesians. 4. 30. Grieve
not the holy spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption.
Printed at BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND By R. P. for Joseph Browning Stationer. ANNO
1684.

Believers on Christ ought to live in a Constant Exercise of Grace.
Gal. 5. 25. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit.
IN the former part of this Epistle the Apostle has been confuting that
Corrupt and destructive Doctrine which some false teachers had been sowing
among the Galatians and wherewith they were many of them deeply infected. The
Corrupt doctrine which he confutes is this, that Believers were both obliged
to, and justified by the works of the Law, particularly by observing the
Ceremonial Law. Having at large Confuted this pernicious Error in this Chapter,
he first exhorts them to stand fast in that Evangelical Liberty that Christ had
made them free withal ver. 1. which he presses from the momentousness, of it
Christ else would profit them nothing: they would be obliged to the keeping of
the whole Law, Christ would be of no effect to them, and they would else fall
from Grace. In the next place he directs them what course to take to prevent
the further spreading of this so dangerous a Contagion, namely to cut off the
pertinacious preachers of this damnable doctrine; and he first laid down a
general principal which he elsewhere makes use of on the like Occasion, See 1.
Cor. 5. 6. It Is a proverbial and Metaphorical speech that they were all in
danger of being infected, unless such were Cut off, A Sin or Error in a Church
easily Catches and spreads, because the Members are all members one of
another, as Romans 12. or all of the same Lump, that there is a spiritual union,
nearness, and Conjunction between them by Virtue of the Instruction of Christ;
and thence if they do not purge out such corrupt Leaven, the Defilement is
easily diffused with great Celerity and Efficacy over the whole lump. Next he
insinuates himself by professing his confident persuasion and hope that they
would readily be of the same mind with him and put in Practice this his
direction ver. 10. to give impartial Judgment upon all that troubled them: So
the Apostle calls the proceeding of the Church in order to Censure I. Cor. 5.
12. adding ver. 11. that himself for the contrary Doctrine to this. (whereby
they were troubled, and wherewith they had been infected) suffered persecution;
thereby Intimating that it was not too heavy a Judgment that they who troubled
them with this new gospel, should suffer Excomunication; For either he must
have bin utterly out in all his sufferings of persecutions, yea and in his
persisting in preaching otherwise, though multitudes stumbled at the Gospel
thereby; or else all these corrupt teachers deserved well to be cut off, who
preached a way of Salvation contrary to what he had both suffered for the
Preaching of; yea and (which was more) given great offense by preaching. Having
thus made his way, he tells them ver. 12. what he would have done with those
that unsettled them in their former orderly walking and believing and
professing, even that they should be cut off. But lest any should say, why do
you thus write unto us? what have we to do to cut them off? he adds. ver. 13.
that God had called them to Liberty, that is God had called and brought them
into such an estate by the Gospel, wherein they had a liberty of acting
according to their place, in and for the cutting off of those that troubled
them. Not that private members may cast out their Teachers by any
Office-Authority over them, but that they have an interest of liberty and
privilege to act in obedience to Christ and in obedience to their Officers
that are sound 2. Cor. 10. 6. in a way of passing a free and conscientious
Judgment on such as are unsound so as to reject them. But because Churches are
too apt in the use of this their liberty to fall into abusing of it, he
presently gives a needful warning and caution, viz. that they used not this
their liberty as an occasion to the flesh i. e. Take heed not to act and vent
their own corruptions, by and in the using of this their liberty: But Churches
being so exceeding subject to misuse their liberty, he contents not himself
with giving that Caution, But further adds directions to be observed by them,
that they may not fall to the abuse of this their Liberty.

Direct, 1. Serve one another by love ver. 13. backed with two arguments,

1. From the large and happy Influence of so doing, all the Law is fulfilled
thereby ver. 14. It would lead them on to the doing of all the duties required
in the Law, wherein he secretly girds at those that would have brought them
under the Law again. q. d. If you would needs be under the Law, here is an
excellent way of being under it to Christ viz. serving one another in love.

2. From the Evils and Mischief that attended the contrary practice, ver. 15.

Direct. 2. Is ver. 2. Walk in the Spirit.

If you would not use your liberty as an occasion to the Flesh for the acting
and venting of corruption, then walk in the spirit, i. e. in the exercise of
Grace. This direction the Apostle backs with a four fold argument.

Argum. 1. So doing ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. which he proves
from the Contrariety between the flesh and the Spirit ver. 17.

Arg. 2. So doing it will appear that ye are not under the Law ver. 18. (being
led by the spirit and walking in the spirit are all one in sense) i. e. not
under the Law to be condemned by it. This the Apostle makes out, and withal
explains what he means by the lusts of the Flesh and the fruits of the Spirit,
ver. 19, to 24. Of the lusts of the flesh, he faith that they are manifest,
that they shut out from inheriting the Kingdom of God; and most of those that
he names are such as people are most apt to fall into in the use of their
foresaid Church-liberty ver. 20, 21. the fruits of the spirit that he
instanceth in are mostly such as should shine out in Churches using their
liberty, and against such he says there is no law that shall condemn them,
they are not under the condemning power of the Law. Perhaps also the Apostle
had his eye on the Circumcision, and Mosaical days and Rites mentioned Chapt.
4. which the false Teachers said were of such Necessity, that there was a Law
against those that observed them not, therefore faith the Apostle, if you will
tie Christians up thus, there are things which, it is past all question there is
no law against therefore look to these.

3. A third Argument why they should walk in the Spirit, is because they had
crucified the the Flesh with the lusts and affections thereof ver. 24. and it is
a very uncomly and incongrous thing for Saints to be led by a crucified thing,
and if they be not led by the Spirit, they must and should be led by the flesh.

4. A fourth Argument for their walking in the Spirit is, because they were
alive in or by the Spirit ver. 25.

Direct. 3. A third Direction that the Apostle gives how Saints may eschew the
abusing of their Liberty is that they should not be desirous of vain glory ver.
26. if we be, we shall abuse our liberty as an occasion to the flesh, and use
it in such a way as may be a provoking to one another; this desire of vain
glory will put us upon envying one another.

Direct. 4. The fourth Direction is Chapt. 6. ver. 1. and the design of it is
to teach Christians in the use of their Liberty to make a difference between
the miscariages of men. There are some that are (...) Crimes but lesser (...)
do not unavoidably overthrow the (...) which the Church pro^, nor yet the
comfortable walking of the Church (...) in all the ordinances and worship in
the Gospel and there are some persons who perhaps through weakness they may be
by surprizal entangled and caught in some carnal and ungospel-like Opinion or
practice, yet they are not obstinate or incurable therein. To such, and in such
cases, you must walk otherwise, if you would use your liberty and that power
which Members have mutually one over another aright. These you must not
presently cut off but you that are spiritual must with a spirit of meekness
labor the Restoring of them: thus bearing one another burdens, and thus
fulfilling ye Law of Christ as he is the Lawgiver of his Church, and has
given them Laws and rules how to carry toward all sorts of offenses and
offenders in his Churches. Moral duties are the Commandments or Laws of God;
but Church Rules and ordinances of mere Institution are properly the Laws of
Christ, as he is the Head and King and Lawgiver of his Church.

5. To these the Apostle adds a Fifth Direction. Chapt. 6. 6. because he had
allowed them a liberty in Cutting off those false Brethren and Corrupt Teachers
that were brought in among them Chapt. 5. 12. Left they should think themselves
at liberty to slight and weary out their sound Teachers, the Apostle adds a
direction touching their Maintenance, which is part of the honor and esteem
they ought to have for their Instructors. But because people are apt to look on
it as a matter of Liberty and not of bounden duty, at least as to the measure
of it, and thence to deal fraudulently; the Holy Ghost backs it with a solemn
Caution, telling them that they had to do with God in his matter, and not with
Poor weak contemptible men whom they could wrong at pleasure: Also with a
weighty argument that the Lords dispensing of his Grace and spiritual blessings
by Ministers teaching, usually holds a proportion with peoples dealing with
them in Carnal good things: their souls would thrive less or more, as they
dealt with God in this matter of Communicating to his Ministers. This is the
scope of ver. 7. 8. And lastly upon this occasion of Communicating to their
Teachers he adds a brief exhortation to perseverance in well doing in the
General ver. 9. and to enlarging their beneficence to others also ver. 10. This
is the Analysis and brief veiw of this latter part of this Epistle; which I
confess I have the more insisted on, because it is not so generally observed.

The Text falls under the second Direction how Christians may avoid using their
Liberty as an occasion to the Fesh, laid down ver. 16. and this verse contains
this fourth Argument that the Apostle presses that duty of walking in the
Spirit withal viz. because they are alive by the Spirit or live in the Spirit
as we translate it. Quest. 1. What is here meant by the Spirit?

Answ. Spirit, in this Chapter is opposed to the Flesh: And hence as Flesh is
the principle of Coruption; So spirit is the principle of Grace. That divine
Principle in the hearts of Saints, which is the spring and root of all new
Obedience and holy actings in a Saints walk. And it is called the Spirit, as
for other reasons, so because it is the proper inseparable ^ffects of the Holy
Spirit dwelling in a believer. And he is said to live in and by the Spirit,
because by this principle of Grace in his heart, he is spiritually alive who by
nature was dead i. e. alive to God, as Romans 6. 11. Here is also an opposition
between the life or living of this principle, and the death or crucifying of
the flesh, ver. 24. which is the principle contrary to it q. d. Original sin is
crucified and therefore you are not alive in and unto sin, but you are alive by
the spirit, the Spirit of God dwelling in you has quickened you to new
obedience, or made you alive by creating a principle of Grace in your hearts,
and this principle being not curcified (as sin is) but alive in us, we ought to
walk in it.

Quest. 2. What is meant by walking in the Spirit?

Answ. Walking relates to all a Christians ways and Actions. The Greek phrase
here used is a military word, used of Soldiers being set and marching in rank
and file orderly, every one keeping his place: so that it extends to all the
Acts of a Christians life. And these must be in the spirit, that is in the
exercise of his spiritual gracious principles. That this is the sense of the
phrase, appears from the like manner of speech used by the Apostle concerning a
Believer in his state of Unregeneracy, see Col. 3. 7. His former state was to
be alive in his lusts opposed to his being now dead through Christ as to the
life spoken of before ver. 3. and his former practice was a walking in these
lusts, i. e. a practicing, acting, and fulfilling of them, a walking in the
acting and exercise of them.

The Doctrine then to be insisted on, is That It Is the duty, and should be the
care of a Christian to walk in the constant exercise of Grace, i. e. In the
acting of those gracious principles that he received in his Regeneration.

See ver. 16. This is that Living to the Lord that is required in the 2. Cor.
5. 15. See Gal. 2. 19. And indeed a Christian cannot be said to live any longer
than he acts Grace: For tho he may have life in him, yet it is no act of life
that is of his spiritual life except Grace be acted in it. As it is no Action of
natural life that proceeds not from the union of soul and body together and
their mutual clasping on each other so it is no act of spiritual life that
proceeds not from the souls union with God and clasping about him in Christ
Jesus.

Quest. What Grace must a Christian walk in the exercise of?

Answ. 1. The General Graces of a Christian that are never out of season nor
ever unsuitable; what ever the case and condition of a person be; e. g. Faith,
Fear, Thankfulness, and Love; Heavenly-mindedness, Watchfulness, etc.

Faith, For ( Heb. 11. 6.) fetching spiritual strength from Christ; and looking
up to him for Acceptance in all.

Fear, Prove. 23. 17. that is, An awful regard to the Authority and will of God,
as his rule subjecting himself to it 1. Pet. 4. 2. ^^^^ting a respect of
obedience to God on all he ^^eth Col. 3. 17. doing all things in the name of
the Lord.

Thankfulness and Love and Joy Putting a respect of Thankfulness upon all his
obedience, as well as of obedience upon every action Col. 3. 12. And from Love
and Thankfulness designing in every thing the Glorifying of God, 1 Cor. 10. 31.

Heavenly-mindedness, Col. 3. 1. 2. Seeking and setting our affections on
things above, and an heart working Heavenward, designing going to Heaven in
all he has, and laying hold on Eternal Life.

Watchfulness, See 1. Pet. 5. 8. Luke 21. 34, 36. Ephesians. 5. 14, 15. Heb. 3. 12.

Those particular Graces, that a man's Relation, Employment, or Gods providence
calls for.

Those which a man's Relation calls for. For the Grace which the relation of a
wife calls for 1. Pet. 3. 2. So for servants Ephesians. 6. 5.

Those which a man's present Condition and Employment calls for. If it be
worshipping of God Heb. 12. 28. Psa. 5. 7. If it be restoring a Brother
overtaken with a fault, then exercise and show forth a spirit of meekness Gal.
6. 1.

Those which God's present Providence calls for, both particular and General,
Inward and outward: When God afflicts we must put on humbleness and mourning as
our garment and Constant attire in such a day, 1. Pet. 5. 5, 6. If God favor,
then beautyful garments or garments of praise must be worn, Isa. 52. 1. and 61.
3.

For the Reasons of this Doctrine, I shall go no further then this Discourse
of the Apostle in this Chapter,

Reas. 1. It will prevent your using your Liberty as an occasion to the Flesh,
and fulfilling the Lusts of it. Of this there is great danger; we are very apt
to it, Corruption is even present and active to get the Start of Grace, and be
before hand with it if we take not heed; Yet this is a great Evil, thus to
abuse God's Favor and our mercies. To prevent it, there is no way like this of
a man's walking in the exercise of it Continually.

Thus it is in their allowed delights and Creature enjoyments, and also in
liberty given by the providence of God from subjection to others, from
Temptations, from Afflictions: And in liberty given by the Institution and
order of Christ in Church matters. and also Spiritual Liberty given by the
Grace of God.

You shall not fulfill the Lusts of the Flesh. See ver. 16. Flagging in the
Exercise of Grace and leting it fall, exposes to the prev^^^ing of Temptations
and Corruptions which hence come easily to grow up and get head over us: Hence
they not only stir within and solicit, but Lead us Captive and prevail over
us. If David, Noah, Lot, Peter had kept up the Exercise of Grace, they had not
Fallen as they did. The Apostle makes this out, from the Contrariety between
Grace and Sin, ver. 17. which is such that the exercise of one, keeps down the
other: And lusts will mingle themselves in all we do, if we walk not in the
Exercise Exercise of Grace, then all we do will become sin: and so be put
among our sins for pardon, not our Obedience for Acceptance.

Every thing we do is a fruit of the Spirit or the flesh, and if Grace be not
exercised it is then a fruit of the Flesh, not the Spirit, Joh. 3. 6.

Thus men come to fulfill the lusts of the Flesh, when they are doing duties
that God calls for; Hence in men's callings, many men are but fulfilling the
lust of covetousness and Love of the world.

And in duties of worship, men thus come to be fulfilling a lust of pride and
of Hypocrisy, yea of contempt of God, because not worshipping Him in faith,
from Love and with Fear, they either look for Acceptance in it without regard
to Christ; or else heed not whether they (...) accepted of God or not.

Reas. This will clear it up that you are not under the Law but under Grace.
See ver. 18. It will clear it up to others: for hereby Grace will shine out in
you, and you will show the virtues of Christ who has called you. So Paul of
the Churches of Macedonia 2. Cor. 8. 12. and of the Thessalonians, 1 Epist. 1.
Chapt. 3, and 4. ver. from their works of Faith and Labor of Love Concludes
their Election.

It will clear it up to your selves in your own Consciences 1. Joh. 3. 14, 18,
19. Por thus to be lead in the Spirit is a certain Sign of it, because the Law
gives not the Spirit, Gal. 3. 2.

He whose state is to be under the Old Covenant has not Grace, and therefore
cannot exercise any, therefore if a man exercise Grace it is a certain Argument
that he is in a New Covenant estate. Exercising Grace will Clear up your State,
because Grace by Acting grows more and brighter, and thence more discernable:
And because in this way the Spirit of God, the spirit of consolation, will
reveal your State to you, enable you todiscern it clearly and judge of it
certainly to your Comfort. Thus God dealt with Abraham, Genesis 22. 12, 15. Now I
know thou fear me --. And the Lord again renews his Covenant with him, and
Confirms it with his Oath, for tho he made it before and gave him also a Seal
of it, Circumcision; Yet I find not that the Lord Ratified it by his Oath till
now. And observe it, that it is not the outward Act of Obedience that yeildeth
peace and Assurance, or on which Consc^^nce can give a Testimony of a man's good
estate, (for there is no outward Act but a Hypocrite may do it, 1. Cor. 13. 1,
2, 3, 4.) but it is from the Exercise of grace in that Action, that in
Simplicity and in Godly Sincerity a man has done it, as 2. Cor. 1. 12. or that
it was done to the Lord, or before the Lord, as David speaks 2. Sam. 6. 21. And
David said to Michal, It was before the Lord etc. For our joy in every thing we
do, comes in by such a trial of our own acting, as no other but we our selves
can be able to make thereof Gal. 6. 4. But let every man prove his own work,
and then he shall have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another. And
against such as so walk there is no Law that can cast and condemn them. For
such have one in Heaven that has satisfied the Law for all their breaches of
it. Hence exercising Grace is the only way to have the Comfort of Grace.

Reas. 3. The flesh is Crucified with the affections and Lusts thereof ver. 24.

Not only the principle of sin but all the inward Stirrings of it; whether
blown up by Satan or rising up from the secret lustings of sin it self (so I
think signify the two words which the Apostle here uses) have received their
death's wound; and thence are (tho not quite dead, yet) in a languishing dying
Condition, and sure to dye as one nailed to a Cross is, tho he be not yet
dead. Yea this is by virtue of Christ's death and your Communion with him
therein, for that the Apostle aims at, and has his eye on in this expression
that the Flesh is Crucified. The flesh being crucified it has less power to
stop and hinder the inward actings of Grace, and its prevayling to Carry you on
in the ways thereof. It was at first crucified for this end, and is kept
Crucified upon the Cross of Christ under the hand of his Spirit and killing
power of his death, for this end that you might walk in the Spirit being set at
Liberty from the prevailing dominion and strength of it.

Besides, If you be Christ's you have Crucified the flesh you yourselves have
been active in it, applying the death of Christ to that end and fetching virtue
from if for the killing of sin in your hearts. And therefore not walking in the
Spirit, is a retracting what you have done in this kind, and an undoing of it
lnasmuch as it is a yiedling and giving way to the flesh to live again and Act
you again.

Reas. 4. You are alive by the Spirit.

You have grace and that not from yourselves but from the Spirit. You have
grace: This is given for Exercise: that is should be drawn forth, and fill your
lives and all your actions Ephesians. 2. 10. Grace unless exercised is so far lost:
Its use lies in its being used, as it is of all other things. It Is below your
privilege and blessed estate not to walk in the Spirit; If others does not
that are not alive in the Spirit it is but like themselves, but for you it is
unsuitable and most incongrous. This Grace is from and by the Spirit, both
first and still maintained. Thankfulness to him obliges to walk in the Spirit,
which is indeed to His praise and Glory.

USE. 1. For Information.

A Great part of a Christians work lies out of other men's sight. Indeed the
greatest part of it is bosom work: both his watch and his work ly chiefly
there where No body else sees. His Exercises are most about such things,
Especially the more grown Christian that he is. And he whose great business
lies without doors is either unsound or very low in growth, Even but a Babe in
Christ and in Grace.

Informat. 1. A true Christians life is not idle life but a busy one.
Especially if a Christian indeed; and in any measure serious and sensible: Yea
when Grace is gotten and cleared too, that a man sees he has it, and so his
Assumnce is settled, yet there he has his hands full of work, even to see that
he fill up his time with Duties, and his Duties with Grace; for both these are
included is walking in the Spirit.

Inform. 3. A Christian should do nothing wherein Grace cannot be exertised.
For it is his indispensible duty to act Grace in every step of his Walk,
therefore he may take no step wherein Grace cannot be exercised. This Rule if
attended would afford Direction in many passages that fall before us in this
World; Especially such Things as appear not flatly Evil in the Matter and
Nature of them.

If there be any thing wherein you cannot exercise grace, do it not. True, the
Rule holds not always affirmatively, that whatever a Christain may Possibly
exercise grace in, is therefore Lawful for him. A Godly Israclite might
possibly Exercise Grace in being present at Sacrifices offered in the High
places. Solomon if seems did so and therefore the Lord overlooked the failing
and accepted his sincerity. And so (I doubt not) many souls have in keeping
Holy Days of men's devising, and not of God's appointing or approving: And also
in Worshipping God after such modes and Forms as the Lord allows not:
Especially in former days when less Light in these matters was broken out. But
is follows not that these things are therefore Lawful because some have
exercised Grace therein: Yea the rule holds Negatively, That wherein grace
cannot be exercised in not lawful. It is in special useful in things
indifferent: As for Example; In Attire and dressing If you cannot exercise
grace in this and thus tricking up yourselves, or spending so much time in it,
it is then unlawful for you. So in going into Company, and sitting with them,
Especially in Public houses, Taverns, Coffee houses etc. Can you exercise
grace in so doing? Can put a respect of obedience to God, yea of love and
Thankfulness on it? Can thou maintain an Awe of him upon thy heart? or does
it not rather ever bring a secret defilement on thy spirit? If so, it is then
unlawful for thee. And indeed, the Rule is general, and holds Concerning all
Recreations, Divertisements, and universally all Indifferent things, If you
cannot exercise grace in them, though through your own Infirmity, and much more
if it be from the Nature or inseparable Circumstances of the things themselves,
they become unlawful unto thee.

USE. 2. For Examination.

Have you walked in the Spirit? Yea, have you minded it in all the Steps of
your walk? or only minded your keeping your Way, and walking on without
regarding whether in the Spirit or no, what grace you acted in every thing.
Indeed it is not enough to act some grace in a duty, but you should fill up the
duty with grace. e. g. Some duties are wider than others; a day of Humiliation
than an ordinary every day's prayer, and therefore should have more of Godly
Sorrow and holy fear acted in it: Hence rending the heart Jocl. 2. 13. and
calling Terrors round about us is the duty of such a day Sam. 2. 22. to beset
and besiege our own souls therewith. So in Sacraments, Faith should be acted at
an higher rate than is always required in hearing the word, because there is a
most solemn sealing Transaction between God and us: and because God in these
deals with us by the most affecting senses. Hence they are wider Duties, and
hence require more enlarged actings of Faith. Examine whether you have acted
Grace proportionably in all your duties.

1. First-Table duties: Prayer, Hearing, keeping Sabbaths, receiving
Sacraments: If no Grace be exercised in these, they have bin utterly lost,
God's Name taken in vain, and hence they will never yield thee any Comfort.

2. Second-Table duties: what grace is exercised in these? Your Calling, your
duties to Relations, your occasional duties and Converses Col. 4. 6. Always
with grace seasoned with salt. Visits Mat. 25. 40. and 10. 40,41,42. Romans 1.
11. and 16. 16. That Scripture forbids not only lascivious and dissembling
kisses, but requires that in them God's glory be aimed at: For as his holiness
is his preserving his own glory in every thing; So our holiness is our being
and: acting like him therein Joh. 3. 6. Duties of Civility must have something
worthy of God in them See Ruth. 2. 4. how their Salutations savor of God and
Grace: verily this Rule extends even to these. Nay more, to Church
Transactions, your debates and votes there and all your use of the liberty
whereto the Lord has called you, ought to be filled up with exercise of grace.
And indeed it is the want of this, that makes Church Members so often warp from
the rule, and act the unsavory pangs and and distempers of their own spirits.

3. Your refraining and forbearing from Sin:

See Nehem. 5. 15. Else your very forbearing sin is looked upon but as sin,
while it is not from grace. For (as before was partly Intimated) it is of the Flesh
and therefore is Flesh, Joh. 3. 6. As a man may possibly in Holy Duties act,
from Corruption, as the Pharisees did Matthew. 23. 14. So many a man fr^^ Lust
forbears sin, e. g. from Pride, fr^^ Covetousness, from base Fear of men etc.

USE. 3. Humiliation for failings herein.

Christ calls upon Sardis Rev. 3. 2, 3. because he had not found their works
filled up with the Exercise of grace before God: Before men they seemed
beautiful and glorious, but there was a secret emptiness and deadness in them
before the Lord. And for this he threatened them if they repented not to come on
them as a Thief in the Night, in an hour when they knew not i. e. when they
least looked for it, were least provided for, and in worst case to bear it, and
with all Circumstances of Aggravation and Terror: This the Spirit says to the
Church.

There is no sin but we should be humbled for it when minded of it in the Word;
much more such an one as this, which argues grace is very low and ready to die,
as it is there said to Sardis And it is a sin of frequent Incursion* a sin that we
sin often every day, and therefore should be the more humbled for. Though we
are apt to make light of such sins, yet the Spirit of God does not, Chirst does
not make light of it to that Church. Other sins that we seldom and hardly fall
into, we think it our duty to humble our selves for: But this, and such as this
do us as much hurt, and usually more then such as affect us more with Sorrow
and shame. If it seem to want any thing of weight and hainousness; yet the
Frequency of it makes it up, and more then up. We must remember and loathe our
selves for our doings that are not good, but empty of grace, as well as for
those that are Abominations because or the Evil of the matter of them, Ezekiel.
36. 31.

Consider two things to help to affect our hearts with shame and sorrow for not
exercising grace in every step of our walk.

1. Hereby we break with God and loose our Communion with him: Not our state of
Communion but the actual exercise and enjoyment of it. If a man should forty
or a 100 times every day loose the exercise of his Reason tho but for half a
quarter of an hour or less, though he should not loose the Faculty it self, how
sad would you account it! much more is this to be lamented, because hereby we
loose our Communion with God, so far and so long as we do not walk in the
Spirit: And Communion with him is as much more precious then the use of reason;
as Divine and spiritual life is more excellent than the life of Reason. In
whatever we cease to exercise grace, we do therein turn off from God and break
with him, and were it not for Christ and His Mediation we were Lost forever.

2. Whatever we do without Exercising grace in it, savours not to God's taste it
finds no acceptance with him, Cant. 4. 16. unless the spices of our graces flow
out, none of our fruit is pleasant to Christ's Taste, and if not pleasant to his
taste he Presents it not to God for his acceptance: Hence nothing wherein no
grace is Exercised is put on our account for a reward, but only amongst our
sins for pardon or for punishment: he^^^ if no grace be exercised, our
Salvation is not at all furthered thereby. And how sad is it for a man that
has a Race to run, and work of life and death to get done; to Nod, and stand,
and sleep, and fall so often in a day!

USE. 4. of Exhortation,

Walk in the Spirit, exercise grace in every Step you take.

Look to it, not only that you do what is good, but also that in doing of it
you act the inward principle of Grace that you have recieved.

Here Consider.

1. You have acted Corruption in all your ways, Col. 3. 2. Let the time past
suffice us, 1. Pet, 4. and from very shame and indignation at yourselvs for you
acting of Corruption, be provoked to walk in the Spirit for the time to come:
For you are much indebted to Christ, you have had much forgiven and therefore
should love much.

2. You must unavoidably in every thing, act Grace or Corruption.

Therefore if you act not Grace, you will act Corruption. These two are the
Universal principles of all our Actions, and do Flow into every thing we do:
They are seated so near together, and are so Contrary one to the other,
perpetually warring each against other, that if one give back never so little,
the other will be sure immediately to come on, And And indeed these two
contrary principles shall and must lodge in the same soul, yea abide in the
very same faculty during this life but the Conquest of the one over the other
lies in the ones prevayling more then the other to fill up your Actings. These
two, flesh and Spirit, Corruption and Grace, divide between them all our
Actions whatever, there being no medium, any more then there is any Action that
has no Rule or Law over it: As there will be either light or darkness in the
Air; So there will be either Sin or Grace, Flesh or Spirit filling every Action
that is humane, that falls under the Command of the Will.

3. By the Exercise of Grace the soul is kept in an Holy Healthful and
Cheerful frame.

Lusts war against the soul, 1. Pet. 2. 11. and thence the prevayling of them
tends to the death of the soul. Grace wars for the soul, and the acting
thereof is the souls strength and health and life. Act grace in one passage,
and you will come off from it with the heart in frame and fitted by it for
another. Grace acted in our Callings, sits the heart for duties of worship, and
in duties of worship fits the heart for the duties of our Calling: Yea, by this
means the heart will be kept fit for every Change and cannot be found
unprepared. Lamps burning, and Loins girt is nothing else but grace in actual
exercise: This also puts and keeps the soul in a cheerful and comfortable
frame. There is comfort and sweetness in the exercise of any grace, Phil. 2. 1.
Comfort in love. For in the exercise of grace the soul draws near to God, and
has Fellowship with him who is the Fountain of bliss and Comfort. And hence
it is that your duties and ways are so empty of Comfort, yea indeed nothing but
secret bitterness in reflecting on them, because there is no grace exercised in
them. Thus it is with us in our walking and Callings, we come off from them with
a secret sting or trouble on our consciences, it is because grace was not
exercised in them. And thus it is in the most sweet and Comfortable duties,
Receiving the Sacrament, praising God etc. if Grace is not Exercised in them,
if they are not performed in the Spirit they yield no Comfort neither
afterward, neither are they sweet in the doing. On the other hand, Duties that
seem to be bitter in their proper Nature, e. g. Repentance and breaking the
heart for sin, Confessing it before God, and Condemning a man's self for it,
even these duties are most sweet, and yield unspeakable comfort if done in the
Spirit, if grace be exercised in them.

4. Thus exercising Grace will sublimate and spirituallize every action,
turning natural affections into Graces.

Thus a man's loving his Wife or Child, or any other Relation or friend, become
gracious acts, and his eating and drinking acts of obedience, and hence are of
great account in the eyes of God, Thus, not the meanest smallest act, but it
has a glory and excellency in it if grace be exercised: as Luther said, a poor
milk-maid milking, if done in Faith is more glorious then ye Conquests and
Triumphs of Caesar or Alexander: And it will appear so another day, being
recorded and registered in Heaven for a gracious Acceptance and reward in the
day of Christ. Thus a man's eating, drinking, sleeping promotes his Salvation
and adds something to his Crown of Glory another day; as well as his Praying,
or his Hearing, or his Suffering for CHRIST.

Tibi Domine et a te.
THE CONTENTS
I. THat the God of Heaven has an Overruling hand of Providence, in whatever
comes to pass in this world. II. That the works of Divine Providence are great
and Wonderful. III. That God does wonderfully suit his Judgments, according to
what the sins of men have been. IV. That Sins of Omission expose men to the
Judgments of God. V. That the Lord's servants whilst living in this world, have
many Opportunities and advantages to glorify God, which they in Heaven have
not. VI. That it is the Duty and should be the Care of a Christian to walk in
the constant Exercise of Grace. This last Sermon was preached By Mr. Nathaneel
Mather.
Advertisement.
THere is ready for the Press, (and will speedily be published) two Sermons on
Psalm. 84. ver. 10. Preached at the Lecture at Boston: by the Reverend Mr.
Joshuah Moody. Printed for Joseph Brunning at the Corner of Prison-Lane next
the Townhouse in Boston.


