THE STING OF DEATH AND DEATH UNSTVNG DELIVERED IN TWO SERMONS In which is
showed The Misery of the Death of those that dye in their Sins, and out of
Christ, and the Blessedness of theirs that Dye in the Lord.

Preached on the occasion of the Death of the truly noble and virtuous The
Lady Mildmay.

By LEONARD HOAR, M. D. Sometime Preacher of Gods Word in Wanstead.

Psalm. 49. 14. Like sheep they are (...) the grave, death shall feed on them;
and the upright shall have dominion over them in the morning, and their beauty
shall consume in the grave (...) dwelling. Eccles. 8. 13, 14. But (...) well
with the wicked, neither shall he prolong his days (...) as a shadow, because
he fears not before God. Ver. 14. There is (...) which is done upon the
earth, that there be just men unto whom it (...) according to the work of the
wicked: again there be wicked men, to whom it happens according to the work of
the righteous: I said (...) also is vanity. Isa. 3. 10, 11. (...) to the
righteous, that it shall be well with him, for they shall eat the fruit (...)
doings. Ver. 11. We (...) the wicked, it shall be ill with him; for the reward
of his hands shall be given (...). Psalm. 48. 14. For this God is our God for
ever and ever, and he will be our (...) unto death. Rev. 2. 10. Fear none of
those things which thou shall suffer: behold the devil shall cast some of you
into prison, that ye may be tried, and ye shall have tribulation ten days: be
thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a (...) of life. Boston, Printed
by John Foster. 1680.

To Mris. Bridget Usher my ever honored Aunt,
MADAM,
I Know you are no Stranger, in the days of your Pilgrimage, to the late and
present rouling posture of the wheels of Providence; you have seen the times
tempestuous, and perilous; and God, who is the great Sovereign, has seen good
to bring an instance of the evil of this time, home to your Person and Family.

Its good for yourself, with all other Relations that yet survive, to look at
the supreme Disposer; when the rong^ of the wheels are high and dreadful, to
eye him him that sits upon the Throne: When Israel was as a woman forsaken, and
grieved in spirit, its he that called her to it, Isa. 54. There is no Staff of
indignation in the hand of Providence, but it is grounded in the eternal
Decree. And what if God willing that this or that or the other friend, or
relation be made as it were a gazing stook to Angels and Men, through
afflictions and reproaches? Who shall reply? Its lawful for him to do what he
will with his own, Mat. 20. 15. Why do thou strive against him? says Elibu,
Job. 23. 13. He gives no account of his matters. Its the duty of all friends
to sanctify God in his sovereign Dispose, and with Aaron to hold their peace;
not to repine or murmr at the dispensation of God, to submit to his holy and
sovereign will in this matter. The great difficulty, and tu^t which is most
studiously to be avoided, is not to be scandalized, nor to have our minds any
ways damaged, or discouraged in the course of our obedience, nor alienated
from the Church and People, and Servants of God, when such instances occurr,
that men upright with God, and walk close with him, fall under such great
afflictions, not to think strange of the fiery Trial, nor the worse of holy
obedience, and the service of God; this I say, is a great and hard Task: and
when there are such accidents falling out, friends receiving such deadly wounds
in the house of their friends, not to be exasperated, nor violate the Rules of
Charity, but to rest in Love toward them, is another hard Task. This is the
Task and duty incumbent upon you at this time; and herein I know is some
measure, as things have been circumstanced, what need all that were nearly
Related, and dearly Affected to him that is gone, I say, I know what need they
have of Caution. It is a notable observation of Mr. Strong, The will of man
subordinated to the Will of God, p. 289. There are as great-snares of Satan,
and as great Judgments of God laid in Scandals, as in any thing in the world
besides: And he adds, (It is an Observation much to be considered) That if
Satan would instill any evil impression, into the hearts of men, concerning any
Truth of God (I may add^ also as well, against any of the Ways, Churches,
Servants and People of God) he does usually bring it in by some providence of
God that they take offense at: As he instanceth in the Caderens, Mat. 8. 31.
The Devil desires to exasperate their spirits against Christ, and he will do
it by drowning their hoggs. I am very sensible, in the Sufferings and Death of
your deservedly honored Companion, and guide of vouth, there was that, which
except God give your self, and all other friends, much Wisdom, and Grace to
balance their spirits, the Devil may improve it to work a Prejudice of spirit
against the Civil Government, Churches, Schools of Learning, against the holy
ways, and the Servants and Saints of God. Pardon me Madam, if I stay here,
knowing what a Narrow this is, and earnestly request you for the Lords sake,
that you labor to guard your spirit and mind against this evil. I know full
well with what Magnanimity and undauntedness of spirit, you passed through the
gunshot, and the heat of the day; but I beseech you don't now stand at a
distance from the Communion of the Churches and People of God, lest Satan get
advantage; for we are not ignorant of his Devices.

The best Remedy against it is,

1. A sincere, meek and quiet submission to the sovereign and holy Will of God:
this will quiet our spirits so that Satan cannot disturb them. All the motions
of our souls are eccentrick and disordered till they come to this
Subordination: we are open to the storms, and fiery darts of hell, if not
anchored in this Harbor.

2. An entire and ardent Love to God, his Churches, Servants and People. If
Love be interrupted, Satan has great Advantage of us: Qui satis deligunt non
cite offenduntur, Salv. Epist. 1. They that (...) much and enough, will not be
soon offended. A brave Christ-like spirit it is to bury and pass by real and
supposed injuryes, and a great duty and concernment it is to live and dye in
Charity.

If I mistake not, it was your design in coming into this Wilderness, that you
might lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty: And
although you have met with so great a trial as you have, yet the Interest of
God, the Government, the Order of the Churches, the Truths and ways, the
Servants and Saints of God, and Communion with and in these, is as sweet and
precious as ever.

I would not be understood by the world, nor be thought by your self to know
of, and be privy to any evil impression upon your spirit, or to have an evil
surmise concerning you, that the evil one has touched you; but only as a
faithful friend, to signify and give you an item of danger, that you and all of
us may avoid it.

And now here by your great and long importunity, I am to present you with some
Notes and Sermons of your dear, and sometime pleasant Companion, which he
himself made choice of, to read and meditate on, in the time of his Sickness,
in order to his Preparation for Death: which shows the misery of the death of
the wicked, and the great change that is made in the death of Believers by
Christ Jesus.

And the great concernment incumbent on you, and pressing hard on all of us,
and my care for my own soul, and my hearts desire and prayer, especially, for
all my dear Relations is, that they and I may dye the death of the Righteous,
and that our last end may be like his. I need not tell you we are mortal, daily
experience proves it, and the multiplied instances of it, within the line of
our Relation, gives full Proof and evidence of it, that we are mortal; and our
dearest Relations they are dying and passing away; and I think sometimes, God
has written a Sentence of Death over the whole Family: and were ^we fit for
that great and solemn Change, I could easily seal to Solomon's Testimony, that
the day of ones Death is better then the day of ones Birth, Eccles. 7. 1.

Now since it is sure that this is the end of all Living, and that God will
bring us to Death; it is an unalterable Statute and Decree of Heaven, that we
must dye; how ought the thoughts of it to quicken us? How ought we to number,
and so to number our days, that we may apply our hearts to Wisdom? How should
the sense of it mortifye our desire to the World, as it did Barzillaes, 2 Sans
17. 34 etc as the Apostle exhorts, 1 Cor. 7. 29. how should it quicken us to
Repentance, Faith, Holiness and Obedience, to do what we have to do with all
our might, Eccles. 9. 10. and to prepare and wait for our Change, that we may
be read? That Is the Errand of this Sermon.

I shall therefore apply my self in a few words, to move and direct in this
great and weighty work, to move and persuade all with whom I am nearly
concerned, to prepare for (...). Consider,

1. It is a (...) wherein Death has received a large and high Commission:
Death has reigned in the Region and Time wherein we live and dwell; it has
put forth its power, and has received a Charge from God; where and concerning
whom is uncertain, and how far it may respect our Family and Relations, God
only knows: but when it is in general a Dying time, and so many of our
Relations are in the space of thirteen years gone to their long home, it near^
concerns us that survive, who know that God will bring us also unto Death, and
the house appointed for all living, to be prepared and stand ready: in such a
time the man of God wakens up his spirit to an holy trembling at the power of
Gods anger, and servent prayer for instruction in this matter, Psalm. 90, 11,
12. So I beseech all my dear friends and Relations at once to receive that
Counsel of Christ to his Disciples, Luke 12. 40. Be ye therefore ready also.

2. It is a great and bird matter to be prepared for Death. I may say of the
Art of D^ing well, Ars longa, Vita brevis, Its a great work, and the time is
short. A whole Life is time little enough to go through the work of a due and
serious Preparation for Death and Judgment. Job 14. 14. He resolves to wait
all the days of his appointed time. A day, week, month or year was not
sufficient to compass so great a work in; but it will take up, and he
resolvedly devotes, all his days to it. L^ no day pass without a Line. Some
have been in an instant, and at the last watch wrought up to it, by an
extraordinary power of the Spirit and Grace of Jesus Christ; but in the
ordinary course of Gods dispensation it takes time: Therefore attend that
Pattern of Christ, to work while it is day, Joh. 9. 4.

3. Christ comes suddenly. Few Ages or places in the world, if any, have been
so fruitful and abounding with instances of sudden Deaths as this. Some, yea
many; have been summoned before the Tribunal of Christ in an instant: God has
indeed granted to all those that have lately died of our Family and Relations,
some time, and to the most of them a long warning, and time of Preparation for
Death. And it was remarkable in the Author of this Sermon. He long desired that
he might, if the Lord saw good, dye of a consumptive and lingering Distemper;
and therefore when he found the grand signs of that Distemper, said, that God
had given him his desire. And through infinite grace (which God shall be
admired in them for) they were moved and stirred up to a solemn Preparation of
themselves, and improving their space given, that they might be prepared for
Death: But God only knows (in whose hands our breath, and our times and ways
are) what time and warning we shall have: its good therefore to be ready,
prepared for the worst: Receive the advice of Christ therefore, Luke 12. 35,
36. Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning, and ye your selves
like unto men that wait for their Lord, when he will return from the Wedding,
that when he comes and knocks, ye may open to him immediately.

4. Consider what a dismal thing it is to dye unprepared: For Death to come
armed by Sin, with the curse and wrath of God. To dye in our sins, it is to dye
miserably, and to come to a miserable end I may truly say of him that so dies,
An untimely birth i^ better then ^e, as Eccles. 6. 3. Yea, as Christ said of
him that betrayed him, It had been good for that man he had never been born.
Hence Solomon tells us, Prove. 24. 20. there shall be no reward to the evil man.
No Reward? And yet is not Destruction to the wicked, and a strange punishment
to the workers of iniquity? Job. 31 3. Yea upon the wicked He i. e. God shall
rain Snares, Fire and Brimstone, and as horrible Tempest, Psalm. 11. 6. Yet the
wise man says, There shall be no Reward or End to the wicked man, i. e. it
shall be worse with him then if he had never been born. The Lord help us all to
consider it, and mind a timous and serious prevention of this dismal issue.

5. A preparedness for Death will render us meet for all duties, and for all
intermediate Changes. There is much service, and many solemn changes before us:
The voice of the Lord cries aloud to all men of Wisdom, at this time to walk
humbly with their God, to watch and pray. They that are fit to dye, they are
and will be fit for any service that God calls them to. Paul prepared for
Death, and willing to dye, is fit to continue and abide with the Churches, and
to be eminently useful for their furtherance, and joy of Truth, Phil. 1. 25.
There are solemn exercising Changes foretold by the fearful signs of this time;
if we are prepared for Death, we are armed against the worst, and to endure the
greatest affliction that can betide us on this side Death, Acts 21. 13. Paul
being ready to dye, is ready for bonds and imprisonment at Jerusalem. O how
comfortable a thing is it to be ready to do and suffer any thing for the Name
of Christ? But not to insist longer here, If we would be prepared for Death,

1. Be and live in the daily and lively exercise of Repentance. It is Sin that
makes Death bitter and terrible to the sons of men. Be thorough and serious in
Repentance for sin: Let no sin lie unrepented of. This was Paul's practice while
he lived, to exercise himself to have a Conscience void of offense, Acts 24.
16. Not but that he had to charge himself with, and which Conscience might
accuse him of yea, but he cleared all Reckonings between God and himself, by a
lively renewed exercise of Repentance. Pass not a day without a serious, and
close review o^ your actions and ways, and without deep searchings of heart,
and repentings for all your errors, and violations of Gods holy Law, and your
Rebellion against the Gospel. Give diligence to be found of God in peace, and
this will make the time of Death and Judgment, times or refreshing, Act. 3.
19. If you can allow, and live in any known sin, if you can digest sin without
great bitterness and sorrow, of a surety you are not prepared for this Change.

2. Believe to the saving of your Souls. Believe on the Name of the Lord Jesus.
To dye in truth, is to dye comfortably; it eases and loses the pains of
Death. This is the way to dye in the Lord, Rev, 14. 13. and to sleep in Jesus,
1 Cor. 15. 18. i. e. in union with God in Christ. They that dye in Christ, will
die in Peace, and be found of God in peace: for there is no condemnation to
such, Romans 8. 1. And the blood of Christ also cleanses Believers from all sin:
now it is a blessed thing to be free from the guilt of sin, and to have our
consciences purified in the blood of Christ; this will prepare us for an happy
and comfortable Death. Now its the Son only that can make us free in this
matter, and that must be in a way of union with Christ by Faith. O believe in
the Lord Jesus; be often and constant in the renewed exercise of Faith: as it is
said of Abraham, Cen. 15. 6. He believed: Though he believed long before that,
when he answered the call of God, Heb. 11. 8. The Apostle tells us, By Faith
Abraham when he was called, obeyed, and yet after this its said He believed, as
if he had not believed before

3. Be thoroughly mortified to the world: Get your Affections crucified to the
honors, pleasures and profits of this life. Weep as though you wept not,
Rejoice as though you rejoiced not, Buy as though you possessed not, Use this
world as not abusing it, as the Apostle exhorts, 1 Cor. 7. 30, 31. When this or
that alurement of the world bids high, and sollicits strongly for your
affections, then think with old Barzillai, How long have too live? O my
friends, God forbid that you should glory, save in the Cross of Christ. If you
are Christ's, then crucify the flesh, with its whole Train of carnal and
sensual Lusts: these corrupt the judgment, and put a false varnish upon the
things of the world. It is a dreadful sign upon any soul to love the world, it
undeniably evinceth, that the love of the Father is not in him, 1 Job. 2. 15.
And he that is destitute of the love of the Father, is not fit to die. He shall
never be received into the everlasting Kingdom, that is totally destitute of
the Love of God. O then mortify and purge out all inordinate affection to the
world, and the things of this life: whatever you do, get your hearts dead to
the Sins, Gallantryes and Jollityes of this time.

4. Live to the Lord, Serve your Generation; this is the way to dye unto the
Lord, and in death to be the Lords. Romans 14. The comforts of a well cempleated
course of life, and service to God therein, will give us a serene and quiet
frame of spirit in Death. I am ready to be offered up, and the time of my
departure is at band: How comes he to be thus ready? I have finished my course
says he, 1 Timothy 4. 6, 7. To the laboring Saints and Servants of Christ, Death
is but a Dismission to Rest: So (...) was to David, Acts 13. 36. and to Daniel,
Dan. 12. ult. Do much for God while you live, Death will be then sweet and
comfortable to you. Especially consider, and put forth acts of charity and
bounty to Christ's poor ones.

5. Secure a firm Union with Christ, that you may dye in the Lord, and sleep in
Jesus. It has pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell, Col. 1.
18. In him there is a full supply of Grace to enable you, to live and dye, to
do and suffer whatever he calls you to; now if you are Partakers of Christ,
and have mystical union with him, then by the almighty power and working of the
holy Spirit, you shall have a full supply of all Grace, and ability to increase
those Graces in Death which are necessary for your comfort and security in such
an hour.

6. Number your Days, yea so number your days as Psalm. 90. 12. General
Conclusions concerning Death should be enforced upon our hearts, by particular
application. The brevity of Life, the certainly of Death, and the uncertainly
of the time of Death, should be thus enforced upon our hearts. I know thou will
bring me to Death. Job. 30. 23. So Eliphaz tells him, he shall come to his
Grave, Job 5. 26, 27. Hear and knew it for thy good.

Lastly. Pray to God to prepare and (...) you for Death, as David, Psalm. 39. 4.
Lord make me to know my end, and the measure of my days. So Moses applies
himself to God, Psalm. 90. 12. in a sense of his own inability to learn.

Thus in a few words have I desired to discharge something of that great care
which bears strongly upon my heart: if God shall help us to fall on, and
seriously to practice this great lesson, then our Death will be but a loosing
from this troublesome Shore; and however various our Course, and the season of
our departure hence are, yet our meeting and Mansion with Christ, in his
Fathers House shall be sure and everlasting; which that it may be, is, and
shall be the Prayer (...).

Dorchester, from my Study, 7 th. of 5 th. 1680. Madam, your most obliged
Kinsman Josiah Flint.

DEATH DISARMED, BEING A Funeral Sermon
Upon 1 Cor. 15. 55. O Death, where is thy Sting? O Grave, where is thy
Victory?
THE great Article of the Resurrection of the Death, in the Subject of the
Apostles Discourse in this Chapter; a Doctrine by the Jews denied, by the
Gentile derided, as Acts 17. 18. They scoffed at Paul, because he preached
Jesus and the Resurrection from the Dead. This as a great Subject, and
fundamental Article of Religion of which some in the Church of Corinth doubted,
or else denied it) the Apostle labors from several Topics to prove,

1. From the common Testimony or joint Witness of all the Apostles, as having
seen, and bearing Testimony unto the Resurrection of Christ, v. 4. etc. to 9.

2. From that Faith whereby these Corinthians did formerly entertain this
Doctrine, v. 11.

3. From the Perfection of the Gospel, which contains this among others of the
fundamental Doctrines to be known and believed, v. 12.

4. From the Resurrection of Christ, who rose as a public ^^^son, v. 13. etc.
He is the first fruits of them that sleep, v. 20. and 23. whence he is called
the first born of the Dead, Col. 1. 18. Rev. 1. 5. And the first begotten of
the Dead, in respect of order and causality.

5. From the many absurdityes that would follow if there were no resurrection,
as 1. Then the Apostles Preaching and Ministry was in vain, v. 14. 2. Then the
Faith of the believing Corinthians was in vain, ibid. 3. Then the Apostles were
false Witnesses of God, (...). Ver. 16. 4. Then those that believe
Justification by the Resurrection of Christ are deceived, v. 16. 5. Then they
that are dead are lost, i. e. damned, totally and finally lost, even those that
are dead in Christ, v. 18 6. Then the hope of Believers is in vain, v. 19.

6. From the Signification of some Christian Rites, v. 29. in which the Apostle
alludes to the custom used, Acts 9. 37. It was the custom not only of the
Jews, and more prudent moralized Nations, but of the Christians also, to wash
and anoint the Bodies of the dead; which sprung from a natural instinct, and
hope of a future Resurrection, as One faith on the place.

7. From the Sufferings of Believers, v. 30. etc.

Lastly. From the easy solution of all Arguments, Allegations and Objections
to the contrary, v. 35. etc.

Now the Apostle together with this proof, does also illustrate and (...) the
Truth, showing the glorious consequents of the Resurrection, as the resignation
of the Mediatory Kingdom to the Father by the Lord Jesus, and the glorious
state of Believers after the Resurrection. When the whole Army of Saints shall
follow Christ the (...) of their Salvation in their own Order, and the whole
Rout of Sinners and ungodly men shall stand bound before him. Christ shall lead
forth his own Soldiers victoriously and gloriously, dragging the Herd of his
spoiled Enemies opprobriously after him. Dan. 12. 2. And many of them that
sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some
to everlasting contempt. He shall receive his Church into the nearest embraces
of Love, he shall rejoice over her with singing, he shall rest in his Love,
each believing Soul shall be raised, changed, made immortal and glorious. As
the Sun rises from under clogging Mists, and obscuring Clouds, so shall they
be exalted unto heaven, and there shine with an high noon glory, Dan. 12. 3.
And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and they
that turn many to righteousness, as the Sta^ for ever and ever, then, v. 54.
Death is swallowed up in victory.

In this Verse, in allusion to the words of the Prophet Hosea Hos. 13. 14. O
Death, I will be thy plague; O Grave I will be thy destruction: the Apostle
sounds the Triumph, O Death, where is thy Sting? O Grave where is thy Victory?
Such was the Apostles confidence Godward, the he can dare what he before
dreaded, and handle the Viper he could not touch before.

To make way for the Doctrine, it is necessary to enquire,

1. What is meant by Death?

Answ. By Death we are to understand natural or bodily Death: It is the
Resolution of the body into its first principles, by and upon the Separation of
the Soul from it, which is the close of this life, and the beginning of
another. There is a twofold consideration of Death, as learned Par^^us notes on
v. 53.

1. There is a general and mere natural consideration of Death, and so it
happens not only to man, but to all Creatures living. 2. A Theological
consideration of it, as it is inflicted by the just punishing hand of God, and
is a part of the curse, and so it is a miserable privation of Life, and so it
is to be considered here, as a judicial penal evil, and so armed with its sting
it is the greatest evil in the world.

2. What are we to understand by the Sting of Death?

Answ. 1. The groundwork is Metaphorical, the Apostle herein alluding to
venomous Creatures, as snakes, serpents and vipers, who are by nature armed
with a sting for offense and defense; so Death has something in it offensive
until it be removed. A Sting (at least in common account) is the chief subject
of venom, and the instrument whereby venomous creatures pierce others, and
convey their ^oyson into them, so as to fill them with pain and anguish.

2. The Sting of Death is its strength and power to annoy and hurt. The sting
of death, in a similitude and resemblance of a serpent, is its offending power:
the sting of death is sin as in v. 56. Sin arms death, and the Law impowers
sin, and hence death has its sting, its power to offend and hurt sinners.
Death is the fruit and consequent of sin, Romans 5. 12. Sin entered, and Death
followed after; hence Death comes as an Evil not only as a natural but as a
penal and judicial evil, as I hinted before. Now sin gives strength and power
unto Death so that he that dies in his sins has a very strong Death; for sin
puts forth all its power and poison to the utmost in the infliction of death
upon the sinner. Sin causes death to pierce, pain and poison the sinner, it
lets out the wrath which is to come upon the sinner: it opens a door to endless
and succorless torments: it makes the parting with life and the comforts of it
^itter to the sinner: hence in the death of a sinner all his sins are revived,
and the curse seizes on him.

3. What is meant by the Apostles thus speaking in a way of triumphant Glorying?

Answ. 1. It is a figurative manner of speech, in which Death is spoken to as
in the form and guise of a Person, as an Officer coming under Commission.

2. It imports that his power was lost as to the Apostle, and so all Believers;
so the Apostle includes all believers, v. 57. who gives us the victory. Deaths
commission and power is taken away: it comes not as a penal and judicial evil
to the Saints, not as a part of the curse, but a remain of the cross, an evil
of affliction sanctified and eminently conducing to their good: hence the
Apostle gloryes over it, not in a way of proud insulting but in an humble
triumph of faith in God through Christ, which plainly argues death, as to him
and all believers, was spoiled of its power.

Hence we may take up these two Doctrines of just and weighty Observation.

Doct. 1. That there is a sore and grievous Sting in natural Death, or natural
Death is armed by Sin with a sore and grievous Sting.

Doct. 2. That the Sting of Death is certainly and infallibly taken out, so
that it cannot really hurt, prejudice or annoy true (...).

These two Doctrines do contain the true meaning and intent of the Apostle in
these words.

1. That there is a sore and grievous Sting in natural Death. This lies first
in our way. Never shall we see our deliverance fully, till we see our danger,
nor be sensible of the excellent remedy, till we have felt the smart of the
sore: hence many men out of stupidity, or a wilful slighting or refusing to
mind their death, their last end, have made too light a matter of it; but of a
truth, when death comes armed by sin, with an high Commission from the Law, it
will be found to be piercing, painful and poisonous.

I shall therefore in the first place endeavor to show more particularly what
the Sting of Death is, before I come to show how it is taken out.

Now there are several Stings in Death,

1. The first sting in death is, that it came into the world through man's own
fault, Romans 5. 12. By one man sin entered, and death by sin, and death passed
upon all men, etc. It is sin brought in death as a curse and punishment. Death
comes from God, not as instituting the course of Nature (...) first; but as
revenging sin. There is a Saying in Ecclsiasticus that God did not make Death:
true, it is not a Creature, but the destruction of the Creature. God is not the
peccant cause of the falling of this house of clay, but our sin, as Eccles. 10.
18. Its plain it the tenor of the first threatening, Genesis 2. 17. They are
Malefactors that are sentenced, adjudged and condemned to die. Every sinner
dies as a Malefactor, as an evil doer suffering for his own sin. And truly it
pierces deep if a man consider, that he fetched the Viper out of the snow, and
nourished it in his own bosom, which now does sting and devour him. When a man
must say, In me convertite ferrum, mea coedes, mea fraus omnis. When it shall
be told him as Jer. 2. 19. Thine own wickedness shall correct thee. And as Jer.
4. 18. thy way and doings have procured these things unto thee: this is thy
wickedness. We like the foolish woman, Prove. 14. 1. pull down the house over
our heads, with our own hands. Before we feel the burden of sin our own will
to it, is our warrant for it; and because our selves have done it, we can
easily excuse it: but at last it will sting like an Adder. This will double the
burden, this will be enough to silence any sufferer in this last execution of
Justice upon him, i. e. in this life. This consideration will devolve all the
load upon our selves. Who shall relieve us? Who shall grieve for us? Whom shall
we blame? but even leave our complaint upon our selves,

2. Another Sting in Death, is, that (...) from the Wrath of God, Psalm. 78. 50.
He made a way to his anger, and spared not their soul from death. God takes
away the wicked in his wrath, Psalm. 58. 9. Death is his destroying Angel that
chaseth them out of the world. There are two things in a c^^^e or punishment,
1. Something that is evil, some oppressing evil. 2. The wrath of God mixed with
it. Now death is a part of the curse; now this is piercing and painful indeed,
for a man to be taken away in wrath: Sinners in Sion are afraid, and a fearful
thing it is (...) all into the hands of the Living God.

3. Another sting in death is, that it is the punishment due to sin. It comes
armed therefore with a Commission, to take satisfaction for offense and wrong
done to the infinite God. It is the wages of sin, Romans 6. ult. We were bound
upon peril of our lives, and on pain of death, to keep Gods Law, Genesis 2. 17. In
the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely dye: that being broken, death
ensues, and seizes on us as our punishment, So v. 22. of this Chapter, In Adam
all dye, Sin and punishment go together. When the body of sin goes before,
Punishment as its shadow attends it: When Eve brought forth a son, she was
brought a bed of death; according to the Proverb, Ex malo Corve malum Ovum. The
Jews have a Saying, There was never any punishment happened to them, but there
was anonnce of the golden calf in it. So there is no death but there are some
drachmes of sin in it. The lively Image of Sin is ever to be seen in Death.
Would you see the sad influence that moisture has upon iron? Look upon the
rust of it. Would you see the horrid evil of drunkenness? Look upon the effects
of it. Prove. 23. 29. Who has woe? Who has sorrow? Who has contention? Who
has babbling? Who has wounds without cause? Who has redness of eyes? v. 30.
They that tarry long at the wine, they that go to seek mixed wine. So here. Who
has shortness of breath, a pale countenance, a crazy body, Catarrhs,
Epilepsies, Palsyes, etc? They that continue in sin. Why does the living man
complain? Lam. 3. 39. A man for the punishment of his sin? This stings, pains
and pierces the sinner when death comes.

4. Another sting in death is, that it separates the soul body each from other.
These ancient friends, whose lives and happiness here (as Jacobs was in
Benjamins. Genesis 44. 30.) are bound up in one another welfare. Will ye take
Benjamin away? All these things are against me. If mischief befall him, then
shall ye bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave. Can. 42. 36, 38. So
may the body which is so closly wedded and so dearly affe^^ to the (...) ^ay,
if ye take away my soul, you take away my life. As it is reported of Hadrian
the Emperor, when he was dying, he thus trembling at the ghastly countenance of
the King of Terrors, bespake his miserable soul, Animula vagula blandula,
H^spes Comes que corporis,
Quoe nunc abibit in loca
Pallidula, rigida, nudula;
Nec ut soles dabic Jocos.


O thou little pleasant wandering soul, the guess and companion of the body,
into what place will it go? etc. So hard did he find it for these two friends
to part. If it be so hard for a man to part from a near Relation, from a
familiar friend and acquaintance: how did Jonathan and David weep over one
another? Ah then, what is it for a man to part from himself, to be rent a
sunder one part from another? The hardest knot, and the nearest and dearest Tie
that ever was, must then be broken; and the strictest Union must then be
disanul'd, the soul turned out of its Possession, the body left as a Vacuum
Domicilium until the great Resurrection: this must needs pierce and sting, and
fill with anguish in a dying hour.

5. Another sting in death is, that the body is consigned over to a state of
corruption. Dust shall return to the earth as it was, Genesis 3. 19. with Eccles.
12. 7. The body must then be reduced and resolved into its first Principles.
When God takes away their breath, then all creatures dye, and return to their
dust, Psalm. 104. 29. The earthly house of this Tabernacle must be dissolved, 2
Cor. 5. 1. Taken down and in pieces, death feeds on them, Psalm. 49. 14. Here
the body feeds upon death, dead creatures are its food, but now death shall
feed upon men: by their death shall worms and such like vermin live, I have
said to corruption thou art my Father says Job. C. 17. 14 as concluding that
his body must see corruption. Some of Gods precious ones, (as Dr. Tailor said
of himself when condemned to be burned, have deceived many, viz. the worms that
waited for them. passing through a more speedy corruption of their precious
bodies, by the rage of their enemies: but the ordinary way is to rot in the
grave. Now this carries a sting with it, to think that worms shall destroy this
flesh, Job. 19. 26. The bowels and the vital parts shall be the Re^^on of
vermin. When Joseph is carried out of Egypt, there is nothing out a Coffin of
bones: and when you shall seek a Father or other Relation, or be sought for,
there shall be nothing but corruption, an ill savor, or a few dry bones.

6. Another sting in death is, the dolorous accidents, and the heavy attendants
that ^^e along with Death: There are many things fall in in a dying hour, there
are the pains of death, grievous sickness, faintness, outward parts grow numme,
the eyes sink the lips quiver and tremble, the tongue fa^ters, the breath
whezeth and draws hard, the whole face waxes pale the heart beats and throbbs.
Mark how Solomon in Eccles. 12. 2. etc. reads the old man to his grave, The
sun, or light and the moon and st^^^ are darkened, the powers of the mind shall
be broken, Understanding Memory and Imagination darkened and weakened. The
Keepers of the house tremble, that is, the arms and hands through the abatement
of the radical heat and moisture do tremble. The strong men bow themselves: i.
e. the thighs and knees and feet grow feeble. The Grinders cease: that is, the
Jaws and the Teeth lose their strength as to chewing the meat. And those that
look out at the windows are darkened: that is, the eyes grow dim-fighted. The
doors are shut in the streets, when the sound of the grinding is low: the
decoction of food is spoiled, and all the passages of nature are obstructed. He
rises up at the voice of the bird: hi^ rest departs from him, he is easily
waked out of sleep. All the daughters of music are brought low: both voice and
hearing fail, Passions, and Fear especially, is apt to move. His hair becomes
hoary. He that was wont to bear burdens, is now a burden to himself appetite
fails. Thus Man goes to his long home. And the Spina is loosed, the Pia matter
and the Veins are broken, and the circulation of the blood is stopped: these last
especially are the constant and immediate Symptoms and forerunners of death.

To have friends standing by, some lamenting over us, others amazed, and
standing aghast to see rooms made dark. Paul when his heart was sound, tells his
friends it was ready to break with the weeping of his friends whom he had told
that they should see his face no more. Act. 21. 13. So it is here; when death
comes, it tells our friends, that they must see our faces no more: This causes
great and grievous sorrowing such as is heart breaking to those that are dying.
And we must then wind up with the sad reckoning of Hezekiah. Isa. 38. 11, 12. I
shall behold man no (...) with the Inhabitants of the world: Mine age is
departed; he will cut me (...) pining sickness.

7. It puts an end to and d^^^royes our purposes as to this life. All the vast
projects and counsels of state which Princes and great ones of the earth have
upon the wheel when their breath goes forth, those perish. Psalm. 146 4. The
rich man's thoughts of pulling down his barns and building greater, they all
perished in that night when God took away his soul, Luke. 12. 18. etc. Its
reported of Coesar, that in his Notes, after his death were found Projects to
unite India to the Roman Empire; to drein the Caspian Sea, etc. But his breath
went forth, Death prevented and his thoughts perished. Death admits of no after
thoughts, but ^^ the tree falls so it lies, Eccles. 11. 3. Whatever designs of
love and good will men have, as Joseph, the Shepherd and Stone of Israel had
toward the Church and People of God in Egypt, they all perish as to them.
Whatever designs of evil, men have, as Herod had toward Jesus in his infancy
they perish. Mortui non mordent. Whatever hopes men have as to the concerns of
this life, as Hezekiah had of a Son to succeed him, they are cut off Eccles. 9
6. Also their love and their hatred and their envy are now perished. And v. 10
there is no work nor device nor knowledge nor wisdom in the grave. This is a
grievous sting in death, for all a man's hopes, designs, Projects and devices to
be brought to an end and to naught in one day, hour or moment.

8. Another sting in death is, that it strips us of all our present enjoyments,
Mors ultima linea rerum. Its the last stroke of things, the utmost boundary
beyond which none can pass or possess. Naked shall I return, Job 1. ult. says
Job. We shall carry nothing with us, Eccles. 5. 1^. 16. Man must then leave
himself, and no marvel if he leave his worldly goods. He shall lean upon his
house, says Bildad, but it shall not stand, he shall hold it fast, but is shall
not endure. Some see the funeral of their worldly enjoyments while they are yet
alive, Friends, Acquaintance, Riches and wealth leave them while they are yet
alive, so it was with Job: but at Death, every one must forsake them and his
worldly enjoyments must be as it were buried with him, Psalm. 49. 10. The wise
man and the fool and brutish person, when he dies leaves his wealth to others;
so God says to that fool, Luke 12. 20. This night shall thy soul be taken from
thee, and then whose shall all those things be? they shall be another man's. Its
certain says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6. 7. that we carry nothing out of this
world. Where we took up our Lot in this life, there we must leave it. The
things of this life are like a boat to wast us over the water, which can do us
no further service when we come (...) shore, as our clothes that we put on in
the morning and put off at night. Now for them that dote upon their worldly
enjoyments, and have their portion in this life, what a grief is it, and how
does it sting them to consider that they yet must, taken an utter leave of all
their joys, delights, friends and good things at once: as the merchants of
Babylon lamented over the costliness of the city, for in one hour it was made
desolate: so may the rich Miser in a dying hour. They at Ziglag wept for the
sacking of the place, and the captivity of their sons and daughters till they
had no more power to weep, yet they might be recovered, but in Death there is
no Return.

9. Another sting in Death is, that Satan is very busy to hold the souls of men
in a desperate security, or plunging them into the depth of despair, which is
the very image of Hell: hence A^aph in Psalm. 73. speaks of some in his
observation, that had no bands in Death; and Bildad tells of others that are
haled to the King of Terrors. O the Ravings and restless tossing of some poor
wretches when they come to dye, that cry out as if their breath were already
made up of Fire and Brimstone, as Francis Spira and Hadrian the Emperor: And
ah the sottish stupidity and senslesness of others, who mind nothing at all
neither past nor present but their bodily pains, when their souls are sinking
into hell. How few are there that commit their souls to God, and wisely and
patiently dispose themselves for their latter end? There is a woe pronounced
upon the inhabitants of the earth, for the Devil is come down unto you having
great wrath, because he knows that he has but a short time, Rev. 12. 12. So
it may be said of every inhabitant of this earth when he comes to dye, the
weight of sin, the unsupportableness of Gods anger, the terrors of hell, the
nearness of the danger, the difficulty of salvation will all appear nakedly to
the naked soul. When God makes darkness and it is night, then the beasts of the
forest creep forth: every frog will be croaking toward the evening, every
puddle will send up a stinking vapor in a foggy night; all the several shadows
of things will unite, every (...) will concur to make up and complete the
misery of the poor sinner, (...) Rulers of the darkness of this world and
powers of darkness set in to do the last and worst in this life.

10. Another sting in death is, in the manner of its coming.

11. It comes inevitably, none can withstand or evade it, the wise, the rich
(...) strong, the beautiful, the virtuous, the young and the greyheaded etc.
fall and perish by it. Its as a River that carries all before it, a Sithe that
cuts all clean before it, and levels all before it, Job. 3. 14, 15, 18, 19. It
turns Kings and Counselors, Princes into the grave: it breaks prisons: small
and great are seized by it: It is appointed for all once to die, says the
Apostle, Heb. 9, 27. Like sheep they are laid in the Grave, and Death feeds on
them, Psalm. 49. 14. This carries a sting with it, to lie open to the power of
an enemy inevitably.

2. It comes suddenly without delay, this night, says God, thy soul shall be
taken from thee, Luke 20. Man knows not his (...), Eccl. 9. 12.

3. It comes irrecoverably, Job. 14. 12. Man lies down and rises (...) till
the heavens be no more: and v. 14. shall he live again? the interrogation
implies a strong and vehement negation. Job. 7. 9, 10. as the cloud is consumed
and vanishes away, so he that goes down to the grave shall come up no more,
he shall return no more to his house, nor shall his place know him any more.

11. Another sting in Death is, that it puts us into a state unknown, and of
which we have no experience: its called a Land of darkness, as darkness it
self, and of the shadow of death, and without any order, and where the light is
as darkness, Job. 10. 22. Men are afraid to go in the dark: the traveller is
afraid pass when the evening is come, and where a man knows nothing he suspects
the worst. Mat. 17. 6. The Disciples were sore afraid at the voice from the
excellent glory.

Lastly. Unto ungodly men, it is a certain is let and entrance into eternal
Death. Its a dark passage into the bottomless pit: they are led through the
prison of the grave to the place of execution. Death temporal ushers in death
eternal: the death of the body makes way for the death of the soul, they dye
now and they dye ever, Rev. 21. 8. We read of A second Death, after which there
is none to come. This is the sting of all its stings, a state in which a man
cannot be worse, and yet shall never be better, when death and hell shall be
joined in one for ever.

USE 1. Hence learn why men dread and are so afraid of Death, yea there are
many causes why a natural man should fear Death, because, ^f the sting that is
in it. Ah, should I tell you nothing, and you should and no other but your
souls separation from your body, can you part with it without a sigh or a
serious thought? or of your bodies corruption, though it might be wrapped in
lead, and entombed in marble, yet in a few days it shall be an abhorring and
loathing to all living, it shall be a prey to vipers and creeping worms of the
earth: your carcases and your remembrance shall alike rot and perish together.
Should I tell you of your sickness^^ and death-pangs that shall oppress you,
and your helpless friends standing by, should I show you your Coffin, your
Grave or Tomb, your Hearse cloth and your Bier; should I tell you of the
breaking of your purposes, and your intents frustrated, and this coming
inevitably, suddenly and unalterably, methinks these things should present
Death as terrible? Ah but I tell you, it is the wrath of God, the scalding
drops of it, and the fruit of your sin the beginning of your everlasting
destruction: Its no other liberty but what the Felon has when he is taken out
of prison and brought forth to execution: its your extreme agony, and the time
of Satan's rage, and the prevailing of the powers of darkness, the black guard
of Hell surrounding of you, the rending of you in pieces. I acknowledge its an
error in the saints and people of God to be so much affrighted at death, and to
go so mournfully out of this world: surely they have not learned to look off
this world, and to look up to that which is to come; yet I am sure it is a
greater error, and a damning error in the wicked and ungodly when they are not
afraid of Death at all, when they look upon Death as a common and usual event
and have slight thoughts of it all their complaints are out of sympathy with
their friends, or from their bodily pains or their distracted thoughts about
worldly matters, but never consider what a weighty thing it is to dye well, or
what a dreadful thing it is to miscarry in their latter end And O the wretched
stupidity of some that can be then most secure, and are even like the beasts
which perish, Psalm. 49. 12. O then blame not any that have woeful apprehensions
of death, and beware of indulging your selves in a stupid secure frame; for as
Solomon says in another case, Prove. 23. 32. It will sting like an Adder and
bite like a Serpent.

II. Hence learn why the wicked and those that are out of Christ have such
dreadful deaths, they are under the sense and apprehension of the sting of
death. Death has a piercing painful and poisonous sting, and it has power
over them, and does (as armed with the curse of the Law) improve its power to
fill them with pain, sorrow and anguish. They may be secure and stupid; and
their consciences may be seared, but those that are not given up to a reprobate
sense, and so are past feeling, they cannot but be full of bitterness and
anguish under the unloosed pangs of Death.

But so much for this Doctrine, I proceed to the second.

II. Doct. The sting of Death is certainly and infallibly taken out, so that it
cannot really hurt, prejudice or annoy any true Believer. They may truly and
groundedly say as he, 1 Samuel 15. 32. Surely the bitterness of Death is past: it
may pierce and pain them, but it cannot poison them; it may bruise their heel,
but cannot break their head. What is become of all that are fallen asleep in
Christ, are they destroyed? Nay, they are made: Are they undone? Nay, they are
perfected: Is their state altered? Nay, it is bettered and completed: Are they
conquered? Nay, they are crowned: Are they perished? No, they are highly
privileged: Are they in bondage? Nay, they are set at liberty: Are they
killed? Nay, they are revived: Are they swallowed up? Nay, Death their last and
greatest enemy is swallowed up into a complete victory.

But I shall endeavor in the opening of this Doctrine to show you how the
sting of death is taken out.

1. That Sting is taken away that consists in its coming through man's own
default. But you will say, is not death even in the godly a fruit of sin? I
answer, it cannot be denied, but that to the godly it is the consequent of sin,
but it is not in a strict sense the Punishment of their sin, for there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ. Romans 8. 1. but it is rather a
sanctified affliction to them, and the Saints privilege: They made themselves
sinful, and God made them mortal, that so they might not be always miserable.
Though it came in by sin, as Romans 5. 12. yet as things are now stated in
Christ, Death to the Saints is the only choice Remedy against sin, and the way
of their return and entrance into a state of Perfection. Thus of the flesh, of
the Viper is made a choice Antidote against his own poison, Chr^^ having
overcome death for us, Heb. 2. 14. Temporal and bodily death is one of the
streams of the bitter waters that flow from our provocation against God, but
since the wood of the Cross is cast into it, it is become to every godly man
delightsome and savoury, and without any distastfulness in it. It came with the
curse of the thorns, but since Christ wore his crown of thorns, we may suffer
and dye without fear. So long as the curse of the Law has power, sin will be
strong, so long as sin is strong, death will be terrible, and bitter, but Jesus
Christ has satisfied the Law, vanquished death, and taken out its sting, even
in Golgotha, the place of sculls, where were so many Trophies of Deaths
victory, in its own territories, there he overcame it, so that now a Believer
may say, I brake the Law, but in Christ I satisfied it, and may glory saying,
In the Lord have I Righteousness and Strength.

2. The sting of Death is taken out in that it is not now a part or fruit of
the revenging wroth of God, but of his fatherly love; and therefore he does not
so much thrust them out of this world when they dye, as take them to himself:
as it is said concerning him, Genesis 5. 24. God took him. And so Christ tells his
Disciples Job. 14. 3. I will come again and receive you to my self. They are
gathered to their Fathers. They that dye in the Lord do not fall, but yield
themselves into the hand of God, Acts 7. 5. 9. Stephen resigns up his spirit
into the hands of Christ. The wicked are gathered like Tares, and like chaff to
be burned; but the Saints like a shock of ripe corn in its season, like the
precious grain into the Garner to be preserved. Hence as a man would carry away
his best Movables when a place is to be destroyed, so does God take away his
Saints before he bring destroying Calamityes upon a Nation, Isa 57 1. The
righteous perishes and no man lays it to heart, and the merciful men are
taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken (...) from the evil to
come. Old Methuselah goes in the year before the Flood came, Hezekiah and
Josiah are removed by death, that so they might not see the evil coming upon
Judah. Precious in the eyes of the Lord is the Death of his Saints, Psalm. 116.
15. Its no messenger of Satan, nor an instrument of wrath, but the messenger of
Christ to translate them into the Kingdom of heaven: whilst others fall into
Gods angry revenging hand, the Saints dye in the Lord, and rest in the embraces
of his Love. It is said of Moses, Deuteronomy. 34. 5. He dyed at the mouth of Jehovah,
with a Kiss of his mouth, as the Rabbis gloss it, as it were sweetly respiring
his breath back again into the hand whence he received it. So that death to the
Saints is not from Justice, but choicest mercy and love. It is one of those
things given us by God in Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 22. Death is yours.

3. Deaths Sting is taken away in that though it separate Body and Soul, yet
neither (...) one nor the other are separated from Christ: their Communion with
^ne another indeed is broken, but their Union with Christ always impaired or
disanulled: They dye in the Lord, Rev. 14. 13. and sleep in Jesus. (...) Cor.
15. ^8 We dye unto the Lord, whether we live or dye we are the Lords, Romans 14.
8. Our friends indeed are not with us, but they are with Christ which is far
better. Phil. 1. They are taken hence, but God takes them to himself. Body and
soul are taken assunder as the pieces of a Watch out of order, not to be lost,
but to be set together again that they may go better. God is a careful and
faithful keeper of those precious Relics, and will bring them together, the
word of his Truth is for it, Ezekiel. 37. 12. O my people, I will open your
graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves. What men though they part
asunder, since neither of them part nor are disunited from the Lord Jesus. O
happy parting to leave this Cell, this crazy earthly Tabernacle, for a glorious
Mansion, and to embrace a dear Savior: Its but like going to bed at night, the
body rests and the soul keeps in action while the night time of the grave lasts
in this world, the bodies of the Saints sleep in Jesus but their souls are in
bliss. The Souls of just men may bespeak their bodies, as the Lord Jesus did
his Disciples, Joh. 14, 3. It is expedient for you that I go away, and if I
go away, I will come again and receive you to myself. The Body like One (...)
unprofitable servant for the present, Phil. v. 11. therefore departs for a
(...), that it may be received for ever.

4. The Sting of Death is taken out, in that though the body rot and consume
and becomes loathsome, yet it is but dissolved, it is not destroyed. As Christ
told Martha, Thy Brother shall rise again, Joh. 11. 23. so the body shall rise
again: hence the Apostle, though he grants that the body does dye, yet it is no
otherwise then as a fruitful seed dies that it may spring up again v. 36, 37.
of this Chapter. Job. 19. 25, 26, 27. For I know, says Job, that my Redeemer
lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the Earth, and though
after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God, whom I
shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold and not another, though my
reins be consumed within me. God does not intend to lose what he leaves behind
in this world; no, but as he brought Israel out of Egypt, so will he ransom us
from the power of the Grave, and redeem us from Death, Hos. 13 14. he will not
leave an hair, nor a broken bone, nor a dust behind. All that are in the graves
shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, Joh. 5. 28, 29. Christ showed a
Type of it at his own Resurrection Mat. 27, 52. etc. And the Graves were
opened, and many bodies of Saints which slep^^ose: which shall be fully
accomplished in all the Saints in the general ^^surrection. The Grave shall
then be found to be a chamber of Repose, and a bed of Rest; Christ having made
it so to the Saints. And as for the soul of a child of God it shall not see
corruption. Its not so much as dissolved, but released and set at liberty. Sin
here makes its motion toward heaven, and its progress in grace slow. The body
is a weight pressing down, but when Death shall rid us of this, the souls
motion and pass into heaven shall be quick and speedy, like the Thief on the
cross, no sooner crucified and dead, but glorified. This day, says Christ,
thou shall be with me in Paradise, Let who will dream of the souls sleep, they
are asleep that think so says Calvin. No, as soon as the vail of the body is
removed, we with open face behold the Glory of the Lord. The spirit shall
return to God that gave it.

5. The Sting of death is taken away in that all the dolorous accidents and
attendants of death are by Christ qualified and sanctified. What are pains and
agonyes of Body, but the putting down of this earthly Tabernacle in order to
the raising of a spiritual and everlasting Building, the breaking off of our
chains and fetters in our being released hence. While the bodies of the Saints
are filled with pains, their souls are filled with the comforts of God. Our
friends lament, but Angels rejoice: though we must now part from them, yet
there is Gods Host, the Life guard of heaven ready to accompany us thither.
Suppose a Saint going to his grave, and the mourners by trains going in the
streets; could the departed utter a word would it not be that of Christ to the
daughters of Jerusalem, Luke 23. 28 Weep not for me but weep for your selves
and for your Children.

6. The Sting of Death is taken out in that though the purposes of a godly man
in death are destroyed, yet his main purpose, and his chief design stands and
abides: his main purpose and design was to glorify God, and save himself, his
own soul; Now he that has walked with God, that has traced the ways of
holiness, that has studied the mysteryes of the Gospel, that has labored and
not fainted, and that is found so doing, that has committed his soul into the
hands of God, and is able to stand at the appearing of Christ, he does not miss
of nor lose his purpose, I have fought the good fight, I have finished my
course says Paul, and henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness. 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.

What though men gather no more of the wealth of this world? Heaven is
^^heritance enough. What though they gain no more repute here? Their Record is
on high. What if they attain not the end of their labors? Yet their reward is
with the Lord. What though their worldly affairs be discomposed, if their
eternal concerns be fixed? What if their days be cut off, since their work is
done? It would not avail a man any thing to win the world and lose his soul,
its profit enough if a man save his soul though he lose the world. It was a sad
thing for the Mariner to cast over their goods, Acts 27. 18. but when Paul told
them that no life should be lost v. 22. they are comforted: So here, though we
leave our stuff and lose our worldly labors, (...) our lives are safe, the
main Chance is secured.

7. The Sting of Death is taken away, in that the Saints are dead and mortified
to the world, they glory in nothing more then in the cross of Christ, by which
they are crucified unto the world, and the world unto them, Gal. 6. 14. Hence
they enjoy this world as though they enjoyed it not, 1 Cor. 9. Hence while they
live in the world, and upon the necessary comforts of it, they live above it.
Hence its no hard matter for them to dye and go out of the world: The world
will have no great miss of me, and I shall have no great miss of it. Things
dead have no feeling or sense of any parting from each other. Wicked men think
the Saints not worthy to live in the world, Acts 22. 22. and God thinks the
world not worthy of them, Hev. 11. 38. nor do they esteem the world worthy to
be desired, the time past of their lives in this world suffices them, and they
are weary of it. He is no Christian whose whole treasure is laid up in present
enjoyments. The Saints are of another spirit, and live much upon hope, Romans 8.
23, 24, 45. We our selves who have the first fruits of the Spirit, groan within
our selves, waiting for the Adoption, and it follows, We are saved by hope, now
hope that is seen is not hope, but if we hope then do we with patience wait
for it. So 2 Cor. 5. 2. etc. In this we groan earnestly, Their going out of
this world is not their loss but their gain, for to me to live is Christ and to
dye is gain, Phil. 1. 21. It Is not their ruin but their redemption, not their
being uncloathed or stripped naked, but their being clothed upon: not their
going into obscurity and darkness, but their glorious manifestation of being
the sons of God and heirs of glory, 1 (...) 6. 6. Godliness in the winding up
of things is great gain. The going (...) of this life is like the ending of a
fight. 2 Timothy 4 6, 7, 8. It is not a flying of the field as those that are
vanquished, but the saints go out Conquerours, yea more then Conquerours. I
have fought a good fight; the time is now come that they may, fairly leave off,
it is the finishing of their course, and the winning of their crown: having
kept the faith while they lived, they are kept from fear in the hour of death.
Pli. 1. 23. Having a desire to depart; Love and longing to be with Christ made
the world tedious to Paul, that which all men naturally love, and Death
desirable which men naturally dread and abhor. As Soon as good old Simeon had
Christ in his arms. Now let thou thy servant depart! Luke 2. 29. When John
Baptist saw Christ, he resigns up all to him, Let all men follow him, Let me
decrease so Christ increase, my joy is fulfilled in him, Job. 3. 29, 30. So
Paul, when once he thought what it was to be with Christ, to go to God, and to
be with the Lord for ever, he felt nothing that he wanted, but this was the sum
of his desire, to be dissolved, and no joy now to him, but to enjoy Christ: no
glory, but to be where he is to behold his glory. The love of this world
cease when we taste of the next: No matter then if the Manna of this world
cense, when we are got to Canaan. Elias can easily part with his Mantle, and
keep on his journey. So a saint dying can easily part with all his present
enjoyments in the hope of what is to come, for how easily can (...) with that
which I know and firmly believe I shall never need. That City which has no
need of the Sun Rev. 21. 23. I am sure needs not any thing under the moon: and
if a dying Saint may leave the temple of God here I am sure he may leave the
world. A Child of God being thus mortified to the world, one sting of death is
taken away.

8. The sting of death is taken away in that it brings the Saints to higher and
better things: as you would take straws and pebbles out of a child's hand, and
give him necessary bread; or remove poison, and things hurtful from a sick
man, and give him cordials and restoratives, so does the blessed God deal with
his Children: He takes away this world from them, or rather them from it, and
gives them another and a better: He takes away occasions of sin and trouble,
and gives us ^^^vation and rest: He takes away the cross and gives us a crown:
(...) takes away temporal enjoyments and gives us eternal (...) He takes away
Earth and gives us heaven. And are we any loosers (...) well to be angry? Is
there grief and fear? No sure, (...) are in Paul's state to reckon as he did, To
live is Christ (...) No better way for a true Christian to better his state and
advantage himself, then to depart hence, lay down his life. No man, says
Christ, (...) left house or parents, (...) or wife and children for the (...)
of Gods (...) shall receive manifold here, and in the life to (...) Luke 18.
29, 30. The Propher resolves that he (...) rejoice in God, though the Fig tree
does not blo^^me etc. (...) Now if the gleaming of Gods gracious presence be so
solacing when (...) lower causes of joy fall what will the bright shinings of
Gods glorious (...) be? Let Ziba take all said (...) since my Lord the King is
come again in peace, 2 San. 19 30. So much more may the Saints of God say, Let
the world take all since my Lord is safe upon his throne, and I am now going
where I may behold his glory. Death is as the Chariot that is sent from Jesus
to carry his true Isreal's to Canaan, and therefore their Spirits may now revive
and say as holy Jacob; Genesis 45 28. It is enough, Jesus that was dead is alive,
and lives for evermore and I will go and I see him. The good, the grace, the
glory of all heaven shall now be theirs.

Now then may the Saints say, I leave a Cottage to take possession of a
Princely Palace: I leave my friends here, and am going to the Father, the holy
Spirit, to Jesus the Mediator of the New Testrment; and to the Angels in light,
and to the Church of the first born: I leave present enjoyments, and go to
take up an eternal inheritance. Let the loss here be as much as can be supposed
the gain is as much, yea more then can be expressed. Ah who would now regard
his stuff when he sees the Wagons, and the Convoy of Angels, the provision for
the way, and the end of his race and that Jesus is there in honor and power,
who would not resolve to got and see-him?

9. The sting of Death is taken away, in that its given in that hour to the
Saints with Faith and patience to endure temptations, to resist and stand in
the midst of danger. A dying hour is an hour of temptation, yea of multiplied
violent temptations. Christ sound it to be the hour and power of darkness,
Psalm. 22. 12, 13; 16. Now the Prince of the world comes, Joh. 14. 30. Now when
his time is short, our bodies weak, and souls perplexed, many, even all
circumstances and accidents occasions of sorrow, is a special season for the
Tempter to tempt to security, infidelity, carnal confidence, to impatience, and
if possible to despair, and casting away of our hope. Now when Satan resists,
God does assist, if Satan desire to win^ow, Christ will be sure to pray that
our Faith fail not. If there be Chariots and Horsemen against Ellsha, there is
a mountain full of horses and chariots of fire round about Ellsha 2 King. 6.
15. 17. If God let Satan out, its but a little way; if he tempt, its never more
then the Saints are (...) bear Hence you may observe as the temptations of
dying Christians are stronger, so the breathings of their souls, the sense of
God love the relish of spiritual things, the ready and apt application of
Scripture are more vivid and copious with them then, than in all their lives
before: even as the Spirit of God and of glory has been wont to rest upon the
Martyrs when they were called to great and eminent Sufferings; so here, there
are those supplies of the Spirit, and that grace to he^^ in this time of need
that takes away the sting. God suffers Satan sometimes to draw out his strength
like Gog and Magog to the battle and stands himself as it were aloof for a
while that he may give him the more sudden and fatal overthrow: I may therefore
conclude this particular with the words of Christ Luke 12. 32. Fear not little
Flock: and of the Apostles. 1 John 4. 4. Greater is he that is in you then he
that is in the world. 10 Deaths sting is taken away in that how unavoidable
soever it is, or sudden and unalterable, yet its welcome to the Believer, he is
reconciled to it.

1. Though it come inevitably, yet its welcome; he does not so much desire to
avoid it as to meet with it: it is the fruit of the promise, the end of his
desire, the answer of his Prayers, and an ease to all his sufferings, They rest
from their labors, Rev. 14. 13. If in this life only we have hope says the
Apostle, v. 19. He does not therefore desire to avoid death Mors si non bona
est finis tamen illa malorum says Cato. Hence Job hates his life, and would
not live always, Job. 7. 16. The Saints are even glad when they can find the
grave, they don't dye as those that must die, but as those that upon
deliberation and choice desire to dye, Luke 2. 29. Now let thou thy servant
depart in peace. Hence Paul is so far from flying from it, that he pursues it.
Act. 22. 13 As it is said of Cato,

Quasi morien (...) occasion^m se nactum esse gauderet.

2. Though it come suddenly its welcome, for it is not sudden to them (...)
wait for it all their lives, Job. 14 14. All the days of may appointed time
will I wait tell my change comes. They may dye sooner then they thought for but
not sooner then they would, they may dye too soon for others but not for
themselves, their own comfort and profit. Yea even the child in Christ dies an
hundred years old, Isa. 65. 20. When I hear Job cry as Job. 14. 13. O that thou
would hide me in the grave: and and see the good old Patriarch break off
from blessing and saying, as Genesis 49 18. I have waited for thy salvation O
Lord. Those that have the first fruits groaning, as Romans 8. 23. bearing a part
with the whole creation and with the Bride, Rev. 22. 20. I rather think they
dye too leisurely, and slower then they would. Do not tell me of a sudden
death where there has been a settled course in a godly life. Nemo parum diu
vixit qui virtutis perfecta profecto funct us est munere. He comes in like a
shock of corn in its season. Job. 5. 26. Thou shall come to thy grave in full
age, like as a shock of corn comes in in his season: now the season is never
taxed with being too sudden. It was sudden we say of this and the other death,
but he was thoroughly ripe first and where there was sufficiency of life, there
cannot be suddenness of Death. God knows when to cut his harvest, when to call
in his laborers. Yea but he lived but a short time, therefore his death was
sudden. Not so, for some live more in one year then others do in many: and for
the true Christian, he is always ready, Act. 21. 13. I am ready to dye.

3. Though it be unalterable, yet it is welcome: its certain the hours of
yesterday will never return again and he that is once gone off the stage shall
return no more. There is no shooting of the Gulf of Eternity: Lazarus cannot
come as a Messenger to Dives his brethren: He that goes down to the grave
shall come up no more: But as there is no alteration so the Saints desire no
alteration* its the best flower in their crown that their state of happiness is
everlasting. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. So shall we ever be with the Lord. Do you think to
scare the Saints with this? you cannot tell them more joyful Tidings than that
their joys shall be for ever. The Rivers of pleasures at Gods right hand flow
always. The tree of life never fades: The robes of glory never fully, nor
admit of spot or wrinkle or any such thing, they do not wax old. Serving God
instantly day and night will not weary: nor will the light of heaven grow dim
like a candle, nor go down as the sun; the Lord shall be our light and our God
our glory, Isa. 60 19 Set a man in such a condition as it cant be better with
him, and tell him it shall never alter nor be worse with him, it will not much
grieve him. So it is with the Saints in light; the chang is unalterable, you
shall dye no more, nor be sick nor sorrow nor doubt any more, nor sin no more,
nor want any more: as Moses said to the Israelites, so may it be said to the
Saints, The Egyptians whom you have seen to day, you shall see them no more for
ever, a^ Exodus 14. 18. Well may Believers breathe out their souls in triumph and
say, O Death where is thy sting? Let that be our station where there is no
alteration, let the better part be ours which shall never be taken away: For
simple is the best of titles, and that only is heaven: in all other things we
are but Tenants for life, and that at the will of our great Lord.

II. The sting of Death is taken out, in that the Saints know whither and into
what estate they enter after Death. The wicked walk in darkness and know not
whither they go, as he said, Anxius vixi, eulius morior, heu quo vado. They
leap as it were from an high hill into a dark and deep pit, not knowing where
they shall light: But the Saints know in whom they have believed, how far, and
for what; and are begotten again to a lively hope of the inheritance of glory;
they have their eyes upon it all their lives, and have a certain assurance of
it, and have the clearest apprehensions of it at Death, Joh. 14 4. Whither I
go ye know, and the way ye know. 2 Cor. 5. 1. We know we have a Building of
God, an house not made with hands eternal. That which the Saints are ignorant
of is the transcendent exellency of the glory they are going to, 1 Cor. 2. 9.
Eye has not seen: But we know when he shall uppear we shall be like him, 1 John 3 2. Our friends to us are as water spilt upon the ground, but with God
they are as water in the Sea, safe and united in its enclosure with the rest of
the element: so the Saints are gone to their place after death, a place of
rest, and known to be so: its a known and knowing state which they enter into:
its known, for their is a clear description of it in the holy Scriptures, a Map
as it were of the heavenly Canaan. Its a knowing state, for then we shall know
as we are known.

12. Deaths sting is taken away, in that its made a passage into heaven. The
Saints they pass from death to life, when the wicked pass from death to death,
from the first to the second death. Hence they may be terrified at it, and
shrink; but a Child of God when he considers its errand, that it comes to carry
him hence to his Fathers house, he can entertain it with comfort. Death to the
Saints is the middle point between two lives, it is an harbinger and fore
runner of their being received up. The righteous being taken up thus they enter
into peace, Isa. 57. 2 they never reach the end of their race till now they
have shot this gulf; and now immediately they arrive at it. No sooner are the
Saints undressed here, but they are clothed upon in heaven. No sooner do they
leave this life, but they enter upon a better. Lazarus died and was carried
into Abraham's bosom, Luke 16. 22. The thief goes from the cross with Christ to
Paradise. Luke. 23. 43. This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Death is
not an abiding, but a transient state, like a dark entry into a lightsome room.
Death does assault but not conquer them: it shall not have dominion over them
as it has over the damned in hell: No, death and hell as to them shall be cast
into the lake of fire: its dominion is taken away here, yet its life is
prolonged for a season and time; as its said of them Beasts, Dan. 7. 12. So
death is prolonged here in this world after its dominion is broke, whilst it is
of use to the Saints and may serve the interest of mercy: but when this is once
over, it shall be swallowed up. So that is a suitable Epitaph which the holy
Ghost has composed to be writ upon the Tombs where Saints lie, BLESSED ARE THE
DEAD WHICH DYE IN THE LORD. Rev. 14. 13. Thus you see how the sting is taken
out by Christ, and how he does disarm Death.

USE I. Of Instruction, 1. Hence see why the Saints deliberately think of
death, and yet desi^^ to dye the reason is because its sting is gone, Death
therefore is no way hurtful or terrible to the Saints, they can have communion
with death and not be harmed by it. A child may play with an Adder when it has
lost its sting. There is no sin, nor curse, nor sorrow nor pain that can hurt a
child of God, O no its all removed in the blood of Christ; were it not so, they
could not desire and long for it as they do. Paul presses forward, and
reaches forth to those things which are before, and his mark is the
Resurrection Phil. 3. 13. 14. Now in the mention of the Resurrection he
necessarily includes Death, yea a necessity of dying: surely this argues death
has no sting to the Saints; it cease to be so great an enemy to them as it
is to the Herd of ungodly men.

2. Hence learn the great difference that there is between the Death of the
righteous and the wicked. They seem as to what is visible to be equal and alike
in death* they all go to their long home, and to the house appointed for all
the living. Yea, but mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end
of that man is peace, Psalm. 37. 37. even a wicked Balaam when his eyes were
open could say (seeing the great difference between the godly and the wicked,)
O that I might dye the Death of the Righteous, and let my last end be like his.
Numb. 23. 10

3. Hence learn wherein the Saints are more then Conquerours. They are
tryumphers over their spiritual enemies, as the Apostle says in another case,
God made them to triumph in Christ, so he, and the rest of believers, Romans 8.
are more then Conquerours i. e. Tryumphers. Christ has overcome for them, and
by his Spirit enables them to overcome, and to triumph in himself.

4. And lastly. Learn unto whom the praise of all the case and comfort which
the Saints have in their death does belong, viz. to Jesus, It is he makes them
to differ: Death would be as powerful, as piercing, as painful to them as it is
to others but that Christ has plucked out the sting of it as to them. What
Hallelujahs of praise are due to him that has redeemed us to God by his blood,
Rev. 5. 9. How thankful how dutiful should all the Saints be to the blessed
Lord Jesus, as v. 57, 58. Thanks be to God that gives us the victory through
our Lord Jesus, and it follows, Be steadfast and immovable, always abounding in
the (...) of the Lord.

II. Let all hence be exhorted, all and every one to labor to get this sting
removed. Make it your work while you live do not leave and neglect it till you
be alarumed by Death, and it comes in view, when flesh and heart fails, and
Physicians grow doubtful or despair of your escape, and Conscience is startled,
when distress and anguish take hold on you. Do not defer it I say till then,
but make it your business while you live.

1. Labor to taste the bitterness of sin so as to be duly affected with it,
and to be afflicted and mourn for it. Its sin makes death bitter and painful,
but now let sin be therefore thoroughly sorrowed for and repented of, that you
may not dye in your sins, and then death will not nor cannot sting you. O you
poor mortal sinful men that must shortly dye, Labor to repent and turn your
selves: Let your hearts be grieved, and your reins be pricked for your sins,
Repent that your sins may be forgiven before you come to dye, get strength,
sovereignty and dominion of sin taken down, this is the way to peace in a dying
hour. Woe to you says Christ, that laugh now, Luke 6.

2. Live by Faith depending on and cleaving to the Lord Jesus as your Redeemer
and Deliverer. There is none that can save and deliver us but He, Act. 4. 12.
When you have done all you can, it is he alone that can save you and deliver you
from the sting of death; live so by Faith that you may dye in Faith, as they,
Heb. 11. that will take away the sting of Death, the shield of Faith quenches
the fiery darts of the Devil, Ephesians 6. 16. the way to loose the pains of Death is
to set, and cleave close to Christ, and to depend upon him.

3. Live well: Walk with God, live holily, righteously and godly in this
present world, serve your Generation as David; get your work done: it is a
dreadful stinging thing for a man to have his work to do when his day is done,
and death is come. No, Work, while it is day, work out your Salvation with fear
and trembling: be steadfast and immovable, (...) abounding in the work of the
Lord, so it shall be a blessed thing to you to (...) Lord, and rest from your
labors.

How much of this was exemplified in the life, and expressed in the Death of
this honorable and virtuous Lady, who is now gone hence to be with the Lord
for ever, who was chiefly in my thoughts in the choice of this Text. What ardor
of desire? What Faith? What Hope? What Confidence? What gleamings of joy? What
Patience and willingness to depart is now issued in her, is known to some, and
some what to my self, I shall not therefore insist.

But since it was not my lot to attend her in her more solemn obsequies, I thus
come to lay down these little branches of Bays and Cypress on her Tomb. And as
it was her earnest desire that whenever this her great change should come, her
own Family might reap the saving benefit of it; so it is my hearts desire and
Prayer that this Congregation may have some saving benefit by, and a sanctified
use of her death, that the remembrance of her pious Life may teach us how to
live so, that when out life is spun out, we may dye in peace, and receive a
Crown of Life.

FINIS.

