Reasons for the Indictment of the D. of York, presented to the Grand Jury of
Middlesex, Saturday, June 26. 80. By the Persons hereunder Named.
I. BEcause the 25 th. Car. 2 d. when an Act was made to throw Popish Recusants
out of all Offices and Places of Trust. The Duke of York did lay down several
great Offices and Places (as Lord High Admiral of England, Generalissimo of all
his Majesty's Forces both by Land and Sea; Governor of the Cinque Ports; and
diverse others) thereby to avoid the Punishment of that Law against Papists.

II. 30 th. Car. 2 d. When an Act was made to disable Papists from sitting in
either House of Parliament; There was a Proviso inserted in that Act, That it
should not extend to the Duke of York: On purpose to save his Right of sitting
in the Lords House; though he refuses to take those Oaths which the
Protestant Peers ought to do.

III. That his Majesty in his Speech March, 6. the 31. year of his Reign, does
give for a Reason to the Parliament, why he sent his Brother out of England;
because he would leave no man room to say that he had not removed all cause
which might influence him to Popish Counsels.

IV. That there have been diverse Letters read in both Houses of Parliament, and
at the secret Committees of both Houses from several Cardinals and others at
Rome; and also from other Popish Bishops and Agents of the Pope, in other
Foreign parts, which do apparently show the great correspondencys between the
D. of Y. and the Pope. And how the Pope could not choose but weep for joy, at
the reading of some of the Dukes Letters, and what great satisfaction it was to
the Pope to hear the D. was advanced to the Cath. Religion. That the Pope has
granted Breev's to the D., sent him Beads, ample Indulgences, with much more to
this purpose.

V. That the whole House of Commons has declared him to be a Papist in their
Votes, Sunday, April 6 th. 1679. Resolved, nemine contradicente, That the Duke
of York's being a Papist, and the hopes of his coming such to the Crown, has
given the greatest countenance and encouragement to the present Conspiracy and
Designs of the Papists against the King and Protestant Religion. -- What this
Conspiracy and Design is, will appear by a Declaration of both Houses of
Parliament, March 25. 79. Resolved, Nemine contradicente, by the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament Assembled; That they do
declare, That they are fully satisfied, by the proofs they have heard, there
now is, and for diverse years last past has been a horrid and Treasonable Plot
and Conspiracy, contrived and carried on by those of the Popish Religion, for
the Murdering of his Majesty's sacred Person, and for the subverting the
Protestant Religion, and the ancient well established Government of this Realm.

VI.That besides all this Proof, and much more to this purpose, it is most
notorious and evident he has for many years absented himself from Protestant
Churches during Religious Worship.

These are the Reasons why we believe the Duke of York to be a Papist.

Huntingdon, Shaftsbury, Gray of Wark, L. Russel, L. Cavendish, L. (...). Sir
Edw. Hungerford Knight. of the Bath, Sir Hen. Calverly, Tho. Thyn, Esquire Will
Forrester, Esquire John Trenchard, Esquire Tho. Wharton, Sir William Cooper, Barronet,
Sir Gilbert Gerrard, Barronet, Sir Scroop How.
The Jury was sent for (...) by the Court of Kings Bench, whilst they were on
this Indi^^^ent, and Dismis^, (...) nothing was further done upon it, saving
that the Jury received the Present (...) And by the Dismission of the Jury, a
very great number of (...) Discharged. A thing scarcely to be paralleled, and
of very ill consequence not only to many private Persons, but chiefly to the
Public.


