AT a Council held at Boston March 8. 1679./80.
THe Governor and Council, upon mature Consideration of the many loud Calls of
Providence, and being also conscious that it is a great duty incumbent on them
at all times (but more especially when there are so many solemn inducements) to
stir up the People of God to humble themselves before Him, and seek his special
Favor: And now in particular, that a Spirit of Grace may be poured out upon
this People to convince them of, and humble them for all their sinful
Prevarications; and in special, those Sins so publicly borne witness against
by the late Synod, and a spirit of Reformation to turn from their evil ways,
and make their peace with God, that so these things aggravate not our guilt,
nor hasten the wrath of God upon us: That having made our peace with God, He
may graciously smile upon, and crown this Year with his blessing, succeeding
the labors of his poor People, and making his paths to drop fatness;
favorably preventing those awful Frowns, in Blastings, Mildews and Insects,
which have consumed a great part of our Labors and abated the quantity and
goodness of our principal Grain for many years past, and most of all the last
Summer. That the Lord would preside and so dispose the Lot in the following
Election of Magistrates, and give out large portions of his Spirit to his
Servants who may then be chosen, such as may witness his gracious presence to
be yet with us: That God will graciously indulge and prove us by continuing and
upholding our precious and desirable Liberties civil and sacred; and utterly
disappoint and bring to naught all the malicious devices of any who hate us,
that seek and would gladly see the subversion of those things wherein our
greatest felicity does consist. That Heavens Blessing and Protection may be
plentifully afforded to our Sovereign Lord the King, defending his Majestyes
Person and Kingdoms from all mischievous designs and endeavors of Papists, or
any other wickedly bent and engaged: That God would signally appear to uphold
and maintain the Protestant interest in the world, and all true Professors of
has Name and Glory, in despite of all the Plots and Policyes wherein the
Antichristian Party, in combination with Hell are united in deep engagement for
their ruin;

Do therefore appoint and Order, that the fifteenth day of April next, be set
(...) for a Dav of Humiliation and Prayer, to be kept throughout this
Jurisdiction of the (...) hereby inhibiting all servile labor on that day; and
do commend it to all the Church^s and People in the said Jurisdiction to be
accordingly observed.

EDWARD RAWSON Secr.


