AN EXPLANATION OF THE SOLEMN ADVICE, Recommended by the COUNCIL in Connecticut
Colony, to the Inhabitants in that Jurisdiction, Respecting the Reformation of
those EVILS, which have been the Procuring Cause of the late Judgments upon
New England.

By Mr. James Fitch, Pastor of the Church in Norwich.

I Sam.7.3. And Samuel spoke unto all the house of Israel, saying, If ye do
return unto the Lord with all your hearts, then put away the strange gods and
Ashtaroth from among you, and prepare your hearts unto the LORD, and serve him
only, and he will deliver you out of the hand of the Philistines. 2 Chronicles.19.4.
And Jehosaphat, etc. BOSTON IN NEW ENGLAND. Printed by S. Green for I. Us^er of
Boston. 1683.

To the Reader,
Concerning those Brief and Nervous Discourses which are emitted herewith, the
Reverend and Worthy Author, had no thoughts of Publishing them, until such time
as others did Importune him thereunto. As for the first Treatise, it was thus
occasioned.

In the distressing time of the late War with the Indians in N-England, many of
the Rulers (both Civil and Ecclesiastical) in Connecticut Colony, being
sensible that public Judgments seldom come, but as Intimations of Heavens
displeasure; and that then, of all Men the Leaders of the People are concerned
to enquire into the Causes of the Lords Controversy, 2 Samuel 21.1. they did
accordingly meet for that purpose. The Ministers drew up in writing what they
conceived to be the mind of God, respecting the solemn Question before them;
which Result, was approved of by their Magistrates, and Recommended to the
Consideration of the Inhabitants in that Jurisdiction. This faithful Servant of
Christ, did wisely take hold on that opportunity, in his public Ministry to
insist upon both the M^la^y and the Remedy, which there is so great cause to be
enquiring into, and did reduce his Instructions into a Catechetical Method, for
the better edification of the younger sort in his Congregation. Sunday Persons
of Worth and Judgment ^apning to be present at some of those Exercises were
very earnest to have them made more public; to gratify whose desires, the
Worthy Author has been prevailed with to grant the Copy of what was more
inlargedly viva voce, delivered. A Discourse of this nature is very seasonable
and needful; and I hope will be blessed for the good of many.

As for the small tractate, respecting the Christian Sabbath; the Author has
(so far as I am able to discern) with very good judgment and in few words,
asserted and proved the Truth whose confirmation he has undertaken. The most
plausible Argument, which our Jewish Sabbatarians insist upon is, their
pretending the Morality of the fourth Commandment. Nor do we deny but that by
virtue thereof, a seventh part of time, or one day in the H^bdomadel
Revolution, ought to be kept as an holy Rest unto God. But it is evident, that
some expressions in the Decalogue, do in a peculiar manner respect the Jewish
State, This is true of the Preface to the Moral Law; and of the promise annexed
to the fifth Commandment; and some particulars in the tenth Commandment, are
accommodated to the then state of Israel. And why some Expressions in the
^ourth Commandment may not be so too* our seventh day Men have as yet given us
no solid and sufficient reason. Nay, the Learned Jews themselves acknowledge it
to be so. And therefore they are not offen^ed when they see Christians doing
servile works upon the seventh day of the week, for they say the Gentiles are
not obliged to the strict and legal observation of their Sabbath. The Jews in
Amsterdam told Jackson, Sands, and other keepers of the seventh day, that
except they were also Circumcised, their observation of that day was
groundless. There is no place ^n the New Testament which the Jews do so much
object against Christians as Mat. 5.17,18. They perversely cavil and say, that
the Apostles did act contrary to the Doctrine of their Master Christ, by
telling Men that they ought not to observe the Ceremonial Law, R. Maimon (In
misna L.I.C.9.) has a whole Chapter full of Blasphemy against those who teach
that the Law is destroyed in whole or in part. The most Judicious and Learned
of our Writers, acknowledge that the place mentioned has respect both to the
Ceremonial and to the Moral Law; And that as (...) is set in oppposition (...)
as destroying is opposite to fulfilling, Christ did not eve^t the Ceremonial
Law: He did himself conform to the Ceremonies of the Law, and require other men
to do so, as long as the Author of that Law did see meet to continue it; and
every way fulfilled those Types which pointed at the Messiah that was to come.
Our Jewish Sabbatarians who abuse those words of Christ to countenance their
Error; might as well from thence argue that the Ceremonial Law is still in
force. For its certain it was not abolished until every tittle contained
therein was fulfilled. It has been objected, that Christians in the Primitive
times observed the seventh day. The Christian Jews in the Apostles time had a
religious respect, not only for the seventh day Sabbath, but for Circumcision
and other Ceremonies, until such time as the Iudaical World was utterly
destroyed, but the Apostles never allowed Christianized Gentiles so to Iudaize.
The Ebionites kept the seventh day, but they were never accounted true
Christians. The Constitutions which pass under the Name of Clement, L 7.C.24.
commend the observation both of the seventh and of the first day of the week.
And Eusebi^^ speaks of some that observed both days* Such Christians were
certainly leavened with Judaism. At this day, the Ab^^sine Christians observe
the seventh day, they also observe Circumcision; and if Men will Iudaize in one
particular, it is not to to be wondered at, if they be left to Iudaize in more.
Of later times there have not been many of any great Fame or Note in the World,
that have stood up for this Opinion. There was in England formerly Braborn and
Trask; but they afterward recanted. Within these few years, Mr. Bramfield of
Sherborn was strangely drawn away into this Error. But his weightiest
Objections are answered, with great judgment and candor, by the Reverend Mr.
William Ben of Dorchester in Dorset (a Man whose Conversion was occasioned by a
Sermon of his own; after which he continued an eminent Light in the Church of
God for fifty years together; and than whom I never knew Man upon Earth that
did maintain a greater intimacy of Communion with God) Nor has Mr. Bramfield
made any Reply to Mr. Ben's Book, so far as I have seen or heard.

As for the present Jewish Sabbatarians in Connecticut Colony they outdo all
their Predecessors, as to Insolent Behavior, being arrived unto that height of
impudent. Profaneness, that they fear not in the sight of the Sun, to bid
defiance unto the Christian Sabbath, by following the servile works of their
particular Callings on the Lords Day. So that it was high time for the
Magistrate who is Custos utriusque tabulae, to interpose. And truly if it had
not been so, there is reason to fear that the hand of Heaven would have done
the Magistrates work, after a ^ar more terrible mann^r. We cannot with truth
affirm, that visible Judgmen^s from Heaven have befallen Christians for not
religiousl^ observing the seventh Day, but Histories abound with Examples of
Gods awful and tremendous punishments inflicted upon the Prophaners of the
Lords Day; which is a very con^incing Argument, that the observation of the
first day of the week is of Divine Institution.

Concerning the Objector here Animadverted upon; the truth is, his Allegations
are feeble and frivolous, so that some may think it is pity a Man of Mr. Fitch's
Strength and Ability, should be improved in a Service which a far meaner hand
might with ease have undertaken. Yet considering, that sometimes as senseless
an Apostate as Ma^omet was, may possibly leven a World of deluded Souls, if due
care be not taken to prevent it; others have judged it necessary that he should
be answered (...) What is written will tend either to his Conversion (which if
possible the Lord grant) or else to his being left the more inexcusable and
condemned in himself, while he opposes the light of Truth. The Apostle does
both allow and require, that some and in special Judaizers should be rebuked
sharply, that they may be sound in the faith, Tit. 1.13. Had the Antichristian
Sabbatarian here refuted, only modestly scrupled whether the seventh day were
not still of Divine Institution, more gentleness in Expression would have been
used with him; but he is not a person to be Saved in that way. If by any means
he be plucked out of the fire, neither himself, nor those that have aimed at
his Salvation, will be sorry, Jude 23. The Lord give a blessing to Faithful
Endeavors, and vindicate his Truth, Name, and Sabbath, in such a way as shall
be most for his own Glory.

In Order to some Explication of the Solemn Advice, which our Honored
Magistrates did in the Time of our Calamity, send abroad unto the several
Churches and Congregations in this Colony, we have occasion to reflect upon both
THe Provocations of New England, and the Impediments of Reformation; and to
make way for the following Discourse: we may consider what Moses that great
Prophet of the Lord, and chief Ruler in Israel did inculcate upon that People
in Deuteronomy. 9.7. Remember, and forget not how thou provokedst the Lord thy God to
wrath in the Wilderness.

We ought to have and hold a remembrance what our Transgressions have been, by
which the Lord has been provoked to wrath against us.

1. The Remembrance ought to be clear and full: the Penmen of the Holy
Scriptures were moved by the Spirit of God, to Record clearly and fully the
Provocations of which the People of God had been guilty, as is manifest in
Psalm. 78. and Psalm. 106. and through the History of the Church in the Book of
God, and some of the spots of the most beautiful Saints, God would not suffer
these to be forgotten and left out of the Holy Scripture Record, 1 King 15.5.
Psalm. 106.32,32.

2. The Remembrance ought to be affectionate, with a heart suitably affected;
Remembering what our cares and fears grief and tears were in that day, when the
wrath, of the Lord appeared to be a consuming fire, and we as combustible
matter; and had not the Lord quenched the fire of his wrath, with his own
Bowels of Mercies, we had perished, Ezekiel. 16 61. Lam. 3.19,20.

3. The Remembrance ought to be particularly Reforming, considering how our
sins have driven us into a perilous state, and we ready to perish in the Ocean
of miseries, and shall we again provoke the Lord to wrath? will he not be angry
until he has consumed us? Ezra 9.14. if we do not remember our Provocations to
our Humiliation and Reformation, the Lord will remember them against us, to our
own confusion and destruction; although we wash ourselves as with Nitre, and
take much Soap, yet our iniquities are marked before the Lord, Jer. 2.22. Psalm.
50,21,22.

And we may see what Record of Providence respecting a People or particular
persons is most agreeable to holy Scripture Rule. That Record which does
declare the Righteous acts of the Lord and our unrighteous deeds, the
superabounding Grace o^ God although our sins have abounded: That Record which
does set forth the Lords Justice Mercy, Truth, Faithfulness and Almighty arm by
^ncov^ring the feebleness, fickleness, falseness and many other bitter
Provocations, both of Rulers and people* Dan. 9.7,8. This is most like the
Record in Holy Scripture, and the Church History therein contained: but such a
faithful Record seldom comes forth in that age in which the then present
Providence were acted, few will suffer a plain Remembrance of their
Provocations, but the Lord has hitherto provided some faithful Recorder, who
has left that in Record to succeeding Ages, which the present Generation would
not endure to hear of, Psalm. 10,4. Romans 3.5. Psalm. 78.36,37,38.

And that we may have and hold a convincing, hearty and Reforming effectual
Remembrance what our Provocations have been; let us consider according to that
most Solemn Advice of our Rulers.

First, What that sin is which is the root actually and nextly of all the other
sins?

An. Apostasy from the true Religion, considered not only absolutely but
comparatively as it is a declension from the stricter part of Religion, or a
decay of the Beauty of a Religious Profession, and this Apostasy does show it
self in the various degrees of it, and in the bitter fruits and effects of the
same.

1. Apostasy may be taken either Absolutely, or Comparatively. 1. Absolutely,
and so its a total turning from the Faith, 1 Timothy 1.19,20. and thus the
Apostate is become a Blaspheming Infidel; or a falling from Profession to
Profaneness, and thus the Apostate is turned like the Dog to his Vomit, 2 Pet
2.22. or a forsaking all Godliness, and godly ways, and loving the present
World; and thus the Apostate is become a mere Worldling, 2 Timothy 4.10.

2. Or Apostasy taken Comparatively.

1. In comparison of that which these Professors have been and done, and thus
they are not the lovers of God, and doers of good works, which sometimes
formerly they have been, Rev. 2.4 5.

2. Fallen away in comparison of the examples of their godly Predecessors,
whose Children they are after the Flesh, but not after the Spirit, Joh.
8.37.44. a noble Vine, and right Seed in respect of their Parentage, but a
degenerate Plant in respect of their own practice, Jer. 2.21. and have gone
away from the Ordinances of the Lord, from the days of their Fathers, and not
kept them in that p^rity and power, as they were left with them by their
Predecessors, Mal. 3.7.

3. In comparison of what they yet profess in words to be, but compare their
words, and their works, and it is manifest that their works, do deny what in
words they profess, Tit. 1.10. concerning that absolute Apostasy, it is not
seen in many in New England, nor usually seen in any, unless it be in some who
at first are left to Doctrinal Profaneness, by falling into damnable Heresies,
2 Pet. 2.1. and are afterward given up to practical Profaneness, Infidelity
and Atheism: But as to this comparative and gradual Apostasy, how far
New England is declined from being New England, I must leave to the wife
hearted to judge, and those only are best able to judge of this, who are kept
in an awakened brokenhearted, and humbly-believing frame, by frequent
heart-searching and self-emptying trvals.

And this comparative Apostasy does appear.

1. In Declension from the stricter part of Religion: an apostatizing Professor
in his consultations and contrivements, will choose the licencing part of that
instruction given by Christ, to be wise as Serpents, but he refuses that
restrictive part to be harmless as Doves, Mat 10.16. but happy is he who is
harmlesly wise, and yet wisely harmless. An Apostatizing Church is ^^tensely
set to the extension of Church Liberties to the utmost extremity of them, that
is the licencing part, but will be remiss in the exercise of Church Discipline,
(...) to keep the difference clear between the clean and the unclean, that is
the stricter part of Religion, Ezekiel. 22,26 An Apostatizing Professor will catch
at Christian Liberty to please the flesh, Gal 5.13. but will not sit as with a
knife at his Throat, as the wisdom of the Spirit of God does warn in that
matter him who is given to appetite, or any sensual affection; this is the
stricter part of Religion, Prove. 23.2. A withering Professor in the midst of
all his Apostatizing and degenerate Practices wants not wi^, nor will, zeal
nor courage, to do some, duties in which he can pacify Conscience and please
corruption, can honor God and exalt himself, and be as Ephraim, like the
Heifer that loves to tread out the Corn, Hos. 10.11. But as to those Duties in
which there must be a crucifying of the flesh and the affections, Gal. 5.24.
and an annihilating the idol self, and that the casting away self, shall be the
way to save himself, and the hating of life shall be the only way to keep it to
life eternal, Joh. 12.25. whatever a believing Conscience may tell and
Apostatizing Professor of the truth of these things, yet an unbelieving and
backsliding heart will draw back, for he loves pleasures more than to please
God, and the praise of Men more than the praise of God, Joh. 12.42,43. and thus
the declension is from the stricter part of Religion.

2. Or a decay of the beauty of a religious Profession, and this is usually
seen:

1. Either in a palpable neglect of some known duty, in which it may be said of
him, thou lackest one thing, Mark 10.21. and is as the deficiency or want of
some part and member in the body which marreth the integrity and compleatness
of the Man.

2. Or some notorious disordering and displacing of duties, that one service
comes in the time and place of another, and not doing that which is comely, 1
Cor. 7.35 and this is as a member of the Body ^ut of its proper place, and a
want of that beautiful and joyful thing called Order, Col 2,5

3. Or a greatning and heightering the respect unto some lesser duties, but a
neglecting and not having a proportionable regard to the greater duties, Mat.
23.^3 and this is as the excessive greatness of a Member above its natural
proportion.

4. Or a want of that true godly, amiable countenance, with which a Service
should shine, that mixture of a true Gospel, white and r^ddy Complexion, which
is made up of a temperate mixture of diverse Graces at once manifest and may be
compared to the M^rrh with the Spice* the Wine with the Milk, Can. ^ 1 But a
declining Professor is either indiscreetly zeal us, Romans 10.2. or luke warm,
neither hot nor cold, Rev. 3.16. he is either Schismatically censorious, and
says, Stand by, I am (...) than you, Isai. 65.5. or is so promiscuously
temporizing that he is mixed among the People, and as a Cake not turned, Hosea^
7.8.

The Conclusion of this is, that the Lord in judgment does withhold from
Apostatizing Professors, those beautiful visions, and transforming Discoveries
of his Glory, 2 Cor. 3.18. he does withdraw the rising Beams of the Sun of
Righteousness, and the shadows of the Evening are stretched upon them, Jer. 6.4
5. and the temptations of Satan, and the World does look upon them, and make
them Sunburned, and Black* Cant. 1.6. and the Beauty of their visible
Profession, does languish as with p^ning sickness, their love decays and
waxes cold, and iniquity abounds, Mat. 24.12. and if there yet remain some
good things with an Apostatizing People, yet how is the Gold become dim,
Lam,4.1. their Profession has lost much of that golden splendour and precious
and pleasant luster. And thus Apostasy considered as a decay of the beauty of a
religious Profession, and this makes way for the clearing of the Reason, why
Apostasy is the root of other sins; and that is,

1. Because other sins in nature follow this, and they are as branches or
bitter fruits: the sin of omission, is in nature before the sin of commission;
a neglect of what ought to be done, before the practice of that which ought not
to be done; a forsaking the Fountain of living Waters, and then follows, our
hewing Cisterns, broken Cisterns which can hold no Water, Jer.2.13.

2. The other sins are (through the Lords just judgment) a punishment of the
former. Apostasy, is punished with many vices, that where Apostasy comes in,
behold a troop of other sins follow, Psalm. 81.11,12. 1 Timothy 5.24,25. But of
this in that which follows. Thus Apostasy has been considered in the kind
quality of it: Now in the next place we may see how it shows it self in the
degrees of it.

The Question is, What are those degrees and steps in which this Apostasy does
show it self?

Ans. Apostasy does show it self in the neglect of several Duties of Gods
Worship, or of Family Duties, or private Christian Meetings, and at last in the
neglect of the Public Worship of God.

1. Apostasy begins in secret, in the neglect of secret Prayer, that which
is called closet Prayer, or praying alone, Mat. 6.6. or in the neglect of self
examination; that which is called a judging a Man's self, 1 Cor. 11.31. to judge
our state whether it be happy or miserable, to judge our daily way and
particular actions, whether they be good or evil, and to this is requisite some
convenient season daily, and a Conscience and Heart awakened to improve the
timely way of Self examination, Lam. 3.40. Jer. 8.6. And the neglect of these
Duties is, either total, as those who have cast off secret Prayer, and
Self-examination, and do neglect any set, solemn and steady attendance to these
duties, Job 15.9. unless it be in some fit of distress, and then they cry to
God, and say, Arise and save us, Jer.2.27.

2. Or if they do daily attend to these Duties, and yet neglect that which is
of most personal and special concernment to their own Souls; you may be in a
secret place with a Friend, and have much discourse, and that in secret, and
yet not one word of secret things, but that which any one may hear: likewise,
you may be in prayer alone in secret, and yet not one word or that which is of
most secret concernment to your Soul, but that which may be expressed before a
Family or a Congregation; and thus one principal end of Secret Prayer is lost,
which respects the Confession of secret sins, Psalm. 19.12. and the
petitioning for those personal and secret favors which may not so conveniently
be expressed before others, Psalm. 38.9. But the specialty intended in the
handling of this, is to show how far the neglect of these secret Duties does
argue a declension from Religion.

1. Those who neglect secret Duties have lost one main evidence of sincere
worshipping of God, not only because they live in the neglect of a known
command of Christ, Matthew. 6.6. and not only because they do decline from the
usual practice of the godly, who are wont to perform these secret duties daily
morning and evening, and sometimes thrice a day, Psalm. 55.17. Dan. 6.10 but how
is it possible these can have an evidence of sincere worshipping of God, seeing
they attend no worship but what is before men, and therefore must be judged to
act the part of a Hypocrite, so our Savior Christ reasons, Mat. 6.5.

2. Those who neglect these secret Duties, have lost the sense of personal,
inward Soul* difficulties; for whosoever feels in a broken* hearted manner, his
Soul ^inched and pressed with difficulties, he must and will have an outlet by
secret Prayer, Acts 9. 11. Behold be Prays, he embraces Prayer not only as a
duty, but as a gracious liberty; but amongst his Soul difficulties, he ever
finds some which cannot be so particularly and expediently reached but by
secret Prayer, and calls for a praying apart, Zech. 12.14. but those who
neglect these secret duties are past feeling of these difficulties, and as they
feel no such need of secret prayer, so Christ passes by them, as those who
have no work for Christ to do for them in secret, and what will they do in that
time, when Hezekiah like, they must turn their face toward the wall; and then
if secret prayer be not the means to take the last step right, they fall into
the everlasting pit, Isai. ^8.2.

3. These have loft the presence of Christ in secret; and as they have forsaken
him in secret, so he will forsake them openly. There are many are very desirous
to hold the presence of Christ openly, although they neglect his presence in
secret, but this cannot be, they have no promise and grounded hope of his
presence openly, who do neglect the means of his presence in secret, Mat. 6.5.
Apostasy first begins in closers and secret places, and that which is in
secret, evil in the sight of God, 2 King. 17 9. and then behold greater, and
more open abominations than these: And so we proceed to the Second.

2. A neglect of Family Duties; as Prayer in the Family morning and evening,
and are of the number of those Families which do not call upon the Name of God,
Jer. 10.25. or neglect reading the Word of God daily in the Family, or
occasional repeating of Sermons, or of that daily instructing the Family by
Catechizing or other profitable means as (...) commanded, Deuteronomy. 6.7. and this
neglect is,

1. Either total and are under the some sentence of wrath with the Heathen, and
are heathenish Families, Jer. 10.25.

2. Or those who are inconstant in these Duties, if prayer in the evening, yet
none in the morning, or if prayer, yet have strangely forgot that by Word and
Prayer all is sanctified, 1 Timothy 4.5. but the specialty I inter^d in this is
not so much to prove these to be duties, for who knows not this, who knows
and thing of the Word of God, and of the practice of godly Families; but let us
consider how far a neglect of these does argue Apostasy from Religion.

1. These want true sanctified love to their Families; the natural love does
incline them to take care and provide for their Families in things of
concernment to the outward Man, 1 Timothy 5.8. Otherwise they are worse than an
Infidel, and if they had true sanctified love to their families, this would
make them as readily to take care for their Families in their Soul
concernments, and Abraham like as a head of the Family, to instruct, yea
command an attendance to the great things of God, Genesis 18.19. but these want
natural affection truly sanctified.

2. These want love to God, and to their own Souls.

1. They want love to God, for this would dispose them to a through care to
bring up their Family in the nurture and admonition of the Lord* Ephesians. 6.4.

2. They want love to their own Souls, its not possible for one to pity his
own Soul, but presently he will pity and take care of the Soul of others,
especially of those who are nearly related to him: if a Master of a Family be
under a strong impression, and a Bowel melting working of a Spirit of love to
his own Soul, Ephraim like to bemoan himself, Jer. 31.18. he will then need no
other motive to make him pray in his Family, Instruct, Catechize, and use all
possible means for the good of his Family.

3. These want true love to Church and Commonwealth; they cannot but know that
such as Families are, such at last the Church and Common wealth must be. How
can it be that a Master of Family, who lives in neglect of Family Duties,
should prove a true Friend to the purity and power of Religion in Church, or to
a true pious Government in the Common wealth? he that will not serve God in his
own House, will not be a true Servant of God in the house of the Lord, no^ i^
the Common wealth, let us view well Joshua's spe^ch and practice, Josh. 24 15.
and what David says, Psalm. 10^.2.

The third Particular follows, and that i^ a neglect of private Christian
Meetings.

1. As those set and solemn Meetings for Conference about the great things of
God and to pray together, and sometimes adding Fasting and Prayer.

2. Or those occasional Meetings of Christians, taking opportunities as they
have occasions one with another, to converse about their Soul concerns.

And the neglect of these is either 1. Total there are some who have wholly
forsake these Assembling of themselves together: o^ 2. If they hold up some set
Meetings; yet a^ to those intimate Discourses, by laying together their
Observations of the times, and other Soul-concerns, as those Jewels spoken
(...) in Mal. 3.16. from these they are Strange^^ and will give no
heart-encouragement (...) other Christians to come near to them, wit^ intimate
Conference about personal and particular Experiences of the Lords dealing (...)
them; and these know not what it meane^^ to come into that broken hearted way
of a^ knowledging one to another, their temptations snares, and Soul-hazards
and that which is called by the Apostle a confessing of Faults one to another,
and a praying one for another, Jam. 5.16.

But the specialty likewise we intend in this, is to show how far these
neglects do argue declensions.

1. These neglect a principal means of practical communion of Christians, that
wherein much of the life of it does consist; for practical Christian Communion
cannot principally consist in Apellations, and Titles, nor in meeting together
at a Sacrament; but in caring one for another, as members of the same body, 1
Cor. 12.25. bearing one another Burdens, Gal. 6.2. communicating one to
another of spiritual gifts, Romans 1.11,12. but those solemn Christian Meetings
o^ occasional intimate Discourses, whereby Christians are intimately acquainted
with one another Burdens, and Soul-concerns; these lead into the life of
practical communion, and where these Christian Meetings fail, their communion
^^nisheth into Names, Titles, or some very powerless forms of communion.

2. These do give place to many dangerous Temptations and distempers; for while
they live as Strangers from the Souls one of another, or any such intimate
Christian Conferences; the Tempter is at hand upon the least occasion, to come
in with uncharitable suggestions, and to employ any evil Instrument to sow
seeds of discord amongst Christians, 2 Cor. 12.20. and when these come to the
Lords Supper, the Gospel Passover, if they be not past feeling, they will find
it too hard for them to ^at with the unleavened Bread of Sincerity, 1 Cor. 5.8.
with that true Gospel spirit of unity as becomes those who eat of the same
spiritual Bread, 1 Cor. 10.16. yea its usually seen (through the Lords just
judgment) that those who are become Strangers from Christian Meetings, or the
hearty way of the management of them, that they are left to too much
familiarity with other Companions to the reproach of their Profession, and harm
to their own Souls, and at last the wrath of God comes and finds them in
fellowship with Children of Disobedience in some works of darkness, which they
ought to have reproved, Ephesians. 5.11.

The next Consideration follows:

Quest. How Apostasy does show it self in the neglect of public Worship?

The Answer is, In neglect either of those Ordinances which all are commanded
to attend, as public Prayer, and hearing the Word of God Preached, and
particularly of Sanctifying the Sabbath, Or a neglect o^ those Ordinances which
do properly belong to those in Church Relation, and particularly in neglect of
the Lords Supper and Church Discipline.

1. A neglect of those public Ordinances which all are commanded to attend, as
public Prayer, and hearing the Word preached, and this neglect is either,

1. Upon some unnecessary occasions, not works of Mercy, as Mat. 12.13. but
from an unwillingness to break through any considerable difficulty, or to be at
cost about public Worship, not as David, who would not offer that to the Lord
which cost nothing. 2 Samuel 24.24.

2. Or not careful to come seasonably to the public Worship, as before the
first Prayer, or entrance be made into the public Worship; in these they are
careless, not as those in Nehemiah's time, who were seasonably ready, and
waited for the public Worship of God, Neh. 8 1.

3. Or attending upon the Ordinances in a slighty and sleepy manner, not
offering their Bodies as a living Sacrifice, Romans 12.1.

4. Hastening away upon unnecessary occasions before the last Prayer be ended,
or before the Blessing be dispensed, not as those who went not away before the
Name of the Lord was put upon them, in a way of blessing by the Lords
Messenger, Numb. 6 26,27. More particularly this neglect does show it self and
Apostasy therein, in the neglect of Sanctifying the Sabbath; and that is
either,

1. In neglecting to prepare for the Sabbath by a timely breaking off from
worldly. Occasions, but do run on to the very time of the beginning of the
Sabbath, so that in their Worldly concerns, their foot steppeth into the time
of the Sabbath, or so nigh to it that they cannot prepare for holy time, and
the Duties of the same so suddenly, Isai. 58.13.

2. Or in the time of the Sabbath, a neglect to Sanctify the Holy time, having
forgot to practice that which is so plainly declared: Call the Sabbath a
delight, the holy of the Lord and honorable, and shall honor him, no^ doing
thine own ways, not finding thine own pleasure, not speaking thine own words
Isai. 58 13.

3. As soon as the Sabbath is ended, those who do fall into vain and
unprofitable discourses, which at all times are sinful, Ephesians. 5.4. but in a
Sabbath Evening are the Soul-robbing temptations, by which Satan does bereave
them of all the good they have seen or heard of God in the holy Day, or are
running into their worldly Discourses, as if they were glad the Sabbath were
ended, Amos 8.5.

But let us likewise (...) this consider how far these neglects do argue a
declension from Religion.

1. These who do neglect the public Worship, and particularly the Sabbath, do
fall short of that Religiousness which many Hypocrites and mere Formalists do
attain, for the^e in the public Worship of God, will behave themselves as the
Lords People are wont to do, Ezekiel, 33.31.32. Many have the form of Religion and
not the power, 2 Timothy.3.5. Many have the letter of Worship and not the Spirit,
Rom.2.28. but those who have not the form, the letter, and external part of
worship are far off from the power, the spirit and ^nward worshipping of God.

2. These do by their practice say, that the worship of God is a burden, and an
abhorring to them, their loathness to come to the public Worship, their
wearisome Behavior in the time of it, and their hastening from it do testify
to their faces, that the Sabbath, and the Word of the Lord is a burden to them,
and these are a burden to the Lord, and he threatens to forget them, to forsake
them, and to cast them out of his presence, Jer. 23.39,40. and 17.27. these by
their works do say, their Souls have abhorred God; and the Lord he says, he
has abhorred them, and that he will not seed them; but that which dies let it
die, and let the rest eat the flesh one of another, Zech. 11.8,9.

The second follows, and that is the neglect of those Ordinances which do
properly belong to those in Church Relation.

1. A neglect of preparing for, and of coming to take hold of the Covenant,
Isai. 58.4.5 not as those whose faces are Zion ward, and weeping they will go
to seek the Lord, and join themselves in a perpetual Covenant never to be
forgotten, Jer. 50 4,5. but those who turn their backs upon the visible
Covenant, and the administrations of it, do by their practice disown God* and
say, the true God is not their God; for how can God be their God, but by
Covenant; and what is the Church Covenant, but an Administration of the
Covenant of Grace: and that Soul who does by words or works, by opinion or
practice turn away from the Covenant, by neglecting to prepare for it, or take
hold of it, is a str^nger from the Covenant, and lives without God, Ephesians. ^.12.
and if by his Parentage and Birth he is in visible Covenant, and when grown up,
yet does neglect to look after it, or take hold of it, he does by his practice
despise his Birth right; and the time may come when he may seek for a Blessing
with tears, and yet find no place of Repentance, Heb. 12.16,17.

2. Or those who neglect the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and can content
themselves to be Baptized, or to have their Children Baptized, but are
insensible of the need of the Lords Supper, that great Seal of Communion with
Christ and his Church, 1 Cor. 10.16,17. or that hastening to this great
Ordinance without due and that worthy preparation in the way of
self-examination, and discerning the Lords body, and these do eat and drink
their own damnation, 1 Cor.11.29. and if the Church does admit those to the
Lords Table who are visibly unworthy, they will provoke the Lord against them,
as the Church at Corinth did, that for this cause many amongst them were weak,
and many sickly, and some were taken away by death, 1 Cor. 11.30.

3. Or those who in their Church Relation to live in the neglect of Church
Discipline, that is, they give offense but will not give satisfaction, Mat.
5.2^. or they will take offense but not manage it according to Christ's Order,
Mat. 18.^5 Lev. 19.19. and whatever their goodly words a^e, yet they are but as
a Hind let loose, Genesis 49 21. and their works say, they will not have Christ to
rule over them; and the quarrel the Lord has against these and the
aforementioned, is that which is called the quarrel of his Covenant, Lev.
26.25. a most fearful quarrel. And to conclude this Discourse, we may consider,

1. Some do despise the Covenant in the administrations of it, or by their
practice profess, that the Covenant is not worthy of their care, labor and
cost, and it may be drop some scoff or mocking expression, but will not seek
the Lord in the way of his Covenant these are in the high way to that
unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost, of counting the blood of the Covenant
an unholy thing, and of doing despite to the spirit of Grace Heb. 10.27,28.

2. Some have visibly taken hold of the Covenant but do live in the breach of
it, Psa. 78.37,38. and 50.16,17. and the Lord says, what have thou to do to
take my Covenant into thy mouth, seeing thou hate instructions, and castest
my words behind thee. And the quarrel the Lord has against a People or
particular persons whether it be for despising his Covenant or breach of
Covenant ever implies.

1. These are guilty of sinning against the greatest love; for the love of God
in condescending to enter into Covenant with a sinner, is the highest act of
love, and to despise this Covenant or the things of it, or live in the breach
of it, is to spit reproach and contempt in the most beautiful face of divine
Love: do you thus requite the Lord, O foolish People and unwise, Deuteronomy. 32 6.

2. These sin against the only Remedy. What cure and relief can there be for
sinners but from Christ, and how does Christ relieve but in the way of his
Covenant, in the administration of it: how can those escape who neglect this
great Salvation? Heb. 2.3. and hence follows the greatest punishment for the
quarrel of the Covenant, Amos 3.3. You I have known of all the Families of the
Earth, and you I will punish, when the inquiry is made when they see what
plagues and sicknesses come upon the Land, wherefore has the Lord done thus to
this Land? and the Answer is, because they have forsaken the Covenant of the
Lord God of their Fathers, Deuteronomy. 29.23,24,25. and thus we see how Apostasy
does show itself in the degrees of it.

1. How gradual it is: First, A growing cold in secret Duties, then remiss and
formal in Family duties, and at length slighty and cold in communion with
Saints, in private and public Ordinances, and at last twice dead and pulled up
by the roots, Jude 12. they were dead as to a principle of spiritual life, as
all are by nature, and they are dead as to the life and zeal of visible
Profession which they sometimes had.

2. As these declensions are gradual, so they grow on upon an Apostatizing
people insensibly, at first somewhat afraid and startled, but by a customary
declension grow insensible of the danger, and so ready to heal themselves with
lazy desires, and pretended good meanings, and formal covenantings, until at
last they are left to a good opinion of their state, that they say, Wherein
shall they return? as if they were not convinced; although from the days of
their Fathers, they had gone away from the Ordinances of the Lord and not kept
them in that purity and po^^^, as they were left to them by their Fath^^, Mal.
3.7. Jer, 8.5,6.

In the next place follows the consideration of the bitter fru^^^ of Apostasy,
as they are specified in the advertisement of our Rulers; and for the clearing
the particulars, let us especially observe how it comes to pass that a People
living under the means of Grace are left to those abominations: and the
Question i^ the first place is,

How it comes to pass that some living under the means of grace are left to
gross Ignorance or abuse of their light and knowledge?

Ans. Because some under the means of Grace have rejected the knowledge of God,
and therefore are left to gross ignorance, or not loving truth as truth, and
therefore are left to abuse their light and knowledge to their destruction.

1. Some have rejected knowledge, that its become the object of their hatred,
as if instruction was not worthy of their love, and if they be reproved, they
do despise reproof, and the reprover, and will not obey the voice of their
Teachers, Prove. 5.12,13. the reading good Books, the Writing and Repeating of
Sermons, the Schools of Learning, the conversing with the wise, and all good
means of knowledge in their hearts they despise, Prove. 1.22, How long ye simple
ones will ye love simplicity, and scorrers delight in scorning, and fools hate
knowledge, Prove.1.22.

2. The punishment upon these follows, therefore they are left to a sottish
ignorance, they have not so much light as shall keep them from sottish and
brutish ignorance, Jer. 4.22. they are sottish Children, they have no
understanding, Jer. 5.4. surely they are poor and foolish, they know not the
way of the Lord, and the judgment of their God, they have rejected the
knowledge of God, and are therefore left to the darkness of gross Ignorance.

A second sort are those upon whose Consciences the light has shined, but have
not loved truth as truth, these have knowledge and will be searching and
proving excellent things, and having a ^orm of knowledge, may be guids to the
blind, and hold sorth light to those who are in darkness, Romans 2.18,19,20. and
these love to live under an able Ministry, and will uphold Schools of Leaaning,
and be in the use of all means of knowledge, but yet never did receive the love
of the truth, 2 These. 2.10. the truth it self, and the true knowledge of it,
was never the ultimate and principal object of their love, but only a mediate
object that by means of their light and knowledge, they set up advance and
serve some Idol in their hearts, but do not like to retian to God in knowledge
as its the knowledge of God, Romans 1.28.

2. The punishment upon these is, therefore they are le^t to abuse their light
and knowledge to their destruction, either to pride and vain glory, their
knowledge has puffed them up, 1 Cor. 8.1. or they are by means of their light
become the more subti^e to devise coverts for sin, and the more slye in
opposing secretly the life and power of Godliness, the more crafty to deceive
others and to cheat their own Souls, the more wise to do evil but to do good
they have no knowledge and are blinded at last with self conceitedness, and say
the Law of the Lord is with them, but they have rejected the Word of the Lord,
and what wisdom is in them. Jer. 8.8,9.

1. Some truths of greatest concernment to them they shall not see, but groap
for light at noon day as if it were night, Deuteronomy. 28.29. Isai. 59 10.

2. Those Truths which they do see, yet they shall be left to misapply,
pervert, and wrest to their destruction, Act. 13.10,11. 2 Pet. 3.16.

3. Those Truths which they do apply rightly, yet their hearts shall not be
affected with them, and not be reformed by them, but to them, it shall be as if
they knew nothing* Isai. 6.8,9. these have often perverted their understanding
and abused their knowledge, and their understanding and knowledge shall pervert
and mislead them, Isai. 47.10.

The second follows concerning Profaneness: the Question is,

How it comes to pass that some under the means of Grace are given up to
Profaneness?

The Answer is, Because some under the means of Grace have rejected saving
Grace in the Gospel, and therefore the Lord withdraws common restraining Grace
from them, and they become profane.

1. Some are profane, although they live under the means of Grace, these will
not show a civil respect to Religion and that good manners which civility will
teach; their words are scornful and mocking, abusing the Holy Scriptures in a
jesting and deriding manner, like those Scoffers who said, where is the promise
of his coming? 2 Pet. 3.3,4. these are a pest and a most dangerous infection in
societies, by their evil communication do corrupt good manners, 1 Cor. 15.33.
their Countenance, Gestures and Lives do declare them to be like a mocking
Ishmael, or profane Esau, Heb. 12.15,16. look diligently lest any man fail of
the Grace of God lest there be any Fornicator or Profane Person as Esau.

2. These have rejected saving Grace in the Gospel the God of all Grace by the
means of his Grace, the Ordinances, and by the gracious Examples of the godly,
seconded by some afflicting providence, and sometimes with convictions and
terrors of Conscience has been striving with these, but they would not hearken
to his voice, and would have none of him and his saving Grace, and therefore
are given up to their hearts lusts, Psalm. 81.11,12. Woe unto thee, will thou not
be clean, when will it once be, Jer.13.27.

3. Hence the Lord has withdrawn restraining Grace, that those who reject
saving Grace in the Gospel, and will not live as becomes godly men; the Lord
withdraws common restraining Grace from them, that they shall not live as
becomes men, this is the reason why some are so lewdly filthy, that in their
filthiness is lewdness, because they would not be purged, and therefore the
Lord says, they shall not be purged, but the Lords fury shall rest upon them,
Ezekiel. 24.13. this is the reason why some under the means of Grace are more
profane than some others who enjoy no such means to reform them, and that they
are become more profane then before they enjoyed the means of Grace; because
they have provoked the Lord by their resistings of the strivings of the Spirit
of Grace, to give them up to most horrid and hellish prophanenss, that as
Israel's abominations shall exceed the silth of Samar^a and Sodom Ezekiel.16.51.
and of this bitter fruit of Apostasy: that Man of God of most blessed memory,
Mr. Thomas Hooker, was wont frequently to w^rn New England, saying, do you
wonder that some in New England are left to such abominations, I tell you that
some in New England will be given up to greater profaneness. His Sermons upon
Psalm. 81.11,12. and Romans 1.28. do at large declare this.

The third bitter fruit, concerning gross neglects of relative Duties: And the
Question is,

Why are some under the means of Grace left to those palpable neglects of
relative Duties, in Family, Church and Commonwealth?

The Answer: Because some under the means of Grace, living in neglect of Duties
toward God, and of duties toward others in the Lord, its just with the Lord
to leave them to gross neglects of relative duties one toward another.

1. There are some who though they enjoy the means of Grace, yet they li^e in
the neglect of duties in Relation to the God of Grace, he has proffered a holy
Marriage Covenant to them; and himself as the only suitable Match and Husband
for the immortal Soul, Isai. 54 5. but they have loved Strangers and after them
they will go, Jer. 2. 25. neither will they honor him as a Father, nor fear
him as their Master, but despise his Name, Mal. 1.6. if they call him their
God, yet they cast off the thing that is good, Hos 8.25

2. Hence it follows, these never did perform duties in relation to others in
the Lord, for this is the Religious and true Gospel band in all Relations;
Husbands love your Wives, as Christ loved his Church, Ephesians.5.25. Wives submit
your selves to your Husbands, as is fit in the Lord, Col.3.18. Children obey
your Parents in the Lord, Ephesians.6.1: Srevants obey your Masters in singleness
of heart, fearing the Lord, Col.3.22. But those who do not conscientiously
attend duties in Relation to the Lord, do feel no such Religious band upon
their hearts and Consciences in relation to others, but act only as moved by
some natural or moral Principles which are too weak to resist the violence of
temptations and distempers.

3. Therefore its just with the Lord to leave these to some notorious neglects
of relative duties one to another; if the Husband be a man of Beliai, he is
likewise a Nabal, and folly is with him, 1 Samuel 25.25. and will behave himself
foolishly or bitterly against the Wife of his Bosom, Colos. 3.19. If the Wife
does not subject to her Husband in the Lord, as the Church is subject to
Christ, she will be left to act the part of a Zipporah, in a reproachful manner
to her Husband, Ephesians. 5.24. Exodus 4.25. If Parents, and Heads of Families do
neglect obedience unto and to act in imitation of the Heavenly Father, and live
as if they had no Master in Heaven, Ephesians. 6.9. they will be left either by
their rash passions to provoke unto wrath, Ephesians 6.9. and to discourage those
under their Government, Col. 3.21. or they will by an unadvised indulgence
neglect to bring theirs up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4.
but let them live like the wild Ass in the Wilderness, snuffing up the Wind,
Jer. 2.24. and if Children are not in subjection to the Father of Spirits, they
will not behave themselves reverently to the Fathers of their flesh, Heb. 12.9.
They do not fear God the ancient of days, and they* will behave themselves
proudly against the ^^ged, the base against the Honorable. Isai. 3.5.

The like may be said of neglect of duties in a Plantation, Church and
Common-wealth-Relations, if Rulers Civil or Ecclesiastic do not rule actually
in the fear of God, 2 Sam^ 23.3. they will either tolerate intolerable
disorders and not care for those things, Act. 18.17. or they will lade Men with
burdens grievous to be born, but they themselves will not touch the burden,
Luke 11.46. and will turn Judgment to Wormwood, Amos. 5.7.

And if a people do not subject to Ruler^ for the Lords sake, they will either
pervert Orders, and wrest Laws to the bringing in of Disorder, and set up
corrupt Rulers, those of whom the Lord says, he knew them not, Hos. 8.3. and
like People at last like Priest, Hos. 4.9. or they will despise Dominions, Jude
8. and behave themselves as Thorns that the man that shall touch them, must be
fenced with iron, 2 Samuel 23.6.

The third bitter fruit of Apostasy is Contentiousness.

Q. How is Contentiousness a bitter fruit of Apostasy?

Ans. Because those who have turned from the right way of true peace with God,
and their own Consciences are given up to those contentious Principles and
Practices, which shall break their peace with others.

1. There is the right way of true peace with God, and with our own Consciences
^namely to abhor every known sin, to deny our selves, to mortify Pride, Envy,
by pocrisie, and all self humoring Lusts, Jam. 4.1. and in this right way of
peace to take hold of the strength of God, Isai. 27.4 Luke 1,79.

2. Those who turn from this right way of true peace with God, are given up to
Contentiousness, the things of their peace are h^^den from their eyes, Luke
19.42. there is no judgment in their goings, they have made to themselves
crooked paths, and they shall not know peace, Isai. 59.8. 1. Those who strive
against their Maker, and set Briars and Thorns in Battle against God, Isai.
27.4. its no wonder if the best of them be as a Briar, and the most upright of
them be as a Thorn-hedge, Mich. 7.4.

2. Those who will not deny themselves for the ^ake of true peace with God and
their own Consciences, let it not seem strange if they will not deny themselves
to please others in that which is good, and would be to edification, Romans 15.27.

3. Those who have vexed the Holy Spirit of God, by their Rebellion or
Unfaithfulness, Isai. 63.10. they will grieve others be their giving offense,
or rashly taking up of offenses, or contentious manner of managing offenses,
and will make divisions, Romans 16 17.

4. Those who never had the fense of the sweetness of true peace with God and
their Consciences, cannot in a right Gospel sense be kind and ten er-hearted,
ready to forgive an God for Christ's sake forgiveth, Ephesians. 4.32. These have
broken the staff of beauty; and the staff of Bands and Brotherhood shall
likewise be broken, Zech. 11.10,14.

5. Those who have been wonted to flatter their own Souls with a false peace,
and to heal the hurts of their Consciences slightly, Jer. 6.14. and would not
endure the faithful wounds of a Friend, by searching reproofs; these will speak
peaceably to a neighbor, and yet their hearts lie in wait, Jer. 9.8. the
conclusion of this is, that fire of Divisions which consumes their peace with
Neigbours did first begin in the fire of Gods wrath, because of some grievous
provocation against God, Judge. 9.20,21. Isai. 4.21.

The ^ourth bitter Fruit is Sensuality.

Qu. How is Sensuality a bitter fruit of Apostasy?

Ans. Because those who have despised the things of the Spirit of God, the only
^bjects of Spiritual senses, are given up to plea^e their sensual Lusts by
Objects suitable to the carnal senses.

1. There are the things of the Spirit of God, those Graces of the Spirit in
and by the means of Grace communicated; Love, Peace, Joy, Long-suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, Gal. 5.^22,23. and these are
the Objects of the spiritual senses: to hear what the Spirit says, is only by
a spiritual sense of hearing, Rev. 2.7. to see the things of the Spirit, is
only by a spiritual sense of seeing, 1 Cor. 2.14. and to taste the things of the
Spirit is requisite a spiritual sense of tasting, Psalm, 34.8. Heb.5.14.

2. But those who have despised the things of the Spirit are given up to their
sensual lusts, these are sensual and have not the spirit, Jude 19. they have
taken more pleasure to hear a vain song or the noise of a Fiddle, then ^o hear
the blessed sound of Emmanuel's voice, Psalm 89.15. they take more delight to
behold vanity then to see the beauty of the Lord in his House, Psalm. 27.4.
these take more pleasure to please their appetite with meat and drink, and to
content other sensual lusts, then to feed upon the flesh, and drink the blood
of the Son of God, John 6.56. and the feast of fat things, and wine of the
Lees, and those Gospel dainties are despised, Isai. 25.6.

3. Hence they are given up to sensual Lusts.

1. Sometimes to excessive Drinking, Ephesians. 5.18. and sometimes to
lasciviousness, Ephesians. 4.19.

2. They commonly do walk at the utmost bounds of liberty, and abuse their
Liberties unto carnal libertinism, and sensual licentiousness, Gal. 5.13.

3. Take these at their best, the savor they have of the Gospel and of some
common gifts of the Spirit, is no better than a savor of Death unto Death, 2
Cor. 2.16. for they savor the things of the flesh as more pleasant then the
things of the spirit, and love pleasures more than God, 2 Timothy, 3,4. and do only
savor those common gifts of the spirit which they can receive and abuse unto
carnal and inferior purposes and ends.

4. And Hence it is that some do expend more upon their sensual lusts, than to
uphold the work of Christ in Church and Commonwealth, and are more in debt
annually in the Ordinary keepers Books for strong Drink, than in the Town and
Country Rate; these have ^repa^ed their Corn, their Flax, and their Wool for
their sensual lusts, as sometimes they did for Baal, Hos. 2.8,9. and the Lord
threatens to take away their Corn, and Flax, etc. in the season of them.

The fifth bitter Fruit of Apostasy is Pride.

Quest. How is Pride a bitter Fruit of Apostasy?

Ans. Because those who will not seek the praise which is of God by a humble
walking, are given up to seek the praise which is of men by lifting up
themselves by some vain glorious means.

1. We ought to seek the praise which is of God, Romans ^^.28,29. and this by a
humble walking, which is always in every state good, Mich. 6.8.

2. Those who will not seek the praise which is of God, are given up to seek
the praise which is of men; for they love the praise which is of men more than
the praise which is of God, John 12.43. and this their ambition does show it
self in listing up themselves by some vainglorious means, in which we may
consider.

1. The lifting up: 1. In respect of Inferiors, contemning them, Luke 18.9. and
sometimes oppressing them, abusing of power and greatness to the wronging o^
inferiors, as great Fishes devour the les^er, Hab. 1.13,14. but their Pride
will not suffer them to condescend to those who are of low degree Romans 12.16.
except it be Ab^a^om like, to humble themselves at a turn, that they may exalt
themselves.

2. In respect of Equals, aspiring after a firstness and honor above those
unto whom honor is due equal with themselves, but those who are first shall be
last, Mat. 20.16.

3. In respect of Superiors; Pride sometimes is not ashamed to show it self, in
listing up the Proud above a Superior; yea, to cast down a Superior, that by
his fall the Proud may exalt himself, Isai. 3.5. this is like Absa^lom's
l^fting himself up above, and against his Father.

2. The means by which the Proud do usually lift up themselves, are vain
glorious.

1. In aspiring after some privilege above others, some freedom from a
burden, that they may be ^ased, and let others be burdened, 2 Cor. 8.13,14.
affecting some precedence and pre-eminence above others, when no season can be
given for it, but only they having a high conceit of some supposed works in
themselves, and therefore love the pre-eminence, John 3.8. but if they sought
the praise which is of God, by a humble walking, this would teach them in
lowliness of mind to serve God, and to esteem others better than themselves,
Phil. 2.3.

2. A second vainglorious means by which the proud does lift up himself, is
some sign or badge of honor.

1. Some Title of Honor which has a very pleasant sound in an ambitious ear,
to be called Master, or to have some chief place in places of Meetings,
otherwise he does not sit easy, Mat. 23.6,10. Many instances may be given to
show how Pride the first born of the Devil is fruitful, but the jettings, and
vauntings of Pride in many in their Apparel is so manifest, that the humble are
grieved to behold it, and the proud themselves are vexed with envy, to see so
many equally lifting up themselves.

1. That strange affectation of being first and forward, and of being furthest
and most in a new and strange Fashion, for which the Lord threatened to punish
the Kings Children, Zeph. 1.8.

2. An affecting of such Apparel as shall make them seem to be of a higher rank
than they are, so that no distinction of the ranks and degrees can be discerned
by their Apparel; none between Rich and Poor, Ruler and Subjects, Master and
Servant, Mistress and Ha^dmaid; these by their Apparel do show that parity is
pleasing to their Pride.

3. These spend so much upon Apparel that either they wast their Estate, or he
in Debt, or pinch their Bellies of necessaries, that they might adorn and deck
themselves with the ornaments of Pride.

But the reason of the ventings of Pride in these and in many other ways, is
because these have not a high esteem of Humility, as the precious clothing, 1
Pet. 5.5. and of a meek and quiet Spirit, as more worth than Cloth of Gold, 1
Pet. 3.3,4. but they have despised the humble walker, and called the proud
happy, Mal. 3.15. and therefore though they have often heard of the evil of
this sin, and known something of the fearful events of it upon some, yet
B^lshazzar-like are hardened in their Pride, Dan. 5.22. their pride has stopped
their ears that they will not hear, and shut their eyes that they will not see,
and although their dangerous slippings and Stumblings upon the dark Mountains,
which they wander in their Pride, are manifest; yet they will hasten toward
the top of the mountain until they be cast down headlong, and leave others to
mourn in secret places for their pride, because they will not hear, Jer.
13.16,17.

The sixth bitter fruit of Apostasy.

Qu. How is Unrighteousness a bitter fruit of Apostasy?

Ans. Because those who have despised the true riches, and esteemed gain to be
godliness, are therefore left to seek worldly Wealth by unrighteous means.

1. There is the true riches, Christ the Pearl of price, Mat. 13.46. the graces
of his Spirit, to be rich in Faith, Jam. 2.5. a meek and a quiet Spirit of
great price, 1 Pet. 3.4. and wisdom more precious than the Rubies, Prove. 3.15.
to lay up treasure in Heaven, Mat. 6.20. by a true godly conversation: for
godliness with contentment is great gain, 1 Timothy 6.6.

2. But the unrighteous have despised the true Riches, they are not rich
toward God, Luke 12 21. and gain is their Godliness, 1 Timothy 6.5. they will
have and hold such, and so much of Godliness, as may be serviceable to or
consistent with their worldly gain, and behave themselves as Demas who had
forsaken Paul, and loved this present World, 2 Timothy 4.10.

3, Hence it is that these are left to seek Worldly wealth by unrighteous
means; they will be rich, and if they cannot compass it by just means, they
will get it by unjust means, although at the end they are befooled to their
everlasting confusion. Jer. 17.11. 1 Timothy 6.9. But the reason why they are left
to Unrighteousness, is their love to money, which is the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6.10. and they having undervalued and despised the true riches, are given
up to overvalue and idolize Worldly wealth; and hence follows such deceit, a
felling truth for gain, and lying to the Holy Ghost, Act. 5.3:

1. In Bargainings: striving to defraud and go beyond another, 1 These. 4.6. and
to devise all cunning evasions to wind away from the equal scope of a Bargain,
and will not perform it faithfully, without unjust vexing and damnifying
another, Psalm. 15.2,4.

2. In Wares; Merchandise and Trading, a gaining what they* can possibly, as if
Justice had set them no bounds, but to gain what they can is their professed
justice; and their gain is their godliness, 1 Timothy 6.5.

3. In Wages; impoverishing him who hireth, and their great design in taking
(...) by the great (as they call it) is that they may receive more Wages than
their labor is worth; but their Money is put into a Bag with holes, Haggai 1.6.

4. In Trespassings; they are not conscientiously careful to prevent damages,
and when they know they have damnified a Neighbor, yet if they can they will
hide it, and what they cannot hide, yet they will not freely and fully made
satisfaction, so that their Neighbor can not dwell safety by them, Prove. 3.29.

5. In Debts; they will engage that which they know they cannot perform in an
ordinary way, and when they have promised, they are not conscientiously careful
to perform their promise according to the true and equal scope of it, and that
which is due, Prove. 3.27.28. but all these and many other unrighteous practices
do proceed through the Lords just judgment, from a being empty and void of
sincere Love to God, and those most rich and precious things of God, and
therefore are given up to an immoderate and in* ordinate love of deceivable
Riches, and therefore are left to hold the truth in unrighteousness, and to be
filled with all unrighteousness, Romans 18.28,29.

And what is the horrible event of this and all the former vices and bitter
fruits of Apostasy?

Ans. Because of these vile Examples, the Heathen do Blaspheme the Name of our
God, and are hardened in their Heathenish abominations.

1. When the Heathen do behold those who do profess to know God, and yet do
live in profaneness, sensuality, contentiousness, pride, unrighteousness,
therefore they blaspheme the Name of God, Romans 2.24. whatever our words be
concerning God, and our Religion; but the Heathen will judge and speak of our
Religion, and the things of our God according as they see our works are.

2. Hence the Heathen grow hardened in their heathenish abominations, and are
ready to think and say, they do well to run into all manner of profaneness,
seeing they behold such vile examples in those who do profess to know the true
and great God, and especially they grow hardened, and abound in that ^in of
Drunkenness, seeing for the sake of lucre many will sell them strong drink.

But the abominable practice of those who are guilty of this, does testify
against them.

1. That they are far off from endeavoring by good works to convince and
convert the Heathen, seeing for the sake of worldly gain, they will feed their
Lusts to the ruin of the wealth, health, and Souls of Heathen, 1 Pet. 2.11,12.
These are Taverns and Ordinary keepers for Heathens lusts.

2. These love their gain more than their Neighbors, or their own safety,
seeing they cannot but know, that many Outrages, yea some ^^r^hers have been
committed by (...) India^s in their Drunken posture and sometimes in the
Families of those who have (...) them strong Drink: or at least the hazar^^
great.

1. These love worldly gain more than God and their own Souls happiness, for if
they had love to God and to their own Souls good they would practically intend
the glory o^ God in all they do, and give no occasion of offense of Jew or
Gentile, nor to the Church o^ God, 1 Cor. 10.31,32. but if these who th^^
practice had any use of their Consciences, a^ a witness or judge, their
consciences would tell them, that while they sell strong Drink (...) those whom
they know will abuse it to Drunkenness, and in this, (...) contrary to to the
Law of the Commonwealth, founded upon moral and religious Principles, and yet
in this to intend Gods glory, is as far off from the heart-intention of these
Heathen Taverners, and as contrary to their practice, as Heaven and Hell are
contrary one to the other.

And how just it is with the Lord that the Heathen should be the rod of his
anger to punish these crying abominations. The selling of Ammunition was for
many years prohibited, but some for gain would secretly sell Guns, etc. to the
Heathen, and at last prevailed to make the Law of the Commonwealth of none
effect; and since that time New England knows by woeful experience the
difference between fighting with Indians armed with Guns, and those who had
only Bows and Arrows. But the selling of strong Drink to the Indians has by
strict Laws frequently revived been prohibited, and yet how incorrigibly some
do proceed is very manifest, and since the Wars, more abounding: And will not
the Lord avenge himself of these for their Provocations, and provoke them with
a ^^^lish Nation, Deuteronomy. 32.21. If our Rulers grow weary of punishing this
horrible practice, the Lord God of Gods will begin to punish (...) after
another manner, and make these who are guilty, to know that it is a fearful
thing to fa^l into the hands of the living God, when his time is come to take
vengeance ^or the despising of Moral Laws, and the strivings of his Spirit of
Grace, Heb. 10.31,32.

Thus of Apostasy considered in the Nature, Degrees and bitter Fruits of the
same, but before we come to the conclusion of these Discourses; let us consider,

2. How it does appear that the judgment come upon New England, are because of
the sin of New England, and not for probation or any other cause.

Answ. Because New England found guilty of those very sins, for which the
judgments come upon them, are threatened by the Word of God: and therefore we
must confe^^ that what God has spoken against us by his Holy Word, he has
inflicted upon us by his righteous hand.

And for the Clearing of this, let us consider:

1. That the judgments come upon New England, are those which are threatened by
the Word of God, are manifest to all. Who know not the mortal sicknesses, the
withering b^^stings, the Drought and the Sword to aven^^ the quarrel of the
Covenant threatened in (...) the 26. the 28. of Deuteronomie? and in many other
places of Scripture, and none can be ignorant, that the Lord has by his
righteous hand executed these threatenings upon us, unless it be those who are
more ^enseless, then the Stork, the Turtle and the ^wallow, who know their
appointed times, and observe the time of their coming, but my people says the
Lord, know not the judgment of the Lord, Jer. 8.7.

2. That these judgments are come upon New England; for the sins of
New England will appear if we consider negatively.

1. That these judgments are come not for probation only, nor principally, for
God is not wont to inflict public judgments upon a people for trial, although
he does sometimes send affliction upon an upright Job for trial chiefly, and
when affliction comes for probation and trial principally it will appear upon
examination, that the person afflicted is found walking in his uprightness
before God, Job 1.8,12. and in the night of affliction, there shall be nothing
found against this afflicted Saint but that which is consistent with
uprightness, Psalm. 17.3. but who is able to make this desence for New England,
as to the generality of them, and as for those who are called the upright, what
their innocence is, and what their guilt is; this will appear in that which is
in the place of it, spoken concerning the div^^ m^nners and sorts of guilt.

2 Neither did New England in the time of the War^, suffer as witnesses for
righteousness sake, although so far as the Antichristian M^lice of some might
be stirring up and working in and with the rage of the Heathen, and might by
the provocations of New England against the Lord, take occasion to persecute
that of Christ and the Christian Religion, which yet remained in the Churches
of Christ in the Wilderness; in this respect Meat came out of the Eater to the
godly of the Land, and they might say as that holy Martyr Bradford said, It is
not the condemnation of Bradford simply intended by the Adversary, but Christ
and Truth, and Bradford is nothing but an instrument in which Christ and Truth
is condemned and persecuted by the Adversary; and in this respect the Lord
says, and has, and will do for his People, as sometimes he said by the
Prophet, Zech. 1.15. I am very sore displeased with the Heathen, for I was a
little displeased, and they helped forward their affliction: But yet our sins
must be confessed to be the Traitors, which gave the opportunity into the hands
of our Enemies against us, and the Lord said of us; as sometimes of that
People, Isai. 42.24. Who gave Jacob to the spoil, and Israel to the Robbers,
did not the Lord, be against whom we have sinned?

In the next place Affirmatively, concerning the causes of the Judgments upon
New England; that New England is found guilty of those very sins mentioned in
the writing of our Rulers, and that these are the causes of those judgments,
will be made most manifest, if we consider the diverse manners and ways by
which a People are involved in guilt.

1. Some are guilty by actual Commission, and that is,

1. Either openly after the manner of the profane sort, whose Countenance does
witness against them, and they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not, woe
unto their Soul, Isai. 3.9.

2. Or secretly, and sometimes God does inflict public Judgments upon a
People for secret sins, and that is,

1. When they are such sins as are not in the nature and kind of them secret,
but as they are by the transgressor bound up, and hiden by some deceiving
Excuses, and fallacious pretenses, Hos. 13.12. and the ignorance these pretend
is wilful, and they are condemned by the Lord for willing ignorance, 2 Pet. 3.5.

2. Or such secret sins as go before the open sins, and the others do follow
them, and together do provoke the Lord, 2 King. 17.9. and cannot be hid, 1 Timothy
5.25. both these openly or secretly are guilty of provocations by actual
Commission.

2. Some are guilty by way of approbation, by consenting, Psalm. 50.^8. or
countenancing, and thus Jehosaphat's love unto, and he pi^^g^ of ungodly Ahab,
did provoke the Lord to wrath against him, 2 Chronicles. 19.2.

3. Some are guilty by way of toleration, and thus Solomon did provoke the Lord
to wrath by his tolerating of the Idolatry of h^^ Wives, 1 King. 11.4.

4. Some are guilty by their omission and neglect of means.

1. To prevent the provocations, and thus some able Expositors have thought
that in this sense it was, that Israel became guilty, and were blamed by the
Lord himself, for taking the accursed thing even that which was taken by A^han.
Josh.7.11.

2. Or a neglect of means to reform th^^ provocations committed; and thus (...)
neglect of a through reforming, and removing the abominations of his Sons, did
provoke the Lord to wrath against him and his house, 1 Samuel 2.22.23.

Many in New England are guilty of provoking sins by actual Commission, and
these kindle the fire, and are Fire brands in the hand of Gods wrath; and some
by approbation do blow up the fire, and are as the bellows to make the fire of
Gods wrath burn: and some by toleration, do in their practice say, Let the fire
burn will do nothing to quench it, and at last some come, who with their luke
warmness, and cold practices, are but as a dish of water dropping upon a great
and vehement flame, but does nothing effectually to extinguish the fire of
wrath kindled and flaming by reason of provoking sins, the Lord guide every one
of us by his Spirit to consider, and in a self-examining manner to see and say,
What have I done to provoke the Lord? Jer. 8.5,6.

But as to fact, the provocations of New England are proved by many witnesses.

1. The witness of the Ministry, especially upon most solemn occasions in the
most public assembly, have as watchmen warned us of the Lords ^^trovers^e
against New England, and of the evil coming upon them, Ezekiel. 33.7. and this
warning was given not only since the Wars, but before that evil day come.

2. Witness that great Handwriting of our Rulers published by their order in
the Congregations of this Colony in a day of Fasting and Prayer in that
calamitous year, 1675. and many Writings and Orders since that, calling for a
renewed Confession of these crying abominations specified in that Writing and
explained in our former Discourse.

3. Witness the sighing of those whom the Lord has marked in our Jerusalem,
because they do afflict and vex their righteous Souls for the provocations they
see or hear of, Ezekiel. 9.4.

4. Witness the sell condemnation, the generality of Professors have received
within themselves, and do frequently at this day express it one to another
(saying) we and our posterity are an undone people, if more be not done for
Reformation, then yet is done, yea, who can say and prove it, that there has
been any considerable reformation wrought in any one matter of weight, after
all that the Lord has spoken and done against us:

But to conclude this Discourse, let us state one Question more:

Qu. What are the Reasons why the work of Reformation does not proceed, but is
hindered after these solemn Advertisements by our godly Rulers, and after all
the awful warnin's from the Lords ^pli'ted hand?

Ans. Because some do not see what ought to be reformed, some who see, but have
no heart to this work; some who have a heart, but little strength; some who
have strength, but do not agree to carry on together every one his part, or
they spend their labor upon a people who are under the power of judicial
impenitency.

1. Some do not see what ought to be reformed, and those are either,

1. Not convinced of a necessity of reformation, but behave themselves as those
did when Godly Hezekiah, zealous for Reformation, sent forth his Edict by the
hand of his Officers to command the People to return to the Lord, but some
derided the Messengers, nevertheless some humbled themselves, and the Lord gave
them one heart to do according to the Commandment of the King and Princes
respecting Reformation, 2 Chronicles. 30.10,11,12. the time hasteneth, when the
bands of Mockers shall be made strong, too strong for them to break, Isai.
28,22.

2. Or these who do not see what ought to be reformed, do fix upon some lesser
matters of the Law, and spend the strength of their zeal in reforming those
lesser matters of the Law, but do suffer the more weighty matters of Judgment,
Mercy and Faith to lie unreformed, Mat. 23.23. and all these poor blinded Souls
are ready to say as those who were reproved for wearying the Lord, for robbing
of God, and were commanded to return to the Lord, with a promise that the Lord
would turn toward them; but they said wherein have we wearied thee, or robbed
thee? and wherein shall we return? Mal. 3.7,8. these do not see what ought to
be reformed, but these shall see whether they will or no, either to their
Conversion or their Confusion, Isai. 26.11.

2. Some who see a need of Reformation, but they have no heart to this work,
and these are heartless either,

1. Because the work of Reformation will reach the Idols of their hearts, Ezekiel.
14.3. and it may be said of these as of them 2 (...) 28.10. are there not with
you even with you sins against the Lord your God? and these no^ being willing
to be cleansed from the Idols o^ their own hearts, they are not hearty in the
use of the means of Reformation, but Rachel-like, they devise shameful excuses
to prevent the search and discovery of their Idols, Genesis 31.34,35.

2. Or they have no heart because of the difficulties of the work of
Reformation, as in Nehemiah's time, some were scared with affrighting
apprehensions of seeming impossibilities for them to carry on so great a work,
Nehem. 4.10. but what will these heartless Souls do? how can their heart
endure? and hands be strong in that day when the Lord shall pour out of his
fury upon them? because they had no heart to the work of Reformation, Ezekiel.
22.14. and then must fl^e like a silly Dove without heart into the Net and
Snare of Destruction, Hos. 7.11,12.

3. Some who have a heart to the work of Reformation, but have little strength,
that is,

1. Little outward strength of Abilities, and opportunity; although (through
the Grace of God) they have a sufficiency of strength to reform their own
hearts and lives, and their own families; and though they have but little
strength, they have kept the Word of God, and not denied his Name, Rev. 3.8.

2. Although these do lay to heart the sins of the times, and their behavior
in Clo^et-Communion with God and in their Families, and their converse and
conversation before all does testify for them, that they have a heart to
Reformation, but they have not the power in their hands to do any considerable
matter in the public Reformation, and for the removing the abominations in the
midst of Jerusalem; and these are the Lords marked ones, Ezekiel. 9.4. sealed
Servants of God, Rev. 7 3: and though they cannot deliver others, yet the Lord
will deliver them, Ezekiel. 14.14.

4. Some who have strength, but do not agree to carry on together the work of
Reformation.

1. Its taken for granted of any who have but any common Notions of reforming
work, that Reformation cannot consist in complaining against others, and yet do
the same our selves; Who are thou O Man who judge another and condemnest thy
self, Romans 2.1. nor in complaining against our selves, that we pine away in our
sins, and yet do not turn unto the Lord, Ezekiel. 33.10,11. how can we then live?
nor in publishing Laws, and professed Covenantings for Reformation, and yet
after all these we go on in our Trespasses, will not the Lord be angry until he
has consumed us Ezra 9.14.

2. But public Reformation must be carried on principally by those who are in
public place; the Rulers of the Common wealth holding and handling the Sword
of Justice impartially, and brightly, to the terror of evil doers, Romans 1^.3.
executing judgment in the Gates, and seeking truth, Jer. 5.1. And the
Ministers of the Lords House managing the two edged Sword of the Spirit, Heb.
4.12. both in Doctrine and Discipline, making and keeping the difference clear
between the clean and the unclean, the Holy and the Profane Ezekiel. 44.23. and
then the People ready to strengthen the hands of their Rulers, as he said to
Ezra, This matter belongs to you, arise and do it, and we are with you, Ezra
10.4.

3. But if every one do not practically agree to carry on according to their
places and power, their part, the whole work of Reformation will be obstructed
in some degree or other.

If those who are in chief place, and have the greatest Power, shall leave the
greatest Burden of the work upon the shoulders of those who are in inferior
places, and power, th^se will sink under the burden or miscarry in the exercise
of their power, and the work fall to the ground: but whatever the care and
courage, faithfulness and zeal of chief Rulers may be, yet if inferior
Officers be no^ Men of approved wisdom and integrity, Laws will not be
executed, and the Oaths of civil Officers will be violated; and because of
th^se Oaths the Land mourns, Hos. 4 2,3. for no public Reformation can
proceed.

5. Or whatever the care and pains may be of Reformers in faithfulness to God,
and to his People, yet when they spend their Labor upon a People who are under
the power of judicial impenitency:

1. Their labor will be in vain at present as to the work of Reformation; if
that people had Moses to be their Ruler, yet they will be stiff necked, and be
corrupting themselves, and one another, and be an unreformed and unreforming
People, against whom the Lord had Sworn in his wrath they should never enter
into his rest, Numb. 14 30. And is Is^ia^ were the Minister to a People under
judicial impenitency, they may hear but shall not understand, they may see but
shall not perceive and not be converted, Isai. 6.10.

2. And yet this is sometimes the heavy work of Pious Rulers, thus to labor in
the fire, and spend themselves, and be spent until at last the Bellows are
burnt, and Lead consumed, and a melting in vain, the Wicked are not taken away;
the Lord in just judgment has said, they shall be reprobate silver, Jer.
6.29,30. for after the most reforming means, they will not be reformed, but
will trespass more and more and yet grow into a self conceited and
(...)-justifying way: and the just and holy One of Israel saying against these,
he th^^ is unjust, let him be unjust still, and he that is filthy let him be
filthy still, and he that is righteous let him be righteous still, and he that
is holy let him be holy still; and behold (says the Lord) I come quickly, and
my reward is with me, to give every man according as his work shall be,
Rev.22.11,12.

3. And yet the harder the work of Reformers is, and they found faithful in it,
though laboring with a People under a judicial impenitency, and it is in vain
as to that people: but yet their work proves the more acceptable to God, and
they shall be the more glorious in the eyes of the Lord, Isai. 49.4,5. 2 Cor
12.15. and those Rulers are in the way to see peace and truth in their days,
as Hezekiah, Josiah, and other godly Rulers had this favor granted to them;
although their work was amongst a People judicially declineing and running to
ruin: yet seeing these Kings Ruled with God, and were faithful to his Saints,
the Lord gave them Peace and Truth in their days, 2 King. 20.19. and 22.20.

4. And although such godly Rulers by their interceding with God, and faithful
laboring to reform a revolting people may preserve them from ruin in their
time; but yet if they be a people whose Rebellion and stiff neck is manifest
while yet their godly Rulers are with them, Deuteronomy. 31.27. it is not all that
heir Rulers can do will preserve them at present from many fearful Judgments;
as those which were inflicted upon the Israelites in the Wilderness, although
Moses was with them, Psalm. 106.23. Psalm. 73.34,38. and when the time is come
that the Lord finds none to make up the Hedge, and to stand up in the Gap
before the Lord for the Land, then will the Lord pour out of his Indignation
upon them, and consume them with the fire of his wrath, and recompense their
own way upon their heads, faith the Lord God, Ezekiel. 22.30,31.

But O that we did hearken unto the Lord, that he might not give us up to our
Hearts Lusts, to walk in our own Counsels, then he would soon subdue our
Enemies, and turn his hand against our Adversaries; but our time should endure
for ever and he would s^ed us with the finest of the Wheat, Psalm. 8^
11,12,13,14,15,16.

But O that we^d^ fear and flee these spiritual judgments more than any other
judgments; for Jesus has said* For judgment I am come unto this world, that
they which see not, might see, and they which see may be made blind ^^ye were
blind ye should have no sin, but now ye say we se^, therefore your sin
remains, John 9.39,40.

And Oh that we could wrestle and agonize by a spirit of prayer, that this
Gospel-vengeance may not be poured out upon our souls and the souls of our
children! crying earnestly to the Lord for his zeal, his strength, the
sounding of his bowels. O Lord why have thou made us to err from thy ways, and
^hardned our heart from thy fear; the people of thy holiness have possessed it
but a little while, Isai. 63.15,16,17,18.

THE COVENANT Which was Solemnly Renewed by the Church in Norwich in
Connecticut Colony in New England, March 22. 1675.
IN this Calamitous Year 1675, the Year of Jacobs trouble in the Wilderness, in
which the Lord does scourge New England by the Outrage of the Heathen; a Year
never to be forgotten.

And we who are in Church state being called by our Pious Rulers, with other
Congregations in this Colony, and in Conscience of our duty moved to seek the
Lord by Fasting and Prayer: and having considered the Particulars contained in
the Writing sent from our Rulers to the several Churches in this Colony, and
which we ought to keep in Record for succeeding Generations, in which they do
advertise us of those sins, for which the fierce wrath of the Holy one of
Israel is poured o^t upon New England; first by Blastings of the Fruits of the
Earth, but in this year by cutting off the Lives of many by the Sword, and
laying wast some Plantations, and threatening ruin to the whole.

Although to wonderment we have been hitherto preserved in the midst of the
Heathen, yea, somewhat by means of some Heathen; but we feeling in this day of
the Lords searching our Jerusalem as with a Candle, we cannot clear our selves
(though through Grace) both we, and ours have been preserved from those many
gross acts of Profaneness, and Drunkenness, Uncleanness, and such like
Scandals specified in that Writing, and do desire humbly to be thankful for
some progress of Converting Work in some of the rising Generation among us: But
while we do behold many unconverted Souls in this destroying year, and the same
sins working in us the causes of them, as in others; and a great degree of
dangerous neglects of that which ought to be for the prevention of Apostasy,
and that the departings of the Glory of God from a People are by little and
little, and not total at once: We do see cause to judge and cast down our
selves at the Footstool of the Lord, being covered with shame. And seeing true
Repentance does not end only in confession, but is restless for Reformation,
and solemn Covenanting with our God is a means (through his Grace) in order to
Reformation, as we find in the tenth of Ezra, and other Holy Scriptures and
pious Examples: We (...) therefore this Day Solemnly Covenant to Endeavor
uprightly by dependence upon the Grace of God in Christ Jesus our only Savior.

First, That our Children shall be brought up in the Admonition of the Lord, as
in our Families, so in public; that all the Males who are eight or nine years
of age, shall be presented before the Lord in his Congregation every Lords Day
to be Catechized, until they be about thirteen years in age.

Secondly, That those who are about thirteen years in age, both Males and
Females, shall frequent the Meeting appointed in private for their instruction,
and to accustom them timely to the exercise of Church Discipline, and these to
continue belonging to this Meeting, so long as they abide under Family
Government of Parents or others, or until they are come to the enjoyment of
full Communion with the Church.

Thirdly, That those who are grown up, so as that they are in that respect,
left to be at their own dispose, shall be required to take hold o^ the Covenant
of their Fathers holding forth qualifications suitable to that solemn duty, or
at least that they hold forth a conscientious endeavor in the use of means to
prepare for the ^ame; and if they be negligent they shall be admonished of
their sin; and if obstinate, they (...) ^e cut off from the Congregation (...)
Lord by that Dreadful Ordinance of Exc^mmunication.

Fourthly, Whereas the indulgence of Parents in bearing with the evil
Behaviors of their Children, their disobedience, unmannerly gestures,
prodigality, and vain and unseemly Fashions, or other things not becoming those
who are given to the Lord, is too manifest, and we are prone through fear or
favor, or not observance to neglect admonishing such, the Church does appoint
some Brethren to take notice of such Children, and timely, meekly, wisely, and
faithfully to admonish them, and their Parents, as the matter shall require,
and if private means does not prevail, then to manage the complaint orderly in
other steps.

Fifthly, Whereas the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the Seal of Communion,
ought often to be celebrated; for the prevention of neglect we do determine
(God granting opportunity) that we will be in the use of that Ordinance once in
every six Weeks.

Sixthly, Whereas it is too often seen, that many through fear, or favor, or
sense of inability, do behave themselves to their Brethren, as if they were not
concerned in that g^e^t Duty of Admonishing their Brother for offensive
behaviors, unless it be in cases wherein they themselves suffer wrong, and
hence love dec^yeth, and offenses abound; and Christ's Government, in works
denied: We do solemnly promise that we will in any wise rebuke, and not suffer
sin to rest upon our Brother, but deal faithfully according to Christ's Order.

And seeing we feel by woeful Experience how pr^ne we are s^on to forget the
works of the Lord, and our own Vows; We do agree and determine, that this
Writing or Contents of it, shall be once in every Year ^ead in a Day of Fasting
and Prayer before the Lord, and his Congregation; and shall leave it with our
Children, that they do the same in their solemn days of mourning before the
Lord, that they may never forget how their Fathers ready to perish in a strange
Land, and with fore grief and trembling of heart, and yet with hope in the
tender mercy, and good will of him, who dwelt in the burning Bush, did thus
solemnly renew their Covenant with God: And that our Children after us, may not
provoke the Lord and be cast off as a degenerate Offspring, but may tremble at
the Commandment of God, and learn to place their ^ope in him, who although he
has given us a Cup of Astonishment to drink, ^et will display his Banner over
them, who fear him.

A BRIEF DISCOURSE Proving that the First Day of the Week is the Christian
Sabbath; Wherein also the Objections of the Antichristian Sabbatarians of late
risen up in Connecticut Colony are refuted.

By Mr. James Fitch Pastor of the Church in Norwich in New England.

Gal.4.10,11. Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years. I am afraid
of you, lest I have bestowed upon you labor in vain. Gal.5.12, I would they
were even cut off which trouble you. Col.2.16.17. Let no man therefore judge
you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the New Moon, or
of the Sabbath-dayes. Which are a shadow of things to come, but the body is of
Christ. Printed in the Year 1683.

ARguments Grounded upon the Word of God, to prove that the First Day of the
Week is by Divine Appointment the Day separated for Holy Worship, and ought to
be kept Holy unto the Lord, according to the Rules of Sanctifying the Sabbath,
and consequently the Cessation of the seventh Day Sabbath in these Gospel Days.

And then a Reply to John Rogers his Answers to some Questions sent to him from
the Honorable Governor of Connecticut; and likewise an Answer to John R. his
seven Questions with which he concluded.

Concerning the Arguments, the Question is not now concerning the Name, whether
to be called a Christian Sabbath* which some take to be Analogically a
resemblance to the Jewish Sabbath; or whither to be called the Lords Day, which
some have thought to be a more Gospel Name. But the Subject of our Discourse at
this time, is not concerning the Name but the thing, and far be it from me to
imagine that I can add any thing to, or do so well as those Worthies, Doctor
Bound, Mr. Abbot, Dr. Owen, and Mr. Baxter, Mr. Shepard, and others have done
in their Learned Elaborate Discourses upon this Subject, only I shall take some
Arguments which to me seem most suitable to my present purpose.

1. The first is from Rev. 1.10. in which the Apostle declared that he was in
the Spirit on the Lords Day: For the opening of which words to make way for the
Argument we may Consider:

First, It was some particular Day in the week, which the Apostle calls the
Lords Day: for his Scope is to notify at what particular time he had the
Visions and Revelations of so great concernment to all the Churches in all Ages
to the end of the World, and this he calls the Lords Day:

Arg. Which was either some particular day, or some general name applicable to
any day of divine Vision, if so then the answer should be the same with the
Question, and prove and make evident nothing, for the question is what day he
had these divine visions and the Answer then should be in the day of divine
Visions, far be it from us to think that the Apostle guided by the Spirit of
God in every word he said, could speak such nonsense: therefore it mu^^ be
understood of some particular day in the week.

2. Secondly, It was some particular Day well known to the Churches of Christ
to whom he wrote, by that name of the Lords Day.

Arg. For it was a Day well known to the Churches by the name of the Lords Day,
or else unknown and obscure, and would want an Exposition; far be it likewise
from us to think that the Apostle guided by the Spirit of God, and having
undertaken to make known to the Churches in what particular Day he had those
Divine Revelations, should put an obscure and unknown name upon the Day by
which the Churches could not knew what he meant; therefore it is to be
understood of a particular day well known to the Churches of Christ.

3. Thirdly, This particular Day so well known to the Churches by the name of
the Lords Day, was a Day of divine Institution a Holy Day:

Arg. For it is called the Lords Day, either because it was a day of divine
Revelation, or a Day by divine Institution; but it was not called the Lords
Day, because it was a day of divine Revelation, for as we heard before, this
would be to speak nonsense, and nothing to the Question, therefore it was
called the Lords Day, because it was so by divine Institution, and so a Holy
Day.

Take one Argument more for the clearing of this, That which is honored by the
Holy Ghost in the Apostle, with the same honorable and holy Title and Name as
belongs to the Lords Supper, and other holy Institutions is holy as these are.

Arg. The reason is, for if the Holy Ghost should honor this particular Day
with as sacred a Name of Honor, as Ordinances are, and yet not be a holy Day,
it would be to honor it above its due, and consequently to degrade other
divine Institutions, but this cannot be, but the day spoken of has the same
honorable title and name, as the Lords Supper, the Word of the Lord, etc.

4. That the particular Day well known to the Churches of Christ, called by the
same honorable and holy Title or Name, as the Lords Supper is, and other holy
Institutions was the first day of the week.

And for the Proof of this, let us consider Arguments of all sorts,
inartificial, and artificial abundantly confirmed by the Holy Scriptures L^ght
and Evidence.

First, To begin with inartificial Arguments, viz. Testimony of all the
Churches in all ages, from the Apostles times, until you come nigh to our
days; take Mr. Baxter's own words, It is unquestionable to any man versed in
antiquity, that all the Churches of Christ, Greek and Latin, Syrian, Ethiopick,
Persian, and Arib^ck, called the first day of the week the Lords Day: and
further he and other Worthies have, and do give the challenge unto any one to
cite out of approved Histories, or from but one ancient Writer, but one Church,
or but one Christian, or but one Heretic, who did gainsay this but of late
times. And what force there is in this Argument we may now weigh it; the Word
o^ God says, that the Testimony of two Men is true, John 8.17. this is granted
of all who have but humanity, that it is legally true, and the contrary to this
is legally false, and we may know what to judge o^ sum that speaks it: but the
Testimony of all the Churches of Christ, from the Apostles time from age to
age, may well have the credit which belongs to two men, and somewhat more,
especially if we consider that it was ^ot possible all the Churches East and
West, those who had no opportunity one with another, that these could convene
or any ways consult to deceive their poor posterity with a lie, by telling
them that the first day of the week had the holy name of the Lords day, and was
to be kept holy, when if it were fa^se: but they all spoke the same thing,
because they were guided according to truth, which came from the same spirit of
truth, breathing in the Apostles, and guiding the Churches in the primitive
time, to declare the same to their Children, and so to Childrens Children in
all age^ according as it was said in another cafe, Isai. 78 6,7. and if de
facto as they call it, concerning the fact for that we now speak of ( viz.)
that the first day of the week from the primitive time, was called the Lords
day, if Histories be of no use to inform us, or what they say ought not to be
credited, although they generally speak the same thing as to fact what was
done. I know not of what use they be: but all the Books and Histories of the
Church of Christ concerning the time of the ten Persecutions, and ever since,
may be committed to the Flames as unworthy of credit: and let us never Write
and Record any thing more for the benefit of Posterity of this kind: But I take
it for granted that no sober minded Christian will agree to this, whatever John
Rogers his judgment may be.

And if any do desire to see more fully how it is proved that the first day of
the week is the Lords day by the testimony of the ancient Writers; let them
read Mr. Samuel Cra^ock's Book Entitled Knowledge and Practice, and Mr.
Baxter's Book, concerning the first Day, of the week by Divine Appointment the
Lords Day; in which Books may be seen the an^ient Writers cited in their
several places and ages from the primitive time to the latter time, attesting
the first day of the week to be the Lords Day.

We have at present done with the first Argument, as it respects Testimony.

2. But let us proceed to that kind of Argument which by the Learned is called
Artificial, and argues from the Artifice* Frame and Nature o^ the thing, and
must necessarily be granted to be the strongest way of Reasoning.

Arg. The Apostle calls the Day as it was by the Lord made, and as it is, or
else he did misc^l it; the first part of this disjunct Proposition must be
granted, that the Apostle did call the Day as it is, as the Lord had made, for
none will dare to say that he miscalled it, unless it be those who have learned
to Blaspheme. The Minor follows, that the first day of the (...) was made by
the Lord above any (...) day of the week to be the Lords Day in Gospel times;
and for the Proof of this let us now Consider:

1. First, this was the day in which our Lord rose, John 20.1. Luke 24.1.

2. This was the day in which he appeared to the two Disciples after his
Resurrection to teach them. Luke 24.13.

3. This was the day in which he appeared to the Apostles, and gave them their
Commission, and the Holy Ghost to enable them, Luke 24.33,36. John
20.19,20,21,22.

4. And this was the day he chose again to appear, when Thomas was with them,
John 20 26.

5. And this was the day promised and prophesied of and fulfilled as in the
former particulars.

It was the day promised in Psalm. 118.24. called the day ^h^ Lord has made:
speaking by way of Promise and Prophecy of Christ's Resurrection Day, as it is
express in the words

And that which some have mentioned in Ezekiel. 43.^7. has likewise its weight,
that the eighth day shall be the day wherein their Offering shall be accepted.

Arg. Take the Argument from hence, either this was performed literally, or
typically, if literally, then the eighth day which is our first day of the
week, was Honored and Sanctified above the seventh day, and that by the Lords
appointment: but thus it was not before the Gospel times for that would be
contrary to Numb. 28 9,10. therefore, it is to be understood typically, viz,
what day in Gospel times the Worship of God, shall be acceptable, and that is
the eight day which is our first day of the week.

And that day of his Resurrection was the day of performing that great promise
and prophecy, Thou art my Son, this any I have begotten thee, for thus its
expounded by the Aposte, Act 13.33. God has fulfilled the some to us, in that
he has raised up Jesus again, as (...) is written in the second Psalm, Thou
art my Son this day I have begotten thee.

For although Christ is the Son of God from everlasting, yet this was the day
in which he was declared to be the Son of God by Resurrection from the dead,
Romans 1.4. and the first day of the week was the very day for the performance of
this promise, Heb. 1.5. as P^rius does more fully explain it.

And to conclude this, and though we cannot expect that those who are under a
penal blindness and dea^ness, will either give or take reason until the Lord
shall give them an ear to hear, and an eye to see, and because they say they
see their fin remains, John 9.41. But to help the mind and memory of those
who are sensible of their weakness, but are willing to hear and see: Let us
gather up briefly that which has been said out of Rev. 1.10. as follows;

The day called the Lords Day is some particular day well known to the Churches
of Christ, otherwise it was in vain, and to no purpose for the Apostles to have
spoken a word of the Day.

And this day called the Lords day was a Holy Day, otherwise it could not have
the holy name proper unto holy things and holy time.

And that the day called the Lords Day is the first day of the week, this has
been proved b^^h by the Testimonies of all Churches in all ages, though
cavelled against by some in la^e times, yet this their Testimony may well pass
for legal Testimony in any Court of Justice upon Earth, and they who oppose it
must be legally condemned for Liars.

And more then all this it has been infallibly proved by the Word of God, and
his Works, that the first day of the Week is the very day which the Lord by his
Prophets foretold he ^ould make to be the day in which above all other days we
should rejoice, Psalm. ^18 24.

And with his Almighty hand he has performed it by the working of his mighty
power which he wrought in Christ Jesus when he raised him from the dead, Ephesians.
1.20. And in this very day revealing himself to his Disciples as the exalted
Head of his Church and People. And in this very day Commissioning his Apostles,
and breathing the Holy Ghost in the same day upon them, to empower and enable
them in all things respecting their work as Apostles of Christ, and
particularly by the Holy Ghost guiding the Apostles to little the first day of
the Week in all the Churches of Christ, as it is the Lords day and our
Christian Sabbath: but more of this in that which follows.

And thus that which the Lord has wrought according to his Word, may well pa^s
for divine Testimony in the Court of Conscience, h^t the first day of the week
is by Divine Institution the Lords Day, and our Christian Sabbath.

And now let us proceed in the second place to prove that the first day of the
week, which the Lord has made by his word and works to be the Lord Day and
our Christian Sabbath, was settled by the Apostles in all the Churches in the
primitive time.

First, By their Doctrine, Secondly, By their Practice.

1. By their Doctrine, and for the clearing of this, let us consider, Heb 4 8 9.

Where the Apostle does by his Doctrine inform us of a Rest which remains to
the People of God, and another day of Rest; and to make way for the Argument,
let us open that Scripture.

1. First, he speaks of a Sabbatism, so the Word in the Original is, a Rest
resembled by the seventh day Re^, spoken of in the third and fourth verses, and
by the Rest in the Land of Canaan mentioned in the seventh and eighth verses.

2. This is another Rest, and therefore another day for this Rest: thus in 8,
and 9 verses, and I shall at present content my self with Pareus his Exposition
until I meet with a better; that David in the Psalms to which the Apostle (...)
respect did speak of another Rest, and a (...) Rest which is neither the
seventh day (...) he Rest in the La^d of Can^an, but (...) ^^emplified by the
one, and sha^^^ out by the other, and the Apostles demonstration of this
Doctrine may be expounded by ad^j^nctive Syllogism.

Arg. ^ither it is of the first rest of God in which he ceased from the Works
of Creation or of that rest in Canaan, or of some other rest, and of another
day of rest, but not of the two former; and therefore the conclusion of the
Apostle is in the 8 th and 9 th verses of another Sabbath of rest.

3. (...) and day of rest spoken of by the Apostle remains, so it is express
in the words of the 9 th verse, which remaining properly, belongs to this rest,
intimating by this his Doctrine, that the other rest, the seventh day rest is
removed, for the remaining signifies the stability and permanency of this
Gospel rest, and the day of that rest, but the removing of the thing shaken,
that those things which cannot be shaken may remain, Heb. 12.27. The rest on
the seventh day, and that day of rest was miserably shaken by the sin and fall
of man, which brought the Curse not only upon himself and his Posterity, but
upon the works of Creation; and therefore the Lord did not only threaten to
destroy Man, but likewise to destroy the Beasts, the Creeping things, and the
Fowls of the Air; for says the Lord, it repents me that I have made them,
Genesis 6.7.

Thus was the seventh days Sabbath which was a memorial of Gods resting from,
and complacency in his works of Creation, shaken by Man's sin, and Gods curse
upon the Creatures because of Man, and the Commandment for the sanctifying the
seventh days Sabbath did remain as a handwriting against sinful and fallen
Man, as other Ordinances and Hand-writings did, until Christ comes and brings
in better Ordinances, and a better d^y of rest which remains, as the Apostle
by ^is Doctrine instructs us.

4 The Rest and day of best which remains, is (...) into which Christ first
entered, and at length did perfectly possess and into which he leads his
People, but Christ entered it to his rest the first day of the week, when he
rose from the dead, and at length the passed into the full possession of the
Mansions and resting places, ver. 14. and he that entered into his rest ceased
from his Works as God did from his, ver. 10.

5. The remaining of this day of Rest is spoken of in the present Tense; it is
said therefore there remains a Rest, so that it is that which at present the
people o^ God do possess although the perfection of it is reserved for them
when they shall come to the Mansions prepared by Christ for them, Joh. 14.2. 2
Pet. 1.11. the words being thus opened the Argument now follows.

Arg (...) the People of God have another day of Rest which is not the seventh
day rest, but that which Christ does lead them into by his own Example, and by
way of communion with him who entered into his rest in the first day of the
week, then the first day of the week is the day of our Gospel Rest, and of our
Christian Sabbath, and consequently a cessation of the seventh days Sabbath;
but the proof of all these particulars we have in the former: and concerning
Christ's entering into his Rest on the first day of the Week, I shall yet speak
more fully concerning that as I shall meet with it in some of the Objections of
John Rogers.

In the second place, to prove that the Apostles by their Doctrine did settle
the first day of the week to be our Christian Sabbath, we may see in 1 Cor.
16.1,2.

1. That which is there expressed is by way of precept and injunction, for so the
Apostle says, he had given order concerning the collection of the Saints, and
therefore not left it as a matter of indifferency or liberty, but whosoever did
neglect this, did transgress the Apostolical precept and order.

2. This order for the collection for the Saints was not only sent to the
Churches at Corinth, but to the Churches at Galatia. so that it was an order
and injunction common to the Churches.

3. The order did not only respect the collection it self, but the time and day
of it, that upon the first day of the week, let every one lay by him in store,
as God has prospered him: so it is express in the 2 (...). verse, now the
Argument follows.

Arg. The first day of the week was either a common and indifferent day, or a
holy day, the day of the Christian Sabbath, but no common and indifferent day;
for how could the Apostle by his injunction and order, make it necessary for
the Churches to attend this work of mercy, collection for the Saints on the
first day of the week, if it was but a common day, and thus esteem one common
day above another contrary to his Doctrine, Romans 14.5. far be it from us to
think that the Apostle could so contradict his own Doctrine, but it was because
the first day of the week was made to be a holy day, and such works of mercy
are very suitable unto the day.

2 Arg. Or thus, the Apostle did order collection for the Saints to be on the
first day of the week, either because it was the Christian Sabbath, or for some
other reasons, but I have so long waited to he^r of some other reasons, why the
Apostle should l^y an injunction upon all Churches to have such an honorable
respect to this day, without any consideration of it as the Lords Day and
Christian Sabbath, and all the Objectors and Cavillers against the first day of
the week the L^r^s day, have not brought forth the least appearance of any
reason to the contrary, that I confess I begin to think, that the Opponents
themselves within themselves, have received a Sentence of despair of giving any
reason, only they have traveled and broug^t ^orth one poor Objection, that
there is not a word spoken of a Sabbath here, and who says there is? but the
Argument is taken from the Apostles Order, and by Apostolical Order advanced
the first day of the week above any other day, and that the reason of this is,
either because it is the day of the Christian Sabbath or for some other reason
which never yet was brought to light, and therefore we conclude as in the
former that the Apostle by his Doctrine d^d ^ettle the first day of the week to
be a holy day, a Christian Sabbath.

Now in the next place, concerning the practice of the Apostles and the
practice of the Churches, of which much may be (...) in order to the^^
attendance to holy Duties in the first day of the week, because it was a day
separated for holy Worship, but at present we may consider Acts 20.7.

First, it was a Church assembly there spoken of, for it is said the Disciples
came together.

2. Secondly, the end for the sake of which they came together, it was for the
sake of religious duties, that they might partake of the Lords Supper called
breaking of Bread in this place, as in Act. 2.42. and did not go alone without
other Religious performances, viz. Prayer and hearing the Word Preached.

3. Thirdly, It is spoken of as a custom, and usual practice of the Disciples,
therefore it is said on the first day of the week when the Disciples came
together. Paul having waited for and taking this opportunity to Preach to them,
for he abode seven days among them, but this was the last day, his being ready
to depart on the morrow, as is expressed in he (...)

Arg. Hence the Argument is, Paul and the (...) (...) either kept the Seventh
day Sabbath (...) the week a Christian Sabbath or (...) they kept (...) Sabbath
at all, if they (...) kept the seventh day Sabbath, that was the day before
this First day o^ the Week then they had a meeting after a Sabbath (...) for
Religious Duties, then the Evang^li^^ would not have spoken of this Meeting on
the first day as the only Church Meeting of the seven days of the Apostles
abode amongst them; therefore it was the first day of the Week in which Paul
and the Disciples assembled, and kept as a Christian Sabbath.

Much more has been said by others, and I have somewhat more in readiness to
say if the occasion calls for it, and God gives opportunity.

But at present having proved that the first day of the Week was by the Lord
himself made by his Word and by his Works to be the Lords day, and our Gospel
and Christian Sabbath, and his Apostles were guided by the Holy Ghost to settle
it in the room and place of the seventh day, both by their Doctrine and by
their Practice; we proceed to make Reply to John R. his Answers to the
Questions: And concerning his Preface to his Answers, I shall at present omit
it until I come to his Conclusion and then consider both his Preface and
Conclusion together, these and the Superscription being to the same Purpose,
and the same for substance.

Quest. 1. The first Question: Are not just and necessary Consequences from
Scripture to be taken for the mind of the Holy Ghost in Scripture, or else how
shall we Answer the Papists against the error of Transubstantiation?

John R. his Answer is,

Ans, If the Consequence drawn from Scripture is agreeable to the Scripture and
no ways contrary to the Scripture, it must be granted truth, because it speaks
what the Scripture speaks. But as to the Papists John R. says, they had no
Scripture that said a piece of Bread was the body of our Lord, or that our Lord
was turned into a piece of Bread, or that Bread was turned into our Lord; for
our Lord did not say to his Disciples, Take eat this Bread is my Body, as the
Papists did affirm, therefore they said that which the Scripture did not say,
so do you say that which the Scripture does not say, for you call the first day
of the Week the Christian Sabbath, but the Scripture does not; you call every
first day of the Week the Lords Day, but the Scripture does not ^o.

Reply The Reply to John R. his Answer follows:

His Answer consists of two parts,

1. First, partly (...) a seeming Concession granting that Consequences drawn
from Scripture and agreeable to Scripture are truth, etc.

2. Secondly he compares us unto the Papists, for saying ha^ which the
Scripture does no^ s^y and the Argument he gives is, If we say the first day of
the Week is the Lords day and the Scripture does not say it, then we are like
the Papists.

Reply, The Reply is, that we have already proved that the Scripture says,
that the first day of the Week is the Lords day, and therefore John R. does
fal^ely Reproach us, and I might say, that he that will hold to the letter of a
Scripture, although contrary to the spiritual scope of that and other
Scriptures, is like the Papists in their defense of Transubstantiation from
those words, this is my Body: But John R. does hold to the letter of the fourth
Command respecting the seventh days Sabbath, contrary to the command of Christ
in the Gospel and that which is the (...) spiritual and proper scope of that
command, as appears by the former arguments, and more shall appear in that
which follows, therefore in this John R. is like the Papists.

Qu. 2. Is not Rest merely due and proper to succeed Labor?

Ans. John R. grants that Rest necessarily follows Labor, and that God
rested on the seventh day after his six days work was ended.

Qu. 3. Was not Jesus Christ as he was God equal with the Father, and as he
was God Man was Lord of the Sabbath; he himself declares in the fourth
Command, and requires Man to do the like by the Command?

Ans. John R. his Answer is that Jesus Christ as he was God was equal with the
Father, all things was created for him and by him, But John R. says, the next
part is an assertion, yet not a solid one in this case, for as Jesus Christ was
God he was commander of the Sabbath, yea the whole Law, but as he was Man, he
was made of a Woman under the Law: And further John R. says, but if thou have
reference to the Scripture, Mar. 2.28. which says, Therefore is the Son of Man
Lord of the Sabbath Day, he does not say, God Man but the Son of Man.

Reply, The Reply to John Rogers is,

1. First, He grants that Christ as God, is the Commander and Lord of the
Sabbath.

2. Secondly, He denies him to be the Lord of the Sabbath, as he is God Man: to
which the Reply is,

Reply, By God-Man is meant, God and Man personally united, that is, the Son of
God having assumed a humane nature into personal union with his Divine nature,
is both God and Man; and if he be not Lord of the Sabbath as he is God and Man
then he (...) not head over all things as he is God and Man, Ephesians. 1.21.22. then
not Mediator as God and Man, 1 Timothy 2.5. And the Argument he gives now follows:

For says John Rogers, as he was Man he was made of a Woman, and made under
the Law, hence his Argument is, if Christ as a Man was made of a Woman under
the Law, then as God-Man he is not Lord of the Sabbath. If this be good
Divinity then let John R. proceed to say, that because he was Man, made under
the Law, therefore as God Man he is not head of his Church, and is not the
Mediator, and as God Man he shall not return to be the Judge of the World;
this is so far from being solid, that it is contrary to the frame of Gospel
Scriptures.

2. Secondly, He argues from Mark 2.28. his Expositions are these, but if thou
have reference to that Scripture which says, the Son of Man is Lord of the
Sabbath, he does not say God Man but the Son of Man; whence his Argument is, if
the Scripture says that the Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath, then John
Rogers judges it is not a solid assertion to say Christ as God Man is Lord of
the Sabbath.

Reply, My Reply is, that if Christ the Son of Man be Lord of the Sabbath its
either as he is the Son of God, or as the Son of Man, or as he is God and Man;
not as the Son of God considered without being the Son of Man for the words are
express, that the Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath.

2. Secondly, Not as the Son of Man, this John Rogers grants to be too low,
because thus he was under the Law, and therefore it must be as he is God Man,
that he was Lord of the Sabbath, and yet John Rogers says this is not a solid
assertion, but he has given no solid Argument to the contrary, but that which
fights against it self.

Only a Question from hence he does propound, I find it to be so long winded,
and yet so short spirited as to any reason belonging to the Question in hand,
that I can hardly spare Pen, Ink and Paper to Transcribe it, but we must have
it as it is:

These are John Rogers his words; I shall propose a Question in this matter, if
in Scripture ^t is said, That the Man was not made for the Woman, but the Woman
for the Man, and in Scripture the Man is called the Lord of the Woman, why then
if the Sabbath was made for Man and not Man for the Sabbath, is not Man Lord
even of the Sabbath day; for though a Man be Lord of his Wife, yet he ought not
to ^ut her away in respect of the Law of God that has made those two one, so
likewise the Sabbath, though Man be Lord of it, in respect it was made for him,
and not him for it; yet by virtue of Gods command, ought not to profane it.
yet if in case it was so that Man must either omit the deed of mercy to Man, or
profane the Sabbath by doing the deed of mercy to the Man, he ^ught to
profane the Sabbath and do the deed of mercy, in respect the Sabbath was made
for Man and not Man for the Sabbath; for God has preferred the Man above his
Sabbath, not making him for the Sabbath but the Sabbath for him; for in this
respect God has made him Lord even of the Sabbath day.

Reply, The Reply to all this is, That all this is nothing to the Question
stated, and who knows not but God will have Mercy rather than Sacrifice whether
on the Sabbath day or any other time.

Qu. 4. Was not the work of Redemption as great, and Godlike as the work of
Creation, and so worthy of Rest and a memorial upon its finishing.

Ans. John. R. his Answer is, the work of Creation was the greatest work that
ever was, for it was the Creating of all things: and the work of Redemption the
m^rcifullest work that ever was to Gods Elect, for by it they were redeemed:
And forasmuch as the God and Father of all things ought to be obeyed as that
one Lawgiver, who created all things and commanded all, that the seventh day
should be kept holy in respect of Creation, ought to be observed by resting
from Labor as he did, and that because he commanded it: And forasmuch as our
Lord Jesus Christ has redeemed Gods Elect by his body and blood, and appointed
for a Memorial of the same Baptism and the Lords Supper to be observed by the
Redeemed ones, he ought to be obeyed in the same, as God the Father in the
other, so that both these works have some thing to keep them in memory by the
appointment of the Workmen.

Reply, The Reply to John R. his Answer is, First, He says the work of
Creation is the greatest work, and his reason is, because God made all things:
The Reply is,

That if the work of Creation be the greatest, then the work of Redemption is
not so great as the work of Creation; but a work, is greater or lesser
according to the greatness of wisdom, power and goodness manifest in it, but
the wisdom of God shining in the work of Redemption, excels the wisdom shining
in the work of Creation, 1 Cor. 2.7. wisdom in a mystery, and the power made
manifest in Redemption is greater than in Creation, called the exc^eding
greatness of his power toward them that do believe, Ephesians. 1.19.

And for goodness to sinners John R. cannot but confess it is the mercifullest
work, and yet he denies that a day shall be appointed for a memorial of this
greatest work; but as it is worthy of a Day, so the Lord has appointed the
first day of the week for that end, as has been proved by the Scriptures
abovementioned, and therefore it is in vain for John R. to deny it.

Qu. 5. The fifth Question is, Was not the work finished at the Resurrection of
Christ on the first day of the week, when he entered into his rest as God did
into his.

Ans. John R. his Answer is, The price was paid as soon as the Sacrifice was
offered, and the dead raised; but the work of Redemption as yet not perfected
in us for we are yet under the bondage of corruption, Romans 8 23. but to say
that Christ entered into his Rest on the first day of the week I cannot, for he
did assemble himself with his Disciples after his Resurrection, being seen of
them forty days before he ascended up into Heaven, and upon the day of his
Resurrection did eat with his Disciples, and did travail with them, which was
Labor.

Reply, The Reply is, that John R. denies that the work of Redemption was
finished, because it is not finished in us: Whence his Argument is,

That if Redemption be not perfected in Believers, then not finished by Christ:
but this is false reasoning for want of distinguishing between the work of
Redemption and the work of Application: Christ's work of Redemption may be
finished although the work of the Holy Ghost as sent from the Father and the
Son to apply Redemption may not be finished and is not in this life perfected
to the Elect.

Obj. The second Objection is, That Christ was not entered into rest on the
first day of the week, and his reason is, because he assembled with his
Disciples, did eat and travail, etc.

Reply, The Reply is, Either Christ was on the first day of the Week in a state
of Humiliation, or a state of Exaltation: if in a state of Humiliation, then
his Resurrection was no degree of his Exaltation, contrary to Rom 1.3,4 Ephesians.
1.20,21. if he were in a state of Exaltation then in a state of blessed and
glorious Rest: And although there are diverse degrees of his Exaltation, as his
Resurrection, Ascension, Session at the right hand of the Father, and his
return at the last Day to be the Judge, but Resurrection is one degree of his
Exaltation and of his Rest; and therefore he was entered into Rest, although for
the conviction and confirmation of His Disciples, he did show himself, and by
some sensible signs make it manifest that it was himself, that very humane
nature which had suffered death, was raised, that he that descended was raised,
and is the same also that ascended into Heaven Ephesians. 4.10.

Qu 6. Did not Christ allow this to be called his Day, as the Sacrament is
called his, or the Lords Supper?

Ans. John R. his Answer is, I cannot say that ever the first day of the week
was called the Lords Day, and therefore cannot say whether he allowed it or no,
I know that the Cup which our Lord communicated to his Disciples, they called
it the Lords Cup, and the Table at which they sa^e to communicate of the Bread
and Wine, they called the Lords Table, and the Apostle John calls that Day in
which the Lord communicated to him those Visions in the Re^elations the Lords
Day, but what day of the Year, or of the Week, I cannot tell.

Reply, The Reply to this is, there has been Arguments given of all sorts to
prove both from humane and divine Testimony, the word and works of the Lord,
the Doctrine and Examples of the Apostles of Christ, that the first day of the
Week was that very day called the Lords day, Rev. 1.10. and if John Rogers was
asked who his Father was, he would be ashamed to say he could not tell, and yet
he cannot but know that as to humane Testimony, there is more clear and
infallible proof, that the first day of the week was called the Lords Day than
he can have who his Father was, this being the Testimony of all the Churches in
all Ages, from the primitive time to this very day, until of late some few have
risen up and raised the Objection.

But besides all these Arguments from the Scripture have been given to prove
it; and if yet John R. will say he cannot tell, we must leave him to his
ignorance, and he ought not to be offended with us, and revile us, because we
do know.

Qu. 7, Did not Christ countenance and allow his Apostles in the practice and
solemnization of that day in proper Sabbath Ordinances?

Ans. His Answer is before, saying not that I know the Ordinance of the Sabbath
is rest to Man and Beast, for so God ordained in the fourth Command after the
six days work to rest.

Qu. 8, Are not Christ and his Apostles therein to be a pattern for Christians
to follow, and so vertually a divine Institution?

Ans. John Rogers his Answer is, that the eighth Question is answered by the
Answer to the seventh, and the answer to the seventh was the same with the
Answer to the sixth, viz. that he could not tell, that he did not know, and
thus he makes a quick dispatch of Answers to the Governors Questions: But in
this he is like those who when the Question was asked them concerning the
Baptism of John, whence was it, from Heaven or of Men? they reasoned with
themselves saying, if we shall say from Heaven he will say unto us, why did you
not then believe him? but if we shall say of Men, we ^ear the People, for all
hold John as a Prophet, Mat. 21.25,26. and therefore they concluded it was
safest for them to say we cannot tell, ver. 17. Thus likewise if John R. should
say, that the Pattern and the Examples of the Apostles, respecting Worship, and
particularly concerning the Sabbath, ought to be followed, then he knows it
would be said, why do you not follow them? and if he should say, that their
Example ought not to be followed by Christians, this would be so un-Gospel-like
and un-Christian like, and therefore John R. concludes it is best for him to
say he cannot tell.

Qu. 9. If the old Jewish Covenant be expired, and sundry Ordinances about time
and place, etc. altered, why not the time of the old Sabbath alterable by the
Lord of the Sabbath upon a Gospel account as a memorial of Redemption?

Ans. John R. his Answer is, I know not what thou do mean by old Jewish
Covenant, I know no Covenant in Scripture by that name, if th^^ do mean the
Covenant which the two Tables of Stone, the Tables of the Covenant which did
contain the ten Commandments which Israel did enter into a Covenant with God,
by engaging to perform the same, which Covenant they brake, and perished in the
Wilderness for the same; God did ordain by the hand of Moses Ceremonies as a
figure of the Mediatorship of Jesus Christ at this time at Mount Sinai, when
Israel entered into the Covenant of works, to show that there was mercy to be
obtained by Jesus Christ, though the first Covenant was broken by them; that is
to say, upon Repentance and Faith. Now though the first Covenant which was
dedicated with the blood of Bulls and Goats, and accompanied with many Rites
and Ceremonies which were figures of the Mediatorship of Jesus Christ, which
Rites and Ceremonies are done away, but none of them placed in the two Tables,
for that Law is spiritual, and it is as easy by Gods Decree, for Heaven and
Earth to pass as for a tittle of it to fail: Now the other Law contained in the
former Covenant, called the Handwriting of Ordinances, which was nailed to the
Cross of Christ, which did contain meats and drinks, New Moons and Sabbaths,
which Sabbaths was besides the Sabbaths of the Lord, but Gods seventh
day-Sabbaths were commanded by the mouth of the Lord with an audible voice,
written with the finger of God in Stone, death inflicted upon the breaker of
it, Exodus 3^,12.

Reply, The Reply is this, John Rogers his Answer is full of confusion jumbling
the Covenant of Works and the Covenant of Grace together:

1. First, The Covenant of Works was made with Adam.

2. Secondly, The Covenant of Grace may be considered either as Ceremonially
and Legally Administered, and this John R. calls the Covenant of Works, or as it
is attended with Gospel Administrations, and there the Question arises.

Whether another day might not be more suitable upon a Gospel account than the
seventh day Sabbath? and what reason does John R. give to the contrary? I
confess I begin to grow weary of forming his Arguments for him, because I find
it more difficult to find out his reason, and to form it for him than to answer
it, and could even determine for the future, that if he cannot, or will not
form his Arguments himself, I shall leave them as I find them covered with
darkness and void of form; but if there be a^y ^ace of reason in this his
Answer, at length it is, That the seventh day being commanded in the Decalogue
is therefore unalterable: but we have proved that Christ has altered it, and
by the Holy Ghost guided his Apostles to settle the first Day of the Week the
Lords Day and our Christian Sabbath, and because I shall meet with this
Objection more fully in the next Answer, I proceed to that.

Qu. 10. Is there not room left in the Words of the fourth Command for the
seventh Day to be altered, and our Lords day to be sanctified by the Lord of
the Sabbath? See the Preface of the Commannment, Remember the Sabbath to keep
it holy, and the Conclusion only says, the Lord blessed the Sabbath: and when
the seventh day is named, it says only is, and not shall be for ever so
observed:

Ans. John R. his Answer is No: there is no room, for the seventh day is the
very day commanded, and Jesus Christ has left it upon Record, that it is
easier for Heaven and Earth to pass than one tittle of the Law to fail, and
has forbid his Disciples for entertaining such a thought in these words,
saying, think not I am come for to destroy the Law; and again, says he; For
verily I say unto you, till Heaven and Earth pass one jott or tittle shall in
no wise (...) from the Law; who dare therefore attempt such a thing against
Gods Law, given in such a terrible manner, being spoken by his own mouth, the
Earth trembling at his Word, and so terrible was the sight that Moses said, I
exceedingly fear and quake, and not only so, but the Son of God testifying that
it shall abide as long as Heaven and Earth, as is already specified, threatening
also any that attempt such a wicked act, saying, Whosoever therefore breaks the
least of these Commandments and shall teach Men so, etc. therefore who dare
attempt such a presumptuous act against Gods Law, and Christ's confirmation of
the same Law, and what is that to purpose in the Preface and Conclusion, seeing
the day commanded is the seventh day and no other, so that Sabbath is proper
only to the seventh day and no other: but as to the conclusion of the
commandment, some Translate it, therefore the Lord blessed the seventh day and
hallowed it, which is most agreeable, it being taken from Gods seventh day
rest, Genesis 2.3. See Beza's Translation, Exodus 31.12. and death not infflicted
upon any ceremonial Law but Excommunication, but death upon the profaning of
the seventh day Sabbath: the Reply is,

Reply: John R. in this Answer is fled to his seeming Fort, and he knows if he
be driven out from this, that neither he nor any for the seventh days Sabbath,
have any Castle nor Covering for their conceited confidence, but the scope of
the Question if rightly stated and plainly expressed is.

That a Sabbath as a Sabbath is first and last in the Precept, and shall not be
changed, but the particular day is secondarily specified, and is mutable as
other positive Laws are, the Lord having reserved a liberty to himself to
change them according to his Royal pleasure, and who shall say he has done
iniquity? And as for John R. his Argument, so far as it has any color of
reason in it, is. That seeing Christ came not to destroy the Law but to fulfil^
it, and that in every jot and tittle of it, and therefore not to change the
seventh days Sabbath into the first day of the Week, and to this we shall
positively and plainly Reply.

1. First, There is that which may be called an actual fulfilling in all and
every particular point and duty required in the Decalogue, but Christ did never
actually fulfill the particular Duties of Parents to Children of a Husband to a
Wise and many other particular points and duties contained in the Decalogue and
yet his fulfilling all and every one of those Duties which had any suitableness
to his station and work, as he had opportunity in relation to God or Man, this
is called a fulfilling of all righteousness, Mat. 3.15.

2. Secondly, There is an actual fulfilling of the Law literally; and in this
sense the Priest in his Labor in Sabbath duties of his Office, might be said
to profane the Sabbath, Mat: 12 5.

And a fulfilling spiritually and finally according to the true scope of the
Law, and thus he was said to be blameless, and so may we, if we keep that day
holy which Christ has appointed as most suitable to Gospel times and the most
spiritual scope of the fourth Command, although we profane the seventh day
Sabbath.

3. Thirdly, To come nearer to the Text mentioned, Christ came not to make any
destructive change of the Law but to fulfill it, and therefore to make a
perfecting or perfective change: And the Godly, Learned do note that the word
to destroy the Law signifies to dissolve or pull it in pieces, Christ came not
to dissolve or pull the Law in pieces, and leave the wills of Men to a lawless
liberty, but to bring in a stricter holiness and righteousness, and a more
perfect Administration and edition of the Law, and this is expressly his scope,
and Christ himself expounds his meaning in the following part of the Chapter,
in Mat. 5. whilst Christ gives a more spiritual exposition than the corrupt
Pharise^, did, who did cleave to and pervert the letter of the Law, as this
Jewish Sabbatarian does the letter of the fourth Command but when Christ
changes the seventh day Sabbath to the first day of the week, that is the
Sabbath from the seventh day of the week to the first day of the week, with
respect to the commemoration, not only of the old Creation which is subjected
unto corruption, but the new Creation the work of Redemption which shall
remain: what destructive change is this of the Law in any one jott or tittle of
it, and no more reason for any to complain of a change then they had when
Christ changed, and made water into wine; is John Rogers cannot choose but
refuses this Gospel wine, yet let him not scorn and scoff at us, for our
thankful receiving of it: And if Beza be in so good credit with J. R. as he
seems to intimate, let him credit Beza in this matter also, who attesteth
that in an ancient Copy he had found it thus Recorded, That the Apostle had
given order for the Collections in the first day of the week with this added
the Lords Day, 1 Cor. 16.2.

But seeing this Ju^aizer and others of his persuasion have so wrested this
Text, Mat. 5.17. we shall add one consideration more for the clearing of the
same, and our Argument is this.

Arg. As Christ came to fulfill the Law, so likewise he came to fulfill the
Prophets, so it is expressed in Mat. 5.17. think not says Christ, that I am
come to destroy the Law or the Prophets, I am not come to (...) but to fulfill.

But Christ did fulfill the Prophets, their prophecies by performing and
answering the scope and end of the same, and by changing the Prophecies into
performances: Oh most happy and glorious change, without which the Prophets,
their Prophecies could not have been fulfilled, this was far off from a
destructive change of one jott or tittle of the Prophecies.

So likewise Christ did fulfill the Law, and particularly that Law the fourth
Commandment, by performing and answering the scope and end of it, and by
changing not the Sabbath as a Sabbath, but by changing of the Sabbath from the
seventh day to the first day of the week, and this was no destructive change of
one jott or tittle of the fourth Command, but a most happy and glorious change
with respect to the glory of the Lawgiver, and the good of his People, which
blessed ends are more fully and perfectly attained by the change than could
possibly be by a seventh day Sabbath, as is more fully explicated in my
Catechism; so that the fourth Command complains not, it is wronged not a jott
or tittle of it destroyed, no more than when vessels of Brass or Earthen
Vessels are turned into Gold and that which is less perfect is turned into that
which is more perfect, for though the Law of God is ever perfect as to the time
and subject for whom it is fitted, and so as the seventh day Sabbath as it
respected the time and subjects for whom it was fitted, but yet when the first
day of the week is appointed by the Lord of the Sabbath as most suitable to
Gospel times, and the subjects of Gospel Administrations; now that which was
less perfect respecting this time and state must give place to that which is
more perfect, and in this fourth Command is not destroyed but fulfilled the Law
being no Enemy to the Gospel, but like Moses and Aaron do kiss one another upon
the Mount of the Lord, and thus does the fourth Command and our Christian
Sabbath.

Qu. 11. Whether do you well, knowing these Arguments are pleaded and
accordingly practiced in all Christian Churches and our Laws thereupon founded,
to disturb our Peace, offend our Consciences, oppose our Government, before you
gave us conviction, either by writing or otherwise, when as you were left to
enjoy your own persuasion in private?

Ans. To which John R. his Answer is, as follows.

I am willing to refer it to the Judgment of God whether I have done well or
not well, who knows whether you have stood for his truth or I* but to say
pleaded and practiced in all Churches* I know i^ to be otherwise both by Books
and R^aso^^ings and as for the Laws respecting there things (...) know no
Authority you have ^o make such Laws; or there is o^e Lawgiver who is able to
save or to destroy, respecting the things as to ma^er of Worship: you ought to
have been (...) to his Laws, and not to have adventured to (...) Laws for him
founding (...) upon no ^ions, and so become despisers of his Laws, and
persecutors of those which will worship God by his own Laws and whatever you
think of it, it is God opposes you by us, wherein you act in darkness and not
Govern according to his will, and as for our not giving you conviction as you
say you are so far from receiving conviction from our hands* that you would not
give us liberty for to make our lawful defense, but use your unreasonable power
by preventing us of lawful plea^ and a so we did w^i^e the first time we were
brough^ (...) you ^o^n Adyn the Secretary being Ju^^e which was before you had
any first (...) Law as since you la^ema^e, we not knowing then but that we
should have had liberty to have pleaded our innocence, but was forthwith took
away by the Constable and not suffered to make our defense, being fined ten
shillings a piece, and committed to the Prison; and no Law of God or of this
Colony produced to convict us by, which we look to be very unreasonable: and
then wrote we to the Court which was then sitting but obtained no answer; I
have a Copy of it to this day with all our hands to it as we then sent it, but
being now in Prison I cannot come at it, otherwise I might have sent you a Copy
of it at this time. And what I have met withal from some of the Ministers
respecting this matter, it will be too much for me to write now, to assert what
opposition I have met with from their hands in not lending me an ear, I deny
that we were left to enjoy our own pers^asion in private, forasmuch as God has
hid these things from the wise and prudent and revealed them to us, He has
required us, that what he has told us in darkness we should speak in light;
what we hear in the Ear to preach upon the house tops.

The last thing in thy Paper is as follows,

John, when you have answered these Queries in writing, then a Reply may be
made by some ab^e^ hand, and published to the World, or you may send it whither
you will, but further to gratify Pride, conceit or your presumption we see no
need nor to be for edification and to this added to the former, John Rogers
says, I having answered to thy Queries writing them at large, so as where my
answers may be seen, they may be seen at large with thy reproachful
Superscription and false charge, with both the Superscriptions and revising
Conclusion, I know not of one Word that is wanting that is in thy Paper, but is
here exactly set down, and the Question spoke to.

And John Rogers further says, I desire now that these following things may be
weighed and well considered; we have this many years suffered under the
Government by Imprisonment, Fines, and other Sufferings, under a pretense of
Heresy, and acting against Christ, and being Antichrist, it must needs follow
that if we are such, it must needs be because we hold such things which are
Erroneous, being corrupted; and if so, why do you not show us wherein, and
confute us by the Scripture? we are ready at any time to produce our Scripture
proof for what we hold, for it does indeed belong to us to prove what we hold
by the Scripture, and also i^ belongs to you to prove what you hold by the
Scripture; for it is not our work to prove your Opinion, nor your work to prove
ours, but the affirmative party is to produce the proof, now we are the
suffering party, being judged by you as if we were Antichrist, and called to an
account by you: could we now have Justice at your hands, and you reasonable
Men, you would demand our proof out of Scripture and weigh the same meekly and
uprightly: we call you not to an account about your Opinion, but you ours,
therefore it is our Opinion that is in hand, and do you think it has a good
face on it, while you are afflicting us, and charging me to be Antichrist, and
acting against Christ, to put forth Questions to me about your own Opinion
whenas I call you not to an account about it; but since thou have begun to
question about your own Opinion well may I.

Reply, The Reply to John Rogers his long Answer, and to the eleventh Querie, I
can find in this his Answer, neither Divinity nor Humanity, neither good
Reason, nor good Manners; but a throng of absurdities and i^ civili^e: and as
soon as they are brought near the Light their monstrous deformities will be
made manifest to any man who has not a blast upon his reason.

1. First, The Word of God says, that we ought to follow peace with all Men,
and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14.

But John R. pretending holiness proceeds to disturb the peace Ecclesiastic,
and Civil, of Pious Rulers and Godly People, and appealeth to God for a
Judgment, like those in Isai. 48.3.4. who said they would trust in God, but
they were rebellious, and their Brow as Brass and Neck as an iron Sinew.

2. Secondly, He denies that all the Churches of Christ do keep the first day
of the week, as it is the Lords Day and asserteth the contrary: but if J. R.
knows of any Church in ancient times or of late times, it is pity he does not
help those of his Persuasion who have been so often challenged to mention one
Church of Christ in former times, or one Writer, or one Christian, or one
Heretic, who did gainsay this until late times: but if J. R. has found them
out and yet they must not be known but lie in obscurity, there we must leave
him and his Churches at present.

3. Thirdly, God and his People has chosen our Governor to be a Judge, but J.
R. has taken upon him to give him his charge, and both in his Preface and in
his Conclusion, has usurped the power to judge, both our Governor and our
Laws, contrary to James 4.11. and although the Word of God says, Rebuke not an
Elder, but entreat him as a Father, 1 Timothy.5.1. and that we should be ready to
give a reason of our hope with meekness and ^^verence, 1 Pet. 3.15. But J. R.
is bold to rebuke our Governor, Dicta^our like, without the least appearance
of meekness but with a gross appearance of irreverence, having wholly forgot
what Titles of Honor Paul gave, not only to Agrippa the King but likewise to
Festus, Act. 26. civility may be in one where sincere Conversion is not, and
good Manners may be where saving Grace is not, but it is not a possible thing
that sincere Conversion and saving Grace can be in that Man in whom there is
not Civility and good Manners. And as for his aspersing Complaints against the
Government, for proceeding against him, I have no call: nor is there any need
for me to take the defense of our Rulers, they are well able to defend
themselves, and will in due time clear their exceeding len^^y toward John
Rogers and their l^g^l proceedings, and wipe away all his reviling Aspersions;
and what has been done by the Ministers and other Christians for the
conviction of J. R. and his Company is well known to those who are not mere
strangers: but reprove not a Scorner lest he hate thee, Prove.9 8. A Man that is
an Heretic after the first and second Admonition reject, Tit. 3.10.

So that means of Conviction are to be improved with respect to the hope of
good fruit but what the fruit has been of the improvement of means upon John
R. is known to any who knows John Rogers.

And whereas John R. is called in that writing a Prisoner of Antichrist, and
this and such like expressions he calls Revilings: I shall propound some
considerations out of the Word of God to guide our Judgments.

1. First, He that sits himself in opposition to Christ in his Messengers, and
in the Communion and Assembling of his Church, does act the part of Antichrist,
1 John 2.18,19.

2. Secondly, He that manageth his persuasion whatever it is against the
Churches of Christ by ^n Antichristian spirit, is in this an Antichrist that is
to say, not with that Christian Spirit as the Witnesses of Christ are wont to
do, by laying aside the use of lawful liberty. As Paul in abstaining from Meat
rather than offend his Brother, Romans 14.

By practicing that which there is no Rule and Command^or, unless it were at
present for avoiding of offense, as Paul's Circumcising Timothy, Act.16 3. And
observing other Ceremonial Rites for a time, although he was as clear in his
Judgment in these things, and far more infallible than John R. can be
concerning his seventh day Sabbath.

And behaving themselves before those who are in place of Civil Government, in
giving a reason of their hope with meekness and reverence as in the
forementioned place, 1 Pet. 3.15.

These and such like virtues have eminently shined in all sufferers for Christ.

But the contrary to these is an Antichristian Spirit, when so far from
avoiding offense, that there is a catching at an opportunity to lay a stumbling
block in the way, not only of the Profane and the Hea^^e; and giving them an
occasion to Blaspheme bu^t grieve those whose godliness is manifest to the
Consciences of all, this is practical Antichristanism in a high degree.

3. Thirdly, He that presently after his pretended Conversion, plungeth into
the errors of Anabaptism and most r^gid Separatism and Enthusiasm more deep
than ever they dip any in the water, and at length is left to fall from set and
solemn seasons of Prayer, and to deny the immortality of the Soul, at least to
dream that after its departure out of the body, it lies in a sleep, and shall
neither go to Heaven nor Hell, this is the Man who is proud, and has doted
upon his Questions until he knows nothing, 1 Timothy 6.4. This is the Man whose
folly shall be made manifest unto all, 2 Timothy 3.9.

The Heathen Philosophers, and the natural light of reason in these very
Heathen, shall rise up to condemn him. This is the Man whose destruction shall
be swift, 2 Pet. 2.1. And perish in the gainsaying of Ko^ah, Jud.11.

4. Fourthly, He that does all the former under a pretense of Conversion work,
having been notoriously scandalous in his life; and as soon as he pretends to
be converted, ^e presently leaps into Antichristian practice; and runs
furiously on with ^n Antichristian Spirit, this is the Man whom the unclean
Spirit finds to be empty, swept and garnished, and returns with 7 Devils worse,
and the latter end of this Man shall be worse than his beginning, Mat. 12,44.
And whilst he acts in such spiteful opposition against the Spirit of Christ in
his Messengers and Communion of Saints, and in that Blaspheming, Reviling or
dirty manner with lies and slanders against the Rulers in the Colony and
Church, if this man has not already committed the Sin unto Death, yet he is in
the high way to that unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost, Heb. ^0 26,27 28.

But how far all there are applicable to J. R. I leave to his own Conscience,
and the Conscience^ of others: I am only at present called to declare the Rule
out of the Word of God by which we ought to judge; and let others who are
eyewitnesses and eat-witnesses of his practice give in their Testimony when
they are called thereunto: But I conclude, that if the Spirit of Christ was not
only in the Martyes, the Witnesses of Christ, but likewise in our godly
Predecessors, Mr. Ho^ber, Mr. Cotton, Mr. Dev^^port, Mr. Shepard Mr. Stone,
and in many others in England and New England: That Spirit that is contrary to
the Spirit of Christ in those Worthies is an Antichristian Spirit, and in
whomsoever it is manifest, that Man is no follower of these godly Predecessors;
and although we are an unworthy and declining People but John Rogers, and those
who are of his fellowship do not oppose us in our declensions, but in those
things in which we are followers of our godly Predecessors in those very things
they show themselves Adversaries against us in this day.

But now I shall hasten unto a Conclusion, John Rogers concludes his writing
with seven Questions: The Preface to them is this; John Rogers says, I desire
you since we are under Sufferings by you, that thou would procure and return
me a direct Answer to my seven Questions un^erwrit, without shifting or
shunning the some.

John R. his first Question is;

Qu. 1. Whether Sin is imputed where no Law is?

Ans. That seeing the Law, whither Moral or Gospel, contains a Platform of
well-doing, the contrary to this is Sin, and if no Law then no transgression;
but Christ is our Judge, our Lawgiver, and our King, and he will save us,
Isai. 33.22. and he has given us his command to keep the first day of the week
holy as the Lords day: And the Mosaical Law respecting the seventh day Sabbath,
in which (...) Rogers (...) shall condemn him for his disobedience against the
Law of Christ, which is Lord o^ the Sabbath, as we have proved already; and
^^us he has an Answer to his first Question, and likewise to his second
Question, whether there can be Transgression where no Law is.

John Rogers his third Question follows;

Qu 3. Whether or no God has given Laws sufficiently to reprove such as are
Transgressors, or is short in his Laws and so need many Assistants?

Ans. Gods Laws are perfectly sufficient, and they need no Assistants, but we
need Assistants to look to the Application and Execution of them against
Malefactors, and to be a terror to evil Doers; and besides many other Reasons
to prove this, the experience of John Rogers his behavior may be sufficient to
convince us that the Government have need of Assistants, although the Law it
self needs none.

Qu. 4. Has God any Law to forbid work on the first day of the week, and that
gives liberty to work on the seventh?

Take likewise his fifth Question almost the same with the fourth, and then we
shall answer them together.

Qu. 5. Has God by any of his Messengers or otherwise in Scripture called the
first day (...) the week the Christian Sabbath, or is it a humane invention, if
not humane, quote the place in Scripture, or a thing is known by the name of it?

Ans. I Answer both to the fourth and fifth Question, I have proved it already
by many Arguments from aforementioned Scriptures, that the first day of the
week is by Christ's Commandment the day appointed to be the Lords day, and our
Christian Sabbath, and therefore I refer him for an Answer to that which has
been already said.

Qu. 6. If any Sect produce Consequence from Scripture, a^ the ^^dge to uphold
their Opinion, and it appea^ to be altogether contrary to the plain Word of God
in the Scripture, whither or no I should look at it to be consequence or
blindness in the Sect?

Ans. They Consequence from Scripture is either a necessary Consequence, and
being according to Scripture, is of as full force as any plain Scripture, as
John Rogers granted in his Answer to the first Question, or else it is a
Consequence seemingly deduced from Scripture, but is really a perverting of,
and contrary to the Scripture, as some unlearned and unstable, who wrest the
Scriptures to their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16. and then it is far off from
being of the same force with the Scripture: But we have given John Rogers
necessary deductions from plain Scriptures in the Old and New Testament, to
prove that the first day of the week is the Lords day, and our Christian
Sabbath; and it is in vain for John R. to deny this until the Arguments be
confuted.

Qu 7. John Rogers his seventh Question, Whether or no there be a possibility
to take out the day commanded out of the fourth Commanament, and put in one of
the six working days, in the room thereof, and not alter one jott or one
tittle of the former Law, if there be a possibility of such a thing, or ever
such a thing was? I desire a Copy of it may be sent me to the Prison as soon as
may be.

Ans. My Answer to this seventh Question is, that I have already proved in my
Reply to his Answer to the tenth Question, that this change of the Sabbath from
the seventh day to the first day of the week is no destructive but a perfecting
change, and so far from destroying the Law in a jott or tittle of it, that it
is a fulfilling of the Law as really and fully as the performances of
Prophecies are the fulfilling of Prophecies, and it is too late for, John
Rogers now to question, whither that be possible to be done which is already
certainly performed and done as we have proved already; and as for some
fragments of Objections and Cavils which I. R. has gathered out of some late
Authors, and yet if all these be put together he is unable to defend his
seventh day Sabbath.

And it is as possible for I. R. to hinder the change of the Moon as he can
hinder the change of the seventh day Sabbath, seeing it is founded upon the
works of Creation which is given to change: but who can hinder the stability
and immutability of the first day of the Week, the Lords day; which is grounded
upon the unchangeable work of our Redeemer, according to an immutable and
everlasting Covenant: And if it be not possible for I. R. yet to see the reason
of this but admire at his legal light, and despise Gospel visions: Behold ye
despisers wonder and perish, for I work a work in your days, a work which you
shall in no wise believe, though a man declare it unto you, Act.13.41. and yet
those who have the Revelations of the Spirit of Wisdom in the Gospel, shall
say, this is the Lords doings, it is mavelous in our eyes, this is the day
which the Lord has made; Save now I beseech thee O Lord, blessed is he that
comes in the Name of the Lord, Psalm.118.23,24,25,26.

And if he that despised the Law of Moses^ and particularly did profane the
seventh day Sabbath was so severely punished, as John R. did note, of how much
sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy, who has despised the Gospel
Commandment, and particularly the Lords day the Christian Sabbath, the
Ordinance and Institution of Christ which he has by his Blood purchased, Heb.
10.28,29.

And thus I have done likewise with John R. his Questions at present; and if I.
R. or any for him shall undertake to make a Reply to that which has been said,
I expect they should answer my Arguments interminis, according as they are in
the frame and method of them: I do not intend for the future to trouble my self
with an Answer to such Lax Discourses as have nothing of the frame of an
Argument with them.

And thus at present I have done speaking to Man, but this I may say, Oh Lord,
I have not desired the woeful day, that which came out of my lips was right
before thee, be not thou a terror to ^e, thou art my hope in the day of evil,
Jerem. 17 16,17.

And if in any thing I have said for matter or manner, or in any respect
whatsoever I have erred, let it not be confirmed but confuted, and let me be
convinced: but if that which has been said be according to thy Holy Word
revealed by the Apostles of the Lord Jesus, let those who do, or shall oppose,
be converted, and repent of this their Wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the
thought of their heart may be forgiven them, or else let them be confounded and
cut off. Act. 8.22. Gal. 5.^2.

And whereas the Plague is come into a neighboring Plantation, and some
Families already shut up, the Lord have mercy upon them, and humble us deeply
for our great unfruitfulness, and especially for our profanation of the Lords
Day: what is the cause of this so fierce wrath to let loose a Spirit of Error
an^ Del^sion thus to rage, that those who received not the love of the truth
may be delivered up to believe a ^lye, and damned that have pleasure in
unrighteousness, (2 Thessalonians. 10.11,12.) And whilst some rise up that they might
cast down the Christian Sabbath, under a pretense of advancing the seventh day
Sabbath; Oh Lord, let not the evil one prevail with the profaneness of others
to cause them to neglect holy time and holy things,

Do good O Lord to those that are good, and to them that are upright in their
hearts: As for such as turn aside to their crooked ways, the Lord shall lead
them forth with the workers of iniquity, but peace shall be upon Israel,
Psalm.125.4,5.

December. 12. 1682. JAMES FITCH, Senior.

FINIS.

