A SERMON Wherein is showed that the Church of God is sometimes a Subject of
GREAT PERSECUTION; Preached on a Public FAST At Boston in New England:

Occasioned by the Tidings of a great Persecution Raised against the
PROTESTANTS in FRANCE.

By INCREASE MATHER, Teacher to a Church of Christ.

Psalm. 122. 6, 8. Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, for my Brethren and
Companions sakes I will now say, peace be within thee. Jer. 51. 50. Ye that
have escaped the sword, stand not still: Remember the Lord afar off: Let
Jerusalem come into your mind. Sanguis Martyrum, semen Ecclesiae,
Persecutio est pignus futurae felicitatis.
Sanguine fundata est Ecclesia, sanguine crevit,
Sanguine succrevit: Sanguine Finis erit.
BOSTON IN NEW ENGLAND: Printed for Samuel Sewall, in the Year, 1682.

To the READER.
T Hat there will a Time come, when the Church of God upon Earth shall enjoy
gloriose Prosperity and Dominion, is a great, and a Scripture-Truth. The
greatness of the Kingdom ( not in, but) under the whole Heaven, shall be given
to the people of the saints of the most High. Dan 7. 27. There shall be no more
a pricking Briar, or a grieving Thorn to the House of Israel, of all that are
round about them. Ezekiel. 28. 24. The Man of the Earth shall no more oppress.
Psalm. 10. 18. It is not said that we do, See Dr.Goodwin's Sermon on Rev. 5. 10.
but that we shall reign on Earth. Rev. 5. 10. But to expect this before the
creation of the New world (that New Heaven and New Earth, wherein Righteousness
shall dwell) So much celebrated by the Holy Prophets and Apostles and in the
Book of Revelation; seems to be unscriptural, and Irrational. It concerns us in
this Age, not to dream of an Earthly Kingdom (as the Disciples sometimes did,
and we are too apt to do.) but rather to think of going by the Cross unto the
Crown; as we see others are doing before us.

That the Protestant Cause ( and consequently the Church of God in this world)
is now in a more hazardous State, than has been known, for above those Hundred
years; is a Truth, that cannot bat affect those who have their thoughts
Exercised in Discerning things of this nature. When matters are reduced to the
lowest ebb, they shall revert again. Nor shall the Churches Persecutors, be any
more able to prevent it, than they are able to make the Sea stand still; or to
change the Ordinances of Heaven. In the mean time, the Lord knows how to
preserve His little Flock, in the midst of millions of Wolves, and Tigers, that
seek to devour it.

The Spouse of Christ, is now in the Lions Dens, and in the mountains of the
Leopards: He knows how to preserve it there and how to bring it out from
thence. Cant. 4. 8. It was a great Sight; and well might Moses wonder at it,
when the Bush burned with fire, but was not consumed. The Church of God at this
Day, is that Bush; which it threatened with the Fire of Persecution; and some
part of it begins to burn: But we have this to comfort us, We know it shall
never be consumed. God has wonderful ways to save His servants; when the
greatest Dangers do attend them. He makes the Earth to help the woman. The
Philistines must invade the Land, that so David might not be swallowed up by
Saul. Senacherib must hear a Rumor that the Ethiopians are preparing war
against him, that so his design against Jerusalem may be diverted. Notable is
that passage which Scultetus relates; that when the K. of France was become a
prisoner to the Emperor of Germany (Charles the 5 th.) He was set at liberty
upon Condition that he would do his utmost to root Protestantism out of his
Dominions. But soon after, they fell at variance again (the Pope blowing the
bellows of contention) by which means, the Church in that part of the world,
escaped the fury of those oppressors. Memorable also is it, That about the
close of the Tridentine Council (or rather Conspiracy) there was a consultation
in Italy, by the Pope and his Cardinals, for an utter extirpation of the
Reformed Churches throughout Europe. Every Prince in Europe had a certain part
designed, where this project should be put in practice. But the death of that
Pope (Plus V.) hindered the prosecution of the Design until the Time of Clement
VIII. when it was revived, and the bloody Resolution confirmed, by him, and his
Cardinals, under their Hands, and Seals. A Kinsman to Cardinal Baronius, was
chosen to carry those bloody Letters to the Princes aforesaid: but whilst he
was in his Journey, the Lord awakened his conscience, that he retired into an
obscure Village, and there spent three Days in Fasting, Fullfilling of
Scriptures. P 465.
and Prayer to God: After which, in stead of going to Spain with the Popes
bloody Commissions for the Destruction of the Protestants; He went into France,
and there disclosed the whole Design to Mr. Figureus, an eminent
Protestant-Minister; and in stead of shedding the Innocent blood of the
Protestant Churches, he himself became a famous Protestant: by which means the
designed mischief was diverted. This was not altogether unlike Paul's
Conversion; after which the Churches had rest, and were edified. The like is to
be said of Vergerius, (the Popes Legate) who designing to write a Book against
the Protestant Religion, was, by reading those Books which he intended to
refute, Converted, to the acknowledgement of the Truth; so that of a
persecuting Papist, Dr. Fuller of English Worthyes. In Westmerl. P. 137. and
Mr. Crane's Prosp. of Providenc. P. 317
He became a preaching Protestant. And there comes to mind, a very remarkable
providence, which Dr. Fuller somewhere relates; viz. That about the Third of
the Reign of Queen Mary, a Pursevant was sent with a Commission in to Ireland,
to empower some eminent persons to proceed with Fire, and Faggot against the
poor Protestants. And it happened by Divine providence, this Pursevant, at
Chester, lodged in the House of a protestant Inn keeper, who having gotten some
inkling of the matter, secretly stole his Commission out of his Cloakbag; and
put a Card (the Knave of Clubs in the room thereof. Some weeks after, he
appeared before the Lords of the privy Council at Dublin (of whom Bp. Goren a
principal) and produced a Card for his pretended Commission. They caused him to
be committed to Prison for such an affront, as if done on design, to deride
them. Here he lay for some Months; till with much ado, at last he got his
enlargement. Then over he returned for England, and quickly getting his
Commission renewed, makes with all speed for Ireland again. But before his
Arrival there, he was prevented with the News of Queen Maryes death: and so
the Lives of many, and the Liberties of more, poor servants of God, were
preserved.

As for our parts, whom the Lord has made to dwell alone in this wilderness,
when we hear of the afflictions of the Churches of Christ, though at a remote
distance from us; There are two things which God does certainly expect from us:
1. That we should Sympathise with them in all their sorrows. Melchior (...)
Christ himself does so Isa. 63. 9. and so shall we, if the Spirit of Christ be
in us. It is Recorded concerning the excellent Calvin, that he was more
affected with the miseries of the Church, than with any of his own concerns. So
was the great Melancthon. When Luther reproved him for his solicitude about
the protestant Interest (which in those Days also was in eminent Danger) he
mildly replied Sinon Curarem non Orarem. If I should have no Care in my Heart
concerning that matter, I should not Pray about it, so much as I do. 2. The
Lord expects that we should also prepare our selves to drink of the same cup.
Are there not with us, even with us also, sins against the Lord our God, which
may deserve it? The Lord planted us a Noble Vine, wholly a Right Seed. Well it
were, if it could be said, we are in no respect degenerate, And did ever
degenerate Churches continue long without smarting under the Rod of
Persecution? It is a weighty word, which a great Worthy of our own has, in a
Book lately published. There has been (says He) no Nation in the World, which
publicly received the Christian Religion; Dr. Owen, of E angelical Churches.
In Prefa. P. 16.
but it has been wasted, and destroyed by the sword of Pagan Idolaters; or such
as are no better than they -- And I pray God, that the like Fate does not at
this Day hang over the Reformed Nations, as from their profession they are
called.

If it should go ill with the Reformed Nations, we have little Reason to
promise our selves nothing but Halcyon Days. Security will be like to hasten,
but a serious Preparation for it, may be a means to prevent, misery from coming
upon us. So may we hope that God will continue to be gracious unto this Remnant
of Joseph; And the Lord grant that the good will, and Blessing of Him that
dwelt in the Rush, may still be upon this His People, who are separated from
their Brethren.

Boston; N. Engl. 1. M. 28. D. 1682. INCREASE MATHER.

ACTS, VIII. I.
At that Time there was a Great Persecution against the Church which was at
Jerusalem, etc.
THe Evangelist having in the preceding Chapter set forth the History of
Stephens Martyrdom, proceeds in this Chapter to relate what things were
contemporary therewith, and consequent thereupon. In this Verse there are Three
things mentioned as Remarkable Events which happened either at, or immediately
after Stephens Death.

1. Saul's Consenting thereunto: So the Verse begins. And Saul was consenting
unto his Death. Gr. (...), It pleased him well. The expression intimates that
others liked it; and that He liked it also. He did indeed manifest his
Approbation of it, both by Words, and Actions. And this is here mentioned as a
thing very Observeable; that the Grace of God in Converting that Saul; in
causing a persecuting Saul, to become a preaching Paul, (of which in the next
Chapter there is a large Account) might be rendered the more gloriose, and
illustrious.

2. A great Persecution against Christians. The chief Persecutors had for some
Time been restrained from doing what they had a mind unto, doubtless for Fear
of the multitude: but when they saw the people patiently bear with Stephens
Death, they were encouraged to go on in that way of Violence, and Persecution.

3. A Dispersion of the persecuted Christians at Jerusalem, into other places.
Thu's the last clause of the Verse. They were All scattered abroad thorowout
the Regions of Judaea and Samaria, Piscator, ^ig^foot, and alii in locum.
except the Apostles: which words Intimate a General Dispersion. ALL does not
imply that all, and every Christian in Jerusalem did leave the City: but that
very many did so; and that all the Preachers of the Gospel, (upon whom
persecution is wont to light most heavy) except the Apostles, did remove.
Therefore it is said in v. 4. They that were scattered abroad, went every where
preaching the word.

It is the second of these particulars which falls under our present
Consideration; viz. The Persecution which happened at the Time of Stephens
Death; which in the words before us, is described,

1. From the Subject of it; viz. The Church at Jerusalem; which was then the
only Christian Church in the World; the Gentiles not having as yet received the
Gospel: So that the whole Interest of Religion, or Christianity, was here
Struck at, and endangered.

2. From the Greatness of it; There was a GREAT Persecution against the Church.
It was so in respect of the Kind of persecution, which the Enemies of the
Chnurch were now come unto. Before this, they had persecuted only with Words,
and Threats: but now they proceeded to bloody Blows, Banishment, and Death. And
it was so, in respect of the Number of them that Suffered. Dorotheus writes,
that at the Time of this persecution, there were Two Thousand Christians that
lost their Lives. And it is evident from the Scripture, that there were many
(tho the particular Number be not expressed) that then suffered Imprisonment,
Death, or Banishment. Compare Acts, 26. 10, 11. where Paul confesses; Many of
the saints at Jerusalem did I shut up in prison; and when they were put to
Death, I gave my Voice against them; and I punished them often, in every
Synagogue. So that it might well be called a great persecution.

The Doctrine from hence is,

Doct. That the Church of God in this World, is sometimes a Subject of GREAT
PERSECUTION.

Three things should be spoken to, for the cicaring of this Truth.

1. When men may be said to be perscuted.

2. What Kind of persecution the Church of God in this world may be subject to.

3. The Reasons, whence it comes to pass that the Lords people in this world
are sometimes persecuted.

Q. 1. When may a man be said to be persecuted?

Ans. This is, When a Christian does suffer in the cause of Christ. There are
three things necessarily employed, in order to Men's being among the Number of
the Lords persecuted ones.

1. They must be exposed unto Sufferings. Persecuted ones are passive ones.
They suffer some Evil or other from the world. The Greek word ((...)) properly
signifies a Following of another: And it is sometimes used in a good sense:
Thus, 1 These. 5. 15. Follow that which is good. and Thus, Heb. 12. 14. Follow
peace, and holiness. But usually, the word is taken in an evil sense: even To
follow another to do him Hurt. When a man does pursue another with a resolved
mind never to cease, until he has obtained his evil desire on him. Here is the
persecutor, and the persecuted. In such a way did Saul, and those with him,
follow David; and therefore does he say, Ps. 119. 157. Many are my Persecutors,
and my enemies. and Ps. 142. 6. Deliver me from my Persecutors: for they are
stronger than I.

2. They must suffer in a good Cause. A man may suffer, and yet, Non Toena, sed
Causa facit Martyrem. Cyprian.
not be persecuted; if the Cause that he suffers for, be not a Good, but an
Evil Cause. Several persons may be exposed to the same sufferings, at the same
time; and yet the one be persecuted, and the other not so; according to the
Cause which they suffer in, or for. We know that in Smithfield, six persons
were put to death on the same day: Fox's Acts and Monum, Vol. 2 P. 529.
three of them being Protestant Martyrs, and the other three, miserable
Papists. Fuller Hist. Cent. 16. Lib. 5. P. 235.
When our blessed Lord Jesus Christ was crucified, others were at the same time
crucified also: They received but the due Reward of their Deeds, so did the
penitent Thief acknowledge, Luc. 23. 41. We suffer justly, for we recive the
due Reward of our Deeds: when Jesus Christ (as it is added) had done nothing
amiss: but was exposed to His sufferings for the sake of the Truth: because He
did bear witness to the most gloriose Truth that can be mentioned: because He
said, He was the Son of God, and the King of Israel.

If men suffer for evil Deeds, they are not persecuted. The Apostle says Gal.
5. 12. I would they were even cut off that Trouble you. They are not
persecuted, who are exposed to Trouble, for unjustly causing Trouble to the
Churches of Christ. When Achan had troubled Israel, and God by bringing him
forth to condign punishment, troubled him; that was no persecution. And if men
suffer for an evil Opinion (as well as an evil Practice) they are not the Lords
persecuted ones. If the Churches in Asia had Censured those that held the
doctrine of the Nicolaitans, they had pleased the Lord Christ; who would not
have looked upon the Nicolaitans as a persecuted People. When Jehu put all the
worshippers of Baal to death, and when that godly Prince Josiah, in an holy
zeal caused the Priests of the High places to be slain; (2 Ki. 23. 20.) they
were not Martyrs; none of them were so. There are indeed some erroneous
Opinions, which if any be exposed unto cruel sufferings from men for them, they
that afflict them are not to be justified. Nevertheless, such sufferers are not
Martyrs. Others do ill so to punish them: and they do ill in maintaining an
Error. Of so great Concernment is it, for men to have their Consciences
rightly informed by the word of God, when they embarque themselves on the
suffering side. Nay more, a godly man suffer from men, and yet not be
persecuted in the Notion which my Text refers unto; h. e. if he suffer in a
cause not justifiable by the word of God. Hence the Apostle Peter, gives such a
caution as that 1 Pet. 4. 15, 16. Let none of you suffer as an Evil doer; yet
if any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed. A Christian may
suffer; and yet not suffer as a Christian. A godly man may fall into sin; yea,
into scandalose Errors and Transgressions, and be justly punished on account
thereof. To suffer Persecution, is to suffer in the cause of Christ. When for
Gods sake, a man does suffer from the world. According to what the Church
says, Ps. 44. 22. For Thy sake we are killed all the day long: we are counted
as sheep for the slaughter. Or, For Righteousness sake. Thus Mat. 5. 10.
Blessed are they which are persecuted for Righteousness sake. Or for the
Gospels sake Mar 10. 29. Or, for Christ's sake 2 Cor. 12. 10. Upon which
account, Martyrs are called the Martyrs of Jesus, Rev. 17. 6. A man suffers in
the cause of God, and so is persecuted, when he suffers for his godliness. As 1 John 3. 12. Cain slew Abel his brother, because his works were Righteous. Or,
for bearing witness to any Truth contained in the word of God. As in Rev. 1. 9.
and 6. 9. and 20. 4. We read of them that were slain for the word of God. Hence
one of the Martyrs when he came to die, held his Bible in his hand, before the
people, saying Behold! Here is that which has brought me hither. In such a
case, Suffering is a blessed Testimony. Or, for opposing, and testifying
against any thing that is condemned in the word of God. He is persecuted, that
suffers for opposing any corrupt Opinion in matters of Faith, or Worship: which
was the case of Daniel, and the three Worthyes; and of the Christians in the
Primitive Times: and in these latter Ages also, the Churches of God have been
subject unto horrible slaughters for opposing Antichristian Superstitious
Doctrines; especially, when the Lords faithful witnesses began boldly to
declare against the Pope, and Church of Rome, they were exposed unto great and
grievous persecution, on that account, as the Scripture foretold it should come
to pass. Rev. 14. 9, 13. He also is persecuted, that suffers for bearing
witness against any sinful Practice. If a man set himself against the sins of
the Times, for that his Life and Blood may be taken from him; Heb. 12. 4. and
Then is he persecuted, Then is he a Martyr. Such an one was Zechariah the son
of J ehojadah; who was stoned to death for his faithful Testimony against sin,
2 Chronicles. 24. 20, 21. And J ohn Baptist, who was beheaded for bearing witness
against the Uncleanness which some great persons in those Days Lived in, Mat.
14. 3.

But, 3. (one thing more) They must suffer from a Right Principle, h. e. from a
principle of Faith, and true obedience to the will of God: a principle of Love
to God; of Fear of His great Name; of Conscience to His will; and that they may
keep their Consciences pure in His sight. If a man for Conscience toward God
endure grief, suffering wrongfully, 1 Pet. 2. 19. If Conscience toward God;
Respect, and obedience to His will, carry a man out in suffering, then is he
persecuted. Indeed, there are, in a more strict and Scripture-sence, No
Persecuted ones, but such as have the fear of God in their hearts: Hence such
are pronounced Blessed, Mat. 5. 10. and called Saints, Rev. 17. 6. and 13. 6.
which does imply their being in a state of grace. It is possible a man may
suffer unto the loss not only of Liberty, but of Life it self; and that in a
good cause also; and yet not be a true Member and Martyr of Jesus Christ: not
having a true principle of Love to God in him, 1 Cor 13. 3. Socrates, an
Heathen, suffered Death ('it is said) for maintaining that there is but one God;
and the poor J ews have sometimes been exposed unto great sufferings, because
they will not comply with Popish, or Mohammedan Superstitions. Arians, and other
Heretics have sometimes lost their Lives in the common cause of Christianity,
when Pagan enemies have prevailed over them: yea, so have some popish Idolaters
done. There have been, that out of pride and vain glory, did suffer not a
little. Ecclesiastical History speaks of those that would Murder themselves,
out of a vainglorious ambitious desire to be accounted Martyrs. But if men are
acted, and carried out in sufferings from no better principles than those, the
Lord will not own them for his persecuted ones.

Q. 2. What Kind of persecutions may the Church of God in this world, be
subject to?

Ans. There is a threefold Persecution.

1. There is the persecution of the Heart: when men do secretly hate the Image
of God in His servants; and therefore malign them, and wish evil to them: It is
said, Ps. 129. 5. Let them all be confounded, and turned back, that Hate Z ion.
Here persecution begins: There is an Hatred of Zion, which is no better than
persecution. J oseph was persecuted by his Brethren, when they Hated him for
his godliness, Genesis 37. 2, 4: Micajah was persecuted by Ahab; when he said, I
Hate him, 1 K. 22. 8. And thus, the Lords people are always the subjects of
great persecution: being much hated in the world, because they cannot comply
with the evil manners of it. The world hates you, Joh. 15. 18, 19. And, Ye
shall be hated of all men for my Names sake, Luc. 21. 17. Says our Lord Jesus
to His Disciples. and This Now is persecution, yea, bloody persecution in the
sight of God: For, whosoever Hates his Brother, is a Murderer, 1 John 3. 15.
If the Lord did not wonderfully restrain them, the wicked would serve the
godly, as Cain did Abel. Inasmuch as they hate them, they would destroy them:
For hatred does not rest, but in the destruction of the thing hated.

2. There is the Persecution of the Tongue: when the Lords servants are
Reproached, and Reviled, because of their Zeal for, and their Faithfulness unto
God. We read that Ishmael mocked Isaac, Genesis 21. 9. Now Paul says, Gal. 4. 29.
He that was born after the flesh, Persecuted him that was born after the
spirit. So then in such Mocking there is Persecution. Thus Christ says, Mat.
5. 11. Blessed are you, when men persecute you: Persecute you! How? It Is added;
And Revile you; and shall say all manner of evil against you, falsely, for my
sake. When Reproaches are cast upon the servants of Christ, on the account of
their Zeal for Christ; then do they suffer persecution. Arians of old, would
call the great Athanasius by the Name of Satanasius; and Papists used to call
their Dogs Calvin; that so they might vilify that great Reformer. Names of
Reproach are commonly gives to the Lords servants: Hugonots, Fanatics, and
what not? And unto this kind of persecution, the Church of God is always
subject; more or less. It is said, 2 Timothy 3. 12. All that will live godly in
Christ Jesus, shall suffer Persecution. Be sure, the persecution of the Heart;
and the persecution of the Tongue, they shall suffer; however it may be with
them, as to a further persecution. Therefore

3. There is the Persecution of the Hand; when Violence is offered to
Christians, because they are Christians; when they are deprived of their civil
Libertyes, for professing the Faith of Christ: which was the case of those
Christians my Text has reference unto: and of the Church in Smyrna; concerning
whom it is said, Rev. 2. 10. The Devil shall cast some of you into prison. Or,
when their Estates are taken from them for that they are faithful to the Lords
Cause, and Interest. As it was with the Chrstian Jews, who took joyfully the
spoilng of their goods, Heb. 10. 34. Most of all, when they Lose their Lives
for their bearing witness to the Truth. They who so suffer, are by way of
Eminency called Martyrs, i. e. Witnesses: ( Rev. 2. 13.) because this is the
Highest witnessbearing that can be, when a Christian does Seal the Truth he
has professed, with his Blood. Great persecutions of this sort, have sometimes
(and many a time) been raised-against the Church of God. Thus in the X.
Primitive persecutions (under the Heathen Emperors) especially the last of
them, the whole Church of God, and Interest of Christianity was persecuted. And
after this, the Arians; who indeed called themselves Christians, did persecute
the Orthodox as much as the Heathen had done before them. And last of all,
Antichrist has made it his Design to destroy those that have born witness for
Christ: It is given unto him to make war with the Saints. And the Antichristan
persecution must continue, more or less, for forty two months, h. e. for the
space of twelve hundred and sixty years, Dan. 7. 21, 25. The Pope of Rome
(successively considered) is that Antichrist, Rev. 13. 5, 7. V. M^de in Ap^^.
13 6. and W^llet's Synops. Papism. Page 1175.
Papists have been the most bloody persecutors in the world; they have shed
Rivers of blood. Among the Albigenses, and Waldenses, they murdered above a
Million. In the last Century, within the space of forty years; viz. between
An. 1540. and 1580 in Europe, they slew Nine Hundred Thousand Protestants.
About forty years ago, they slaughtered Three Hundred Thousand Protestants in
that one Kingdom of Ireland: and according to the computation which some have
made, V. Alsted Encyclop. in Chronol. C. 8. ad Annum 1540.
they have, since the setting up of the Inquisition, shed the blood of more
Protestants in Europe, than there are Papists at this day alive upon the face
of the Earth.

Q. 3. Whence comes it to pass that the Lords people in this world are thus
persecuted?

Reas. 1. Sin is the cause of it. Be sure, that sin which is in the hearts of
the persecutors themselves, even the Natural Enmity, which they have against
godliness, and godly men, is the Reason of the persecution caused by them.
There is enmity in the seed of the serpent against the seed of the woman Genesis
3. 15. and from that enmity persecution does arise. Cain (the first persecutor)
persecuted Abel to death because of this. Sore eyes cannot bear the light: Nor
can guilty sinners endure the light of Gods Image appearing in the spirits, and
in the conversations of His Saints. Tigres (they say) are put in a Rage by a
fragrant Smell brought near unto them: Truly, the fragrant graces of the
Saints, put the Tigres of the world into a cursed Rage at them.

Yea, and many times the sins which Gods people themselves are subject to, are
the procuring cause of great persecution. By their own sins they provoke the
Lord to put a sword into the Hands of their Enemies. The sins found amongst the
Churches of Christ, do this. For indeed, their transgressions do most of all
dishonor, and displease Him. If his Sons, and his Daughters provoke him, He
will surely scourge them in the open sight of others. For Three sins especially:

1. Apostasy. When Solomon did forsake God, the Lord raised up these, and those
Adversaryes against him, 1 Kings, 11. 9, 14. The Babylonian persecution came on
the Jews because their backslidings were increased. Therefore were they torn in
pieces by Evening-wolves, by Lions, and by Leopards, J er. 5. 6. And in the
Days of the Judges, Enemies made havoc of the Israelites, because of their
going a whoring from God. By their Apostasies, they provoked the Lord; that He
sold them into the hands of their enemies round about, Judge. 2. 13, 41. When
the Lord strengthened the King of Moab against Israel, it was because Israel
had done evil in his sight. So when the Lord left them to be oppressed, and
scattered by the Midianites, Philistines, Ammonites; It was because they had
left G od, in departing from his holy and righteous ways. We need go no
further than our own Nation, for the confirmation of this. The Saxons (from
whom we are generally Descended) became great Idolaters, serving graven Images,
Canonizing Saints, and worshipping them; in stead of God in Christ alone. For
which cause, God punished our forefathers with the Danish Persecution; and
after that with the Norman Conquest.

2. Sinful Divisions and contentions; If Gods people fit loose from him, or if
they fit loose one from another, the Lord lets loose persecuting enemies upon
them. When a shepherd sees his sheep scattered one from another, he sets his
Dogs to drive them together. Persecutors are called Dogs in the scripture, Ps.
22. 16. When the Lords people are scattering, and dividing, the Shepherd of
Israel lets loose those Dogs upon them. That was the case of the Primitive
Christians: especially with reference to Aurelian's Persecution They were
exposed unto the Scorn of the Heathen, and that on public Theaters, for their
Contentions; and then persecution followed. If Christians will not have peace
with their Brethren; then they shall have war with their Enemies.

3. Formality in Religion. When professors are generally grown cold, and
lifeless in Religion; God casts them into a fiery furnace of Persecution: that
life, and heat might be brought into them again. Thus does the Lord Jesus say
to the Church at Sardis, Rev. 3. Init. Thou have a Name to live, and art dead:
Therefore I will come on thee as a Thief. h. e. Suddenly. Storms of persecution
arise suddenly for this. The truth is, Formalists in Religion, are many times
the most bitter persecutors. Though Formalists may be professors of the same
Religion with the sincere; (as Cain and Abel were of the same Religion; only
Cain was a mere Formalist, when Abel had the power of godliness) yet the former
sometimes persecute the latter to the Death. And it is just with God to punish
His degenerate people by those that they are become like unto. And if we search
the Records of former ages, we shall find, that an eminent Persecution, whether
of the Church in general, or of the Churches in this or that particular Land,
have seldom happened, except great decays as to Zeal, and the power of
godliness amongst professors, have gone before it, and made way for it. The
British Churches of old, retained the Name, and Form of Christianity, (just as
some in these days, have the Name of Protestants) but they were, many of them,
persecutors of those that had the power of godliness in their profession, and
coversations, (as Gildas a faithful preacher of their own, Gildas de Excid.
Britanniae.
Testifies) therefore the Lord first plagued them by the Picts, (a sort of men
not unlike our Indians) and after that, rooted them out of their own Land by
those Saxons and Angles which came out of Germany.

Reas. 2. The power, and malice of Satan, is another Ground of the persecution
suffered by the Saints. Satan has an Hand in all those persecutions which are
raised against the Church of God. In Rev. 3. 10. it is said, The Devil shall
cast some of you into prison. If the people of God are cast In o Prisons, for
the Truths sake; It is the Devil that does it; whoever are the Instruments. And
therefore in Rev. 12. end, we read of a Flood cast out of the mouth of the
Dragon. When floods of persecution arise, they come out of the Dragons Mouth.
And there are especially two ways, whereby Satan brings about his Design of
persecuting the Churches of God.

1. By Slandering of them. He is called (...) ( i. e. a Slanderer) in the
Scriptures. He raises evil Reports; causes this and that Evil to be believed,
concerning the Lords servants: as if they were Seditious, and Rebellious, and
what not? So 'twas said of Jerusalem, Ezra, 4. 1^. This City is a Rebellious
City; and Hurtful to Kings, and they have of old time moved Sedition within the
same. Yea, so 'twas said of the blessed Lord Jesus Christ Himself; Luc. 23. 2.
We have found this Man perverting the Nation, and forbidding to give Tribute to
Casar. Or, as if they were Heretics, and held blasphemous Opinions, Acts, 24.
14. Stephen was accused for speaking blasphemous words against Moses, and
against God. Acts, 6. 11. In the Primitive Times, Christians were traduced, as
if they did not wish well to the Emperors under whose Government they lived:
yea, they were charged with most monstrous both Opinions and Practices; as we
see by the writings of Justin Martyr, Tertullian, and others; who were
necessitated to publish Apologies for Christians, vindicating them from the
malignant Slanders, which Satan and his Instruments had raised against them.
They would put them into Bears skins, and then Dogs would devour them.

2. By stirring up the Powers of the world-against them. The Devil, for the
most part, (though not always) has the Powers of the world on his side. Hence
we read of the Power of the Enemy, Luc. 10. 19. And when it is so, he causes
great persecutions. When wicked Men, and those that are bitter Enemies to the
ways, and servants of God, have great power in their Hands, this is as Satan
would have it; and these he stirrs up to persecute. Where wicked Rulers are,
Satan has his Throne. 'Twas said of Pergamus, Rev. 2, 13. There it the Seat (or
throne) of Satan: because there was a wicked Ruler; a general Governor over
that Province, who did reside in the City of Pergamus; and was Satan's chief
Instrument in persecuting the Saints. See Rev. 13. Its said v. 2. The Dragon
gave the Beast his power, and his seat, and great authority; and then, it is
added, v. 7. It was given to him to make war with the Saints. If the Dragon
gets power into the hands of the Beast, bloody persecution is raised against
the Church of God. And yet, neither Sin, nor Satan could cause the Church to be
persecuted, without another Reason: without the Lords permission they could do
nothing. Wherefore,

Reas. 3. The Lord has an holy hand, and glorious ends in all the Persecutions
which befall his people. The Lord aims herein

1. At the glory of His own Name; which is his principal end. Peter was to die
a Martyr: and it is said, Joh. 21. 19. Christ signified to him by what Death he
should glorify God. A man by Suffering, may possibly bring more glory to God in
one hour; than by Doing never so much for Him all his lifetime before. In this
way, the Lord attains the propagation of his Church. The Church never thrives
more than when (like a Vine) watered with its own blood. The more the Egyptians
afflicted the Israelites; the more they multiplied, and grew: Exodus 1. 12. The
Borders of the Church were enlarged by the persecution in my Text. Usher de
Eccl. Brit. Primord. P. 15.
It caused a Dispersion of Christians, and so an Increase of Christianity; so
that by this occasion, the Samaritanes, Fuller's Hist. of Brit. P. 6, 7. Mr.
Clark's Martyrol. Page 78, 134, 231.
and Gentiles came to have the Church of God among them. Some write, that a
persecution raised by the Jews against Christians, caused Joseph of Arimathea,
and others to come over into England (then called Britain) by means whereof,
the Gospel, and Christianity was first planted in the Land of our Forefathers
sepulchers. When the Waldenses were persecuted, some of them fled into Picardy;
others into Germany: whence also the Doctrine of the Gospel was spread abroad,
and embraced in those places. When the Papists raised a great persecution
against the Bohemian Brethren, they grew in numbers; many of the Peers of the
Land joining with them. And when some of their Ministers were banished, they
carried the Gospel into Moravia, and to the remotest parts of Prusia. The
Church of God in France wonderfully increased, when above an hundred years
ago, they were persecuted, and miserably oppressed by Popish Adversaries.
Though the Devil, and his Instruments design the Destruction of Christianity by
persecution, yet the only wise God does outshoot him in his own Bow, and cause
it to tend to the Enlargement thereof. The constancy, and patience of the Lords
servants in their sufferings, does gain others over to the truth; perhaps,
convert many thousands to the ways of God. This made the Heathen in the
primitive Times, cry out, Vere Magnus est Deus Christianorum. Truly! Great is
the God of the Christians. Sometimes their cruel Executioners, have been
thereby Converted. And because of this, a popish Adversary advised that no more
Protestants might be burnd to death: for (said he) The Smoke of such a Sufferer
infected all it blew upon; and made them Turn Protestants too.

2. At the Trial of his servants. The Lord Jesus said to Smyrna, Rev. 2. 10.
Behold! the Devil shall cast some of you into prison; that you may be Tried:
and ye shall have tribulation ten Days. There was the persecution under
Trajan, that lasted ten Days; viz. ten prophetical Days: h. e. ten years. And
this was for the Trial of those Christians. Persecution is to try whether men
will cleave to God, or no; to try the sincerity of their Faith, and Obedience;
to try what Metal they are made of: whether pure, or base: and whether they
are Gold, or Dross. Grapes come not to the proof, until they come to the press.
Alas! Many professors of Religion are like the Stony-ground hearers, See Mr.
Burroughs's Sermons on Matthew. 5. 11, 12.
Mat. 13. 21. that having no Root in themselves, endure but for a while: and
when tribulation, or Persecution arises because of the word, by and by they
are Offended. Persecution tryes who are such. When a Storm comes, withered
leaves fall off; but green leaves abide: Even so sincere Christians will stand;
but withered, unsound professors fall away, when a Strom of persecution blows.
For this Reason the Lord sends persecution on His Church, that so men may
discern between the righteous and the wicked, between those that truly Fear
God, and those that Fear him not.

3. The Lord hereby aymeth At the Good of his people. They are bettered as to
their spiritual estates, by all those sufferings which in this world they are
subject unto. God's children are like Stars, that shine brightest in the
darkest night; like Spices, that smell sweetest when pounded. It is noted of
the persecution under Antiochus, Dan. 11. 35. It should be to Purge the saints,
and to make them White. Their temporal losses are made up in Spirituals. Mar.
10. 29 30 Whoever does leave or lose any thing for my sake (sais Christ) shall
receive an Hundred fold now in this time with Persecuton. If persecutors
prevail so as to deprive them of their Estates, then god gives them spiritual
Mercyes, that shall an Hundred fold make up their outward Miseryes. Yea, at the
last they are partakers of the greater glory in the highest Heaven for ever;
because of the persecutions which they have endured. Their light afflictions
work for them a far more exceeding, and eternal weight of glory. 2. Cor. 4. 7.
See 1 Pet. 1. 17. There is indeed a special crown of glory, which the Lord has
prepared, and reserved for them that suffer for His sake, and are Martyrs in
His Cause. It is said to such, Great is your Reward in Heaven Mat. 5. 12. Hence
were the Christians in the primitive times most desirous to suffer Martyrdom.
How did they even long to be exposed to the utmost sufferings: because they
knew there was a special crown of glory that such sufferers should receive!

4. The Lord in those persecutions which come upon his people, aims At the
Ruin of His, and the Churches Enemies; that way may be made for that.
Persecutors must prevail, that they may be fit for the Destruction which the
Lord has reserved them for. If we hear of great persecutions raging against the
Church of God, it is a sign, and we may conclude that there is great
Destruction, and Desolation on the Enemies of God's people, near at hand.
Consider the Instance of Pharaoh: and see Phil. 1. 28. unto this purpose. It is
an evident token that destruction from God is hastening upon those that Trouble
his people. The sin of persecution has always been a Fatal, Ruining sin to
them that have bin guilty of it. The four great Monarchies, to their cost, have
found it so. Persecution has been the Ruin of the Babylonian; the Ruin of the
Persian; and the Ruin of the Grecian Monarchy. This was the Ruin of Rome
Heathen: Rev. 6. 9. See Dr. Goodwin' s Sermon on Psalm. 105. 14, 15.
and this will be the Ruin of Rome-Antichristian also: Rev. 18. 24. Yea, it is
seldom seen that the Lord bears long with this Iniquity: And notorious
persecutors seldom escape remarkable strokes of the Judging-Hand of God upon
them in this world: besides the Vengeance of Eternal Fire, in the world to come.

The Application of this Truth remains, Wherefore Use. 1. Let us be Exhorted to
prepare for Times of Persecution.

To awaken hereunto

Consider. 1. What ground we have from the Scripture, to expect such Times as
the Exhortation mentions. It is evident from the Scriptures of Truth, that
great persecutions against the Church of God, are at Hand. It is said, 2 Timothy
3. 1. This know also, that in the last Days, (and how much more then, in the
last of the last Days?) Perilous Times shall come: Times perilous especially
on account of the great persecutions that the Church of God shall then become
subject to. Indeed we expect gloriose Times for the Church of God on Earth: and
we have ground from the Scripture so to do. But we have so much the more reason
to expect great commotions in the world; yea, great, and dismal persecutions on
the Church: For, relating to the Revolutions immediately preceding the great
glory promised to the Church upon Earth, it is said, Numb. 24. 23. Alasl who
shall Live when God does these things? It is the Lord's usual way to prepare
his people for glorious Times, by great persecutions. What a distressing
persecution was there, a little before the children of Israel were delivered
out of Egypt? The greatest of the Ten persecutions: (that under Dioclesian) was
it not just before the Lord raised the Great Constantine to advance Christians
in all places of the world. In order to the ascension of the Witnesses, there
is first a most horrible slaughter of them. And we know what is said, Rev. 12.
12. The Devil has great wrath, because he knows he has but a short time. It
is so at this Day. Ere long, the Angel with the key of the bottomless Pit, and
with a great chain in his hand, will come down from Heaven, and lay hold on the
Dragon, that old serpent, which is the Devil, and Satan; and bind him, and cast
him into the bottomless pit. Therefore the Devil has great wrath; and
Therefore the Church of God may expect great persecution. A dying Beast will
bite cruelly: so is Antichrist, a dying Beast, His Day is comeing; his Time is
well nigh expired: but, since he is going out of the world, we may expect that
he will give a cruel Bite at the Church of God. Some of the Lord's Worthyes,
have often spoken concerning the last Conflict with Antichrist; which will be
indeed, a short, but a sharp Trial. That Learned, and Holy Usher, was, not long
before his death exceeding confident, that the greatest persecution on the
Protestant Churches, was yet to come.

Consider 2. What solemn Warnings the Lord has given unto us, to prepare for
Times of Persecution.

God has given us Warning, by letting us know what bloody designs are on foot
among the Antichristian Party against the whole Protestant Interest: A Design,
the like whereunto has not been, since the Days of Haman. God has given us
dreadful warning by Signs in Heaven: especially by that fearful Sight, and
great Sign which we, and all the World saw the last year blazing among the
stars of God. Such things have sometimes presaged great persecutions on the
Church. There was a Comet went before Nero's persecution:. The Arian
persecution likewise was preceded, and presaged by Blazing Stars. God has
given us yet more solemn warning by what is already come upon the professors of
the Truth in other parts of the world. There is a great persecution raised
against the Churches of God, in diverse parts of Europe: especially, in the
Kingdom of France: which has occasioned our being thus before the Lord this
day; and which, I cannot but look upon as one awful Consequent of that
Portentous Blaze which was seen in the Heavens this time Twelvemoneth. Many
thousands of French Protestants lose their Estates: Many thousands of them fly
into other Lands; being forced to leave their own. And there is an Edict come
forth concerning them, more bloody than what came from the Court of Pharaoh:
Pharaoh's Edict was to destroy only the Bodies of Israelitish Infants: But now
there is an Edict that reaches further: An Edict for the destruction of the
Souls of the Children of Protestants. An Edict to make Idolaters of them.
Behold! Our Neighbors House is on Fire! It behooves us to look about us! The
Protestants in France, were once ( viz. in the Days of their King Henry IV.)
as unlikely to be oppressed by their enemies, as we are. V Mr. Clark' s
Examples Vel. 1. Page 91.
Yea, in the judgment of man, it was supposed no Power could wrest their
Libertyes from them. Many of their greatest Nobility were on their side. They
had great Armies and brave Commanders to stand up for them. They had above two
hundred walled Towns in their possession, for their safety, and security. But
trusting too much to an Arm of flesh they soon lost all, and lay at the mercy
of their Enemies. We have no reason then, merely because we are Protestants,
and have the Truth with us, to think that we shall not feel the Cross, as well
as our Brethren in the world have done. We have escaped it a great while. Our
Land has had rest above forty years: It is therefore Time for us to think of,
and prepare for sufferings. Our predecessors, the Ancient Britans, living in a
remote corner of the world, felt little or nothing of those general
persecutions, which other Christians bled under. Nevertheless, the last of the
primitive persecutions, fell heavily upon them. And whether the last of
Antichrist's Persecutions, will not reach both Englands, the Lord God knows.
It will be wifedome for us all to prepare for it. In England's peace, we shall
have peace. That there are special Designs against the Protestant Interest
there, we are all assured. Neither are we ignorant how awfully God has
threatened us with Changes among our selves; as if He would pluck up our Hedge:
and then the wild Boar would soon break in upon this Vine. If the Lord should
be provoked to bring a Change upon us as to our Civil State: If that wall of
Government, which has hitherto been such a mercy to this people, should be
removed; there are three Evils, that would quickly follow; viz. Superstition,
Profaneness, and Persecution. If the raines of Government should fall into
Hands that are enemies to the ways of Christ; we can in reason expect no
better.

Consider. 3. What Sins there are among us that call for such a scourge at
this. Those very sins that are wont to be the Forerunners of persecution, are
to be found in the midst of thee, O N-England. I shall not enlarge, but is
there not a great decay of First-love? See Rev. 2. 4, 5. Thou have left thy
first Love. What follows? I will come quickly, and remove thy Candlestick out
of its place. How was the Ephesian Candlestick removed, but by a storm of
persecution, which blew it down? This is the Issue of leaving First-love! And
have not we done so? It is indeed seldom known that an Apostatizing people are
brought home to God, but in such a way as this. We may then fear it; especially
considering that other means have not prevailed unto our Reformation. Are there
not Contentions? Have not we been like foolish little Birds, Pecking at one
another, until the great Kite be ready to come, and devour one as well as
another? Of late God has let loose Indian Wolves upon us; in part, for this
very sin, no doubt. And what further He may do unto us, is known unto himself.
Is there not Formality? Oh! what Formality! I remember it is observed, that a
little before the great Parisian Massacre in France, wherein thirty thousand
Protestants perished, there was a great Decay of the power of godliness among
them: Formality was grown upon them. Notwithstanding the extreme dangers
attending them; there was little earnest seeking unto God: but their minds were
taken with worldly matters; the great concernments of Eternity in the mean time
neglected. Oh that it were not too much so, with the generality of Christians
amongst us! We have then cause to fear, and to be awakened.

But what shall we do, that we may be prepared for suffering Times?

I would say but two words by way of Direction. Labor for true Faith, and for
Assurance, and you will be Well prepared for the greatest sufferings.

1. Labor for Syncerity. O let us look to that, that we are built upon a right
foundation; and then the House will Stand though the Floods come against it.
Yea, though never such winds, and waves, and floods of Temptation, and
Persecution should arise; He that is by a true Faith built upon Christ, after
all is done, shall stand. I know it is a Thought, that often times comes into
the heart of a child of God, If suffering Times should come, shall I be able to
hold out? If my profession should cost me the loss of all that is dear to me in
this world, what then should I Do? And it is good for Christians, to maintain
an holy Jealousy over their own hearts. Self-jealous Mr. Saunders, endured the
fire; and died a Martyr at the Stake: when Self-confident Dr. Pendleton turned
Papist, and served the Times, to avoid persecution. But this is the way, to be
sure to hold out, (come Life, come Death)even to be sincere in the Lord's
sight; To believe on the Lord Jesus Christ with faith unfeigned. All the gates
of Hell, all the persecutors on Earth, in conjunction with all the powers of
Darkness, shall never finally prevail against any true Believer. Mockings,
Scourgings, Bonds, Rackings, Tortures, the worst that Satan, and his bloody
persecuting children can devise, will be endured, rather than Sin will be
committed, or the Truth denied, where there is true Faith, Heb. 11. 35, 36, 37.
For Faith makes a man courageous; and willing to venture himself in the Cause
of Christ. It makes him to fear God more than men. The sincere Believer will
say, as sometimes that great Confessor told his persecutors, You may pluck my
Heart out of my body: but you shall never pluck the Truth out of my Heart.

2. Labor for Assurance. In the Primitive Times, Assurance was not so rare a
thing among Christians, as now it is: for those were suffering Times; and
believers did need Assurance; that so they might be, at a Minutes warning,
ready to be called forth to die, and to suffer for the Truth. If a man be
called to part with his Estate; and he has no assurance of that which is
better: how sad, and miserable will he be? When otherwise, he might be as
joyful as they in Heb. 10. 34. Where there is Sincerity, there will be
constancy in sufferings: but Assurance is necessary, in order unto comfort in
sufferings. It will tend much to the honor of Christ, when his servants are
exceeding Joyful in all their Tribulation: For which cause, He does sometimes
bestow the grace of Assurance upon them at the Time when they are called to
suffer for his Name; though before that, they had it not. One of our English
Martyrs, that suffered in those Days when Popery sat in the Throne, as He was
going to burn and die at the Stake, cried out in an Ecstasy of Joy, O the
Comforter is come, He is come, He is come into my soul. O then Labor for this
Grace. They that know in themselves, that they shall be rewarded in Heaven, if
they be persecuted on Earth; will not be much Troubled, though they be deprived
of their Estates, Liberties, Lives, and All, in the Cause of Christ or for the
Gospel's sake.

Use. 2. Let us endeavor to Prevent this evil which I have been discoursing of.

For although it be true as has been said, If persecution do come, the event
of it will, by the overruling Hand of divine providence, be good; God will have
glory; the Church will have spiritual advantage: yet it is not, in it self, a
thing to be desired; but to be greatly deprecated. Woe to them that desire the
evil Day: that Day is dark, and not light. When a storm of Persecution comes,
what woeful Desolations come therewith! How many Churches are thereby laid most
desolate! How many Lives are lost therein! especially of the Ministers of God;
and most of all, of those that are most faithful, able, and useful. Look for
that! If a storm of persecution blow over into America, Some Ministers of God
whom you now hear preaching, will be made a Sacrifice: A sacrifice to confirm
the Faith of this His people. The Lord Jesus has placed them in the forefront
of the hottest battle. And such of them as are most dear to Christ, shall be
singled out to be his Champions, and to lose their lives in his Cause.

But what shall we do, that this Evil may be Prevented?

I Answer.

1. Let us be Humbled for those sins that might provoke God to let loose
Persecutors upon us. Some may think, the best way would be, to comply with the
Adversary: But I am sure This is a better way; even to be Humbled for our sins.
The wise man sales, When a man's ways please the Lord, his Enemies shall be at
Peace with him. Prove. 16. 7. O Let us be Humbled for the sins already
mentioned: For that Apostasy; for those Divisions; for that Formality, and
Lukewarmness in Religion, which is too general among us. And let us be Humbled
for one sin more. That is, Our great Unthankfulness for our precious Libertyes.
Never any people in the world, had greater cause of Thankfulness unto God, than
we have had. In respect of our Civil Libertyes; wherein we have been admirably
privileged; and which God his to a wonderment, continued to us. And in respect
of our Spiritual Libertyes; The Libertyes of the Gospel of Christ, and of the
House of God; which we have been blessed with. But certainly, we have not been
so Thankful, as we ought to be: O be Humbled for this!

2. Let us Pity, and Pray for the Lord's suffering servants.

To pray for the peace of Jerusalem, is the way to prosper. Psalm. 122. 6. To be
grieved for the Afflictions of Joseph, Amos, 6. 6. is the way to prevent the
like sufferings from coming upon our selves. The Lord give us much of that
public spirit. Perhaps carnal Reason will say, It is not good to be so open in
espousing a suffering Cause: we had better be more private. But Moses, who was
a wise Man, was of another mind: Choosing Rather to suffer affliction with the
people of God. Heb. 11. 25. And let us give the world to see, and know that we
are not ashamed to own His suffering saints. Let us remember them that are in
bonds, as bound with them; and them which suffer adversity, as being our selves
also in the body. So that if Enquiry be made of those that are going from us,
to other parts of the world, What are they doing in New England? The Reply may
be, They are Fasting, and praying for the persecuted people of God in the
world. I say, if any ask of you, What are they doing in New England, Tell them,
that in New England, they did no sooner hear of the persecuted Condition of the
Protestants in France, but they set themselves, to Past, and Pray to the God of
Heaven, for them. We shall not repent of what we have done; when God appears to
take Vengeance on the Enemy. If we sympathise with the Lord's people in their
present sufferings, and sorrows; In the Day when Jerusalem shall Rejoice; we
shall be glad, and rejoice with Her: Even in that Day, which is not far off;
when the Lord will be Jealous for Jerusalem, and for Zion, with a great
Jealousy.

Tibi Domine.
ERRATA.
Page 11. L. 19. for (have) Read (has)

P. 15. L. 24. Read 2 Cor. 4. 17. and 1 Pet. 1. 7.

Advertisement.
There is intended shortly to be Published, a Treatise of this Authors, about
the Duty of PRAYER, also concerning the SACRAMENTS of the New Testament; and
several other Subjects.


