An Arrow AGAINST Profane and Promiscuous DANCING. Drawn out of the Quiver of
the SCRIPTURES.

By the Ministers of Christ at Boston in New England.

Judge. 6. 31. Will you plead for Baal? Let him plead for himself. Chorea est
Circulus cujus Centrum est Diabolus. Gulielm: Parisiensis. Boston; Printed by
Samuel Green, and are to be Sold by Joseph Brunning. 1684

(...) call Dancing, or that which is commonly called Mixed or Promiscuous
Dancing, viz. of Men and Women (be they elder or younger persons) together: Now
this we affirm to be utterly unlawful, and that it cannot be tolerated in such
a place as New England, without great Sin. And that it may appear, that we are
not transported by Affection without Judgment, let the following Arguments be
weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary.

Arg. 1. That which the Scripture condemns is sinful. None but Atheists will
deny this Proposition: But the Scripture condemns Promiscuous Dancing. This
Assumption is proved, 1. From the Seventh Commandment. It is an Eternal Truth
to be observed in expounding the Commandments, that whenever any sin is
forbidden, not only the highest acts of that sin, (...) all degrees thereof,
and all occasions leading thereto are prohibited. Now we cannot find one
Orthodox and Judicious Divine, that writes on the Commandments, but mentions
Promiscuous Dancing, as a breach of the seventh Commandment, as being an
occasion, and an incentive to that which is evil in the sight of God. Yea, this
is so manifest as that the Assembly in the larger Catechism, do expressly take
notice of Dancings, as a violation of the Commandments. It is sad, that when in
times of Reformation, Children have been taught in their Cotechism, that such
Dancing is against the Commandment of God, that now in New England they should
practically be learned the contrary. The unchaste Touches and Gesticulations
used by Dancers, have a palpable tendency to that which is evil. Whereas some
object, that they are not sensible of any ill motions occasioned in them, by
being Spectators or Actors in such Saltations; we are not bound to believe all
which some pretend concerning their own Mortification. But suppose it were so,
if there be other persons, who are by Mixed Dancing drawn into sin; that is
enough against it. And that many are so, Juvenal's Verses are a sufficient proof

Forsitan expectes ut [Gaditana] canor^ Incipiat prurire chor^, plausuque
probatoe.

And that of Horace, Motus doceri gaudet Jonicos Matura Virgo, and Fingitur
Actibus, jam nunc and incestos amores, etc.

2. Besides the seventh Commandment, There are other Scriptures, which seem
expressly and particularly to condemn the Dancing we plead against. It is spoken
of as the great sin of the Daughters of Sion, that they did walk with
stretched-out necks, and with wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and
making a tinkling with their feet, Isa. 3. 16. Those great Interpreters Junius,
and Rivet, and Ravanellus, conceive, that Scripture has a special respect to
those artificial and proud carriages which are learned in the Dancing School.
And the holy Apostle Paul condemns Rioting as a vice, Romans 13. 13. The original
word Critical and Accurate Expositors Interpret, as reflecting on Petulant
Dancings. And another Apostle speaks not only of Excess in Wine, but of
Revelling, as a Sin which the Gentiles before their Conversion to Christ, were
generally guilty of, 1 Pet. 4. 3. The word translated Revelling, may be read
Dancing. It is the same with that in the Romans, which our translation calls
Rioting. The learned Aretius comments thus upon it; By K(...) he intends wanton
Dancing, and so it is fitly mentioned after that of Excess in Wine, because it
was customary with the Gentiles, after they had been drinking to Excess, to
fall to dancing and singing; and commonly their Songs were profane and obscene.
Thus he, And indeed, as Ravanellus and Voetius have well observed: the Greek
word K(...) (which our Translators call Rioting, and in Peter, Revelling) is by
the most learned in the Greek Tongue, judged to intend Dancing. Thus Hesychius
says, that it is (...) And it is evident, that Pindar, the Greek Poet, does so
use the word. He says, (...) i. e. Salta cum Hymno. Vid. Zuinger. Theatr. Vol.
2. lib. 5. p. 389.

The sum is, that according to the judgment of the most profound and accurate
Interpreters; the Scripture does expressly, and by name condemn Dancing as a
vicious practice. The argument stands thus, K(...) are expressly condemned in
the Scripture? But mixed Dancings are K(...) Therefore they are expressly
condemned in the Scripture. Also under that of Chambring, Wantoness,
lascivousness Dancings are implied.

3. There are many other Scriptures which do implicitly condemn them as sinful.
How often does the Scripture commend unto Christians, Gravity and Sobriety, in
their behavior at all times; and condemn all Levity in Carriage. When as
Dancing is (as some have expressed it) a Regular Madness. That wise Prince
Alphonsus, after he had seen such things, the question being asked, What is the
difference between a Dancer and a Madman? Replied; There was no other
difference, but only this; that the person who is really Phrentick, is mad all
the day long; when as the Dancer is only mad an hour in a day perhaps. Lud.
Vives tells a pleasant story of certain men, who coming out of Asia into Spain,
when they saw the Spaniards dance, they were so affrighted, as to run away,
supposing them to be possessed with some Spirit, or mad at least. And truly
such affected Levity, and Antic Behavior, when persons skip and fling about
like Bedlams, a s they say, Dancers are wont to do; is no way becoming the
Gravity of a Christian. Moreover, the Scripture says, Whatsoever things are of
good report, think of these, Phil. 4. 8. which implies, that Christians ought
to avoid things of evil report. But Promiscuous Dancings are so; and that not
only amongst serious Christians, but even amongst the Gentiles. Their grave and
wise men have branded that custom as vile, infamous, and abominable; whose
words we shall hear anon. But therefore that Rule which says, meddle not with
things of bad report, forbids Christians to have any concernment with
Promiscuous Dancings. Yet again the Scripture says, Give no offense, neither
to the Jew, nor to the Gentile, nor to the Church of God, 1 Cor. 10. 32. In
indifferent things this precept takes place; but the impleaded Dancing is very
offensive upon more accounts than one, as will afterward appear.

Arg. 2. If we consider, by whom this practice of Promiscuous Dancing was first
invented by whom patronized, and by whom witnessed against, we may well
conclude, that the admitting of it, in such a place as New England, will be a
thing pleasing to the Devil, but highly provoking to the Holy God.

We design to write as comprehensively as we can; and have therefore in this
Argument put several things together, the particulars whereof we shall
endeavor to clear.

1. Who were the Inventors of Petulant Dancings? They had not their original
amongst the People of God, but amongst the Heathen. Learned men have well
observed, that the Devil was the first inventor of the impleaded Dances, and
the Gentiles, who worshipped him, the first Practitioner s in this Art. They did
honor the Devils, whom they served in this way; their Festivals being for the
most part spent in Play and Dances. And from them did the Apostatizing
Idolatrous Israelites learn to behave themselves, as they did, when they
worshipped the Golden Calf. They sat down, to eat and drink, and rose up to
play, or to dance. 1 Cor. 7. 10. Hence amongst the Greeks, Bacchus, was styled
(...) the God that loved Dancing. Their manner wa s, that a Company of Young
Men and Women, with Musical Instruments, would Dance and Sing together, in
honor of Bacchus; whom also they called by the name of K(...) which (as before
was showed) does from thence signify Dancing. vid. Alting Theol. Problem. Loc.
10. p. 510. Nor is it to be wondered that those miserably deluded Souls, who
thought and taught, that their Gods were Adulterers, did suppose that they
would be delighted with such Dance s; as had a tendency that way, yea, the
Gentiles took such pleasure in Dancing, that they learned some irrational
Creatures that foolish Art. In special (as Strabo in lib. 13. relates) they
taught Apes to Dance. When Diana's Festival was celebrated, Dancing A pes were
brought forth to honor it. This is enough to make Christians, not only deride,
but detest such Vanities; especially considering that the Scripturer says,
Learn not the way of the Heathen. Jer. 10. 2. And that the Lords People may not
do after their manners, nor imitate their Heathenish Customs, Lev. 20. 23. And
that Christ came to redeem Believers from their vain Conversation, 1 Pet. 1.
18. And that they should not be conformed to this world, Romans 12. 2.

A practice in use, only amongst the Heathen, but never known among the people
of God, except in times of degeneracy, ought not to be taken up. But this is
true of that practice, which we now testify against.

2. By whom have Promiscuous Dances been patronized? Truly, by the worst of the
Heathen. Caligula, Nero, and such like Atheists and Epicures were delighted in
them. Lucius (that infamous Apostate) has written an Oration, in defense of
profane and Promiscuous Dancing s. Amongst the Papists, some of their more
gtave Writers, decry such a practice as a great Immorality. Alexander
Fabritius, a Learned Man, though Popishly affected, was indeed clearly
convinced of the great sin which is therein. His words are worthy our taking
notice of them; he thus expresses himself. The entering into the Processions of
Dances, binders men from ingress into the heavenly Procession; and those who
Dance, offend against the Sacraments of the Church. First, against Baptism;
They break the Covenant which they made with God in Baptism; wherein they
promised, to renounce the Devil and his Pomps; but when they enter into the
Dance, they go in the Pompous Procession of the Devil. Thus that Author: But
generally, Popish Casuists justify it, as they do many other moral evils; so
Cajetan Azorius, Silvester, and other Papists: The corrupt Schoolmen makes a
light matter of it, calling it a Venial Sin: And therefore Lavater does justly
upbraid the Popish Religion, in that their Writers do generally maintain the
lawfulness of P romiscuous D ancings. So that the Patrons of this Practice are
men not sound in the Faith.

3. Who are they that have faithfully testified against this practice? Ignorant
and Profane Men-say, no body i s against it, but a few silly Precisian s, who
are more precise than wise. But we certainly know, that the wisest, and the
learnedest, and the holiest men in the world have disliked it. The Ancient
Doctors, (Father s a s they are called) have thundered against this Sin.
Chrysostom in hi s Sermons on Genesis, treating on Jacob's Marriage; Here
(says he) We read of a Wedding, but not a word of Dancing there. Yea, he
sticks not to call D ancing a D iabolical Practice. And in another of hi s
Sermon s; He says, that Wherever there is a Petulant D ance, the D evil is one
of the Company. And Arnobius does vehemently reprehend the Gentiles, because of
their lascivious Dance s. Austin does severely tax this vice. Ambrose does
advise all Godly Parent s, that would not have the Souls of their Children
corrupted and ruined, not to send them to the Dancing-School. And how often do
the Father s call the D ance a Work of Satan, one of his Pomps and Vanities,
which all baptized persons are bound to renounce? And not only Fathers, but
whole Councils have born witness against them. So did the Ecumenical Synod at
Constantinople. Also the Synod which met at Laodicea, and several others,
absolutely prohibit all Promiscuous Dancings, not allowing them so much, as at
Weddings. Thus it was with Christians, before the World did degenerate again
into Paganish, Heathenish Customs. We have now heard the ordinance of Antiquity
discharged against the impleaded Dancers. A Shower of Arrow s are yet behind.

As for the great Reformers of Religion, and Opposers of A ntichristianism,
none have gone beyond them, in an Holy Zeal against Profane and Promiscuous
Dancing. Let us in the first place, cite the Waldenses: They are in the
Scripture, honored with the name of Saints, Rev. 13. 7. These Saints of God,
and Martyrs of Jesus, were haters of Mixed Dance s. Because their words are
Pathetical; we shall here transcribe and insert them, a s we find them
mentioned by Perrin, in his History of the Doctrine and Discipline of the
Waldenses, p. 63. They thus testify: A D ance is the D evils Procession. He
that enters into a D ance, enters into his Possession. The D evil is the Guide,
the middle and the end of the D ance A man sins in D ancing diverse ways; as
in his Pace, for all his steps are numbered; in his Touch, in his Ornaments, in
his Hearing, sight, Speech, and other Vanities. We will prove first from
Scripture, and then by other Reasons, how wicked a thing it is to D ance. -- He
that Danceth, maintains the Devil's Pomp, and sings his Mass. Again, In a
Dance, a man breaks the Ten Commandments of God. The very motion of the Body,
which is used in Dancing, gives Testimony enough of evil. Austin says, The
miserable Dancer knows not, that as many Paces, as he makes in Dancing, so
many steps he makes to Hell. Thus (and much more to this purpose) do those
faithful Witnesses of Christ, declare against this Profane Practice. Moreover,
the Minister s of the Reformed Churches in France, did above an hundred years
ago, ( viz. Anno 1581.) concur in writing, and publishing a Book, against the
vice we are impleading. Also Venerable Calvin, Marlorat, Lavater, Danoeus,
Tilenus, Polanus, Zepperus; all condemn it as utterly unlawful. Peter Martyr
and Aretius in their common places, do elaborately discourse about mixed
Dancing, and prove it to be an unlawful Recreation. The Judicious River says,
that such Dancing s as teach wantonness s in look s, or pride in behavior, as
he thinks almost all the Saltations do, which are now adays Artificially
learned in the Dancing-Schools, are breaches of the seventh Commandment, and
ought not to be tolerated in any Christian Commonwealth. The great Voetius
has lately, and (according to hi s wonted manner) with very much learning and
strength of reason, proved that such Exercises are very sinful. The like has
been done by the Excellent Altingius, Amongst our English Divines there is a
cloud of Witnesses. There are three Bishops who have written against
Promiscuous Dancing a s unlawful; so Dr. Downham, Babington and Andrews, and
one Archbishop (tho we confess a Puritanical one) viz. the incomparable Usher,
has given his Testimony against Vanities of thy s kind. Beside s these Dr.
Rainold, Dr. Ames, Mr. Perkins. Mr. Dod, Mr. Elton, Mr. Bolton, Mr. Brinsley,
Mr. Durham and others have abundantly proved it to be unlawful. Also Mr. Pri^
ha s in his Histrio Mastix, a large discourse on this subject. Whosoever shall
please to read him, will find that good men have been very severe in their
censure on Dancers. He will there see it affirmed, that mixed Dancing is a
Recreation fitter for Pagans and whores and Drunkards than for Christians: And
that the Gate of Heaven i s too strait for a Chore of impure Dancers to enter
in thereat: and that such Capring Goais will not be found amongst Sheep at the
last Day, with many the like severe expression s. So odious was this practice
Practice in former times, when Debauchery and Atheism had not obtained that
Credit which thy s Adulterous Generation ha s put upon it.

Arg. 3. That Practice which the Graver sort of Heathen have condemned as
unlawful, Christians may well look upon as Sinful, Romans 2. 14, 15. But this is
true concerning mixed Dancing; as shall by Testimony be made to appear.

Macrobius informs us, that amongst the Ancient Romans skill in Dancing wa s
reputed an infamous thing. Scipio Africanus complain s that some in his time
would go with impudent Dancers (a s he calls them) and learn to sing with them,
Which practice their Ancestors looked upon a s a disgrace to Gentlemen. He
therefore speaks of it a s a great degeneracy of that Age, that some being
Person s of Quality, sent their Children to a Dancing-school, and that he had
himself seen at one of their Schools, a Boy of twelve years old Dancing, which
he thought was a fitter employment for a lewd and foolish serving-boy, than for
the Son of a Gentleman. And Salust (that brave Roman Historian) lays it a s a
Brand of Infamy upon Sempronia, that she had been taught to Dance, which he
says was a sign of dishonesty; such a practice being the instrument of Luxury.
And Cicero in his Oration Pro Muroena says, that if a Man be as Dancer, he is
doubtless either a Drunkard or a mad man. Nemo saltat sobrius nis^ forte
insaniat. He blames Cato for having such hard thoughts of Muroena, as to
suppose him guilty of Dancing. For (says he) if he be a Dancer, without doubt
he is a bad man indeed, since that Vice never goes alone. ^le says of
Gabinius and Antonius that they must needs be vicious persons, because they
were Dancers. Seneca bewails it, that in his time young Ones were corrupted
with Obscene Dances; and that Dancing-schools were tolerated in the City, and
that some when they were inflamed at the Dance, went from the Dancing-school to
the Brothel house. Priamus severely reproved hi s sons because he understood
they were (...) i. e. Dancers, Plutarch in hi s Description of a Virtuous
Woman, mention s this as a Negative qualification, that she must not be a
Dancer. Understand him and the other Authors cited, a s speaking of Promiscuous
D ances. The Emperor Tiberius banished D ancers, not only from hi s Court, but
out of the City of Rome.

Now then, shall the Gentiles, who had only the dark Light of Nature to show
them what things are good and what evil; condemn Petulant dancings? And shall
Christians who have the Scriptures and the Glorious Light of the Gospel to
illuminate them, practice or plead for such work s of Darkness? And shall that
Abomination be set up in New England (the place where the Light of the Gospel
has shined so Gloriously) which Moral Heathen have detested? The Lord lay not
this great sin to the charge of any, who have at all been guilty of it.

Arg. 4. The practice which is not sanctified by Prayer, but is an Enemy to
Religious Exercises, is surely an evil Practice. But this is true concerning
mixed dancing. It i s a good Rule which Practical and Casuistical Divines are
wont to give, That work which a Man cannot pray over, let him not meddle with.
A Christian should do nothing wherein he cannot exercise Grace, or put a
respect of Obedience to God on what he does. This in lawful Recreations may be
done. 1 Cor. 10. 31 But who can seriously pray to the Holy God to be with him
when he is going to a Promiscuous dance? It is that which hinder s Religiou s
Exercise s, especially for persons to go immediately from hearing a Sermon to a
Gunecandrical Dance. It i s an high degree of profanenes s, an impudent
contempt put upon the Gospel. The Devil thereby catches away the good seed of
the Word, and the former Religiou s Exercise i s rendered ineffectual. Some
that write against dances, observe, that many young persons who seemed to be
hopeful, and to have some good beginnings of Piety in them, by falling into
acquaintance with that unlawful Recreation, have in a little time utterly left
all savor of good; it being just with God, when they have forsaken him to
follow the Devils Pomps and Vanities, to withdraw his Holy Spirit from them,
and judicially give them up to mind nothing else but Folly. The Lord grant that
none amongst our selves may find the observation true.

Arg. 5. For Persons to Dance at a Time when God calls them to mourn, is
certainly unlawful. But such is the case at this Day. If the thing were in at
self lawful (which the Arguments insisted on prove that it is not) yet to set
upon such a practice at such a time, must needs be a great provocation to the
sight of God. Dancers are wont to allege that Scripture, Eccl. 3. 4. There is
a Time to Dance, (though that does not speak a syllable for the Justification
of such Dancing as we are writing against, nor indeed for any other Dancing,
since the meaning of the place is not that there is a lawful time, but only a
limited time to Dance.) But they should consider that There is a Time to mourn.
Now to set up Dances at a Time when Gods calls to mourn, is most certainly a
provocation. There was a Time when God by his Prophet said, Hear the Word of
the Lord, O ye Women, and teach your daughters wai^^ Jer. 9. 20. And so does he
speak by his providence at this day: But at a Time when God says, Teach your
Daughters wailing, shall we say no, We will teach them Dancing? There is a woe
pronounced upon them that are at ease in Sion, and who at a season when they
should be grieved for the Affliction of Joseph, are Chanting to the sound of
the Visl, Amos 6. 5. Every body knows that it is a time of much Affliction with
the Church of God in the World. They that begin a Dance now, give but a poor
evidence of their belonging to the Mystical Body of Christ, when they do no
more sympathize with its sorrow. Is this a Time for Jigs and Galiards! Let us
recommend to such persons the serious Consideration of that Scripture, Isa. 22.
12, 13, 14. In that Day did the Lord God of Hosts call to weeping and to
mourning. And behold Joy and Gladness, Let us Eat and Drink, for to morrow we
shall Die. It was revealed in mine Ears by the Lord of Hosts, surely this
Iniquity shall not be purged from you till you Die, says the Lord of Hosts.
The Judgments of God are abroad in the World, and hanging over our own heads
too. Should we then make Mirth? Ezekiel. 21. 10. Blessed Mr. Cotton, tho he be
dead (and has been so 33. years) yet speaks. He has left behind him this
Testimony (in his Book on Eccl. 3. 4.) To Dance though at Marriages is unmeet,
especially in N. E. And at such a Time as this, when the Churches are in
Distress. Should he rise out of his Tomb (which is here amongst us) how would
his Holy Soul be grieved to behold such Degeneracy in this Boston.

Arg. 6. That Practice against which the wrath of God has been revealed from
Heaven, may well be dreaded as unrighteous. Romans 1. 18. But this is sadly true
concerning mixed Dancings. The Fruits and Effects thereof have been Tragical and
Dismal. No doubt but that the Promiscuous Dances (for at their Sacrifices the
Heathen used to do so) between the Moabites and the Midianitish Woman, proved a
snare to the Children of Israel. But how terrible a Plague followed? Rivet,
Ravanellus and others conclude that Dinah went to see a Dance among the
Shechemites; if her good Father had not indulged her that liberty, he had saved
her from Ruin, and himself and Family from great Reproach. Salome, the
Daughter of Herodias was notable at Dancing! But what end did she come to?
Nicepho^^^ relates that falling under the Ice, her feet Capered under the
water; and her Head being cut off by the Ice, it danced above water. The Story
of that Bishop is famous, who having a Mixed Dance in his House, he and the
female in his hand happened to be crushed to Death. Also in the City of
Magdeburg. 24 Persons (Men and Women) were struck dead with the Lightnings as
they were Promiscuously Dancing. See (...) Theater of Judgments, Chap. 36.
Hereby may we understand that such Men have provoked the Lord, Numb. 16. 30.
Histories have many other tragical stories confirming this Argument, which we
forbear to mention. It is known from their own Confessions that amongst the
Indians in this America, oftentimes at their (...) the Devil appears in bodily
shape, and (...) away one of them alive. In some places of this Wilderness
there are great heaps of Stones, which the Indians have laid together, as an
horrid Remembrance of so hideous a fruit of their Satanical Dances. The Writer
of Magica de Spectris, observes, That there was hardly any meeting betwixt the
Devil and Witches wherein there was no Dancing.

But let us hear what the Patrons of Dances have to plead. Produce your Cause,
and bring forth your strong Reasons, says the Lord. Say all that you have to
say.

Plea. 1. We Read in the Scripture of Dances. Miriam Danced, and David Danced.

Answ. 1. Those Instances are not at all to the purpose; for they were
Religious Dances accommodated to the State of the Old Testament-Church. They
had also Music in the^^ worship, but such as have so in these days J ^^daize
more than Christians ought to do, (...) should divert into another Question,
should (...) speak to that.

2. Neither were those mentioned, Mixed dancings: It is said of Miriam, The
Woman went out after her with Dances, Exodus 15. 20. But not that Men went out
with them: Nor did David take a Woman by the hand to Dance with him before the
Ark. In one Word, there is not so much as one Example in the whole Book of God
concerning mixed dancing, except it be the Instance of that accursed and damned
Harlot the Daughter of Herodias.

Plea. 2. The Design of Dancing is only to teach Children good Behavior and
decent Carriage.

Ans. Religion is no Enemy to good Manners, to learn a due Poyse and Composure
of Body is not unlawful, provided it be done without a provocation to
Uncleanness, and be not a Nurse of Pride and Vanity. If therefore any be
disposed to have their Children instructed in that which may be truly
Ornamental, or a desirable Accomplishment in these respects, they may send
them not to a Blasphemer, but to some Grave Person that will teach them Decency
of Behavior, not Promiscuously, but each Sex by themselves; so neither God nor
Man will be offended.

This notwithstanding, Every thing is not Good Carriage; which Light and Vain
Persons shall call so. Why should Pantomimical Gestures be named good Carriage.
There is a behavior which Light Persons look upon as an accomplishment; but
such as are grave and solid, and wise (whose esteem is most to be valued) have
other thoughts of it. If the Holy Prophet Isaiah were alive in these days, he
would not call a stretched forth neck, and wanton eye, a Mincing as they go, by
the name of good carriage. It is one of the Devil's Wiles to Guild over corrupt
Practices with Golden Names, that men may the more easily swallow them. In this
debauched Age; frequent Osculations amongst those that are not in any Conjugal
Relation, is called good Breeding, Gentile behavior, and the like. But
Christians ought to hate such tendencies to Nicolaitism, for Christ hates them,
Rev. 2. 6.

Plea 3. Children are much pleased with this Exercise. Ans. That we believe:
But if it suit with their corrupt natures, that is a sign it is evil. No doubt
but that if a Stage play were set up, many Children would be as much pleased
with it, as now they are with the Dance. If a Blasphemer shall tell them,
There Is as good Divinity to be learned by a Play as by the Scripture it self,
perhaps they may be debauched into the belief of it, if ever they should see
Scripture-stories acted in a Play, which indeed is a profane Practice common
amongst the Papists, but prohibited in Reformed Churches under pain of the
highest censure. The Lord says, Seek not after your own heart and your own
ways, after which you use to go an whoring, Numb. 15. 35.

Plea. 4. Such dancing is now become customary amongst Christians. Ans. Which
cannot be thought on without horror. A great and Learned Divine takes notice of
it as a very sad thing, that all the profane Dances in use amongst the
Lascivious Greeks of Old, have of late years been revived in the Christian
World; yea, and in Places where the Reformed Religion has taught men better.
But shall Christians follow the course of the World? They ought to swim against
the stream, and to keep themselves pure from the sins of the Times of which
this of mixed dancing is none of the least.

Plea. 5. Some good men think it is lawful! Ans. We are not to walk by the
Opinion of this or that good Man, but by the Scriptures. To the Law and to the
Testimony, if they speak not according to that there is no light in them.
Fearful Judgments have befallen a Professing People for doing such things as
some good Men through error of Judgment have approved of. We dare not deny,
that there have been some good Men in the world, who have been so far misled as
to justify Profanations of the Lords Day. And Lutherans have pleaded for Graven
Images, contrary to the second Commandment. But should such things be tolerated
in N. E. we have reason to believe that the hot displeasure of God would soon
burn against us. Besides, it is more than we know, if one good man has written
in defense of mixed Dancings. One that has written against Dancers, gives his
Book this Title, The Church of ungodly Men and Women whose King is Lucifer. But
we cannot call to mind one Protestant Author who has been real for the interest
of Reformation, that has set his Pen on work to plead for a practice so vile
and infamous. This Objection turns upon Dancers thus, That practice with Holy
Men in all ages have abhorred may well be suspected to be an evil practice: But
it was showed that this is true of promiscuous Dancing. We shall then conclude
this Discourse with a double Corollary.

Corol. 1. It is the Duty of Churches to exercise the Discipline of Christ
toward such of their Members as shall offend in this matter. The Rule is clear
and written with the Beams of the Sun, 2 These. 3. 6. We command you, Brethren,
in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you withdraw your selves from every
Brother that walks disorderly, and not after the Tradition which he received
from us. Now they that frequent Promiscuous Dancings, or that send their
Children thereunto, walk disorderly, and contrary to the Apostles Doctrine. It
has been proved that such a practice is a Scandalous Immorality, and therefore
to be removed out of Churches by Discipline, which is the Broom of Christ,
whereby he keeps his Churches clean. Zepperus and others observe that it was by
this means, that Churches in the Primitive times were preserved from this
corruption. And thus it has been in the Reformed Churches. The National Synod
held at Dort, Anno 1578. thus express themselves, Because Dances are for the
most part attended with a Levity unbecoming Christians, and are an offense to
the Godly, especially when practiced in a time of common Danger and Calamity,
they that go to Dances, shall be reproved, and if after diverse Admonitions they
persist therein, they are to be excluded from Communion. And several Provincial
Assemblies in Holland, have declared that the sword of Discipline ought to be
brandished again such Offenders, as Voetius testifies ( In Disput, de excelsis
mundi, p. 346, 347.) And the Reforming Synods in Poland above an hundred years
ago, did absolutely prohibit these Dances, and prescribe the use of Discipline
against that evil: Once more in the printed Discipline of the Reformed Churches
in France, p. 45. They have this Article, Dancing is to suppressed, and those
that take the liberty or custom to Dance after they have been several times
Admonished shall be Excommunicated, when they show themselves obstinate in
their Rebellion. And the Consistories are exhorted well to put this Article
into Execution, and to read the same publicly in the Name of God, and in the
Authority of the Synods, and the said Synods and Conferences are exhorted to
take heed of and warn those Consistories that therein do not their Duties, to
censure the Offenders for it.

And shall Churches in N. E. who have had a Name to be stricter and purer than
other Churches, suffer such a scandalous evil amongst them? if all that are
under Discipline be made sensible of this matter, we shall not be much or long
infested with a Choreutical Demon.

Corol. 2. Such Church Members in N. E. as have sent their Children to be
Practitioners or Spectators of mixed Dancing between young Men and Maidens, have
cause to be deeply humbled. But stand still a while! what a word is here!
Church Members and their Children in N. E. at mixed D ances! Be astonished O ye
Heavens! without doubt Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel knows us not. If
our Fathers should rise out of their Graves, they would not own such Children.
It has been observed by several learned and holy Men that Job gives it as the
Description and Character of ungodly ones: They send forth their little ones
like a Flock, and their Children Dance, they take the Timbrel and Harp, and
rejoice at the sound of the Organs, Job 21. 11, 12. Mr. Caryls note on those
words is, That worldly men breed their Children vainly. This is all their
Religion. The Catechism which Wicked men teach their Children is to Dance and
to Sing. Not that Dancing, or Music, or Singing are in themselves sinful: but
if the Dancing Master be wicked they are commonly abused to lasciviousness, and
that makes them to become abominable. But will you that are Professors of
Religion have your Children to be thus taught? the Lord expects that you should
give the Children who are Baptized into his Name another kind of Education,
that you should bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord: And do
you not hear the Lord Expostulating the case with you, and saying, you have
taken my Children, the Children that were given unto me; the Children that were
solemnly engaged to renounce the Pomps of Satan; but is this a light matter
that you have taken these my Children, and initiated them in the Pomps and
Vanities of the Wicked one, contrary to your Covenant? What will you say in the
day of the Lords pleading with you? we have that charity for you as to believe
that you have erred through Ignorance, and not wickedly: and we have therefore
accounted it our Duty to inform you in the Truth. If you resolve not on
Reformation, you will be left inexcusable. However it shall be, we have now
given our Testimony and delivered our own Souls. Consider what we say, and the
Lord give you understanding in all things.

FINIS.

