The Fiery Trial no strange thing; DELIVERED IN A SERMON Preached at
CHARLSTOWN, FEBRUARY 15. 1681. Being a Day of Humiliation:

By SAMUEL WILLARD Teacher of a Church in BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND.

Matthew. 10.24: Think not that I am come to send peace on Earth: I came not to
send peace, but a sword. Vel resignemus Christianam militiam, vel parati simus
ad quasvis pro Christo tribulationes ferendas. Musculus. BOSTON In: NEW ENGLAND
Printed for Samuel Sewall. 1682.

TO THE READER
Christian Reader,
There is nothing, more perplexeth a Believer in his race of Godliness, than to
meet with, and be engaged in such difficultyes as he allotted not upon: Those
that promised themselves a fair, and easy way in the service of Christ, when
persecutions arise, anon they are offended in Him: Our Savior therefore
advises every man that will undertake to be a Christian, first to sit down,
and count the Cost. The ensuing Discourse will acquaint you with one of the
hard Lessons of Religion; and tell you what you may rationally propound to your
selves, as likely to meet withal between this, and glory: Nor is this to
discourage, and make you to repent, as of an hard bargain; (for an Eternal
weight of glory, will more than compensate all the tribulations you can go
through, in the way to it) but to call you to preparation: that the newness of
it may not amuse you; nor the greatness of it affright you. How seasonable such
a word is, let the Times speak. If what is here spoken may in any wise help
your Faith, it shall not be labor lost; which that it may, I commend it, and
you to the Grace of God, who am

your servant for Christ, SAMUEL WILLARD.

I Pet. IV. XII. Beloved, think it not strange concerning the Fiery Trial,
which is to try you, as though some strange thing happened to you.
THis Epistle (as is to be seen by the Title or Inscription of it) was directed
to Christians dispersed and scattered up and down the World. Whether they were
the remainder of the Babylonish Captivity, who returned not with their Brethren
into Indea; or the dispersion occasioned by the cruelty of Antiochus, in the
days of the Machabees, of which the Apostle Paul, Heb. 11.11.35 etc. or those
that fled in the Persecution raised soon after the death of Stephen: recorded
Act. 8 beginning (to each of which Interpreters do diferently incline) I
determine not. But they were such as labored under the exercise of manifold
afflictions, as appears from Chap 1.v.6. now, etc. you are in heaviness through
many Temptations. For their relief and encouragement our Apostle does in every
Chapter commix some consolatory and wholesome advise to strengthen and animate
them to patience, and help their perfeiting: and in the latter part of this
Chapter, beginning at this 12th. verse, he more particularly counsels, and
quickens them about this matter.

These words are introductory to the discourse, and taken by themselves (and we
need not at present look further) do contain an Exhortation or Direction, how
to entertain the great Trials that were like to come upon them; or rather a
caution and negative injunction, or a prohibition, respecting the observation
they should make of, and inference they might draw from those troubles. In the
words observe.

1. The Compellation, Beloved: The afflictions of the Saints should not
alienate our affections from them, or render them any whit less amiable in our
eyes: there is no reason why our love should abate, or hearts grow strange to
the people of God, because they are persecuted and hated by the World. Jesus
Christ loves them, and declares them blessed, Mat.5.10. and if they are beloved
by Christ, they deserve it of us, if we would be like him: nay their sufferings
are for Christ, and on that score ought they to be dear to us, as they stand up
for his honor: nay and they are for the Church of Christ too, Col.1.24. we
have our share in the benefit, which challenges for them a share in our love.

2. The subject matter about which the Exhortation is given, viz. the Fiery
Trial: the Word ((...)) signifies burning, and so it is Translated, Rev.18.7.
Thus also some render it here. It designs the more sharp and severe exercises
of affliction, such as are occasioned by the violent oppression and persecution
of Enemies, which are frequently in Scripture Phrase expressed by the Metaphor
of Fire, from the manifold resemblance which is between them: it is here
translated Fiery Trial, respecting the end which God looks at in ordering it to
befall his people, and that is further expressed and amplified in the
description; which is to try you; the Greek is, which befalls you for a
temptation or trial, intimating to us the great design of God in all, even the
severest Afflictions which his Children suffer; nor is it a vain Tautologic,
but a needful amplification; flesh and blood being very ready to count of it as
rather to destroy, then to prove their Faith.

3. The Exhortation it self: Think it not strange, the Word is, be ye not like
to Ghests or Strangers; and it is used for those which are troubled with
admiration at some new and strange thing. The Apostle therefore expounds
himself at the latter end of the verse: As if some strange thing had happened
unto you.

2. Or, as if a stranger came to you: so some read it: and his meaning is, that
they should not entertain it as a thing which they had no expectation of, and
were thereupon moved with wonder and surprise at the coming of it.

I shall not here endeavor to express all that might usefully be observed from
the words, but among many Truths that might hence be treated of, make choice of
that comprehensive one, for our present meditation. viz.

Doct. It becomes not the people of God to look upon the fiery trial which
befalls the Church of Christ in the world, as a strange thing. We may take up
the Explication in three things: 1. What is meant by fiery trials? 2. What it
is to count them strange? 3. The ground of the Doctrine.

1. What is meant by fiery Trials?

A. Trials in propriety of speech, are such experiments as are made, for the
finding out of the nature, qualities, and operation of things, when they are
applied, in our speech, to rational agents, they then intend, either an Essay
of Endeavor to draw, and by Arguments to persuade men to any thing which we
have a design to make use of them in, and so they are called temptations, and
in which sense mainly, the Devil is called the Tempter, because he uses all
endeavors to insinuate into, and gain men to follow his suggestions: or else a
proof which we are minded to make of the fidelity, sincerity, and constancy
which is in a person, that we may know him the better, and so they are more
peculiarly called Trials: in this sense it is said, A wise man will try before
he will trust; thus God put Abraham's faith and obedience to the trial,
Gen.22.beginning. Afflictions in Scripture language often bear the name of
trials, because by them proof is made of Professors, and men are tried so as to
be discovered, oftentimes, whither they be indeed sincere or hypocritical; and
indeed it is one of the best evidences we can have of men's integrity, when
these drive them not from, but establish them in their profession.

When the Epithete Fiery, is added to trials, it serves to denote such
afflictions as are the most sharp and severe, and do the most of all put a
Christians constancy to the test: and among these, the Apostle (as by our
Context is manifest) does here intend, such as are occasioned by persecution;
those things which the people of God are called to suffer in defense of the
Gospel, against the cruelty of raging Enemies; of which sort are imprisonments,
stripes, revilings, exile, confiscation of goods, and the like: these are
called fiery, metaphorically, because such is the pain, grief, and trouble
which they put the mind of man to, and sometimes his body also, as render them
exceeding difficult to bear; and because as fire they serve to purge and
cleanse them from many pollutions: yea, and sometimes they are so termed
Properly, because the Persecutors of the Church, do often prosecute the true
professors of Jesus Christ with Fire and Faggot: and they are called Trials,
because (whatsoever the Instruments of them aim at in executing them upon the
people of God) they are designed by God himself, who is the Sovereign and
Supreme disposer of all things, to be probationary, and used as a Refiners fire
to purge out the dross, and not to wast the good metal which is cast into it,
Mal.3.3.

2. What it is to count them strange?

A. We look upon such things to be strange, which are,

1. Things unusual, and with which we have no acquaintance: such things as
rarely happen, as scarce come once in an age, are esteemed to be strange
things: a man whom we never or seldom saw before, and with whom we have not
taken up any familiarity or friendship, is usually counted and called a
stranger: familiarity and strangeness are opposed each to other: so that then
we count the fiery trial a strange thing, when we look upon it as a thing
unusual, a thing not wont to befall the people of God, a rare thing; so the
phrase is used, Luke.5.26. We have seen strange things to day: such as ages
have not produced the like.

2. Things unexpected; such as come upon us at unawares; which we did not so
much as dream of; it never entered into our thoughts to look for, and apprehend
any the least probability or likelihood of such events. Those things which we
do expect, they are not strange to us when they come, and that because we were
in our expectance familiarized with them; but when they come suddenly, they
surprise us: when we expected and promised our selves to live at ease, and not
to be molested, and now trouble comes, we are amused: and thus strangeness is
opposed to expectance, so it is used Ioh.33.3. a strange punishment to the
workers of iniquity, i.e. such as they were secure in their thoughts against,
and siezed on them unlooked for.

3. Things whereof we cannot give a reason: the cause of them is hidden from
our cognizance, and we understand not either whence they come or what they come
for; strange and admirable are sometimes used synonimically, so the word is
used, I Pet.44. They think it strange that you run not, etc. i. e. they wonder
at it, and think there is no reason for it: now admiration is a suspension of
the understanding, when we see an effect, and are not able to dive into the
cause of it: when we see that a thing is, and then sit down and consider either
whence, or why it is, and cannot satisfy our selves about it, we then wonder,
and place it among the number of strange things: and such an Opinion had the
Psalmist conceived of the fiery trial, Psalm.73.^6. When I thought this, i. e.
the reason of these dispensations forementioned, it was too painful for me; his
understanding was not able to bear the disquisition.

4. We show that we look at things as strange, when we carry it to them as unto
strangers; and that is in two things principally;

1. When we suspect them to come for no good to us, but rather for mischief:
Jealousy is a frame or disposition, wherewith we do frequently entertain
strangers: it is very natural, and therefore usual for us to think of such,
that they have some evil design upon us; which jealousy occasions us to keep a
critical eye upon them, and warily to watch all their words and actions, yea
their very looks and gestures; and let them pretend to never so much
friendship, yet we are hard of belief, thus Hanun suspected David's Servants:
thus Jacob looked upon his Afflictions, when he concluded These things are
against me, Gen.42.36. and Job when he uttered that complaint, Job 19.11. He
has also kindled his wrath against me, and he counts me to him as one of his
enemies.

2. When they are a burden and wearisomeness to us, and we had rather have
their room than their company: and this is a fruit of the former; for when we
expect no good by them, but suspect some design of evil upon us from them, it
makes their presence a burden and grief to us; and this puts us upon it to
desire, and eagerly long for their departure, and if they tarry long we are
quite tired out with them, and would use any course to be rid of them, they are
such unwelcome guests to us: thus did Hezechiah Isai.33. 13. I reckoned till
morning, that as a Lion he will break all my bones; from day even to night will thou make an end of me.

3. For the ground of the Doctrine: or why it becomes not the people of God
thus to esteem of the fiery trial; this is evident upon a double account: For
so to think is both in it self unreasonable, and also prejudicial to the people
of God.

1. It is a conclusion very unreasonable; there is no just reason to be rendered
for such a thought: if we will ponder every circumstance, we shall see it
evident that it is not a strange thing in it self, and must therefore be
irrationally so judged by us; For,

1. It is no unusual thing, but very frequent: we have the Saints of all ages
for examples; there is a whole cloud of witnesses testifying to this truth:
ever since righteous Abel lost his life for Christ, to this day, there has
been in all ages almost more or less of the fiery trial upon Gods Children: it
was thus with Israel in Egypt, who were made to serve in hard labor, and in
cruel bondage, and are therefore represented as a bush on fire and not
consumed: yea their whole passage through the Wilderness, what was it, but a
going through fire and water* So the Psalmist expresses it, Isai. ^6 1^. We
went through fire, and through water. And besides the fires kindled upon the
Church, particular Saints have their fires also to try them: fore and sharp
afflictions, this is David's complaint in respect of himself, Psalm.57 4. My soul
is among lions, and I lie even among them that are set on fire. Nay God speaks
of his Church as a place where he constantly keeps a furnace for their trial;
hence he makes it a paraphrase upon his name, or one attribute whereby he may
be known by us, Isai 31 9. the Lord, whose fire is in Zion, and his furnace in
Jerusalem.

2. It cannot rationally be looked upon as an unexpected thing. This will
appear, (if laying aside all other grounds of it) we only consider that God
has forewarned his people of it, and told them that it shall be: for either we
must think that he speaks not as he intends, and so would deceive us with vain
fears, or else that he is ignorant of it, and so we must deny his supreme
providence in all these events, or else we must take his predictions for
evidence of the futurity of it: the Scripture frequently puts us in mind of,
and counsels us to prepare for such times: it declares it not only as a thing
possible, which yet should prevent our security; or probable, which yet will
put a wise man upon expectation; but future, or a thing which must be, it was
one of the last warnings which our Savior Christ gave to his Disciples, and
with which he closes up his last Sermon to them, just before he was taken from
them, Joh.16. ult. In this world ye shall have tribulation. The Apostles of
Christ looked upon it as a necessary Doctrine to be taught all the people of
God, and were therefore careful to instruct them in it in all places where they
came, Acts 14.21,22. That we must through much tribulation enter into the
kingdom of God. Paul ascerteins Timothy, that it is a Catholic verity, a
thing to be expected by all, as being equally extensive to a godly life, 2 Timothy.3.12 Yea and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer
persecution. So that not to expect it, is an implicit denial, at least calling
in question of the truth of the Gospel.

3. Neither is the reason of it abstruse or difficult, but if we look into all
the causes of it, we may discern sufficient ground for it: For,

1. If we consider the principal agent in it, who is God, (for it is his
sovereign providence, which determines and disposes of all the changes which
come over his people) it follows from his infinite wisdom, goodness, and love
to his Children, so far is it from contradicting any of these, (whatever
prejudices the carnal reasonings of our dark under standings may take up) as
will appear, if we consider the use and improvement which he makes of it: our
Text informs us, that it is to try them, in which trial (like a refiner) he
makes his own people more fit for the use and service of their Lord and Master.
For,

1. By it he burns off the dirt that clave to them: Metal when it is first
taken out in Ore from the Mineral, has much of heterogeneous matter (dirt and
filth) cleaving to it, and (...) the fire burns off: so do these fiery trials
that come upon the Church, they make it too hot for nominal professors to abide
by it; as close as they seemed to cleave to the people of God in a seeming
Profession before, now they must fall off; the stony ground is offended when
tribulation and persecution arises, Mat.13.21. Hypocrites cannot long abide
they fiery trial, but when it grows hot upon them, they relinquish their
Religion, and comply with the World, to avoid trouble.

2. By this also he separates the dross from the good metal: when the dirt is
removed away the metal indeed looks brighter, and makes a fairer show, but yet
there is a great deal of dross and dregs in it, which render it less precious,
and more unserviceable, but the fire melts that out, separates it, and leaves
the rest by far more pure: there may possibly be abundantly less of it, but
that which is, is of a great deal more value; the people of God themselves have
much of dross and corruption cleaving to them; and that especially in times of
outward peace and prosperity, but when God brings a fiery trial upon them, it
refines and purges them: this is the very design of God in these
dispensations, Isai. 27.9. By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and
all the fruit is to take away sin. And chap.1.25. I will turn my hand upon
thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and take away thy tin.

3. Yea, and by this too, he melts down the good metal: the fire prepares and
fits the metal by melting to take any form, to be cast into any mold which the
Founder designs: by sore afflictions the people of God are made more humble,
and made pliable to any Command of God: they are sometimes stiff and
inflexible in days of prosperity, but now they subject themselves to the
framing hand of God, and are ready to receive his stamp and impression,
Zech.13.9. I will refine them as silver, etc. and what then? why now they shall
call on my name, and shall say the Lord is my God.

2. If we consider the procuring cause of it, and that is the sin and
provocation of his people. Sometimes indeed God sends it merely as
probationary, so he did to Job, but usually there is something on our part,
putting some sort of necessity upon God to proceed in this way with us: the
Church of God here has its converse in an evil World, where, by reason of the
remainders of indwelling corruption, apt to take the infection of many
temptations, they are contracting a great deal of filth and pollution, so that
their necessity seems to call for a fiery trial, to burn off their cords of
vanity, to purge and purify them from these corruptions. They that are
acquainted with their own hearts, and know how much they have dishonored God
in days of peace, quiet, and liberty, will easily judge and acknowledge that
it is not without very just ground, and good reason that he often brings
trouble and persecution upon them. The Prophet therefore pleads it with the
people of God, Jer.2.17. Have thou not procured this unto thy self? and 4.^8.
Thy way and thy doings have procured these things unto thee.

3. If we look upon those that are the instrumental causes of it, which are
Satan and wicked men, neither herein will it appear wonderful; either,

1. That they are ready and forward to afflict and persecute the people of God:
he must needs be strangely unacquainted with their native malice, that thinks
it is a strange thing: it has been a truth from the beginning, that the World
ever hated the Church: they hated Christ first, and thence it is no wonder if
they hate his people too: our Savior Christ to show what entertainment his
Disciples are to expect in the World, compares his people to Sheep among
Wolves, Mat. 10. 16. Behold I send you forth as sheep in the midst of Wolves.
And the Wolf seeks no other quarrel against the sheep, but that he is a sheep,
and if he can, will devour him, right or wrong: to be a servant of Jesus
Christ, a sincere Professor of the Gospel, is enough to stir up the hate and
malice of the World: Caius Sejus bonus homo, sed christianus, if they can in no
other point charge them, yet this very name renders them odious: Its charge
enough if they can charge them in the matters of then God: and we may as well
wonder, way Serpents hate men, as why the old Serpents seed hate the seed of
the Woman. nor,

2. That God uses them as instruments, neither is this any wonder, since they
are the fittest materials to make his rods of: these are rods which will smart
most: their hatred makes them most ready to afflict and chastise the Church
withal: it is true, if they were principal agents, and left to act their own
pleasure they were very unfit, for they think only of the ruin and desolation,
but not of the trial and reformation of the People of God; but as instruments
in the hand of God, they will make it smart, but cannot do any hurt: again, they
are therein the fittest to make rods of, that when God has done with them, and
chastened his People by them, they may be thrown into the fire: yea in this
respect God makes eminent discovery of his infinite wisdom in the choice of
Instruments, because in this way he takes an advantage to prove the reality of
his love to his people, then when he is most angry with them. It is therefore
worthy our diligent observation, that though God be never so angry with his
people, and cause his wrath to burn never so high against them, yet then he so
loves them, that he will be avenged on the very Instruments of his displeasure
upon them, and therefore makes choice of his, and his Churches Enemies to
punish them withal: why does God call Babylon to come down and sit in the dust?
Isai. 57.1. we have the reason rendered in ver.6. I was wrath with my people,
and gave them into thy hand, and thou have shown them no mercy. Though Babylon
did no more then what God both intended and threatened: there cannot be a more
manifest token of men hated by God, and appointed to destruction, then to be
raised up to be persecutors and oppressors of the Church and People of God,
whatever their iniquities and provocations may have been.

4. If we consider the end of these fiery trials, and that arises from the
improvement which God, who is the prime agent in them, makes thereof, and it is
to be discovered and observed by us in the operation; the substance of it is,
it is to make his people more humble, more holy, more serviceable to the glory
of his own great Name, more profitable in their generation, and better fitted
and prepared for the Kingdom of glory, Moses sums up all briefly, Deuteronomy.8.16.
Where having given an account of the difficulties, and fiery trials which
Israel met with in the Wilderness, he certifies them that the design of all
these was only this, that he might humble thee, and that he might prove thee,
to do thee good in thy latter end.

2. It is prejudicial to the People of God: for them to place such an account
upon the fiery trial is much to their disadvantage: for that,

1. It tempts us to rob God of that glory which is his due, and we ought to
give him in the fires: God expects to be glorified by his people, but whiles we
look with amazement, and these things astonish us, we are more ready to
dishonor him, by calling his wisdom, love, goodness, truth, etc. into
question, if we count the fiery trial strange, we shall answerably have strange
thoughts of God, and hard thoughts of Religion, so he, Psalm 73.13. and 77.8,9.

2. It will wonderfully weaken our Faith in God, our trust and reliance on his
promises, it confounds faith when a soul knows not what to make of things:
while Jonah is amazed, he beings to draw up a conclusion of desperation, then I
said I am cast out of thy sighs, Jon.2.4. Faith must have its evidence,
Heb.11.1. which is lost in these transports.

3. It will fill the soul full of jealousies and strange suspicions, ready to
say of every cross and trouble, this is certainly against me: he will take all
for Enemies, and think God so too, and say as he, thou set me for thine
enemy.

4. It will make the trial by these means far more grievous and hard to bear,
it will fret and vex the Soul, raise disquietments and discontents; we shall
behave our selves like Ephraim, as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke, Jer.31.
28. here is the very reason of all the unruly carriages of the people of God at
any time under their afflictions, because they have not a right apprehension
and opinion of them.

5. And from all these, we render our selves exceeding incapable of receiving
Counsel, or Comfort: If God send us advise, we cannot hear it, if consolation,
we cannot receive it: thus we read, Exodus.6.9. Moses spoke unto the Children of
Israel, but they hearkened not unto Moses, for anguish of spirit, and for cruel
bondage. Now all these things damnifie us, and so prevent that good which
otherwise we might derive to our selves from these exercises, how sharp soever.

Use. To wave other things, let me apply this truth for the helping of our
faith unto a suitable improvement of the fiery trial which any of the people of
God are at this day laboring under; and which we our selves also have weighty
reasons to live in the continual expectation of; that so we may not so think of
it, or entertain it as a strange thing: and to that end that we may have a
right judgment, and soul satisfying apprehension of it, let us diligently and
prudently compare the works of Gods providence, with those intimations which
are given us in his word, and it will afford us a true and a full discovery of
the true meaning of these things, and that in both respects.

I. It may satisfy us in regard of that fore persecution which is at this day
upon diverse of the Protestant Churches abroad: we hear of many sad and
sorrowful calamities which by the malice of Satan, and rage of men, are brought
upon that cause, and are ready to sit down as men amused, wondering why this
is, and wherefore God suffers it, how Jesus Christ can bear it: let me assure
you, it is not because God does not own and approve of that cause; it is his
own, he has born, and will bear witness to it; it is the cause which shall
stand when all other shall come tumbling down into ruin: nor is it because God
has cast off his people whom he has chosen; for his love to his Saints is
unchangeable, inviolable: nor is it because he approves of, or takes delight in
the contrary prevailing interest, though they indeed make their boast of their
successes, and pretend the offering up the liberties and lives of Gods people,
to be a sacrifice of thanks giving therefore; no; Gods curse is on them and
their cause, and in due time their foot shall slide, It is then none of these;
But,

1. The Scripture tells us of a time wherein Satan is to be let loose, in which
he will rage extremely against the Church, Rev.12.12. and these are some of
those days wherein these things are to have their accomplishment, as relating
to the persecutions which Antichrist was to raise and continue against the
Saints of the most High. It is true that the rage and malice of Satan and his
Instruments are always eagerly bent to ruin the Church; yet are they tied up
by the Sovereign Almighty Power of God, who stilleth the noise of the seas, and
the tumults of the people; yet if he please to give them leave, and lengthen
their chain of restraint, as he did in Jobs case, they will vent it to the
utmost of their advantage and opportunity: it is a certain truth, that Satan
and his Agents have no other stint or bounds of their malice then the limits of
divine permission, they ever do as much as they can, and that they do no more
is because God has an hook in their nosthrils; now God does sometimes, for
ends infinitely wise, give them leave to do a great deal, and vent abundance of
their spleen against his People.

2. God wills that at sometimes the truth be sealed to by the sufferings of his
own people, as well as owned by their Profession, that he may make the
fulfilling of that truth gloriously resplendent, Mat.16.18. The gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it. The truth of the Gospel is never more honored in
the World, then by faith and patience of suffering Saints; they then glorify
God, and his name is magnified, when his honor, and the profession of his
name, and vindication of his truth is more dear and precious to them then their
own lives, and they can readily sacrifice them, in the defense of it: hereby
their faith appears in its vigor, and it is seen how powerful the spirit of
God in them is: the trial of their faith is a most precious thing, better then
that of gold, I Pet.1.8,7. and herein the excellency of divine love makes it
self eminent, in that many waters cannot quench it.

3. It is certain that the Protestant Churches abroad in the World have given
God a great deal of provocation, by manifold enormities and scandals that have
discovered themselves shamefully amongst them. If the judgment of those be
right, who conjecture the seven Churches in Asia, to whom John wrote, Rev.2,and
3. do stand for an emblem of the various estate of the Church to the Worlds
end, they seem now in these days to be fallen under the last and worst
pattern, lukewarm Laodicea: it is too true and manifest, that there is but a
little true zeal stirring for the glory of God; though there be abundance of
formality: there is but a very little of the power of godliness to be seen, but
a great many wickednesses growing and abounding: such profanation of Gods holy
Sabbaths, that in many places they are disowned, and the morality of the fourth
Commandment not only called into dispute, but wholly renounced; abundance of
covetousness, uncleanness, profaneness, and many other provoking sins, such as
an holy God, will not, cannot bear in a people that are called by his name:
they therefore stood in need of a fiery trial to purge and refine them: they
have gathered abundance of dirt and dross, and it is not a small fire that will
burn it off, and melt it out: and therefore at such times God is wont to set up
his furnace, and provide hot coals for it, cruel and bloody instruments, to
execute his just displeasure upon his own people by: thus he threatens Israel
in case of Apostasy, Deuteronomy.28.49,50. The Lord shall bring upon thee a nation,
etc. a nation of fierce countenance, which shall not regard the person of the
old, or show favor to the young.

4. There is a time of reformation expected, and waited for by the people of
God, and it is hoped not to be far off; and this is the very way in which God
has purposed to bring it about: when the Lord speaks of the happy reformation
of the people of the Jews, he propounds such a method as this to do it in,
Zech.13.8,9. two parts therein shall cut off, and die, and the third part shall
be left therein, and I will bring the third part through the fire, etc. Gods
work of reformation, as it is a glorious, so also it is a terrible work, a work
which but a few will be able to endure: it is very probable that two thirds
when they come near the fire, and begin to feel it scorch, will not bear it,
but seek to avoid it: and thus we hear of many thousands in France that are
daily renouncing the Protestant cause, and coming over to Popery, through fear
and cowardice: and the other third part they must pass through the fire that
they may be reformed, that when they are tried, they may come forth as Gold:
and is there any strange thing in all this? hence therefore, that we may be
settled and not shaken, let us carefully build upon these conclusions.

1. That the fiery trial is intended only to try the Saints. it is not brought
to destroy them, but only to refine and purify them: were believers thoroughly
persuaded of what God means, by these things, they would not be so liable to
those frights and amazements which distract and disturb them: our Text
fortifies this conclusion, restraining them to this proper end and purpose.

2. That God overrules all instruments: yea, though, as they are rational
agents, and causes by counsel of their own actions, they design nothing but
mischief, yet he will use them as mere instruments in his hand, not to gain
their own projected ends, but his, which they neither know nor design: they
shall but do his pleasure, and not their own, Isai.10 7. Ah Assyrian! the rod
of my anger: what can a rod do without an hand to manage it? no more can they
but as God improves them: we look too much on men, and think their power is
great, and rage implacable, and now what are we not to expect to suffer? but
remember, their wrath shall but serve to praise God, and the remainder he will
restrain.

3. The Gods people, though in the furnace, are yet very precious to him; yea
that he chooses them in the furnace: Israel in affliction is often tempted to
say, My God has forgotten me; but God assures us that it is far otherwise:
they are then as tender to him as the sucking child is to the pitiful Mother:
you see how God thus expostulates the case with Zion in this regard,
Isai.49.14,15,16.

4. That the fiery trial shall not be always, but only for the appointed time,
until it has wrought out Gods gracious ends, and then deliverance shall come:
God will not suffer the rod of the wicked to be always in the lot of the
righteous, he knows that if he should, the spirit which he has given us, would
fail and faint; he has therefore promised that he will not contend for ever,
nor be always wroth, Isai.57.17.

5. That during all that season wherein his people are in the furnace, he sits
by and tends it. He sits as a Refiner, Mal.3 3. sitting notes a fixed posture;
intimating that God does not only come now and then, and occasionally take
notice how the fire burns, and metal melts, having mean while other things to
divert and divide his care; but that he makes it his work and business to tend
it, and therefore tarries constantly by it; he throws in every coal with his
own hand, and not one coal more then is meet and useful for the work. He uses
his skill to make it melt down, and become fit for his Mold; he humbles his
people, and reforms them by their trials, puts a virtue into them, or gives a
blessing with them, whereby effectually and powerfully their corrections become
instructions to them, and they are made the better by them: yea they are fitted
and prepared to be taken out of the furnace again, and be vessels of honor,
employed in the service of their Lord and Master.

From hence therefore we may be directed both how and what to play at this day
in the behalf of the Persecuted Church of Christ abroad in the World.

1. How to pray for them, i. e. in Faith; when a thing seems strange to us, it
stirs up unbelief: when men cannot tell what to make of these providence which
are in their view, they know not how to believe; they know not where to fix
their faith: but when a child of God sees the evidence of things, he has now
the reason of his confidence before him.

2. What to pray: it will teach us not to over hasten God in his work, but to
leave him to his leisure, who in infinite wisdom knows what he has to do:
when the fiery trial looks strange, all we can think of, is the removal and
taking of it away, and we cannot tell how to pray to God for any thing else,
because we can see no good in the affliction: but when we are acquainted with
the author, nature, and end of all these trials, it will direct us first of all
to pray that God would sanctify it for the cleansing of his Churches; that he
would purify sons of Levi and reform the Protestant Profession in the World:
the Church most of all needs our Prayers at this day, on this account; and then
we may wait upon God for their deliverance.

2. It may advise us not to think it a strange or unlikely thing, that we our
selves may be brought under the fiery trial, I am sure there are many awful
symptoms of it, and more from time to time: yea we are likely enough to pull
it down upon our own heads by our foolish divisions, and strange indiscretions:
and ready enough we are to censure and charge one another in this kind: but
there is an higher hand moving all these lesser wheels: and if we would look
aright, the thing which should mostly aw and affect us is this, that we are
become degenerate, we have backslidden and gone aside from God, we have lost
our first love, we are grown dirty and drossie, obstinate and hard-hearted, and
unwilling to be reclaimed: if therefore God should withdraw from us, and leave
our public affairs to miscarry in our hands, I would say it is of the Lord,
that he might fulfill the words of this Ministers, that told and warned us of
days of great calamity approaching; because we would not hear them, and return
to our God: and let all such as fear God ponder of these things; look for, and
see abundant reason to expect a winnowing time, a time of burning, a day of
great trial, that when it comes, you may not be taken at unawares, or (judging
it a strange thing) be surprised with undue terrors and frights; but may with
quietness and patience submit to the work of God in it: so shall you endure the
trial, and not be burnt up, as chafe and dross, by it, but be brought out of
it again with joy and glorying, inasmuch as it shall be accounted to you for a
filling up of the sufferings of Christ, and shall contribute very much to the
completing and enlargement of your eternal joys.

FINIS
FRIENDLY READER
THe desolating Judgments by Water and Fire, with which God has, and intends
to cleanse the World; are in Scripture brought together, and made to illustrate
each other. Wherefore be not offended at the remaining Page, as if its service
were unseasonable, and out of place, whenas it relates (as well as it can) what
the Gazetts report concerning the terrible INUNDATION that the Low-Countryes
lately smarted under; and which was looked upon as one awful consequent of the
late formidable Blazing Star.

Toward the latter end of January last, there having been for many days much
Rain; and a violent Storm, sundry of the United Provinces, viz. Holland,
Zealand, Buabant, Flanders, felt the direful effects thereof: For the Sea with
wonderful impetuosity broke through and over the Banks, which those
Low Countries are defended with, unto the unexpressible Distress and Amazement
of the Inhabitants. Many Villages were reduced to be wholly underwater: even in
great Cities the Waters overflowed their Streets, and were diverse foot higher
than has been formerly known; so that Boats passed to and fro, where men were
wont to walk. Persons we enforced to Barricado their Houses, and get into their
upper Rooms; yea (in some places) to the tops of their Houses, where ('it is
said) some were famished to death. In some Churches the Water was above eight
foot high and Corpse were taken out of their Graves, and carried away therewith.
Hundreds of dead bodies were seen daily floating down the River, to Artwerp.
Many stately Fortifications were spoiled, and strong Walls beaten down. Sundry
Places now over thrown, cannot in many years be recovered; and some never. The
losses of one City have been ^^^ged to amount to some Millions. The sufferings
of Merchants cannot be related. Innumerable Cattle were destroyed. Some great
Men's Estates were laid wholly under water: Noble and Wealthy Families are
brought to Poverty: If we are not misinformed, above fourscore Lands and
Polders have been over whelmed. And the Dutch have lost more by this Flood,
than by all their late grievously expensive Wars. And (which is more
tremendous) a vast number of People have lost their lives. In some Islands,
most of the Inhabitants; and in one Polder no less than a thousand have been
drowned. In one Land where about a thousand dwelt^ but one (like a Job's
Messenger) escaped Death. Yea it is generally said; that near twenty thousand
perished by this overflowing Scourge.


