Serious Advice to delivered Ones from Sickness, or any other Dangers
threatening Death, how they ought to carry it, that their Mercyes may be
continued, and After Misery prevented.

OR THE HEALED ONES PROPHULACTICON Or Healthful Diet.

Delivered in several SERMONS On JOHN 5.14.

By JAMES ALLIN, Teacher to the most ancient Church of Christ in Boston.

BOSTON: Printed by John Foster, in the Year 1679.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
THese Sermons written out by some pious Hearers from their own Notes, and by
their desire hastened to the Press, so that I could not, for want of time,
supervise them as I would; and not being willing to burden them with writing
them again, I have been prevailed with, to consent to their publishing in this
homely Dress; unfit indeed for the vein of this curious and carping Age, that
are more for what pleases then what profits them: But seeing it has pleased
the Lord so far to bless them to any, as thereby to stir them up at their own
cost and pains, to endeavor to promove others good thereby, if the Blessing
may attend the Reading, that did the Preaching of them. And that it may, let me
advise thee, into whose hand this may come, and thou think not thy time lost in
reading it, that with the same integrity thou come to read them, that those who
are the occasion of the publishing, did to the hearing, and with more mind to
mend thy own, then find another faults. If thou find any benefit, let it
further thy Prayers for the Instrument, thy Thanks to the Lord for those have
occasioned it; and let you and I adore the wisdom of God in managing unlikely
and foolish means for thy saving good, to stain man's pride, and exalt his own
glory, which is the aim and design of him who is,

Boston, May 16. 1679. thy Souls friend James Allin.

John 5.14. Afterward Jesus finding him in the Temple, and says to Him, Behold
thou art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee.


IN the Chapter you have, first the Hystory of a glorious Miracle Christ
wrought in healing an impotent man, from the first, to the tenth verse. 2. The
Jews quarrelling at it, designing the ruin of him that healed him, from the
tenth, to the nineteenth verse. 3. Christ's Apology for himself in defense of
the work he had done, to the end of the Chapter.

In the first verse, and so on, you have the Miracle, and therein, first the
time of it, it was at the Feast of the Passover. 2. The place, and that was
Bethesda, where was a Pool for healing any disease, to the person that first
stepped in, after an Angel had troubled the waters. 2. You have the person
healed, described. 1. By his Impotency, left of all in the time, none helped
him into the water. 2. By the long time he had been under this distemper, which
was 38 years. 3. You have the manner of his cure, it was by Christ's word of
command, in obedience to his command, he was to take up his bed and walk, as a
sign that he was healed. Then in the second part of the Chapter you have the
Jews quarrelling; and before they knew the Author of this healing, they charge
the poor man with breach of the Sabbath, by carrying his bed, and his Apology
being, that he was so commanded by him that healed him, and upon their Enquiry
who it was, he replied he did not know; Then you have Christ manifesting
himself to the healed man, by whom the Jews understanding the person, they
design his death. But you see Christ finding this person gives him heavenly
Counsel how to carry it, that the benefit received may be for good to him, go
and sin no more, etc.

In the words are two things, 1. Christ finding this impotent man he had
healed, 2. The excellent counsel Christ gives him, 1. By way of direction,
Behold thou art healed, 2. By way of caution, sin no more, lest, etc. In
Christ's finding this man, two things observable, 1. The time of it, it was
afterward, after his obedience to Christ carrying his bed, which the Jews
charged him with, and Christ manifesting himself to him in a glorious manner;
and from thence we may draw this Observation.

Doct. That they who meet with most difficulty in the way of their obedience to
Christ, may expect to meet with a reward in having more of Christ's presence. So
that whether it be Duty in the way of our general course, or any particular
duty we are doing for Christ, no difficulty should discourage us therein; the
Lord Jesus knows how to make a Recompense and compensation to us. As you should
consider, 1. The time when, so 2. The place where Christ found him, it was in
the Temple, where he was offering his Thank-offering, and he was early at the
Temple, for you find Christ did not stay for his coming, but found him there,
so that he was early in returning Thanks; thence observe,

Doct. That it is a good fruit of healing mercy from God thankfully to
acknowledge the (...) in our diligent attendance upon his Instituted Worship;
We have here, 1. Christ's own Example he leaves us, to be early in seeking God in
the Temple, thither Christ comes, and 2. this healed man's Example also, there
Christ finds him: he finds him not in a Tavern, or in his own house neglecting
the means and public worship, but in Gods house; And he is not there as one
loath to come, or weary of that Service, but was early there, when Christ comes
he finds him there; and from hence further we may observe,

Doct. That it is a great advantage to any that are able, to attend upon the
Instituted Worship, yea, to be diligent in attending (...) for there it is you
will sheet with the presence of Jesus Christ, there you will find that
knowledge of him, and acquaintance with him, that you meet not with elsewhere,
there Christ found him waiting upon God, to acknowledge his healing mercy, and
there he meets with Christ. And further you may observe,

Doct. They that do what they can in the acknowledgement of God, in their duty,
so far as they know they shall therein be acquainted with more of their duty.
God will give greater and clearer discoveries of his mind to him in that way;
and you must remember God is not a debtor to us by any thing we pay him, but we
are more indebted to him for those communications of his to us, Psalm. 50.23.
They that glorify me to them I will show the Salvation of God.

But the latter part of the verse is that I would chiefly speak unto, the
counsel Christ gives this healed man. Christ is a gracious Physician, and comes
now to heal his Soul as well as his body, that he may be kept in such a measure
of health as may be for his comfort, and in order to it he gives him this
counsel.

1. By way of direction, Behold thou art made whole; That which Christ herein
calls him unto, it is a diligent observance of the mercy God had bestowed, he
would have him take more notice in a fuller view of this mercy, thou art made
whole, Adding, Behold, healing mercy is that which should not pass your more
serious consideration, where God gives it.

2. The caution Christ gives him, Sin no more lest a worse thing come unto
thee, he gives him a special Caution against sin, specially that sin God had
been punishing him for, And he backs this caution with an enforcing Argument:
lest a worse thing then thirty eight years sickness by such a distemper come to
thee. And when Christ says, Behold thou art made whole, he does not say, I
have healed thee, thereby teaching us humility (for he did not understand
Christ to be God) but would mind him of the chief Author, consider thou art
healed; So from the words we may take these three observations.

Doct. 1. It is the duty of those that have received healing and delivering
mercy from the Lord to take special notice of it.

Doct. 2. Those that are healed or delivered are to take very good heed that
they sin no more.

Doct. 3. That sins after great and eminent Salvations, Deliverances, and
mercies, they pull down greater Judgments.

Doct. 1. Those that are under saving and healing mercy from God they should
take special notice of it, Beold thou art healed. You must not take a transient
view but take serious notice of Gods mercies; It is one of the most precious
and pleasant works of a Christian to take notice of, and observe Gods
Providence to himself, Psalm. 111. The works of the Lord are great sought out
of all those that have pleasure therein. For the Explication of the Doctrine*
we may Consider,

1. What is this beholding and taking notice of delivering and healing mercies.

2. How we should take this notice of them* and 3. Why we should do so.

1. What is that notice Christ would have every one delivered and saved to take
of the mercy vouchsafed. I Answer, this beholding is variously taken,

1. For a beholding with our bodily Eyes, as God said to Moses, Deuteronomy. 3.27. get
thee up into the Top of Pisgah, and lift up thine Eyes Westward and Eastward,
and Northward, and Southward, and behold with thine Eyes the Land, etc. he
was to see the Land of Canaan with his outward bodily Eye.

2. There is a beholding with the understanding, a considering of it, a looking
upon it with the Eye of the Soul, Romans 11.32. Behold therefore the goodness and
Severity of God; if you would see the goodness and Severity of God in his
Providence, you must behold it with your understanding Eye, you must consider
it, and that consideration fixed to behold it, which imports two things.

1. Taking a full view of it in the latitude of the mercy, a looking it all
over, it is a through and diligent observation; taking notice of every Argument
in it that does advance the mercy for your better acknowledgement of it: Not to
take it by the lump, but observing every Circumstance that may heighten it to
your consideration, to behold it so that you may see matter of wonderment, to
behold every mercy with admiration.

2. It bespeaks the intention of the act, Behold, you must look intensly upon
it, you must keep your eye fixed upon it, it must not go out of your view, you
must look wishly all round about it, and into every part of it with intenseness
of Spirit.

2. But how should we thus take notice and look upon the mercy that we may
rightly behold it, and consider it; I Answer,

1. In every Deliverance and work of Providence look into all the particular
passages of Providence you find in it; We should take the mercy in pieces, and
look into every part, and see what special Circumstances there are for our
notice and observation. I shall mention some of those things in delivering
mercyes that are worthy your observation.

1. Take notice of the time and seasonableness of the mercy; at what a needful
time God sent such a mercy; God then delivered you, and if it had not been
then, what had become of you? Mercy coming in that needful Season puts a beauty
upon it, as Eccles. 3. Every thing is beautiful in its Season, it is then a
mercy suitable. This poor man who had lain thirty eight years at the Pool, and
none helped him, it is probable, his Faith and Patience was worn out, and now
in this nick of time Christ comes, according to that in Isai. 41.18, 19. When
the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their tongue fails for
thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them.
That is a Season of mercy when the heart is ready to fail, and mercy comes in;
Abraham takes notice of his mercy and the deliverance of his Son in the nick of
time, Genesis 22.12. At that time when he was taking the knife to slay his Son,
and calls the Name Jehovah Jeirith, there, and then, in the Mount the Lord was
seen.

2. Observe and consider the care of Gods Providence in bestowing the mercy,
his special and distinguishing care in preserving you, when others dye, you are
singled out for deliverance, when others are not spared: Christ speaks
Emphatically here to the man, thou art he God has healed, when so many lay
sick, there at the Pool besides: to have a healing mercy in a killing time it
heightens the Mercy in a special manner, In Isai. 26, 20. God puts a special
Remark upon this deliverance, they must enter into their Chambers; God has a
Chamber of safety and preservation for such, in singular and distinguishing
favor to them.

3. Observe and consider how leading this mercy is unto other mercyes. Usually
Deliverances and healing mercyes do not come alone, but are attended with many
other mercyes; Now you must observe all the Concomitants of mercy that do
attend it, as you find Hezekiah does, Isai. 38.17. Behold for peace I had great
bitterness. But thou in love to my Soul have delivered me from the Pit of
Corruption, for thou have cast all my sins behind thy back. He takes notice of
his healing mercy, deliverance from the pit of outward destruction, by that
killing disease, and specially, of the mercy attending of it, that God did it
in love to his Soul, and that it was a Testimony of Gods favor in pardoning
all his sin also, one mercy goes not alone, to the People of God.

4. Another thing observable in a healing mercy is* the Instrument God makes
use of, or the way he does it in, sometimes it is in an unknown way, a way we
did not expect such a mercy in, the poor man waited for healing at the Pool,
but little thought Christ should heal him by his Word. It is sometimes a
strange way that God sends in a mercy to his People, so Luke 5.33. a stranger
passed that way and he took up the poor wounded man, and healed him, so it is
sometimes a strange way God heals in, the impotent man had none to put him into
the Pool, now to be healed in a strange way unexpected, this does greatly
inhance the mercy of God.

5. Observe and take notice of the design and end of mercy and deliverance,
what Errand it comes upon; what work, and what gracious effect it has, all
believers are under that general Promise, Romans 8. that all things shall work
together for good to them. etc. afflictions shall, and mercyes shall, every
thing shall; now to see them thus working for our good, this heightens the
mercy. The poor man goes into the Temple, and there acknowledges it; it is to
further duty when it is done in mercy, caring not only to be healed, but to be
Thankful.

6. Observe the respect mercy has to the Prayers and desires of your Souls,
and to the things you beg: there is a wonderful value upon mercyes, when they
are in Answer to our Prayers, when you in distress have cried to God, and
called others it may be to cry to God for you, and the Lord has heard, as
Psalm. 34. This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and delivered, etc. he
had Answer of Prayer, so that you should have such Interest in Heaven, and that
God hears the cries of his poor ones, this exceedingly endears the mercy to us,
as Psalm. 40.1, 2. I waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined to me, and
heard my cry, he brought me up also out of the horrible pit, out of the myery
clay, and set my feet upon a Rock, and established my goings. That is the first
thing to be observed in our healing and delivering mercyes, the Circumstances
in it that heighten the mercy, being looked upon with a considerate fixed Eye,
and an intelligent heart, to further our acknowledgement.

2. Observe and behold every mercy and deliverance how it does fulfill the word
of God to you; there is never a Providence of God but it is a fulfilling of
Gods word, as it is said, Psalm. 148.8. Stormy winds fulfilling his Word, so
does every mercy and deliverance to his People. Now you should look on the work
of Providence together with the Word of God, and see what particular word of
God is made good to you by his Providence, for that is encouragement from
experience to trust in the word of God another time: God says, call upon me in
the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me, Psalm.
50.15. Now such a Deliverance is an Answer to such a Word and Promise sued out
by Prayer, for therein God has fulfilled a Promise to you. So 1 Cor. 10.13.
the Lord tells you that with every Temptation he will work a way for your
escape, and that you shall be able to bear it, and in such a deliverance God
has fulfilled that Word to you, this adds Beauty unto, and honors Gods word,
in seeing God fulfilling it in the Execution of Providence, so in Joh. 19.36.
not a bone of Christ was broken, (...) done that the Scripture might be
fulfilled.

3. In all Deliverances and healing mercyes, that you should observe and
consider in them who is the author of them, we are not only to look to the work
done, that this person is healed, but whence it is. The Effect is a
manifestation of the cause, we must labor to understand the cause, our
understanding must look through things done to the cause, every one should see
the hand of God which heals him, for there is the Name of God written upon
the mercy and especially upon a gracious and eminent delivering Providence. And
consider what you are to see of God therein.

1. You are to see the care God has of you as your heavenly Father, so we are
told in Scripture, God as your Father cares for you, he knows what you need,
Math. 6.26, 27. if for inanimate Creatures, much more for rational, especially,
those among them that are also spiritual, and in every delivering mercy
manifests that care of you; We are commanded that we should be found in our
duty whether we are under afflicting Providence, or any other: Trusting in,
and leaving the Issue with the care of our heavenly Father, who cares for us,
1 Pet. 5.7. therefore we are bid to cast our care upon him, and so every godly
man rowls that care as to the Issue and Event upon the Lord, and then in the
Deliverance the Lord manifests his care, so that in considering the mercy, you
may read and see, that God does take a fatherly care of you under whatsoever
dispensation of Providence you are.

2. You may see the wisdom of God in healing and restoring you, especially,
being eminent Deliverances; when it may be you were past hope, and had no means
left for encouragement, the wisdom of God found out a way, provided (...) and
gave the blessing to a good Issue, 2 Pet. 2.9. The Lord knows how to deliver
the godly out of Temptation, etc. he has many ways he does not make known
till the time of Deliverance, so that here also you may read this in the
Deliverance, the wisdom of God.

3. Observe in what way God does convey his mercy, that is a great and
beautiful thing, to behold the way in which God conveys every mercy to you; The
way is Christ Jesus. No mercy comes to you but through the blood of Jesus
Christ, Remember thou art he whose sins brought distress upon Christ's Soul, how
comes any Remedy for, or deliverance from the wounds, sicknesses, evils and
dangers sin has brought thee into, but only by Jesus Christ. That Pool of
Bethesda was a Type of Jesus Christ: who can make any thing healing, and
Sovereign for recovery; A curse came by the fall upon every means used, only
Jesus Christ has restored the blessing upon the means; and that should
heighten our thoughts of the mercy that it comes from and by Christ, no mercy
comes otherwise, therefore never look on any mercy, but in the view of it,
remember and think of Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.22 23. all is yours, says the
Apostle, life, death, every thing, but how? only as you are Christ's? We came to
have a right to every mercy by Jesus Christ, and only by him, and that should
be a most beautiful Contemplation to us here upon Earth, which will be so
glorious to our Eye in Heaven, where this discovery will be made fully, how all
our mercyes flow to us by and through Christ.

4. You may read the grace of God in every such mercy. It is great love and
kindness of God manifested in every mercy, for every sinner is unworthy of the
least mercy, as Jacob acknowledges, I am less then the least of all thy
mercyes, so it must be grace that brings mercy to you, and if you are made
whole, know that healing mercy (...) of grace, yea, there are riches of mercy
in every outward favor the Lord bestows; and this you should behold; Behold,
the free and undeserved favor of God in all.

5. See the wonderful condescendency of God; every mercy shows wonderful
Condescendency in God to a poor Creature, considering, though the Lord be high,
yet he has respect to things below, Psalm. 138. and those that are so very low
as we have made our selves by our sins, Oh what a stoop is it in the divine
Majesty to take such care of vile sinners, that God should have any respect to
your prayers, if God has heard you in such a day, it heightens the
Condescendency of God.

6. Lastly, observe and consider the end that God aims at in your Deliverance.
God is a rational Agent aiming at a spetial mark in the Deliverances he gives.
Now what is the aim and design of God, what is Gods language to you by the
mercy, is not the design of it to further your Repentance, and your returning
into Gods favor? that is the general end; these mercyes are the great
Arguments God would prevail with sinners to return to him by true Repentance;
That is their encouragement in Hos. 6.1, he has wounded, and he will heal, but
you may be much more encouraged, if you can say, God that has wounded us, has
healed us, therefore in Romans 2.4, 5. he tells us this is the language of every
mercy, and of all Gods goodness, to bespeak our hearts for Repentance, the
goodness of God leads thee to Repentance: as one mercy is leading to many
other mercyes from God to you, so the design of them all is to lead you to
God, to serve him with cheerfulness, Deuteronomy. 28.48. Consider therefore what God
calls for, that you may comply with God, and that is what Christ here minds the
poor man of, Behold thou art healed, thou have attained that thou have long
waited for, and God has given it, now it is not enough to bring a thank
offering to bless God before the Congregation, but that you sin no more, it is
walking thankfully and obediently before the Lord all your days, and so you
shall serve the end and design of God herein.

2. As you should contemplate thus the mercyes God gives, so you should take a
full and through view of them, with a fixed mind upon them, and that is in two
things.

1. So look on every mercy that your heart may be affected; a serious fixed Eye
will affect the heart, as we should look on transgressors breaking Gods Laws,
so as to be grieved at them, Psalm. 119.158. I beheld the Transgressors and was
grieved, because they kept not thy Word; so you should behold the mercyes of
God and be affected, so as to rejoice, and have your heart engaged to God; as
the Psalmist, Psalm. 116.1. I will love the Lord because he has heard my voice,
etc. There should be a drawing out of our affections to God from the beholding
the mercyes of God to us; and as you should love, so admire God, so behold as
to wonder at such a mercy, as he Psalm. 31.19. how great is thy goodness which
thou have wrought for them that trust in thee before the Sons of men?

2. We should be so fixed in our contemplation of the works of Gods mercyes
that we should never forget them, observe them so as to be always minding
them, Psalm. 111. he will cause his works to be remembered, etc. It must not be
such a view as (Jam. 1.21.) a Man looking his natural face in a glass, and
going away forgets what manner of person he was, you must not look so on your
mercyes, but keep up the Remembrance of them, that they may never be forgotten.
We are prone to forget, though highly taken and wonderfully affected with them
for the present; be it the escaping of death, when the deliverance is over, as
with Israel, Psalm. 196.13. they sang his praise, but soon forgot his works;
David therefore ingageth, Psalm. 103.3, 4. to praise the Lord with all his Soul,
and charge his Soul never to forget the mercyes of God; therefore you should
charge your memoryes to be a Treasury of the mercyes of God, there may be
erected a monument of them in your hearts. That is the second thing how you
should take notice of Gods delivering mercy, we should take a through view of
them, observing how the Lord manages all our afflictions, by merciful
providence leading us on to eternal: For as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 107.43.
By observing these things, we may understand much of the loving kindness of the
Lord.

SERMON. II.
IT is the latter part of the verse we are speaking unto, the counsel Christ
gives to the impotent man whom he had miraculously healed, how he might
preserve that mercy and improve it. There are two Directions given him, 1. That
he should take special notice of his Deliverance, Behold thou art made whole.
2. A Caution against sin, go and sin no more lest a worse thing befall thee.

From the first, we observed, That it is the duty of those that are under
saving mercy, to take special notice of it. I showed you what was the notice we
should take of such a delivering and saving providence, we should look upon it
thoroughly, upon all the circumstances that do endear that mercy to us, that
tender care of God, that respect it has to our Prayers: we should look it all
over: We should do it with intention, so as to be affected with it, that it
may abide with us, that we may remember it, that it may be a mercy never
forgotten.

I shall give you only a few Reasons, briefly, because I would pass to the
other, which I mainly intended in the choice of these words.

Reas. 1. You ought to consider your mercyes because God commands it. It is a
duty that God commands, and that God expects, and therefore has frequently
put that affix upon a special mercy, Behold it. So Christ says to this man
Behold this mercy, look upon it with wonder, that a Sinner, a provoking sinner
should be saved and delivered: wonder that God has wrought so great
deliverance before men: That was a matter of the Psalmists wonder, Psalm. 31.19.
And in Math. 6.28. Christ says there to his Disciples, Why take ye thought for
raiment? consider the lillies of the field how they grow: Look on the care of
Gods providence to other creatures. If we must observe Gods care of inanimate
creatures, or those only animate, much more should we look on his care of our
selves, and the special mercyes he bestows on us: God would not have you so to
look abroad, that you should not look at home, but the more to admire Gods
mercy and care toward your selves.

2. Reas. The non-observance of Gods mercy God does severely reprove. We find
it smartly reproved by God, when his People do not consider their deliverance,
Psalm. 106.13. They soon forgot his mercy. It is put as a special aggravation of
their sin, in their murmuring against God, They soon forgot his mercy. Why did
they so soon forget it? Because they did not consider Gods mercy, did not
charge their Souls with the remembrance of it, that they should forget none of
Gods benefits.

3. Reas. We cannot have the benefit of mercy, unless we take a serious view of
it. There are two special designs of God in every delivering mercy, one is to
further our obedience: the other is to strengthen our Faith against another
time. It is to further our obedience, to make us serve God the more cheerfully.
Every mercy should be always in our eye, to spur us to our duty. Deuteronomy. 28.47.
They did not serve me with cheerfulness: it is a great sin, under great
mercyes, not to serve God with a great deal more cheerfulness; that we cannot
do, without we observe his mercies. Then it is to strengthen our Faith in the
expectation of mercy another time, 2 Cor. 1.10. God has delivered us, and he
will. God then heard your cry and delivered you. Abraham makes it a standing
Proverb, and encouragement to Faith, Genesis 22.12. He puts a remark on that
mercy, a name on the place, there God beheld me, and took that care of me, and
prevented that ruin to my Son, in the Mount God will be seen.

4. Reas. It is a great contempt of God not to observe his mercy. God in every
deliverance does come near to us, and it is a mavelous inobservance not to
take notice of him when he is near, Psalm. 106.4. Remember me O Lord with the
favor thou have to thy People, visit me with thy Salvation. When God comes
with Salvation, he comes to give a visit to us; now we should take notice of
it. We cannot see God, but only in the effects, God is made visible to us in
his works; we should observe and see God there, what of the name of God is
written upon it, what of the mercy, grace, goodness of God, else you carry it
with disrespect to God.

5. Reas. We cannot carry it suitably to God in our duty to him, without
observation of his works and mercyes toward us. The various providence of
God, call for variety of duty in us, we cannot be in the exercise of our proper
duty, unless we observe that mercy. What is the duty under delivering mercy? It
is to praise God, and that not for a day, but always, to live Gods praises:
and therefore we should live in the view of those mercies, that are the matter
and occasion of our praise, Psalm. 107.19.20. They cry to the Lord in their
trouble, he saves them out of their distresses: He sends his word and heals
them. What was the duty God required? O that men would praise the Lord for his
wonderful works! You cannot give God praise for deliverance, unless you
observe the full of that mercy, and your hearts be suitably affected by the
Consideration of it:

But by way of Improvement.

USE. I. A word of Reproof to those that are inobservant of Gods Mercyes. Men
that only take a sensitive notice of mercyes, will be thankful, and praise God
as long as they feel the benefit, but how soon is it forgotten: Psalm. 106.13.
they carry no more a remembrance, then a beast and sensitive creature: this is
not the remembrance of a rational Creature which God expects from every one.
The reason why you so soon forget it, mercies are so soon lost, and your
affection and love to them, and to God for them, is because you do not
consider the mercy and kindness God bestows

USE. II. It should put us upon this duty, that we would take special notice of
every saving mercy: Look through it, see what special Arguments of Thankfulness
to God there are in every mercy: there is not any deliverance that comes alone,
not any mercy that comes alone; we should by consideration look into every
thing of the mercy, yea and what does attend it, that which may further that
notice that you may take of those mercies. There should be never a special
deliverance and mercy God vouchsafes you, but you should keep a Record of that
mercy, that it might be always to be overlooked by you, and all the
circumstances of it. You find in the old Testament frequently, it was the
practice of Gods people, to erect Monuments of praise for signal Mercies. Jacob
Genesis 28.12. erecteth a Pillar on the place where God appeared to him. And
Abraham called the name of the place Jehooah jireth, there God beheld me, Genesis
22. So Genesis 16. Hagar, when God in special distress delivered her, and showed
her a Well, where she might be relieved, she called the name of the well, The
Lord that has seen me, though I did not look after him: So we should take
notice of the mercy God vouchsafes: a Christian should keep his Diary, and
special Remembrance of Gods goodness.

But to pass to that I mainly intend, and that is the caution Christ gives to
this healed man, go and sin no more, Christ here deals with him as a
gracious Savior, that shows he had not only care of his outward Deliverance,
but of his Souls deliverance, and that that mercy might not be lost by his sin,
that God had in his mercy bestowed on him, and therefore Christ prescribes him
a diet, how he should behave himself, that he might preserve that health, and
continue that mercy: you must take heed of your old diet, that there be no
pleasant morsel of sin that you should delight in, but as the Psalmist prays,
Psalm. 141.4. Incline not my heart to any evil thing, to practice wicked works
with them that work iniquity, and let me not eat of their dainties; this the
Lord Jesus gives him charge about, do not eat of their dainties, it will prove
a surfeit, there will be a relapse, that will be a more dangerous disease if you
do not take heed of sin.

Doct. 2. That those that are under saving mercy ought to be very careful that
they sin no more. For the clearing this Truth, I shall 1. Show you what this
duty is to sin no more, what it is that God does expect of those he has
prevented misery unto, or delivered out of it, that have been under it, for it
is the same, that God does expect if you have not been sick, but have been
preserved from it, your preservation engages you to this duty; If you have
been preserved, and God has delivered you from it, this is your duty, that you
sin no more. 2. The Reasons why it is the duty and should be the special care
of them under saving mercy.

1. What this duty is?

I Answer, 1. Negatively, It is not meant a Legal obedience, Christ does not
call any to impossibilities, to perform duty without the least stain of sin,
that is impossible to fallen man, yea, to man restored, since his fall in this
world, it is not a Doctrine of Legal perfection Christ here commends, it is a
great Truth, Eccl. 7.20. There is no man that lives and sins not, 1 King.
8.46. says Solomon, If they sin, and come and confess it, for there is no man
that lives and does not sin, Joh. 1.8. he that says he has no sin he denies
the Truth, the Truth is not in him, that is his greatest sin, a very great sin,
and discovers him to be in a state of sin, to say he lives and does not sin.

2. But it is an Evangelical obedience, and Perfection Christ calls for, and
especially you may take up the meaning of it under these three considerations
and heads.

1. Go and sin no more, that is, labor to be in such an Estate, that thou
may be in a Gospel Sense in a sinless Estate, you are now healed, you have
bodily healing; let that be your care now that your Soul may be healed. It is
said of the Children of God those that are truly converted, 1 John 3.9. He that
is born of God does not commit sin, for his Seed remains in him, and he cannot
sin, because he is born of God, that is that Christ now directs you to, to
labor to be in such a State, in which thou can not sin, that you may not be
under the dominion and reign of sin, under the domineering Ruling power of sin,
nor under the damning power of sin! your great business is to labor to have a
real, saving Interest in Jesus Christ; thereby Christ does manifest his great
care of this poor man, that he would have his Soul healed, he would have him in
a saving State, for Eternity. Now let it be your main care to improve your
health and strength renewed and spared to you, to get a right to eternal life,
that you may be a child of God, and though being such will not secure you from
outward chastisement and affliction in the World, yet it will secure them from
you as being the punishment of sin, and the effect of Gods wrath. You are
thereby perfectly healed in this respect, that there shall never be an
affliction in Gods anger, but only the fruit of his love; you find the same
Counsel given by Jesus Christ, Joh. 8.10, 11. when Jesus saw the woman brought
before him, and accused of Adultery, that he should condemn her, and all her
accusers were gone; he said unto her, does no man accuse thee, she said, no man
Lord, Jesus said unto her, neither do I condemn thee, go and sin no more, as
if the Lord Jesus should say, I came not now into the world to be a Judge, and
to condemn sinners: indeed there is a time when Christ will be the Judge, but
now I Judge no man, therefore let that be your care that you sin no more, you
get a pardon of your sin, and interest in a Savior, that your heart be
sanctified for your future walking with God. In this command of Jesus Christ he
does not only express, what is his will, what is approving to God, and his own
will, but Jesus Christ was actually the Savior of this man by this command, he
did hereby heal his Soul by this command as well as his body, by bidding him
take up his bed and walk, and he does thereby show his readiness, when that is
our care that we may not sin again, that we may truly be the Children of God:
you shall find God manifests this in his mercy, that he is much more willing
to save your Souls, then he has been to deliver your bodies; this is the great
thing God would have you go to him for, that your Souls may be healed as well
as your bodies, that is the first thing, that you labor to be in such a State,
that no affliction may ever come upon you in way of Judgment, or in Gods wrath.

2. Go and sin no more, it does import thus much, that it should be the
diligent care and endeavor of them that are under saving mercy, that they do
not allow themselves in any known sin, take heed of sin as of a poison, that
will do you a great deal more mischief now then ever before; that you do not
allow any sin either in thoughts or actions, nor live in any known sin, 1 John
2.1. says the Apostle there, My little Children these things write I unto you
that you sin not, but if any man sin we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous, all the writings of the Gospel (that is the meaning of
it) it is not to encourage you to sin, but to caution you against sin. What
sinning? that is, see you do not allow it, but if sin be too hard for you, and
in a conflict carry you captive, then make your confession to Christ and labor
to get pardon and power against it, Romans 7.18, 24, 25. as Paul did, he
acknowledged there he did sin, but it was against his will, the sin that I
would not do, I do it, and how does it appear to be against his will, by the
sad moans he made to Jesus Christ, by his earnest cry for deliverance, and by
his acknowledgement of that great mercy of God, that had found out such a
deliverer for him, so you must go and do likewise. Do not allow your self in
any sin, but show you disallow it, confess it: there is your encouragement, you
have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, there is great
liberty for you to go for every Covenant mercy; pardon and power against sin
are great Covenant mercyes.

3. Go and sin no more, that is, be sure you take heed you do not commit that
sin again, for which God has especially afflicted you, or has threatened you
for, that sin God has in especial manner been dealing with you for, chastising
you for, go and sin no more, commit that sin no more, so he says to that
woman, Joh. 8. Go sin no more, take heed of Adultery as long as you live, you
must remember that ordinarily the chastisements and afflictions God brings on
his people, are for their sins, and there are some special sins of the people
of God that are the provocation of special chastisements, when God does not
cast you into hell for them, but does deliver you and save you, then that is
your great duty, that you should live with a fear of that sin all your days,
and take heed of that, Psalm. 89.33. If thy Sons break my Statutes I will
chastise them with the Rods of men. We ought to look on every Chastisement as
coming to us for sin, and to find out those special sins, and there should be
the great care of a Christian, that he should forsake them, not to meddle with
them any more, that that has pulled down so great a Judgment, Oh take heed
you sin that sin no more.

Quest. But you will say, how shall we know, what is that sin that God does
specially chastise us for, that we may be warned and take heed ever of
committing that sin any more?

Answ. Observe and take specail notice what evil God does threaten with
punishment and Chastisement on his people, for what sins God does especially
threaten to punish his people for all afflictions, are the accomplishment of
Gods word, they are the fulfilling of Gods Threatenings, therefore in the
Threatening you may read what the sin is that God punishes, that that he says,
Psalm. 89. when they break my Laws, I will chastise them with Rods. Especially
God does threaten to punish with his immediate hand, afflictions that come from
God more immediately, are to punish those sins that men cannot see, that do
not lie under the observation of men, that men cannot reach, sins committed in
secret, Hebr. 13.4. whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge, God himself
will judge them, they may commit that sin secretly, out of the view of men, but
God himself undertaketh to judge that. So 1 These* 4.6. Let no man go beyond
and defraud his Brother in any matter, because that the Lord is the Avenger of
all such, if there be any secret hidden way of unrighteousness, and Oppression,
that men cannot find out, the Lord himself is the Avenger of such.

2. Observe for what sins God has inflicted punishment on his professing
people of old, for they are written for our example, there we shall read the
indignation of God against sin, and the ordinary way of his dispensations
against them, when they are sins of a professing people. 1 Cor. 10.6. The
Apostle gives a Catalogue of those sins for which God did inflict variety of
Judgments on his people Israel in the wilderness, as that he would do in the
same way, or in a greater, among Professors in gospel times: these things were
our example, to the intent we should not lust after evil things, as they also
lusted, neither be ye Idolaters, as some of them were, neither commit
fornication, as some of them committed, nor tempt Christ, as some of them
tempted, nor murmr, as some of them murmured: These are the sins that provoke
God to those variety of Judgments. There was Idolatry, superstition,
worshipping God in a false way, and Fornication, that sin of uncleanness, and
the tempting of Christ: How did they tempt him? By despising his own way of
providing for them, having low common thoughts of that Manna from Heaven;
preferring the satisfying their own lusts, before the counsel and will of God
to lead them to eternal life. There was a murmuring spirit against God, and
against those God set up, for these things God did punish, 1 Cor. 11.30. For
this cause many are weak and sick among you, and many fallen asleep. What
cause? Their slightness at the Sacrament, want of preparation for it, and being
in the spirit of it, for this cause many are sick and fallen asleep.

3. If you would know what sin God does chastise and punish you for, take
special notice of what sin God does represent the guilt of before you in the
time of your sickness; or in the time of the visitation of his people, God does
many times carry a discovery of the sin in the punishment, it carries a great
deal of Conviction with it, may be many times you have heard many a Sermon that
has convinced you of that very sin, that you have taken no notice of: but God
has set it before you in the time of affliction, and distress, it may be that
has been the thing, for which you have prayed God to deliver you and spare you
now, and you would mend that course. How many on their sick beds have confessed
and bewailed their contempt of the word of God, of Jesus Christ, and of the
gospel, and their Sabbath breaking, God has laid the weight of it on them in
the time of their sickness, and they have promised amendment: usually, that is
the special provocation God has, which he makes men's Consciences to smite them
for, at such a time, that though it may be Conscience has told thee many a
time, and checked thee, but now awakeneth thee in another manner, therefore it
is said, you find God does many times represent the guilt of sin (that has
long time before been committed) in the time of affliction, and thereby tells
you it was laid up among his Treasures, hence, Psalm. 25.7. Lord remember not
the sins of my Youth. It was in a time of affliction God brought to
remembrance, and brought into his view the guilt of some youthful sins, Job.
13, 26. Thou have made me to possess all the sins of my youth; that is, God had
represented them to him in the horror, terror and guilt of them: so God suffers
many times even sins that have been pardoned in his own, to be represented to
them as if they had never been pardoned, in the time of affliction, that they
might be the more humbled for them, and might esteem the manifestation of a
pardon in respect of those sins; So 1 King. 17.18. Says that woman to Elisha,
when God had slain her son, Do thou come to bring my sins to remembrance?
Afflictions bring sins to remembrance, those that it may be we have forgotten,
they are as if they were newly committed, those sins that were a provocation to
God: observe in the time of distress, what are those sins God does load your
Consciences with, that you would be glad to be unburthened of, that you make
many vows and promises to God of amendment, that is your great duty, when God
has answered your cry, that you sin no more; take heed you do not lick up
those vomits you have vomitted out in time of distress, and break your promise
and vow to God. By a diligent observance of these things you may see what is
the quarrel God has personally with you, and therefore to take heed that you
do not provoke him anew.

2. The Reasons of it. There are two heads of reasons: I shall take up only
those given in the Text, expressly or employed.

Reas. 1. Is drawn from God, why you should take such care that you do not sin
again, do not abide in an unconverted estate, and do not allow your self in
any evil. Do not abide in any sin God has punished you for: there are two
Arguments, 1. From the mercy and goodness of God to you; thou art healed and
restored to means of salvation, therefore do not sin any more, do not live in
such a state, mercy bespeaks thee. 2. From the Justice of God that stands
ready to avenge abused mercyes: if you do, besure you must look for greater
evils then any you have had, a worse thing then thirty eight years sickness,
or any plague.

2. The Arguments drawn from our selves, should engage us not to sin any more,*
1. Our own engagements and promises to God not to sin any more: Have you not
made many vows and promises at such a time that you would not? Now God
expects that you should pay your vows. 2. From the nature of this duty of
thankfullness to God: You will all own that you owe God Thankfullness for
healing mercy, the truth of it appears in this, that you do not provoke God
again, it is else but to mock God, if you be not resolved to sin no more. But,

1. From God, from the mercy of God, that is a great Argument why you sin no
more, because God has healed you; if you look upon this healing mercy, how can
you kick against that bowels, love and kindness that has healed you? The great
design of mercy is to lead you to Repentance, Romans 2.4. The goodness of God
that leads thee to Repentance, that is the errand that every mercy comes ^n
to you, its the voice and language of every mercy and deliverance, that you
should Sin no more, should not abuse this mercy, by sinning against the God of
your mercy. You are healed: Who healed you, whence was it you were healed? Was
it not wonderful mercy of God, that you should be on this side the bottomless
pit? Were not many of you unprepared to dye, when you were looking into
eternity? it was dreadful to think into what eternity you were going: would
you not have given the world for a day more, and for the striving of Gods
Spirit? Now God has healed you; the mercy and kindness of God are said to be
Cords to draw us, Hos. 11.3. I drew them with the Cords of a man: They are not
drawing as you draw Beasts, but as men are drawn: How is that? It is by
arguments suitable to reason; There is so much goodness and truth appears in
every mercy of God, that nothing can carry greater persuasion to draw you to
God, and to prevent your sin. O the Rhetoric there is in mercy, if you could
but understand the Language of it, wonderful sweetness there is in every mercy
to persuade you not to sin; and there is not only Rhetoric in it, but Logic,
the strongest reason to take hold of the rational part of man, if thou have any
thing of a man, and of the rational being God has made.

I should have showed you here, and given you some hints of those Arguments,
mighty Arguments, that lie in a delivering mercy, the language it speaks to
them that are delivered, to caution them against sin, and against any
provocation to God. There are three Arguments, a threefold Cord, that might
draw and persuade men to this duty, that when they are delivered and saved by
God, they should take heed they do not sin any more, they do not despise and
contemn this mercy of God, for every abuse of it is the highest contempt of
mercy, despisest thou the riches of his goodness?

SERMON. III.
WE are now upon the second Doctrine, viz. That they that are under delivering
and saving mercy ought to be very careful that they sin no more, that is, 1.
Not to abide in any state of sin, you that God has spared longer in this
world, you should not live without Christ and conversion one day more. 2. Not
to sin any sin willingly or wilfully, to live in any known sin, or to approve
of sin. 3. Especially be careful you return not to such evils that God has
been punishing of you for. And you may know them thus. Those that God has
awakened your Consciences to charge upon your Souls at such a time: and those
God has helped you to make many promises never to commit them, take heed of
such sins especially. Methinks the Lord Jesus Christ does in a most
compassionate way plead with poor Souls, and with every sinner, that they
should sin no more: And by these three Arguments, 1. From the kindness and
mercy that they have received from the Lord, thou art healed, therefore sin no
more. And there are these two main Arguments in it, 1. It is great ingratitude
to God to sin again after healing mercy, would you carry it so to any man that
was an Instrument of your healing. A Physician whose endeavors God has
blessed, would you therefore do him the greatest mischief? Thus you do when you
sin against God, who is the Author of all your deliverances. What is sin, but
an endeavor as much as the sinner can, to destroy the very Being of him that
has given and preserved your Beings. This is an ill requital, Deuteronomy. 32.5. Do
you thus requite the Lord, is this all the thanks that you will give to a
healing God, to spit in the face of Christ, and do him all the despite you
can? methinks it is a heartbreaking expression, 2 Samuel 15.17 Is this thy
kindness to thy Friend; to such a friend as David was, that you will go into
the Camp of his Enemies. So by every sin you go aside from God. Has God saved
thee from Hell, and delivered thee out of the pit, and is this all thy
requital? That that goes nearest to God are sins against love, Psalm. 55.12. Had
it been an Enemy I could have born it, but it was thou my friend, and my
familiar. So says God to every saved sinner, thou whom I spared from going
down to the pit, and showed such kindness to: Ingratitude is an evil that is
abhorring among mankind, and the greatest of all evils. Our Lord Jesus tells us
Math. 5.45. To do good unto them that do good unto us, sinners will do the
same, and one man to another. Indeed, it is to act like God, and to be a good
Christian, to do good against evil, but it is to act the part of the Devil to
do evil against goodness, they are the vilest of all sinners. Therefore that
should be a great Argument with them that are healed, has God healed you? Do
not the greatest wrong and injury against God. 2. It is not only ingratitude to
God, but it is a great injury to our selves; and if that be not a great
Argument to prevail, If thou art so vile and sinful that the kindness of God
will not prevent your sin, yet methinks your own mischief thereby might
persuade you, as Psalm. 85.8. I will hearken what God the Lord will say, for he
will speak peace to his People, and to his Servants, but let them not return
again to folly. For it is the greatest folly in the world for a man to sin
after God has spoken peace, and after he has healed him, Deuteronomy 32.6. Do you
thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise. It is the greatest injury
you can do your selves; if you consider, 1. The folly that is in it, by this
kindness of God you may see where your true happiness lies, and where your
greatest misery lies. The missing of it in a man's chiefest end, is the greatest
folly, now this is a missing of it in your chief end to sin again. The mercy
and kindness of God in healing of you does manifest what kindness there is in
this God, and what rest you may find in returning to him, Ps. 116.7. Return
unto thy rest O my Soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. You
find no rest in the way of sin, no Soul rest but in God. And thou have no
reason to doubt but that there are Arms of mercy ready to receive thee, that
has reached out so much love unto thee when thou were in the way of thy sin.
2. It shows thee the way to greater mercy, as the contrary is the way to thy
greater misery. A confessing and forsaking of sin is the way to find mercy. The
Lord does bespeak in every healing mercy, that is not all, I would do for thee,
but do not hinder, nor forsake your own mercyes. You have now experienced that
you have to do with a God of mercy: and he that has showed mercy to you
through Christ, you may easily think how rich and bountiful you may find him if
you would close with him. But if you turn aside to lying vanities, you forsake
your own mercyes, Joh. 2.8. 3. It is a great folly because healing mercy gives
space for Repentance, and neglecting this is a despising of the mercy; why are
you restored but that you might have opportunity to make your peace with God?
It is a space to repent, but sinning is an abusing this patience, in mispending
the present time, that God has given you to make sure of a good estate. What
serious thoughts have you had, if you had time again how you would improve it.
5. Take heed how you spend the time now you have it, Romans 2.4. losing a season
for Salvation, and it may be the last you may have you would think it folly in
other matters, for a vain companion or trifle, to lose the opportunity of
getting a great bargain, here you do so for worse then naught.

Lastly, it is a great injury and folly to your selves to sin again after you
have been healed* for it is an acting against a man's own experience. God has
made you to taste the bitterness of your sins, and yet he tells you in your
deliverance, how unwilling and loath he was to punish you; sin brought all your
evils, it was free mercy that delivered you. Have you surfeited with the
dainties of sin, and will you desire them again? Thus David prays, let me not
eat of their dainties. And the burnt child dreads the fire. Now mercy tells you,
you have escaped, do not run into sin again; this will appear to be greater
folly.

But that is the first Argument from the goodness of God toward you; will you
hear then the language that your healing mercy speaks. Oh the Oratory it has
in the Ears and hearts of men, if we be men, O that it would bespeak our Souls
now, and caution us against sin.

2. Another argument Jesus Christ uses, and that is an argument used by mercy:
it does not only put you in mind of the good you receive, but it gives you
warning of future misery. If it were Justice that should come to treat with the
sinner, it would not be by warning, but by smiting: but mercy tells you how the
Justice of God stands engaged to avenge the abuse of it. You must not be
pleased with your condition, and think the bitterness of death is over: No, a
worse thing may befall you. Mercy is now willing to embrace you, but if that
will not do, Mercy will at length deliver you into the hands of Justice; and
woe to the Sinner that is so delivered by the hands of Mercy! Methinks it is
such a language as God spoke to Balaam, Numb. 22.31. when an Angel with a
flaming sword stood in the way of his Rebellion: He was striving to go, though
he found difficulty in his way: So the Lord Jesus tells you, there is a flaming
sword in every sinners way after deliverance, you run upon your own peril and
uttermost hazard; the Judgments of God will be bitter, and you will feel the
smart of them, And by these three Arguments, the Lord gives warning of
Judgment to come upon the Sinner that continues in sin.

1. Consider that all the afflictions and troubles that you had, were a fruit
of your own doing: He puts you in mind to remember your former ways and evil
doings. You were in the hands of Justice, and mercy has delivered you; but it
is not a complete and total deliverance, if you continue in sin: it is but a
Reprieve, if you sin again. There is a present respite of Judgment, it is not
a consuming and desolating Judgment: you are reprieved, but if you sin,
remember you are in the hands of Justice still, and those afflictions you have
suffered, are but the beginnings of those sorrows which God will bring upon you
for your Sins.

2. Remember that God has greater strokes, and can lay on heavier then any
yet: Don't you think that God has spent all his arrows, or has done his worst,
No, He can do yet a great deal more: God can heat the furnace seven times
hotter then ever yet: Lev. 26.1^. But if ye will not hearken unto me, to do
all those commandments, etc. I will even punish you seven times more for your
iniquityes. God has other arrows that are more poisoned deadly arrows.

3. Continuance in sin will provoke God (after deliverance) to inflict greater
strokes. As God can punish you more, so he will certainly punish an impenitent
people, when Judgments and mercyes will not change them, Ezra. 9.14. Should we
break again thy Commandments, will thou not be angry with us till thou have
consumed us? That this holy man was afraid of after deliverance.

Reas. 3. Why you should take heed that you sin no more; From the proneness
that is in man's nature to return again to sin; more prone after deliverance,
especially, those that are in a state of unregeneracy; when corrupt nature has
been only under a chain of restraint, with what eagerness do they return to sin
again. Yea, we find a proneness in Gods own Children, as Hezekiah after great
deliverance, his heart was lifted up, and he did not render unto the Lord
according to the benefits received: How much more those that are in a state of
sin, you will meet with the same Temptations, and the Devil will be more busy,
and your own heart more careless, if you be not exceeding cautious.

Lastly, Consider the engagements that lie upon healed sinners, not to sin any
more. And they are,

1. From God, what a mighty engagement is that, when God says, Oh do not this
abominable thing my Soul hates. That when you have had the love and kindness of
God manifested to you, you should carry it so to God.

2. The engagement of your own vows. When God has made sin bitter so you, O
how ready were you to vow and engage to sin no more! This, then, is a
forfeiting of your Bond and Obligation.

USE I. For Information: Hence learn, and you may see that our Thankfulness to
God (the main of it) does not lie in our expressions only, but in our Spirits
and Conversations This was a man that Jesus Christ found forward in the Temple
bringing his thank-offering to God, and he was early there; Christ finds him
there diligently attending upon the means, (very few are thus amongst us, many
are willing to be last at the house of God, and the first that may go out) but
now you will throw all that you have done after your Thank-offering, if you go
and sin again. It is not whole burnt-offering and Sacrifices, but a loving and
serving God with all the heart and Soul, that is acceptable to him. Therefore
you must not think you have made amends to God for healing mercy, because you
have given a verbal acknowledgement: no, this is the language of mercy, and if
you would be true to God, go and sin no more, Psalm. 50. ult. Who so offers
praise glorifieth me, and to him that orders his conversation aright, will I
show the Salvation of God. They go both together; to such a one God will show
his Salvation. Indeed all our acknowledgments else are but mockery. For to say
God we thank thee, or to bring a public acknowledgement of praise to God, and
yet for the sinner to do all he can against God, it is a horrid piece of
mockery: you had better say nothing at all: As she said to Sampson, Judge. 16.
Thou have mocked me, and have not told me all thine heart; so may God say to
many a sinner. This must needs be a great sin when instead of acknowledging
God, you come to provoke him; and to put the highest affront upon the divine
Majesty, Psalm. 78, 36. They remembered that God was their Rock, and the high God
their Redeemer, nevertheless they flattered him with their mouth, and lied to
him with their Tongue: for their heart was not upright with him, neither were
they steadfast in his Covenant. To think to flatter and speak God fair, it is
the greatest indignity a sinner can put upon the great God, he that is able to
discern all your flatteryes, and what your hearts say, it is to put a great
affront upon the heavenly Majesty, and instead of giving him the praise, it is
a cursing and blaspheming of him to his face.

USE II. It is of Reproof unto those that are so far from taking heed that they
sin no more after great and eminent Deliverances, when God has unbound them
and set them a liberty, that they do sin a great deal more; that instead of
being reformed, and carrying it better to God, they carry it a great deal
worse. This did stigmatize Ahaz; 2 Chronicles. 28.22. This is that Ahas, after his
affliction, and Gods deliverance he sinned more and more.

And that the Lord charges upon Israel, Judge. 10.11, 12. I delivered you from
such and such a misery and affliction when you cried, yet notwithstanding, you
have forsaken me, therefore I will deliver you no more. In Jer. 1.6. it is
said, the Lord hearkened and heard, and no man spoke aright, no man repented
him of his wickedness, saying, what have I done? like wild Creatures that have
been chained up a while they are the more fierce; They turned more fiercely
after their wicked ways, and were more bold and daring in them: this is a
great provocation.

USE. III. It is of Exhortation to press this holy and suitable Counsel of
Jesus Christ on them that have been under Deliverance: Have you been delivered
from the sword of a cruel enemy, or the Small Pox, that killing disease? Have
your Families been delivered? What is your duty now? That should be the great
enquiry of your Souls, what shall I do for God? I cannot give you Counsel in
better words then Christ gives here, Go and sin no more, that is, take heed
that you do not go on in those evils that God has convinced any of in
themselves or others in the time of their distress. As,

1. In sins of Omission, God has been punishing for these things: and how many
in bitterness of soul have expressed how God has charged these home upon their
Consciences, when they have been near unto death? as neglect of a right
improvement of the precious seasons of grace: when any of you live under
soul-saving means, under the offer and tender of Christ, and yet have not
improved it: Consider that the neglect of Christ is the greatest sin, and it
will be charged by Christ at the day of Judgment among the greatest of evils,
even sins of Omission, Mat. 26. latter end. This you did not to me. This
neglect of Christ will be charged heavy at that day upon you, that do not make
it your great, main and daily business to be turned and truly changed, to be
fitted to die; when God has put you in fear of death and eternity, what evils
have been your trouble and fear then but your unfitness for that change? Will
it not be your great sin, that another sickness or danger should find you as
unprepared as you were? How bitterly have I heard this lamented by some that
they have not given up themselves to be in Covenant with the people of God as
well as to the Lord; that they have been negligent of Church Communion with
Gods people. How many dying ones have with bitterness of Soul bewailed this,
that there own sad and discouraging thoughts of themselves, or rather their own
pride has hindered from that which is such a Covenant-engaging duty. How many
in a time of distress have made these vows, that after such a sickness they
would give themselves up to God. Do you look upon these as great things of
Christ, and of his Interest; Has not God made the special promise of a
blessing to a thousand generations? That that does perpetuate there enjoyment
of God to future Ages, is this joining our selves to the people of God.
Therefore to live in the neglect of that is a great sin, and if God has
convinced you of it, take heed that you forfeit not your deliverance by such
sins.

Again, negligence under the means of grace: This has also been sorrowfully
bewailed; either in not coming to hear, that they have neglected any Season:
and when hearing, they have cast Gods word behind them.

2. As sins of Omission, so also of Commission: when God has convinced of
these sins, take heed of them again. Has God told you of Sensuality, or of
uncleanness, or unrighteousness, take heed that these sins do not live and
revive in you after healing mercy: Let not God find you at these practices
again. The Lord says to us, you shall have your life upon condition you will
sin no more, and you accept it, and look upon it as a great favor: Now the
Lord when he comes to condemn you, will do it out of your own mouths, and this
sin, especially, your sin after deliverance hastens thy Judgment, 1 King.
2.42. As Solomon said to Shimei, so here it may be said to such a sinner.

SERMON. IV.
THe Doctrine we are speaking to is, That it is the duty of healed and saved
ones to be very careful they sin no more. We showed what it is to sin no more,
and why such as are under healing and saving mercyes should sin no more. We are
upon the improvement hereof by way of Exhortation, that I may set home this
Counsel of Jesus Christ on all your hearts, and upon my own, that we take good
heed that we sin no more* There are five or six Motives or considerations to
further our acceptance and improvement of this Counsel. If it were no more then
that it is the Counsel of Christ from his own blessed mouth, who is a true
lover of men's Souls, that were enough to further any that have love to Jesus
Christ, and to their own Souls, to be careful to attend to his Counsel, Christ
never advised any to their own hurt.

Suppose you had been hearing Christ himself, and that he had spoken in
particular to you, do not you think his words would have been of weight to you?
why, this is Christ's advice, and not to that man only, but to all in like case,
therefore for your furtherance, Consider,

1. That sinning again will disappoint you of the good of your deliverance, I
say it will eat out the good and sweet of it. The outward mercy of healing, or
whatever the Salvation of God is to you, it is not a mercy alone. Such is man's
misery since the fall, that there is no outward mercy or dispensation of God to
him, but if it comes alone, it comes under the curse, and it proves a greater
misery then a mercy; and where you enjoy any mercy from God, if it do not
deliver you from sin, it is not in favor, but comes under the influence of the
old Covenant, 1 Timothy 4.4, 5. As the Apostle says of every Creature of God it
is good, if it be received with Thanksgiving, for it is sanctified by the word
of God and Prayer, ( i. e.) if it be received with a heart truly Thankful, it
is sanctified, without this you have no good in any Creature enjoyment, because
it is unsanctified: as whatever the sinner does is defiled, because himself is
defiled, so whatever he enjoys is defiled, he himself being unsanctified. Then
mercy and outward deliverance carries a great deal of good in it, when it fits
you for Gods service, then it tends to the end of its first Institution, to
further the Service of God, but sinning again destroys this end of it. If a
mercy makes you better, then it is a choice mercy* but if it do not better you
in your Souls, it is far from being good to you, I may say of such mercies as
of Jonahs goard, Jon. 4.5, 6. When he was in great distress, and the Sun beat
upon him, and greatly afflicted him, and the Lord made a goard to come up over
Jonah, to be a shadow over his head, to deliver him from his grief, and Jonah
was exceeding glad of the goard. But Jonah was not sanctified hereby in his
heart, by obedien^^^ to God, therefore there was a worm that smote the Goard
that it withered

You may be glad of your deliverances, but if sin remain, it will be as a worm
in them to destroy the shadow and the comforts of them; therefore take heed
that you sin no more, for that will spoil you of the best good of your
mercyes, the flower and sweetness of a mercy will be eaten out thereby, that is
the first Motive.

2. Consider, that sinning after deliverance, will hinder you from the
enjoyment of other mercyes which God intends you together with your
deliverance; for that is not all God intends in showing poor sinners a common
bounty, Christ seems to tell this healed man here, this is not all my meaning
in coming to heal thee, I have Soul healing to bestow upon thee, but sin stops
and prevents this, as the Lord said to David, If that had been too little I
would have done so and so for thee, 2 Samuel 12.8. the outward mercy is the
least, God is inclined to do more, but as Jer. 5.25. Your iniquities have
turned away his Ear from you, and your sins have withheld good things from you.
Are you not made better by mercyes, are you not changed and renewed by
repentance under mercyes, what is the matter? why, your sins have hindered, your
iniquityes have kept good things from you. As it is said, God makes a way for
his anger, so sometimes he does for his mercy; in removing a present Judgment:
but Impenitency, unreformedness, that stands in the way God had made for his
mercy; as it is said of Christ at Capernaum, he could do no great works there
because of their Unbelief. So to speak with reverence* God cannot proceed in
mercy when sin is renewed. Christ tells them, Luke 16.11. If you have not been
faithful in their righteous Mammon, who will commit to your trust the true
Riches? if you carry it not well to God in a common mercy, do you think that
God will bestow and betrust you with more and better mercyes?

3. Consider, that sinning after deliverance it is a greater sin then your sins
before you received the mercy, you cannot sin now at so easy a Rate as before;
you sin with a higher hand. Your mercy puts an aggravation upon your sin, for
to him that knows to do good and does it not, to him it is sin, Iam. 4. ult.
that is, he sins at a higher Rate then another, because he sins against
light, yea, and against love, (Gods love) therefore his sin is of a deeper dye
then the sins of others are.

4. Consider, they that sin after Deliverance, they are a greater provocation
to God; God is more angry with such, for such sins then others, 2 Samuel 12.8.
the Lord by the Prophet reckons up great things to David he did for him. I
anointed thee King over Israel, I delivered thee out of the hand of Saul, I
gave thee thy Masters house, and thy Masters wives into thy bosom, and I gave
thee the house of Israel and of Judah, and if that had been too little, I would
moreover have given thee such and such things, wherefore have thou despised the
Commandment of the Lord? for it is said, Chap. 11. ver. ult. The thing that
David had done displeased the Lord, so that the Sword should not depart from
his house, etc. Sins after Deliverances, and great Mercyes are a great
provocation.

5. Consider, sins after deliverance they are sins against your special
engagements and Covenants; I doubt not but many of you in time of distress have
made that prayer which David did, Psalm. 119.175. Let my Soul live, and it shall
praise thee, have not many of your prayers and cries in sickness been, that you
might live to praise God to be better in Gods Service; Now to live in sin to
Gods dishonor after deliverance, how contrary is this to your Engagements, to
reproach and blaspheme his holy Name afterward.

6. Consider, the great advantage of not sinning any more; this is preserving
Diet of an healed sinner, Christ as a wise and faithful Physician prescribes
this as health preserving Diet. This is the way to preserve and continue the
mercyes you have received and do enjoy, as you will, if you continue a holy
man, etc. take heed to sin no more, Isai. 48.18. O that thou had hearkened
unto my Commandments, then had thy peace been as a River, and thy Righteousness
as the waves of the Sea; it would have born down all before it, all should have
given way, no Enemy should have disturbed that peace given you by the favor of
God upon his Reconciliation with you. But by way of Direction.

If you should say now, but what is that that we must do that we may not sin
any more: Here are but a few words, but there is a great (...) in them as the
sense of them, A little to spread before you what is contained therein, Go and
sin no more. that is,

1. Let this be your special care to improve the time you have by this
deliverance, and your saving mercyes to the saving of your Souls: That is,
labor now to get into a saved Estate, take heed you do not again nor any
longer neglect the offers and tenders of Salvation made to you, and if you say
this is to put a man upon impossibilities, such as man cannot do, and it is as
much as to say, to a hungry man eat no more, and to a thirstyman drink no more,
so is it to say sin no more, Job. 15.16. my meaning therefore is, labor to be
in such a Case and Estate, that you may so sin no more as formerly, or as
others do, that is, labor to be converted, that lies in two things.

1. To make that your great business to get a clear knowledge and through sense
of the evil of sin.

2. That you heartily close with Jesus Christ, that is the way to sin no more.

1. Get a clear knowledge and deep sense of your sin. Man is a rational
creature and is always acting and moving for an end, and that which is his
greatest encouragement in his motion toward such an end, is the apprehension of
good, that draws the affections of man, either real good, or the appearance of
it: and nothing will deter a man from the practice of evil, but the
understanding it to be evil: the understanding is the guide of the will, the
will has the command of every other faculty, what the understanding represents
as evil, the will avoids it, refuses it, and commands the whole man so to
carry to it, and now the will of man will follow the ultimate sentence of the
Judgment, when the sinner is fully convinced, and can represent the evil to
be an evil indeed to the Judgment. Now when is that? The mere knowledge of
good or evil, will not persuade to the embracing the one, or avoiding the
other, to fallen man; it will (I say) be no persuasion, as it would to man in
the state of innocence: Now there must be not only the knowledge of good and
evil, but the experience of both: and by the same way that man was brought in
love with sin, must he be brought out of love with it. How came man at first to
be in love with sin, but by experience? The Devil tempted him, telling him that
by eating the forbidden fruit he should know both good and evil. And by the
loss of good, he lost the inclination of his nature unto good, and thereby came
to taste nothing but sweetness in the creature. Now there must not only be in
the recovery of man, a discovery that sin is evil, but an experience of it that
it is so. He must be cut off from evil by finding the bitterness that is in
sin, Jer. 2.19. Thou shall know that it is an evil and a bitter thing. A
speculative knowledge of the evil of it will not do, but you must know it to
be bitter also: and indeed this is the last conclusion of the sanctified
judgment that it represents to the will that sin is a most bitter thing:
Therefore says Job, the Lord has made me to possess the sins of my youth, by
writing bitter things against me. He came to have an enjoyment of the fruits of
his sin, those fruits of his own doings. Now what pleasure, what profit have
you in things that God has made so bitter? You could not have believed it; but
now God has made you to believe it. Hence the Lord promises Covenant good to
those that do reform their evil ways. Lev. 26.44. If their uncircumcised
hearts be humbled etc. When a man is brought not to sin, and to dislike sin,
when his soul is humbled in the sense of the evil of sin. Therefore as you
would not sin, O beg of the Lord, and make it part of your daily prayer that
God would give you an humbling sense of sin, that it may be more evil to look
over it, then ever it was pleasure to commit it. When the arrows, those
poisoned arrows come to drink up a man's spirits, when he has been in the fire
of Gods anger, this will make him pray. Then labor to get an humbling sense of
sin: whatever we talk of future judgments of God for sin, it seems nothing
till we are thoroughly humbled, till God makes us feel what and how grievous it
is to have an hell in our Consciences: this will make sin terrible.

2. As you must feel the evil of sin, so you must heartily close with Jesus
Christ. You will never be taken off from what you thought to be a good, until
you experience sin to be such an evil, and Christ the best good. When you come
to obtain pardoning mercy from God, and sanctifying, your will is then carried
out with a greater pleasure in the ways of Christ, then it took in the ways
of sin. And this counsel Christ gives to the blind man cast out by the Jews,
Joh. 9.35. When he had found him, he said to him, do thou believe on the Son
of God: As if he should say, this is your great business: And if ever you would
be engaged against sin, you must close heartily with Jesus Christ, this is the
whole work of true Conversion: Now the Seed of God is sown in stead of the Seed
of the Devil, and he is brought under another power, 1 John 5.3. it is said of
such, the Commandments of God are not grievous. Those ways which were so
burdensome, now he finds them pleasant ways. Hence it is said, 1 John 3.9. he
that is born of God cannot sin, because he is born of God, neither fully, nor
finally, not with the full consent of his will: It would be contrary to his
renewed principle and sanctified Reason, that a man should choose misery in
stead of good, when he has experienced both: such a one will say, (when every
one shall leave Christ and turn to his lust) as Peter, Lord, whether shall I
go, Joh. 6.68. that is the language of every believer, I have found by
Experience the bitter ways of sin, and the sweet ways of believing and
walking with God, therefore he can never utterly leave it, unless it were
possible to lose his sanctifiing grace, and be cut off from believing. This is
the man that takes the counsel of Christ, to sin no more: The Lord hereby did
represent himself to him as the Physician of his Soul, and minds him of a
greater good then the mere healing of his body. Oh that this were the serious
care of healed ones, not to sin against God by resting still in an unconverted
Estate; endeavor sight and sense of sin as the worst evil, and Christ the best
good, then and not till then you will avoid the one, and cleave to the other.

Direct. 2. Couched in this Counsel of Jesus Christ is, labor to keep up a
deep and a through sense of the bitterness of that sin for which God has been
chastising of you. Though you may lose the sense of your affliction, never lose
the sense of your sin: the dreadful and terrible thoughts you had of sin, when
you were looking into Eternity. You should labor to remember those things when
you are well, and delivered, that so your Soul may be kept in an humbled frame:
thus the Church, Lam. 3.19; 20. Remembering mine affliction, and my misery, the
wormwood, and the gall, my Soul has them still in remembrance, and is humbled
in me. This should be the care of every Christian, remembering the terrors of
God, and the terrors of sin, how bitter God has made it to you in your
affliction, and this you should remember continually. And as we soon forget the
sense of sin, so we soon lose the humbling sense of affliction, this is our
misery; we should labor to keep up the sense of both upon our Souls to humble
and encourage us. If so be your Soul were in the same Agony, if you could put
them in the same Case as they were, when the Terrors of God were upon you, and
you were within the sight of Eternity, you dare not commit those sins as you
did before.

3. If you would sin no more, then take heed of the Temptations to sin, avoid
all occasions of sinning. It is a mere pretense for a man to say, he does what
he can to avoid any evil while he runs into the Temptation to it, Jude Epist.
v. 23. Hating the very garments spotted with the flesh: would you not be
defiled with sin, take heed of coming near the garment spotted with the flesh.
You cannot go upon hot coals and not be scorched, nor touch pitch and not be
defiled. Those sins that are greatest Temptations, you must especially take
heed of them, avoiding the very appearance of evil, that you may be sure to
avoid that which is really evil. Take heed of that which appears to be so,
stand at the greatest distance from it. Our Lord Jesus taught us to make this
our daily prayer, Math, 6. Lead us not into Temptation, we should be so much
afraid of it. I grant, when ever God does lead us into Temptation, we have a
greater encouragement to pray, that God would lead us out of it; But you should
beware that you do not lead and thrust your selves thereinto: That you do not
tempt the Devil, You have no encouragement to trust God to preserve you from
the evil that you run into. The Lord will say, who bid you go upon the Devils
ground, when snares and Temptations watch for you, God never sent you. It is
said of Jesus Christ, Math. 4. though he was without sin, and had no personal
evil, yet when he went into the place of Temptation, he did not go of himself,
it is said, the Spirit led him into the Wilderness. Do thou think thou can
withstand a Temptation better then Christ himself. Temptation is the Seed of
the Devil, and our hearts are the natural ground: would you not think him a mad
man that sows briars and Thorns in his ground: they will come up fast enough.
So will you run to the Devil to fasten his Temptations. They that would avoid
sin should stand at a great distance from every Temptation, avoiding those
places and Companyes that are too hard for them: stand at a great distance if
ever you would be kept. Adam in Innocence, though he had no sin, the Devil made
way to enter in, that crooked, winding Serpent. It was going into the
Temptation that lost mankind, therefore we should fly from it.

4. If you would not sin after Deliverance, then labor to get through
knowledge, and make a full representation to your Souls of the evil effects and
fruits of every sin. Do not look upon sin as it is in the Temptation, and comes
in the appearance of good, but look what will be the Issue of it. This the Lord
Jesus, minds him of: Remember worse things will befall you, Deuteronomy. 32.29. O that
my People were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their
latter end. It is a part of your greatest wisdom to consider what will be the
end of your sinful practices. A rational man should act for an end, and all
that means should be commended to him that suits his best end. It is a great
Truth, the measures of good and evil are as they stand related to Eternity. As
he said to Joab, 2 Samuel 2 26. will it not be bitterness in the latter end: so
would I say to every Soul, Consider what will be afterward, that you should
labor to possess your Souls with: that will discover the Hook that lies under
the bait. All these pleasures* and vanities are but to catch your Souls, and
bring you into everlasting misery.

5. If you would sin no more, That which is wrapped up in his heavenly Counsel,
it is, that you would seriously weigh the advantage you shall have by not
sinning. If you would not see sorrow any more, you must not sin any more, 1
Pet. 3.10. He that loves life, and would see good days, let him refrain his
Tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile: Would you see merry
and prosperous days, then you must sin no more in heart, Tongue, or
Conversation. It is true, that the most holy man in the world that walks most
closely with God, cannot expect to be free from outward trouble and affliction,
but they shall not be evils to him. He may dye in youth and strength, but he
shall fill up his time, as much as he that lives one hundred years. That man
that walks with God shall never see any evil days, for his very afflictions
shall further his everlasting good. It is a Truth, that walking close with God,
and free from sin, is the best way even to outward prosperity. Though there may
be afflictions and sorrows to particular believers for the exercise of their
grace, yet walking with God will give lasting peace and prosperity to them that
so walk closely with him, when a people do so, and inward peace to Believers.
Would you lose all your sweet enjoyments, would you that God should bring a
great deal more terrible dispensations upon you? then sin again, but if you
would avoid these, it is by laboring to be in a way of Reformation.

6. If you would sin no more, be in the use of all means that God has
appointed to preserve you from sin, with earnest prayer; for his Spirit to help
you to mortify sin, and be found in the way of obedience, that you may be
assisted by his Spirit in the doing of it. All means and endeavors that any
man can use himself, without the help of Gods Spirit will not do, Romans 8.13.
mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit. You may refrain a while, but you
will never destroy one sin without the Spirit, and this Spirit is to be
obtained by prayer, Luke 11.13. the Lord will give his Spirit to them that ask
him* O be earnest with the Lord to lead you by the hand of his Sprit that shall
guide and assist you in a holy course.

7. And Lastly, Resolve not in your own, but in Christ's strength that you will
not sin any more, Job. 34.31.32. I know resolutions and engagements in a man's
own strength, they will fail him, Peter is a sad instance, Luke 22. He was as
resolved as any could be, though I dye with thee, I will never deny thee. That
is the Reason why they come to no better Effect, the Vows and Resolutions of
men, because they think they can do it of themselves; Therefore (says David) I
said I would take heed to my ways that I sin not with my Tongue, Psalm. 143.
But he begs that God would keep the door of his lips, and establish his saying,
I said, through the grace of God that I would do my duty, and be waiting upon
God for his help, Psalm. 119.132. I will run the ways of thy Commandments, when
thou shall enlarge my heart. Teach me O Lord the way of thy Statutes and I will
keep them unto the end. Thus we should take up those holy resolutions in the
grace and strength of Christ that we sin no more; But labor to walk more
closely with God for time to come.

SERMON. V.
THe last Doctrine we observed hence, was this, That continuance in sin after
eminent deliverances, pull down heavier Judgment; or those that contitinue in
sin after eminent healing mercyes from God, worse things will befall them. For
the handling this Doctrinally, we shall show you, 1. that there are worse
things may befall men then ever yet have befallen them. 2. What are those sins,
the continuance in which, or what is that continuance in sin, that worse
Judgments shall befall such sinners. 3. That it shall be so, and the Reasons
of it.

1. That worse things may befall sinners, then ever yet have befallen them, God
has sharper Arrows in his Quiver, other manner of Judgments to inflict on
sinners then ever sinners have undergone; there is none should be so bold as to
say, what ever afflictions they have come under, that God has done his worst.
I remember I have heard of one in England near Westchester, that had such
expressions upon a great affliction; that God had now done his worst, but God
made her a living monument of his sorer Judgments, and that for many years. It
is a great deal of boldness for any sinners to limit God in his Justice, as
well as in his mercy, for any to say of God in his mercy, can God provide for
us? it is a tempting God; so for any to say, Can God bring a greater Judgment?
yea, there may be a great deal worse: Christ tells this man (you do not read
what his sickness was, but you find by the Effects it was very distressing, he
was unable to help himself, had never a friend to help him, and had lain under
this infirmity thirty eight years, and yet the Lord Jesus tells him) if he does
not carry it better, worse things shall befall him, and the Lord tells us of the
last times in which we live, Dan. 12.1. There shall be a time of trouble such
as never was since there was a Nation; there are troubles God will bring upon a
professing people, such as never was worse on any Nation, so there are those
God can bring upon a person such as never were worse on any person. But more
particularly, 1. There are worse Judgments in this world, that God can
inflict, then ever have been inflicted on any. 2. There are worse Judgments
God has to inflict in another world.

1. In this world, as 1. Temporal, or outward Judgments, such as respect the
outward man, God can bring other manner of outward miseryes then ever yet he
has done on any. 2. Spiritual Judgments, such as respect the inward man.

1. For outward Judgments, the Lord has variety of them, a great variety* but
especially we read of four sore Judgments of God, Ezekiel. 14.21. For (...) says
the Lord, how much more when I send my four sore Judgments on Jerusalem, the
Sword, the Famine, the noisome Beasts, and the Pestilence; to cut off from it
man and Beast. God has sent his Sword among you, but Famine is a sorer
Judgment, and noisome Beasts that is a sorer Judgment still, and the
Pestilence, but how much sorer are these, when all these are together; when
what the Sword leaves the Famine shall devour, and what the Famine leaves, the
wild Beasts shall devour, and what these leave, the Pestilence shall devour.
When God sends all his Jugements at once (...) a people, that is a sore
affliction, as there are worse sorts of Judgments, so there is never an one of
these sorts, but God can make it a worse Judgment in the degree of it, he can
make every one of these Judgments a great deal worse, as you read, Ezekiel 9.10.
As for me says the Lord, my eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity:
but I will recompense their ways on their heads. When Judgments come in such
a way of Judgment, without any mixture of Gods sparing and pitying mercy,
then it is a sorer Judgment: when the Errand of them is only to destroy, not
refine, and purge a People, but to ruin them, and God will have no more mercy
on them, this is a sore affliction.

2 There are spiritual judgments that God inflicteth in this world, and they
are a great deal worse then any outward judgment; there are variety of
spiritual judgments, but especially there are four main sorts of spiritual
judgments, and the sorest, there is the sword, that is the word of God, when
it is only for terror, only for conviction: a wound in the conscience is more
dreadful then a wound in the body: when God sends an arrow into the
conscience, a wounded spirit who can bear? Prove. 18.14. it is an intolerable
unsufferable wound, especially when God will provide no balm in Gilead, nor
healing medicine for it, when God shall make a man a terror to himself, this is
a sorer judgment. The Soul is the tenderer part, the more spiritual part,
therefore every such judgment is far greater, that reaches the Soul* and
spiritual Famine, that is a more terrible judgment, when there shall be a
famine, not of bread, not of that only, but of hearing the word of the Lord,
Amos 8.9, 10. That is a threatening of a sorer judgment, when you want bread
for your souls, there shall be none to break it to you. And those spiritual
wild beasts, those that will make a prey of men's souls; either those that will
persecute for conscience sake, or as Christ says of them, Math. 23.13. Such as
will not go to heaven themselves, nor suffer any else to go; when the bonds
shall not be only on your bodies, but on your consciences* you shall be
conscience bound, and there shall be snares laid for your consciences, this is
a sore Judgment, when you shall have such, that in stead of feeding the Flock,
shall devour the Flock, Eccles. 34.4. when there shall be none but wolves that
shall not spare the Flock of Christ, or make any profession to be so, this is a
sore Judgment; as it is a far more desirable mercy then any outward
enjoyment, for a people to see their Teachers, they are not driven into
corners, Isai. 30.12. So it is a sorer Judgment then the want of any outward
comfort, that in stead of those that lead you to Heaven, should as blind guides
lead you to Hell, and both together fall into the pit. And those Temptations of
the Devil, when God lets loose Satan with violent oppressing Temptations, and
God will give up men to be oppressed by the violent and subtle Temptations of
the Devil: and then this spiritual plague is the worst of all plagues, that
Pestilence of a hard ^eared Conscience, that plague of the heart, when God
shall inflict it as a Judgment, when God shall give up men to their hardness,
yea, into the hand of their own lusts Psalm. 81.11, 12. So I gave them up to
their own hearts lusts, into the hands of their hearts lusts, This is the
sorest Judgment that God can inflict on a people in this world, when it is in
the highest degree of it, a man to be delivered up to his own hearts lusts,
when the Lord says to a people, ye will not be saved* and ye shall not be
saved, ye will not be reformed, and ye shall not, ye will not be made clean,
therefore ye shall be filthy still. That very sin of living in sin after
deliverance, is a greater Judgment then the affliction out of which ye were
delivered: when God inflicteth spiritual Judgments in the highest degree, as
there are higher degrees of spiritual judgments, when temporal and spiritual
shall be together, that is a great deal worse, when God shall follow you with
all his sore judgments, both these afflictive to the body and the Soul, when
there shall be a Famine to the body and the Soul, the Sword of the Enemy, and
the Sword of God, an outward plague, and a spiritual plague, these are worse
and greater judgments.

2. God has worse to inflict in another world, if you should escape in this:
if a sinner should go scot-free here, every day would aggravate his
everlasting punishment. What will a sinner be a gainer in the issue, when his
main work in sinning and going on in sin after deliverance, is but heaping up
the measure of his wrath, Romans 2.4. Thou treasurest up wrath against the day of
wrath, and the Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God, Hell punishment is
greater then any that can be inflicted in this world, Math. 13.28. Fear him
that can cast Soul and body into Hell, that is most to be feared as being the
most terrible judgment; and there are degrees of punishment in hell, there is
a hell that is seven times hotter, they that continue in sin after judgment
and mercy after deliverance, they will have a greater degree of Torment, Heb.
10.29. How much sorer Judgment shall they be counted worthy of, there are some
are worthy of greater judgment then others are, and God has greater* there is
the Heathens Hell, there is the hell of them that live under the Gospel, there
is the hypocrites hell where the fire will be more intense, there will be a
thicker darkness, more exquisite Torment, that God will inflict upon one, then
upon another, that is the first thing, that there are worse judgments may
befall you, worse in this world, and in that that is to come. 2. what is that
continuance in sin for which God will inflict worse judgments, that
continuance in sin after deliverance and mercies? Ans. 1. it is a continuance
in a state of unregeneracy, a being without a saving close with Christ, the end
of Gods mercyes and deliverances is to give space for repentance, to give
another time, to try a sinner whether he will use longer time better, in making
provision for Eternity Romans 2.5. the riches of Gods goodness that leads to
Repentance, 2 Pet. 3.15. the end of Gods long suffering is your Salvation, that
is Gods end, his gracious end, that that he does approve, if that be not a
sinners end, and his work that he may be saved, this is a continuance in sin,
that will bring greater judgments, Rev. 2.22. I gave her space to repent, and
she did not repent, therefore God threatens he would throw her on a bed of
sickness. It may be many of you were afraid when you were near to death, that
that was your great fear of dying, was, of being unprepared to dye: what Vows,
and what promises were made then? if you might have another day of grace, now
God tryes you, if that be not so improved, that that is given for your trial,
when it is improved contrary to Gods end, will pull down worser and greater
judgments on a sinner: this is that will leave you without excuse, when
another judgment overtakes you, when God will say, he will take your word no
more, when he has tried you, and found you false to your Promise of improving
time better.

2. Continuance in sin, in those particular evils, God has been convincing you
of, as provocations to himself, some evil course and way of life, some
particular evils that God has burdened Conscience with in time of sickness,
or under the word of God, sins that you have Confessed, that you have in some
degree bewailed before God, and promised amendment, the continuance in those
sins is a provocation to greater judgments, as is said of those, Jer. 42.21,
22. I have this day declared to you, but you have not obeyed the voice of the
Lord your God, for any thing for which you sent me to enquire of God: they
promised and made solemn Vows, they would obey, yet did but dissemble with God;
now therefore know certainly, that you shall dye by the Sword, by the Famine,
and by the Pestilence, in the place whether you desire to go: you will
dissemble with God, but God will not be mocked, if you will not be as good as
your promise, and your word to God, God will certainly be as good as his
Threatening to you, Jer. 44, 25, 26. when Jeremiah had told them from the Lord,
what was the sin had provoked the Lord against them, therefore if now they
would carry it better, God would have compassion on them, but they were
resolved on their way, and would have their lusts. We will surely perform our
Vows, we have vowed to pour out drink offerings to the Queen of Heaven,
therefore hear the word of the Lord, behold I have sworn by my great Name that
my Name shall be no more named in the mouth of any man of Judah. So what ever
is the sin you have made solemn Vows to God in the time of your distress
against, if it have been your Sabbath breaking, contempt of the Word and
Ordinances of God, Covetousness, pride, Sensuality, Contention, if these be not
reformed, if you will live in them still, and have your own way, what ever God
says to the contrary, this is to live in those sins that will pull down
greater judgments.

3. That greater Judgments will befall such, for God has threatened it, Lev
26.24, 28. If that does not do, says God, I will punish you seven times more
for your abominations: when one is over, God tryes what that will do, and if
that do not do, and God on trial sees that you are never the better, then you
must expect seven times greater judgments. And we find that this has been the
way of Gods proceeding, both with profane sinners, and his professing people,
that he has followed them with worse judgments, when they have not been
amended with lesser: so God did with Pharaoh, God has variety of plagues* when
he delivered him from one, and yet he continued hardened against the Lord, then
he brought another and worse plague, till he himself at last was destroyed and
his people. So it was with a professing people, Psalm. 78. throughout that
Psalm: God delivered them many times, and they provoked him, and provoked him
so far, till he gave up his glory into the hand of the enemy. There were
degrees of punishment, and every punishment was worse then before: then God
abhorred his people, and gave up his strength into the hand of the enemy. v. 60.

The Reasons of it.

Reas. 1. From the Justice of God, who gives every man according to their
works, Romans 2.6. He will render every man according to their deeds. Where deeds
have been worse, the Judgments of God will be worse, Tribulation and anguish,
to the Jew first, and then to the Gentile: a Jews punishment shall be greater
and worse then that of the Gentile, because God will render to every one
according to his works: Judgments are the wages of sin, Romans 6.23. Now* God
will give wages according to every man's works, they that have been more in the
work of sin, shall receive greater wages of sin; now sinning after eminent
mercy is a greater sin, therefore deserves greater punishment: for,

1. It is a sin against a great deal more mercy; there is Gods sparing mercy,
and the riches of Gods goodness, as the Apostle calls it, Romans 2.4. Despisest
thou the riches of his goodness? there is a great deal of riches of mercy in
every mercy a sinner enjoys: when God has a sinner at such an advantage to
destroy him, it is rich mercy now to spare him: the going on in sin, is
contempt cast upon the riches of Gods mercy, that which Justice will not bear,
but is sure to revenge.

2. It is against more light, after more of the knowledge of their Masters
will, now he that knows his Masters will and does it not, shall be beaten with
many stripes, Luke 12.47.

3. They are sins against vows and engagements to obedience, to sin after
deliverance: the praying for deliverance lays the Sinner under a Vow of
obedience and duty to God; besides the voluntary vows that many have made in
their distress, unto God: now that is a great sin, to sin against our voluntary
engagements we have made to God, when we have said we will no more transgress:
see how God puts Jacob in mind of it, how angry God was with Jacob when he did
not perform his Vow, Genesis 35.1. Go to Bethel where thou vowedst to serve the
Lord. The greatest affliction that ever he had in his Family, was on the
neglect of his vow, that great miscarriage of his daughter Dinah, and of his
Sons, was a punishment of the neglect of his vow. God does not delight in
fools, Eccles. 5.4. that when they say they will take care of their duty, do
not perform it: when they are rash with their mouths, it is a provocation to
God to destroy the work of his hands.

Reas. 2. From the faithfulness of God: worse things must needs befall such,
because he will as certainly perform what he has threatened, as what he has
promised. God will be as good as his word, and he has threatened every Sinner
that continues in sin after warning, after mercies, that greater judgments
shall befall them.

Reas. 3. From the wisdom of God, the manifestation of Gods wisdom, a great
deal of Gods wisdom will be manifested, as in variety and excellent ways of
delivering his People, so in special judgments on evil doers, 2 Pet. 3.9. God
knows how to deliver the godly, and to reserve the wicked to the day of
Judgment to be punished. It is a part of the wisdom of God in governing the
world, that he knows how to give out punishments to evil doers, that he knows
how to reward all the obedience of his Servants, though he seems to forget them
for a time, and knows how to punish Sinners, though he seems to wink at them
for a time.

By way of improvement.

The only Use we shall make of this is, to be a word of Conviction and
awakening to us: we have been under the judgments of God, and God has
eminently delivered us, He has delivered from the sword of a barbarous enemy,
and has in a great measure delivered from that more immediate judgment the
Smallpox that came with such commission from God to destroy; now you are
delivered, you must not look on your selves out of the reach of Gods
Judgments, do not think God has done his worst, and will do no more, or put
your selves in a fools Paradise, to say as Agag, 1 Samuel 15.26. He put himself
in his brave clothes and said, The bitterness of death is over: so many think
the bitterness of death and hell is over now they have escaped the present
Judgment: but he found it otherwise to his cost. And you that continue in your
sins have reason to be afraid that greater Judgment is nearer then you are
aware of. 1 These. 5.3. When they say peace and safety, when an ungodly man
says so that lives in his sin, all shall be well with me, then sudden
destruction comes.

I would only lay before you these two or three Considerations.

1. Consider that outward Providence are no argument of Gods love, whether
they be afflictive or merciful: merely outward Providence are no argument of
Gods special love, Eccles. 9.1. You cannot see love or hatred by any of these
things that are before you. You cannot say God has more love to you, then he
has to them he took away by the disease, because he spared you; for these in
themselves are but common mercies.

2. Consider that merely when outward judgment cease, we cannot thence
conclude Gods anger cease, or is turned away: We cannot conclude by the
present removal of a judgment, that the anger of God is removed; for God may
remove it in anger. There are pardoning mercies, God may be said to pardon,
when he does only spare for a time. Psalm. 78.36. So he forgave their iniquity:
How forgave? Not with a special saving pardoning mercy; for he punished them
afterward, yea unto destruction, many of them; but it was a present reprieve
from the judgment. God may be as angry with you still as ever, though he has
removed the present Judgment: a sparing mercy may be in wrath, in displeasure
to the person that is spared; therefore you have no reason to be secure, nor to
be pleased with your present condition, while God may be angry with you, while
the anger of God is not appeased: you have no reason to cry peace to your
selves when God does not speak a word of peace.

3. Consider, that when men are delivered from affliction, and not saved from
their sins, it is certain God is angry with them still: when they are delivered
from an outward affliction, and sin remains, that that is the cause and coar of
affliction and evil be not removed, you may certainly conclude it is but a
reservation to greater judgments. As it is an argument of their happy
condition that are in the very midst of affliction, when they are taught of God
in it, made more holy, humble and conformable to Gods will: so it is an
argument of a miserable and a cursed estate, though you are out of affliction,
if you have not been taught of God: if you are out of affliction, but still in
sin, it is a certain argument of reservation to greater punishment, that worse
things will befall you, unless timely Repentance prevent it. There are these
two ends why God does punish his people, and God will accomplish his end in
every punishment: there is his work, and his whole work God will do on mount
Sion, Isa. 10.22. When God has done his whole work, then he burns the rod,
and not till then, it is b^^ laid by, and Gods intention to bring a greater.
What is Gods whole work? There (...) in every Judgment, a work of judgment,
and a work of mercy; there is a work of mercy God has to all his elect and
people, to reform and refine them to purge away their sin, to make them holy,
and to make them better. Isa. 27 9. That is the work to them that are the true
children of Sion. But then God has a work of judgment, that is on those he
never intends saving mercy to: every judgment is but the beginning of their
misery: God judges them in way of satisfaction to Justice; there is but part
of payment in one judgment that is upon them, and it is is to ensure them that
the remainder is behind, that God will be sure to take the full payment. If
none of this work be done, if God has (...) refined his people, there is still
some work to be done; and if there be those that are unconverted, never to be
converted, greater and worse judgments do abide; none such, but shall have
greater cause to curse the day of their birth, then ever Job or Jeremiah, yea,
to curse the day of their preservation: better you had died of that sickness,
because your judgment is but so much increased by your living. Those that
shall live out their days without true repentance of their sin, every days
mercy is but an aggravation of their condemnation. There are many signs of Gods
remaining displeasure; methinks the clouds do seem to return after the rain,
God does not make it clear day with us, nor cause the clouds to break and
scatter, but to gather again: There are many Signs, as God's taking away those
that are the prime, and hopeful ones of the next generation, that is a sad
sign of worse judgments. 1 King. 14.13. It was sad to Jeroboams house, and so
to all Israel, the taking away Jeroboams Son, in whom some good thing toward
the Lord was found: it was a judgment to the whole house of Israel; he was
taken from the evil, and it was a sign from the Lord of the evil he would
bring on them: so the taking away so many of Gods faithful ones, especially in
eminent place, in Magistracy and in Ministry, putting out so many lights in the
Candlesticks, and that men, many of them, in their prime, in the flower of
their years, that were very likely to have lived many years, and done much
service to God; that died not in a full old age, and full of days, but in their
youth, and in the flower of their days: and, which is a great deal worse, and
makes it look the sadder, that there are not any do rise, and fill their
places: that it is so hard a thing to see, and rationally to think, that there
are men to fill up the rooms of those God has taken from us: When stars do
set, and there are no others that rise, it is a sign of a very dark night when
men that stood in the gap are taken away, and none to put in their room, they
are sad signs that God has a mind to take away the hedge, unless speedy
repentance and reformation prevent this ruin. Yet this is the saddest sign of
all, that these things do befall us, and so few do lay them to heart, that
men are not awakened, to bestir themselves to lay hold on God, that when they
have lost all visible props, they do not make sure of God to be their friend;
While God himself stands at a distance, and poor sinners stand at a distance
from God: this is the saddest sign of all, that men are not humbled* do not
stir up themselves to lay hold on God, Isa. 57.1. The Righteous are taken away,
and no man laying it to heart, that was the sad doom of that people: had there
been broken hearts under a breach, that might have made some amends, and have
been a means to prevail with God to pour out his Spirit: but to be an
unhumbled, unreformed people under such dispensations of God, this (...) one of
the saddest signs, though I do verily believe, and have many Arguments to sway
my thoughts concerning it, that God will not throw up the work he has done in
New England, will not utterly root up the plant he has planted, and that the
Judgment God has taken out of the hand of an Enemy, he may not easily put it
into the hand of another, but that he will take it himself, and deal with his
People by his own hand: but yet believe it, if God love you, if you are such
that God has special favor for, then God will not spoil you, and if God will
not spoil you then he will not spare his Rod, and you may be sure, if one will
not do another shall. The godly and holy shall be refined, if one Furnace will
not do it, another shall. Those that are Elect, however they are like wild
Asses Colts, God will have his Month to find you, God has other Thorns to set
in the way of your lovers, if you will be like Manasseh, that must be taken in
the bushes, God will have his time to do it, when you shall humble your selves
and your Souls before the God of your Fathers; them that God has designed for
Conversion, they shall be converted, what ever way God has to do it, it seems
to be a terrible way? but if there be some God has no such special love for,
let me tell you, God will not spare you to spoil his end, God is about
reforming work, not only his People, but things among his people, God is about
to have other manner of Churches, and other manner of Spirits, his People shall
be refined, but they shall be consumed, it will be a terrible day of the Lord;
but shall be as refiners fire, and will purify the gold, but the dross shall
be consumed in the fire.

And therefore let me leave this solemn advice with you, nay, it is not mine
but Christ's, and that the Lord himself gives you; that you bewail your former,
and take heed of future sinning, Eccl. 12.1, 2. Remember your Creator in the
days of your Youth, the Clouds may not return after the Rain. It is spoken to
those that are not only in the beginning of their time, but in their prosperous
time. If you (...) do, you will not only prevent future judgments, but be in
the way to better mercyes, as well as continue those you have; I may say to you
from the Lord, you have seen the worst days, the bitterness of death is over,
the best are behind; and your present preservation is a pledge of your future
Salvation, Psalm, 94.12. Psalm. 119, 71, 75. which will put an end to sin and
sorrow, and the fear of either for ever. And may say with him, Isai. 38.17. In
love to my Soul the Lord has delivered me, for he has cast all my sins behind
his back, and with the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1.9, 10.

FINIS.
In the Epistle, l. 4. for vein r. view. P. 4. l. 20. r. Luke 10.


