THE DIVINE RIGHT OF Infant Baptism Asserted and Proved from SCRIPTURE And
ANTIQVITY.

By INCREASE MATHER, Teacher of a Church of Christ in Boston in New England.

Mic. 2.9. From their Children have they taken away my glory for ever.

Mar. 10 13, 14, 16. And they brought young Children to him that he should
touch them, and his Disciples rebuked those that brought them. -- But when
Jesus saw it he was much displeased, and said unto them, Suffer ye little
Children to come unto me and forbid them not; for of such is the Kingdom of
God. -- And he took them up in his arms, put his hands upon them and blessed
them.

Paedobaptismus in Ecclesia Judaica in admissione Proselytorum ita fuit notus,
usitatus and frequens, ut nihil fere notius aut usitatius: Non igitur opus erat
ut aliquo Praecepto roboretur, cum Baptismus jam in Sacramentum evaderet
evangelicum.

Dr. Lightfoot. Hor. Hebr. p. 40. BOSTON, Printed by John Foster, in the Year
1680.

Christian Reader.
IT is the good Counsel of Solomon, yea, and of a greater then Solomon,
unquestionably worthy of all Acceptance, Buy the Truth, and sell it not, Prove.
23.23. Importing, that Divine Truth (respecting matters of Faith and obedience)
is a good Bargain, what ever it costs; and that he will be a great loser, that
suffers himself to be cheated of it, or parts from it on any Terms. One may buy
Gold too dear: but Truth will pay for the purchase at any rate. The merchandise
of it is better then the merchandise of silver: and the Gain thereof then fine
Gold, Prove. 3.14. Truth is such an excellent commodity as will more then quit
the cost of any pains and Travel in the pursuit of it, and cannot be exchanged
(as wares by the Merchant) for any thing the world affords, but to great
disadvantage. It was the affectionate speech, and is deservedly one of the many
celebrated sayings of that happy Instrument of the Reformation, the great
Martin Luther, potius ruat Caelum, quam pereat una mica veritatis. Let the Sky
fall, or Heaven tumble on our head, rather then one crumb or particle of Truth
perish. Which though it may be despised by irreligious Scepticks and worldly
Politicians (the wise fools of the times that deride the seriousness of good
men in this matter) as a rash Effort of injudicious Zeal; yet was indeed a
sentence well fitted to the lips (Prove. 22.18.) of so renowned a Champion of
Truth in his Generation. But what Tears then are sufficient to lament the
Spirit and genius of too many Professors at this day? the wantonness, the
levity, the unaccountable fickleness and folly of men, that make little
difference between Truth and Error, spurn at Truth, and support themselves with
their own deceivings, and can, upon very slender occasions abandon the Truth
they have sometimes courted and entertained, falling in love with, and
espousing those erroneous opinions about the things of God, which both
Scripture and Reason, as well as the most pious, learned, and Judicious men
have condemned and branded? This is matter of unspeakable sorrow, and portends
very ill, to this loose and slight, evil and adulterous Generation. Whosoever is
wise and observes these things, will dread the Consequents, and tremble to
think, what severe course the Lord (who is very jealous of the honor of his
Truth) may take, to right himself and his Truth, and bring it in request again.
What has been said of Divine Truth in general, may be brought down to
particulars, and aptly enough applied to that precious Truth which the ensuing
Treatise labors in the defense of, respecting the Divine Right of Infant
Baptism. Which indeed is a Truth of higher Elevation, and greater Importance
then many of the good Friends of it apprehend; And the opposite Error (however
resented by some as very harmless, and of no dangerous Influence into the main
concerns of a Christian, and represented by others as a Truth of great
Consequence, and laid in the Foundation of a pure and entire Reformation from
Anti-Christianism) will be found (upon a due search into the nature and
Appurtenances of it) plainly subversive of the frame (might I not have said? of
the whole Frame) of Divine Dispensations toward the visible Church of Christ
in the World. It is not unworthy of a serious Inquiry, what should be the
matter that so many Christians are so much enamoured on that Error of
Antipaedopaptism, and make no difficulty to sell or give away that great Truth
concerning the Interest of their Children in the Covenant of God, and the
Appendant Seal of it, notwithstanding so much Scripture evidence for the
privilege of the Seed of Believers, and such an utter silence of the
Scriptures of the New Testament, as to any express or consequential denial,
Repeal, or Revocation of the Grant of that privilege, which was so clearly
made, and long enjoyed by the Church-Seed before the coming of our dear Lord
Jesus into the World. It is not ill guessed in my Apprehension, by a worthy
man, that some of the causes why many persons pretending to Religion and
Conscience, are so strangely transported and carried away with that erroneous
Opinion so uncomfortable to themselves, so injurious to their Children, are,
the want of due esteem of Covenant privileges, and of natural Affection to
their Relations, which the Apostle long since foretold would be one of the
Epidemical diseases of these last and perilous Times, 2 Timothy 2.3. There are at
this day loud Outcries made and lamentable Tragedies raised about Persecution:
and it were well for some in the World, if they were altogether groundless.
That Persecution upon the account of the profession of Religion, which the
Scripture condemns, (and I know no Reason to enlarge the Notion of it beyond
the bounds the Scripture has assigned it) is not (for ought appears) troubling
men for an erroneous Conscience, and the Disorders or Irregularities they rush
upon, in pursuance thereof, but for Righteousness sake, Math. 5.10. Christ's
sake, ver. 11. for Christ's Name, 1 Pet. 4.14. for Christ's sake and the Gospels,
Mark. 8.35. So that he who suffers, fills up that which is behind of the
Afflictions of Christ, etc. Col. 1.24. And has such Communion with Christ in
his Sufferings, that Christ is persecuted in Him and with Him, Act. 9.4. which
how it can be verified concerning such as suffer for Heresy or Heterodoxy
professed and practiced, is beyond the reach of my understanding. It Is readily
acknowledged, that that persecution which the Scripture brands is a grievous
provocation, and one of the great sins of Anti Christ and his Followers, whose
damnation slumbers not. But what if the Antipaedobaptists themselves are
engaged in a course of Persecution? yea, and of the most barbarous and
unnatural Persecution, in their injurious and cruel usage of poor Children,
that are incapable of the use of Tongue, or Pen, or Hand in their own just
defense? Was it persecution in Ishmael to deride and mock Isaac, (Genesis 21.9.
Gal. 4.29. on the account of his Right and prerogative of Primogeniture, and
Heirship, or Interest in the Covenant of God, as some not improbably
conjecture? And is it none in them, that deny the Interest of the children of
Gentile Believers (upon whom is come the blessing of Abraham, Gal. 3.14.) in
the Covenant and promise of God? Was it persecution in Saul and his
Counselors, that drove David away from abiding in the Inheritance of the Lord,
saying (according to the just construction of their practices against him) Go,
serve other Gods? 1 Samuel 26.19. And is it none in them that would drive the
children of the faithful out of the Inheritance of the Lord, and disseize them
of that which God has given them to possess? saying, in Effect, what have you
to do with the Lord God of Israel? Josh. 22.24. Was it persecution in
Dioclesian to emit an Edict, and give order that all Christians should be
disfranchised, and lose their civil privileges? And is it none in them that
would divest children of better privileges then Dioclesian could give or take
away? Was it persecution in Julian the Apostate to forbid the children of
Christians Admission into the Schools of Learning? And is it none in them that
would undisciple them, and turn them out of the School of Christ? Was it
persecution in Heathens and Antichristians to murder the children of Christians
with their Parents or Relations? (of which the following discourse gives some
Instances) And is it none in them that would rob children of that which is
dearer and better then their lives? their interest I mean in the Covenant of
God (on which the visible hope of their Salvation depends) and the Seal of it?
I doubt not, whatever is clamoured to the contrary, but the interest of
children in the Covenant of grace, and the initiating Seal thereof, has been
irrefragably demonstrated by many of the Lords Servants; and is now asserted
and vindicated with an high hand of Evidence, by the Learned and Judicious
Author of this Treatise. And may we not then if we listed to recriminate,
return a much juster charge of persecution upon the men of this heterodox
opinion then they can possibly fasten upon their Opposites? I speak not of the
design of the Opinionists, but of the nature and tendency of the opinion, which
una Litura with one dash, strikes out one half of Gods Covenant with Believers,
and turns all their Seed out of possession of that inheritance which God has
given them. I confess it were no small indiscretion to give hard words in this
Preface, where there is no room to back them with hard Arguments; but that I am
well assured the following dissertation will make good all I have said with
Advantage. It is truly said by a very moderate and judicious Divine (Mr. Joseph
Caryl) Though erring persons may have our Charity, yet no error ought to have
our love: Though many who err may have much of our patience, yet there is no
error (how small soever) should have any of our countenance. I profess I have a
great deal of charity for many well-meaning persons* that have unawares imbibed
or inconsiderately slipped into that Error of Anabaptism. Nor would I be so
unkind to the opinion of Antipaedobaptism (as bad as it is) as to give it that
hard name of Heresy, in that sense of the word which has obtained in the
Church for many Ages, importing an Error in the foundation of Faith,
pertinaciously retained against due means of Conviction. But I cannot avoid
saying, it is an Error of too perilous consequence to be dandled and dallied
withal: and it argues but an ill spirit, and very low esteem of the Truth, when
a man dreads no Error, but that which will damn him: which yet an Error, small
in it self, or in comparison, may do, as it may be circumstanced. Nor yet can
those justly censure us for laying much weight upon this matter of the interest
of children in the Covenant, and Seal of it, who themselves are transported to
such extremity on the other side, as to place proram ac puppim, the whole and
all, in a manner of their Religion, in the belief and practice of Anabaptism;
Antichristianizing, or unchristianizing (in a very Magisterial and dictatorly
way) all that are not baptized into their spirit, and in their way:
Acknowledging none for the Churches of Christ, or true Members thereof (that
is, visible Heirs of Salvation) but those that are of their own Constitution
and Profession.

That this Error of the Anabaptists has been a great Troubler of the Church
and Disturber of the peace and Order thereof, to the extreme disparagement and
obstruction of the work of Reformation, is well known to those that are
acquainted with the History of the last Age. Nor does the Lord ordinarily bless
the world with the discovery of any momentous Truth in Religion, by the hand of
Persons of such a Complexion, as the Fathers of this Opinion were in the last
Century, whose horrible Immoralities, and almost unexampled Outrages (too
notorious and demonstrable to be denied with any great hope of Belief) were
enough to turn the spirits, and inflame the Zeal of all sober and conscientious
persons against them and their Sentiments. If it might be supposed after such
undeniable Demonstration of the Error of it, that the Opinion of Anabaptists is
the Truth; I must say, It is the unhappiest truth that ever yet appeared on the
Stage, in respect of the trouble it has given the Church of God, and the
prodigious enormityes of the first Discoverers and Followers of it. Though some
Errors are mere infirmities of the Understanding, where there is an honest
Heart, but a weak and injudicious Head: yet most Errors are occasioned by a
corrupt Bias in the will and affections: and so was this manifestly in those
that unhappily started it in the infancy of the Reformation, to the great
Scandal of the World, and weakening the hands of the first Reformers. I know
there are some quick and pungent Expressions of the Author of this Treatise, in
the management of his last Argument, which those (I doubt not) against whom
their edge and point is turned, will quickly feel and complain of: but let him
not become their enemy for telling them the Truth. There is one sure and good
way to help themselves in this case: Let them quit their Error and they are
unconcerned. It is necessary to remind the World of the Truth of those
Historical Passages, when there are some of late that have confidence and
Forehead enough to face down the world, if it were possible, in those matters
of Fact, which were acted but yesterday in comparison, and not done in a
corner, attested by very many witnesses of unquestionable Reputation. Nor is it
any great wonder if those men have impudence enough to cry down Infant Baptism
as a nuperous or novel invention, an upstart Error, the pretty contrivance of
some Pope or Heretic, unknown to the primitive times of the Church; that have
the boldness to deny, or question, or palliate the foul miscarriages of the
Founders of their order against the best evidence that can be given by the Sons
of men. Concerning the cogency, or how concluding this Argument from Gods
Testimony in the ways of his providence, is, I will not here dispute, but
surely the world had need be told the Truth in this matter, though it cannot be
done without dealing otherwise, with the memory of the Ringleaders of this new
Way, then will be to the liking of their Followers. Nor can the Error be
branded as it deserves, and men duly cautioned against it without such just
reflections upon the prime Assertors of it. When Christ has signified his
displeasure from Heaven against those that would hinder little children from
coming to him in the way of his appointment, and pleaded the cause of the
children of the Covenant in his signal and tremendous Judgments against those
that would injuriously bereave them of their Covenant-Birthright; I suppose the
Author has an authentic Dispensation, and more then a Dispensation, to jogg
the careless or forgetful world, and tell them the story of these things over
again. It is sufficiently known to those that know the Author, that he is none
of the Ishmaels of the times, that have their hand against every man, and love
to be taking a Dog by the Ears (as Solomon speaks, Prove. 26.17.) or to be
dabling in the waters of strife. His Abilities in Polemical Divinity are too
manifest to be denied: but they that know his Doctrine and manner of life,
cannot but know that the life of his Spirit is in the things of practical
Divinity, and the great Design of his Ministry is to promote the power and
practice of piety in the greatest instances. Nor can he be ignorant of the
pugnacious humor of his Antagonists in this Controversy, in which respect he
understands well enough, he has not consulted his own repose in this
undertaking. The love of Truth, and compassion to such as are gone out of the
way, or may be exposed to the danger of seduction is doubtless, that which has
drawn him forth to this Engagement. I dare undertake for the Reverend Author
(that has deserved so well of the Church of God by sundry discourses formerly
published) that his design in this Treatise is not to traduce the persons of
those that are otherwise minded, or expose them to severities and sufferings on
the bare account of their opinion: but to appear in the defense of a precious
Truth, at such a juncture (wherein who sees it not to be seasonable?) and to
secure some, rescue others from the Error of the way of Anabaptism. But to what
purpose all this wast? may some say. Satis cribatur hoc cribro. Enough has
been said and written on this Subject. And it must be acknowledged with great
Thankfulness, that there are many excellent and unanswerable Discourses on this
Argument already extant. But as long as the Tongues and pens of men are going
so fast in the favor of Error, it would be strange neglect and unkindness in
the friends of Truth, if they should leave it to shift for it self, or desert
their post, and quit the defense of it, when there are so many Batteries raised
up against it. And possibly those that make this Objection, if they duly weigh
the perspicuity, conciseness, and comprehensiveness of this discourse (wherein
the sum of what is usually pleaded is delivered in a narrow compass) as well
as the strength and solidity of it; will thank the Reverend Author for his
pains, and acknowledge he has not bestowed labor in vain. It must be
confessed that the tenaciousness in men of Errors (which take faster hold of
the minds of carnal men, and of good men, so far as they are carnal, then Truth
will do, and have something whatever it is, that renders them very
recommendable to the corrupt principles and lusts in the hearts of men) and
their unwillingness to lay down any dear opinion they have once taken up, is no
small discouragement in this kind of undertaking. And it is particularly
observed by a learned man about an hundred years since, that the Anabaptists in
those times were wont with much wiliness, to pretend to great Humility and
Teachableness, as if they desired nothing more then Instruction and Conviction
out of the Scriptures, and were readily disposed to conform to the discoveries
of Truth, whereas they performed nothing less; but persevered in their Errors
against all means of Conviction. But it is to be hoped, this Character does not
universally agree to the men of that persuasion. Who knows but the good Lord,
that has put it into the heart of his Servant to lay out himself in this way,
may so prosper his labor, as to make it instrumental to reduce some into the
way of Truth, from which they have wandered, and deliver them out of the snare
of Error, with which their foot has been taken? However, he will have comfort
in the clearness and faithfulness of his Testimony. It was the saying of him
who is Truth it self, To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into
the World, that I should bear witness to the Truth, Joh. 18.37. If our Lord and
Master thought it worth his coming into the World to bear witness to the Truth,
though no man (none in comparison) received his Testimony, Joh. 3.32. Well may
his Servants esteem their Time and pains well bestowed in giving due Testimony
to the Truth, though few or none receive their Testimony. The blessing of the
God of Truth (who is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or
think, Ephesians. 3.20.) go along with this seasonable discourse, that it may
happily accomplish all (and more then all) the good designed by the worthy
Author in its publication: which is the hearty desire and prayer of him, who
is, good Reader,

Thy Servant for Christ's sake, VRIAN OAKS.
Cambridge, Febru. 21. 1679./80.
THE DIVINE RIGHT OF Infant Baptism Asserted and Proved.
IT is an Act both of Charity and Justice, to appear as an Advocate for those
that being wronged are not able to speak for themselves, especially if they be
deeply injured. And such is the case of the children of Gods Servants, when
there are designs on foot to turn them out of the Lords and their Inheritance,
as if they had no part in the Lord or in his heavenly Kingdom, but must all at
once, ( Quo jure quaque injuria) be cashiered and deprived of all the
privileges thereof, and so the glory taken from them for ever. The Lord Jesus
has not been without those that have appeared on his side, in defending the
Cause of his dear Lambs; In these latter Ages especially, great have been the
Company of those that have published and proved their just Title before the
World, and that it is no usurpation to set the Mark of the Lambs of Christ upon
them. Few of those many who have written sums of Divinity, or larger
Catechisms, but have handled this Argument; Yea, whole Tracts have been long
since emitted by the most eminent Reformers, (such as Calvin, Bullinger,
Zuinglius) tending to evince The divine Right of Infant Baptism. Nor have any
done more worthily in this Cause, then some of our own Nation, such as Mr.
Ainsworth, Mr. Marshal, Mr. Geree, Mr. Fuller, Dr. Hammond, Dr. Winter, Dr.
Homes, Mr. Brinsley, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Sidenham, Mr. Stevens, Mr. Crag, Mr. Cook,
Mr. Carter. Also of our New English Divines, Mr. Cotton, Mr. Hooker, Mr.
Cobbet, Mr. Phillips have elaborate Treatises extant on the same subject. And
within these six years last past, there are at least six Ministers in England
that have appeared in the same Cause, five of them being provoked thereunto by
the daring Confidence of one who having harnassed himself in Mr Tombs his
Armor, has thought good to enter the List of disputation, and again to throw
the gantlet to the Paedobaptists; but he is come off with small credit, they
whom he has stirred up to fall upon him, having indeed smitten him under the
fifth Rib. So that the Truth we are now to stand up for, has been so fully
vindicated by others, as that hardly any thing more needs to be spoken; In
which respect, I would have spared this pains, had I not been sensible that the
discourses mentioned are in few hands, and not to be purchased; or if they were
some of them are voluminous* and in that as well as on other Accounts, not so
adapted for vulgar Capacityes. Moreover, Anabaptistical Books are lately
scattered among us, whereby not only the Lambs of the Flock are in danger to be
lost, but the Sheep some of them are ready to be seduced; And considering where
the present opposers and despisers of Infant Baptism, have thought meet to hive
themselves, it is conceived that the Lord does call upon me in special (however
in my self weak and worthless) to maintain the Right of the Innocent, which in
the strength of Christ I am willing to do. Nor shall I need to draw forth any
other Arrows out of the Quiver of the Lord of Hosts, any other Arguments from
Scripture, then those which have already been shot by other hands, whereby the
Anabaptists cause and Kingdom* has long since received a Mortal wound. And
they are such as these.

Arg. 1. The Covenant and the Seal of the Covenant should go together; In
Scripture they are so closely conjoined as that the Seal is called the
Covenant, Genesis 17.10. Act 7 8. They then that have an Interest in the Covenant
of grace, have a Right to the Seal of the Covenant; But the Infant children of
Believers have an Interest in the Covenant. It is certain they had so in the
days of old, Genesis 17. Deuteronomy. 29 11. And if it be otherwise under the Gospel*
then there is a substantial difference in the Covenant under the New Testament,
from what it was under the Old. To take in the Parent, and leave out the child
makes an Essential Alteration, whenas Abraham's Covenant is said to be
Everlasting, Genesis 17.7. Which shows that as to the substance of it, it is the
same throughout all Generations. And the New Testament does expressly declare
that the blessing of Abraham is come upon the Gentiles by Jesus Christ, Gal.
3.14. What was that blessing of Abraham but the Covenant? So then the Lord
says to every believing Gentile Parent, I will be a God to thee, and to thy
Seed. And indeed if it were not so, the condition of the Saints in the days of
the New Testament (which is a dispensation of more grace) would be worse then
it was with any of them before Christ came, which is most contrary to Scripture
and Reason to imagine. The Jews would then have been unhappy loosers by
believing, if thereupon all their children must be immediately thrust out of
the Covenant and Kingdom of God, which before that time they had an Interest
in. The three thousand Converts in the Acts, who repented at Peter's Sermon, it
is certain that before the Sermon their children were Interested in the
Covenant; and shall we think that as soon as the Sermon was done, because their
Fathers believed the Gospel, their children were all cashiered and
discovenanted for ever? Without doubt if it had been so, the Jews would have
stood up for their children* and have told the Apostles, whilst we continued in
our Judaism, our children had a part in the Lords holy Covenant, but if we turn
Christians it will be so no longer. And this would have been such an Objection
as no man could have answered; Wherefore since the Jews did never so Object
against Christians, we may conclude that in the primitive times there was no
such stumbling block cast before them. But on the contrary, the children of
believing Parents are termed Holy, and it is said of them that they are not
unclean, 1 Cor^ 7.14. In Scripture language, they that have no right to the
Seal of the Covenant are unclean persons, Isai. 52.1. And they that are the
Lords Covenant Servants, are upon that ground, Holy, Exodus 19.6. Deuteronomy. 7.6.
Whence the Covenant is styled the Holy Covenant, Dan. 11.30. because the Lords
Covenant people are and ought to be an holy people. Nothing is more clear, then
that the Scripture does acknowledge a faederal Holiness, As for the
Interpretation which the Papists, and after them, the Anabaptists have given of
the Apostles words, when he says, your children are holy, as if his meaning
were only that their children were legitimate, it is (with due respect to any
more Orthodox that have so sensed the Apostles words) an impertinent
Exposition; for then in case neither Parent be a Believer, the children are
Illegitimate; which is contrary to Heb. 13.4. And indeed to the light of
nature, and Law of Nations. Can any rational man think that Legitimation is
peculiar to the children of Believers? but the Holiness of children spoken of,
1 Cor. 7.14. is peculiar to the children of Believers. And whereas it is
objected, that in the same place it is said, that the unbelieving wife is
sanctified by the Husband, but that does not prove Right to Baptism. The Answer
is easy, the Apostle does not say the unbelieving wife is sanctified, and no
more but sanctified by, or unto (the Greek Preposition ( En) may be and is so
translated, 1 These. 4.7.) the husband, which is a different thing from saying,
she is holy, as intending only a sanctification to his use; as the Raiment a
man does put on, the meat he eats is sanctified to him, (Tit. 1 15. 1 Timothy
4.5.) h. e. He may without sin make use of those creatures for the end God has
ordained. He does not say, your children are sanctified to you, but they are
holy* or as the words may be read your children are Saints. Now there is not so
much as one place in all the Bible to be produced, where any are called Saints,
but a faederal holiness at least is intended. And Paul, who was an Hebrew
makes use of a phrase that was common among the Jews with respect to the
children of the Covenant. Besides all this, if the Infants of Believers be all
strangers to the Covenant, there is no hope that any of them should be saved,
Ephesians. 2.12. Which to affirm would be sinfully uncharitable, and Anti-scriptural
Doctrine Math. 19.14. Some, to unlose the difficulty wherewith they find
themselves entangled by this Argument, cut it in pieces, by denying that
Baptism is a Seal of the Covenant. But they may as well say that Baptism is no
Sacrament, or that the Lords Supper is not a Seal of the Covenant, or that the
Covenant which the Lord has established with his people has no Seal annexed
to it; and in a word, deny whatever principles in Religion they please. If
Baptism be not a Seal of the Covenant, how are we said to be baptized for the
remission of sins, Act. 2, 38. And how is Baptism said to save? 1 Pet. 3.21.
Except signanter, as it is a sign and Seal of the Salvation promised in the
Covenant? Give a Scripture description of a Seal of the Covenant, and see if it
agrees not with Baptism; But more will be said to confirm this under the
fourth Argument.

Arg. 2. All that are by Divine Institution members of the visible Church, have
right to Baptism. To maintain that Church members should continue unbaptized is
such gross absurdity, that Anabaptists themselves are not, (or at least not
long since were not) willing to avouch it. But some Infants are Church members.
They that appertain to the Lords spiritual Kingdom are of his Church, for his
Church is his Kingdom, Math. 8.12. Now that is true concerning the children of
Christians, they come in for a partnership in the Lords Kingdom. If the Jews
children were so privileged, then the Infants of Believers are not to be
disfranchised, since the same Kingdom that once did belong to the Jews is now
given to the Gentiles, Math. 21.43. They are come from the East and from the
West, and do sit down with Abraham, and with Isaac, and with Jacob in the
Kingdom of God, Math. 8.11. Were not the Jews children as well as their
Fathers deprived of their Church estate, when because of their positive
unbelief in rejecting the Gospel, they were broken off, no longer to be
branches of, or belong unto that Tree of the visible Church, as the Apostle
disputes more largely, Rom.11. The Covenant did constitute the Church, Zach. 11
10. Therefore all concerned in the Covenant were belonging to, or Members of
the Church, which we have proved that the Infants of Israel did, therefore the
like is to be said of the Infants of Believers. The Christian Church being
surrogate Israel, Romans 11.24. Rev.7.4. therefore we cannot without sin deny
Baptism unto those whom the Lord owneth as Subjects of his Kingdom, Members of
his Church.

Arg. 3. Disciples have right to Baptism, Ioh. 4 1, Math. 28.19. But some
children are Disciples. The Scripture does expressly call them so, Act. 15.10.
They upon whose necks, the false Teachers would have imposed the yoke of
Circumcision, after the manner of Moses, were called Disciples. Now Moses Law
required that Infants should be Circumcised; and without doubt, it was the
design of those false Teachers, to bring Christian Infants as well as Parents,
under Circumcision: These then are called Disciples. By far the greatest part
concerned in that yoke were Children; And would the Apostle use a Term that did
not suit with the generality of the Subjects spoken of? Is not a Disciple the
same with a Scholar? 1 Chronicles. 25.8. Now it is the Anabaptists great mistake, to
think that no one can be a Scholar before such time as he has learned so many
Lessons. He that is put to School, the first day of his entrance is a Scholar,
though as yet he has not perhaps learned one Lesson. Thus is it true,
concerning the children of Believers; The Lord Jesus has graciously taken them
into his School, and they are to be subject unto the Orders and Instructions of
it, according as they shall be capable, and therefore to receive Baptism as the
Seal and Testimonial of their Admission into that blessed School, where Christ
himself is the great Teacher. Again, they that belong to Christ are Disciples;
It is said in Math. 10 42. He that shall give unto a little one a Cup of cold
water, in the Name of a Disciple, etc. and the same thing is expressed in Mark.
9.41. by saying, whosoever shall give a Cup of water, because they belong to
Christ, so that whoever belongs to Christ is a Disciple. Yea, they that are
Christ's are Abraham's spiritual Seed, and therefore to be baptized, Gal.
3.27.29. Now where is the man that dare affirm that no Infant in the world is
Christ's, or that will presume to pronounce concerning all the Infants among
Gods people, They belong not to Christ; and if they do belong to him, they are
Disciples, and (The order of the Gospel always being duly observed) ought to
be baptized.

Arg. 4. They that have the inward grace signified by Baptism have right to the
outward sign. That is the Apostles own Argument, Act. 10.47. and 11.17. But
some Infants have the inward grace signified by Baptism. The Subjects of
Christ's special blessing have the inward grace signified by Baptism. But this
is true, concerning some children. There were that brought young children to
Christ, and when his Disciples rebuked those that brought them, he was much
displeased, and said unto them, suffer little children to come unto me, for of
such is the Kingdom of God, and he took them up in his Arms put his hands upon
them, and blessed them, Mark. 10.13, 14, 16. Those children, doubtless were in
the state of Infancy, for Christ took them up into his Arms. And they are
termed little children, The Greek word ( Paidia) properly denotes one that is
not above seven years old. The same word is used concerning Christ, whilst an
Infant, Math. 2.11. Now it is a known Determination, Infantem accipimus septem
annis minorem. And Luke has put it out of Question, by declaring that those
children were Infants, Luke 18.15. (tabrephe) i. e. Nurslings, or Babes, as the
same word is translated, 1 Pet. 2.2. He that when on Earth did vouchsafe such a
visible sign and Testimony of his Respect to little children, and manifest such
holy indignation against his own Disciples, when they would have withheld such
from his blessing, is surely offended with those that will not suffer them, to
be brought under the dispensation of his blessed Ordinances now. One thing
signified by Baptism is Regeneration, Joh. 3.5. Tit. 3.5 And that some children
have this, shall (by the help of Christ) be demonstrated when we come to the
next Argument. Again, Baptism does seal Union with Christ, and incorporation
into his mystical body Gal. 3.27. 1 Cor. 12.13. We may believe that the
greatest part of the Church of Christ (which is his body) does consist of
Infant, and not Adult Members; they are (as a worthy Divine has observed) both
the greatest and the purest part of the Church.

Again. The pardon of sin is sealed in Baptism, Mark. 1.5. Act. 22.16. And are
not some children the Objects of pardoning grace? The children of believers
that dye in a state of Infancy, either they have no sin, or if they be saved,
that sin is forgiven to them. If it be forgiven to them, they ought not to be
deprived of the sign and seal of that Remission. This Argument, so pressed the
old Anabaptists that they fell to down right Pelagianism, denying the Doctrine
of original sin. They maintained that children as they come into the world are
under the guilt of no sin, and therefore do not need the Application of that
Ordinance, which is a sign of Remission of sins. And this does invincibly prove
that some Infants have jus in re as to that Ordinance of Baptism, and that
being granted, their jus ad rem will undeniable follow, if their Parents attend
that order which the Rule requires with respect unto present administration.

Arg. 5. Believers have right to Baptism, But some Infants are Believers. The
Scripture speaks of little ones that do believe on the Lord Jesus, to deprive
whom of their Right will be found uncomfortable. Math. 18.2.6. compared with
Mark 9.37. Infants are subjects capable of Grace. Yea, some of them are
regenerated whilst in a state of Infancy. The Scripture tells us that John
Baptist was filled with the Holy Ghost from his Mothers womb, Luke 1.15.
Therefore his Soul was filled with Grace from his very childhood. Peter
sometimes argued, Can any man forbid water that these should not be baptized
who have received the holy Ghost? Act. 10.47. The Lord in Scripture tells us,
that an Infant has received the Holy Ghost, who then can without sin forbid
water that they should not (any of them be baptized? If Infants have not Faith,
how are they saved? There is no Salvation but by Christ, Act. 4.12. No
Salvation by Christ except there be union with him, 1 John 5.12. There must be
Union before there can be Communion. There is no Union to Christ without Faith.
Ephesians. 3.17. If the first Adam convey his sinful image to Infants, why may not
the second Adam communicate his holy image to them? Elect Children dying in the
state of infancy have Faith (they believe the Resurrection of their bodies) and
other Graces, when in heaven, and therefore whilst on earth also seeing there
is no grace in heaven which was not wrought on earth. Whether infants do act
faith (as the Lutherans maintain) or have only seminal habitual faith, is
another Question, which I meddle not with. They do not put forth acts of
Reason, and yet we must not reckon them among irrational creatures.

It is Objected, But we do not know which of them have grace: and the children
of godly Parents baptized in their Infancy sometimes do after that appear to
be unholy and profane.

To which three things are to be replied,

1. That Baptism (as Mr. Cotton rightly observes) is an engagement unto future
Repentance. Hence is that expression of Baptism unto Repentance. Math. 3.11.
because, by virtue of Baptism the subject of it, is engaged to repent and walk
in Newness of life, before the Lord, and woe unto him if he do not so. And
withal, when elect Infants are baptized, the Lord does (which is matter of
great encouragement to a believing Parent) engage to bestow Repentance on them
in due time. In like sort, was Circumcision an engagement unto Repentance,
Deuteronomy. 30.6.

2. Many of the Elect of God, have had the seeds of grace wrought in their
Souls, whilst in their Childhood. Mr. Ianeway has lately exemplified in
thirteen children, that clear Evidences of faith were observed in them, albeit
sundry of them not seven years old. And daily experience confirms the Truth of
this. Yea, more, some Infants among the Lords people have dyed Martyrs of
Jesus. So when that noble Romanus suffered, there was martyred with him a
little child, but seven years old, because he said that Christ is God, and that
there is but one God, professing that he learned those Principles of his godly
Mother, from the time that he hung upon her breasts. And many other Christian
Children both in former and latter Ages have dyed Martyrs, See the Martyr
Books, vol. 1. p. 53 57, 83, 116. and vol. 3. p. 200, 747. and continuation of
that History. p. 63. The bloody Papists, exposed four hundred Infants amongst
the Waldenses, to death at at once with their godly Parents.

The Scripture speaks of a threefold Baptism, 1. Flaminis, Some are baptized
with the Holy Ghost and with Fire, Math. 3.11. 2. Sanguinis, Math. 20.22, 23. 1
Cor. 15.29. They that dye for the Truth are baptized in Blood. 3. Fluminis. The
Baptism of Water. Many Children have been dignified so far as to be the
subjects of the two former Baptisms; and shall they be accounted unworthy to be
the Subjects of this Baptism which is not of so high a nature as the other
mentioned?

3. Whereas it is suggested, that some baptized Children do afterward
discover themselves to be faithless ones, the like is to be said of those that
are baptized in adult age, how many of them have proved Apostates? The
Anabaptists of this age, are better than their Fathers in the last Century, if
the greatest part of them be true believers. Until the contrary does appear, we
must judge charitably of Children, as well as of those which are adult. Mr.
Hooker says truly, That we are to think as well of the infant Child of a
Believer, as we do or ought to do of his Father, respecting his spiritual and
eternal estate. Since God of his infinite Grace has spread the wings of his
Covenant over such, until they violate that covenant, there is sufficient
ground of charity toward them.

To conclude this Argument, The Children of the Faithful are either Believers
or Unbelievers. They are not all unbelievers, or to be reckoned as Infidels, or
strangers to the household of Faith; for then they must all have their portion
in that lake which burns with fire and brimstone, Rev. 21.8. which who will or
dare affirm? So then the Anabaptists strongest Argument is turned against them,
and batters down their error. For they glory in this argument, and some of them
(as Mr. Marshal notes) have challenged all the world to answer it. Unbelievers
(say they) may not be baptized, Children are all Unbelievers, therefore no
children may be baptized. But mind whither this argument will lead, and the
woeful havoc it does make in the flock of Christ; since it may with as much
color of reason be argued, Unbelievers shall be damned, Mark. 16.16. all
infants are unbelievers, therefore all infants shall be damned. Let the
Anabaptists answer this argument, and they will remove the other, wherein their
confidence lies. In a word, since infants have faith enough to bring them to
heaven, they have faith enough to bring them to Baptism.

Arg. 6. They that are among the number of the Lords bought, redeemed Servants,
ought not to be denied that which is the Mark and Livery appertaining to such.
Why should not the badge and character of persons devoted to the Lords service,
be given to those whom the Lord does own as his Servants? But some children are
in the number of the Lords bought, redeemed Servants. So does the Scripture
expressly teach and testify, Lev. 25.41, 42. Hence is that, Psalm. 116 16. O
Lord, truly I am thy Servant; I am thy Servant, the son of thy handmaid. Bought
Servants (says David) do not only themselves owe perpetual servitude, unto
him that is their Lord and Master, but their children also are born his
servants; and so am I born the Servant of God, inasmuch as my mother did fear
his Name. A child as soon as he is born into the world is a Subject and servant
of that Prince whom his Father was a servant unto. And shall the King of Heaven
have only such as are grown unto years, bound unto him as his subjects, but
their children freed from all service to their fathers God? And indeed, they
must of necessity be as to their visible state the servants of Christ, or of
Satan only, but to say that the children of Believers, do all belong to no
other Master but the Devil, is fearful Doctrine. Now Baptism is the Mark and
Livery of right belonging to the servants of Christ. As of old, Circumcision
was the Mark and Cognizance of one visibly belonging to the only true God,
whereby such were distinguished from the Heathen Nations, Jer. 9.25, 26. The
like is to be said of Baptism now. Hence the Ancients were wont to call Baptism
the Seal of the Lord, and the Mark of the Lord. And great Interpreters (as I
have elsewhere noted) conceive that Rev. 14.1. does allude to Baptism.
Furthermore, learned men have observed, that amongst the Jews of old,
Proselytes were admitted by Baptism, as well as by Circumcision and Sacrifice.
See Ainsworth on Genesis 17.12. So Buxtorf and others versed in Jewish Antiquityes
have evinced: Yea, and the Jewish Masters tell us that when a Proselyte was
baptized, his Children were baptized with him. And therefore Dr. Lightfoot
judiciously argues, that if children under the Gospel might not be baptized,
there must of necessity have been an express prohibition against it, which it
is certain there is not. Since the Lord Christ appointed his Disciples to lay
aside those Rites of Circumcision and Sacrifice, and was pleased to retain only
the other of Baptism, setting an Evangelical Stamp upon it, the Apostles must
needs do as formerly was practiced in baptizing Infants, except their Master
Christ did forbid them and say, Though Infants of Proselytes have hitherto been
baptized, yet now it is my mind that not they, but adult persons alone shall be
the Subjects of that Ordinance. The Antipedobaptists call upon us for an
express Command in so many words and syllables, Go, Baptize Infants, whereas
we may with more reason, urge them to show a command to the contrary: And until
the Repeal from Scripture can be made out (which will never be) the good old
way, of applying the initiating Seal of the Covenant to the children of the
Church ought to be attended. And let the Anabaptists if they can, give one
instance of any child of a Believer, that was suspended from Baptism until he
came unto years of discretion. They have been challenged in the Name of Christ
to produce any one such example throughout all the Book of God, but could never
do it. Not so much as one person mentioned in the Scripture, that was baptized
after he was able to give an account of his Faith if his father was a
Belieever, or did embrace the Christian faith, before that.

Arg. 7. If Infant Baptism be unlawful, and so a Nullity, then it will
necessarily follow, that now, either Baptism must cease, or else that they who
are unbaptized themselves may administer Baptism unto others, without an
extraordinary Commission from Heaven. Not long since, there was hardly a man to
be found in the world, that had any other Baptism but what was received in
Infancy, and so (according to the Anabaptists principles) not one baptized
person to be found upon the Earth. Of necessity then, if a man would be
baptized, it must be done by one that is himself unbaptized. And shall a man
that is unbaptized take upon him to baptize others! Who gave him that
Authority? The first Anabaptist was baptized by an unbaptized person. Dat quod
non habet. Their principle is that believers being baptized are visible Saints;
So that an unbaptized person is with them no visible Saint. Shall he then be an
Administrator (to use their own word) of Baptism? This Consideration has so
molested the Anabaptists, that being at an utter loss for an Administrator,
some of them have turned Seekers, renouncing all instituted Ordinances, until
new Apostles appear in the world; Others have become Se-Baeptists, (as did Mr.
Smith in Holland) because they could not meet with a baptized man to Immerse
them, they have thought meet to plunge themselves into the water, and after
that to style themselves Baptized Believers. But where do these men, that call
for a precept or example in Scripture, find precept or example in the
Scripture, either for men's administering bap-Baptism to themselves, or to others
whilst themselves had no Baptism? As for the Apostles, it is certain, they were
baptized before they did baptize. Some of them were baptized by John, as having
been his Disciples before they followed Christ, Joh. 1.35, 36, 40 41. As for
John Baptist, he had not only Circumcision, but an immediate call from Heaven
before he did administer Baptism unto any, Luke 3.2. So then, let not the
Antipedobaptists venture upon Rebaptization, until one with an immediate Call,
or at leastwise, a regular Administrator, shall appear. And such an one (if
their Doctrine be true) is never like to be seen in this World.

Arg. 8. If the Children of Believers under the Old Testament had right to
Circumcision, then the children of Believers under the New Testament have right
to Baptism. But the former is true. Therefore so is the latter.

The Anabaptists laugh at this Argument; and it is easier to do so, then by
solid Reason to refute it. All our Divines for above these hundred years (as
far as has fallen within the Compass of my Observation) in their discourses
about Infant Baptism, have improved this very medium to confirm the Truth in
hand. Yea, and so did some of the Ancients above a thousand years ago. Had the
Consequence been so Irrational as our Antagonists imagine, I suppose, some of
them who were better able to discern the strength of an Argument, then those we
dispute against, would hardly have made use of it- I am rather of learned
Whitakers Judgment, who says, All the Anabaptists in the world will never be
able to answer this Argument. Let us then Consider.

1. That Baptism comes in the Room of Circumcision, wherefore the Apostle
dissuading the Colossians from the practice of Circumcision, he tells them that
they were buried with Christ in Baptism, Col. 2.12. q. d. you are Circumcised
because baptized, for Baptism supplies the place and room of Circumcision.
Nothing is more evident, then that of the Apostle, whilst laboring to take
them off from Circumcision, does put them in mind of their Baptism, why should
he do so; if the one do not succeed the other? And it is not to be believed,
that God would repeal the former Seal of the Covenant (wherein Infants were
concerned) and not institute any other in the room of it. If there be any other
Ordinance come in the Room of Circumcision, besides Baptism. Name what it is.

2. Circumcision and Baptism are Seals of the same Covenant. If
Antipaedobaptists could prove what they affirm, in saying that Circumcision did
seal to the promise of temporal blessings only, they would do something to
enervate this Argument. But it is certain, that it was a Seal of the Covenant
of grace, wherein, though temporal blessings are included, spiritual are the
chief. There was no regular subject of Circumcision, but God said to him from
Heaven, If thou will become my faithful Servant, I will be thy God for ever.
Genesis 17.7. Now in that is the substance of the Covenant of Grace. God does not
any where except only in the Covenant of Grace, Say to the fallen children of
Adam I will be your God. Thus did he say in that Covenant, of which
Circumcision was a Seal. It follows then undeniably that Baptism and that, are
Seals of the same Covenant.

3. There is not an essential difference between the Sacraments of the Old
Testament and the New. If there were, the Apostles Argument would be invalid,
when he tells the Corinthians that notwithstanding they were the Subjects of
the Sacraments of the New Testament, if they rested there, they might perish,
inasmuch as many of the children of Israel fell under the displeasure of God,
albeit they had such and such Sacraments. 1. Cor. 10. Their Sacraments held
forth Christ yet to come, ours as already come (and so did John's Baptism and
Christ's differ) which makes not an essential difference. The outward Signs,
(as to the Sacraments of the Old and New Testament*) were not the same, but the
inward Grace and mysteryes signified (in which the Essence of the Sacrament
especially consists) were mostly the same. So is it eminently true, with
reference unto Circumcision and Baptism. Hence Christians are called the
Circumcision, Phil. 3.3. And the Children of Israel are said to be all
baptized, 1 Cor. 10.2. Which shows that those two Ordinances are, as to the
main intendment of them, the same. Let us consider how they agree. Does not
Baptism hold forth Redemption by the blood of Christ? So did Circumcision.
Baptism signifies a dedication and devotion to the Lords service (as before
was partly observed) Hence men are said to be baptized ( Eis to O noma) into
the Name of Christ. Act 8.16. Especially when the Apostles baptized the Jews,
they are said to baptize into the Name of Christ, because the Jews above
others, did disown Christ from being their Lord. And the Gentiles who served
Idols before, upon their conversion, were baptized into the Name of the only
true God, who is Father, Son and Holy Spirit Math. 28.20. So did Circumcision
signify the like Dedication to the service of God. Jer. 4 4. Again, does
Baptism intimate that the nature of man is corrupt and needs cleansing, Ephesians,
5.26. Heb. 10.22? So did Circumcision, Josh. 5.5 Col. 2.13. 1 Pet. 3.21. Does
Baptism hold forth Regeneration, Conversion, Mortification of sin through the
Death of Christ, Tit. 3.5. Romans 6.3, 4. All this is likewise true concerning
that Ordinance of circumcision. Romans 2.28.29. Deuteronomy. 30.6. Col. 2.12. Is Baptism
a seal of the Righteousness of Faith? Is there in that Ordinance a solemn
Declaration, that men are justified by Faith in the Righteousness of Jesus
Christ? The same is to be affirmed with reference unto Circumcision Romans 4.11.
That which Antipedobaptists most stand upon, is, That Baptism does call for
Regeneration, Faith, Mortification, which Infants are not (say they) capable
of. But circumcision did also call for Regeneration, Faith, Mortification in
the subject of it, and yet Infants were circumcised. Nor do I know any thing
objected against the baptism of Infants, but carnal Reason might have made the
same Objection against their being circumcised. Now then, if baptism come in
the room of circumcision; if they are both seals of the same covenant of Grace;
if the same mysteries that are now signified in baptism, were of old held forth
in Circumcision, it follows strongly, that if Infants had right to
circumcision, they have right to Baptism.

And this I conceive, is the reason why the baptism of Infants is not in so
many words and syllables mentioned in the New Testament (albeit there are such
precepts and expressions therein as do evidently imply it) because it was so
clear and known a thing, that Children should have the initiating Seal of the
Covenant applied unto them, as there was no need to insist upon that: but there
is express notice taken of women's being baptized, Act. 8.12. Inasmuch as they
not being subjects of Circumcision (except virtually Exodus 12.48.) it was
requisite that should be particularly spoken of, to show that the subject of
Baptism is not narrower, but larger then that of Circumcision.

Arg. 9. That which has been practiced by the Churches of God in all Ages
thereof is of Divine Institution, 1 Cor. 11.16. Quod ubique quod semper, quod
ab omnibus creditur Catholicum est. But so must we say concerning
Infant Baptism. This was Augustines Argument of old, and there is great weight
in it, sc. that those practices in the Church which have been universal, and
not instituted by any Council, are Apostolical Traditions, which ought to be
observed, 2 These. 2.15. In all places of the world, where the Christian Faith
has been planted by the Apostles, if the Christian Name continue there, the
Baptism of Infants is no new thing among them* though in most places not
without Superstitious Additions. Albeit there are old Errors, yet Truth is
older then any Error. The Anabaptists cannot inform us, who was the first that
baptized an Infant; a sign that it is no Error, but an Apostolical practice,
and Divine Institution. We can tell them who first opposed Pedobaptism. The
holy Martyr Philpot declares that Auxentius (an Arrian Heretic) was one of
the first Anabaptists that appeared in the world. Indeed, according to the
proper signification of the word, Anabaptist, i. e. one that is baptized again,
there have been many such of old. So the Novatians that Cyprian; and the
Donatists whom Austin opposed. But as for Antipedobaptists, i. e. such as deny
the lawfulness of Infant Baptism, I cannot, after diligent Enquiry find that
any party of men called Christians (excepting such as denied all other Divine
Institutions) did ever scruple the lawfulness of it, until since Luthers
Reformation, those execrable persons in Germany (who have left their Names for
a curse to posterity) led the dance. Nay more, I could never yet see it
demonstrated that so much as one man of any note amongst Christians did scruple
the lawfulness of Pedobaptism, for above 1500 years after Christ. It is true
that Popish Authors (and from them some late Anabaptists) have most injuriously
charged the old Waldenses as if they had scrupled Pedobaptism, but the contrary
is certain from their own writings and Confessions, albeit they did indeed (as
well they might) refuse to have their Children baptized by Popish Priests, or
after their Superstitious (...). Likewise, I know that Tertullian, and some
others of the Ancients, persuade to delay the baptizing of children, (and he
does urge the like procrastination with respect to the Baptism of Adult
Christians) in case they be unmarryed) Tererl. de Baptism. p. mihi, 225. Not
that they questioned the lawfulness of it, only upon prudential, or rather
Superstitious grounds they judged delays the most advisable; Therefore at the
same time they counsel to baptize Children, if there be imminent danger of
death; which if they had deemed the thing in it self unlawful, they would not
have done. And certainly, (as Mr. Geree notes well) those of the Ancients that
advise to delay the Baptism of Infants, if they had esteemed the practice as
sinful, or as nuperous and novel, would have improved those Arguments to
enforce the Cunctation by them persuaded unto; which they never did: A clear
Demonstration, that in the Ancient times Infant Baptism was neither a new
practice, nor thought by any to be unlawful. He that can produce one Instance
out of the Ancients, proving that any one of them did dissuade from Infant
Baptism, because there wanted Scripture precept or example for it, erit mihi
(...). It is confessed de facto, that many Christians informer Ages deferred
their Baptism from year to year. Some because not rightly understanding, Heb.
6.4. they were afraid if they should fall into sin after Baptism, they could
never repent or obtain forgiveness. Others, that so they might be baptized, at
the same Age, and at the same River where Christ was baptized. Others, through
the defect of such an eminent Administrator as they desired; but not as
Questioning the lawfulness of the thing. Whosoever pleases may see more in Mr.
Walkers Preface to his late plea for Infant Baptism. And if we look into the
writings of the first Fathers (as they are called) that lived next after, or
were Contemporary with the Apostles, we shall see clear Testimonies for the
Baptism of Children. It is to be admired, that Providence has so ordered that
any such Testimonies are extant, considering that this was in those days no
Controversy, and but few of those that then lived have left Books behind them,
or if they have, their design was to insist upon other Subjects. Yet the Divine
right of Infant Baptism, is frequently intimated by Ancient Doctors in the
Church. Clemens Romanus, (who is not improbably thought to be the same that is
mentioned, Phil. 4 3) in his grave and godly Epistle to the Church at Corinth,
exhorts that not only men, but women and children should be recipients of the
Discipline of Christ. Are children subjects of Christ's Discipline? Then
certainly they are Disciples, and subjects of Christ's Baptism. The Book of
Constitutions are unjustly fathered upon that Clement, yet the Author was an
Ancient writer, and therein (Lib. 6. c. 15) the Baptism of Infants is expressly
mentioned. In the very next Age to the Apostles lived Justin Martyr. Many that
have discussed the Controversy about Pedobaptism, have produced passages out of
some of that blessed Martyrs writings, which plainly infer the Divine Right of
Believers children to that Ordinance; not to insist upon the Quest. and Resp.
ad Orthod. which passes under his Name, and is indeed (though none of Iustins,
yet,) an Ancient piece, wherein the Baptism of Infants is in express words
asserted. Irenaeus, who is by Ierom reckoned as a man of Apostolical times,
faith, Omnes vedit per semetipsum salvare, omnes, inquam, qui per eum
renascuntur in Deum, Infantes, Iuvenes, Seniores. Haeres. Lib. 2. C. 39. p.
192. That Christ came to save all sorts, even all who are born again to God by
him, Infants as well as young men, and elder persons. Are some Infants born
again unto God by Christ, and are none of them Subjects of Baptism? Besides, to
be born again, Renasci, is the very word by which the Ancients were wont to
express Baptism. Also Hyginus (who was martyred Anno 144.) brought in Sponsores
Suretyes, to undertake for the instruction and education of such children as
were baptized into the Name of Christ, which is since degenerated into an idle
piece of Formality. In Cyprian's time (who flourished Anno 250.) there was a
Question started by Fidus, Whether, because children of old might not be
circumcised before the eighth day, they might now be baptized before that time?
And in his Epistle to Fidus (Page mihi. 37) He declares that himself with
sixty six more Bishops had considered the Question, and concluded in the
affirmative, that Children might be baptized before they were eight days old.
So that in Cyprians days, it was not so much as doubted whether children had a
Right to Baptism, but was taken as a thing granted and unquestionable; only as
to the particular day when the Ordinance should be administered, some began to
have needless scruples. Not long before this lived Origin, who in his 8 th.
Homily on Leviticus, and his 14 th. on Luke, does in so many words again and
again declare, That some Infants have right to Baptism, and gives Reason for
it. And that known passage of Origens on Romans 6. is not to be passed over with
silence, Ecclesia ab Apostolis traditionem accepit etiam parvulis dare
Baptismum. The Church (says he) has received by Tradition from the Apostles,
that even little ones ought to be baptized. It is vainly pretended that Origin
was translated, and so interpolated, and corrupted by Ruffinus, since it does
not appear, that either his Comment on Luke, or on the Romans was translated by
Ruffinus, and in both of them he is for Infant Baptism. As for those who lived
in the next Century, as Nazianzen, Chrysostom, Basil, Athanasius, Epiphanius in
the Greek, and Ambrose, Ierom and Austin in the Latin Church, pregnant
Testimonies concerning Infant baptism, are to be seen in them; which Mr. Wills
and Mr. Walker lately, and others formerly have produced for the confirmation
of this Truth. If we must allow men to answer such clear and full Testimonies,
as those that have been insisted on, by saying (but giving no solid reason for
what they say) that happily those expressions were foysted into the works of the
Fathers, (so called) by Popish hands in after ages all Records respecting the
practice of Antiquity are of no use: for who that has audacity enough to
affirm it, may not say, that whatever practice or profession suits not with his
Opinion, was never expressed by Origin or Cyprian or Iraeneus etc. only
Antichrist inserted such words into their Writings. And indeed there is one who
has found an easy way to answer all this, it is but saying Mentiris, all these
things are falsehoods, and that is confutation enough. For Henry Danvers (if you
will believe him) has found that Infant Baptism was not practiced upon any,
until the fourth Century, and that Pope Innocentius was the first Institutor
and imposer of such a Superstition. p. 223. Prob Padorem tuum! Did not Austin
live at that very time? And does not Austin, (who was more likely then H.D. to
know what was practiced in the Church in the Ages next to the Apostles)
witness, that Infant baptism had been practiced in the Church universally ever
since the Apostles days? How could he say so, if in his days (or not long
before) it was first practiced? It is to be marvelled at, that any who profess
the fear of God, should be taken with such an Author. He is a most notorious
Plagiary; not an Argument of any moment, besides what is borrowed from Mr.
Tombs; yea (as Mr. Wills tells him) He has taken 43 Pages of his Book
together, almost verbatim out of Mr. Tombs, and yet has not the ingenuity to
say so. And the spirit of the man is enough to turn a Christians heart against
him. For he is not ashamed to own his design, in persuading all men to renounce
communion with the Churches that practice Infant Baptism. And how does he abuse
those of his own Party, Mr. Allen, Bunian, Lamb, because they are of more
peaceable and moderate Principles then himself, desirous to hold communion with
the Churches of Christ, whom in the point of Pedobaptism they have differed
from? And he does plead for, and justify those Monsters of men, the German
Anabaptists? In his judgment Menno an Heretic, Hubmer an Apostate,
Knipperdoling, John Matthias, Becold, Muncer (then whom the world has seldom
known greater Thieves and Murderers) were all very honest men only because they
were Anabaptists. What others have done, I know not, but for my own part, I
must needs confess, that the like forehead and Forgery in denying the clearest
and most convictive Testimonies that make aganist his Cause, and in producing
others for it, (whom and where he pleases) I have seldom seen, except it be in
some Popish Legenders, of whom Paul did long before prophesy, That they should
speak Lies in Hypocrisy, having their Consciences seared with an hot iron.

Mr. Baxter in his more proofs of Infant Church membership and right to
Baptism, shows what is to be thought of this lamentable Reporter, as to the
Historical part of his Book, and that his quotations are utterly false many of
them, not having so much as one word of Truth in them, and (supposing him to
have read the Authors referred unto) professes that he can scarce match him
again among all the falsifiers he knows in the world, and that the untruths
(in matter of fact) by him published, are of such a stupendous magnitude as
might have affrighted the Conscience of a Turk or Pagan, yea that a sober
Papist or Pagan, would blush to have been guilty of some one page, the untruths
therein are so notorious, and shameless, and does seriously propound, whether
it be not a dishonor to the Anabaptists Congregations, to have such a loose,
partial Discipline, as to retein such a member, without either bringing him to
repentance, or proceeding to Excommunication. Thus Mr. Baxter. I would hope
that the man has not wilfully mistaken but that he has abused the ignorant
world, partly by inadvertency in reading Authors, and partly by taking upon
trust what he has met with either amongst lying Papists, or in the Dutch
Anabaptists Martyrology, or some other late writers amongst that party. Just as
if another Anabaptist should publish a Book and declare that the old British
Churches, the Waldenses, the Wickliffites, and the primitive Doctors in the
Church, for 300 years and more, were against Infant Baptism, and then to prove
so notorious a forgery, should produce the Authorityes quoted by Major D. If he
does but read the Canons of an old Council, and therein finds nothing expressed
for Infant Baptism, he concludes they are against it. Or if he meets with an
Author that speaking of adult persons, maintains that they should profess their
faith and enter into Covenant before admission to Baptism, he thinks he has
found a witness for believers, and consequently against Infant Baptism. If he
meets with another, that refused to baptize the children of Excommunicates then
he writes down another witness against Infant Baptism, or if he finds this or
that Author professing against the necessity of Baptism in order to Salvation,
and that baptism does not regenerate or save, ex opere operato, then he gives
out that he has found more Antipedobaptists. Upon all these grounds he may
call mean Antipedobaptist if he please, and with as much Truth, as he has so
written concerning Wickliff, (who does expressly assert the Baptism of Infants)
and many other Authors both Ancient and Modern by him perverted and abused.
Yea, and he wrongs his beloved Donatists, who though corrupt in many things,
and practicing Rebaptisation on those that did Apostatize from more Orthodox
Churches unto their party, yet opposed not Infants Baptism. Austin who
conversed and contended with them, and does ( de Here Is. Cap. 69.) give an ample
description of their Heterodoxies, says not a word of their Antipedobaptism;
that is Mr. Ds. Invention. And whereas it is recorded concerning some old
Heretics, Manichees, Messalians, Cathari, etc. that they rejected Baptism,
and all other instituted Ordinances as unprofitable things, what will you say,
if now he has found more witnesses, (precious ones) against Infant Baptism.
But his Book is well answered by Mr. Baxter, Mr. Whiston, Mr. Blinman, Mr.
Wills and Mr. Walker. Nor do I find that what they have written is in the least
enervated by the vain attempts of Edward Hutchinson, who calls upon Mr. Baxter
to repent of that absurd and Heretical Position (those are his very words) of a
baptismal Covenant of Grace, running in a fleshly Line, as he shall shortly
answer it before the dreadful Tribunal. We may judge by that, whom the
Anabaptists look upon as Heretics, and what favor the Churches, and in
special, the Ministers of the Lord Jesus would find from them, had they power
in their hands. The like may be said of Tho. Delaun, who gives The Lie to that
man of God last mentioned, and moreover revileth Mr. Whiston and Mr. Wills (men
of known integrity and moderation) saying that They supply the want of reason
(no doubt but they are the People, and wisdom shall dye with them) with rage
and malice, and at last concludes, that if any persons be deceived by those
Arguments which are urged for Infant Baptism, it is because they will be
deceived. If these men should be such themselves as they judge others to be,
what punishment may they be thought worthy of?

Arg. 10. Antipedobaptism is a blasted Error. The Lord has not delighted to
water it, and that is a sign that it is a weed that he never planted. I cannot
easily think of any opinion that has been more eminently witnessed against
from Heaven by visible Judgments upon the professors of it. I do not (as some
have done) Judge simple Antipedobaptists as Heretics; I have known of that way
not only in New England, but in England and in Ireland, that I believe were
sincerely Conscientious. Nevertheless, the generality of those that have
imbibed, and embraced that persuasion, have been a blasted Generation all
along. The Lord said to Abraham that he would bless him, and make him a
blessing, but as for these opposers and despisers of Abraham's Covenant, they
have been unhappy Instruments of much trouble to the places where they have
sprung up, not promoving, but retarding and woefully scandalizing the Interest
of Reformation. Bullinger, that great Reformer, does declare that at Waldshut
the Gospel did once flourish, but the Interest of Reformation was utterly
rooted out there, by the Anabaptists. At Basil, and other places in Germany,
and in Amsterdam also (had not the signal of ringing the Town bell been happily
disappointed, by reason that a drunken man took away the rope) they had like to
have done so too, and at Geneva, had not the Discipline of that place been a
Terror to them. And when the King of Swedeland began the work of Reformation in
Stockholm, the Anabaptists party had like to have ruined all; And how few have
we known that when once the Lord has been provoked to give them up to that
Error of Antipedobaptism, have stopped there!

Apparent rari nantes in gurgite vasto. This Error is oftentimes the first step
of the Lords dereliction; yea departure from God begins here. Many an Apostate
Professor of Religion, that here he began first to decline from God. Blessed
Dr. Winter (once my special friend, whom for honors sake I mention) in his
Sermons of Infant Baptism, says, that some have confessed that when they were
inclining to the Anabaptists, they found their hearts sitting loose from all
former owned principles of Truth, and as the first matter ready to receive any
form, Impression or error whatsoever. And the same Author observes, that an
Anabaptist who was executed for a Capital crime at London, confessed, that from
the Time of his going under water, he sensibly found God departing from him,
How few of that persuasion at this day, but that which is worse then merely
through a weak and scrupulous Conscience to question the lawfulness of Infant
baptism, is too truly to be affirmed of them? Are they not generally of a bad
Spirit? Bitter Enemies to the Lords most eminent Servants? yea, to his faithful
Ambassadors, spitting the cruel venom of Asps against them. A black mark! It
was formerly good Divinity among those blessed Souls, the old Puritans, that
lived in the days of our Fathers, that Love to the Ministers of God as such,
is a sign of grace; what then shall be thought of those that hate the Ministry?
To snarle at the Shepherds is no sign of a sheep. And as for other Errors, has
not Anabaptism been the Trojan Horse out of which an Iliad of them has issued
forth? Mr. Baxter has said enough on that Argument, showing how Anabaptistry
has been the ordinary inlet to the most horrid opinions, and he professes
that of the multitudes of Anabaptists that he was acquainted with, he could not
call to mind one that stopped there. Alstedius writes of fourteen several
Sects of Anabaptists, and all of them tainted with other most vile opinions.
The Anabaptists in Holland formerly were for the most part Arminians; And many
of them Socinians. Whence a late learned Professor says, Anabaptist a est
indectus Socinianus. Servetus (that blasphemous Arian) was an Anabaptist, being
wont to call the Baptism of Infants, an horrible Abomination.

Also in Poland, the Anabaptists are infected with the Heresy of Socinus
denying the Lord that bought them; so that in a manner all the Churches in
Poland have been overrun, and laid waste by them; the smoke of their errors
having utterly darkened the light of the Gospel throughout that forlorn Nation,
which yet calls it self Christian And if we look into Germany, what work have
the Anabaptists made there? Its a known Observation, that when the Lamp of the
Gospel did begin to enlighten every corner of that Land, the pestiferous breath
of Anabaptism had like to have put it out; the Lord ordering those commotions,
by a Judicial hand, to punish the ungrateful World, for despising the Gospel,
and the faithful Dispensers of it. Nicholas Stork, Mark Stubner and Thomas
Muncer (three ignorant conceited Souls) did Anno 1522. begin to sow this Cockle
in Saxony, and in little time the whole Country was overrun with it. For at
first (as Cloppenburgins, Hortensius and others have informed the world) they
pretended to more then ordinary Zeal and strictness, they would decry
Superstition and Profaneness and pretend great Mortification, (which was their
Sheeps clothing) whence they quickly had a multitude of Followers, it being
more natural for men to embrace Error then Truth, when speciously set forth. At
last they became professedly Enthusiastical, and manifested more malignity
against Luther and the Reforming Ministers of that Age, then against any men in
the world; calling them false Prophets, and saying, they were worse then the
Pope and his Clergy. And by force of Arms would defend themselves and their
Cause, until they made the Countries where they came swim in blood (as good
Authors relate) no less then an hundred thousand of them perished by the sword,
among whom no doubt were some honest souls that followed their Leaders (as they
of old did Absalom) in the simplicity of their hearts, albeit most of those
that fell in with them, were the Scum of the Towns from whence they came. After
this, they played their Pranks in Switzerland, the Lord at last leaving them to
such Enthusiasms, and horrid actions thereupon as proved their ruin. In the
year 1526. Feb. 8, At Saint Gall one Thomas Skyker in the midst of an whole
Congregation of Anabaptists pretended to have a Revelation from God, in whose
Name he commanded Leonard Skyker his own brother to kneel down before him, who
being no wiser then to believe him, Thomas with his sword cutts off Leonards
head, in the presence of them all. A formidable Story; Yet I believe it,
because holy Bullinger does relate it as a thing known and certain. In the year
1529. Melchior Hophman (a Glover) dreamed that Strasburgh was the place
designed for the New Jerusalem, and only Anabaptists were to be the Citizens
thereof. A multitude of silly Souls were seduced by him, and the Interest of
Reformation prejudiced. After these things happened the doleful Tragedy at
Munster, which has filled the World with astonishment. The Anabaptists there
at first seemed an harmless People; until at last, under the conduct of their
Captain John Becold a Tailor, once of Leyden, it was revealed to them, that all
men not anabaptized were no Saints, but the world of the ungodly, whom they
ought to subjugate and destroy. They became Masters of that City, and Becold
was declared by them to be The King of Sion. And such horrid outrages
committed, that the mentioning of them is enough to strike horror into a
christain heart. The Princes of the Empire could not prevail with them to
desist from their madness, until (which was in June 1535) by force of Arms they
had taken the City, having endured a Siege of eighteen Months. John Becold the
Anabaptists King was taken, and deserved execution done upon him. He abjured
his Errors, and promised to reclaim those that had bin deluded by him, might
his life only be spared; but considering the murders (not only of bodies but of
souls) by him procured, he was tied to a stake, and his body pulled in pieces
with hot pincers. At his death (which is not to be wondered at) he roared
horribly. Becold being thus dead, and gone to his own place, one John
Battenburg rose up, declaring that since the Gospel preached by Becold had been
despised, the Time of mercy was now expired, and that he had received a
Commission from Heaven to kill all the world except they would be rebaptized;
but those Battenburgians were within a few years extirpated. Yet, Wilhemes,
Cordwainer, Appleman, lead the same dance, and came to the same fatal
Catastrophe in the low Countries. The Anabaptists now have (some of them) the
face to deny all this, nevertheless, these things will be objected against them
to the worlds end, In perpetuam erroris infamiam, And if such men as
Melancthon, Luther, Calvin, Bullinger, Zuinglius, Gualter, Sleidah, Zanchy, who
lived in the time of these disorders and Confusions, and testify to the Truth
(some of them) upon their own personal knowledge, (not to mention the
Narratives of Spanhemius, Gastius Hortensius, Cloppenhurgius, or others, that
have more lately written the History of those things) I say, if the Relations
of such Worthyes of the Lord so circumstanced, may not be credited, all
writings not of a Divine Inspiration may at once be rejected, and we may do as
the old Munsterian-Anabaptists did, burn our Libraryes, because no Book but the
Bible is of Divine Authority. Besides, in my opinion, those Antipedobaptists
who both call in Question the received History of the German Anabaptists, and
also justify them as a godly, Innocent Generation, do not therein act wisely,
forasmuch as they do give the world thereby too great occasion to think, that
if they had the same advantages and Temptations, they would do as their
Predecessors did, whom they cannot exceed in pretensions to piety. But
supposing there never was a Muncer, nor a John of Leyden in the world, only
that the stories about them were the fictions of men that lived an hundred
years ago, yet fresh instances, which our own eyes have seen, and that in our
own Nation are not wanting, sadly to confirm the Argument we have in hand. How
the Anabaptists Party carried it when they were like to carry all before them
in Ireland, above twenty years ago, there are enough still living that can
testify; and I (all circumstances considered) am not forward to mention. In
England, several Anabaptist Congregations, emitted Confessions of their Faith,
wherein they professed Orthodoxy as to Fundamentals in Doctrine, and that they
only differed from other Churches as to Infant baptism, and yet, I know not how
many of the Leaders, in those Congregations, afterward durst openly strike at
the foundation of the true Christian Religion. Hobson and Erbury were both of
them Ring Leaders of the Anabaptists Party: The first of these became a
Socinian, disowning the eternal Deity of the Son of God; and as for the other,
he turned a blasphemous Heretic, and as I have been credibly informed, dyed
blaspheming in such a manner, as I tremble and abhor to mention. Who was the
Father of the Ranting High-attainers in England! was it not one Copp. once an
Anabaptist of prime Note! Most of the Quakers that I have had occasion to
converse with, were first Anabaptists, and then Quakers.

My design in writing these things, is not to stigmatize all that through
weakness of Conscience scruple Infant Baptism; some of which, their error
notwithstanding, could embrace with both arms, for I believe God has received
them. Only what has been insisted on, seems to evidence the Lords displeasure
against the way. The Opinion, I doubt not, is from Satan, though the men, who
through ignorance hold that Opinion, may some of them belong to God. A late
worthy Writer says well, that we are not to judge a Doctrine false, merely
because the Professors of it have miscarried, nevertheless, we may safely
affirm that Doctrine is to be suspected as false which is usually attended with
gross miscarriages on the Professors of it, for that speaks the Doctrine
ominous, and looks like a spiritual Judgment of God upon it. I must confess
that the reading and consideration of the Particulars referred unto, and
attested by such a Cloud of Witnesses, has caused me to dread Anabaptism, And
I know not but that they may have the same impression upon others, and
therefore have judged it both lawful and necessary, a little to insist on this
Historical Argument. And under this Argument, I might have taken notice how the
Lord has appeared against the Anabaptists when they have engaged in public
Disputations. When there was a Disputation held at Zurick between Zuinglius and
Hubmer (a wretched Apostate) the Head of the Anabaptists there, how miserably
did the Anabaptists come off? So again, when at Munster they disputed with the
Reforming Ministers there. And when in our days, there was a Dispute at
Coventry between Dr. Brian and Mr. Kiffith, who was worsted? Yea and Mr. Tombs,
the great Antesignanus of that Party, who is by all men acknowledged to be the
most learned and able of any that have undertaken the Vindication of that
Cause; how egregiously was he nonplus't (himself confessing it) in his
Disputation with Mr. Baxter at Bewdly; and with Mr. Cragg, who had not then
studied the Controversy about Antipedobaptism, which Mr. Tombs had spent much
of his time in, yet how shamefully was he foiled? So in the Conference with the
Anabaptists at Terling, Jan. 11. 1643. And when something of that nature was
attended here in Boston about twelve years ago, the Anabaptists concerned did
so speak and act, as that some wiser then themselves, of their own persuasion,
were troubled and ashamed of them. Certainly these things came not to pass,
without the Finger of God, manifesting his dislike of that Opinion which such
men have undertaken the patronage of.

Upon all these Considerations, I cease to wonder that the most faithful and
eminent Servants of God, that have lived in the world since the Reformation,
have been so sharp in their Zeal against the chief Fautors of that Way of
Error. The Lord Jesus did never manifest more indignation against his
Disciples, then at the time when they endeavored to withhold Children from
him, Mark 10.14. ( eganact^se) So has it been with those that have received
much of the Siprit of the Lord Jesus; an holy Zeal has been kindled within
them, when they have seen men about to rob Christ of his Lambs. Calvin cannot
speak of them, but, as Ierom says of Tertullians Polemical Treatises, Quot
verba, tot Fulmina, every word is a Thunderbolt. The Learned may see what he
writes in his Epistles, and de Psychopannych. p. ult. and his Institutions,
Lib. 4. Cap. 16. That noble Martyr Mr. Philpot, thus expresses himself, The
Anabaptists are an inordinate kind of men, stirred up by the Devil to the
destruction of the Gospel, having neither Scripture nor Antiquity nor any thing
else for them, but Lies, and new Imaginations, feigning the Baptism of Children
to be the Popes commandment. When the Prelates charged the good old
Non-Conformists, as being Favorers of Anabaptism, renowned Parker replied,
Disciplina Ecclesiastica tantopere distat ab Anabaptistica confusione,
quantopere Christus ab Antichristo. De Polit. Eccles. Lib. 1. C. 34. We have as
much favor for their Opinion, as Christ has for Antichrist.

As for the Anabaptists, of late years combined, in opposition to the Churches
of Christ in New England, there are several things that do greatly dissatisfy
serious men concerning them. To say nothing of their evil in not departing from
the sin of Jeroboam, who made Priests of the lowest of the people; There is (as
by them it is improved) a pernicious principle in the confession of their
Faith, wherein they thus declare, Believers being baptized are visible Saints,
and the true matter of the visible Church. Now they look upon Infant Baptism as
a mere nullity, or as the Apostle says of an Idol, that it is nothing in the
world. Whence also they arrogate to themselves the Name of Baptists, as if
there were none baptized, but they who are rebaptized. So then our Churches are
no Churches, as wanting the matter (which is an Essential cause) of visible
Churches, nor are we any of us so much as visible Saints, as not being (if
their Judgment be according to Truth) baptized believers. And it is
sufficiently known that when put upon it, in a solemn Assembly, to declare
whether they did believe, that the Churches in New England, were indeed true
Churches of Christ, they would not be persuaded to own that. And another ground
of great and just Offense, is, the Time and manner of their proceeding, when
they first combined into a pretended Church Estate. I need not say how
New England was circumstanced at that hour, which they chose to make their
disturbance in, and who did countenance and animate their motions; but that
they should moreover take one that was under Censure, (at that very time under
the lesser, and afterward under the greater Excommunication) in a Church of
Christ, and set him up for an Administrator of Baptism, yea, and of the Lords
Supper too, and to receive Members of other Churches, without the consent of
the Church whereto they do belong; Turn thee yet again and thou shall see
greater Abominations. Nay, to receive such as have been actually delivered up
to Satan by a whole Church of Christ, not for the opinion of Antipedobaptism,
but for moral Scandal. Yea, themselves in cold blood being Judges for sin and
great iniquity, which I know to be true with reference to the Anabaptists in
Question? What is this better then setting up an Altar against the Lords Altar?
And that this should be done in Jerusalem, and as it were in open defiance of
the Lords Temple, cannot but provoke the eyes of his glory. I am uncertain,
whether this deed can be parrallel'd throughout the whole Christian world. From
these Considerations, that holy Man, blessed Mr. Wilson, (who like the Apostle
John, excelled in the grace of Charity, and yet was a Son of Thunder when he
had to do with seducing Spirits, witness his lately printed Sermon on Jer. 29
8. which Sermon was preached on occasion of the Anabaptists first setting up in
opposition to these Churches of Christ) He laid those of his Family under
solemn Adjuration, that they should not at any time dare so much as once to
enter into the Anabaptists Assembly. ( O my Soul, Come not thou into their
secret, unto their Assembly mine honor be not thou united) I charge you (said
the Man of God) that you do not once go to hear them, for whatsoever they may
pretend, they will rob you of Ordinances, rob you of your Souls, rob you of
your God. Blessed Wilson* Thy body, Thy dust remains still in Boston, but
where is thy Spirit? where is thy Zeal?

I shall add no more at present; How long I have to speak or write, I know not.
But that God whose I am, and whom I desire to serve, has set me in this place
for the defense of his Gospel, and the holy Ordinances of it, amongst which
Infant Baptism is one. And to him in Heaven I can appeal, that love to the
Truth, to the Churches, and to the dear Lambs of the Lord Jesus has moved me
to stand up, and appear in this Cause. Fuit Ilium, fuimus Troes. The first and
most eminent Christians in New England, were not defective in Zeal against
Errors, or those that with an high hand have propugned and propagated them; Ah!
New England, art thou now New England! Remember whence thou art fallen, and do
thy first works, lest the Lord Jesus, who has lately removed four of thy
Candlesticks out of their places, and sorely threatened others, say that he will
come quickly and remove all thy golden Candlesticks. Therefore embrace not
unchurching principles. The snow is fallen off from the venerable heads of
thine Ancient Worthyes, thy Leaders both Civil and Ecclesiastical, so that now
thou may expect a Land flood to be not far off. The Lord in mercy grant, that
it may not be such a flood (wherein Churches fled into the Wilderness are
concerned) as that spoken of in the Revelation, which shall endanger thee and
thy Seed.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
P. 1. l. 16. for have r. has. p. 7. l. 15. r undeniably. P. 12. l. 25. dele
of. P. 14. l. 26. r. Church.


