Ne Suitor Ultra Crepidam. OR BRIEF ANIMADVERSIONS upon the NEW ENGLAND
Anabaptists LATE FALLACIOUS NARRATIVE; Wherein the Notorious Mistakes and
Falsehoods by them Published, are Detected.

By Samuel Willard Teacher of a Church in Boston in New England.

Prove. 18. 17. He that is first in his own cause seems just; but his
neighbor comes and searches him. Romans 16. 17. Now I beseech you Brethren,
mark them which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye
have learned, and avoid them. 18. For they that are such, serve not our Lord
Jesus Christ, but their (...), and by good words, and fair speeches deceive the
hearts of the simple. BOSTON IN NEW ENGLAND, Printed by S. Green, upon
Assignment of S. Sewall. And are to be Sold by (...) Philips, at the West end
of the Exchange: 1681.

To the READER.
THe Anabaptists in New England, have in their Narrative lately published,
endeavored to make Candida de (...) and de (...), themselves the Innocent
person and the Lords servants (...) no better than Persecutors. In which
respect, it has been (...) necessary, that some one should (...) upon what
they (...) done, that so such persons as have been (...) by their untrue
Relation; may be disabused. Many are of the (...) it is not worth the while, to
take notice of what (...) by men so obscure and inconsiderable. And I (...) I
have though (...) self; so far as I am personally concerned in any of their
reflections (...) shall (...) lose precious time in a needless desence. (...);
furore, ego (...) contemptu; and vincit (...), in Christ. It seems to me, that
the Reverend Author of the following (...) versions, has showed much humility,
in condescending to take persons in hand between whom, and himself there is
such an Impar congressus, and let it be, that for this once. He has
contradicted that proverbial saying Aquils non capit Muse as Had he not been
sensible, that by good words, and fair speeches the hearts of the (...) are
deceived, this pains would have been spared. I verily believe, that the (...)
baptists by their fallacious Narrative, have grievously offended God; (...) the
things by them misrepresented, were not done a far off (for then mistakes about
them would have been excusable) but at home, where right Information was easy
to have been obtained; had they been willing to have (...) others should have
known the truth. And by this means, have they done ill (...) themselves,
forcing others to discover the enormities of some, whose (...) and shame should
not have been divulged to the World, and to posterity forever; but slept in a
grave of silence: had not their own Narrative brought them forth. They have
also by Letters, misrepresented worthy and honorable persons as well as
things, and their reports have been received elsewhere, with too much readiness
and credulity, as I perceive by certain Complainants, whosay they understand
that the present Honorable Governor of this Colony, had threatened this poor
people, their Christian friends (as they style them) with death: which (...)
report of theirs, is like too many particulars in their vindication, an utter
(...) quil (...). The Governor (whose integrity, wisdom, and (...) is well
known) has sometimes moved, that an old severe Law made against those that
should manifest any public contempt of that ordinance of Infant (...) might be
lenifyed. So far is the scandalous report which they have raised upon the
Governor (and caused it to fly three thousand miles) from being true.

As for the Brethren, that have thought good to prefix an Epistle to such a
Narrative and there (...) declare, that Molestation is given, and severity is
exercised toward (...) England, merely for a supposed Error about the subject
of (...), and holy men, they are marvelously deceived in (...) possibly I do
not fully cape their meaning when they say, (...) Protest and Congregation to
persecute another, is more unreasonable then all (...) of the (...) Church Some
are ready to take it for an intimation, that (...) Churches of Christ in
New England, are more cruel and unreasonable than (...) Romish Synagogue; like
as the Anabaptists in Germany, looked upon such (...) Luther, Bullinger,
Calvin, Zuinglius, etc. to be worse than the Pope and his (...). But I hope
they are far from any such insinuation, and that they design no other then to
suggest unto us, that for men whom God has by his holy spirit made one through
faith in Christ, to be cruel to their Brethren, is most unreasonable. Which
Assertion, (though true in Thesi) if applied to the Churches of the Lord Jesus,
in this Wilderness; it is both an erroneous conception, (...) un just
reflection, Protestants ought not to persecute any; yet, that Protestants may
punish Protestants; and as the case may be circumstanced, a Congregation of
such as call themselves Protestants: cannot rationally be denied. Those of the
Congregational way (as themselves in the preface to their confession of Faith
have professed) fully concur with the old puritan Non-conformists, such as
Cartwright, Rainold, Whitaker, Bains, Parker, etc. in whose writings,
Congregational, Principles about Church Government, are to be seen. Now the old
(...) notwithstanding their sufferings from those that took delight to (...)
fellowservants) did believe that disorders in whole Congregations were (...) to
the civil Magistrates censure, as is evident from that excellent and judicious
(...), called Puritanismus Anglicanus, composed by Mr. Bradshaw, and published
by Dr. Ames. Affirment si particular is aliqua ecclesia erraverit, Magistratus
civilis (...) in (...) redigere, Cap. 2. Th. 6. Why then should we be r^ndred
as men of (...) rigid spirits and principles; when we say nothing but what
(...) Puritans, (worthy Confessors, and sufferers for the Truth) (...)
affirmed. Our famous Cotton, was another Moses, in respect of meekness, and
christian forbeatance, as to Dissenters from his judgment in matters of a
lesser concernment, yet would he sometimes make a zealous Protestation, that if
Magistrates in New England should tolerate Transgressors against the Rules of
godliness (as well as offenses contrary to what the rules of honesty require)
he believed that God would not long tolerate them. And whereas the Brethren
that have (...) the Epistle, pray the Honorable Governors in New England, to
be careful of doing that which may give occasion of trouble to Nonconformists
elsewhere: I shall heartily join with them in the same request; and I can
assure them, that consideration has caused more indulgence to be exercised
toward their Friends (as they call them) here, than ever they were worthy of.
And I (...) it will be so still, so far as may consist with Scripture Rules,
and the safety of the interest of Christ's Kingdom in this Wilderness. These
Churches are Tender vines, and I cannot persuade my self, that the Brethren
when they rightly understand things, will think that the Magistrate should see
little Foxes spoiling them, and should look on all the while, as one no way
concerned. As for those of the Antipaedobaptistical persuasion, which differ
from us only in that particulars I would speak to them as unto Brethren, whom
(their Error (for so I believed (...) is) notwithstanding) I love, and would
bear with, and exercise the same indulgence and compassion toward them, as I
would have others (...) to me; who feel my self compassed with infirmities.

I have been a poor labourer in the Lords Vineyard in this place upwards of
twenty years: and it is more than I know, if in all that time, any of those
that (...) Infant-(...), have met with molestation from the Magistrate merely
on the account of their Opinion. I would there (...) others of their
persuasion, who may be of a Christian and moderate-spirit (...) have subscribed
the Epistle, seriously to consider;

1. That the place may sometimes make a great alteration, as to (...) to be
expected. It is evident, that that Toleration is in one place. not-only lawful,
but a necessary duty, which in another place would be (...) the expectation of
it irrational. That which is needful to ballast a great (...) will sink a small
boat. If a considerable number of Antipaedobaptists should (as our Fathers here
did) obtain Liberty from the State, to transport themselves and families, into
a wast, American wilderness, that so they might be a peculiar People by
themselves; practicing all, and only; the institutions of Christ: if now (...)
Baptists should come after them, and intrude themselves upon them, and (...)
they cast men out of their society for moral Scandals, entertain them (...)
they would desire such persons; either to walk orderly with them, or to return
to, the place from whence they came. And if they would do neither, they would,
think that such Paedo-Baptists were blameworthy: let them then do as they
would be done by; and deal by us as they would have us to deal by them, were
they in our case, and we in theirs.

2. Let them please to consider; that those of their persuasion in this place,
have acted with so much irregularity and profaneness, that should men of any
other persuasion, whatsoever, have done the like, the same severity would have
been used toward them. I truly profess unto them, that if any men, either of
the Presbyterian, ^^ Congregational (or never so much of my) persuasion (...)
matters referring to Church Discipline, should behave themselves as the (...)
in Boston, in New England, have done, I think they would have deserved far
greater punishment than any thing that to this day, has been inflicted, upon
them. Whether the sentence passed on them by the Churches, proceeding in the
Name of the Lord Jesus, were only the abuse of an holy Ordinance; or a (...)
process according to Scripture Rule: the following Ammadversions, (...) unto
those that are willing to weigh matters Impartially, in the balance of the
Sanctuary. How vain is it for men, after they have received such Excommunicates
into their communion, and them perceive that the World cries shame on them for
it; and some of their own persuasion reprove them: in stead of abhorring
themselves before God and the World; and purging out the old (...) think they
shall come off with saying, It was a defect! and who in this world (...)
without their failings and then by retaining such in their communion to persist
in their scandal to this very day? To parallel the case of the Anabaptists in
New England, with that of the Nonconformists in England, seems most
unreasonable. Do the conforming Congregations there, cast men out of their
fellowship for moral, scandalous evils? I doubt the godly Discipline which
their (...) confesses was in the Primitive Church, and should be in theirs, is
not found amongst them (...) should, I believe the Nonconformists would be loath
to receive any such into their Communion; which the New England Anabaptists
have done and have (...) therein from year to year, and that after conviction,
(...) in their (...) Narrative, they seek to palliate this offense, by (...)
Representation of things; their iniquity is marked before the (...) and much So
(...) will never wash them clean. If then Dr. Stillingfleet, or (...) shall go
about to stir up Persecution against conscientious (...) (...), and endeavor
to justify it by the practice of Congregational (...) in New England: we see
not that any real advantage has been (...), (only taken) from proceedings
here. The Author of the (...) called The Mischief of Impositions, has given a
fair, and (...) answer to the Doctor, as to this particular. They say, those of
the Congregational way in England, plead for Anabaptists liberty as for their
own. That they plead for liberty and indulgence to be extended toward those
that differ from them only in that point of Paedo-Baptisme, I believe: when I
was in England, I did so my self; and if I were their now, I would do so again:
but that they should plead for liberty unto such practices, as our Anabaptists
have been guilty of, is not easy to believe; or, if they do, it is because
such Narrators as these Animadverted upon, have by untrue Relations misguided
them into undue Apprehensions. Nay, I am fully convinced, that those of their
own way, if of serious and gracious Spirits, when once they are possessed with
a true Relation of things concerning them, will see cause to condemn
New England less, and those their Friends more, than at first they were aware
of: How did they bear the World in hand, that the Churches here did
Excommunicate them for nothing but their Opinion, in scrupling Paedobaptisme!
But that therein they have dealt most untruely, and injuriously; the subsequent
Answer to their Narrative has made apparent from the Church-Records concerning
those matters.

Finally, let me entreat the Brethren to believe, that some of us would show as
much indulgence unto truly tender Consciences, as themselves. It is not so long
since our own Necks bled under an intolerable yoke of Imposition upon
Conscience, as that we should forget what it is to be so dealt with; or
exercise that severity toward any, that we have our selves complained of, in
others. But the Brethren will readily own that some men have pretended
Conscience, when pride, and perverseness in the will, have been at the bottom:
They will also confess, that a mere pretense of Conscience, is not enough to
bear men out in an evil practice. All the difficulty is, in discerning the one
of these from the other. Blessed Mr. Buroughs in his excellent Irenicum, has
laid down Rules concerning this: And if that which he says, page 32. be sound
Doctrine (as undoubtedly it is) some of our Anabaptists, have not such
characters of a tender Conscience upon them, as were to be desired. If men will
call (...) Practices by the name of their Opinion: and when their (...) born
witness against make out cries, that they suffer for their Opinion, and for
their Conscience: How is it (...) or those help them, who desire to keep their
own Consciences pure, and with out offense toward God, by being faithful
according to that capacity the Lord has set them in; and giving a due
testimony against (...) things, which they believe provoke him to jealousy?
And if A(...) in this Land, have declared their agreement with those of (...)
like persuasion in England, as to matters of Faith and Worship: (...) not, but
that there are many godly Antipaedobaptists there, (...) will never declare
their agreement with those here, as to their (...) practices, which have been
so offensive to Christ, and unto his people in New England.

Boston New-Engl. Nov. 4. 1681. INCREASE MATHER.

Brief Animadversions Upon the New England Anabaptists late Narrative wherein
the great Mistakes by them published are made Apparent.
SECTION I.
THere are two things which every one who designs to give the World an Account
of the History of things done, ought principally to endeavor; viz. 1. Truth of
expressions, with a plain and full recital of all essential passages thereto
belonging. 2. Candor, in Animadverting charitably upon them, not setting our
malicious gloss upon things deserving a better interpretation, which rules if
the Author of this Narrative had in any degree observed, this reply had been
needless: our present business is not to vindicate the Doctrine and Practice of
these Churches in point of Infant Baptism, which if the Anabaptists judge not
to have been already sufficiently performed, we cannot help that; but it being
so that these Churches in New England are herein charged with persecution
raised against that sort of men, and both their and our management of affairs
depending between them and us in that respect are grossly misrepresented, and
convincible of manifest falsehoods, of which they cannot be (except willingly)
ignorant, and (should no answer be made) the World might judge us truly charged
as to matter of fact, and on that account draw such conclusions as best sure
their own apprehensions; yea, our best Friends might possibly be prejudiced at
us: it was thought needful to prevent a second Error by discovering the first.
In such a case the wise man's counsel seems applicable, Prove. 26. 5.

Concerning the Author of this Narrative, Divine Providence (...) removed him
from our endeavors of conviction, and the Laws (...) Humanity (as well as
Religion) forbid us now to be over severe (...) our censures of him; his
everlasting estate is not my business to (...) quire after, nor would I at all
reflect upon him, if an Answer (...) have been made without it: However, it
being John Russel with (...) consent of the Whole, of whom they tell us he was
an Officer, it (...) them therefore to stand by it as far as they can, whom to
(...) obnoxious, and make known to the World, so far as they (...) made it
necessary to do it by this script of theirs, is the professed design of this
Reply, and let the Reader take notice, that my controversy is with an
Historian in point of Truth and Falsehood, and not with a Divine in matter of
Orthodoxy and Error: in which we hope the Anabaptists will not be angry, if we
are as tender of our reputation, as they were in printing of their Pamphlet for
the clearing of their Innocence.

SECT. II.
I shall begin with the Title, which promifeth fair, and looks innocently; but
yet (methinks) might have done better to have spoken (...) and told us indeed
what it intended. It is not fair to invite a man with a specious show, and then
cheat him: he calls it a Brief Narrative, and we promised our selves to find an
honest toothless (...), but (upon reading it) it seems more fit to be called a
Saty(...) Invective; for certainly the principal part of it is rather a (...)
than a Narrative, or what if we call it a Romance? which (according to the use
of the word) is a story built upon a real Subject, but adorned with Fictions,
or a representation of things according as we saney they should be, not
regarding what they are indeed: But let it be a Narrative, what is the business
it has to acquaint us with? Considerable Passages. Sometime the worth and
excellency of a thing sometime the newness and strangeness of it render it
considerable: and sometimes it is very considerable whether the thing be so or
no. But what is it that is so consiberable? why (...) story of the first
gathering, and further progress of a Church of Christ in Gospel Order in Boston
in New England: It is certainly considerable (and admirable too) that Christ
should have any Church in Gospel Order in the world, since Satan and (...) are
so busy so wast and overturn all Order; partly by secret conspiracies, and
open persecutions, partly by seducing Spirits, and disorders of Erroneous
persons such as Quakers, Anabaptists, etc. but through Gods goodness there are
more Churches then one in Gospel order in Boston in N. Engl. whereas that is
rather an Ubiquitarian Church. But what Church may this be which is so
eminently observable? Oh! it is a Church commonly (though falsely) called by the
(...)] and it is well that it is (...) else we should hardly have believed it a
Church in Gospel (...), because we know Baptism is one of the foundations of
Gospel Order, Heb. 6. 1, 2. But are they falsely so called? Alas for our
ignorance! we have mistaken the men all this while: Men render themselves
suspected when they deny their names: but they have but one Baptism, therefore
not to be called Anabaptists: but to deal fairly, by Anabaptists we mean no
other but those men that deny the Baptism received in Infancy to be any
Baptism, and seek another pretended one of their own, and thereby undermine the
Baptism that has been practiced and owned by all the Churches of Christ in
the World ever since Christ, excepting a few of their own sect; and if the word
be not so proper, yet being generally used, and well understood, it pleads
custom, and may do better then a new one: their own term ( Baptists) is
fallacious, insinuating that there are none for Baptism but themselves. Next
he tells us the moving cause of that Narrative, which is very honest and good;
It is for the cleaving of their innocence and that every good man may lawfully
do, and sometimes ought. The first Fathers in the Church wrote their Apologies.
But it were better to be innocent without a plea, then to do mischief, and then
wipe their mouth and say, I have done no wickedness. It was high time to purge
themselves with a Narrative, when there were so many scandalous things laid to
their charge, but if either the things be not laid to their charge, that part
of their defense will be vain and superfluous, or the things laid to their
charge be both true and scandalous, they will never be able to render them
other then so by writing Narratives.

SECT. III.
In the next place, we have an Epistle to the Reader, to usher in the
Narrative, Dignam Patelld operculum. If strangers will needlessly be meddling,
they must thank themselves if they get a blow. They tell us, they leave the
ensuing Apology to plead for it self (But it had been friendly to have spoke a
word for it, it being able to speak to (...) for it self) yet they are willing
to give in their testimony (...) that one and the same spirit in Christians
makes them in passions and affections present, though locally distant, and
extends a follow-feeling with the members of the same body) and if that were
proper to sincere Christians, or characteristical of them, they had said
something: But experience lets us know, that a spirit of Error is as diffusive,
as that of sincerity, and a common cause (though bad) can tie men up in a
combination and conspiracy: hence they do well to subjoyn that plea from their
perfect agreement in matters of Faith and worship] for if so, then self
interest also obliges them to take part with their Brethren: and they do it to
purpose, having squeezed the quintessence of the Book into their Epistle. The
intendment, of it is to accuse this Government and these Churches of
Persecuting the Saints and Servants of Christ: and they begin with the Churches
where (wisely taking the Question for granted, which might have put them to
some difficulty to have proved) they endeavor to aggravate our guilt by diverse
Arguments.

1. Our practices are contrary to the Principles and practices of our (...) of
the Congregational way in England, which do equally plead for the liberties of
the Anabaptists as their own] But let them not be angry if we are hard to
believe that those of the Congregational way in England, do judge such
Anabaptists as these in New-Engl. to be as Orthodox as themselves, and deserve
like countenance and favor; or that Magistrates and Churches are no ways
bound to labor (according to the power given them) to suppress Errors
scandalously persisted in, or to manifest a practical dislike of them: is not
this to scandalize the congregational Churches there, that they may better
accuse them here?

2. Our practices are contrary to the design of our first Planters, who left
all for liberty of Conscience, and we are the Children of those that felt the
lash of Imposition, and yet will show to others the like severity.] I perceive
they are mistaken in the design of our first Planters, whose business was not
Toleration; but were professed Enemies of it, and could leave the World
professing they died no ^ Libertines. Their business was to settle, and (as
much as in them lay) secure Religion to Posterity, according to that way which
they believed was of God. If (therefore) this People parted with so much and
were at such charges for their liberties why then do the Anabaptists trouble
them, who had neither scot nor lot in that charge? let them go and do the like,
and we shall not so molest their Churches, as they have shamefully done by ours.

3. It is against their Brethren] the sincerity of the expression (...) much to
be suspected, since we know that they do deny us to be, so much as visible
Christians, while they declare our Baptism, not only to be a mal
Administration, but a mere nullity. But granting it, we never could find that
Discipline rightly administered, was against Christian charity; and yet the
subject of it is Brethren; yea the neglect of that duty (in case) would argue
want of love, if not hatred, Levit. 19. 17.

4. But they are Brethren that avowedly profess and appeal to the same rule]
But what if the Churches, in their bearing witness against them, do appeal to
the same rule? and think they should violate it by neglecting this duty, how
shall we do then? why do they censure our Church censures against them that
have sometimes been our Members? we do avowedly appeal to the same rule. Is it
sufficient to satisfy men in one another proceedings (though contrary)
because they appeal to the same rule; this must certainly be some Lesbian Rule,
that may square to all men's Opinions and fancies.

5. That the present molestation given them is merely for a supposed Error
relating to the Subject of Baptisme] Here learn, how dangerous a thing it is,
to take a thing for truth, upon the credit of prejudiced persons. How untrue
this is, there will be afterward occasion in diverse examples to make appear:
only we must give them leave to call it a supposed error; but with whom? with
them it is a believed truth, and of such weight, that it were better set a fire
on the World than not stand up in it is defense: and (I can assure them) with us
it is more than a supposed error: and yet that that has been the only ground
of their being molested, shall also appear to be more than a supposed falsehood.

6. It is a matter which has been, and (if we believe them) is still sub
judice: controverted, and that between learned and judicious, holy and good
men] why then should they be so stiff for it, or we against it? it is very
weak for men to be so rigid on all hands about a nice controversy, and
indeterminable question, which learned and good men have not these 1600 years
known how to determine. But (upon search) I find it has been both professed
and defended in all ages by the Churches of Christ: though this truth (as many
others) has not escaped the opposition of men left by God to a spirit of
error: but it has fared as well, as almost any great Gospel Truth; God having
ever raised up worthy Patrons for the defense of it. If fundamental Truths must
be the more charily or dubiously (...) because men (...) with Error and holding
perverse principles, yet pretending holiness (and what (...) ever did other)
impugn it, it would be a plausible way to subvert all.

With these Arguments they fortify their conclusion, viz. that (...) one
Protestant Congregation (on such occasions) to persecute (...) (where there is
no pretense to infallibility in deciding controversies) seem^ much more
unreasonable then All the (...) of the (...) Church, etc.] Before I saw this
Narrative, one told me it was a moderate piece, and showed a Christian spirit.
If they intend us not in these words, they are vain men; if they do, they
render themselves the Persecutors, pursuing us with bitter words, who have this
to say that in all our dealings with them, we have (allowing humane
infirmities) walked by the golden Rule they urge upon us (if rightly
understood) doing as we would be done by.

Now they have a word of counsel to the Governors in New England, to consider
their Brethren of the Congregational way in England left they justify those
that trouble them there.] They owe thanks to any that will fairly put them in
mind of their duty, only in this counsel there lurks a dangerous evil, which
(in retaliation of courtesies) they are to be admonished of, viz. they forget
that the cause evermore alters the quality of the action: nor was it ever
thought by any (of a found mind) that justice should not be administered upon
offenders, left others (by misapplication) should thence take occasion to wrong
the Innocent: and the Honorable Governors in New England have learned, and
are persuaded, that if they should sin, by omitting duty for man's sake, they
should both dishonor God, and grieve their Brethren. To scare us the more with
this, they tell us how Dr. Stilling. fleet improved it to the same purpose
against us] all I shall say to this is, we cannot confess guilty, for the
censure of those, who neither knowing what we do, nor weighing the difference
of cases (which they would make parallels) rashly conclude against us: we
humbly conceive men that are not prejudiced, will easily discern that
suppressing with all gentleness and tenderness, a dangerous error and of bad
tendency (such as Anabaptism especially so circumstanced as in New England it
has been) and the enforcing of Ceremonies in Religion, which are neither
directly, nor by any good consequence required, in or by the word of God, do
differ toto coelo.

For the concluding Prayer, we can heartily put it up to God, and might have
joined with them in it too, had they not added it as a cloak to the slander of
their Epistle.

SECT. IV.
Now follows the Narrative it self, in which the first thing that (...) us is
(indeed) a brief account of their congregating, or that (...) of theirs in
gathering a Church; where we have the moving (...) the manner, and the
materials of it.

1. The moving cause of it is brief and pithy: It pleased God to (...) their
hearts] and if this be indeed so, then those that opposed (...) in it, and
endeavored to suppress them, will be found fighters (...) against God, and to
act in vain, for the Will of God shall be accomplished, and no weapon formed
against it shall prosper: and this Argument we shall find them making use of (
page 2.) But who knows not that all Heretics pretend to the Spirit and
Direction of God; though it is certain that in so doing they take the Name of
God in vain: and it is little less then Blasphemy to bring God in, to patronize
their sinful Actions: For,

1. God does not graciously move the hearts of any to irregular and unlawful
Actions; and though men are very prone to entitle Him to it, yet He utterly
disclaims it, Jam. 1. 13, 14.

2. And it is certain that when men grow wanton, and despise the Ordinances;
God (many times) judicially gives them strong delusion to believe a lie, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11. and that is none of the least, to misjudge a seducing spirit
to be the spirit of God.

3. To follow an erring Conscience, which verily believes his error to be the
truth, is not to follow the direction of the Spirit of God. If what God
forbids, Conscience persuades, this is not of Gods approbation for so He should
be against himself. It is a snare and a judgment to be under such a
Conscience; so that they must pardon us if we suspect the moving cause.

2. The persons thus moved are described from their former experience of his
teaching: such whom by his Word and Spirit he had instructed and taught in the
way. etc.] Thus one error begets another: what have we to do with the
Anabaptists Kuria doxa? do none but the Orthodox bring this plea? we expected
he should have given us some Rules by which we might have known it. It is a
piece of arregancy for men to beg the principle, or forcibly impose upon our
belief that which is the very Dispute and Controversy between us, i. e.
whither it be an error or no: and they tell us God taught them, therefore it is
no error, true, but if we reply, it is an error, therefore God taught them not,
where are we now? are Anabaptists only Masters of Rules and Canons? may not we
as easily deny, as they affirm without proof?

3. They entered into solemn Covenant to walk in Communion in the practice of
all the holy appointments of Christ, etc and so became (...) Church of Christ]
This alone will not make them a Church of Christ (...) for it so, then every
combination of Enthusiasts, Ranters, (...) etc. may become Churches of Christ,
for they do pretend, and promise each other in words as much as these, or any
other Churches (...) the World can do: but there are Synagogues of Satan too,
in (...) World. If they who are fit to be cast out of Churches, (and are (...)
actually) combine and covenant, does that make them a Church?

4. They are men of holy and exact walking, viz. In the (...) and performance
of the holy Ordinances of Christ according to (...) Institution) If men were
not proud and confident, they would never impose their assertions upon us with
an ipse dixit: grant but an Anabaptist, that his Opinion is true, and he can
easily prove that ours is false; but if you question that, he has no more to
say to you. It is certain they have exploded Infant Baptism, which has been
acknowledged by the body of the Church Christian in all ages: not only for an
Institution, but a principal Institution of Christ; but if these deny it, then
we are mistaken. How like holy men they have walked will appear afterward.

5. He gives us the names of the men who laid this precious Foundation, and if
they had been such men as had done this to begin right Church Order in
New England, they ought not to be forgotten but had in honorable remembrance;
but if they were (and I am afraid the great day will discover that they were)
the Heads and Ringleaders of a Schism, and culpable cause of great troubles in
the Churches of Christ in New England, they had better been forgotten.

SECT. V.
And now we have a Church gathered of such excellent materials, and in so
regular a way; what reception is it they find in New England? one would think
that such a Church, and in such a place. should have been highly esteemed,
strenuously defended by the civil Magistrate, and imitated by all the Churches,
who came into the Wilderness on very purpose to serve God in his own way, but
unhappily missed of it, till the Anabaptists found it out, but lo! they meet
the quite contrary; they are assailed with troubles and afflictions: and from
whom? certainly a vile Generation; but it must be born, they (...) not the
first sufferers for the truth (nor for falsehood neither) it (...) always
befallen those whom God has singled out from others to bear (...) to the
truth] true, the World ever persecuted the Church: (...) have not the People of
God also had their zeal to maintain the (...) of God, and counted it their duty
to use means to suppress (...) as upon what pretense soever, sought to pervert
them? and if (...) have proved his People with Anabaptists (as he is wont to do
his (...) with Seducers) who shall blame them that have shown their (...) to
God, in endeavoring to stop their progress? and thus the (...) sufferings of
these men will be a poor Argument to prove them (...) servants of Christ,
though men may be sufferers, yet they are not presently Martyrs: Causa, non
passio, facit Martyrem.

But these precious Saints, (acted by the right Spirit of the old Confessors)
had counted the cost, and therefore cheerfully past these pikes and are now
gone to rest] and it is pity to disturb them only it might not be amiss to
remember, that the vilest Heretics, and grossest Blasphemers have resolutely
and cheerfully (at least sullenly and boastingly) suffered as well as the
people of God; (Histories are pregnant with examples) and therefore hitherto
they have said nothing to convince any one of their Orthodoxy and sincerity:
they may be right, they may be out of the way for all this.

SECT. VI.
We have now done with the Narrative (handsomely contrived in one page) the
other fourteen are Apologetical, which they were put upon for three Reasons.

1. To Emblazon the Names of their dead Founders, and prevent the Worlds being
mistaken in them: and truly, first Founders deserve a Record, and they should
be unworthy Successors if they did not Canonize them: though (as things are
circumstanced) some wise men think they had done them a kindness if they had
said nothing: and to me, I am sure, for then I had been prevented this
undesired task of publishing the follies of men after they are dead. The child
does his Father the best kindness to say nothing of him, when by speaking he
does but revive his Infamy. But I take it for a just judgment of God on that
generation of men that by a fallacious Narrative, they should enforce us to
make the World acquainted with the scandalous conversation of these beginners,
which had otherwise slept in the private records of those Churches wherein they
were acted.

2. The very grievous Scandals cast upon these Beginners] (...) men (if
incorrigible) deserve to have scandals cast upon (...) and if we shall prove
these such, they must (for ought I know) (...) the Reproach of it, and thank
themselves.

But yet there are two things wherein they are to be blamed (...) lay scandal
to them; though just, yet it is unjustly done. viz.

1. The frame of spirit they do it with, they are rugged (...) truly this
becomes not men who profess a Spirit of Meekness: (...) yet sometimes the
Gospel calls Christians to withstand Seducers (...) the face; to characterize
some men in their proper colors, and (...) earnestly with them for the Truth:
yea, experience tells us (...) such a rough thing as a New England Anabaptist
is not to be handle] ever tenderly: the spirit which they have at all times
discovered under the greatest disadvantages (and God grant that they may never
have more advantage over us) easily tells us what they would have been, if
circumstanced as those whom they accuse.

2. A wicked end: and a good action may be spoiled by a bad design at bottom:
We have charged them on purpose to make them odious, and make the World believe
them a people not fit to live) men wonderfully sagacious, and extremely
charitable! I dare say none of ours ever told them this was their end; why
might they not have interpreted it zeal? Paul so interpreted his persecuting
Countrymen.

But, suppose it be made appear that we have not endeavored to render their
persons odious but only their perverse Doctrine, and that we have used all
meekness, patience, gentleness toward men in that capacity we took them to be
in? for any such passage of any of ours as judging them not fit to live, I know
not of it, nor (I believe) do they, nor do we patronize any such expression,
though (since their Book has so many in it) I know not why this may not go for
one of their mistakes: and now they appeal to God) we accept it readily.

SECT. VII.
Their great Sufferings are of two forts.

1. In Estate, and Liberties, of which we must not expect a particular account,
and are charitably to think it is because they are tender of our reputation:
but errorsly in generals, a particular account might have been more satisfying.
These things look directly upon our Magistracy, in vindication of them a word
will suffice. Two things take up this discourse; The persecution, and the
success.

1. The persecution is compendiously represented. Some of (...) were oftentimes
brought before Councils, etc.] (I suppose they allude to Mat. 10. 17.) To which
let this be taken as a Reply, viz. that as the Honored Magistrates here are
Christian, so have they judged it their duty to maintain the ways of Christ,
and strengthen them by civil Laws, which has not only been the practice of
Reformers of old, but the constant Judgment of the Church of Christ ever since
the Apostles. If evil minded men will take this advantage to oppress the truth,
it is no more then may be done in all other cases: and as it is thought no good
plea to keep the Scriptures from the laity, lest they should learn to be
Heretics; so neither to deny the Magistrate his due power on supposition that
he may abuse it. On this Principle our worthy Rulers have made Laws against
many Sects and Intruders, and among the rest the Anabaptists. That in quelling
the Anabaptists they do not oppose the truth, but suppress Error they are fully
persuaded: and although they never pretended to a Lordship over men's
Consciences, yet they account the outward man is subject to them: and if we
must tarry till all men are agreed about what is truth before we oppose Error,
we shall stay till there is no need (...). For the progress of our Magistracy
in the execution of these Laws, they have been so far from a violent, eager, or
willing taking advantage against these men, that (notwithstanding their
opprobrious speeches when they have been before them, their scornful carriages,
and purposed endeavors to irritate them by insolent challenges) they have
always proceeded slowly, tenderly, far on this side the Law, as those who
sought not to ruin either their Names, Liberties, or Estates. How often when
fines have been laid upon them, have they stopped the Execution? if any have been
imprisoned, it has been but when dared to it: and though once a Sentence of
Banishment did pass upon two of their Ringleaders (heady violent men) yet then
they neglected, and scorned to take notice of it (resolving to run utmost
hazards) neither was this improved as any advantage against them. Nor is it to
be wondered that our Governors have been opposite in particular to these men,
since, if they could get head among us, they would certainly undermine the
Churches, ruin Order, destroy piety, and introduce profaneness.

2. For the success of these endeavors: God is pleased still to uphold them,
and they are by these means not weakened, but strengthened and increased)
Methinks I hear the Jews crying, we are delivered to do (...) these
abominations. Let them but remember that many things are done by Gods
Permissive providence, when the doers have not his approbation: nor is it an
unfailing ground of sincerity, that they have withstood such trials and are
increased: we know (do what we can to restrain them) Evil men and Seducers
shall wax worse and worse, and many shall follow their pernicious ways. Nor is
it to be wondered at that persons discontent with the yoke of Christ in the
Churches, or taking offense at particular Administrations, which might touch
their own Interest, have so readily followed the faction of the Anabaptists, of
which sort of men the most of their society and Founders here, have consisted.

SECT. VIII.
2. Their great sufferings in their Name; and (it should seem) there are many
terms of Reproach cast upon them: pardon them then if they are very tender of
their Reputation. Only they should have gone orderly to work, first to have got
a good name, and then to have kept it by walking worthy of it. Here we have a
file of scandalous things laid to their charge) they might have done well to
have told us where and by whom, that we might have compared them, but (I see)
we must do what we can, and consider what is charged, and how justly, and
whither they are wipe I away in their defense. These are no fewer then eight:
let us examine them.

1. They are a Schismatical company who have rent themselves from the Churches
of Christ, and received into their society such as have disorderly left the
Churches.)

Ans. This charge (in terms) was never made against them by us, and so, part
of their vindication is superfluous; for we never said all of them rent from
these Churches: some were strangers to us till their trubulency made them too
well known and others were never joined to other Churches, but had lived
without Communion. But that they are a society of schismatics, (if Schism be
an unjust renting from a Church of Christ) we assert. Three things they (in
words) grant. 1. That our Churches are Churches of Christ ( page 14.) 2. That
some of them were once Members of them ( page 4.) 3. That some of theirs did
depart from these Churches and join in this new combination ( page 5.) now to
prove them hence, a company of Schismatics: Observe,

1. That whosoever combine with, and encourage Schismatics, have fellowship
with them in their sin.

2. That Thomas Gold, and Thomas Osborn (the persons in dispute were
Schismatics, or did unjustly rend from the Church where they were before
Members, will appear by a true Relation of matters of fact (for this story of
the Narrative, and Truth are Strangers) whereof there is sufficient Testimony
to be found in the Records of the Church at Charlstown (whereof they were
Members) and there are many faithful witnesses yet alive, who were present at
these transactions and can say, if these things be not so; which ought to
outweigh the story of a prejudiced person, who has all by hearsay, whose very
business is to palliate and lick over matters to shape them to his own turn:
Here,

1. For Goodman Gold: Let the Reader consider these things; and let the
Anabaptists disprove them if they can.

1. That though he was first called to an account about withholding his child
from Baptism, yet that was not the reason of his being admonished (as the
Pamphlet asserts) nor because he could not be convinced of Error; not yet did
the Church proceed to Admonition, till such time as (he not only spoke
contemptuously and irreligiously of the emptiness and nullity of that
Ordinance, but also) used unbecoming gestures in the time of Administration, of
which (being asked the reason) he (before the Congregation) acknowledged they
were to cast disresect upon it: nor then neither till after much patience. Now
let Anabaptists themselves judge whither there be not a vast difference,
between doubting about an Ordinance, and professedly vilifying of it by
unhandsome words and carriages; and whither they will bear with any Member of
theirs that will so contemn any of those things which are to them sacred, and
acknowledged as Christ's Institutions.

2, That at his first Admonition he was not sententially suspended, but only
desired for the preventing of the offense of some, to abstain from coming to
the other Sacrament.

3. That upon This, Thomas Gold took up a trade of absenting himself from the
Meetings of the Church to worship God on the Sabbath, which made a new offense.

4. That the Church in much tenderness waited upon him, and (after many
provocations) proceeded not to Excommunication, but tried with Admonition upon
Admonition, and that by the space of seven or eight years: nor was he
Excommunicated, till (...) having left his own.) he joined to another Society,
without the churches leave; or once asking it: and now also being twice sent
for by the Church (...) their authority over him.

5. That Thomas Gold did not leave the Church at Charlstown on the account of
the Anabaptists new Church (as is pretended) but had many years before
renounced his submission to that Church.

6. That he did (while under Admonition) neglect public worship, and gather a
private meeting on the Sabbath to his house.

7. That he did (contrary to the Judgment of Anabaptists themselves) wickedly
slight the Admonition of the Church, declaring that they had by it discharged
him of all relation to them.

2. For Thomas Osborne; the Churches proceedings with him were with the like
patience as to Thomas Gold: only it is to be observed, that his first offense
(which this dissembling Pamphlet, finding it disadvantagious, wilfully passes
over) was this: whereas it is one thing which Church Members engage to upon
Admission, to walk with the Church in constant attendance upon public worship,
he (without notifying any offense) did withdraw and separate, frequenting those
Schismatic Meetings at Golds on the Sabbath: this was the offense (where was
the Narrators Conscience mean while?) nor did he (when first dealt with)
pretend any disl^ke of Infant Baptism, but that the Church gave no liberty to
private Brethren to Prophecy, that they limited the Ministry to learned men,
and (...) he did not find his own spirit free to come: though afterward he
(...) both of that, and of their severity to the Quakers, though that Church
meddled not with them, but only to preach against their Errors. In this practice
he contumaciously persisted many years, denying himself to be subject to that
Church, or bound to assemble with them (though he had solemnly given himself up
to them in Covenant) slighting many Admonitions; and afterward (with Thomas
Gold) went off to, and became a worthy Pillar of an Anabaptist Church. And
whereas he insists so upon a bitter spirit in the Church against dissenters,
let seven years patience, with serious endeavors (in all tenderness) to
reclaim them, speak whither it be not an audacious Slander. And now (Reader)
judge, are these a Church of Schismatics or no?

SECT. IX.
2. That we are Scandalous in three respects. 1. The Foundation was laid with
Excommunicate persons. 2. We called such to Administer holy things, who were
justly for scandal cast out of (...) Churches. 3. For receiving such into our
Society.

Ans.. This is indeed the charge, from the just imputation (...) all their
tergiversations, excuses, suppressions of the truth, and suggestions of
falsehood, shall never acquit them. I find not that he denies the first
proposition, viz. that those who do such things (adding the word justly to the
first part of the charge) are to be reputed scandalous. That they have so done
remains to be proved.

1. Their Foundation was laid with persons excommunicated, and that for
scandal: for this it may be considered.

1. Thomas Gold was not admonished for his Opinion (nor does it appear that
ever he should, if he had carried humbly) but for opprobrious words and
carriages against an Ordinance. Which he himself had before professedly
reverenced and highly esteemed and which he knew that Church he walked with had
still in the like esteem. And Thomas Osborne, by relinquishing public Worship
directly violated his Covenant, not so much as pretending (at first) any doubt
about infant Baptism.

2. They both of them despised the Church, continued to absent themselves, laid
false charges against them, separated in a private meeting, went off to the
Anabaptists without asking leave, and so became (supposed) Members of one,
before they were regularly discharged of their obligation to another Church:
all which things are against the Anabaptists own professed Rules if they will
stand to their confession. Whereas he faith, their not hearing the Church was
nothing else but their not coming when the Church sent for them] it is a
foolish pretense: their not hearing the Church was their appearing and proving
themselves impenitent and that after many Treaties used with them many solemn
Admonitions laid upon them, convictions sufficiently offered, of sins against
the light of their Consciences, and which (it is certain) they would have
acknowledged, had it not been for fear of being reconciled to the Church, whose
Excommunication they feared not, but impudently des^red. The truth is, they
were weary of their Church Relation, and resolved to get rid of it, and not
knowing any regular way to obtain it, they chose to sin rather then suffer; and
undergo a just Excommunication, that they might be by themselves; presuming
that they could blind the World with a vain pretense that they were ejected for
no other reason but because they questioned the right of Infant Baptism. Hence
Thomas Gold did particularly express before the Church his desire to be
excommunicated, which yet they proceeded not to (till by a first and second
refusal to appear at the Churches citing of them) they proved themselves
incorrigible. Besides, it is to be observed that these men (having privately
exercised their gifts in Meetings with applause) began to think themselves
wronged that their light was put under a bushel; and finding no remedy in our
Churches, threw on, a cloak of Anabaptisme, and so gained the thing they aimed
at, in a disguise.

2. They called such to Administer, etc.] against all his winding to get clear
of this, [only say, Thomas Gold was thus employed, concerning whom too much
has been said, except we had better to say.

3. They have received such as have (justly) for moral evils been cast out of
other Churches; add, and never given Christian satisfaction. Here he
endeavors a salvo. The persons instanced are Thomas Foster, and John Farnham;
the former sometimes of the Church as Billerica. the other of the second
gathered Church in Boston. He acknowledges they have received them but on just
reasons, or (at worst) not very irregularly. Let the Records of these Churches
be compared with this Narrative, and see if the Anabaptists have not good skill
in painting, and putting a fair face on a foul matter.

1. For Thomas Foster, let it be observed.

1. That he was not only a Member of the Church of Billerica, but of the
Foundation, and at their gathering was full, free, and forward in owning Infant
Baptism to be as Ordinance of Christ's Institution: and if he judged himself
(that notwithstanding) to have been then a true Christian he ought to have
extended more charity (then his after expressions) showed to the Church still
remaining of the same persuasion.

2. That he first discovered his receding from that (formerly received)
judgment by disorderly carriage at the time of Administration of that
Ordinance, and being reproved for it, he confessed he had carried unbecoming
any person in any Christian Assembly; which gave satisfaction to the Church.

3. Though, (when about three months after this, he began, and thence continued
to leave the meeting at the celebration of Baptism,) he was, at a private
Church meeting given to understand that it grieved the Brethren, and that he
had receded from his Covenant and was advised solemnly and seriously to
consider of it, yet he was not (as the Narrator asserts) laid under Admonition,
or prohibited Communion: nor did the Church ever do any such thing in private
to any (which he knew) nor did they intend for this, to have debarred him of
Communion.

4. That after this, he neglected the Church Assemblies; and frequented the
Anabaptist meetings, and was there rebaptized: and being called by the Church
at a meeting; at the Pastors house, to give an account of these proceedings;
though at first he dissembled, yet at length acknowledged, and justified his
actions, (if false charges may be accounted a justification:) For he told them;

1. That they had laid him under sin, whereas he thought he had not (...)
amiss; but they had not so done judicially; though they told him (...) carriage
was a grief to his Brethren: nor (as I have said before) (...) intended it; so
far is the Narration from speaking truth, when it (...) nothing but matter of
Conscience was (or could be) laid to his charge.

2. That they denied him Baptism: whereas they owned him for Baptized, and if
he was not it was wickedness in him (an unbaptized person) to come to the Lords
Table.

3. That they yoked him with Unbelievers: which was, because they extended
Church watch to a Child (or children) of the Church: and yet, for this, he
judged his separation lawful, and produced for it 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 17. therein
(implicitly at least) pronouncing the Church a company of Belialists and
Infidels.

4. That they had presented him to the Court] The truth is, one of the Brethren
of the Church, had made complaint of him to the Grand Jury, which occasioned
his presentment, judging his Freemans oath engaged him so to do, when other due
means to reclaim him from his turbulent carriages had been used; and this he
makes the Churches fault, because they did not lay that Brother under a
censure, for not daring to violate his Oath, and betray his Fidelity to the
Civil Authority.

5. That they had dealt injuriously by one of his Brethren, in laying him under
Admonition] In justification of which act there needs no account be given here;
only, let any judge whither it be a just ground to separate from a Church,
because I am not fully of their mind in every act of Administration: and also,
it seems a thing not warrantable for a private Member of a Church (in pretense
of selfvindication) to vilify and asperse a Church of Christ: if this be
humility, what is pride? But yet,

5. The Church still continued to labor his conviction: and when they could
not obtain it, after much patience, they called him forth in public, charged
him with offensive departing, and rending away from the Church; denying himself
a subject of Discipline, and vilifying the Church by (...) charges: he,
observing on ready to write his Answer, refused to speak any thing, unless he
were forbidden; and not obteining it, essayed to depart; yea, though required
by the Officer to stay, and hear the Church, he wilfully withdrew: on the
following Sabbath, he was for these carriages admonished, and debarred
Communion, and not till then: and after some patience used being called forth
again, to see if it repented him, he remained obstinate, and was therefore
Excommunicated: and now compare notes, and see what will become of John
Russel's consectaries: As for his retaining the respect of a very Godly man
where he is known (which is so boasted of) it must be only among men void of
reason, for (though we will not say but he may have the root in him; yet) he
has blasted profession, by wicked ways impenitently persisted in, and thereby
wounded such men's charity, who judge (as they ought) of the tree by the fruit.

SECT. X.
2. Relating to John Farnum, we have him confessing guilty in some things,
acknowledging a defect, but would not have it thought wilful, nor such as any
Church in their imperfection may not easily fall into: well, they can make
great faults little and small ones none at all. In sober earnest we may say of
this act of theirs about Farnum, that if in nothing else they had been guilty,
yet that is enough to render them low in the hearts of any good men, and a
shame to Anabaptists themselves. A little in so dirty a matter is enough to be
said: Therefore,

1. They say when he walked in fellowship with the Church, he was in reputation
among them for a very godly man.] They should have left the word (very) out:
though (in charity) they had hopes he might have the root of the matter in him;
yet he was never judged eminent for his piety: it was long ere he could obtain
Admission into the Church at Dorchester: and some discerning Christians ever
suspected him to be ( John Farnum) such an one as he after proved.

2. That he was deputed by them for a Deacon] and yet neither the present
Teacher; nor any that have been added to the Church, these twenty years, either
deputed, or thought him fit for that Office: and whereas there is but one
surviving of the Founders of that Church, he professes there is never a
syllable of truth in that report.

3. That the Churches (...) was (...) upon account of his Opinion.

4. The rugged spirit in these men against (...), was the (...) his withdrawing.

5. Other things were gathered to this, having a face of Scandal.

A true survey of the Churches proceedings, will show the vanity of these
Assertions: For,

1. The Church did not so much as deal with him till he had wholly withdrawn
Communion from them, refusing so much as to hear the Word Preached with them
for many months, no, nor so much as declared themselves offended with him. What
now is this rugged spirit?

2. When he alleged his Opinion, the Teacher of the Church (though possibly
some may think he did more than the rule required) declared to him, that if he
were so weak as not to think it lawful to see a Child Baptized, his withdrawing
when that Ordinance was Administered, should not be imputed as an offense: how
is it then that his Judgment was the principal thing in that process?

3. His offense for which he was dealt with, was many moral evils (and so a
complicate offense) breaking forth at once: viz. 1. Renouncing Communion with
the Church, contrary to Heb. 10. 24. 2. Holding familiarity with Excommunicate
Persons, contrary to Math. 18 17. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6, 14. 3. Slanders against
several holy and worthy men (now with Christ.) 4. That having been often
reproved for these things he still persisted. When the Elders reproved him for
these slanders he replied, that they might be offended at a thousand things, he
cared not: and that there was never an Elder in New England was willing any
should read the Scripture, but themselves: After this, he was called before the
Church, tenderly dealt with, and those Scripture Rules which he had
transgressed were applied to his Conscience: but in vain.

At the third Church Meeting on his account ( October. 16. 1665.) the Pastor (Mr.
Mayo) told him it wos expected that after so much patience he should manifest
repentance. His reply was, that he desired none of their patience, he was
humbled for his sins. The Teacher (Mr. Mather saying to him, we must see it by
the fruits, he retorted, you see it! you shall never see it: some Brethren told
him his speeches and carriage were very sinful they had never seen the like be
replied, I did not come hither to be (...) and (...) at by every one, and so he
turned his back to depart: the Pastor wished him to stay and hear what further
they had to say, and seeing him still proceed, charged him in the Name of the
Church and of Christ to stay: he rejoyned, (...) Christ to me, I am not out
that can how and stoop (...); and exit. The same day he told some of the
Brethren that he wished the Church would Excommunicate him, and then he should
be of a better society. On all these accounts was he laid under Admonition. Two
months after which, being called before the Church, he, in words, confessed the
evil of some of the particulars, but was observed at the same time to turn
about and laugh: where then was his Repentance? The Church (this
notwithstanding) waited diverse months longer, till he went on to that height of
impiety and profaneness, that one of the Teaching Officers, setting before the
Church the Rule concerning Excommunication, Farnum makes a leg to him (in the
Assembly) in way of derision, and declared, that except the Church would yield
to four things, he would have no communion with them: viz. 1. They must set up
the Ordinance of (...). 2. Promise to Baptize no more Infants. 3. All be
Baptized (i. e. rebaptized) themselves. 4. Put away their present (and still
continuing) Teacher from his Office. Upon these things the Church concluded
upon his censure, only allowing him another months patience: after which (no
repentance appearing) they proceeded.

Now judge: 1. Whither these things have no more than a face of scandal and
that too, only as they are taken and construed. 2. Whither their Admission of
him were not more than a mere defect in those who so admitted him, yea, a mere
scandal stinking in the no^thrils of moral men. 3. Whither if it were but a
defect, it were not a wilful one, since they either had, or might have had, an
account of the Churches proceedings with him; and ought to have inquired after
the true cause of his Excommunication, before they received him. Well, it was
but a little fault, and a little amendment was enough: and what was that? when
clamors were revived and renewed:] and then to speak of open and notorious
wickedness, if it be approved by a society of An baptists, is Clamor. But it is
well a clamor roused them; whom serious warnings and informations could not.
And now the Church (in good time) are dissatisfied, and determine to make
search:] But they knew before, that he was Excommunicated: only because he was
an Anabaptist, they concluded it was for his Opinion: We see what harm too much
credulity does men. Now they send Messengers, etc. procure a copy of
proceedings, and are convinced, (better late then never) suspend him, bring him
to give them satisfaction, advise him to satisfy the Church he had offended:]
patcht cobling work! a good Shoemaker would have scorned it. Who appointed the
Anabaptist Church to be a (...) Court of (...) to judge cases for, and receive
satisfaction on the account of (...) Church, in respect of any of their
Members? Ex (...) this teaches us what Lordly men they would be, had they
advantage. But he did apply himself to that Church, and all were well satisfied
but one:] How did Goodman Russel know this? suppose all but one remained
dissatisfied; nay what if not so much as one was well satisfied? where are we
then? except he know them better then they know themselves; both the Elder and
Brethren utterly deny the truth (...) this passage It is true indeed he did
once and again (in (...) acknowledge that the Church had exercised patience
toward him, and that he had been guilty of sin; and great evil; both in word
and action: and (orally) before the Church, he confessed, he had done very
wickedly, and was ashamed of himself:] The Church then, had done well. But why
is he not (then) upon this restored? alas! this he sought not; but, the very
next day declared, that if he should return into Communion with that Church, it
would be the greatest sin that ever he had been guilty of in his life; which
made the Brethren suspect his Confession to be insyncere, and yet this
satisfies the Anabaptists; they still continue to hold Communion with a vile
person justly cast out, not seeing to be restored; and therefore by the will of
Christ) to be counted and carried to, as an Heathen and a Publican.

SECT. XI.
3. That we are disorderly, and walk disorderly.] For all his (...) excuse, and
abuse of Scripture in it, there needs no more but to consider, whither it be
not to walk disorderly, to receive into their Communion persons that are under
Church dealing for moral evils, yea, excommunicate Impenitents: and not to
withdraw from them, after they have confessed they missed it in so doing. If
this be not disorder, to set up a Church for a Sanctuary, or City of Refuge for
scandalous men who (scorning to submit to the discipline of Christ) presently
take up Anabaptisme, and know where to be made welcome, we may then enquire
whither there be any such thing as Disorder.

SECT. XII.
4. We are disturbers of the public p^ace:] that this has (...)) been charged
upon them, I find not: but that they have made disturbance among us, is true;
what else have been the (...) of some (now theirs) when of other Churches with
the courses they have taken to make parties? what their many complaints into
England, and misrepresentations of us, to render us as obnoxious as might be,
and what this Narrative?

SECT. XIII.
5. That we are under miners of the Churches] and is not this true neither?
alas that in all things we should so mistake! But this we mean, that such of
these men as sometimes stood in relation to other Churches, fought to draw
others away with them: witness Thomas Gol^'s private meeting in his own house
for many years: where (living two miles distant from the public place of
Worship) their Neighbors (I speak things known) were drawn in, and there were
the Churches (...) and Ministers scoffed at, and means used to alienate men's
hearts: and not only so, but they have published to the World that Infant
Baptism is a nullity, that we are Churches of unbaptized men and women, and
have unbaptized Officers; by these pleas seeking to draw men off: and if this
be their reduction, it is in vain distinguished from destruction, and is
properly Seduction. Add to this, their readiness to receive any discontented
persons, so that if any be under offense in any of our Churches (though he be
never so vile) let him but turn Anabaptist, they will take up his case, if he
can satisfy them (and we may think a little will do) let his own seek it where
they can get^: is not this undermining? nay, have they not by that unjust
(...), and false reports, done more hurt to the Churches of Christ in
New England, than all their Enemies in the world besides?

SECT. XIV.
6. We neglect public Worship on the Lords Day] What he brings are for
justification, is (to us a confessing guilty; that is it we mean, and therefore
what we say, is not utterly untrue: only the reasons (...) give for their
separation, are misrepresented. Whereas they (...) mould not admit any of them
to communion with us: they know (...) our Churches have received some that were
scrupulous about (...) Baptism, who were willing to carry inoffensively: that
we have ^used such as were rebaptized among these Excommunicate Ana(...) is
true by (...) viz. except they would acknowledge (...) repent of that act:
because we judge it scandalous. And (...) the World We have been shut out of
our public house, and (...) nailed up and we forced to meet without in the
open Air, on a (...) old day:) he seems to have forfeited all honestly, so to
relate It is true, the Civil Authority here, have (by a (...)) prohibited any
from erecting any public Meeting House, (...) the consent of the Freemen of
the Town where they live first orderly had and obtained at a public Meeting
assembled for that end; and License of the County Court; etc. Without such a
Law many hopeful Plantations would have come to nothing. And it equally
concerned all others, with Anabaptists; and yet these men (neglecting this Law)
undertake such a business. Report of this is made to the Civil Magistrate, who
enquired into it, and these fallaciously pretend it might be for a Warehouse,
or a Brew House, that they still proceed, till it become a Meeting House, and
is met in on the Lords days: Now are they again called before the Council,
justly reproved for slighting the Law, and for Dissimulation, and lovingly
desired to be content to meet in private (as before) till the General Court
(near approaching) might hear and determine this matter. They refusing to
promise so to do. Order was given to nail up their doors: whereupon the
Anabaptists sullenly meet in the open Air on a cold day (though a large house,
and their usual place of meeting stood just by) that they might make matter to
frame a scandalous clamor out of: yet were the Doors soon broken open again,
and they there publicly meet before the Court. Now only desire to be satisfied
who gave these men leave to trample all Authority under foot, and live as men
that are lawless?

SECT. XV.
7. That we are Idolaters:) For this they quote the late Synod-Book, but there
is no such word there: we have not been afraid to charge them with the breach
of the second Commandment. Every declining from the Rules of Worship, omission,
or alteration of Divine Institutions, without immediate warrant from the Law
giver, is against that Command.

SECT. XVI.
8. We are charged to be enemies of Civil Government.) I find no such charge:
The first Germane Anabaptists were so, we hope these (though they have shown
too much contempt of Authority) are not so far gone. But for his so gloriously
^^blazoning their service in the late Wars, it is neither to the purpose, nor
of much moment. That they did join against the common Enemy is true: Swanzy (a
place chiefly consisting of Anabaptists and where they had a Church) was the
place where the Enemy made the first onset (which Church (...) being one of
two) was as much removed as our four (of above forty) they so (...) upbraid us
with page 15.) Besides, (...) would fight, rather than have his throat cut; it
was not for Religion, nor Civil Government, but for lives and estates. For
Captain Turner, we have not abridged him ought of his due acknowledgement, in
what has been published. But for his acts at Connecticut Falls, they are
hyperbolically discribed: for 1. There was another Captain and his Company,
joined with him in that undertaking, a man of appoved valor and conduct, which
at that time he discover^^ (...) prudent drawing off his men. 2. Captain Turner
was at that time by sickness disabled from doing much. 3 God saw meet to
obscure the victory by the affrighted and disorderly retreat of our men, the
slaughter of many, and death of Captain Turner. Nor did the Indians receive the
greatest blow at that time; nor is it the Anabaptists true, but vain glory, to
set such an encomium upon their own deeds.

SECT. XVII.
We have dismissed the charge, now comes a strong Argument of their Orthodoxy,
a witness from Heaven, viz. their happy preservation in the (...) of the Small
Pox) Let it be remembered, that one of their persuasion did of it at Woborn
(where John Russel lived, and should have observed it) and many of their
Children. But be it so; their Society is small, and scattered from Dan to
Beersheba. And who knows; but God might spare them in judgment, to harden
them? These things are too high for us: only when God comes to chasten his
People, those that are not chastened, may ask whither they are no Bastards.

SECT. XVIII.
And now he had done, had not a Book of Mr. Mather's come out, to which he has
a few words to say: and a few he thinks are enough to confute so weak and silly
a piece, It is Titled, The divine right of Infant Baptism: Ans. sooner said
then proved. Excellently refuted! But he has a word more in general, and one
or two in particular to say to it.

1. In general, Any sober unbyassed Christian may be satisfied, that the main
(or one main) design of it, is to render all that are nicknamed Anabaptists as
odious as he could) I am sorry for it, that so good a look should have so bad a
design: but he is no unbyassed Christian who asserts it: and it is strange that
that worthy man, whose charity has been so large to such men (as is well
known) should be thus guilty, and if he be, truly it is very unhappy. But
diverse that have (...) the Book, cannot spy it; I fear it is a suspicious (...)
censorious slander. For his Arguments, It Is Answered, they are no new ones] And
I like them the better; verissimum est antiquissimum: Had he brought novel
pleas, I had suspected him, as I do (for that reason) the Anabaptists: nay, he
tells us, (page 2.) he intends old Arguments, and no other. But what then? they
must have no new Answer, being sufficiently confuted already. I am glad of
that, he saves me some labor by it. He blames him not for disputing for what
he believes) nor I neither, but think he deserves commendation, and God has
blessed it to the reclaiming of several that way inclined, and settling many
more in the truth. But why should Mr. Mather wickedly injure holy men, by
arguing, An Opinion must needs he bad, because the Professors of it have
miscarried.) But Mr. Mather has expressly declared against any such conclusion.
(Page 25.) This is the sum of his Argument. That Opinion which has been
attended with signal judgments on the first and chief assertors of it, and
generality of those that have (especially at first) embraced it, is to be
suspected as Erroneous. And is it any harm for men to suspect themselves, when
God seems to frown on them? do not the Anabaptists allow this Argument; and
therefore plead that God kept and increased them under persecution, ( page 2)
and wonderfully preserved them in times of sickness, ( page 12.) which they
desire may be observed; (though this is of little weight, because these are not
the first, nor the chief.) And do not the generality of the Orthodox, improve
this Argument against Heretics? does not John Russel use it against us? (page
15.) what besel Corinthus, Manicheus, Arius, etc. Dr. Beards Theater of Gods
Judgments, Mr. Clarks Examples, and others may speak for this. Nay, was it not
thus with Korah, with Ananias and Saphira? and for Gods judicially leaving them
to scandalous evils. See Mat. 7. 15, 16. 2. Tim. 3. 13. and what befell the
first Anabaptists? see Sleidan's Commentaries, and other Authors of great note
quoted by Mr. Mather.

SECT. XIX.
2. But there is a thing or two in particular which he (...) pass, they touch
him so near. Mr Mather charge them with the sin of Jeroboam, but they are not
concerned in, or with it.) The Text alluded to, is, I Kings 12.3 1. the
Original is, Jeroboam made Priests of the extremities of the People; both ends
comprehend the whole (see (...) in Ezekiel. 33. 1.) It was (...) sin, that any
that would might (under him) be made Priest, fit, or unfit. The Belgic and
others read it, of both ends of the People. If a fit man would accept it, so;
if not, to the other end; and take one unfit. The Anabaptists would have a
learned Man, if they could get one of their mind; if not john Russel the
Shoemaker. The learned Zepperus. Depolit. Eccl. p. 186. lamenting the low and
miserable estate of Religion, gives this for one reason of it; they make
Ministres De (...) populist i. e. Sartoribus, Sutoribus, Idiotis, etc.

He does not think the Spirit is locked up in the narrow limits of College
Learning.) Nor we neither; nor yet Ministerial gifts to be (ordinarily)
acquired in a Shoemakers Shop. We believe men are to be instructed, and
endeavors used; and that there are Schools of the Prophets to that end, or
there may be private means used. We believe a learned man may prove v^tious,
and so not fit to improved in that work. We believe every true Christian
receives the spirit in his measure; but that he therefore is fit to teach and
instruct a Congregation, is an Enthusiastical notion. Truly, if Goodman Russel
was a fit man for a Minister, we have but fooled our selves in building
Colleges: and instructing our Children in learning.

Frange leves calamos, and scinde Thalia sebellos;
Si dare SUTORI, CALCEUS ista potest.
Mart. We have enough of his Last to people New England with Prophets.

SECT. XX.
One thing more, and he will dismiss us: Mr. Mather charge them with a
pernicious Principle in their Confession of Faith, viz. That Believers Baptized
are visible Christians, and fit matter for a visible Church.) How may the
altering of a word or two change the sense? the words of their Confession are,
Believers, being Baptized are visible Saints, and true matter of a visible
Church. Hence (if the Anabaptists would give leave to draw consequences, (but
then they would never have done with us, and that is the reason they cannot
receive our Arguments for Infant Baptism, because they are nothing but a few
consequences, and that is nothing to the purpose:) a man might argue that
Believers being unbaptized are not visible Saints; and we know they acknowledge
none Baptized but themselves: and that will bring in another consequence, that
there are no visible Saints but Anabaptists, But suppose a man cannot reach
them a blow with a consequence; let them yet say, is Baptism administered to
persons within the visible Church or without it? Besides, they say, Baptized
persons are true matter of a visible Church, (...) were only sprinkled in their
Infancy, were never Baptized: (...) not this undermine the foundation of all
the Churches in the (...) but theirs? and what more pernicious? They had even
as good (...) with Edom' Sons, Raze it, Raze it to the Foundation.

And now he cannot choose but burst out into a lamentation over such a spirit:
But thus it will be in the world, that the joy of some, will be made the grief
of others; the triumph of (...) will be the mourning of error: I pray God this
cause of the (...) may be continued, by the constant supply (...) men zealous
against errors.

SECT. XXI.
For a Conclusion the Narrator turns Prophet, and gets up to the top of Mount
Ebal, and there curses the people of God, or these Churches in New England: and
what is it so stirs his spleen? why they have born their witness faithfully
against Anabaptists Errors and Scandals and detected the sin of those men who,
after they have (for Lyes' Slanders Covenant breaking, despising Gods
Ministers, and slighting the Admonitions of their respective Churches) been in
Christ's Name delivered up to Satan, have joined themselves in erecting and
establishing in Anti-Temple, and (like the Samaritans of old) become a Mount
Gerizzim, a Den, and Receptacle for every mal-content and scandalous person
(that cannot submit to the Discipline of Christ in his Churches) to repair
unto. And now for this they are compared to those damnable Hypocrites mentioned
Mat. 24. 49. and threatened with no less then eternal desolation. We see what
men may come to in time, (...) with falsehoods, and end with cursings. But
causeless curses shall not come, nor need these Churches regard, if they keep
faithful to their God, though Anabaptists Anathematize them.


