A RELATION OF Captain Bull, Concerning the MOHAVVKS At FORT-ALBANY. May, 1689.
COnnecticot Colony upon many Rumors of Hazard, sent Captain Jonathan Bull to
Albany to inform the Albanians of the News from England we had Received; and
what Change was made in the Bay, who seemed much Rejoiced; Declaring they would
allow the Fort to Remain not twelve Hours longer in Papists Hands: That being
noised about, Major Baxter Declared he d Remove in four or five Days, which
accordingly he did, leaving the Fort to the Inhabitants, who have placed twenty
five Men in it for the best.

The English and Dutch there are very sure of the Friendliness of the Mohawks,
and the five other Nations above them.

May 24. The Mohawk Sachems, appeared in the Courthouse of Albany, with a
Present of Beaver of about twenty pound value, who chose their Speaker, he
taking two or three Skins, the rest sitting silent, Rose up and said:

1. Brethren, we are now come as our Grandfathers used to do, to Renew our
Unity, Friendship and Covenant made by us and you.

2 We desire the House, being the Covenant and Proposition House may be kept
clean, that we may keep a clean, single, and not a double heart.

3. We do now Renew the Former Covenant or Claim that has been made between us
and you; (viz.) New England, Virginia, Maryland, and those parts of America,
that it may be kept bright on every side, and not suffered to rust, or be
forgotten.

4. We are heartily sorry to hear of the Bloodshed by those ill minded Indians
to the Eastward; and we now Present this Gift as our Indian manner is, to wipe
the Tears from the Eyes, and the Blood from off the Relations of those who have
lost Friends by those ill-minded men.

5. Let the Tree of Love, Unity and Commerce grow and flourish, and let the
Roots spread and branch forth through all our several Dominions, to stand fast
that none may move it; so that we may live under the shade of the Tree, so that
the Sun of Discord and Quarrelling may not scorch and wound us.

6. We have heard there has been several Embassyes the last year from you to
Canady, that we could not be acquainted with, we do all publicly Above-board,
and we desire you do so also.

We heard that the Eastern Indians came where some of our men were Hunting,
desirous to speak with us, but we refused to have any discourse with them, but
warned them to be gone, so that they came not near our Forts, but went as they
came.

7. We intend a Meeting of the Chief of our five Nations in a little time, at
Amadado, there further to consider of public Affairs, and desire that you
would send some persons from you to hear what we shall Confer of, and also some
of the River Indians if they see cause, the Meeting was chiefly intended to
consider what Answer to give the French, who had often sent to have Speech with
them.

When the Sachems had heard how Matters were circumstanced, in the Country,
and what News was come to hand, seemed to be glad, and much Rejoiced, and
wholly laid aside their intended Meeting, promising neither to speak with them,
nor to allow the French to speak to them.

The Dutch at Albany say, the Mohawks show themselves very willing to go
against the Eastern Indians, if Desired.


