SERMON Occasioned by the (...) of a Man found Guilty of Murder: Preached at
Boston in New England, March 11 1686/5.

(Together with the confession, Last Expressions and Solemn Warning of that
Murderer, to all Persons; especially to Young Men, to beware of those Sins
which brought him to his Miserable End.)

By INCREASE MATHER, Teacher of a Church of Christ.

Deuteronomy. 19.20, 21. And those which remain scall hear, and fear, and scall
henceforth commit no more any such evil among you.

21 And thine eye scall not pity, but life shall go for eye for eye, tooth for
tooth, head for head, foot for foot.

Prove. 28.17. A man that does violence to the blood of (...) shall flee to the
Pit, let no man stay him.

Boston, Printed for Joseph (...) Seller, and are to be Sold at his Shop, ner
of the Prison Lane next the Town. Anno 1686.

To the Reader,
THe Sermons emitted (...) that of mine, and that also Delivered by my Son) are
Published to gratify some who have been perhaps too importunately desiro^s to
have it so. The Person that occasioned the Preaching of them is now incapable
of receiving benefit by them. Whither they were blessed for a^^ saving good to
his Soul, the Lord knows; and it becomes us to leave secret things with God:
Late Repentance is seldom true. There are who think that many who perished in
the Flood, were by means of that Judgment brought to true Repentance. To this
sense some interpret that Scripture, 1 Pet. 4, 5: otherwise we read not of more
than one man in all the Book of God, that was brought home to Christ but a few
hours before his death. Nevertheless, the Lord knows how to make the woeful
death (as to his Body) of a great Sinner, to occasion the Conversion and
Salvation of many Souls.

If any be awakened by this sad Example, to turn from those sins which proved
(...) a miserable Man: And if these Sermons (such as they are) may be a means
to further the Work of Repentance toward God, and Faith in the Lord Jesus
Christ, in any that shall read them; the Design of this Publication will be
attained.

As for the Exhortation annexed to these Discourses, it was ^^livered on the
same day with that Sermon Preached by my Son (whom the Lord Jesus has fi^ed in
the same Church to which I am related) but in the after part of the day, and in
another Congregation, the Reverend and Worthy Auth^r has not had time to
Transcribe his whole Sermon, only that part of it which concerned the (...)
Condemned Malefactor. Many have carn^sily desired that it might in this way be
made public. And because it is most suitable that the best (...) come at last,
it ^s in this Pro^^^ation (...) to the other Sermons. The Lord p^o^pe^ his
Truth by whomsoever spoken or written, for the good of Souls.

Increase Mather.
March 26 1686.
Numb. 35.16. And if he smite him with an instrument of iron (so that he die)
he is a murderer, the murderer shall surely be put to death.


A Great part of this ^^^pter is taken up in declaring who should have benefit
by the City of Refuge; and who might not expect ^dvantage thereby. There are
two sorts of Man^ayers, (1) One may kill his Neighbor accidentally, though he
had no design of hurt to him-nor any displeasure against him. The City of
R^fuge was for such. (2.) A Man may in hatred or in passion kill another, and
then the City of Refuge could not secure or save him from the hand of Justice;
To intimate which is the scope of the Words which have been now read: wherein
we have two things: 1. A Criminal. 2. The Punishment to be inflicted on such a
Criminal.

1. A Criminal He is a Murderer: there are three Particulars mentioned, which
if they concur the person is guilty of Murder: 1. If he smites another man, h.
e. if he does so, not accidentally but designedly. 2. If the Instrument which
he smites him with be of Iron, that makes the Murder to be the more evident. In
the verses following it is added, That if he smite him mortally with a Stone,
or with Wood, he shall be accounted a Murderer. The Jewish Writers tell us,
Vide Grotium and Ainsworth in Locum.
That if a Man were slain, there was diligent enquiry made ^^ncerning the
Instrument, whereby he was killed. If it was with a Stone, or with Wood, they
examined whether the Stone or Wood were of that bigness as that the dead man
might probably receive his deaths Wound thereby: But (they say) if it were with
an Instrument of Iron; no enquiry was made as to the greatness of it, because
the least nail of Iron might easily kill. And it is to be presumed, that a man
will not strike another with an Instrument of Iron, except Blood and Murder be
in his Heart. 3. If the Wound prove mortal, then the striker is guilty of
Murder. Though a Man should smite another, and that with an Instrument of iron,
if death does not follow, he is not guilty of that high degree of Murder which
the Text speaks of; but if he smite his Neighbor so that he die, then he is a
Murderer.

2. Here is the punishment to be inflicted on such a Criminal. The Murderer
shall surely be put to death. Only Gods Order was to be observed. The Murderer
was to be put to death in a judiciary way. Amongst ^he Jews, the avenger of
blood was to be the Execu^^^^^, as the nineteenth verse in this Chapter shows,
where it is said, that the avenger of blood himself shall slay the Murderer.
The Hebrew Word for the Avenger of Blood is GOEL, which is sometimes transla^^d
a Red^^mer. The Word properly signifies one that is near a kin. The next
kinsman had right to Redeem, he also was to be the Avenger of blood. Only
before Execution could be done, the Magistrate was to pass a Judgment. The
Manslayer was sent from the City of Refuge whither he fled, unto the place
where the Fact was done, there to have his Trial. If the Magistrates of that
place found him not Guilty, he was returned to the City of Refuge there to be
in safety till the death of the High Priest, and then to be set at liberty: But
if he was found guilty of Murder, he was to be put to death publicly by the
hand of Justice.

The Doctrine then before us, or suited to the present Occasion is, That Murder
is a Sin so great and heinous as that whoever shall be found Guilty of it, must
be put to Death by the hand of Public Justice.

The Explication and Confirmation of this Doctrine may be set before us in
three Propositions.

Propos. I. Murder, is when a Man does voluntarily and unjustly take away the
life of another person.

So that there are three things implied in Murder:

1. The Object slain must be one of mankind. To take away the life of another
Creature is n^^ Murder. The eighth Commandment says, Ye shall not Kill. The
Hebrew words are LO TIRTZACH, i. e. Thou shall not Murder. It was vain opinion
of the Man^bees* when Austin confutes, That the Life of no Creature might be
taken away, because the Commandment of God says, Thou shall not kill. God has
given express leave to all the Sons of Noah, i. e. to Mankind, that they should
take away the Lives of other Creatures, as they should see cause; only Man
being a more Divine Creature, his Life is to be Sacred. It may not be meddled
with, except in cases where the Great and Sovereign God, who has an absolute
Power of Life and Death, has appointed.

2. Capital Murder is wilful. There is a difference between Murder, and Casual
Homicide, or Accidental Man slaughter. If a Man shoots an Arrow, or throws a
Stone, or the like, not thinking that any one will be hurt thereby; in case it
should happen to kill a man, it is not Murder. If that he did it ignorantly,
unawares, and no way sought the ^arm of the slain Man, he is not to be punished
as a Murderer: This we see in the Context. ver. 15, 23, 24, 25. The City of
Refuge was for such an one; Deuteronomy. 19.4, 5. And this is the case of the Slaver,
which shall flee thither, that he may live: whosoever kills his Neighbor
ignorantly, wh^^ ^e hated not in time pa^^; as when a man goes into the Wood
with his Neighbor to be^ wood, and his hand fetches a stroke with the Ax, to
(...) down the Trre, and the head slippeth (...) the (...), and lights upon
his Neighbor that he (...), be shall f^ee unto one of those Cities and (...).
Not but that a man may be guilty of Murdering his Neighbor: though he did not
^^tend to kill him; namely, if he did smite ^^m in anger, or intend to harm
him, as the expression is in the Twenty Third Verse of (...) Chapter. And it is
here expressy declar^^, not only that he who shall lie in wait, or (...) for an
opportunity to destroy his ^^^^hbour, or that did formerly hate him, (...) be
judged a Murderer, but if he smite (...) that he dye, verse 21. i.e. in (...)
^ile wa^; though he had no quarrel (...) before, if h^ fall out with him, and
(...) passion smite him a mortal blow, he (...) murdered his Neighbor, and is
guilty (...) ^eath. This is presumptuous Murder, (...) heart was in it, nor can
it be said to ^^^one ignorantly. There is another clear ^^^^pture, which
pro^eth, that if persons ^^ll out, and in the strife one shall strike the ^^her
a deadly blow Life shall go for Life, ^ee Exodus 21.14, 21, 22.

But then Thirdly, In Murder the Life of a Man is taken away unjustly. In some
cases it is lawful to take away the Life of another. Yea, matters may be so
circumstanced, as it would be a great sin not to do it: There are Three Cases,
wherein the Life of a Man may be taken away, and yet no Sin, no Murder
commit^ed.

1. (...) ca^^ of a Just War. There is a great di^ between Bloodshed in War,
and (...) ^^me of Peace. Joah was guilty of Murder, because he Shed the Bl^od
of War in Peace, 1 Kings 2.5. Had he Killed Abner and Amasa in the War-Time,
before David had made Peace with them, he had not been guilty of Murder; but
because he shed Blood after a Peace was concluded, he was a Murderer. Sometimes
in War, they that take away Lives do an Acceptable Service to God. Abigail told
David, that God would certainly bless him, because he fought the Battles of the
Lord, 1 Samuel 25.28. And we know that Abraham was blessed, after he returned
from the Slaughter of the Kings, with whom he had a just War, Heb. 7.2. In
these Cases the not shedding of Blood may possibly expose to a Curse. Jer.
48.10. Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord deceitfully, and cursed ^^
^e that keeps back his Sword from Blood.

2. They that are in Civil Authority, may and ought to take away the Lives of
Men, that shall commit Crimes, by the Law of God worthy of Death. The Apostle
therefore says concerning the Magistrate: He is the Minister of God to thee
for good: But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for he bears not the
Sword in vain; for he is the Minister of God: a Revenger, to execute Wra^h upon
him that does Evil. Romans 13.4. Private Revenge is evil, but public Revenge on
those that violate the Laws of God, is good. The Magistrate is Gods Vice
gerent. As none can give Life but God, so none may take it away, but God or
such as he has appointed. It is their work to see that the Lives of Men be
taken from them, when God has said, That they shall surely be put to Death.
Hence David speaks, as in Psalm. 101.8. I will ea^ly destroy all the Wicked of
the Land, that I may cut off all the Wicked Doers from the City of the Lord.
God had put the Sword into his ha^^ for that end; that so he might clear the
L^nd of wicked Malefactors, who were wor^hy of Death, and he was resolved to
see Justice done. But private persons are not to arrogate to themselves that
which is the Magistrates proper work. Men must have lawful Authority for what
they do, else in taking away Life, they be^ame guilty of Murder. Suppose a
person to have committed never such Capital Crimes, if a private person, or one
that has no Legal Authority, shall take away his Life, he is guilty of Murder.

Except 3. In case of a man's own just defense. So a private person may take
away the Life of another: The light of Nature teaches men self preservation.
If a Murderer assault him he may kill rather than be killed. We cannot say that
Abner was guilty of Murder when he slew Asuhal in his own defense. Alsted
Theol. Cas. Cap. 15. p. 350.
If a man be contrary to Justice, invaded or set upon by another in an hostile
manner, and there be no other way for him to preserve his own Life, but by
killing the Assailant: The Law of Nature, and of all Nations acquit him from
the guilt of Murder. But he that has shed Blood causeless, or that has Avenge^
himself is a Murderer. 1 Samuel 25.31.

Propos. II. Murder is an exceeding great Sin. It is an expression in the
Scriptures, he is as if he slew a man, Isa. 66.3. Implying, that to slay a man
is a thing most horrid and hateful; it is indeed ^h^ greatest Sin against the
Second Table of the Moral Law, and is therefore set in the first place, amongst
negative Precepts therein. God forbids the greatest Sin in (...) ^^rst place:
It is a Crying Sin. The Lo^d said to Cain, The voice of thy Brothers (...)
cries to me from the ground, Genesis 4.10. In the or^ginal, the word is in the
Plural N^m^er, the voice of thy Brothers Bloods. Every drop of Abels Blood had
as it were a voice, a tongue in it, crying for Vengeance against his Brother,
that had Murdered him. But that this is a grievous Sin is manifest: 1. In that
it is a most unnatural thing. Creatures of the same kind are not wont to
destroy one another. Naturalists observe concerning Wolves, that though they be
crue^ creatures, they will never kill one another; therefore if men do so, they
are worse th^n Wolves and Tigers; so that Murder is an unnatural and a
monstrous wicked^^ss. 2. The Vengeance which is wont to follow this Sin,
proves that it is an horrid and heinous Transgression. There is a peculiar
Vengeance that does pursue this Sin at the heels of it. The Gentiles had the
notion of this fixed in their minds: Hence those Barbarians could say, No doubt
this Man is a Murderer, wh^^ though he escaped the Seas, yet venge^^^^ suffere^h
(...) to live, Act. 28.4. The Heathen Ethnici dice^ tanquam Deam and Filiam
I^vis colebant in Plut. lib. de sera vindicta dice D^^on dicitur.)
Esteemed (...) (which is the Word there used for Vengeance) as a D^i^^ that
would not suffer great Sinners, and in special Murderers to go unpunished.
Temporal V^ngeance pursues this sin. Hence they that have been guilty of it
seldom live long in quiet. Bloody and deceitful men shall not li^^ out half
their days, Psalm. 55.23. Either they are (...) off by the Sword of Civil
Justice, or if their Murders happen to be undiscovered, a secret Curse of God
follows them: oftentimes they are themselves Murdered, as both Divine and
Humane Records do abundantly declare: Nay, though men should truly Repent of
this sin, and are then through the merit of Christ saved from everlasting
punishment, yet not from temporal Judgment. I cannot tell whither ever any Man
that was found guilty of this sin did escape temporal Judgment at last. When
David had caused Uriah to be Murdered, he did repent of it most deeply and
unfeignedly, yet God punished him severely as to outward Judgments; he saw but
few comfortable days after that, the Sword never departed from his House. I
have read of a Man that ( c) fought a Duel and Murdered his Adversary, who
afterward was very penitent, and for several years an emin^nt ^nstance of
exemplary pity; but at last ^^ was smitten by the immediate hand of God, so as
that Blood gushed out of all the passages of his Body, and he died suddenly.
The Relator notes upon it, that though God forgave him as to Eternal, yet not
as to Temporal Vengeance. But especially Spiritual Vengeance follows this Sin:
The Murderers Soul is filled with hellish horror of heart; so that he is as it
were Damned above ground, and in Hell whilst he is yet alive. The Avenger of
Blood pursues his Soul; Murderers have confessed, that as soon as ever they
had committed the Bloody Fact, they felt the Flames of Hellfire in their
Consciences, and this we see in Cain. Therefore after he had murdered his
B^other, he cried and roared out, that his ^in was greater than could be
for^iven^, his punishment greater than could be endured. And some think that
the mark which the Lord set upon Cain, was a ghostly, guilty Countenance, that
he had Hell and Horror in his Countenance as well as in his Conscience. And
without Repentance, ^^e^lasting Vengeance will follow that Sin. It is said, No
Murderer has Eternal Life, 1 John 3.15. that is, without true Repentance: And
if he has not Eternal Life, then I am sure he has Eternal Death and Damnation.
If the Murderer were only to have the Life of his Body taken from him, tho in a
painful, shameful and accursed way, that were a light matter; but there is an
eternal (...); a weight of everlasting vengeance, h^^^ier than Mountains of
Lead, that shall press his immortal Soul to death, world without end, Murder
then is a fearful Sin.

Propos. 3. The Murderer is to be put to death by the hand of Public Justice.
And this confirms the former Proposition concerning the greatness of this Sin:
Men may not pardon or remit the punishment of that Sin. Among the Jews there
was no City of Refuge for a wicked or wilful Man slayer; and it is said in the
one and thirtieth verse of this Chapter, You shall take no satisfaction for the
Life of a Murderer, which is guilty of death, but he shall surely be put to
Death. This Sin shall not be satisfied for, with any other punishment, but the
death of the Murderer: There are some Crimes, that other punishment less then
death may be accepted of as a Compensation for the wrong done; either some
mulct or Fine in their Estates, or some other corporal punishment less than
death, but in case of Murder, no Fine or Imprisonment, or Banishment or
Corporal Punishment less than death can be accepted: Y^u shall take no
satisfaction for the Life of a Murderer. And indeed equity requires this; by
the Law of Retaliation, it is m^^^ that men should be done unto, as they have
done to others; and that as Limb should go for Limb, so Life for Life. But
besides that, there are two Reasons mentioned in the Scripture, why the
Murderer must be put to death.

Reas. I. That so the Land where the Murder is committed, may be purged from
the guilt of Blood. For Murder is such a Crime as does pollute the very Land
where it is done; not only the person that has shed blood is polluted thereby,
but the whole Land lies under pollution until such time as Justice is done
upon the Murderer; thus in the thirty third verse of this Chapter; this is
given as the reason why no satisfaction might be taken for the Life of a
Murderer, so shall ye not pollute the Land wherein you are; for blood it
defiles the Land, and the Land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed,
therein but by the blood of him that (...) it. One Murder unpunished man b^ing
guilt and a Curse upon the whole land* that all the Inhabitants of that Land
shall suffer for it; so that mercy to a Murderer is cruelty to a people.
Therefore is it said concerning the Murderer, Thin: Eye shall ^e pity him, but
thou shall put away the giult ^^^n^^cent Blood from Israel, that it may go well
with thee. If the Murderer be not punished, it may go ill with the whole, all
may fare the worse for it; if the sin be not duly punished there is a partaking
in the guilt of it.

Reas. II. Because Man is made in the image of God. This Reason is mentioned
Genesis 9.6. Whosoever sheddeth man's b^ood, by man* ^.c. by some man in Authority,
proceeding in an orderly way of Judicature, as the Hebrew Expositors do rightly
interpret the words, shall his blood be shed, for in the image of God made be
him. Hence there is sacriligious guilt in this sin; Amongst the Romans Sucton.
in tiber. cap. 58.
if a man did but strike his Servant near the place where one of their Emperors
lay, he was to die for it, because that was looked upon as an affront put upon
his Imperial Majesty; so he that shall kill a man that is made after the image
of God, (...) a Contempt upon the Divine Majesty, there ^s Treason against God
contained in the bloody bowels of this Sin. Upon this account it is indeed a
greater sin to kill a good man that ^as the Image of God renewed in him, then
(...) ^ill a wicked man. Nevertheless, that (...) ^s a Capital Crime; for all
men have something Calvin Rivet. and Pareus in Genesis 9.6.
of Gods Image remaining in them, not only in that every man has an immortal
Soul, and is in that respect more like the Immortal God than any other Creature
in the world, and in that men have a dominion over the Creatures, which is one
part of Gods image; on that account does the ^p^stle say, That Man is the Image
and Glory of God, 1 Cor. 11.7. But also, in that the Law is written in the
hearts of men by nature; Ames. Theol. lib. 1 cap. 14.
though God has executed spiritual death upon mankind for Adams Apostasy, after
a dreadful manner, yet he has moderated that punishment; hence men in a natural
estate, yet close with some Practical Principles of Piety and Righteousness, as
that God ought to be wor^hipped, that men should do as they would be done by,
and the like; and many natural men, yet have an Image of virtue, they have
something like Grace; a shadow of it, they hate flagitious Crimes, and approve
of a morally honest Conversation; these things show that there are some
remainders of the Image of God in men: Therefore he that shall murder such a
Creature is worthy of death.

But thus for the Doctrinal handling of the Truth before us: I proceed to make
some Application.

1. By way of Information.

2. For Exhortation.

Infor. 1. This Doctrine justifies the Authority here, in respect of the
Sentence of death which has been passed on the Murderer, who is this day to be
executed.

There is a man standing before the Lord, and amongst his people this day, who
has done just as my Text expresses, He has smitten his Neighbor, and that
with an Instrument of Iron too, with a cruel Spit made of Iron; the thing
proved by several Witnesses, and the man that was hurt dyed by that wound;
therefore he that has smitten him is a Murderer, and must surely be put to
death; though for a long time he denied it, nevertheless since his Condemnation
he has acknowledged it, and yesterday he confessed to me, that he had in his
rage murdered the man, whose death and blood has been laid to his charge; he
told me that the other gave him some ^ll language whereby he was provoked, and
that h^ said to him, if he came within the door, he would run the Spit into his
bowels, and he was as wicked as he said he would be, so that he is guilty of
Murder. Therefore none ought to blame those in Authority for causing the
Murderer to be put to death; conscience to God, and to the people under their
charge, and to their own Souls also, has necessitated them to do what they have
done in this matter. Let every one remember that Scripture, Prove. 28.17. A man
that does violence to the blood of any person, shall flee to the Pit, let no
man stay him; if he has shed blood, to the Pit let him go, and fly thither,
let all convenient speed be used in the execution of Justice, that so the Land
may be cleared from blood, and let no man in Authority stay him, let no private
person Solicit for him. But let us be thankful to God, that we are under such
Magistrates, as will do Justice, and Execute Judgment, and punish Sin according
as the Word of God requires that it should be done.

Inf. 2. Hence those things which have a tendency to, and a degree of Murder in
them, must needs be (...) e.g. Ra^^ sinful anger is an evil thing, Murder
begins there. It was said of those Brethren in iniquity, Simeon and Levi, That
Instruments of Cruelty were in their Habitations, for in their anger th^^ slew
a man, Cursed be their ^rath, for it was cruel, Genesis 49.5, 6. And our Lord
Jesus Christ in his Exposition of the sixth Commandment, shows that rash
anger is a degree of Murder, Matthew. 5.21, 22. You have heard that it was said
by them of old time, Ye shall not kill, and whosoever shall kill, shall be in
danger of the Judgment, but I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his
Brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the Judgment There is Man's
Judgment Seat, and Gods Judgment seat: murder makes a man be in danger of the
former; sinful anger exposes him to the latter; not that all anger is sinful,
there is an anger that is good, when a man is angry in Gods Cause, moved with
zeal and indignation, because God is dishonored; that is very good; and a man
may sometimes be angry in his own Cause too and yet not sin. Be angry and sin
not, but when men are angry without a just cause, that is evil. When they are
angry more than they have cause for, that they are all on a Flame for a mere
trifle, when (as one well expresses it) See Mr. Cradocks Supplement chap. 9.
p. 368.
Man shall suffer the Beacon of his Soul to be set all on fire at the landing
of every small Boat, that's a foolish and evil thing, or when men shall be angry
longer than they ought to be; an implacable Spirit is a vile Murderous Spirit:
Anger rests in the bosom of Fools; sinful anger is poison, which as soon as
ever a man has taken it into his mouth, he should spit it out again. And when
anger shall break out into Curses and wicked imprecations; that's wicked Anger.
This Condemned man that stands here, confesses that he was wont in his passion
to Curse all near him. He murdered many a man with his bloody tongue, before he
was left of God to murder any with his hand. His mouth was full of Cursing and
^itterness before he shed blood; and when men in their rage imprecate and curse
themselves, it is a very evil thing; there are some that will say, They wish
they may be hanged, if such a thing be so, and many times the Righteous
Judgment of God brings that very evil upon them.

There is a Printed Relation concerning Sir Gervase Elmayes mentioned by Howel
in his Londinopolis, and by Mr. Bali of the power of Godliness L. 4. C. 3. P
329. And by Mr. Leigh In his Body of Divinity, Book 4, C. 16. P. 445.
a person of Quality that was hanged for a Crime laid to his charge; and when
he came to die, he confessed that he had been much addicted to that sinful
Recreation of Cardplaying; and that many times when the Game went otherwise
than he wished for, he should in his Passion, wish that he might be hanged if
it were so, and once he wished he might be hanged if ever he played again; and
therefore (said he) God is just in bringing me to such a death as that. And
when anger shall break out into blows, quarrelling and fighting between
Neighbors that ought to live in peace, there is great evil in it. This
miserable Creature before us, acknowledges that it was so with him. In his mad
passions he cared not whom he did strike or hurt. It is not good for them that
have lawful power to strike others, to do it in passion. It is not good for
Parents to strike their Children, or Masters their Servants, or School masters
their Scholars in heat of anger, lest they become guilty of breaking the sixth
Commandment. A moral Heathen, when his Servant had committed a fault that
greatly incensed him, said to him, If I were not angry with thee I would strike
thee; but I will stay till my passion is over before I punish thee. Again, a
spirit of Revenge is an evil thing: it is Murder in Gods sigh^, 1 John 3.15. He
that hates his Broth^r, is a Murderer. Hatred never rests but in the
destruction of the thing hated. To say no more here; Cruelty is a degree of
Murder and a great Evil. And most of all for men to be cruel to those that
stand in nearest relation to ^^em (as this Malefactor owns that he has ^een)
whom they ought to love dearly; is an high degree of inhumanity No man that
acted like a man, ever hated his own flesh. To be cruel, though to a Serv^nt or
Slave, is a very sinful thing. Nay Cruelty though to a Beast argues a
murderous, bloody disposition. The Scripture says that a good man is merciful
to his Beast. They then that make themselves sport with putting dumb creatures
to misery, do very sinfully. Yet that has been practiced here of later years in
the open Streets, especially on one day of the Year I intend the Cock-s^alings
of Shrove Tuesday.
To do it at such a time is vanity and Heathenish Superstition; besides to make
sport with exercising cruelty on dumb Creatures, which had never been miserable
had not the sins of men made them so; it is a wicked thing, and ought not to be
amongst those that call themselves Christians.

Inf. 3. If Murder be such a crime as has been showed, it is then a ^^rrowful
thing that so many of the Child^^n of m^n should be found guilty of this evil.

There a^e some p^aces of the World where Murder is a common Sin. The dark
corners of the Earth are full of the habitations of cruelty. And there are many
in the World that call themselves Christians, who nevertheless delight in
shedding innocent Blood. Persecutors are Murderers. Bloody Papists are in the
Scripture charged with Murder on this account: It is said of them, they
repented not of their Murders, Rev. 9.21. namely of their Murdering the Saints
of God for their Religion, for the truths sake; and because they would not
comply with their Superstitions and Idolatries. That Mother of Harlots the
Church of Rom^ she has made her self drunk with blood; many millions of Saints
have been murdered by her. Persec^^^ts are Cains Children. O how many are there
going up and down the World with Cain's bloody Club in their hands to this day!
It was Luther's sayings, Cain will kill Abel to the end of the World. But
besides this, that which the Civil Laws of Nations make to be Murder is
frequent in some places. A late Historian reports, that in the Kingdom of
France, See Tr^p on Genesis 9.6.
within (...) space of ten years, there were known (...) no less than six
thousand Murders committed. And in Popish Countries, they have Sanctuaries for
Murderers. V. Corn a Lapide in Deuteronomy. 1.9.
A ^an that has been guilty of a wi^ful Murder, ^f ^he does but run into a
Church (as they call (...)) or into a Monastery, he is protected in those
bloody places of Refuge. Their Writers plead for this. And though no convicted
Murderer did ever escape the stroke of Justice in this Land (which is matter of
rejoicing) yet it is a very sad thing, that any in such a place as this should
be found guilty of such a Crime. That men should do so wickedly in a Land of
uprightness: but so it has been. Diverse have been Executed for this sin
formerly, and one that is to be put to death for it this day. And there have
been several Murders committed amongst us, the Authors of which are not as yet
known. Some that have been so monstrously Wicked and Unnatural as to embrew
their hands in the Blood of their own Children: who they are God knows, and
will find a time to judge them; and one day we and all the World shall know who
they are. Besides these, several others have been under vehement suspicion, and
tried for their lives, on the account of this Sin. We have all cause to Pray
for New England, as the Lords People of old were directed for to do, in case of
an uncertain Murder, Deuteronomy. 21.7, 8. They shall Answer and say, our hands have
not shed this Blood, neither have our eyes s^^n it; Be merciful O Lord to thy
People Israel, whom thou have Redeemed, and lay not innocent Blood unto the
people of Isreal's charge; and the blood shall be forgiven them. Be merciful O
Lord, to thy People in New England, and lay not innocent Blood to their charge.

USE II. For Exhortation:

There is a double Exhortation before us:

1. Hence men should beware that they do not become guilty of this Sin. It is
in Man's corrupt nature. Nothing is more natural th^^ a spirit of Revenge, as
we see in little Children, which discovers that the Children of Men bring
murderous Natures into the World with them. Hence the Apostle declaring, what
men by nature are, says, That their Feet are swift to shed blood, Romans 3.15.
because he^e is a marvelous propensity in man's Nature unto this sin. Should not
the Lord either ^y special or common Grace restrain them, how m^^y would soon
become guilty of Murder it self? Yea, and those too that do not ^elieve any
such thing concerning themselves. When the Prophet Elisha told Hazael what a
^rodigious Murderer he would be, what (said ^e) Am I a Dog, that thou should
have such ^houghts of me? But in a little time he appeared to be as cursed a
Blood-hound as ever ^he Prophet had said to him. O then beware of this sin. And
therefore take heed of gi^ing way to wicked passions. Lesser sins make way for
greater. And especially take ^eed of great Sins: For many a Man by being guilty
of other great sins, has provoked ^he Holy God to leave him unto this Sin too.
The poor condemned Malefactor who stands ^ere in the sight of this
Congregation, does ^cknowledg, that he has by living in other ^^ns provoked God
to leave him unto this, which he must now die for, and warns others e^pecially
Young men to take heed of those ^ins as they love their lives or souls. I know
^ot but that it may be for edification, and and to Gods Glory, if I should read
in this great Assembly; what I received in Writing from this dying and
distressed Creature. It is this which follows;

I James Morgan, being Condemned to die, must needs own to the glory of God,
that he is Righteous, and that I have by my Sins provoked him to destroy me
before my time. I have been a great sinner, guilty of Sabbath-breaking, of
Lying, and of Uncleanness; but there are especially two Sins: whereby I have
offended the Great God; one is, that Sin of Drunkenness, which has caused me to
commit many other Sins; for when in drink, I have been often guilty of Cursing
and Swearing, and quarelling, and striking others. But the Sin which lies most
heavy upon my Conscience, is, that I have despised the Word of God, and many a
time refused to hear it preached. For these things, I believe God has left me
to that which has brought me to a shameful and miserable Death. I do therefore
beseech and warn all persons, young men especially, to take heed of these Sins,
lest they provoke the Lord to do to them as he has justly done by me. And for
the farther peace of my own Conscience, I think my self obliged to add this
unto my foregoing Confession, That I own the Sentence which the Honored Court
has passed upon me, to be exceeding just, in as much as though I had no former
grudge and malice against the man whom I have Killed, yet my passion at the
time of the fact was so outrageous, as that it hurried me on to the doing of
that which makes me justly now proceeded against as a Murderer.

Thus does this miserable man confess: but how many are there in the
Congregation, that this may strike terror and trembling into their Souls.

O Lord, how many are there in this great Assembly, who have lived and do live
in those very Sins, for which this man confesses that God has been provoked to
destroy him! Let Sinners hear and take warning this day; this man now that the
Terrors of God have awakened his distressed Soul bitterly complaints of two
Sins especially; one is that of Drunkenness. And indeed, Drunkenness has been a
bloody Sin; it has been the cause of many a Murder. The man here who is now
flying to the Pit, confesses that in his drink, he was wont to curse and
swear, and to quarrel, and strike those near him; and he acknowledged to me,
that he had made himself grievously drunk the day before he was left of God to
commit the Murder which he now must dye for; yea, and that he hid that v^^^
night been drinking to excess, and that ^e was not clear of drink at the time
when he did the bloody Fact? And does not the Scripture say, Who has We, Who
has Sorrow, Who has Contentions! who has Babbling? who has Wounds without Cause!
They that tarry long at the Wine -- Prove. 23.29, 30. Wicked men when they are
in drink, will fall to quarrelling; words will bring on blows, and those blows
will cause wounds, and those wounds may perhaps prove mortal. And then what Woe
and Sorrow follows: Oh how many have by means of this Sin, been guilty of
Interpretative Murder! They have caused others to die by making them drunk;
There has been an horrible thing done in this place; some wicked persons (who
they are God knows) have given or sold Strong Liquors on the Indians, and made
them drunk also, and several of them have dyed in that condition; let such
know, that the Lord will judge them; yea, he will judge them as men that have
shed blood shall be judged; they must answer for the blood of Souls and Bodies
too. Most wick^^ and miserable Creatures they are, that ^o gain a few pence,
will bring upon themselves the guilt of the blood of Souls and of Bodies too.
And this bloody sin of drunkenness has been the cause of many a self Murder;
how many have made themselves the woeful Martyrs of Bacchus thereby: by
Drunkenness and intemperance, they have brought their Bodies to the Grave, and
their Souls to Hell before their time. It is an unhappy thing that of la^er
years, a kind of Strong Reverend Mr. Wilson once said in a Sermon, (...) of
drink come into the Country, which is called, (...), but it should be called,
Kill men for the Devil.
Drink has been common amongst us, which the poorer sort of people, both in
Town and Country, can make themselves drink with, at cheap and easy rates. They
that are poor and wicked too (Ah most miserable Creatures!) can for a penny or
two pence make themselves drunk: I wish to the Lord, some Remedy might be
thought of, for the prevention of this evil. It is a very sad thing, that so
many Bodies and Souls should be eternally ruined, and no help for it. How few
are there, that if once they be addicted to this vice, do ever truly repent of
it, or turn from it. There was a man, who hearing that his Son took evil
courses, and that he followed such a vice, well (said he) I hope he will leave
that; and that he was given to another vice, I hope (said he) he will leave that
too; but it was told him his Son was given to Drunkenness also: Nay, then (said
he) I have no hope of him. I will not say (as he did) there is no hope that
ever a Drunkard should repent, but I say, there have been but few such
instances in the world. How rarely have any of you known a man that has been
addicted to this Body destroying, and Soul-murdering iniquity, that has truly
repented of it, or turned from it again. O then, let men that have any love for
their Lives or Souls, beware of this bloody Sin.

But the other evil which this undone man, does especially cry out of, and
which now that he sees his Soul going into Eternity, he says, lies most
heavy upon his Conscience, is his despising the Word of God. I do not wonder to
hear him speak so, for I have known several Condemned Persons, who have made
the same outcry. O nothing terrifieth our Consciences, like the thought of
this, that we have neglected the means of Grace! And what think you of Sinners
in Hell, who are wayling for this with tears of Blood for ever and ever; whose
doleful and bitter cry, is, O the Sermons which we once heard, or might have
heard but would not: Ten Thousand Worlds would we give for an opportunity, to
hear one of those Sermons again with any hope of finding mercy with God! O you
that have lived under the Gospel, but despised it, think of this. Verily I say
unto you, all the sins in the world will not Damn like this: Suppose a man to
have been guilty of Adultery, or Murder, or the most horrid Transgressions
against the Law of God, these will not Damn his Soul like that of despising the
Word of God. For this is the Condemnation that light is come into the world,
and men love darkness rather than light. And how shall we escape, if we neglect
so great Salvation: They that shall (...) ^ound guilty of neglecting the great
Salvation offered in the Gospel, cannot escape the Wrath of God to the utmost
of it. And this is true, not only concerning such as have lived under the
constant preaching of the Gospel, and yet remain, and live and dye in a natural
unconverted estate; but of them also, that might hear the Word of God, but will
not; concerning such Christ says, it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and
Gomorrah at the day of Judgment, than for them, Mat. 10.15. This dying man, now
that his Conscience is awakened, says, it is a terror to him to think, I might
have heard the Word of God Preached many a time, but refused it; he neglected
to hear Sermons, not only on Lecture-dayes, but on Lords-days too; when he was
a Servant, he was wont (as himself says) on the Sabbath days, to go out into
the Fields, and there to profane the Lords day, at the very time when he might,
and ought to have been hearing the Word of God; and since he had a Family, his
custom was to keep at home, when others were attending the Public Worship of
God; and he told me, that he did foolishly please himself, and think he had a
sufficient reason to stay at home, because he had not Clothes good enough to
appe^r publicly in; when as the money that he misspent in drink, would have
procured him clothing. Let others then by his example, be warned against this
evil, lest they provoke God, and feel sorrow for it, as he has done. I doubt
there are very many in this great Town guilty of his Sin in this particular,
perhaps some that are Professors of Religion, which is dreadful to think on. I
hear some say, that there are many hundreds, nay, some thousands in this place,
that seldom hear a Sermon Preached, from one end of the year to the other; if
that be so, it is very lamentable. What is like to become of the Souls of such
profane persons? If they that are in place of Power (be they Superior, or
inferior Officers) can possibly redress this evil, they will certainly do a
Service acceptable to God, and to the Lord Jesus Christ.

But I proceed to the second Exhortation.

If Murder be such a Crime as has been declared, then, let whoever has been
guilty of ^^'s sin, be humbled for it, and repent of it. As for Interpretative
Murder, many are guilty of that. O how many that have by debauchery and
intemperance, shortened the lives of themselves or others; let such repent, and
turn from their sins unto God. But I hope there is none in this vast Assembly,
that has been guilty of that Murder which is by the Law of God, and of the Land
a Capital Crime, excepting one man, and one such person where is here present,
unto whom I shall now particularly apply my self. Do you then hear, that your
Soul may live: This is the last Sermon that ^ver you shall hear. Time was when
you might have heard S^rmons, but would not; and now you shall not hear them,
though you would. For, as God ^id to him, This night thy Soul shall be required
of thee; So I say to you in his Name, This night thy Soul shall be taken from
thee: This might your Soul shall be either in Heaven or in Hell for ever. You.
are appointed to die th^s day, and after death, comes the Judgment; as soon as
your Body is dead, your immortal Soul shall appear before the Great God and
Judge of all, and a Sentence of Everlasting Life, or Everlasting Death shall be
passed upon you. Are you willing when those Chains, which a^e about you, shall
be taken off, that your immortal Soul should be hanged in Everlasting Chains?
Are you willing that when your Body is removed from the Prison, your Soul
should go to the Spirits that are in Prison? You have complained that you have
been in a Dungeon, and had little light there; but are you willing to go where
you shall never see light? Are you willing that when your Body is delivered
from this Dungeon, your Soul should go into that Dungeon, where is blackness of
darkness for ever? If not, I charge you in the Name of God to hear and obey his
Word: Yea, that Word which you have many a time despised: I have spoken so
often to you in p^^vate, since your being Apprehended, that I ^ all not need to
say much now, only a few words.

1. Consider what a Sinner you have been: The sin which you are to die for, is
as red as S^arlet; and many other sins has your wicke^ life been filled with.
You have been a S^ranger to me, I never saw you, I never ^^ard of you, until
you had committed the Murder, for which you must die this day; but I hear by
others, that have known you, h^w wicked you have been; and you have your self
confessed to the world, that you have been guilty of Drunkenness, guilty of
Cursing and Swearing, guilty of Sabbath-breaking, g^ilty of Lying, guilty of
secret Uncleanness; as Solomon said to Shimei, Thou know the wickedness
which thine own heart is privy unto; ^^ I say to you. And that which aggravates
your guiltiness not a little, is, that since you ^^ve been in Prison, you have
done wicked. ^y^ you have made your self drunk several ^^es since your
Imprisonment; yea, and y^u have been guilty of Lying since your C^ndemnation:
It was said to a Dying man D^ not thou fear God, seeing thou art under
Con^^^nation. O what a sinner have you been! for since you have been under
Condemnation, you have not feared God. And how have you sinned against the
Gospel? What Unbelief? What Impenitency have you been guilty of?

Consider 2. What misery you have brought upon yourself, on your body, that
must die an accursed death; you must hang between Heaven and Earth, as it were
forsaken of both, and unworthy to be in either; and what misery have you
brought upon your poor Children, you have brought an everlasting reproach upon
them. How great will their shame be, when it shall be said to them, that their
Father was hanged, not for his goodness, as many in the world have been, but
for his wickedness: Not as a Martyr, but as a Malefactor, truly so? But that
which is ten thousand thousand times worse then all this, is, that you have
(without Repentance) brought undoing misery upon your poor, yet precious Soul:
Not only death on your Body, but a second death, on your never dying Soul: It
is said in the Scripture, that Murderers shall have their part in the Lake,
which burns with fire and Brimstone, which is the Second Death: Rev. 21.8. O
tremble at that! I remember a man that was Condemned and Executed in this place
some years ago, that had been a Soldier, and as stout a spirited man as most
in the world, who when he came to die, thus expressed himself to a Minister,
that treated with him about his Soul, I (said he) never knew what fear meant,
though I have been amongst Dr^wn Swords, and before the Canons mouth; I feared
not death; but now you tell me of a Second Death, it makes my Soul to shake
within me. That Is a death, the thought whereof may make the Soul of the stonest
Sinner in the world to tremble; for that is a death which is eternal: The things
which are seen are temp^ral, but the things which are not seen are eternal. The
death of the body, that is seen, and it is soon over; but what becomes of the
Soul when a sinner dies, they that stand by him do not see, but if he die
impenitent, the death which is not seen takes hold on him, and it is eternal:
The God against whom he has sinned, lives for ever to punish him. And a
fearful thing it is, to fall into the hands of the everliving God: O run not
into the mouth of the Second Death; into the wide mouth of the fiery Pit, which
has devoured millions of millions of immortal Souls; and know you for certain,
that if you die impenitent, your Damnation will be no ordinary one; for you
have not only transgressed against the Law of God, with an high hand, but
sinned against the Gospel too. The Sermons which you have heard formerly, o^
might have done, will be as so many witnesses against you, before the Judgment
seat of Christ: the three Sermons which have been Preached to you in Public,
since your Condemnation; the pains which has been taken with you in private, by
one or other of the Lords Servants; all these will aggravate your Condemnation,
when you shall be Judged again before all the world, at the last day if you die
impenitent.

Consider 3. There is yet a possibility that you^ Soul may be saved;
notwithstanding all that has been spoken to you, do not despair; repent but do
not despair. I would not have you say as Cain did, My sin is greater than can
be forgiven: The Lord is a merciful God; though men cannot forgive you, God
can; and he will do it, if you unseignedly repent, and believe on the Lord
Jesus. There is infinite merit in the death of Christ; if your bloody Soul be
washed in his blood, it shall be made whiter than the Snow: That sin which you
must now dye for, God has forgiven to others: upon their true Repentance:
Manasseb filled the streets of Jerusalem with innocent blood, but when he
humbled himself, and besought the Lord for mercy, God was entreated of him. O
therefore repent, and then tho your Body (...) die, your Soul shall live, and
not die.

I have but two words more to say to you, and then I shall ^ake my leave of you
for ever.

1. Be sure that you be sincere in your Repentance. Many times men under fears,
will seem very penitent, when as they do but fla^^^ God with their mouths, and
lie unto him with their Tongues: Thus it was with Pharaoh, and with many a
Sinner, whose hard heart was never broken nor changed; we see often, that
Sinners on sick-beds, when they behold Death and Eternity before their eyes,
will confess their sins, and promise Reformation; but if the Lord spare and
restore them, they are the same that they were before* And we have known
instances among our selves, of men that when they have been Captives, and in
Turkish slavery, they have pretended to a sense of those sins which provoked
the Most High to bring that misery upon the^, and have written seemingly pi^^s
and penitent Letters to their friends, but now God has delivered them, they are
as vain as profane, as ungodly as ever in their lives before; nay, some of them
worse: for the truth is, if men be not humbled and converted by such signal
dispensations, many ^^mes they are judicially and everlastingly hardened. They
never leave sinning until they have sinned themselves into Hell, pa^^ all hopes
of mercy, or of recovery. To come nearer to you, I have known some, more than
one, or two, or three, that have been Condemned to die, and whilst they
remained under that Sentence, they seemed very penitent, but they were pardoned
(for they had not been guilty of Murder as you have) and since that, have been
as wicked as ever. O then look to your self, that you do not dissemble with God
and man, and your own Soul too. And let not the fear of punishment only, but
the sense of mercy break your heart.

2. In this way of sincere Repentance, be take your self to the City of Refuge;
go to Christ for life. The wilful Manslayer had (as you heard but now) no
benefit by the City of Refuge; so shall impenitent Sinners have no Salvation by
Christ; but they that have a real sight of their sins, and fly from the
Avenger of Blood, unto Christ for Life, he is ready to succor them. Poor man!
has the si^ty Serpent bitten and stung thy Soul; then look unto the Brazen
Serpent, look unto the Lord Jesus, that you may live and not die for ever.
Build your hopes of Salvation on Christ and his Righteousness alone: Do not
think you shall be saved, only because Good Men have prayed for you, or for the
Confession of your sins, which you have now made; or for the sake of any thing
but Christ. And I pray the Son of God to have Compassion on you.

The Last Expressions and solemn Warning of JAMES MORGAN, As they were in
Shorthand taken from his Mouth, at the place of Execution: March 11. 1685/6.
I Pray God that I may be a warning to you all, and that I may be the last that
ever shall suffer after this manner: in the fear of God I warn you to have a
care of taking the Lords Name in vain; mind and have a care of that Sin of
Drunkenness, for that is a sin that leads to all manner of sins and wickedness:
(mind, and have a care of breaking the sixth Commandment, where it is said,
Thou shall do no Murder) for when a Man is in Drink he is ready to commit all
manner of sin till he fill up the cup of the wrath of God, as I have done by
committing that Sin of Murder: I beg of God, as I am a dying man, and to appear
before the Lord within a few minutes, that you may take notice of what I say to
you; Have a care of Drunkenness, and ill Company, and mind all goo^
Instruction, and don't turn your back upon the Word of God as I have done. When
I have been at Meeting, I have gone out of the Meetinghouse to commit sin, and
to please the Last of my flesh; and don't make a mock at any poor object of
pity, but bless God that he has not left you as he has justly done me to
commit that horrid sin of Murder. Another thing that I have to say to you, is
to have a care of that House where that Wickedness was committed, and where I
have been partly ruined by: But here I am, and know not what will become of my
poor Soul which is within a few moments of Eternity; I that have Murdered a
poor Man, who had but a little time to Repent, and I know not what is become of
his poor Soul; O that I may make use of this opportunity that I have; Oh that I
may make improvement of this little little time before I go hence and be no
more: O let all mind what I am a saying now, I am a going out of this World; O
take warning by me, and beg of God to keep you from this Sin which has been my
ruin. His last words were, O Lord receive my Spirit, I come unto thee O Lord,
I come unto thee O Lord; I Come, I Come, I Come.

ERRATA.
In the Epistle, page 1. line 16 read 1 Pet. 4.6. in the Sermon, p. 4. l. 6.
for or r. as: p. 5. l. 4. for when r. whom: p. 12. l. 4. for pity, r. piety l.
24 for Ghostly, r. Ghastly.

FINIS.

