A Brief DISCOURSE OF JUSTIFICATION.

Wherein This Doctrine is Plainly laid down according to the SCRIPTURES.

As it was Delivered in several SERMONS on this SUBJECT.

BY Samuel Willard, Teacher of a Church in Boston.

Phil. 3. 9 And be found in him, not having mine own Righteousness which is of
the Law, but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which
is of God by Faith. Hic locus in Theologia facile primarius, nobisque maxim
salutaris est, quo obscurato, adulterato, vel everse fieri nequit ut puritas
doctrinae in aliis locis retineatur, aut vera Ecclesia consistat: Synopsis pur:
Theol. de Justif: p. 407. 1686. Boston, Printed by S: G. for Samuel Phillips at
the West end of the Town house. 1686.

To the Reader.
I T may be thought a thing superfluous and altogether needless to trouble the
Age with any thing of this nature, after so many excellent Treatises have been
exhibited on this Subject: nor am I so much a stranger to my self, as to think
that any thing of mine can make an addition of light thereunto.

I have only this to say, that the Doctrine it self is of such moment to be
known by all Christians, that it must needs be the duty of such Ministers as
would approve themselves to be Faithful, to be much in asserting and evidencing
it to their Auditories, and laboring to establish them in the knowledge and
belief of it: which I having accordingly endeavored in the following Sermons,
it found that acceptance in the Preaching, that I was desired to let it come
abroad: and considering that the smalness of the Book might invite some to read
it, that would not allow themselves time to peruse larger tracts on the
Subject; or to be at the expense to purchase them: as also that the diverse ways
of handling the same Doctrine is found to be of profit, by reason of the
various inclinations of men to entertain things, I was the rather willing to
it, because I knew not but this also might possibly be of some service;
especially, since in it I made it my endeavor to avoid all controversy or
dispute, and labored with all plainness to suite expressions to common
capacities. I hoped it might on that account yield some advantage to more
unlearned Christians, to whose perusal I do more especially recommend it. This
I am fully persuaded of, that a right conception of the Doctrine of
Justification, is of as great necessity to the making one a sound and stable
Christian as any one thing in Religion: and if this small piece may any way be
serviceable to the faith of any, I shall not think my labor in vain; which
that it may, I commend it to his grace on whom all good success depends;

Who am the most unworthy to be called a Minister of the Gospel. S. Willard.
Boston 1686.
Phillippians III. IX. And be found in him, not having mine own Righteousness,
which is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the
Righteousness which is of God by Faith.
THe Justification of a Sinner before God, is (as one great mystery of the
Gospel, and Wonderment of Angels; so) that after which every one of the
posterity of fallen men has great reason to be earnestly inquisitive; it being
the foundation of our present peace with God, and the ground of our appearing
before him with joy in the great day of Accounts. How much Paul's heart and
thoughts were taken up with this solicitude, the Text and Context will make to
appear; for having told us how highly privileged he was, verse 4, 5, 6. and
how willingly he parted with those privileges, verse 7. yea, and how
resolutely he continued to despise every thing of his own, verse: 8. beginning:
he proceeds to render the reason why he so did; and that is drawn up in several
particulars, and all relating unto Christ: q. d. I do ask this for Christ's
sake: there are therefore three ends here specified.

1. To know Christ, verse. 8. which knowledge he declares to be a very excellent
thing.

2. To be entitled to Christ, to win him, to get him for his own, verse 8.

3. To be found in him, Text: q. d. that my relation to him may be real; that
there has been a certain and unquestionable implanting of me into Christ; not
only such as will give me the denomination of a Christian among men, but that
will prove me to be one of his in the day of judgment. And to let us see that
it is no insignificant or mean design that he is so intent upon, he gives us an
account of the advantage that he promised to himself hereby, or what benefits
he expected to receive, as the fruits of this interest in Christ, and these are
three.

1. Justification by Faith in him, Text.

2. Communion with him, verse 10.

3. A Glorious Resurrection in the last day, verse 11.

The first of these is that which is to be the subject of the ensuing discourse.

In the words of the Text then, we have presented to us,

1. An expression of Paul's great aim, viz. to be found in Christ; and this
should be the reach of every one that would be a Christian indeed.

2. As an Exposition of what he means by this option of his, so a reason given
of this desire, in the sequel of the verse: It is, q. d. By being found in
Christ. I intend being interested in his Righteousness; or the reason why I
would be upon trial found united to Christ, is, that I may have his
Righteousness reckoned to me as mine own; that I may be acquitted and justified
in the great day upon his account. The words therefore clearly held out unto
us, the whole substance of the great point of Justification, or the way wherein
a sinner comes to be Justified before God, viz.

1. In general, he must be found in Christ:

2. More specially or explicitly:

1. He must have a Righteousness for the matter of his Justification; as
appears in the setting of an affirmative against the negative: not having mine
own, but, etc. one is denied or removed to make way for the other.

2. This Righteousness which he is thus sollicitously reaching after, is
expressed,

1. Negatively, not mine own Righteousness, which is of the Law.

2. Affirmatively, but that, etc. i. e. The Righteousness of Christ, whose
Righteousness is to be looked upon as the Mevitorious and Matertal Cause of our
Jaustification.

3. The Author of this Righteousness is here declared, viz. God, the
Righteousness which is of God:

4. The instrument of our Justification by this Righteousness is declared; and
that is Faith, which is of God by Faith, and the object of this Faith is also
signified, viz. Christ, through the Faith of Christ.

By his own Righteousness of the Law, Paul intends his Personal Righteousness,
performed by his own endeavors, and accommodated to the tenor of the Covenant
of Works. By the Righteousness which is of God, he intends both that which God
has devised and procured for us, and confers upon us freely, and that also
which was wrought by a Divine Person, even the Eternal Son of the Eternal
Father: By the Faith of Christ, he intends not the Faith which Jesus Christ
exerted, or his personal and inherent Faith, but the Faith which both has the
Lord Jesus Christ for its object, and also flows from or is wrought by Christ,
as the efficient of it in us*

What further explication the words may require, will be taken notice of in the
prosecution of the Subject.

I shall not take up all that might be observed from the words, but endeavor
to pick up something out of them, which may lead us to that which I intend,
viz. a little enquiry into the great article of Justification: Hence,

DOCTRINE,

That Justification of a Sinner before God, flows not from his own legal
righteousness, but from the Righteousness of Christ, freely impated by God, and
received by Faith.

That Paul is here speaking of Justification, is very plain and evident; for he
fully describes to us the quality of that righteousness which he would appear
in before Gods Tribunal; and no other reason can be rendered why he should be so
careful about his Righteousness then; but upon the account of his standing
justified, and escaping of Condemnation; nay, though he names not the word, yet
his terms are the very description of Justification by him else where,

In the opening of this great Truth, enquiry may be made into these things:

1. What is meant by Justification?

2. That it is impossible that it should flow (...) our Legal Righteousness.

3. That it is derived from the Righteousness of Christ alone.

4. That it is freely imported by God.

5. That it is received only by Faith.

I intend not here any Polemical, but only a Doctrinal Discourse.

The point of Justification is a main Article of the Christian Religion, and
that which principally gives us light into (yea wherein mainly consists) the
difference between the Law, and Gospel Covenant; one therefore calls it,
Arti^^lum (...) cadentis Eccles^^; and upon this account it has been most of
all battered by Satan and his Instruments, and made the apple of contention;
and ball of controversy in many Ages; there is therefore need of the greater
care to be well established it, and rightly built upon it, and indeed I (...)
see how Christ can rightly be believed in unto Salvation, where this Article is
either not at all known, or fundamentally mistaken:

I shall therefore endeavor to offer a brief Scripture account of it, and that
with the greatest plainness, and accommodation of it as far as I can to the
meanest capacities; and let it be attended with diligent heed, for it is our
life; there is but one way for a Sinner to be Justified, and if he so mistake
in that, as finally to come short of it he must fall under everlasting
condemnation, therefore it infinitely concerns us to take pains with our selves
that we may come to be acquainted with it.

Here then,

1. What is meant by Justification?

Answ. To justify a man, is in Scripture sense, For a Judge to absolve a
person from guilt, by pronouncing him Righteous. Now this sentence which is
thus past upon this person, is his Justification properly, Justification is a
word borrowed from Courts of Civil Judicature and the right understanding of it
is best (...) unto by considering of the allusion, and comparing it by these
several steps that are taken in this process in order to such an issue. Here
then these things may be observed.

1. That Justification presupposes a Legal Trial. The Apostle is here
referring to the day of Judgment, and tells us that he would then be found in
Christ, when he comes upon his last Trial, that so he may be able to stand it
out, and find an absolution at Gods Tribunal. If there were no Judgment wherein
men are to appear, and give up their accounts, there would be no need of their
Justification: but Paul lives in expectation of such a thing, and has also
given us to understand that all men have as much reason to expect it as he, it
being a truth of which there is not the least ground to make any doubt, 2 Cor.
5. 10. we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, Heb. 9. 27. it is
appointed for men once to die, and after that the Judgment: Now if men must be
judged, they must then first be tried, how else shall a Righteous Judgment
proceed?

2 That in this Trial there is a question supposed: and this question must be,
whether the man whocomes upon his Trial, be guilty of the breach of the Law by
which he is to be tried, or no. For all judgments must have a relation to some
Law, which is to be the Rule of Trial, and according unto which the man must be
found guilty or not guilty. In order to such a process, it is requisite that
there be a Case made, and this Case referred to, or examined and compared by
the Law, and thus there must be an account taken of the person, and a distinct
enquiry be made into all such matters as may be alleged either for or against
him, hence that, 1 Pet. 4. 5. Who shall give account to him that is ready to
judge both the quick and the dead. Giving an account, implies an examination of
a case; and the question can be no other than this, Whether the man be under
the guilt of a breach of Law, whether (...) have any such hold of him as to
condemn him; or any thing wherein he is guilty to lay to his Charge; or whether
he stands clear of it, and it has nothing whereof to accuse him.

3. That Justification is properly the act of the Judge of the Court. The man's
clearing must proceed according to his Sentence, and none can do it
authentically but he. It will (...) profit the man that stands at the Bar, to
have all the (...) standers, when they hear his Cause pleaded, to declare
themselves for him, and to say that it is good, innocent and faultless; all
this cannot justify him, but his case is still depending until the Judge himself
speaks, and his Sentence only determines it. Justification is an act of
authority, Pilate speaks in the quality of a Judge, John 19. 10. Know thou
not that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to release thee? God only
can justify a Sinner, for he is the mouth of his own Law, and reserves the
dispensation of it to himself, and to his Son (who is also God) who acts by
Commission from his Father, all Judgment therefore is given to Jesus Christ,
and the exertion of it remains with him, John 5. 22 The Father has committed
all Judgment to the Son.

4. The proper essence of Justification consists in two things.

1. The Absolution of the person from guilt. Justification in this respect
properly stands in opposition to Condemnation, which is the detaining of a
person under guilt, and fastening of that guilt upon him, hence we have the
opposition express, Prove. 17: 15: He that justifies the wicked, and he that
condemns the Just: Now guilt is properly an obligation binding a person over
to suffer punishment for some Transgression which he is fallen under;
Condemnation is a passing of a Sentence formally upon such an one, adjudging of
him so to suffer: and there is only this difference between these two, guilt
proceeds immediately from the Law, and is the Sentence of that; Condemnation is
the Sentence of the Judge, and proceeds from him, as one that has the power in
his hand of putting the Law in execution. Hence, Justification in reference to
this, is the denial of any such obligation, or the Judges freeing of the person
under Trial, from the Law, a delivering him out of its hands, a removal of
condemnation from him, so Romans 8. 1. There is therefore no more condemnation to
those that are in Christ; it is a pronouncing the person not guilty; and hereby
he sets the person out of danger of being hurt by the Law, and that by an
authoritative declaration, Signifying that upon trial and through examination
of the case, the Law has nothing against him who has done nothing worthy of
death or bonds:

2. The pronouncing of him Righteous: I therefore name this as a distinct part
of justification from the other, because, though it does contain that under it,
(for if I do declare such an one to be righteous, I do necessarily and by
consequence affirm him not to be guilty, because righteousness and guilt are
inconsistent) yet there is here something more in it; for there is not only a
negative Righteousness consisting in innocence, (which in some cases is enough
to free a man from condemnation among men) but there is also a positive
Righteousness required in the Law of God, and it was the condition of a
glorious reward; and this is a part of our Evangelical Justification, or it is
contained in the Sentence of the Judge, that we have this positive
Righteousness; not only that the man is not worthy of condemnation, because he
has not broken the Law, but that he is worthy of life, because he has kept
it, see Rev. 3. 4. They shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy. And
though the former of these does most properly answer the import of the word,
yet because they are both inseparable each from the other, and also each of
them is imputative, they are therefore suitably looked upon as the constituent
parts of our Justification.

How much this manifestly differs from Sanctification, (though by some they are
confounded) might largly be made to appear, but it is needless here to insist,
only in brief, the one is imputed, the other is inherent; the Righteousness of
the one is in Christ subjectively, of the other in the Believer; the one is an
act, the other is a work; the one a judicial act, the other a Phisical work,
the one works a Relative, the other a substantial change; the one is perfect at
once, the other gains its perfection by degrees; the one discharges a man from
guilt, the other frees him from pollution; the one declares him righteous, the
other makes him holy; and thus briefly for the thing which we are enquiring
after, viz Justification, according to the right notion of it.

2. It follows to make it to appear, that it is impossible that our
Justification should flow from our legal Righteousness: and in order to the
making out of this assertion, we may for an introduction, first enquire what is
meant by our Righteousness of the Law, and then what it is for our
Justification to flow from this Righteousness; And here,

1. Our own Righteousness of the Law intends anything that is done by us, what
her it spring from a principle of common Morality, or be performed by the
virtue of special inherent sanctifying grace: Paul in this Text has an eye
unto both these, for we have him renouncing of the former in verse. 7. and
undervaluing of the latter, in ver. 8. whatsoever personal act or work of
Obedience we do, whether in our state of unregeneracy or of Regeneration, as it
is a work, and bears a respect unto the Law of God, is called our
Righteousness, in opposition to the Righteousness of Christ.

2. For our Justification to flow from this, is as much as that this should be
the matter of our Justification; or that for, and in respect of which the Judge
is to pass a Sentence upon us according to the tenor of the Law; or that this
should be the ground and reason of the Sentence which he passes upon us: for
otherwise, there is no scruple to be made but that every true Believer does
sincerely desire to be found in a Righteousness which is according to the Law
of God, and to be full of good works: he would be sanctified throughout, and
perfectly conformed to Gods holy will, he makes it his study every day to live
unto God, and desires to be found so doing when he shall be summoned to appear
before his judge: but he has no mind to be found in it as his trust his
reliance, that which he would be tried by, and stand or fa^^ according as it
shall be found.

Now that this cannot justify us, or be the matter of our justification; or
that our inherent Righteousness and good works proceeding from it, will not
merit and procure this for us, is the thing to be evidenced and will appear if
we lay together these conclusions following.

1. That God in the Justification of a Sinner acts the part of a Judge, and
Justifies the sinner judicially, or as a righteous judge, i. e. he does it in
the way of a process, and upon trial, and according unto equity: He does not
act the part of a Father in this case who may connive at, pity and overlook
faults and weaknesses in his Child, but of a judge that takes the Law for his
Rule, and clothes himself with Righteousness as a garment: Thus is the Relation
which God stands in unto man according to the tenor of the first Covenant, and
the respect which condition bears unto it; for under that Covenant every sinner
stands until he becomes a believer, and from which [believing] he must be
delivered by this act of justification, and that in such a way as the Law may
not be violated, or any injury be offered to it; but the sinner must be fairly
discharged from it.

Now in a Judge it is requisite.

1. That be he of a discerning eye; That so he may be able to see into the
whole case, to state it right, and to understand the true and full sense of the
Law which referrs to it, and to compare the matter of fact with the mind of the
Law, that so he may not miss it in his final determination; for the justice or
equity of the conclusion has always an inseparable dependence upon the
premises; and such God is declared to be, Psalm. 11. 4. His eyes behold, his eye
lids try the Children of men:

2. That he be impartial in the Examination: That he do not willingly,
purposely, or negligently overlook any thing that is of the least moment in the
case, but search into all matters to the very bottom: that he be not (...) or
blinded and so induced to connive or wink at any action, or let (...) any
evidence for favor or affection; but laying aside all undue favor or respect
of persons, to keep to, and thoroughly survey the case, and lay it open in all
its true colors, and cease not till he comes to the full knowledge of it: thus
Job faith he did when he was a Judge, Job 29.16. The cause which I knew not I
Searched out, and this the Apostle ascribes to, or asserts concerning God, Romans
2. 11. for there is no respect of persons with God.

3. That he be just and righteous in passing the sentence, after he has taken
an account of the whole case: That he condemn not the innocent, nor justify
the wicked; Solomon acquaints us that both of these are an abomination unto
him, Prove. 17.15. and if he hates these things in others, we may be sure that
he will not do them himself; nor is he indeed worthy to be acknowledged a
Judge, that does not make it his business in matters of judgment to administer
impartial Justice, hence that in Genesis 18.25. Shall not the Judge of all the
Earth do right? and the conclusion that follows from hence is, that in a legal
Justification, the person justified must be without fault; or he must be first
justified by the Law, before he can be so by the Judge: all this therefore is
requisite to the Justification of a Sinner according to the Law of God.

2. Hence it follows, that if a man be justified by his own righteousness,
there must necessarily be these two qualifications found in it, viz.

1. That the actions and works themselves by which he is judged be found
perfect: not only to have some conformity to the Law, that will not be
sufficient, but they must exactly and fully quadrate therewithal: they must be
thoroughly righteous, and they must not be chargeable with any defect, they must
not in the least point fall short; but being laid by the rule of trial, they
must answer it in all its dimensions without any the least imperfection, for
the Law will not lose one tittle of its own; Mat. 5 18. One jot or tittle of
the Law shall not pass till all be fulfilled. that is accusation enough against
any for God to have to say to us, Rev. 3.2. I have not found thy works perfect
before God: There must therefore be discovered in them, not only the matter of
a duty complete, but also that love to God in it which is required, and that is
with all the heart, and soul, and strength and might; and the least degree
wanting in it of this, will bring it under a censure, and make it, when weighed
in the balance, be found too light.

2. That the person thus tried, be not found guilty of transgression in any
other points of the Law; or at least that full satisfaction has been made by
him for every such default: There must be no Debts standing out, no arrearages
unpaid: for upon the presumption that there be many perfectly good deeds done,
yet if there be other deeds that have been faults, o^ faulty, the Law will not
bate them: if a man has kept the Law in every other point but one, and that
one be alleged against him he cannot be justified; for if he have no persisted
in all, it declares him to be accused, Gal. 3. 10. Cursed is every one that
continue not in all things written in the book of the Law to do them: Hence we
have that plain assertion of the Apostle James, Jam. 2. 10. Whosoever shall
keep the whole Law, and yet offense in one point, is guilty of all: and
therefore (...) no reparation be made he is unjustifiable.

3. That Justification is properly one entire and perfect act, and therefore
must needs flow from an entire and perfect principle. My meaning is, that it
must proceed from the whole case as it is taken together, and not separately
Justification does not divide, and say thus far the man is righteous, only
herein he (...) something defective; but it lays the whole state of the case
together, and in one single sentence it says, either that the man is
righteous, or that he is unrighteous. It is not to be denied that in the
sentence past for Execution, there is respect had to the offense, and according
as it is aggravated, accordingly the doom is more moderate or more severe, so
that there are different degrees of punishment; but as to the man's state, upon
the cognizance taken of the whole, he is always either acquitted or condemned;
if acquitted he is thoroughly absolved from the Law, if condemned, the Law takes
hold of him: Here then it is to be observed as a necessary conclusion, that
Justification requires the whole case to be good, whereas unto Condemnation,
one Article proved against him is sufficient, as Jam 2. 10. forecited; and the
reason is, because Justification is of the person who exposes himself to the
Law by one delinquency.

4. Hence it will appear that men's inherent Righteousness; or legal, and the
exercise of it, cannot justify them, if we shall consider,

1. The imperfection of man's Righteousness; though he be a Believer, and
consequently sanctified by the spirit of God: evangelically indeed he is looked
upon as one that cannot sin, 1 John 3. 9. He cannot sin because he i^ born of
God. But yet at the same time legally, he does nothing at all that is righteous
i.e. perfectly and entirely, according to the extent of the Command; and there
need but these two things to be thought of sufficiently to make this evident,
viz.

1. That the Command requires constancy i^ obedience: He that will be justified
by the Law, must never transgress it in thought word or deed; no one failing in
all his (...) must be able to be laid unto his charge: but it is a great Truth
concerning all, eve^ the most Holy of the People of God, that in many things
they offend all, Jam. 3. 2. The just man falls seven times; the bes^ have had
their failings and short comings. It is the Wise man's demand, Prove. 20. 9. Who
can say I have made my heart clean, (...) am pure from my sin? and the Apostle
John with confidence lays down the Assertion, 1 John 1. 8. If we say we have
no sin we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us.

2. The Command expects perfect obedience; i. e. that every act of obedience do
fully come up to the height of what the Law requires, that there be no flaw or
defect in it, whereas the people of God are perfect in no one act. Believers
indeed are sincere, and that sincerity is accepted as evangelical perfection;
but as for a legal perfection, which properly consists in a coming up to the
full of the Laws demands, there are none in this life are so far recovered as
to be able to attain thereunto; we have Paul himself lamenting of his own
grievous imperfection, Rom.7.18, 22,23.

2. The severity of the Law: It is an unchangeable Rule of Gods proceeding with
the reasonable Creature, it is that for obedience unto which (and thereby to
glorify God) Man was made, and by which he must be judged at the last: Now
this Law will have both Obedience and Satisfaction, or else it will never
acquit and justify us: but man can do neither of these. That he cannot legally
obey, has been already made to appear; but the Law will not release him from
that obligation: neither yet can he make satisfaction for his defaults; none of
Adams race can clear themselves from having been Law-breakers, and they have no
recompense to make for the wrongs done to it by this transgression of theirs;
thousands of Rams will not do it; a whole World will not be taken in Exchange,
Mat. 16. 26. and as man is not able to satisfy, so till satisfaction be made,
the Law cannot, will not give him an acquittance; if once it lays the Debtor
in Prison, there is no hope of a Goal delivery till the last mite be paid, Luke
11. ult.

3. The Justice of God; by virtue whereof he neither can nor will condemn the
Righteous, or acquit the guilty: he declares that man, that earthly Judge, that
does so, to be an abomination in his sight, Prove. 17.15. and denounces a Curse
against any such one Isai. 5.23. which justify the wicked for a reward, etc.
he must and he will do that which is right. If he justifies any person, the
Law shall justify him; he will not pervert the Law nor wrest Judgment; and if
the Law justifies it shall find the person perfect, free from any guilt,
perfectly righteous, fully conformable to it in all things. But when God comes
to judge men, he finds none of this perfection in their righteousness, but
manifold defects, and therefore, for, or upon the account of these he cannot
justify them, he cannot in truth declare that he has found the man righteous,
that he has seen no iniquity in him, that all his works are right before God;
hence therefore, we shall find the Psalmist deprecating this kind of Judgment
or manner of proceeding, Psalm. 143.2. Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant,
for in thy sight shall no flesh be justified: he knew that upon a strict Law
Trial, the case must needs go against him. God is a God of Truth, and therefore
as he weighs all the actions of the children of men, so he will declare
concerning them, according as he finds them, and no otherwise: and upon this
account we shall find Paul's conclusion to be full and positive, and universal,
against all hopes of ever obtaining our Justification in such a way as this is,
Romans 3. 12. They are all gone out of the way, they are together become
unprofitable, there is none that does good, no not one: So that the conclusion
stands, that our works cannot be the matter or meriting cause of our
Justification; they must altogether lie by, and either we must find it
somewhere else, or otherwise we must for ever despair of obtaining so precious
a privilege as this of Justification is: but such is the wonderful kindness of
God to the children of men, that though they can find none at home yet it is to
be had from abroad; and therefore,

3. It follows that I make to appear, That the Justification of a Sinner flows
from the Righteousness of Christ, and that only. And for a more through
discovery of this, there are three things to be disti^ctly enquired into, viz.

1. How Christ's Righteousness merits our Justification?

2. What Righteousness of Christ is to be accounted as the matter of our
Justification?

3. The ground of the necessity of this Righteousness of Christ for our
Justification?

1. How Christ's Righteousness merits our Justification?

A. Let me here premise this, That by meriting or deserving, I intend a
Covenant Merit, or a coming up to the terms of the Covenant, according to which
men are to be justified or condemned; that which fully satisfies the demands of
the Law of the Covenant, upon our account, does properly Merit for us; for a
Covenant merit is nothing else but a fulfilling of these Covenant Conditions
upon which the promises of it depend: Now every serious soul would willingly be
satisfied upon this account; he would be informed in this point, how the
righteousness of one can answer for another who has none of his own; yea, how
one man's Righteousness can deserve Justification for a great many, who are
themselves sinners: and there can be no rational settlement of the soul in
quiet and comfort, without some good satisfaction in this point: And let me
answer this,

1. Negatively, It does not proceed from the Righteousness of Christ barely
considered as the Obedience of a mere man to the Moral Law: For,

1. If Chirsts had been a mere man, or only an humane person, he had owed all
his active Obedience to the Law for himself, or upon his own account. The law
of nature obliged every mere Son of Adam to full, perfect constant obedience to
all the commands of God and when he had done all, he had done but his duty, and
could have challenged the Covenant reward for none but himself: It is but a
just debt which every man ows to God, to love him with all his heart, Soul,
strength and might, and his neighbor as himself, Mat. 22, 37, 38. and if
Christ's humane nature had been a person by it self, this had been his case, he
would have had so much work to do upon his own score, that he would have had no
room to have done any thing for any else besides himself.

2. Neither could the passive obedience of a mere man be of virtue sufficient
to satisfy for the offenses of many. The eternity of sinners sufferings is a
full proof for this, for eternal death is not a distinct sort of death
contained in the curse, but only an accidental continuane of the other; for if
Justice could take satisfaction of a mere creature in any measure of time,
there would be good ground of hope that the damned might a^ length have a Jayl.
Delivery; for Justice requires no more then satisfaction, though it will have
that to the utmost, Luke 12 ult. and because it cannot take it in measure upon
a finite creature, it is necessarily compensated by the duration; so that if
Christ had been a mere man, though he should have died for our offenses, yet he
could never have risen again for our Justification, but must have been detained
an eternal Prisoner, and never have crossed the accounts, or taken out the
acquittance for his people.

2. Positively, there are three things which go in to make up the merit of
Christ's Righteousness for sinners.

1. The Righteousness it self which he has performed in Obedience to the Law.

2. The person that performed it.

3. The Office which this person sustained in this performance.

1. The Righteousness it self which is requisite for our Justification, must be
that which, fully and in all the parts of it answers the terms of the Covenant
which was between God and man at the first. The Law of that Covenant was the
rule of Justice and Righteousness between these two parties and he that will
either do or suffer u^^n the account of another, must come up to the whole of
that which he was himself to have done or suffered: he that undertakes to pay a
Debt for another, must either take care to pay the whole Debt, or else, by
leaving any part of it unpaid, the man is still obnoxious to his Creditor: and
if this be well considered, it will thence be apparent, that both Christ's
active and passive obedience were need (...) case, and no more than what was
(...) requisite; and if he had not so (...) he could not have perfectly merited
for us: for Covenant merit is nothing else but the performing of the Articles
of the Covenant: and therefore Paul resolves our Justification into the
obedience or Christ as the p^^curing cause of it, and that both his active
obedience Rom.5.19. As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by
the obedience of one shall many be made righteous: Now it was Adam's active
disobedience which made men sinners; And his passive obedience, 2. Cor. 5.21.
For he has made him to be sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness
of God in him. For though it be a truth, that God in his absolute Sovereignty
might have dispensed with and given a pardon to sin freely, and without any
satisfaction, upon man's submission and repentance, the punishing or pardoning
sin belonging to his efficiency, and flowing therefore from his will or good
pleasure; and though he might have given happiness without consideration of any
active obedience, i^ it had seemed best for him so to have done yet when God
has once entered upon the with his creatures, and engaged himself in such a
Covenant, as infinite wisdom had suited to his own purposes for the displayes
of his glorious Holiness, Justice, and Grace he now occupies the place of a
righteous Judge, and cannot dispense with his own Law, because his Truth and
Righteousness engage him to it: Christ's Obedience therefore was perfect and
full, it answered the Law in the whole substance of it, he both did all that
was required, and suffered all that was denounced, be fulfilled all
Righteousness, Mat. 3. 15. all this was necessary, but considered alone it was
not sufficient, there must be something more to render it meritorious; consider
therefore,

2. The person that did all this; and that was no other then the Eternal Son of
God in our nature. If it had been any other kind of person, it would have
yielded us no comfort; for what if his Obedience had been perfect; yet if not
extensive, what advantage could there have accrued unto us from it? but when we
look upon it as performed by such an one, that renders it not only right for
the kind, but also valuable or of sufficient worth to answer the end for which
it was done, and that will be evident if we consider what each nature
contributed to it, and put both together; For,

1. The Humane Nature which was assumed by the Son of God, made him one
answerable to the Law. The Covenant was made with man, the Obedience due to it
was required of man; and therefore it must be a man that must do and die; no
other kind of being, no not an Angel, would have sufficed or answered the
Covenant, the Son of God therefore became a man, assumed a true humane body,
and a true reasonable soul, was the Son of David; the word was made flesh, John
1. 14. and by this way he was fitted to be under the Law, and responsible to
it, upon our account, and therefore the Apostle puts them together as things
inseparable. Gal. 4. 4. made of a woman, made under the Law for as if he had
been a mere humane person he could not have sustained the place of a surety for
us, so except he had taken out humane nature, he could not have done the work
of a surety upon our account Paul therefore puts a great deal of weight up on
this consideration, Heb 2. 16. for verily be took not on him the nature of
Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham: we must therefore study the
Incarnation of Christ if we would be clear in the nature of his merits.

2. The Divine Nature which assumed the Humane into his Person, put an infinite
virtue, and value into his Obedience; for the humane nature losing its
Personality in the person of the Son of God, hereupon all the Righteousness
which he performed is accounted (and that properly) the Righteousness of God,
and that is one reason why it is so called in our Text, and 2 Cor 5. 21. it is
not of God only be ordaned it, nor yet because he did accept it of his hands,
but mainly because the person that did it was God: upon this score also is his
blood called the blood of God, Acts 20. 28. The Church of God which he has
purchased with his own blood, and hereby it came to pass that the Obedience of
Christ was of greater worth by far, than the Obedience of all the world could
have been, because he was a Divine Person that did it: and from hence it came
to pass that there was enough in it to merit for a great many, even a whole
world, the blood of Redemption is therefore called precious blood, 1 Pet. 1.
18. and there we have found a valuable price to merit, that which has in it
enough to answer for the Justification of Sinners, but still this added to the
former yet falls short of the actual meriting of it, there is yet something more
wanting, but that also is supplied by Christ, hence consider.

3. The Office of this person, and that was Mediatorial, see it expressed in 1 Timothy 2. 5. There is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, the man
Christ Jesus. It was the Office of a surety that he bare, and therefore he is so
called, Heb. 7. 22. he was set up and anointed unto that very business, that he
might reconcile God and man again, whom the sin of man had separated each from
the other: So that Jesus Christ neither lived for himself, nor died for
himself, but he went through both for us, and that as he was constituted a
Mediator; and that is that which properly rendered his work of: Obedience
Satisfactory and Meritorious, which otherwise would in no wise have turned to
our account: So that in Christ we are not only to consider his personal fitness
to be a Redeemer, and to satisfy Justice fully for us, and that he was made
man, and took our nature upon him, and was completely furnished with all these
graces in his humane nature, whereby he was carried through the work which he
was engaged in: but we are also to eye his deputation or appointment to this
work in the Covenant of Redemption, which past between his Father and him in
the days of Eternity, and in the consideration of that Covenant we are to
observe these two things.

1. What was done by God the Father in order to the bringing of it about, and
that was, he made a proposal of the work to him, and exhibited before him a
promise of this reward on the condition of his performance of it; those are the
words of the Father, Isai. 53.13 when he shall make his soul an offering for
sin, his soul shall see his seed; and they are a declaration of the terms of
the Covenant: the Apostle assures us that he took not this Office upon him
without a special call given him unto it, Heb. 5.4, 5. and there was a great
deal of reason for this; for fallen man was Gods Prisoner, and it was at his
pleasure whether he would accept of an atonement for sinners at the hand of
another in their behalf. It was not a matter of mere Debt, where if the money
be paid, the Creditor has no reason but to be satisfied, and cannot trouble
his Debtor any further; but the case was properly Criminal, man had forfeited
himself, his life to divine Justice, and it lies in the breast of the Judge
whether he will take another in exchange to die for him, and let him go free; if
he refuses such a Ransom, and resolve that he who has offended shall in
person suffer the smart of it, none can lay injustice to his charge: If
therefore there had not been an agreement about this between the Father and
Son, there had been no efficacy of it.

2. What was done by Jesus Christ in the performance of it; and that was, he
both undertook the work, and went through with it: he accepted the offer and
condition that was proposed to him, and did all that was required on his part
for the purchasing of this benefit, Psalm. 40. 7, 8. Then I said I come, in the
volume of the Book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will Oh God! Phil.
2. 7, 8. He made himself of no reputation, etc. So that in this way God made
himself a Debtor to Christ by a free promise, that he would justify all such
for whom he should make satisfaction, and that his righteousness should stand
for their justification, Isai. 53. 11. By his knowledge shall my righteous
Servant justify many. And thus by this Covenant, the righteousness of Christ
came to be, not only equivalent in virtue and worth, but the very actual price
of the ransom of Sinners, 1 Timothy 2.6. Who gave himself a ransom: and Christ
not only vertually but actually, properly, and according to Covenant, merited
the pardon of sin and life eternal for all of Gods Elect; he is therefore said
to purchase them with his blood, Act. 20.28. and his Death is called a Ransom,
Mat 20.28. and a Propitiation 1 John 2.2 and Christ is said to be made of God
unto us, our Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.20. In a word, if Adam had completely
obeyed the Law, though there were no proportion between the work he had done,
and thereward to be enjoyed, yet he had merited by Covenant; so, much more the
Lord Jesus Christ, having done and suffered that which was vertually
meritorious for us, and doing this under a Covenant of Life, he must of
necessity merit it for us: so that all his redeemed ones are worthy to live, in
as much as he has bought their lives for them, and fully satisfied the justice
of God upon that score: and thus we have a brief account of the way in which
the Righteousness of Christ merits our Justification.

2. What Righteousness of Christ is accounted as the matter of our
Justification?

A. Though (as we heard) there was required to the making of Christ's
Righteousness meritorious, not only the work it self, but the person also that
did it, and the office by virtue whereof he did it; yet we are here to
consider, that the thing which is applied to us for our Justification, or that
which God tryes us by when he justifies us, and in which he finds the ground or
reason for his so doing, is only the righteousness it self which this person by
virtue of his Office did perform: That therefore which is applied to us, and by
which we are justified, is the (...) medi^^^rly Obedience of the Lord Jesus
Christ, both active and passive. Whatsoever the Son of God in our nature either
did or suffered, either in his life or death, or throughout the whole state of
his Humiliation, wherein he was considered as standing under the Law, and (as
so) acting for us; goes into the righteousness of his which is by God accepted
for us, and is reputed as our righteousness: this is that which God looks upon
as he is the Judge, when, and for which he pronounces us righteous.

For a more distinct clearing up of this, let us here consider;

1. That the whole active and passive Obedience of Christ was requisite to our
Justification; we stand in need of them both, and this will appear undeniably
if we observe,

1. That it is the Justification of sinners that Christ stands engaged for; so
the Scripture calls it, Rom,4.4. Believes on him that justifies the ungodly:
and this is a thing to be well considered, that when God comes to justify any
person he is in himself a Sinner, an ungodly one; and the way how such a thing
may be so fairly done, calls for aspecial consideration and enquiry: If the
case were only for the justifying of a just person, one to whose charge nothing
could be laid, there would need no great ado for that: his own righteousness
would stand up for him, it would plead his innocence, challenge the discharge
of the Law, and his active Obedience were sufficient, for the man was never
obnoxious: but it is another manner of thing when it comes to the justifying of
a condemned sinner, who has transgressed the Law, and thereby incensed and
opened its mouth against him; and here is a great deal more required to prepare
the way that Justice may give such a man an acquittance: and as a sinner can
have no righteousness of his own personal, so there must be a manifold
Righteousness in him who will obtain this favor for him. Hence,

2. There are two things required to the perfect Justification of a sinner,
viz. There must be a remission of the guilt of his sins, and there must be the
reputation of him as just before God: for it is before intimated, that
Justification absolves a person from guilt, and declares him righteous, and
that according to the Law: and these two are inseparable, as being essential
parts of Justification; and there is reason for it, because by Gods Law, no man
can be declared free from guilt, except he be found perfectly righteous, and
that because it necessarily involves a man in gui^^ not to be so: For there is
a guilt in omission (...) w^ll as in commission; such are therefore pronounced
accursed, Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that
are written in the Book of the Law to do them.

3. To each of these parts these is required (...) answerable righteousness. If
man had never sinned, one righteousness had sufficed for him, and there had
been no occasion for the other; but now he is become a sinner before God that
will not do, but he needs a doub^ righteousness: For,

1. In order to a sinners acquittance from guilt there must be a Pardon
procured for him, and applied unto him. This is a plain and known thing, that
where offense or transgression (...) the Law has gone before, there a pardon
properly attends upon Justification, and he cannot be justified except the
offense be for given: for the Law in its charging of (...) upon him does
together condemn him for it and adjudgeth him to suffer the threatened death:
and till such time as that be suffered either by himself, or his Surety in his
stead the Law is not satisfied, nor will ever give him acquittance: As for the
prerogative which (among men) the supreme Judge assumeth to give a free pardon
without satisfaction to one condemned by Law, it is a liberty which he enjoyes
above the Law, and there may be great reason for it in some cases: but this
consideration has no room in the present case, for God is resolved to proceed
in all things according to the Law which he has constituted; and this infers
the necessity of the Passive Obedience of Christ, his Death, his Sufferings,
his undergoing of all that which we should have undergone ourselves: this the
great Judge must have to look upon and regard in his setting of the Prisoner
free, who was a lawful captive; and for this we read such expressions, Isa. 53.
5. He was wounded for our Transgressions; he was bruised for our iniquities:
the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we are healed:
and for this reason it is said, that he was made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5. 21. Now
these sufferings that Christ thus underwent are the very matter of the
satisfaction of the Law for sinners, that Righteousness which it accepts of
upon this account, hence that in Romans 8 34. Who is he that condemns? it is
Christ that died.

2. When a sinner is declared righteous, he is together with it adjudged to
receive the (...) reward of Righteousness. Justification not only exempts a
sinner from hell, and wrath, and eternal death, which he had been obnoxious
unto, but it also appoints him to life, and peace, and salvation; and this also
must be done according unto the tenor of the Law. Now if we search, we shall
find that the Law of God propounded happiness to man upon condition; it was to
be the reward of his keeping this Law, Romans 10. 5. Moses discribeth the
righteousness of the Law that the man that does these things, shall (...) by
them. It did exact obedience of man (...) a duty, and looked upon him as (...)
under a bond, obliging, of him to (...) performance of it; and as he was to
(...) no reward of life, except he did so (...) so t^ ^ail of or omit it was
death: hence, as without such a righteousness he cannot clear himself of the
threatening, but it will take hold of him, and bring him under condemnation, so
much less can he without it expect to receive the recompense of reward (...)
and this is that which is called active obedience, and this also must be
performed either by him or (...) surety, and because he herein (...) he did in
the former, and as he has not wherewith to satisfy for his offenses, so
neither has he any strength to perform what is his duty, hence as Christ did
(...) all Righteousness, Mat. 3. 15. so he did it for us; his passive obedience
was not only for us, and his active for himself, but both served to the ^^cs of
Redemption, and in whatsoever he was made under the Law, it was that he might
redeem such as were under the Law, and makes them partakers in the (...) of
So^^, Gal. 4. 4, 5. his holiness of life old not only fit him to be an
acceptable sacrifice for us, but it was also a part of his Mediatorial work on
our account; and this is the very matter of the Righteousness for which we are
adjudged to receive a Crown of life, and so made heirs of eternal glory,
according to the promise made in the Law Covenant on this condition.

4. Hence it follows, that the Law is upon this account said to be fulfilled by
us in believing. Such an assertion we find in Romans 8. 3, 4. God sending his own
Son, etc. that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, and chap
10. 4. for Christ i^ the end of the Law for Righteousness to every one that
believes. Now this could in no kind sense be true, if it were not upon this
account, viz. that our Faith laying hold upon Christ, and closing in with him,
does, in so doing, embrace and receive as our own, legally, or in point of Law,
the righteousness, which does in all respects and degrees answer the whole
demand of the Law from us; and that is both active and passive obedience: for
it is certain that believing is not it self the obedience which the Law
requires, and therefore it must needs entitle us to something that is so, else,
though it might be looked upon as a new condition of life, in a new Covenant
yet it could not be accounted as the fulfilling the condition of the old
Covenant. In su^^ Christ by doing of what we should have done, and by suffering
of what we should have suffered, affords us something to take hold of for our
clearing, and the Law matter upon which to proceed to justify us: for we are
as defective in doing to acceptance, as insufficient for satisfactory
suffering. Hence

2. This obedience of Christ is in the Scripture reckoned to be the matter of
our Justification: those expressions do fully infer it, in Romans 5.19. For as
by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one
shall many be made righteous. How is it possible that one man can be made
righteous by the obedience of another, but only as his obedience is made ours
in Law; or as when i^trieth us, it does it by his obedience, and not by our own
personal? like unto this in that 2 Cor. 5.21. He has made him sin for us who
knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. How can we
be made the righteousness of God, in him, but b^^our having of his
righteousness so looked upon as if we our selves had been the actual performers
of it? and what else but this can the Apostle aim at in our Text, when he
desires to be found in him, under the robe of his Righteousness, and not of his
own, but that he would have that to cover his defects, and stand for him in the
trial of the Law, and so become the matter upon which he is to be judged, and
according to which the Sentence may pass?

3. Now let us a little consider and enquire into the ground of the necessity
of our having the righteousness of Christ for our justification; and there will
need no more for the making of this manifest, but only the laying together of
these few following Conclusions.

1. That Justice as well as Mercy must shine out in the pardoning of a sinner,
and pronouncing of him righteous. God must be righteous or else not be God:
there can be no unrighteousness at all with him. It is one of his inseparable
Attributes: the Psalmist therefore acquaints us that these two Attributes of
God viz. his Justice and Mercy do in the great affair of Man's Salvation meet
and consent most harmoniously Psalm. 85. 10. Mercy and Truth are met together,
righteousness and peace have kissed each other. As it is a truth that i^ God be
not merciful the sinner cannot be pardoned, fallen man must be made a monument
of mercy, or he must be forever hopelesly miserable; it is no less true, that
if God be not just, he cannot be the Judge of the whole World, for Justice is
absolutely requisite in him who bears the place of a Judge Romans 3. 5, 6. Is God
unrighteous, who takes vengeance? (I speak as a man) God forbids how then
should God Judge the World? and he tells us, ver. 19. That all the World is
become guilty before God. Had God only intended the display of his mercy to
mankind, it had been another case; but since there is his righteousness that
must be signally made known, it is therefore necessary that where guilt has
gone before, there revenging Justice must take place, and prepare the way for
mercy to display it self.

2. That God having entered into a Covenant with man when he first made him, be
has therein engaged his Justice to the confirmation and fulfillment of his part
of the Covenant. It is one thing to say what God might have done by virtue of
his absolute Lordship, and unconfined prerogative, if he had not voluntarily
obliged himself in the threatening annexed to his own Command; and (...) in
pos^itively threatened man with death if he should disobey it; and another
thing, what he will do when he has so bound himself to the terms of a
Covenant: Gods word is now past, he positively said, Genesis 2. (...) In the day
that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye. And his truth engages him to
see to the performance of his Word. Eve greatly mist it when she interpreted it
to be only (...) as if God had only said, left ye died the fall did not barely
expose man to the hazard, but brought him under a necessity of dying; it not
only made him obnoxious to Gods displeasure, if he should see meet to sue the
forfeiture, but it brought him under a full, firm, and engaged Sentence of
death: and God must be true and faithful to his threatenings as well as his
promises; (...) this the Prophet confirms the Sentence denounced against Saul,
1 Samuel 15. 29. The strength of Israel will not ly, nor repent, for he is not a
man that he should repent. There is then no hope of man's escaping the righteous
Judgment of God: he fell under the Law, and this great rock will grind him to
powder if there be no way to remove it off from him.

2. Hence man must of necessity have a righteousness to offer unto Gods Justice
for his Justify (...); if ever be hopes to attain it; and not only so, but he
must have such a righteousness (...) may in all the parts of it answer to the
demand of the Covenant. For, without a righteousness to look upon, and proceed
according unto, the Justice of God can have nothing before it which it has any
any advantage to justify him by or for, and except this be (...) large and
full as the Law requires, it has (...) that in it which is sufficient (...)
end of it; as good none at all, as an imperfect one; for if it be found to have
any flaw in it, then either Justice must connive, and give him some abatement,
which it never will, nor were in Justice if it should; or else it must be
rejected as a thing altogether insignificant; and so it shall, for not a jot or
tittle of the Law shall pass, till all be fulfilled, Matthew. 5.18.

4. Though God has positively engaged his Justice to require satisfaction for
man's offenses, yea, and to stand upon punctilio's in the case; yet he has not
absolutely bound it to exact the satisfaction of the person himself who is the
offender; or that it must be a personal satisfaction that is given, and no
other: for, though it was not plainly expressed in the first Covenant, in so many
words, nor had man any apprehendsion of any such thing, till God was pleased to
reveal it to him, but fell under a fearful expectation of dying by the hands of
God: yet it is certain that God did leave room for the interposing of a Surety,
and the event, which is the best interpreter of Gods mind has proved it to be
so; for God has accepted of one, which he would not have done over the head of
his own Law; nay, it is certain that in that everlasting contrivance and
engagement between the Father and the Son, there was a Surety laid in or
provided, before this, Covenant was made with Adam: and as Paul speaks, Gal. 3.
17. so may we a little varying of his words: (and for ought I know the Text may
ultimately refer to it) The Covenant of works which was made with Adam in time,
could not disanul the Covenant of suretyship which was made between God the
Father and God the Son in the days of Eternity. Yea, and we may now find some
tracks or footsteps of this Truth in the very nature of the first Covenant: it
seems to intimate that there was some room left there for such a transaction by
a surety, because God dealt with man at first in Adam as in a surety, and he it
was that lost them; and all that ruin which is fallen upon his Progeny, refers
to his first Transgression; hence therefore he might, for their recovery again,
deal with th^^, if he saw meet in another surety, who should restore them: it
is true, it was all his pleasure, and he was free in it, but the way was
consonant to equity, and that he has so done, himself has made to appear, by
bringing in of this new way of life; Paul makes a kind of parallel between
these, 1 Cor. 5.22. As in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive:
he is therefore called the second man, or second Adam.

5. This surety, if he will take off man's guilt, and render him just, must be
able to do and suffer all that the Law requires: If he will acquit guilty man
from his condemnation under which he is detained, and procure for him Eternal
Life, which he has lost, he must fulfill all the Covenant Articles for him.
Jesus Christ therefore assures us that this was his Errand and work that he
came into the world about, Mat. 5. 17. I came not to destroy the Law, but to
fulfill it. Now this is a work that every person is not competent for, a
province that any one cannot successfully undertake, it requires one that is of
sufficient abilities, for it is not undertaking that will do, but it must be
fullfilling: Justice is not so regardless of its own glory as not to be sure
that the surety be sufficient and solvent, before it will indent for the
delivering up of its Prisoner.

6. This is more than any mere creature can possibly do: there is no created
being, that is such and nothing more, that is able to stand in the Judgment
before God for sinners, and obtain their absolution. That man cannot by his own
Righteousness obtain this for himself, has been already proved in this
discourse; that the whole Creation of second beings cannot do it for him, is as
certain and undeniable; for (and there need no more to be said of them in this
case) they are finite beings, and their Obedience but a finite Obedience, and
of a limited virtue: the things of the world are of no value, thousands of rams
signify nothing for satisfaction Mic. 6.6. the men of the world are under the
same condemnation, and need a surety, and so are incapable; the holy Angels
only remain, of whom this may be affirmed, th^^ though they are not themselves
under guilt ye they are under a Law, and that requires (...) much as they can
do; all the active Obedience which they are able to offer to God, (...) but
their own duty, and will but suffice for themselves at the best: and as for a
passiv^ Obedience, all they can suffer is far short (...) being a valuable
price for the Redemption (...) Gods Elect; besides that they are of an other
nature, and therefore their suffering could not truly be called the suffering
of man whereas it is man who is come under condemnation, and his surety must be
a man Heb. 2. 16,

7. Hence if Christ had not come and done this work, it could never have been
done, and so we could never have been justified: When we have seen all other
persons and things stand by refused, a whole Creation counted but an
insignificant Cipher in this respect; there remains now no other but Jesus
Christ to do it for us; and on this account he is said to come and die, when we
were without strength, Romans 5. 6. and to be sent forth in due time; and in
fullness of the time, Gal. 4.4 when we were just dropping into the pit, and the
gulf was ready to shut its mouth upon us: when Justice was upon the point of
doing execution, and there was none to stay it; yea he is said to come when
there was no other Savior to be found, Isa. 63.15. woe, yea ten thousand woes
had fallen upon poor sinners, if the Lord Jesus Christ had not undertaken this
work, to obey for our Justification; to become our Righteousness, and stand
between us and all our harms, to look Justice it self in the face, and by his
perfect Obedience to set us free from that dreadful sentence of Condemnation,
which had past upon a world of sinners, and exposed them to suffer for ever the
revenges of the Law, and impression of the holy indignation of the great God.

4. In the next place I am to make it evident that this Righteousness of Christ
is freely imputed of God. It has already been made to appear, That there must
be a Righteousness presented to Justice for the procuring of our Justification;
That this cannot be out own personal; That there is both a complete sufficiency
in the Righteousness of Christ for the bringing of this about, and that there
was an actual intendment of it to this end: But still, except it had been so,
that all Adams lost Progeny had been equally advantaged by it, all that is
hitherto said, is not enough to satisfy an inquisitive soul (...) for the
great enquiry yet remains, viz. how shall I come by it? in what way are any of
the children of men made partakers of it (...) Here therefore there is
something done (...) Gods part, and something on our part in order to this. The
former of these, or what is done on Gods part is now under our consideration,
and that is his gracious imputation of this Righteousness unto sinners. Here
then there are two things that offer themselves to be made Good.

1. That Christ's Righteousness justifies us in way of imputation.

2. That this imputation is an act of Gods free grace.

1. That Christ's Righteousness justifies us in way of Imputation; or by the
reputing and accountng of his Righteousness to be ours: That this is a great
and undeniable Truth, there needs no more to clear it up, then the
consideration of the plentiful Testimony of the Scripture, which ascertains us
that it is so: The word [ Justification] as it is used in the word of God does
almost every where intend a change of a man's state as it is legally considered,
or refers to the relation which he bears to the Law, but besides we read, 1
Cor. 1. 30. That Christ is made of God our Righteousness to us; wherein is
expressed one of the great benefits which believers are made partakers in by
Christ; namely, that he is that Righteousness which is accepted as theirs; so
that when Justice looks for a Righteousness which it may acquit them for, it
finds it in him: and we read 2 Cor. 5.19. that we are reconciled to God in
Christ: and ver. 21: proves it to be by imputation; for no otherwise could he
possibly be made sin for us, who knew none in himself; or we be made the
Righteousness of God through him, who in our selves were sinners, and in Romans
5. 19. the Apostle makes our Condemnation in Adam, and our Justification by
Christ to be parallel, when he says, as by one man's Disobedience many were
made sinners, so by the Obedience of one shall many be made Righteous; but that
was by imputation, and therefore so must this, and it must needs be so,
otherwise it would be an unjust thing to justify the ungodly; nor could God be
both just, and the Justifier of them that believe, both which things the
Apostle does assert, Romans 4. 5. 3. 26. But that which I would a little further
commorate upon it, to consider how, or (...) what way the Righteousness of
Christ come to be imputed to the people of God (...) theirs. I shall not need
here to say much in the explaining of what it is to impute (...) thing to any
person; acknowledging, reckoning, accounting a thing to a man as (...) own, all
sound one and the same thing. Imputation of Righteousness in a process (...)
Law, is an act of the Judge properly; and (...) is of two sorts:

1. When a man's own personal Righteousness, being proved, and made legally to
appear, and all the grounds of suspicion alleged against it are removed and
confuted, (...) judicially declared to be his, and also to be sufficient to
answer the demands of the Law and thus if Adam had perfectly obeyed, and kept
the Law in all its parts, that Righteousness of his should have been imputed to
him and he have been justified by it; and this would truly have been that which
the Scripture calls a being justified by Works.

2. When another person has done this for a man, and is accepted in which he
has done upon this account, and the man is thereupon declared to be looked
upon as if he had done it himself, and is on this very account acquitted; now
is the other persons doing imputed to him. That there is such a kind of
imputation as this is, (...) evident and very well known among men. If a man be
sued for a Debt, if he can prove that another has paid it for him, and is able
to produce the acquittance given for it, it is accepted, and the Law can take
no place against him. If another man offer himself to bear the punishment of an
Offender, and the Judge has consented to such an exchange, and accordingly
inflicted the penalty upon him instead of the other, he now imputes this to the
prime Offender, and so he is delivered from the sentence of the Law, as having
thus satisfied it: though in the latter case there is this difference from the
former; viz. That such a proffer to bear the punishment in exchange is not of
it self sufficient, except the Judge shall see cause to accept of it, but if he
does, it suffices: and this is that which is done when God justifies a
Sinner, viz. to accept of the righteousness of Christ, his active and passive
obedience for him, and accounts it to be as really and truly the Sinners, as if
he had personally wrought it: and in this sense some Divines take notice that
the words counted, reckoned or imputed, are used at least ten times in Romans 4.
and now it may not be amiss, briefly to enquire after the way in which Christ's
Righteousness comes to be justly imputed to us, and reckoned as ours, unto our
Justification; and this may be taken up in the consideration of these few
following Conclusions.

1. The Son of God assumed our nature, not for any perfection which it added
unto him, but for the redemption and salvation of Gods Elect. His own divine
Person was not any whit perfected, or made better or more complete and happy by
this Assumption; for he had (...) the fullness of Divine and Glorious
perfections in himself, being God: and what addition of glory can such a thing
be conceived to be capable of making to him, for the eternal King to take upon
him the form of a Servant? no; if we had not been sold for Bondslaves, and
thereupon stood in need (...) being Redeemed; if we had not been lost, and must
either be recovered again, or undone the Son of God would have had no occasion
for his incarnation: we stood in absolute need of it, and could not have been
saved without it, and his great love to us put him upon such a thing: this
business therefore was engaged in for us, Isai. 9. 6. Unto us a Child is born,
unto us a Son is given: and Paul plainly tells us what he came into the world
for, 1 Timothy 1. 15. Jesus Christ came to save sinners.

2. Jesus Christ to the end that he might be a Redeemer to mankind, took upon
him to be a Surety for men, He is therefore called the Surety of the new and
better Covenant, in which the salvation of mankind is contrived and laid up,
Heb. 7 22. now the proper work belonging to a Surety as such, is to take upon
him the state, and to bear the penalty which is due to the person or persons
for whom he thus becomes a Surety; he is to stand in their room, and whatsoever
it be that that the Law has to lay to their charge and to doom them for, he is
to stand to all the hazard of it, and undergo it; to pay their Fines, to bear
their punishment in their stead, or for them i. e. in way of Exchange; for
there is an Exchange that is made when a Surety comes in the room of a
principal Debtor. The Lord Jesus Christ took upon him this Office, namely, to
stand in the room of Gods Elect, to ly liable to the Law in all its suits and
demands, and for this is he said to be made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5. 21.

3. God the Father accepted of this. Suretyship of Jesus Christ upon the
account of his Elect: God the Father is, according to Scripture Language,
looked upon as the supreme Judge (not exclusively as shutting out the Son and
Holy Ghost, but inclusively; for it is certain that the Deity is offended by
sin, and every person is equally interested in the satisfaction that is to be
made; but only the Word of God is wont to ascribe works particularly to that
person wherein his order and manner of working does especially appear) Jesus
Christ God man is Judge, 2 Cor. 5.10. We must all appear before the Judgment
Seat of Christ: But he is a delegated Judge his Kingdom is a Mediatory Kingdom,
and he must resign it again, when the work so laid upon him shall be
accomplished, 1 Cor. 15.26,27. his Father put this Judgment into his hands,
Joh. 5. 22. The Father judges (...) man, but (...) committed all Judgment to
the Son. Now God seeing how infinitely this Suretyship of the Lord Jesus Christ
would redound to the Glory and Praise both of his Mercy and Justice, accepted
of him as our Surety: for, as it is at the liberty of the Judge to accept or
refuse, so it belongs unto his prudence to consider and well weigh the capacity
of the Person thus making a tendry of himself to become a Surety, and to look
to all the consequences which will result from such a thing, and accordingly
either to receive or reject him; and in such exchanges persons are wont to take
care at least that there shall be no disadvantage or loss arising therefrom;
and the Great God saw and considered, that Justice would fit in the highest
State, when it led the Son of God in triumph: That Christ should be put under
the Law, and made to bear the rigor of it, afforded i^ a far greater Triumph
than if all the World had been Judged and Condemned by it. Never did Justice
sit in such State, or appear in such Majesty, as when it arreigned, condemned,
and did execution upon the Son of God. When Gods Sword was awakened against the
man that was his fellow, (so is he called by God himself, Zech. 13.7.) he ^hen
declared himself righteous to purpose; and not only so, but he also saw that
grace should in this way appear gloriously, which otherwise must never have
been heard of in the World; I mean saving Grace, whereby ruined and condemned
man is restored to life, and the lawful Captives are set at liberty, which is a
most strange and stupendous thing, Isai. 49.24, 25. God therefore voluntarily
accepted of this; and how could he but accept of it since it was his own
contrivance and he proposed it to the Son, and he came about the work to do his
Father Will in it, Psalm. 40.7. and he has given his testimony to this
acceptance of his, Isai. 42.1. Behold my Servant whom I have chosen, mine Elect
in whom my Soul delights. Mat. 17.5. This is my (...) loved Son in whom I am
well pleased; hear (...) him: It is therefore said of the work under taken by
him, that the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand, Isai. 53.10.

4. The Lord Jesus Christ having gone through this work as a Surety, and full
accomplished it it was now in justice looked upon as their work for whom, he
did it in Suretyship. The act ve^ and passive obedience of Christ must of
necessity be accounted theirs, and they must have a real title to it for whom
it was done by him, and in whose name it was accepted of by the Father; I say
the active as well as the passive obedience; for though it was due from him as
a man, and as under the Law, yet the Son of God was neither man, nor under the
Law for himself but for his people. Christ therefore, taking upon him the
person of his Elect, to answer and satisfy for them, and God receiving him in
this quality, having before deputed him to it, it was as much in the exact
rigor of God's Justice, as if they themselves had done and suffered in their
own persons.

5. Hence, the Lord Jesus, when he had gone through with, and finished the work
of Redemption, received a full acquittance in the name of Gods Elect. That the
Son of God, after he had done and suffered, was actually acquitted is evident,
for otherwise he had never so risen from the dead in such a glorious manner as
is recorded of him. Justice, which had him its Prisoner, under the bonds of
Suretyship, would never have knocked off his Bonds, and set him at liberty on
any other account, but because it had received satisfaction from him: and what
satisfaction could that be, but the complete answering of the obligation
wherein he stood bound: he had made no personal forfeiture of himself by any
Transgression; for he did no sin, neither was there any guile found in him: it
was therefore satisfaction for us, according to all that which was required of
us: so that his acquittance was in the respect that he stood Surety, and on
that score it was our acquittance, we were discharged in it, and thus much is
intended in that, Romans 4.25. He was delivered for our offenses, and raised
again for our Justification. Intimating, that as he had never been condemned
but for us, so his Justification was for us: as he had never died, if our
offense had not procured it, so when he arose from the dead, he brought with
him a full discharge for his people.

6. Hence, when God accepts any into favor, and pardons their sins, it is upon
the mere account of the righteousness of Christ. It is a true and bare respect
which God has to his obedience, he fixes his eye upon that, when he does
this, and for the sake thereof he does it: That God seals a Pardon, and gives
evidence of it to the Souls and Consciences of any of the Children of men, upon
their believing, fetches its reason from hence, because Christ was righteous:
we therefore find such an expression in the Scripture, of our being, accepted
in the beloved, Ephesians. 1.6. Having Redemption and forgiveness through his blood,
ver. 7.

7. From the premises it naturally follows, that Christ's Righteousness is made
ours by imputation; or, that that very individual Righteousness of his, which
he in person performed as our Surety, is the righteousness which is reckoned to
be ours, so as that we are justified before God upon the account of that, and
no other: and there are diverse considerations which will serve to enforce the
credit of this Article. for,

1. It must necessarily be either by imputation, (...) by infusion: a third way
is not to be thought of, and a mixture of these is in no wise to be admitted,
for that would be to confound the two Covenants; that the individual and
personal Righteousness of Christ cannot be infused into a Believer, is a truth
so plain and necessary, that to assert the contrary, is to speak a
contradiction; and therefore if it be any way ours, it must needs be imputed to
us. Every one that knows anything of the nature of things, can tell that acts
themselves are confined to the doer of them, and terminate in him, and that no
other person can in propriety of speech be said to do that individual action
that another did: but on the other hand, this is a notion that is very well
agreeing with common reason, that another did such a thing for this man, such
an one paid a Debt for him, etc. that though the action terminated on the
agent, yet the virtue of it extended to the benefit of another: and thus Paul
tells us that Christ did for him, Gal. 2.2. Who loved me, and gave himself for
me: It is not the same individual Grace that Believers receive from Christ, but
Grace for Grace, Joh. 1. 16. i.e. a like Grace, Grace of the sa^^ kind, and out
of the same treasure.

2. The infused Righteousness of believers (...) not in this life perfect: That
believers have infused Righteousness is not denied: they ha^^ the renewing of
the Image of God upon them, which is in Righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians:
4.24. there is the grace of Sanctification, as well as the grace of
Justification but still this Image is restored here but in (...) and not in
perfection: God has not (...) to his people such a measure of it as will
endure the Covenant of Works; Paul had (...) Righteousness personal, but he
durst not ^^rogate perfection to his Obedience, but altogether disclaims it,
and gives us to understand that he is but in pursuit of it, Phil. 3. 12, 1^ so
that although it be so, that Christ does (...) his Spirit infuse an holiness
and Righteousness into his people, when he works the wor^ of Conversion in
them; yet it is not the thing we are justified by or for; for tha^ which is
imperfect, though it may be accepted in a way of grace and pity, yet it cannot
justify in a way of Law and equity, for these two things are quite of a
distant nature the one from the other; and therefore there must be another
Righteousness found for the doing of that, and another way discovered, wherein
it may become ours: which Righteousness (as is before proved) can be no other
but the perfect Righteousness of Christ, (for it must be a perfect one) and
that can become ours in no other way but only by Imputation.

3. That which is by another Righteousness, as being done by him, and accepted
for us, can be ours only in the way of Imputation: for this is the very notion
of a thing which is imputed, it is the proper nature and definition of
Imputation; and it is impossible that there should be any other conception of a
way wherein it should be translated from the one to the other, to become his
right, and to give him the liberty to challenge a true and real propriety in it.

4. That Justification which is of the ungodly, must needs be by imputation;
and the reason for it is this, that where God justifies, there also the Law
justifies: It is never to be denied, or so much called into question, but that
God speaks the Truth, and there is no deceivableness in his word, when he
says, that he sees no iniquity in Jacob, nor perverseness in Israel; he (...)
not dissemble; it is not because he (...) eyes, and resolves not to see or
regard it, but the Reason must be, because he has received full satisfaction,
for it, the Law is answered, and therefore according to the Judgment of that he
is as clear as if he had never sinned; and though it be a Gospel Truth, that a
believer being once in Christ by Faith, and so justified, is not to be looked
upon as an ungodly man after Justification; yet before Faith, and till he is
justified he is ungodly, God finds him such when he comes to do this favor for
him, Romans 4. 5. God who justifies the ungodly: and not only so, but he would
also be so accounted still, were it not that God has found a Righteousness in
Christ that answers for him: If we say we are without sin, we lie, and the
Truth is not in us, 1 John 1. 18. and thus sin, if there were nothing to answer
for it, would stand for our Condemnation, and rigorous Justice would certainly
pass the sentence of the Law upon us for it: the sentence therefore of
Justification must needs proceed from a Righteousness which we never performed,
or else God must baulk his own Law, in declaring us righteous; which he never
will; Hence also,

5. They who have sin remaining in them after Justification, must needs be
justified by imputation, and so have the best believers, Paul himself complains
of soul captivating sin, such as made him to cry out of his wretchedness, Romans
7. and the wise man makes a challenge to all the holy men living, Prove. 20. 9.
Who can say I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? satisfaction is
but in part, there is something of the old man and his works; these things are
obstructious to being justified for our own doings; the Psalmist cries out,
Psalm 141. 2. Enter no^ into Judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall
no flesh be justified, and Psalm. 130. 3. If thou Lord should mark iniquity,
who could stand? and therefore there must needs be another Righteousness
reckoned to Gods people as their own, or else they would every day lay
themselves open to be Condemned.

If any shall here further enquire, at what time this Righteousness of Christ
is accepted for us, and imputed to us for our Justification? I Answer; That if
we speak of what is past in Heaven, and there transacted between God the
Father, and God the Son upon the account of all his Elect; it is then very
certain, that there was an act past for this in the days of eternity, in the
Covenant of Redemption, where, as God gave unto the Son the names of all his
chosen ones, for whom he undertook to merit life and salvation, so they were
appointed to obtain pardon and eternal life through this merit of his; and
therefore Christ calls them those whom his Father had given to him before the
world was, i. e. as to their Redeemer There was also another time, viz. at
Christ's Resurection, when there was a solemn act of Justification past for, or
in the behalf of all these when our great High Priest had, on the day of
Atonement, born the names of his Israel upon his shoulders, and breast plate
before God: and made expiation for them with (...) blood, he received a
discharge of all their debts, and they were set free unto him; for he rose to
our Justification, Romans 4. 25. But still this notwithstanding, there is yet a
time wherein Gods Elect, lying in sin, and living out from God, and remaining
in a state of natural corruption, have not the application of this grace made
unto them personally, but they remain children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. i.e. the
curse is still lying upon them, they are not actually brought under the
condition of the Covenant of Grace; Paul therefore at verse 12. speaking of the
time preceding their conversion, declares concerning the believing Ephesians,
that at that time they were without Christ, being aliens from the common wealth
of Israel, and strangers from the Covenants of Promise, having no hope, and
without God in the world; and that time was after that Christ was risen, for it
was the time when the Apostles came to Preach the Gospel to them, which was
many years after Christ's Resurrection: so that the Application, or actual
imputation of Christ's Righteousness to sinners, by virtue whereof they are
justified, and have this privilege conferred upon them, to be delivered from
the hands of the Law, and just accusations of a condemning conscience, is at
such time as God gives them the grace to believe and lay hold on this
Righteousness of Christ to that end, and not before: till when they are held
under condemnation, as will appear under the next head: for though they are
justified to Christ, yet they are not justified in themselves. The substance of
what has been here said, amounts to thus much; viz. that he only who could pay
our debts of Active and Passive Obedience to the Law, could possibly be our
Justification before God, and this there was none but Christ could do: and
therefore God who justifies, must needs as a righteous judge have a proper
respect to his Righteousness in his proceeding to justify us: we could not
obey the Law perfectly in our own persons, but woefully fell short in all
respects; but God is therefore pleased to reckon as if we had done all because
Christ did all in our behalf.

2. In the next place we are to take notice that this imputation of Christ's
Righteousness to our Justification, is an act of Gods fre^ grace; in order to
the evidencing of this, let me here premise;

1. That the freeness of Imputation does no shut out the condition of believing
which is required in the Gospel Covenant, as will appear more fully under the
next general head. All conditions do not destroy the freeness of (...) gift;
nay there are some which do properly and purposely make it the more manifest,
and of this nature is Faith, which is the Gospel condition; God confined it to
this, that so through it his rich grace might shine out the more conspicuously,
Romans 4. 16. Therefore it is of Faith, that it might be by grace; as a man that
bequeaths a Legacy, on condition that the Legatee shall receive it as a
kindness: and much less then does it obscure the riches of grace, when we
consider that he himself who makes, does also give the condition, as well as
the gift of Justification following upon it; and we are assured that he does
so, Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. by grace are ye saved through Faith, and that (namely faith)
not of your selves, it is the gift of God; and indeed we are no more able to
believe of our selves, than we are able to justify our selves, for none can
come unto Christ without the Father draw him: So that it is evident, that a
gracious vocation does not destroy, but contrarily establish the grace of
Justification, it being nothing else but an Antecedent Grace bestowed upon us
in order to our being made to participate in one that follows.

2. That it does not take from, but increase the greatness of the free grace of
it, that the Righteousness which is imputed to us, was to Jesus Christ a costly
Righteousness: the kindness of a benefactor discover it self, in his bestowing
of that upon others for nothing but their accepting of it, which cost him a
great sum to purchase for them, more than it would if he had only parted with
that which stood him in nothing at all: The Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction
for the working out of a Righteousness for us, by the which we might be
justified, does not derogate from, but greatly illustrate the Doctrine of the
free grace of God: if a man Redeem a captive, and set him at liberty without
any Repayment, his kindness is valued according to his expense; and so it is in
the present case, for though it cost Christ an unknown price to obtain it, yet
all this cost is laid our upon the sinner gratis Now that this Righteousness of
Christ is freely imputed to us, or is an act of rich and eminent grace, will
appear, if we consider these things.

1. The first and highest cause from whence is derived, and that is Gods own
mere good plessure. He was the first that ever thought (...) this thing, and if
he had not thought of it would never have entered into our heart. It was rooted
in his eternal Decree of Election, and the foundation of it was laid (...) the
Covenant of Redemption: in that b^ contrived the way how it might be done
agreed about it, and made it sure; and hen^ it comes to pass that our
Justification is derived down to us from this wellhead, Romans 8. 29, 30. Whom
he foreknew, them he predestined, whom he predestined; them he called and
(...) he called, them he also justified Justification is one of those benefits
that (...) receive by and with Christ; and all that partake in his benefits,
were predestined there unto before time, Ephesians. 1. 5, 6. having predestined
us to the Adoption, etc. and what can there be thought of but his own grace
that should put God upon it, when we were not, to lay in for a Justification
for us when we should come to stand in need of it?

2. The way wherein Jesus Christ came to be the Meritorious Cause of our
Justification; or made way for this imputation of his Righteousness to be made
unto us, and that was in a Covenant-way; in which Gods free and willing
acceptance of him to be such an one for us intervened, to give such an efficacy
or operation to this Righteousness of his: It is true, that the Obedience of
Christ was in it self an Obedience so full, and so worthy, and every way so
completely answering to the Law, for the matter of it, that it had in it self
and intrinsically a sufficient value and virtue, enough to stand for the price
of the Redemption of all sinners, as is before proved; so that if God had seen
meet to have justified and saved the world, and every individual of the race of
fallen man, there needed no more to be done for the doing of it in a way of
Justice, then what was to be found in the Obedience of Christ: but still, that
which made it actually to become a ransom for us, was that God accepted it at
his hands for us, or on our account and if he had refused it, it had not been a
Ransom, though its real worth had been nothing less than it now is: Ahab
proffered to Na^^th a full and valuable price for his Vine yard, whatsoever in
reason he would ask for it, but yet he did not so buy it, or that was not the
purchase of it, because he refused to accept it, who was the owner of it, and
did not lie under the obligation to sell, because the other had a mind to buy.
God has sinners forfeited into the hands of his Justice and for sin bound to
dye, yea the condemnation of death is past upon them: they a^ his Prisoners,
and he may do with them (...) pleasure: till therefore he takes a price for
their Redemption, all offers of all one how worthy soever it may be, are
altogether insignificant. Now when God imputes us the Righteousness of Christ
for our Justification, and so delivers us from our Judge he in so doing gives
away that right of his which he had over us to have destroyed (...) for ever,
and that of his own mere motion for if he had refused so to do, and fallen upon
us with implacable fury, none could (...) this have charged him with the least
injustice: herein therefore he displays the freedom of his own grace, in that
he was free willing that sinners should be saved; and it is an observation
which deserves to be much thought upon, and carries great consolation in it,
that God was as forward for man's deliverance by Christ, as Christ was to
undertake it, that the heart of the great God is as much engaged in love to
poor men that have undone themselves that there may be saved, as the heart of
Christ was in (...) through that great work in which it was accomplished; or
otherwise it had been frustrated and come to nothing.

2. Because, though God in his Justifying of a sinner, looks at, and requires
the full merit of Christ's Obedience, yet he looks not at any Righteousness at
all in the person who is to be justified. He has no consideration of the
person in this case, nor is it enquired about him, whether he have been a
greater or lesser sinner, whether he has lived a longer or a shorter time in a
state of alienation from the life of Christ; but this Righteousness is as
readily and willingly applied to a chief sinner, such as Paul confesses
himself to have been, 1 Timothy 1. 15. as to one that has not sinned so
notoriously but been more restrained in his conversation: he as well, and as
soon justifies one that has been a blasphemer, a Drunkard, an Idolater, a
profane Sabbath-breaker, Swearer, etc. as him that has been a civil and moral
man, see what a crew Paul reckons up. 1 Cor. 6. 9. 10. and yet tells his
Corinthians that though some of them had been such, yet they were Justified,
ver: 11. the force of this Reason lies here. That the sinner never struck one
stroke to the procuring of his own Justification, of to his deserving to have
the Righteousness of Christ imputed to him: there is not one grain of his own
Righteousness in it, but it is all Christ's: this garment of Righteousness is
made to his hand; yea, and he does no so much as put it on of himself:
Imputation alone is that which makes it his, and that (...) Gods act; and he
did never by any thing that he has done lay any the least obligation upon God
to do it; and that must need be most free, to the earning and procuring which,
we have never done any thing, (...) not so much as to move his favor toward us.

4. Because at the same time when God justifies a sinner, he might by the
sinners own acknowledgment justly condemn him: he hat plea enough against him;
when a poor sensible sinner, ready to sink under the load of sin and guilt,
betakes himself to God in the name of Christ for pardon and peace, he there
ingeniously confesses his own unworthiness of it, and that in himself he can
lay no claim to it, thus does the Prodigal, Luke. 15. 18, 19. Father, I have
sinned against heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy
Son; yea he confesses his own worthiness to be condemned, Dan. 9. 8. to us
belongs shame and confusion of face; and therefore he puts mercy and
forgiveness together, and acknowledges them to be Gods prerogative, ver. 9. to
the Lord our God belongs mercies and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled
against him; and what can such an imputation be less than free grace, that is
applied to one that lies at the foot of Sovereignty, and is persuaded that if
God spurn him away to hell, he shall do him no injury at all? that knows
nothing but mercy can spare and save him.

5. Because till God imputes the Righteousness of Christ unto him, the sinner
is in no better a state than the rest of mankind: he is a child of wrath by
nature as well as they, Ephesians. 2. 3. all the difference which there is made
betwixt them, proceeds merely from Gods good will and until that breaks out,
there is no intrinsecal difference between the one and the other: It is true,
God makes him holy too but yet he was as faulty in himself till God came to do
this for him: if therefore God is righteous in withholding of this imputation
from all the rest of mankind, that had an equal goodness in them with those
that are justified, the imputation of Christ's Righteousness unto them for their
Justification must needs be free grace, for, what other reason can enter into
man's thoughts to conceive, why two that are every way themselves a like, and
one has nothing in him more to engage the good will of God to him than the
other, should have such a vastly different dispensation of Providence dispensed
to them, that the one should be justified, and the other left under
condemnation? if it be said that the one believes, and the other believes not,
it is readily answered, that this faith was given him for his Justification.

5. The last thing offered to consideration, is to clear it up that this
Righteousness of Christ is received only by Faith, we have already se^^ what is
done on Gods part in order to the making of Christ's Justifying Righteousness
ours; he reckons or imputes it to us, and that to this mere grace: we are now a
little to consider what is done on our part to this end; and that is we are to
receive it: If a man will be the possessor of a gift which is given him, he
must take it, give it acceptance: now the hand which here entertains this free
favor of God, is Faith: here therefore three things may be enquired into, viz.

1. What is Justifying Faith?

2. How this Faith serves to our Justification?

3. How may it appear that Faith only on our part is instrumental to our
Justification?

1. What is true Justifying Faith?

A. That there are several sorts of Faith made mention of in the Scripture, is
easily obvious unto such as are acquainted with it; but there is one sort only
by which we are Justified; and I shall not here need to take notice of any
other, nor enquire after any other, nor enquire after any other consideration
of this Faith besides what is proper to it as it justifies; and accordingly it
may be thus described: Justifying Faith is a particular receiving of Christ in
the promise of special mercy, by a confidence of reliance of the Soul upon him,
for all that good which be has purchased, and God has promised.

In clearing up of this description we may observe these things.

1. That the next and immediate object of Justifying Faith is Jesus Christ.
Faith that justifies closes in with the person of Christ; not barely
considered as he is the second person in the Trinity, but as he is
God-man-Mediator. Justification is one piece of communion with Christ in his
benefits; now our Union to him. Christ himself must be ours, if ever his
Righteousness come to be ours; he is therefore called the Lord our
Righteousness, Jer. 23. 6. and is said to be made Righteousness it self unto
us, 1 Cor. 1. 30. which expressions refer to his person: so that when once we
have gotten an interest in him, and are really entitled to him, we are then,
and not till then, invested with a Righteousness which will clear us from all
guilt, and declare us to be righteous; for in him it is that we are to have it,
Isa. 45. 24. In the Lord have I Righteousness and Strength, and ver. 25. In the
Lord shall the seed of Israel be justified: on this account it is that Paul in
our Text concludes upon this, that if he can but be found in him, he is then
safe enough, as having a Righteousness to friend, which will justify him
perfectly.

2. That which gives the soul the advantage to take hold of the person of
Christ, is the promise of special mercy in the which he is exhibited. It is not
to be denied that the whole Scripture is serviceable to the Faith of Gods
Elect; and it all some way or other leads to Christ; and for this reason is the
Scripture called the word of Faith: 1 Timothy 4. 6. and it is all of it to be
believed, because it is all true, and confirmed by the Testimony of God
himself; it is the word of him who is the Truth; and it is all profitable, and
there are various uses to which it serves, both in the drawing of men to
Christ, to believe in him, and in the building of them up in their most holy
Faith, and for the direction of them how they ought to serve him in all things;
see 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. But yet every portion of Scripture does not alike nextly
serve to give the sinner an advantage to lay hold upon Jesus Christ. The
Scripture consists of dive^s parts, and these serve nextly to various ends and
uses, though all of them contribute something to the helping forward of the
glory of God in the happiness of fallen man: There are recorded in it many
histories; and these serve partly for holy example, and partly for solemn
caution to men: there are moral precepts, there are sharp reproofs, there are
severe threatenings, etc. all of which have their particular profit and will
serve, either to the preparing of a sinner for this closure with Christ by
faith, or for the helping of a believer home to the heavenly Kingdom: But that
which nextly and most proper gives us the advantage and encouragement to
believe in Christ, is that special revelation which God has been pleased to
make of him, in the which revelation he gives us to understand, that as he is a
complete and all sufficient Savior, so he invites sinners to come to and
accept of him, and put their trust in him, and engages to all such as so do,
that they shall in and by him obtain the pardon of Sin, and peace with God;
that if they will but take Christ on his terms, he shall be theirs: hence it is
that by the promise we are said to be partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet.
1.4. and it was upon a promise that Abraham believed, and it was accounted to
him for Righteousness, Genesis 15. 5, 6. and such a promise is a necessary mediam
for faith to come to Christ and take hold of him by. For Sin, which all the
children of men are naturally guilty of, and separated between God and man, and
all mankind was for Sin under a severe threatening: so that they lead no hold of
God at all, but were quite knocked off from any such thing: and now how shall
they believe that this God will pardon them, and be reconciled unto them
without some encouragement. The alone and bare consideration of Gods power to
do them this kindness, is not enough, because there is a dreadful curse stands
between to dishearten them from taking hold of that; and until it be removed
they may be certain that God will never be so propositions to them. It must
therefore be only a word of promise that can offer a Sinner any encouragement
at all. To believe that God will accept of and pardon us in Christ, before such
time as he has declared himself willing to do it, is not faith but frenzy:
because before the word of promise did break out, there was nothing else but
wrath, and a sentence of condemnation to be read or heard of for the Sinner;
here therefore is the first peeps hole of hope.

3. That property of Faith whereby it justifies, is that it helps the soul to
rely upon Christ for all the good which is laid up in the promise; this
reliance, trust or confidence is the proper justifying act of Faith. It is
true, at there is a promise revealed to the soul, by which he comes to take
hold of Christ by Faith, so there are two things necessarily prerequired to
this confidence: As

1. That he have the understanding or apprehension of the things that are
promised, and of the terms of the promise: there can be no justifying Faith
without this; the object must be revealed to the man, or otherwise it can not
be relied upon by him; without the knowledge he cannot close in with the good
of the promise, an ignorant faith is a great contradiction: Paul knows whom he
has trusted; our Savior Christ speaking to the woman of Samaria, tells her,
John 4. 22. Ye worship ye know not what? we worship what we know: Faith is the
act of a reasonable creature; now the natural motion of the will in man, is by
the light of the understanding, which is to be eyes unto it, and hence Faith is
said to come by hearing, Romans 10. 17. and that there is no believing in him of
whom men have not heard, ver: 14. now hearing is counted the sense of
discipline, because by it the understandings of men are wont to be informed in
the notion of the things that they are told of:

2. That in his Judgment, he yield a credit and assent to the Truth of these
things that he knows, for although an historical Faith alone, will not amount
to a justifying Faith, yet there must of necessity be such a Faith in order to
the other, and without this there cannot be any of that in the man.

He that does not give credit to the truth of the promise, will never rely upon
it for mercy and salvation; he that comes to God, (i. e, in Faith) must believe
that he is, and that he is the rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Heb,
12.6. It is therefore one great part of Gospel work, to enlighten (...)
understandings in the knowledge of Christ, and of the* great things purchased
by him to be conferred upon his people, Ephesians. 1. 18, 19. and if ever we come to
take hold of the promise by Faith, and of Christ in it, we are to believe that
God is true in all that he faith, that his Testimony carries its own credit
with it, because it is the Word of God who cannot lie; and that this word of
promise is his word; and that there is salvation sufficient in Jesus Christ who
is exhibited (...) us in this promise, and that this salvation shall without
fail be bestowed upon all such as do believe in him, according unto it: that he
who has promised is faithful, and will also perform: without a free and full
assent to, and credit of all this, there is no hope that a soul should be
persuaded really to adventure it self upon the word of promise.

But still this is not all that is requisite, nay there may be all this, yet
not a saving faith that therefore which is the proper distinguishing note of
this faith, in that upon all (...) the soul is carried forth to close with, and
cast it self upon Christ as he is revealed in the promise. I am not here
speaking of the strength by which this is done, but only (...) the act it self;
and to make the thing more distinct, let me propose these things to
consideration.

1. That it is not the promise it self, but that which is promised in it, which
is the object of Justifying Faith. The promise it self is not our
Justification, but it is a medium to it, or it brings something along with it,
that is by it offered unto us, which is able to justify us, and that is Christ
and his Righteousness: It therefore contains in it a revelation of that great
mystery of Salvation by Jesus Christ. The promise indeed makes offer to the
children of Men of a pardon of sin, and of reconciliation unto God; but this is
not all, but together with such an offer made, it exhibits the way by which,
and the Author by whom it is to be enjoyed, and that is no other but Jesus
Christ: so that the promise in the proper notion of it, is nothing else at an
instrument of bringing Jesus Christ to the Soul, and helping it to its closing
in with him.

2. That Jesus Christ is in the general promise offered to every one in
particular, that is privileged to hear it, upon a Gospel condition. A general
bears a true respect to all and every of the individuals that are contained
under it; when the Gospel of Jesus Christ is Preached to a company of sinful
men, and it is proclaimed to them, and in their audience, That whosoever will
may came and drink of the waters of Life freely, Rev. 22. 17. That everyone who
is a thirsty may come and buy and eat, etc. Isai. 55. 1. now every person for
himself, that comes within the sound of such a Proclamation, may with great
safety thus argue in himself, I then am herein concerned I may come if I will,
the invitation is made to me, why then should I neglect to accept it, or shut
out my self by unbelief? such is the Gospel promise: and it is also made up on
a condition, there are the terms annexed to it, there is the way declared in
which the good promised may be obtained: for God in bringing Sinners home to
Christ, bring them under a new Covenant Relation, and the promise that is
revealed in it, is the gray encouragement of the Covenant, giving men to
understand what shall be the advantage that shall accrue to them by putting
(...) themselves under it; and as it is in it (...) an encouragement, so it
always carries in (...) something that is required in order to (...) being
made the owners of it, and heirs of (...) the good which is contained in it;
now the condition is believing: that which the Gospel says, is, that if we
ever hope to get Pardon of all our sins, and have our person to find acceptance
with an Holy God, (...) and through Jesus Christ, we must believe (...) him;
and this is so positive and unalterable that the want of it will exclude us
from (...) hope of participation in such a favor; an therefore it is not only
assured to all (...) but denied to all others, Mark 16. 16. (...) that believes
and is Baptized, shall be saved but he that believes not shall be damned, 1 John 5. 12. He that has the Son has life, but he that has not the Son has
not life.

3. That he who performs the condition of the general Gospel Promise, does in
so doing make the good of it so to become his own by promise. If there were no
promise made to such a thing, or if the party doing it were no way related to
it, it not being propounded and offered to him, the performance were then of no
force; but if there be a promise made and offered, and accepted, and the demand
of it performed, the fulfillment of it stands engaged. If God says, let him
that will believe in Christ, and if he does, I will certainly justify him,
then whosoever hears the condition, is persuaded by the promise to entertain
it, and accordingly does believe, he thereby comes under a particular and
personal relation to the good exhibited, and has a security of it in the
promise: If Christ invites a whole company of weary and heavy laden sinners to
come to him, and tells them, that he of them that does come shall find rest to
his Soul, then if this or that person, if one or more of the company come,
though all the rest stay away; they take him at his word; they do, as it were
bi^d the Covenant and bring Christ himself into Bonds; so that God can as well
deny himself, as refuse to justify such; his word is past, the offer is his
own, and he neither may, nor can, nor will in any wise reverse it.

4. This is done by every one who upon the Gospel invitation, is persuaded by
the Spirit of God to cast himself upon Christ, and to put his trust in him. It
is not a believing Christ to be, but a believing in Christ: it is not a bar^
act of the understanding that is here exerted, but the promise comes in at the
understanding, which judges of it, and gives approbation to it as that which
is true and eligible and so passes it over to the affections, which are raised
and stirred by it, but all this is too little alone, but at last the Will sets
its Seal to it, chooses, embraces, rolls it self upon it: So that Faith and
Unbelief are rooted in the Will: hence we shall find that Christ lays the
blame of men's not believing in him upon their Wills, Joh. 5.40. Ye will not
come unto me that ye may have life: thus also the Scripture is frequently
expressing the work of Faith, by the Souls putting of its trust in Christ, as
psalm. 2.12. Blessed are all they that put their trust in him. So Isai. 50. 10.
Let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. And unbelief is
called a departing from him, Heb. 3.12. Faith also is expressed by the notion
of embracing the promise, and so of the good that is brought in it, Heb. 11.
13. they were persuaded of them, and embraced them. So that every one who
believes, has performed the thing which is required; he has come up to that
which the promise challenged of them that would be entitled to it.

5. Hence, when a Soul is enabled to believe in Christ as he is revealed to us
in the promise, Christ now becomes his to all those intents and purposes for
which he was exhibited therein. So that when Christ is his, then all of Christ's
that is communicable is his also in the same Covenant; for Christ and his
benefits go together, as being inseparable, and as we cannot have his benefits,
except we have his person, so we cannot enjoy him, but we must withal
participate in all the precious fruits of his Redemption: the Scripture
therefore delights to be frequently setting forth this thing under the name and
notion of a Marriage Covenant between a Man and Woman, in which it is known
that a propriety in the person, gives a right to the estate: Now own part of
Christ Treasure, a tide whereunto he conveys to such as do believe in him, and
so are married to him man everlasting Covenant, is his Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.
30. He is of God made unto us, Our Righteousness, All the new Covenant
relations of Christ, do passover in this conveyance to the Believer, and he
has an unquestionable claim to them all; he is now our Redeemer, our Mediator,
our Surety, our Advocate: and upon this account it is, viz. because in
believing we receive Christ unto an efficacious Justification that it is called
justifying Faith.

2. It follows to consider how Faith Justifies, or how it serves to our
Justification; and this may be easily gathered out of the foregoing Discourse:
the nature of justifying Faith, if it be duly pondered, will tell us what
influence it has into the justification of a sinner: but to make it a little
more clear and easy, we may make a little more distinct and particular enquiry
into it, and consider of it.

1. Negatively; and here let us observe these things;

1. That Faith does not justify us, as it has any worth or merit of its own
in it, to deserve or earn Justification for us: they do very grossly mistake
themselves, who think that Faith has every way the same consideration in the
new Covenant, which obedience or works had in the Old: It is true, it is the
condition of this as obedience was the condition of the other: but yet there is
this plain and manifest difference, that in the old Covenant God had a proper
respect to the work of Obedience, as that which had a Covenant merit in it, or
for which man was to have been justified, if he had continued in it, Rom 10. 5.
Moses describes the Righteousness, which is of the Law, that the man that does
these things shall live by them. But in the process of Gospel Justification, it
is Christ's Righteousness which stands to answer in the room of ours, and not
our Faith: So that the merit of our Justification is in the object, viz.
Christ; and not in the act of Faith: If we believe in him, he then stands to
answer for us to our Judge, and all his earnings are made over to us upon our
believing, and placed to our account.

2. Hence it follows naturally, that Faith has no natural or proper virtue in
it self to justify a Sinner; for that which has in it self a real virtue to
justify, must answer the Law in all its demands, whereas Faith in it self
answers to none of them: there is no such thing as a legal obedience in Faith,
for it is the property of Faith to fly from the Law unto Grace and therefore it
never designs a personal answering of the Law, but seeks a deliverance from it
in and through Jesus Christ; and that is the privilege of believing, Romans 6.
14. ye are not under the Law but under Grace. Faith fetches in all virtue from
abroad: and in truth it justifies a man no more, than the look of a bitten
Israelite upon the Brazen Serpent healed him: now it was not the virtue of the
look, but the virtue that was put into the Brazen Serpent that healed him who
so looked upon it, else he might have looked long enough before he had been
cured: so it is not the virtue of believing, but of Christ who is believed in,
that justifies. Faith justifies a sinner, as the Woman's touch of Christ's
Garment healed her Issue of Blood, and that was the virtue, not of the touch,
but of Christ, which issued from him upon her touching him; and therefore he
declares that he felt virtue to go out of him, upon that exertion of her Faith
in so touching him, Luke 8.46.

3. And from the premises it follows, that Faith does not justify as it is a
work; for if it did so, then it would either have merit, or at least virtue in
it to justify, but we see that it has neither. Faith is, in large sense a
work; it is an act of Obedience to God, it is an answering to the Gospel
command; it is in it self, as it is habitually rooted in the soul, one of the
graces of sanctification, and as it exerts it self in the acts of believing, it
is an exercise of holiness: God requires Faith of all that hear the Gospel,
that is his command that they believe in the name of the Son Jesus Christ, 1
John 3. 23. but in this sense it cannot justify: for then we must not only be
justified by believing, but this privilege must be bestowed upon us for
believing; for if it answer faith as a work, then it comes as wages; but
justifying Faith excludes all works, and therefore cannot it self justify as a
work; Romans 3. 28. we conclude that a man is justified by Faith, without the
deeds of the Law: faith is the condition of the New Covenant, and a Covenant
receives its denomination from the quality of its condition, if then faith
should justify as a work, it were but a New Covenant of works, whereas it is
in truth a Covenant of Grace.

4. Neither does Faith justify as the principal applier of the Justification
which is procured by Christ, unto us; it is not to be looked upon as the
highest cause of the application of the benefit to our persons: this also was
to exalt it above its place, and give it a pre-eminence beyond its due. It is
before into mated, that in the application of the Righteousness of Christ unto
us, there is something done by God, and something done by us: now that which
God does is the principal, viz. he takes this Righteousness of the hands of
Christ, as done for us, and the^ he gives it to us, or imputes it to our
account of his own rich grace, and this imputation is the main efficient of our
Justification; for it is God that justifies, Romans 8. 23. i. e. principally,
giving is more honorable than receiving, and we owe the acknowledgment of all
the benefit we have in being enriched by such a gift, to him that conferred
(...) upon us, and nothing to our selves for taking it; although it be still a
truth, that if we had not received it, we could not have been enriched by it.

2. Affirmatively; Faith justifies instrumentally, as it receives the Lord
Jesus Christ, and his merits offered in the Covenant. It is before made clear
that the Righteousness of Christ is the thing for which we are Justified: now
the proper work of Faith in this affair, is to receive it unto Justification;
and that because it is the term or condition of the new Covenant. God has in
his good pleasure (...) choice of this way to convey the (...) to, and bestow
an interest in the Righteousness of Christ upon sinners, viz. by their
believing in his Son: He does (as it (...)) say, behold here is a
Righteousness, (...) which I am well contented, it exceedingly (...) pleases
me to bestow pardoning grace ^^on sinful men upon the account of it, but (...)
if any desire to have the application of made unto them in particular, it is to
be ^ected only in this way, they must believe, (...) if they so do, it shall be
theirs: and ^^eupon we may come at the right conception of what faith does
toward our being ^^tified; this is all that can be with any truth ascribed to
it, that it brings us under the Covenant condition, and thereupon it ^^ders us
the qualified Subjects of the promise of grace which is therein exhibited; and
this (...) does by accepting, embracing, and placing its hope and trust in the
Righteousness of Christ: and so it follows that we are justified (...) for our
faith, or believing, but for Christ; but yet it is by faith, or in a way of
believing For cu^ full satisfaction in the truth of this, it is good for us to
take notice that the Scripture is pleased to ascribe our Justification to
diverse things, and that tells us that it must have reference to diverse
respects, an^ they are to be well understood by such (...) would not be
deceived, but ascribe to each of them, that which belongs to them, and no more
or less: and the rather should (...) labor to be distinct in our conception
(...) them, lest otherwise we should rob Christ (...) his merits, and God of
his grace, and lift (...) selves up above our own place, and to (...) it in one
of the main and fundamental point of our hopes. Sometimes then it ascribes it
(...) grace, Romans 3. 24. Being justified freely by (...) grace: and then it
points us to take notice (...) the Imputation, or the act of Justifying (...)
which being done by God, proceeds or flow from his mere grace, no ways merited
or deserved by us: Sometimes it ascribes it to the Blood of Christ, Romans 15.
Romans 5. 9. much more than being now justified by his blood, and then it directs
us to eye the meritorious cause his blood being put Metonimically; for his
satisfaction; and that Synechdochically for (...) whole Obedience by which be
merited for us and therefore sometime it gives it to his Obedience in general,
Romans 15. 19. By the Obedience of one many shall be made righteous; and so it
shows us the matter of our Justification. Sometimes it acknowledges it to God,
Rom, 8. 33. It is God that justifies: and so we (...) given to discover the
efficient of our Justification, for it is God who applying the righteousness of
Christ to us, and covering (...) with it, does actually justify us, and
sometimes Faith is honored with having it ascribed to that, Romans 5. 1. Being
justified by faith; (...) then it intends the instrument or hand whichreceives
it, for when we have given to ^^ch other that which is their due, what else
(...) their remain to be attributed to Faith (...) only this? And this further
serves to let (...) understand, that our actual or personal justification,
being one part of the work of application, wherein this fruit of Redemption is
by the Spirit applied to us upon our believing, that therefore we are not
Justified in a Gospel sense, before, but in and with our believing in Christ:
for then only so that Justification which the Son of God has procured for us,
and received in our name, brought home to us, and conferred upon us, which is
plainly included in our being said to be justified by Faith.

3. In the last place, it remains to make it evident, That Faith only on our
part is instrumental to our Justification: that nothing else of ours has any
influence upon the pardon of our sin, and the declaring of us Righteous: and to
evident this, let it be considered, that there are but two things of our that
can make any pretense to have any share in our Justification, and they are our
Faith and our works of Obedience to the Law or Command of God, or the exercises
(...) the other graces of Sanctification in us: (...) will therefore suffice to
make it appear to (...) of Faith alone, and that nothing else that (...) done
by us can have any influence into it, (...) showing how impossible it is that
any holy works, or gracious acts of Obedience done by us should contribute any
thing to our Justification before God, whence it will follow that either Faith
alone, or nothing at (...) which proceeds from us is concerned in it and the
truth of this will appear to any that shall but thoroughly weigh these following
conclusions.

1. All the acts of Evangelical Obedience, as they come from us, (...) are done
by us, all parts of our Righteousness; and therefore for that reason they are
wholly excluded from having any influence into our Justification, as has been
already proved in the foregoing discourse: and there is this one reason which
carries enough in it to stop the mouth of all cavillings against it, viz. That
which does it self stand in need of a pardon, before it can find acceptance
with an holy God, cannot any way help to justify us; but such are all our acts
of Obedience: there is indeed an Evangelical Righteousness in them, they are
done in sincerity, and they Flow from a principle of Sanctification, and have a
conformity, though imperfect to the Law of God, but yet they cannot justify,
because they have their spots, deficiency, short coming, and thereupon they
need the Righteousness of another for their Justification: we are called
Priests to God, in respect of our new Obedience, but we must remember that
there was a Law requiring that the Priests right ear, right thumb and right toe
must be touched with the blood of the Sacrifice, intimating that all we do in
our service to God stands in need of the imputation of Christ's merit, or else
it is of no worth: yea and we find that the High Priest, who was principally a
Type of Christ, was to bear the iniquity of the holy things of the children of
Israel, and to make expiation for them, telling us that Christ makes it one
part of his work to appease his Fathers displeasure, and give ground for the
acceptance of all we do in integrity, through his own merits.

2. We are justified by the Righteousness of another, viz. of Jesus Christ,
which is made ours, and accepted for us, and instead of our own, of in the room
of the Righteousness which we were by the first Covenant obliged unto; this
has been already proved, and thence it follows by way of cons^ctary.

1. That the Righteousness by which we are to be justified, is already wrought
out and perfected and if so, then there is nothing of ours that can justify us
by addition to, or being a complement of that Righteousness: for is has been
made to appear, that it is alone, Christ's Righteousness; it admits of no
addition to it, or completing of it, it needs no eiking out, for then he
should not save to the uttermost. As God indented with Christ for so he
accepted of his Obedience, as the full price of our Redemption, and the whole
Satisfaction to his Law; so that God looks only to this, and there is nothing
else that he will look upon as the procuring cause of our pardon and acceptance
into favors but only his Sons Righteousness.

2. Hence there is nothing of ours that can have any hand in our Justification,
but only that which is instrumental to make this Righteousness of Christ to
become actually ours: we have nothing to do for our being justified, but to
receive Christ's Righteousness for it: now there is nothing of ours but only our
Faith which is capable of such a thing as this: as for our moral virtues, and
all our actions of obedience to the Law of God, they are far from having a
virtue of receiving Christ, for they, are truly and properly our returns, or
offerings of Thanksgivings into him, in the acknowledgment of his great favors
bestowed upon us; so that faith and no other Grace is fitted for this work.

3. To be Justified by the free Grace of God, excludes any works of ours from
our Justification. That the riches of free Grace are discerned in this affair
has been already made evident: and what contribution can our works of
Obedience be conceived to make toward our being justified, except we should
suppose that they move, and prevail with God, offer him some ground and reason
why he should pass this act upon us: and if this be supposed and conceded to,
then it will follow that he must justify us for our works, whereas the Apostle
assures us that such a notion does certainly exclude Grace, and brings in vain
boasting, which God had design wholly to remove in the way of man's being
justified, Romans 3. 27. Where boasting then? it is excluded, by what Law of
works? nay, but by the Law of Faith. 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved us, and called
us with as holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own
purpose and grace.

4. They are only the work of a justified Believer that are Evangelically
acceptable unto God; and therefore there are no works that can contribute so
much as instrumentally to our Justification: We no sooner believe, but we are
justified, for Faith takes on the Garment of Christ's Righteousness, and we are
immediately in him, and stand under the security of his Suretyship, and all
this passes before we are capable of doing any one action, that in Gospel
account may be called good, (...) without Faith is impossible to please God, He
11.6. now it is certain, and evident to any rational man, that the effect
cannot go before the cause, and be causal to it; it involves a contradiction so
to say or suppose works are the fruits and evidence of Justifying Faith, and
therefore they cannot possibly be helpful toward the justifying of a Sinner
before God, who until their persons are accepted, receives none of their
Sacrifices a^ the hands of men it must then be Faith alone, that beggarly
Grace, that carries the soul to Christ, and lays it prostrate at his (...),
and takes hold upon his Righteousness, and confides in him for all good; there
is nothing else of ours that can have any influence into this affair, and that
only in the ^^nse before expressed. This does not assert his Faith to be alone,
for it never is so, but (...) is alwaves accompanied with all the other ^^races
and Virtues of the Spirit of God, which at the same time when he makes a man
Believer, are infused into the man; and ^^uth is every day envigorating of, and
working by them, in a course of grateful obedience, in acknowledgment of the
free ^ours of God bestowed upon him: and therefore the Faith by which we are
justified (...) not such a Faith as emboldens men to (...); such a Faith as
allows men this indulgence, will be found far from justifying: at Faith, and
that only which works by (...), and purifyeth the heart, can afford men (...)
comforts and assurances of the pardon (...) their sins, and their peace with
God.

USE 1. For Information:
There are two or three Conclusions which properly arise from the Doctrine;

1. We may hence (...) main different between the first and second Covenant; or
the Covenant of works and the Covenant of Grace. The difference between these
two does (...) lie in that the One has a Righteousness according to which it
proceeds, and by which it tries the Children of men, and that the other has
none at all; it is highly derogatory to the Glory of God for any to think that
he who was exactly just in the dispensition of the old Covenant between him and
man, has left off to be just, and laid (...) his holiness and righteousness,
that he might so make way to be gracious in the dispens^tion of the second: no;
its Gods glory (...) he can be both just, and yet justify a sinner that he can
give to him, and accept for him. Righteousness, according to which he himself
may righteously proceed to acquit him. But here therefore properly lies the
difference between these two, viz. that the one look at a personal, whereas the
other has respect to a Relative Righteousness: there is (...) great, and in
some ^ense a greater Righteousness in the new Covenant than there was in the
old; for this looks at the Righteousness of man, but that has fixed upon the
Righteousness of God, Text. That confined the man within himself, and bid him
to look for it at home, whereas this sends him abroad to ^nquire for the matter
and ground of his justification. And this consideration may ^each us, that all
such as hope to be justified, and would not finally miss of their expectation,
must go out of themselves for it: This then is essential to justifying Faith,
that it carries us ^^uite out of our selves to Jesus Christ for (...).

2. Here also we may be informed, that a man may be without sin in respect of
Justification, and yet have a great deal of the remainders (...) sin in him, in
respect of Sanctification. It has offered matter of no little perplexity to
^^rious souls, when they read such Texts of scriptures, as speaking of new born
Christians, or regenerate m^n, represent them to be such as are without sin, as
1 John 3. 9. Whatsoever is born of God does not commit sin, and Numb. 23.21. He
has not beheld inequity in Jacob, neither has he seen perverseness in Israel:
and are thereupon ready to conclude themselves not to be of Gods Israel, not to
be born of God, for alas, they commit sin every day, and that not only thought
sin, but word sin, and deed sin too; are strangely overtaken with it, and led
captive by it; and certainly if they were truly regenerate it would be
otherwise with them. I shall not here dispute how far these Scriptures are
applicable with regard to the sanctification of the people of God; it is not to
be denied but that in that respect they do not so commit sin as ungodly men do;
they have a principle of true holiness in them which hates it, which maintains
a spiritual warfare against it, which humbles them, and leads them to godly
sorrow and repentance, by reason of it; it is against their new nature, it is
no longer they that do it, but sin that dwells in them, it obtains not the
full consent of their whole soul: But still it is also w^fully true on the
other hand, that they are over taken with sin, drawn forcibly into it; yea,
they are miserably hampered with it, the oppression which they suffer from it
sets them (...) groaning, and fills their Souls with distress holy Paul makes
bitter complaint about it, Romans 7. and so does David too, though a man after
Gods own heart, as we have instanced in diverse Psalms: yea, they find, by
reason of the body of death, that they have in the (...) much of love to it,
liking of it, hankerings after it, and proneness to be over easily carried away
with the temptations to it; which fills them with sorrowful groans under the
oppressing weight of it, and bitter cries for a deliverance from it; doubtless;
in this sense; there was a great deal of iniquity in Jacob, and perverseness in
Israel at this time when God uttered this of them, otherwise they would not
have been so soon led aside, and drawn away by the temptation to commit
lewdness with the Midianitish Women, and to offer their Sacrifices unto (...):
yea the same Apostle John, in this very Epistle tells us, Chap. 1. 8. that if
we say we are without sin, we ly, and the truth is not in (...); and in Chap 2.
beginning he gives encouragement and direction to Believers that do (...) any
time, to go to, and wait upon the (...); so that the main and full resolution
of this case, of enquiry, how the children of God may be truly said to be
without sin, is by reducing it unto this head of Justification. God* looks upon
his Israel, even all those that are regenerate, not as in themselves, but as
they are in Jesus Christ; and because he who was their Surety was altogether
without sin, he knew none, either as to pollution by it, or commission of it;
hence they are also accounted in him to have no sin; though Sin considered in
its own nature, be sin still, and it will for ever be a truth concerning Gods
best Saints here upon Earth, that they did do such things every day, as
deserved death; yet Sin legally considered, cease to be sin in a Law account,
when satisfaction is made for it, and a pardon is applied to the Sinner, upon
which he becomes justified: now the law no more calls him a Sinner, but a
Righteous person; and God as a Judge can no longer see Sin in him, because
there is none that does expose or lay him liable to a Sentence of condemnation.

3. We are hence further informed, How deeply we^^ and obliged to God in
thankfulness for Jesus Christ, and particularly in respect of his
Righteousness. If this be that alone upon which the foundation of our
Justification is laid, everlasting praises then are his due for providing of
poor man with such a Righteousness whereby he might be justified: what would
have become of us all for ever (...) if it had not been for this? see how the
Evangelical Prophet comments upon it* Isai. 52 6. All we like lost sheep have
gone astray: we have turned every one to his own way, and the Lord has laid on
him the iniquity of us all. And there are two things especially, which serve to
heighten the obligation that is lying upon us in this respect, viz.

1. Gods great love appearing in it to the children of men; the Evangelist sets
is forth emphatically, or rather Christ himself, for they are his own words,
John 7. 16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begoten Son, etc.
needs must it be a love that transcends al verbal expressions or heart
conceptions, that so deeply engaged the heart of the Great God in man's
Salvation; as not only to give him a precious rule of happiness, and a
concreated principle and power to have obeyed it, and been made happy by that
Obedience, but also, when he had altogether fallen short of it by sin, and
thereby subjected himself to Eternal R^ine, and had set the Righteousness of
that Rule against him, to his unavoidable condemnation, now to find out a
Remedy for this misery, by providing for him another Righteousness, which
should completely answer that Rule in all its demands; and instead of letting
the Curse fall upon him in its full weight, which would have crushed him down
into the bottomless pit, and sunk him into endless destruction; to interpose
his own Son between sinning man, and the Curse of God due for sin, to bear it
off from them, by bearing of it himself, that so be being made sin for them,
who know none, they might be made the Righteousness of God through him; and
that he should do all this for those that were his enemies, and had wilfully,
and unreasonably revolted from and taken up arms of Rebellion against him
behold what manner of love God has loved us withal, thus to do for us in our
most urgent distress, the Apostle cannot choose but chew upon it, Romans 5. 6. but
God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ
died for us: and that he should accept of Christ for us sinners* and accept of
us in him, and do away all ou^ sins by him, is a strange piece of unparalleld
love; the world cannot exemplify it in all its Records of humane kindness.

2. Our infinite need, which was such as we could not possibly have done well
without it; Christ was not given for Righteousness to man in Innocence, when he
had no occasion for such a benefit, being innocent in his present state, and
furnished with the habits of a Righteousness of his own, by using whereof he
might have fulfilled the Covenant condition, and for it stood justified before
God: but it was to fallen man, when he had lost his own, and stood under the
sentence of a Law that had no pity or compassion for him, but was fully engaged
to his destruction; he was not given to man, when God and he was friends, and
there needed no Intercessor, but when they were enemies and there was none to
take up the controversy between them, and put an end to it: when man must else
unavoidably have died, and perished for ever; when he must needs have fallen in
the judgment, and execution have been done upon him accordingly: and how can
such an one, who has been made the happy subject of this so glorious a
privilege, ever enough celebrate the high praises of that God, who has
wrought out for him so wonderful a deliverance by Jesus Christ? what strains of
thankfulness can be thought too high for him to raise his heart up unto, in the
solemnization of this unspeakable gift? had he the Oratory of Angels, he could
never find out expressions full enough to give it its deserved encomium, but
must at length, finding of words to fail, lose himself in an ecstasy of silent
admiration.

USE. II. For Exhortation: And that,
1. In general, though more especially to Unbelievers: the counsel here is,
That as we desire to stand justified before our great Judge, when we shall come
to be judged by him, we labor to make sure of an undeceiving title to the
Righteousness of Christ by Faith in him. This is the great concern of all the
children of men that come within the sound of the Gospel, the main thing which
all (...) dams Posterity have to be (...) out after and yet alas, how few are
there among all this company, who mind or have any regard to it? It is one of
the principal artifices of Satan, that great adversary of Souls, to lull men
into a quiet sleep of carnal security and persuade them to live in the world
altogether unconcerned about the hazardous estate of their Souls, and if
possible, he will prevent them from ever so much as considering how the case is
like to go with them in the great day of Accounts: whence it comes to pass,
that the greatest part of this number do unhappily leave this great affair
unprovided for: Or if at any time he sees men to be under some ro^zngs and
awakenings; if they begin to be a little troubled about their present state,
and in fears of the issue of it; if some beams of light are darted into them,
and they feel some tokens of Divine Displeasure, and think what they shall do
to escape it, he will be sure to do what he can to gull them into some
groundless hopes, whereby they may be cheated into a Fools Paradise, and so go
on quietly in the ways of destruction, like an Ox to the slaughter, and know
not that it is for their lives, till it be too late, and there be no recovery:
give me leave then to offer some ro^zing motives, to quicken you to this work.

1. Consider, The certainty of the great Judgment. If it were so, that the
children of men were never to come to a Trial, it would then little concern
them to enquire into their own case, or the estate of affairs between God and
them, they might well enough, and with safety let all things run on without any
concernedness upon their Spirits: but since there will certainly (...) time
come wherein every Son and Daughter of Adam shall be brought forth to the ^ar,
and pass an exact Trial, it must needs speak it a piece of the highest prudence
in them to be most carefully providing for it, and the most manifest folly to
be negligent about it; and if the Scriptures of Truth may be believed, they
have given us undeniable assurance that there will be a time wherein all the
world shall be Judged, and all persons in particular shall be called forth to
give up their account at the Bar: see Eccles. 12. ult. For God will bring every
work to Judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good or evil, 2 Cor.
5. 10. For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every
one may receive the things which he has done in the body, etc. and there are
many other Scriptures of the like import. So that the thing it self is
indubitable; and it is an argument of horrid Atheism as well as Unbelief; for
any to suspect the Truth of this assertion, as all these practically do, who do
wholly neglect all manner of care to be providing for it: Remember then, that
it will be but a little while, and all that are in the graves shall arise, and
be gathered together unto the Judgment when the Thrones shall be set, and the
Books shall be opened. and all the children of men that ever have been shall be
judged out of them: when you and I shall, whether we will or no, be brought
forth and made to stand out and appear before that awful Tribunal.

2. Consider, Who shall then be Judge: the Scripture sometimes ascribes this
Judgment unto God, sometimes to Jesus Christ: the Apostle reconciles these two
together, Acts 17. 31. He has appointed a day in the which he will judge the
world in righteousness, by the man whom he has ordained. So that God judges
the world by Jesus Christ; and although it be a great comfort to Believers,
that they shall be Judged by Christ, because he who is their Judge, is also
their Savior, and they could not be made partakers in the imputation of his
Righteousness without his knowledge, and therefore they must needs meet him in
that day with great joy^ yet this consideration will add no matter of comfort
or hope to any other besides these, and least of all to that company that have
enjoyed the Gospel, and the offers of Christ made unto them in it, and have
despised it, and disobeyed: yea his being to Judge themselves to augment the
terror of all such as these, because this great Savior has been specially
and horribly affronted by them, and therefore he has a peculiar design of
taking vengeance upon them, 2 These. 1. 8. in flaming fire, taking vengeance on
them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.
But yet this may awaken all to consider that if he be the Judge, we may be sure
that he will proceed in exact Righteousness, and will do nothing in that affair
for favor or affection, but just as men's case shall there be found to be, just
so the sentence shall then undoubtedly pass upon them, Romans 2. 6. Who will
render to every man according to his; deeds, Psalm. 96. ult. He shall judge the
World with Righteousness, and his people with his Truth. Know it then, That if
you are to be judged by him, it greatly concerns you to see that your matters
be good, and that more especially, as to the consideration of his exact
Justice, you are to remember that he is also the heart-searcher, from whom
nothing can be hid, but all things are opened and manifest before him; and
therefore you had need to search into your own case, and sift it to the bottom,
and see that there be no f^a^d or fallacy in it, for if there be, it is
impossible to cover it from him, or prevent his bringing of it to light, and
judging accordingly.

3. Consider, What vast and infinite consequences depend upon this judgment: if
it were a little matter, and a thing of small moment, it were too much to be
sollic^tous^y engaged about it; that is beneath the wisdom of a man to be
serious about trifles: but for him altogether to neglect, or to be flighty and
careless in providing for such a cause depending, whose issues are everlasting,
and in which his eternal weal or woe is concerned, is folly with a witness: and
such is this: consider that when you shall come to be Judged, in the last and
great day, one of these two will undoubtedly be the conclusion of this affair,
either your condemnation, or else your Justification: there is no middle
betwixt these two to be expected, your case will be found and declared to be
either good or bad, and that which will come in upon either of those will be
unconceivable; For,

1. If it shall be your infelicity then to fall under a Sentence of
Condemnation, it had been better for you that you had never been born:
everlasting punishment will be the certain fruit of it, Mat. 25. ult. These
shall go into everlasting punishment, i. e. those that shall then be found
under guilt, and who can tell what that punishment contains in it? it put the
Son of God into an agony, and made the man Christ to sweat clods of congealed
blood to be called to enter into these lists, is made his Soul sorrowful unto
the death; and shall sinners who shall be made to feel all this be better able
to endure it? those doleful shrieks, and everlasting lamentations of cursed
Sinners, condemned to the bottomless ^it, and cast into that burning Lake of
Fire and Brimstone, are doubtless to be avoided with utmost care and
solicitude, by all such as have the happy advantage put into their hands so to
do: and what man is there, who is in his right mind, that would not be an
seriously careful so seek after an escape from the dint of such a Sentence, as
will bind him over, and expose him to an eternal separation from the glorious
presence of God, and endless suffering the merciless impressions of his
enflamed fury, in that place which is on purpose prepared for the triumphs of
divine vengeance over the children of perdition: and this, and nothing short of
this, is the inevitable consequence of the Judgment upon all such whose Case
shall be found not to be good.

2. On the other hand, If your Cause shall be right and it shall be your
happiness to receive a Sentence, of Justification at that Bar, you are then
happy indeed, and may bless God with all your Souls that ever he gave you a
Being, wherein you were made capable of being the Subjects of these infinite
and indeterminable Glories, which that blessed Sentence shall invest you with;
and your Judge shall upon the pronouncing of it, put you in possession of; who
shall hereupon, not only deliver you for ever from the direful Curse of the
Law, which contained all miseries in it, but also exalt you to a glorious
Throne, and set a massy Crown of life upon your heads; entertain you in the
everlasting embraces of his ravishing affection, and make you eternally to swim
in bankless, boundless and bottomless Ocean of pleasures, in the presence of
God, and of the Lamb; where you shall be filled and run over with fullness of
Joys: and what do you now say to these things? must these needs be the issues
of this matter? and will you notwithstanding you are told of it, and ^ss^rep of
the truth and certainty of the thing, still be secure and careless about it?
shall such a cause of so infinite moment, be slighted, and let run at
uncertainty? are Salvation and Damnation things so indifferent, that it is no
great matter whether of them be your Lot? however you may think of these things
how, I am sure you will be another persuasion ere it be long.

4. Consider, By what Law or Rule you shall when be judged: that there must be
some Rule upon which that affair shall proceed, is necessary, how else can
there be any justice then administered: for Justice in Trials is nothing else
but a proceeding with men according to that Law or Rule under which they lived:
where there is no Law to command, there can be neither transgression nor
righteousness; and if so, there can follow neither Condemnation nor
Justification; for all these things have a necessary reference to some-Law. Now
it is of great use for us to be well informed in this point, viz. what Law it
is that men must be tried by in the great day: it has been already hinted in
the Explication of the Doctrine, that it was the Moral Law, or that Law which
was given to Adam in the first Covenant, with promises and threatenings, that
shall be the highest Rule of that days proceedings, or that unto which the
judgment which shall then pass shall ultimately referr; that being the Rule of
proceedings between God and Man, which was at first fixed by God himself, and
is of perpetual force and must never be baulked. But that I may preven^^
misunderstanding of this Assertion, give me leave here a little more to explain
it: my meaning then in this point is this ((...) it is nor other but according
unto the Scriptures of God) That no man shall stand acquitted by the Judge in
the day of Judgment, but only he who has answered all the demands of the Law,
either in Himself or in his Surety. Now because the oringing in of a Surety to
stand in the place of the man himself, is the proper Foundation on which the
Gospel Covenant is built; hence it is also a truth, that some men shall be
judged by the Gospel, i. e. according as they are found in Christ related to
him, and entitled to his satisfaction, but still, the enquiry concerning such
as these also will be, whether or no the Law has been answered by them or for
them; whether the command of it has been perfectly fulfilled, or whether the
sin that has been committed against it, has been satisfied for, and the due
deserved punishment has been born for it? and therefore Christ faith, that be
come not to destroy the Law but fulfill it; and though Heaven and Earth shall
pass, yet the law shall stand, Mat 5. 17, 18. yea when the heavens are past as
a scroll, and folded up as a Garment, this Word of God shall endure. There are
too many that indulge themselves with a fond expectation, that there shall be
some more remiss and easy rule of trial brought in at that day; because Jesus
Christ is the Judge; but they woefully deceive themselves: God is of one mind,
the Rule given to Man and under which he Covenanted, is a unchangeable Rule.
There is indeed a way which infinite Wisdom has found out, and made the
discovery of, whereby a sinful Man may be made able to stand the dint of that
Trial, and be justified in it; and this indeed is the great glory of the
Gospel, that it has made such a discovery as this is, even a way in which
mercy may be agreed with Justice, in and by Jesus Christ: but there is no way
to avoid this Trial: the Law Book is one of those Books that must and will be
opened in order to that solemn Process which shall be made in the day of
Accounts, and there will be no waving of it.

5. Consider from hence, That you must have a Righteousness, and not only so,
but such an one as will fully answer the Law too, if ever you hope to be
justified at that day: It is a vain thing for any men to pretend to an hope,
that they shall do well enough then, and yet never concern themselves about the
getting of a Righteousness that may then stand to answer for them: there are
many that plead God is merciful, and they feed themselves up with fond hopes,
that he will have pity upon and not reject the works of his hands, and this is
all they have to comfort themselves with in the contemplation of the day of
reckoning: but this is an empty Plea; Justice is one of his Attributes as well
as mercy, and he will not be merciful any farther than as he can be just too:
and further, remember, it is a Court of Judgment where you must stand, and a
Bar of Justice at which you must plead; and if you be not found to have a
righteous cause then, all the Pleas for Mercy which you can make will be too
late: for the present indeed it is a precious day of Grace, and in it Jesus
Christ is sitting upon a Throne of Grace, and the humble prostrate confessions
of true Penitents may avail for sinners, with him who now delights in mercy;
and if men would be persuaded to embrace this opportunity, and improve it in
making of their piece with him, it would be well for them: but when once he
comes to sit upon the exalted Throne of Judgment, and shall put on
righteousness for a Garment, the case will then be altered, and if you shall
upon Examination be found too light, there will be no more room for repentance.

6. Consider, There is no other Righteousness to be found, but only that of
Christ, that can or will satisfy the demands of Justice for you. This truth
has been sufficiently evidenced in the opening of the Doctrine; only be here
persuaded to meditate and ponder seriously upon it: There will be no appearing
then under a covering of your own making, it will be too short, and too narrow,
and too dirty to stand you in any stead: If you should wash your selves with
Nitre, and take much Soap, and be at a great deal of pains, yet all will not
cleanse you from your spots, or ri^^se off those blemishes which you have
cleaving unto you, which are like the Leopards Spots, and Ethiopians blackness:
there is no maa (...) can make his heart clean; and if our own personal
Righteousness be too short to do this for us, it is certain that there is no
relative Righteousness to be heard of, which will suffice, but only that of
Christ: there is none else which has such an intrinsical worth in it, as to be
able so to merit for us; for that which so does, must be an everlasting
Righteousness: and if there were any other such, as in truth there is not, yet
there is none other which God has declared his acceptance of, without which,
we criminals can never plead Justice for our acquittance and deliverance from
condemnation upon another score: this therefore, and none but this will be of
any worth to us, when we come to make our plea for our lives: and therefore it
is of most momentous concern that we use utmost endeavors to get entitled
unto this. For,

7. Consider, That it is not sufficient that there is such a Righteousness of
Christ, and that the report of it has been made unto you, and you have heard
of it, except you have also made it yours by believing on him; there are
thousands in the world who have heard this report, and possibly have given a
literal assent, and historical credit to the truth of it, who shall yet
notwithstanding go for ever without the benefit of it; and that because they
did not apprehend and close in with it by a living faith, they did not throw
themselves upon it, and renouncing every other object of trust, place their
whole confidence in (...): It is not the Righteousness of Christ talked of, or
highly commended, but savingly believed in, that will stand men in any stead,
and do them a kindness indeed, There is no doubt but the Devils do believe the
Truth of the Gospel, they confessed Christ when he was on Earth, to be the Son
of God; but this profits them not; this general faith is the undoing of
multitudes: Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, he died to
satisfy Divine Justice for such, and therefore they hope that they shall
escape condemnation, and be admitted into his favor, and be justified upon
this mere account, but yet they never had the impressions of a saving work of
grace wrought upon their Souls, whereby they were brought over to cast
themselves, upon him by a lively faith, or were enabled to betake themselves to
him alone, in an utter renunciation of every other trust of their Souls, they
never embraced his Righteousness, and that only to be their security against
the thundering menaces of the Law; and so all their hopes, how Strong and
satisfying soever they may seem to be, and whatever comfort and content they
may take in them, do prove but as the spiders web; for God has firmly
restrained Gospel Salvation to believing, John 3. 36. He that believes on the
Son of God, has everlasting life; and he that believes not the Son, shall
never see life.

8. Consider, This Righteousness of Christ is freely held forth and offered
unto you in the Gospel; yea, the Lord Jesus Christ is earnestly soliciting and
wooing of you to accept of it: it will therefore be your own fault if at last
you shall go without it: God himself has provided it, Jesus Christ has
wrought it out, and there now wants nothing else but your cordial accepting of
it to make it yours; and if now after all this you shall be so foolish as
carelessly to neglect it, or wilfully to reject it, and are thereupon found in
the last day to be without it, how bitter and heart piercing a reflection must
it needs be for you to remember, that once there was a time when Jesus Christ
offered himself to you, to be your security against the wrath of God, and the
courses of his holy Law, yea pressed you, and with great sollicitousness
entreated you to accept of him as such, and waited long upon you, as one loath
to receive a denial at your hands, and yet you scorned him and made light of
him: ^now then and be assured, that this Righteousness of Christ, is so
presented in the Gospel-offer, that it is made sure for every one that comes
within the reach of the publication of it, and feels in himself an absolute
necessity of it, and is made willing to accept of it upon Gospel terms; and
they are no other but an hearty forsaking of every others object of trust or
affiance which men have ignorantly and foolishly chosen to themselves, and a
casting themselves wholly upon Christ, for peace with God, and all his other
concomitant benefits: and I am here once more in Gods name solemnly to acquaint
you with this message; That although you have many, and many a time despised,
and set it at naught, though you have stopped your earn against it, and
desperately refused to hearken to these fair terms but have chosen rather to go
without it, then part with the least lust only for the sake of it; it yet may
be made yours, there is a possibility still of obtaining it, if so be that you
have any heart unto it; and do therefore entreat you by the love which you bear
to your immortal Souls, and desires you have not to be cast in the Judgment and
so lost for ever, that you do no more put it away from you, left for so doing
you come to rue it eternally, and confess your madness, when there is not
reparation; when every refuge of lies, and hiding place of deceit shall be laid
level, as they certainly will in that day, when he shall lay judgment to the
line, and Righteousness to the Plummet.

9. Consider the daily danger you go in till you are justified: did sinners but
know how many mischiefs they lie open to, what infinite hazzards they run every
moment, as long as they continue strangers to the Righteousness of Christ, it
would surely either drive them to doleful despair, or else forcibly put them
upon it to make it their first work, to seek after the obtaining of it with the
utmost diligence: and what faith Christ himself, John 3. 18. He that believes
not is condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the only
begotten Son of God: The sentence of the Law is already past, that the Should
that sins, that Soul shall dye: guilt and a curse are now upon you, and they
hold you in such betters as are indissoluble by any created power whatsoever,
and keep you fast for that woeful execution which God will come (...) long to do
upon all those who shall be found held under that condemnation; and it is Gods
mere patience which presents you a present reprieve, but for which you had long
ere this felt the weight of his hand; and remember that this also is only
^urante been placito: rich mercy has also exalted this, day of patience into a
day of grace, wherein there is offered an opportunity, together with the means
of making your peace, and getting reconciled unto God, but how long that shall
last is only known unto him, who has all our times in his hand, and if he do
but once give the word, it ends in that very moment; and if you shall go down
into the grave unjustified, being naked for want of Christ's Righteousness to
cover you, you will never more have and offer of it made unto you throughout
eternity: and thou, when the powerful word of God, shall awaken your drowsy
dust, and reunite your separated Souls and Bodies, and the dreadful sound of
the last Trumpet, shall alarm and hasten you to the terrible Tribunal, how will
you be able in that day to look this Christ in the face whom you have thus
wilfully despised? how will you weary the mountains, and tire the hills with
fruitless cries and entreaties to cover and hide you from the presence of the
Lamb, in the great day of his indignation? with what pale faces, and ghastly
countenances, and trembling joints, will you stand to hear your selves
examined, judged and condemned; and with what horrid roarings and shriekings
will you drop down into the bottomless gulf, where you must receive double
damnation, not only for being without, but also for refusing to accept of
Christ and his Righteousness? now there is a precious price in your hands, and
as fair opportunity for the preventing of all this, if a Savior may but find
welcome, and you are but indeed willing to accept of him as he is offered in
the Gospel: oh, be persuaded to make haste, give all diligence to get in to
him, before the doom that is past, be put in execution.

If now there be any soul that is moved with those things, and does with
seriousness make the enquiry, how shall a wretched condemned sinner come to
make sure of an unfailing interest in the Righteousness of Christ? or how shall
I obtain that Justifying Faith by which it is apprehended and received? To such
an enquirer I would answer, that you can do nothing for your selves by your own
Strength, but you are in sense of your utter impotency, to be looking to and
waiting upon God in Christ, for his Spirit and Grace, and that in a way of
diligent attendence upon all the ways which are of his appointment and in the
which he has been wont to come and bless; and in this way there are two things
requisite to be found in you, if ever you hope to have a sure claim to this
great privilege, viz.

1. You must be wholly broken off from, and utterly reject all trust or
confidence in your own Righteousness: The Righteousness of Christ is not
provided for, or applied unto righteous persons but sinners: his medicine is
not prepared to be administered to those that are sound and whole, but such as
are sick of sin, Luke 5. 31. this is not spoken, as if we were to conceive that
any of Adams children are in themselves whole and righteous, no, the contagion
of sin has fallen upon every one of the race, that is born into the world by
natural generation: but it is to let us know, that there are a great many who
have still a fond conceit of themselves, as vainly to think they are sound
enough, righteous eough, sufficiently able to do for themselves and as long as
they are of this opinion, they are strangers to the righteousness of Christ:
This is the great thing which the Spirit of God has to do with poor sinners,
in order to the bringing of them unto a Savior, to empty them of their self
conceitedness, and high opinions of their own abilities and worth: and it is a
far easier thing to convince men of the error of their wickedness, and to drive
them to their performance of legal duties, and their reformations, then (after
they have taken up a course of these, and to their own apprehension much
profited in them) to remove them from, and destroy their carnal confidence in
them. This is the great stumbling block that lies between conviction of sin,
and true Conversion: there are very few (if any) of Sinners that have been
awakened with the Law, and so far wrought upon by it, as to think some thing
must be done to get rid of the curse of it, but turn in here first, and try
what is to be done by legal repentances, and endeavor to establish a
Righteousness of their own, and the misery is, the greatest number of sober
Professors take up and tarry here, and can be gotten no farther; and so they
perish at last: for the destruction of then is equally unavoidable, either by
being drowned in the wide sea of profaneness, or being swallowed up in the sands
of a legal Righteousness: here therefore for your help in this case, let me
speak to three things.

1. How far a man may be said to trust in his own Righteousness.

2. What may be helpful to break a sinner off from this vain confidence?

3. By what dicsoveries we may be assured that it is broken?

1. How far a man may be said to trust in his own Righteousness? This is well
to be considered, for there be many who think that they are gotten off from
this; when as indeed they are not; and so they please themselves with their own
deceivings. It is hardly to be thought that any who have lived all their time
under the clear light of the Gospel, should be so far deluded, as wholly to
deny any dependence upon the Grace of God, or to think that they can of
themselves make satisfaction to a righteous Law for the sin they are guilty of:
and you shall find none but if it be asked to them, will readily acknowledge
that they have some need of, and use for Christ; and this shallow
acknowledgment makes them presently to conclude in themselves, that they are
not the legallists, or self confident men that are here pointed at: but you
must know that if there be any self reliance in this point, if in any respect
you look upon your own doings serviceable to procure you the favor of God in
Christ, this lies as a block in your way. Now besides there (if there be any
such) who suppose themselves of themselves able to do so as to merit eternal
life; there are others also who do really lean upon their legal Righteousness
for Justification; and they are such as these:

1. All those that dare not come to Christ in their sins for his mercy; but
they must have some reformations, and some specious duties of their own laid
in, to bring with them, before they can come to him: and when they suppose
themselves to have gotten something of this kind, now they can from them take
heart, and by looking upon them take some confidence in their coming: This very
thing manifestly discovers that men are not as yet fitted for the Gospel
dispensation of Grace; for that bids men to come in their unworthiness, and
when they have nothing at all of theirs to commend them to God; but these must
have some worthiness for which they may be received, or else they dare not to
adventure: and though men here plead for evangelical works, as those which they
only design; viz. they have a desire to be more humbled, they are not
sufficiently abased in themselves; they would be more penitent, they have not
suitably grieved for, nor enough mourned by reason of sin, and they would fain
wait till they have gotten a little more of this, and they will come; this will
not free them; for let the enquiry be made, what is all this for? why do they
not dare to come to Christ in the present state, but must wait for these
dispositions? why thus it is, they are afraid that Christ will not accept of
them, such as they are, but if they were thus of so, could but find in
themselves these desired frames, then they should have encouraging hopes, that
he would bid them welcome; and here is a trusting in their own Righteousness so
far as to hope that they may without Christ get something that may commend them
to him for his Righteousness: and though it is certain that God in converting a
sinner, does so far make discoveries of him to himself, as to let him see his
absolute need of a Savior, else he would never believe in him for Salvation;
yet these are always not soul filling, but soul emptying discoveries, and till
men can come plumply up to practice as the Publican, and say with him, Luke
18.13. Lord be merciful to me a Sinner, finding nothing but sin in themselves,
looking for all mercies to derive from his undeserved favor and good will,
they are not gotten so clear of their own, as to be ready to rely on the
Righteousness of Christ alone.

2. They whose hopes and comforts are measured by their enlargements or
straitnings in Duty. I know it is the duty of every Child of God to pray to him
for Enlargements, and to mourn under Straitnings, his care to live to the Glory
of God, and desire to lay himself out to the utmost for the promoting of it,
will engage him to this: but when these are made the measure of men's confidence
and comfort: when they are carried forth, and find an apprehended fullness of
Spirit in their duties, they are now lifted up, and abundantly satisfied in
their justified state, and Gods favorable acceptance of them; but if at any
time they find a flagging of these, and they drive heavily in Duty, now their
hopes also fail them, and they begin to call all in question, and doubt about
it: such men do evidently place too much upon their own Righteousness, thinking
that it is this which ingraciates them with God; and though there is too much
of this frame in such as are justified, by reason of the remains of a legal
Spirit which are in them: yet it is too often an Argument of a vain trust, and
sign of one that has not been broken off from himself: and how much of this
was to be observed in that unjustified Pharisee? Luke 18, 17. he does not thank
God for Jesus Christ but only for his seize and enlargements.

3. Such as acknowledge professedly all they have to be of Grace, and yet do
look upon it that they are through Grace enabled to do that themselves which
stand for their Justification, at least in part: There are a great many who can
speak high in the commendation of rich and free Grace; but what Grace is it
that they make so much talk of? not that which has provided us with a
Righteousness in another; but that which has provided us with a Sanctification
in our selves; in the exerting whereof, through the renewing of the Spirit, we
are enabled to merit the favor of God: and although Christ has made
satisfaction for our sins, and born our hell for us, yet still we may earn
heaven by what we do; though yet we would not rob God of the Glory of this, but
pay him this honorable acknowledgment, that we received it from him, (and so
did Adam, his Original Righteousness with which he was to have earned his
happiness) and that without him we can do nothing: but let it be made so fair
and plausible as men will, and lickt up into the best shape they can put it
into; still it is to trust in our own Righteousness, i. e. a Righteousness
inhereet which is destructive to the way of Gospel Justification, which calls
us off to a Righteousness without us, to one that must be imputed to us for our
acceptance into Gods favor.

4. Such as think it hard and injurious to them that their own duties and
performances are no more regarded and rewarded by God. Some there be who are
very diligent, and take much pains in the attendance upon duties both ordinary
and extraordinary; and they make a great deal of do in the formalities of
Religion; and this notwithstanding though they read, hear, pray, follow their
callings, abstain from the common sins of times and places, etc. yet God seems
to take but a little notice of them; he does not in his providence gratify
them in all these things that they desire and ask of him, but they meet with
many crosses, affliction, disappointment; and this angers and discontents them,
and they fret at it, charge God with hard dealing, and think themselves not a
little injured by his Providence; and he^eupon they begin to murmr, and call
him to an account; thus did they, Isai. 58. 3. Wherefore have we fasted, and
thou see not? wherefore have we afflicted our Souls, and thou take no
knowledge? this also is the discovery of a legal Spirit, an^be art not broken
off from self; it shows that men set a price, a value upon their own doings,
when they think that God undervalues them if he do not for them and gratify
their desires in every point: now all these you must get off from, if ever you
would be privileged with a right and title to the Righteousness of Jesus
Christ.

2. For help to break this confidence, I shall only offer these two Directions:

1. Labor and pray hard for a right discovery of the Law of God, and he
frequent in the comparing of your selves by it. The most of men have
entertained carnal conceptions about the Law, and that occasions their taking
up of confiding thoughts in themselves: they have not made a discovery of the
exceeding great latitude of it, and that makes them to think it an easy matter
to pay all observance to it: and when men are thus persuaded, they can live
very well satisfied in themselves: whereas a clear beam of this light darted
into their Consciences, would be a Thunderbolt to them, and strike them down
dead: what faith Paul? Romans 7 9. I was alive without the Law once: but when the
Commandment came, sin revived, and I died. It killed his Pride, and
Self-conceitedness. The right understanding, and impartial application of the
Law of God to our selves, will bring us to take up other kinds of thoughts
about our selves, and about our duties, then formerly we were wont to have: it
will make known unto us the great imperfection that there is in our best, that
when we have done all we are unprofitable; and the sin that cleaves to them;
yea and it will convince us of our personal impotency to the doing of that
which is good; it will show in the wanderings of our hearts, the deadness of our
affections, the many stains and spots that are upon our clearest performances;
his light rightly used will show us all, and enforce us to confess the utter
impossibility of our standing a Trial before the all-seeing Judge under this
shelter; because we shall have the clearest evidence, that if the Law be that
according to which we must be tried, it will certainly Cast and Condemn us.

2. Be persuaded and assured, that as long as you do either for the whole, or
for any fast of your Justification place your trust in your own Righteousness,
Christ will never offer you his to justify you: There is no dividing or
parting of stakes in this matter: Christ is resolved, that he will either be a
whole Savior, or none at all; there shall no person or thing come in to share
with him in the honor of this, but he will do the whole work, and he will have
the whole glory of it: man must be utterly lost, before he will come to seek
him up, he must be a bankrupt, a beggar, a prodigal that has spent all, and
has not an husk to live upon, before he will entertain him: It is therefore
one part of the work of the Spirit whom Christ sends, to convince the world of
Righteousness, John 16 9 i. e. firstly of the Righteousness of the Law in all
its demands and sentences, that it requires nothing, and that it threatens
nothing but what is according to the strictest equity, and there can be no
fault found with it; and then of the only Righteousness of Jesus Christ, that
is able to answer both the commands and menaces of the Law: that, that and no
other is fitted up to respond for man to the Law. They therefore who come to
Jesus Christ must deny themselves, and abjure every thing of their own, or he
will none of them: so that as long as men have in their apprehension a way of
their own Righteousness, they are too many to be saved by him: and the truth
is, to believe in Christ alone for Justification, is altogether inconsistent
with a man's having any confidence in the flesh. If then you account it a matter
of any moment to be found having a righteous cause at that day; and when you
have examined your selves, and made proof of your own hearts and lives, and
upon trial found by experience, that you are altogether defective of a personal
Righteousness to that end, you here see what it is that is incumbent on you to
do, i. e. you must trample upon all your own rags, throw them off as filthy and
noisome things; let them be so to you, and then think how much more they are so
to God, and now come as naked to Christ as ever you were born: and to the naked
and destitute it is, that he makes the offers of these white Robes of his own
Righteousness, which shall hide all their spots cover all their imperfections,
and present them clear of all offense, so that Justice it self must needs
acquit and justify them.

But you may say, how shall I know whether I have thus utterly rejected mine
own Righteousness? and if there be so vast a dependence upon this matter, it is
of infinite consequence to be rightly informed in the truth of this conclusion,
and this brings me to the next, viz.

3. To give some discoveries whereby we may know when this trust is broken, in
a few particulars.

1. When all our duties, even the very best that we do, help to make us more
humble, and more vile on our own eyes: trust in, and conceitedness of duties go
always together; and so much as we are lifted up in our own conceits by the
review of what we have been doing, so far we confide in it: but when not only
our sins serve to abuse us before God, and lay us in the dust before him, but
those very duties wherein are most conscientious in obeying God, do by our
looking upon them, help to make us see what worthless nothings we are: when we
gather up out of every one of them something to make us see how little cause
there is why God should look toward us, and to wonder at his rich
condescendency to accept of any thing at our hands: and this is a good token of
Humiliation: Thus it was with David, after that large contribution was made
toward the building of the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 29. 13, 14. We thank thee, and
praise thy glorious name, but who am I? and what is my people, that we should
be able to offer so willingly after this sort? and the Church, Isa. 64. 6. we
all are as an unclean thing, and our righteousness are as filthy rags, every
prayer, every Sabbath, every Ordinance in which we attend, do all help to let
us see how unworthy we are of Gods favor; how full of death, and of a body of
death, we are; and that there is and can be nothing in us, that can commend in
any wise unto God.

2. When we do duty without any the least aim to procure our Justification by
it, but one^^ as a practical Testimony of our thankfulness unto God for Jesus
Christ and his righteousness which is given us for our Justification; when we
say after all according to our Saviors direction, Luke 17. 10. we are
unprofitable servants, and have done but our duty; resolving in out own hearts
that this that we have done cannot be the procuring cause of Gods favor, or of
Christ's application of himself to us and therefore we lay all such thoughts
aside: no^ is it our motive to drive us to duty, that so we may obtain it; vain
men are ready to think that Christ has more reason to look toward them, and
love them, better than others: because they do more for him, and are more
careful in serving of him: but an humble soul, being fully satisfied that he
can never do any thing that can oblige God to him, any further than he will
mercifully accept of him, would fain order his life and conversation always
after such a manner, as that he may give a clear testimony of his cordial
gratitude to God, and therefore all his own Obedience is only the Sacrifice of
praise.

3. When our best duties drive us to Christ for his Righteousness; those very
things where in we give the clearest evidence to the world of our being the
Servants of God, yea and wherein we have the fullest witness in our own
consciences to our sincerity, yet these tell us, and we ^ead in and from them,
that except Christ spread his skirt over us, and sprinkle our Sacrifices with
the blood, they will condemn us; there are many who when their sins stare them
in the face, and the apprehension of the wrath of God which is denounced
against them, puts them into a fright, and they are afraid least vengeance
should overtake them, are now driven with great amazement to call upon Christ,
and implore his pardon; but if they can keep clear of notoriously scandalous
and conscience wasting sins, they are little apprehensive of their need of the
blood of sprinkling to be applied to them, and their duties: but when a man is
truly broken off from his own Righteousness, his duties will drive him as fast
to Christ, for the imputation of his Righteousness, as the other man's sins will
do, so it was with Paul in our Text: and thus of the first direction:

2. If you would close in with Christ by such a Faith as shall indeed justify
you, you must in it embrace and accept of whole Christ in all his Offices. If
you would him to be your Righteousness, you must take him also to be your
Wisdom and your Sanctification: there are multitudes that make a great pretense
to have closed in with Christ in his Priestly Office; they have been convinced
of the breach of peace that has been made between God and them, and the wrath
that is out against them, which they are afraid of, and earnestly desirous that
they may be delivered from it, and hereupon they would have him to be their
atonement or reconciler to God, to satisfy the demands of Justice upon their
accounts, and procure them pardon and peace with God, and are mightily taken
with the notion they have entertained about him as such an one, and highly
commend him for this great work of Redemption, in procuring a rescue from
condemnation, and delivery from hell and eternal miseries which otherwise the
sinful children of men must needs have undergone: and they would fain persuade
themselves to rely upon this, and take him (...) such a consideration, and
finding something like a consent to it, which they take for faith, they are
hereupon ready to think that it is theirs; and now they are delivered from
their great fears, the bitterness of death is past, they have an HighPriest who
in entered into the Holy of Holies for them; and for all this, if these men
would but look a little closer into their own hearts, they shall find that they
have not as yet been brought unto a willing consent to part with their own ways
and courses, or to submit themselves to his Proobetical and Kingly office: they
lean to their own wisdom, and will follow their own directions, his commands,
at least all of them, do not please them; they cannot yield a full compliance
with his preceptive will, and they rise up against his Providential will: and
allow themselves a liberty of following the edicts and advice of their own
hearts: But be assured, that these two always go together, and they that will
not have him to reign over them, shall never enjoy him as a Savior unto them,
they both go hand in hand, Acts 5. 31. Him has God exalted with (...) right
hand to be a Prince and a Savior. There are two things which obstruct man's
happiness, and till they are both of them removed from him, he remains
altogether hopeless of it, viz. his guilt and his pollution: the former has
armed the Law against him to his condemnation, and the latter has made him
actually and habitually miserable: the taking away of any one of these singly
is not enough to make him happy, if the other do not remain behind: for upon
the supposal of his being pardoned, if still he be detained under the
defilement and dominion of Sin, he is under the greatest evil, and by reason
thereof is extremely miserable, and cannot get to heaven that place of
blessedness, Rev. 21. 27. into it there shall enter nothing that defiles or
works abomination; and likewise if he be sanctified, and not pardoned, he
must still be unhappy, if a curse of death can (...) him so: Christ therefore,
that he might be a complete Savior, and able to save to the uttermost, had all
his Offices put upon him; and all such as hope to be found saved by him, must
accept of him in them all: and hence it follows, that whosoever he be that
truly believes in him for pardon, does also lay hold upon him for his
sanctifying grace, and together with his taking shelter under his Priestly
Office, for the obtaining of Gods favor to be extended to him does also put
himself under his Prophetical and Kingly Office, that he may be savingly
enlightened in the way of truth, and have his sin mortified, his soul and body
cleansed throughout, according to, Isa, 25. 24. In the Lord we shall have
Righteousness and Strength: and till you are come thus far, you do but in vain
expect to be the better for his Righteousness: but as for those who have made
Christ their all, they shall find him to be all to them.

2. The Exhortation is in the next place to all such in particular as have
believed in Jesus Christ; that have indeed taken him for their Savior, and
whole hope is placed upon him. Here are two words of counsel to these.

1. Let the consideration of this Doctrine direct and teach you the right way
how to answer all the ^^vils and satisfactions of Satan and your own misgiving
hearts, that at any time do offer to give you disquietment; and that is, be
sure to keep the eye of your Faith always firmly fixed upon the true and proper
ground of your Justification. Satan is often making his assaults upon the
people of God, and endeavoring to disrest them, and that by endeavoring to
puzzle them with doubts about their state of reconciliation to God: yea and our
own relenting hearts are exceeding ready to be hurried into the Temptation, and
be exceedingly molested with fears and jealousies about it: and that which
usually is the main reason of our being in such perplexity is, because we look
off from that which is the true and only bottom of all our hope upon some other
thing which has not strength enough in it to bear it up: whereas if the people
of God could keep their eyes firmly fixed upon Jesus Christ, and his
righteousness, and keep open a clear discovery of their particular interest in
it, this would afford them at all times argument enough to confute, and put all
that they can say to silence: what is it that he can allege to overthrow our
Consolation, but may with this be beaten back? he will be ready to tell us that
we are sinners, and for that reason are righteously condemned according to the
tenor of a just Law, but from this ground we have that to answer that we are
without sin in Christ, and are made righteous in Gods account, by virtue of his
perfect obedience, believed in by us, and reputed to be ours by our Judge. It
may be he will clamor against us, and say that we never did fulfill the Law of
God, and so are altogether incapable of making any fair and rational Plea to
the being possessed of the good and blessedness therein promised, only to such
as do fully do all that is there commanded, but contrarily must needs fall
under the sentence of eternal death which is out against all Law-breakers,
because by our transgression we have certainly brought our selves under it, and
how shall we think to escape it? but we have here also to reply for our selves,
that although to us personally all this is true, yet as we are considered in
our surety, who never was chargeable with any failure either in point of
performance of what the Law enjoined us, or of satisfaction by suffering
whatsoever it threatened in way of penalty, so we have fully and in all points
answered the Law: that in him we have never transgressed it, neither in thought
word nor deed, because he never did, and that there can be nothing due from us
to the Law in way of satisfaction, except it can be made to appear (as it never
can) that the great sufferings of the Son of God in our nature, were
insufficient to make reparation to the wrath of God; for what we poor sinners
were to have suffered from it: He will urge us with the consideration of the
rigor and severity of Gods Justice, and how impossible it is for us to answer
it, who are able to do nothing at all, but what Justice must needs find a flaw
in, and condemns us for; and how can we take any comfort in such things as
these are? but we have still to reply that Christ in our name and stead stood
at the Bar of Justice, and there he answered for us, to all the demands that it
was able to make of him; that he delivered himself freely up into its hands,
and let it do its pleasure upon him, he continued under it, and bare all the
impressions of the rigor of it, until such time as Justice it self said it had
full satisfaction, and could make no further demands of him, but set him at
full liberty, and gave him an honorable discharge in his Resurrection: he will
be often fearing of us with calling us to consider the holiness of God, and his
truth, and thence also picking up something which may weaken this our hope in
respect of our Justification by Christ, how is it possible that he who hates
sin with so perfect an hatred, who is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity;
should yet let such a wretched Sinner go out of his hands, and yet be
unspotted? yea, and how can he be a true God, and yet declare us to be
righteous who are unrighteous, or say that he finds no iniquity or perverseness
in us, when we are full of it, and there is hardly any thing else in us? but
the answer is yet ready at hand; that although Gods Holiness forbids that he
should baulk his Justice, or lose the honor of that so precious an Attribute,
yet notwithstanding he can accept of another in exchange for the Sinner;
provided he who is received in exchange be of sufficiency to answer what is
required, and there be no loss in that respect: and he can receive satisfaction
at the hands of a Surety; and when he has executed his Justice upon him, and
taken all the revenges upon him which the Law was to have done upon the
principal; now what rational Argument can possibly be alleged, why he may not
without any the least wound to his Holiness, pass a Pardon upon him, for whom
all this has been done to procure him one? But there needs no disputing here,
about the right of the thing, for it tends only to bring us to Atheism, and
possess us with such thoughts about God, which carry in them a denying of him
to be God, viz. that he is not Holy nor Just, nor True; for it is certain that
God has done all this already, and you may silence all from your own
experience, he has declared it to you, he has given you the witness of it, as
in his Word, so also in your own Soul; and therefore let him vindicate his own
name from such imputations, and he both can and will, Thus may a Child of God
find the righteousness of Christ to be a refuge from the Tempest.

2. This may also direct you to the right way to keep up and maintain peace in
your own Consciences: God People are oftentimes much put out of order, and find
abundance of trouble in the reflections of their minds within them; and the
usual reason of it is because they do not make that use of Christ's
Righteousness which they ought to do, they do not improve their Justification
up to the height: Peace within a man's self is a wonderful blessing, and happy
is that man who enjoys it, and can live upon it: and this peace, if it be of
the right kind, and that which will hold out, has its foundation in our
Justification by Faith in Jesus Christ: this is the proper ground of all inward
solid peace, Rom 5 1. Being justified by Faith, we have peace with God, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. There is in the first place peace with God, and then
consequent upon that, is peace in a man's Conscience, which is an inward
quietness settled in the soul of a true Believer, arising from a saving
reliance upon the Righteousness of Christ, as that which shall answer the Law
for us, shall deliver us from the curse and condemnation of it, and also bestow
on us all the felicity which is revealed in the now Covenant, and treasured up
in all these precious promises which are therein revealed. A Believers peace of
Conscience, has not its dependence upon any worth or worthiness of his own,
but upon Gods promise, Christ's merit, and his assured interest in it: how much
then does it concern every serious soul to labor after this? considering that
just so much as we attain unto of it, just so much of freedom we enjoy from a
spirit of bondage; and so much of liberty, and spiritual freedom in the
cheerful serving of God: this is it which helps us with a quiet and sedate
spirit pursue the business we have to do in our Generation, and which affords
us holy boldness to make our near approaches pro^ches to the Throne of Grace,
to ask the help of God in all our concerns, and to leave all our requests
before him with the greatest confidence: yes, and it also greatly helps to
sweeten all both mercies and afflictions that we meet with in our whole
pilgrimage; and that because he that knows that the one are the tokens of a
Fathers kindness, and the other the discoveries of his fidelity, and bottomed
with love, from whence it follows of necessity that they shall in the working
of them be made serviceable to our best good; and what can give more help to
the satisfying and settling our minds in all the changes and conditions which
pass over our heads in this life? Now if we would be sure to keep and uphold
this peace within, in the midst of all the various disquietments which we may
encounter both from without and within, but from sin, and Satan, and the World;
we must be always getting and keeping clear the evidence of our interest in
Jesus Christ and his Righteousness; and not that only but also the apprehension
and confidence of the sufficiency which there is in it, and our relation to it,
to answer fully all those ends of it, for which we have embraced it: we must
therefore labor for a distinct discovery of the fullness and perfection of it
in self: that it is that which has enough in it to answer Justice for all
those who do rely upon it: the acceptableness also of it unto God, how well
pleased he is with it, and has thereupon given all his chosen ones credit for
it, (...) on that account has already in their surety given them a discharge;
and being satisfied in these points, and having also a witness in our Souls,
that it is indeed ours; Now we have relief enough against the soul sinking
discouragement offered from the reflection upon, and consideration of our daily
infirmities, and sometimes greater transgressions, which in an hour of
Temptation we are too forcibly hurried into, and for which conscience is
disturbed, and oftentimes ready to fly in our faces, and draw up not only heavy
accusations against us, but pass a sentence of condemnation upon us: here only
can we at such a time find relief and settlement: It is not all our
confessions, rep^^tances, satisfactions, hanging down of our heads, and going
softly, that will of themselves give us the least ground of true confidence,
(though there must be repentance too, of else there is not true faith, these
graces being inseparable) but still when we fail never so much, and every thing
we do is far short of the command of the Law; this Righteousness abides, and
the virtue of our in being in Christ by Faith, still keep up our justified
estate, though we may be liable to many rebukes in Gods Providence.

USE III. For everlasting consolation to all such as have truly laid hold upon
the Righteousness of Christ by faith in him; for such as have fled form the Law
to the Gospel, have utterly renounced themselves, and repaired to Jesus Christ;
who having found themselves to be guilty condemned sinners, have betaken
themselves unto, and harbored in Christ as a powerful and sufficient Savior,
and have reposed the whole trust and confidence of their souls in him; let all
such happy souls rejoice, and be right glad, the Apostle tells us that there is
strong consolation for such as have fled to this refuge, and cast anchor here;
Heb. 6. 18, 19 and the Psalmist with a full mouth declares all such to be
blessed ones, Psalm. 32. 1, 2. Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven,
whose sin is covered. Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not
iniquity: I might here expatiate in setting forth the great happiness of such
men: but let me say in one word, they are in a most safe condition: if you have
thus believed, you are then in Christ Jesus, and you shall be found in him, and
being so, you are delivered from all grounded fear of evil, and have reason to
expect to partake in all needful good: briefly, that you are every way as safe
as can be desired, for

1. You are out of the danger of condemnation. Romans 8.1. There is therefore no
more condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. The Son of God in your
nature, and standing in the place of a Surety for you, has been arraigned,
tried, condemned and slain, Justice has done all to him which it had threatened
you withal, so that you are now out of the danger of all the menaces of the
Law, the accusations of Satan and whatever charge there may be brought in
against you, Romans 8. 33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
(...) it is God that justifies, who is he that (...) it is Christ that died.
Your condemnation is over, the punishment threatened you is past, and there now
remains nothing but a glorious acquittance, and open declaration of the
righteousness of your cause.

2. The world can do you no harm, nor all the changes that you lie liable to in
it; they may give you a great deal of outward molestation; they may pervert
Justice, and condemn you as wicked persons, they may rifle your houses,
imprison your persons, take away your lives, and remove you from off the face
of the earth, yea and make you the scorn of men, and expose your names to
standers and obloquie; but here lies your comfort in the midst of all this,
when they have done their worst, and vented their spleen with the greatest
bitterness, yet they can never take away your righteousness, but that shall
abide for ever, being laid out of the reach of their malice, nor can they
overturn you in your great cause, or ever separate you from the love of God
which is in Christ Jesus: Principalities and Powers have not any power so far
to reach you to your harm, Romans 8. 38, 29.

3. Your many weaknesses and infirmities cannot undermine of subvert your
safety: they cannot destroy or break the peace that is made in Christ between
God and you; they may, if fallen into through neglect of duty, and remissness
in your spiritual watch, procure you the displeasure of a father, discovering
it self in his chastizing of you with affliction: but can never alienate his
heart from you, though your grace be faint, and your corruptions strong, though
your strength be made weak in the way, and there be many Temptations which do
assault and wound you; though you can offer to God nothing in any duty that is
worth his acceptance and favor, but you faulter and stagger at every step you
take, and sometimes also fall down and break your bones, which puts you to a
great deal of pain and sorrow, and may make you to lie in of it for a great
while, before you recover either your former strength or comfort; yet still all
shall be well at the last: Jesus Christ your advocate is pleading for you, and
presenting the merit of his righteousness on your account, though you sin
through frailty, and the prevalency of the Law in your members, that carries
you captive, you may yet humbly go to him, and that with great confidence, for
the renewed seal of your pardon, and this Advocate is ready of sue them out for
you, and to bestow the witness and comfort of them upon you when you come to
him for it,

4. Neither need the greatness or numerousness of your former sins distract or
affright you: these need not to make you afraid that God will reject you, if
you have Christ's Righteousness engaged for you, that is as big as your
unrighteousness, look upon it with all the aggravations you can: and what need
you then be terrified? God has imputed it unto you, and in so doing, he has
made all your sins to be as if they had never been, they are concealed they are
sunk into the depths, they are lost, and quite out of sight for ever doing you
a displeasure any more: See how fully the Lord declares himself in his word,
concerning all those that have betaken themselves to, and sought shelter under
the Righteousness of Christ, Isa. 1. 18. though your sins be as scarlet, they
shall be as white as snow though they be red like crimson, they shall be as
wool, chap. 43. 25. I, even I am ^e who blotteth out thy transgressions for
mine own sake, and I will not remember thy sins, cap. 44.22. I have blotted out
as a thick cloud thy Transgressions, and as a cloud thy sins, Jer. 50.10. In
those days and at that time says the Lord the iniquity of Jacob shall be
sought for, and there shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not
be found: for I will pardon them whom I restore: and what can be said more full
to your comfort? they had great sins, and many sins; but they are all
obliterated, the remembrance of them is lost; they stand as clear in Gods
account as if they had never done any thing to his Just provocation.

5. This also is your security for the great day of Judgment: and they that
are sufficiently provided for that day are in an happy condition indeed: what
makes it matter how things go with you in this world, if you are but sure that
all shall go well then? here is the great and main concern of all the children
of men, that they may be able to stand upright then, and have nothing to appal
them. I know it is a solemn and serious thought which sensible souls are often
chewing upon, and lay out many retired meditation in the enquiry after, to get
some good assurance how their cause shall then go, when they shall come to
stand before him that judges the quick and the dead; and truly it is worth the
while to be much and frequent in the consideration of, and endeavor to get
satisfaction in this great question: and if you are such as have gotten Christ's
Righteousness to be yours, you have here a comfortable resolution of it: and
let me assure you, that whatever you have formerly been or done how much sin so
ever you are conscious of to your selves, yet if you have but made (...) one
thing sure, that you are indeed gotten under Christ's shadow, and have his
perfect Righteousness to stand up and plead for you, it is abundantly safe to
appear before God in that Righteousness: if you had all the personal
Righteousness imaginable, were habitually as holy and righteous as our first
Parents were, that hour wherein they came out of Gods hands, and had lived in
the exercise of that grace, so as to have perfectly kept all Gods commandments,
(...) not come short in one point of moral Obedience, nor chargeable with the
least defect in your whole conversation, it could not stand you in greater
stead, or afford you any more consolation: for there can be nothing at all
alleged against you, how true soever the accusation may be in it self, but
this Righteousness of Christ will fully answer to it all: for why? it is the
Righteousness of God: God himself found it out, prepared it, and appointed it
for the help of poor sinners that believe in it: he who is God as well as man
performed it in his own person, and thereby he gave infinite virtue unto it, so
that as its worth can never be with any reason called in question or suspected;
and God has also given his approbation unto it, testifying that he is
wellpleased in it, and has accepted it for all those that Jesus Christ has
redeemed by it, and these are all those that do believe in his (...) me; for as
he has promised it unto all (...) who so do, so this faith is a certain
evidence that this Righteousness wa^ fulfilled for them, and they shall have
the benefit of it: either therefore Christ must be condemned, or else you must
be justified in the great day: if he was perfectly righteous here when he was
upon earth, then you shall be acknowledged and declared so to be, when you
shall come to Judgment: and if this be the case with all those that have truly
believed in the Son of God; then it will follow, that all the good which is
laid up in the Covenant, and has been purchased by his Righteousness and
perfect Obedience, even that glorious inheritance, and eternal Kingdom, the
felicities whereof are here unutterable, shall all be assuredly yours. Let then
the Redeemed ones of Jesus Christ Rejoice, and again I say Rejoice, and be
exceeding glad; let nothing damp your spiritual rejoicing, or hinder your holy
melody; let not any temporary changes make you to think your selves miserable,
but looking over them all, account your selves to be everlasting happy in him
who is, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS.

FINIS.

