NEGLECT of SUPPORTING AND MAINTAINING THE PURE Worship of God, By the
Professing People of God: is a God-provoking and Land-Wasting Sin.

And REPENTANCE with REFORMATION of it, the only way to their OUTWARD FELICITY:
OR, The Cause of NEW-ENGLANDS SCARCITY: And right way to its PLENTY:

As it was Discovered and Applied in a Sermon Preached at Roxbury on a
Fast Day: July 26 1687.

By James Allen, Teacher to the first Gathered Church in Boston.

BOSTON: Printed for Job How, and John Allen: And are to be Sold at Mr. Samuel
Greens by the South Meeting House, 1687.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER
THis Sermon was Preached on a Solemn Fast Day, occasioned by the afflictive
Providence of God in sending Worms and Caterpillar which in some places, as
Gods great Army, marched in numero(...) Companies, and devoured all before
them, both Corn and Grass which Awakened some of the People of God to seek the
Lord by Fastin(...) and Prayer: and Roxbury among others appointed such a Day,
to the ^e(...)ping on which Service the unworthy Author being called, and in
preparat(...)on ^o it more than ordinarily pressed in Spirit with the Subject
then handled And being unusual and new, might be the more affecting to some,
but th(...) seasonableness, and necessity of such a truth to be improved among
such People who have degenerated greatly into this Sin of Suffering the
House(...) of God to lie waste, undervaluing the Pure Institutions of Jesus
Christ denying or witholding Gods due for the upholding of them; together
wit(...) the Importunity of some occasioned the publishing of it. A Sin th(...)
Lord has been many years testifying against by his Providence, in Blastings
and M^ldows, and other wasting Judgments, and now by these Devourers. The
Reverend Elders in the Country have been slow of bearin(...) Minist^^^
Testimony against it, least it should be prejudicial to they(...) Ministry,
among such who are more ready to be angry with their Reprovers than their Sin:
It was needful some should do it, and having such an occasion, and unwonted
awakening Providence, being also stirred in my Spirit to bear this Testimony, I
have endeavored by clear Scripture Evidence to evince the Truth of it, and
bring it home to this people; if the Lord will set in with it, and make it a
convincing and bumbling word, this sin may he seen and Reformed, and first Love
to the House of God, and his Pure Institutions be recovered: I doubt not but
then the Lord will be with us as with our Fathers, and will not leave nor
forsake us nor ours; But incline our hearts and yours to his Service, that this
People may be blessed to a Proverb, and all Nations may call them so.

Which is the Hearty prayer of Your Soul Friend and Well-Wisher. James Allen.

Neglect of Suppporting and Maintaining the Pure WORSHIP OF GOD. etc.
Malachi III verse 9, 10, 11, 12. 9 Ye are cursed with a Curse: for ye have
robbed me, even this whole Nation.

10 Bring ye all the Tithes into the Storehouse, that there may be meat in
mine house, and prove me now herewith, says the Lord of Hosts, if I will not
open you the windows of Heaven, and pour you out a blessing that there shall
not be room enough to receive it.

11 And I will rebuke the Devourer for your sakes? and he shall not destroy the
fruits of your ground, neither shall your vine cast her fruit before the time
in the field, says the Lord of Hosts.

12 And all nations shall call you blessed: for ye shall be a delightsome land
says the Lord of Hosts.


THis Prophet was the last in the Old Testament, his name signifies Angel,
there be some Conjecture he was so and Assumed a Body, others that it was Erra,
and this name offends his Office, and his faithful discharge of it, when the
Priests so generally declined, chap: 2.7. He was indeed a Messenger of the Lord.

But he sems to be after that time, and in whom Prophesies with them did cease,
a person eminently and extraordinarily raised.

1. To reprove the prevailing Evils of the Church of God (that was delivered
from Babilonish Captivity; their Temple Erected and Liberty of Worshipping God
according to his Will Indulged, but were sadly degenerated in his time, chap.
1 st. and 2 d.

2. To foretell the speedy and sudden coming of the Messiah, in such a way as
they did not expect, chap. 3. and chap. 4. and so to stir them up to Repentance
of those Evils, they thereby might be prepared for it in this third chapter

1. We have the Prophecy of Christ's first coming in the flesh, verse 1. to 7.

2 Reproof of the sins of this people, with Exhortation to Repentance, verse 7.
to 13.

3 Threatening of the Obstinate which he describes, verse. 13. to 16,

4 Encouragement to the Pious, v. 16. to the end.

1 The foretelling Christ's Coming, which he ushers in with a note of Attention
and Admiration! Behold!

1 By telling his Forerunner to prepare his way.

2 The Lord himself coming, and that suddenly and certainly, who is described
here by his Divine Nature, the Lord; his Office and also Humane Nature, the
Messenger of the Covenant; or rather his Humane Nature is signified by his
Coming, which would be according to the Promise of the Seed of Abraham: This
was that they sought and delighted in according to their carnal apprehensions
of it.

3 The terribleness of his coming,

1 To the good as purifying fire, yet for their benefit, v. 2, 3, 4*

2 To the Wicked it will be a Day of Judgment, v 5 a destruction of them, and
the Jewish Church State which was to that time continued upon account of Gods
unchangeableness in his Covenant to that People, till the Promised Seed was
come, v 6

2 The Reproof of this People for the sin that was the cause of their present
Judgments, Gods sending Devourers to destroy the fruits of the Earth, and that
which did unfit them for that time of Christ's Coming, with Exhortation to a
through Repentance of it, v 7 to 13 the sins he charge them with.

1 Their Impenitence under former Warnings, and Convictions of this Evil, v. 7.
a sin that they had long continued in; this was aggravated thereby.

2 That which is the very sin Which had been the cause of former Judgments of
this kind, and that at present they were under; it is Sacriledg, v 8 to 10.

And Secondly Exhortation to Repentance, with Arguments to enforce it, v 10 to
13.

1 The sin charged in the evil nature of it, v 8 which he convinces them of by
appealing to Conscience to judge according to the light of nature, with an
Answer to their Enquiry wherein they have done it.

2 The evil effect of it, the Curse upon your outward blessings, which it is a
cause of, and when the Judgment is general, the sin is so, v 9.

2 The Exhortation to Repentance, v 10 to 13 with directions to the duty, is to
be done, and Motives to the doing it, which we shall open and improve in the
Use.

The Ceneral Doctrine hence is,

Doctrine, True and General Repentance is the only remedy of public Judgments
upon a Professing people, or the only way to Remove them.

Q 1. What is this true Repentance?

Q 2 When it is, and why it must be general?

Q 3 How this appears to be the only and sure Remedy of public Judgments.

Q 1 What is this true Repentance?

Answer, It consists in these three things.

1 It lies in a through Conviction of sin, especially that Evil whereby the
Lord is most provoked.

1 Sin is the cause of all public Judgments, Isa 59.1, 2. It is true in
personal afflictions, the Lord sometimes uses Sovereignty, and may do it for
trial and many other holy ends, as in Job, Hamon, etc. but when upon a people
it is always for sin. The Reason is, because outward mercies and Judgments are
the proper rewards and punishments of a people as visible*

2 It is some special sin of a people the Lord is most provoked with when he
sends his Judgments upon a people, the Lord is a God of Judgment, by him
Actions are weighed, 2 Samuel 2 3. And there are some sins cast the scale for
some particular judgments, see Amos 1^3.6. chap. 2 4, 6.

2 This sin must be known, as there can be no Repentance with out Conviction,
so where it is only of generals, that is not true: there is some special sin
end of a person that is leading and ruling so among a people, this must be
known in order to the Confession and Reformation of it as evident by the
enquiry, v 8. and the Prophets reply to it, and by the charge the Lord gives
about it, Josh. 7.11^12

Two things necessary to be known here.

1 The evil in the nature of it, v 8. Offense against God, and that of an
heinous nature; it is a robbing of him, taking away by force.

2 In the effects, the mischief it brings, its that curses all your blessings,
and that upon a whole Nation, by Gods violent taking away that which they had,
fair hopes and expectation to have enjoyed, which they are to look upon as the
fruits of the Curse for this sin: It is Gods seizing that which your sin had
forfeited into his hand.

2 Another part of true Repentance is deep humiliation, as for all, so
especially for this sin, which though it is not so plainly expressed, yet it is
fully implied in the Text; for there will be no thorough Reformation when there
is not a heart separated from it, Which is in this way.

This lies in these three things.

1 An humble and penitent Confession of it, Psalm 51.4^ In self-condemning, and
justifying God in all his Proceedings with you, upon the provocation given, so
great a part this is that it is sometime put for the whole, Jer. 3: 13. 1 John
1.9: It being the most difficult where it is sincere, and will certainly be
attended with the rest.

2 Inward shame and confusion, Ezra 9 4 Jer. 3.22. Romans 6.21 it speaks the
sinner duly affected with the offense to God, and mischief to himself.

3 Dislike and hatred of it, your self aborrence, Job 42 6, 7 Isai. 64 6 this
is called the knowing the plague of the heart. 1 Kings 8.38, 39.

1 Knows it to be a plague, his sickness.

2 Deadly one is at the heart, without he have Divine Relief.

3 At his heart; this is one case you must needs confess and open unto the
Physician of Souls, and feel it, and cannot but bewayl and abhor it. It is also
an accepting the punishment of his iniquity, Lev. 26.41.

3 Reformation, Prove 28.13. doing contrary, Mal. 3 verse 10* Isai. 1 21

Q 2 Why this must be general?

Answ. 1 The Judgment is general, verse 9 this whole Nation therefore
Repentance must: for when judgment is general, sin is public; Judgment
declares the provocation to be so* not that every particular person is guilty,
there be many Holy Ones there among people that yet may suffer with them that
are not personally guilty, yet involved in the affliction and common calamity:
so if the Re^enting and Reforming part be the Ruling Part, a lesser number will
not hinder the blessing, nor will some few, though eminent prevail to remove
such public afflictions; many times where it is not generally seen and
bewailed though they may obtain some peculiar favors to themselves, yet not
for the whole, Ezekiel. 14 13, 14 Jon 3 8

Q 3 Why this is the sure and only Remedy.

Answ That it is so is so fully attested in Scripture, and made good by
Providence, and a subject you are so well acquainted with that I shall not
insist upon it.

1 But that it is a sure way will appear,

1 In that God has prescribed it as the remedy; and promised that it shall be
so, Mal. 3.7.

2 When the very Judgments have been threatened in severest manner, it is with
this exception, Jer. 18.7, 8 Jon. 3.10.

3 Yea when he has begun to execute, it has been effectual to remove them, 2 Chronicles. 12.4, 5, 6, 7 Amos* 7.1, 2, 3.

2 And the only.

Reason 1.

Because this is the only Remover of the cause of the controversy; such
Judgments are effects of Gods displeasure, which is not against his creature
but the Sinner, Lam. 3.33. Mat. 5.25. Creatures come to execute the curse upon
a People of Gods Wrath, but where true Repentance, they are not the Subjects it
unvalidates their Commission* disarms them, his condition is changed where such
a changed disposition is, Jer 50 20.

2 It is a duty highly pleasing to God, its new Covenant Obedience, Jer. 31.19,
20. Lev. 26.41.

Improvement of this Truth is my main design, and I shall follow the method of
the Prophet in it, my whole Text being an Exhortation to Repentance of this
evil especially, urged by cogent Arguments, and furthered by suitable Advice
and Counsel; which also gives us sufficient ground of Conviction and
Humiliation.

The Uses then shall be, 1 Of Conviction and Humiliation 2 Of Exhortation*


USE 1.
Of Conviction and Humiliation which is the main work of such a day as this,
and that such Providence call for, and must proceed, for there will never be
through Roformation without deep Humiliation* This is that we acknowledge, and
do openly profess before God to intend in Fasting Days, otherwise they will not
be Days of Atonement but of provocation, Lev. 23.27, 29. our business with God,
under testimonies of his displeasure, is Atonement, our peace with God through
the blood of Jesus Christ, the way to which is sense of sin, and the need of
pardon.

Two things are requisite in order to this: 1 Enquiry into the cause of the
Judgment, or to find out sin, that sin that God is most displeased with. 2 A
search into our own hearts, whether we are the persons under the guilt of it,
Lam 3.40.


1 The first of these is that I shall endeavor to further you in, this being a
great part of Ministerial work in such a day, Isa 58 1 To tell the people of
their sins; as it is every christians to enquire of the Lord to show him his
sin, Job 10.2 Job 34 32 searching out of sin is the great duty in days of
affliction, and in that search, its the christians duty.

1 To acknowledge their own ignorance and darkness about sin, and especially
those God is chastening for, the best may be ignorant, and the humble Soul sees
it.

2 To desire Gods teaching:

1 By his Word, that is the ordinary and visible way of Gods teaching in an
Ordinance, 2 Samuel 21.1.

David did by the Ephod enquire for this teaching, Psalm. 22.4 enquire in the
Temple, Mal. 2.7. he is the Messenger of the Lord, enquire at his mouth.

2 By his Providence, that also is a way of Gods teaching.

3 But especially by his Spirit, Isa 14 26 2 Cor 3 6 in the word to give full
and an humbling sight of it, that the Spirit only can do, and when he does it,
its ordinarily by the Ministry of the Word, he brings it home, and carries it
to the heart, and sets the soul upon its own searching, and bringing it self to
the searching of the Word.

To help on this work, we have a plain discovery in my Text.

1 What is that Sin which provokes the Lord, to inflict such Judgments as we
are now under, why he sends Devourers to lay your fields waste? It is because
the House of God lies waste, it is the neglect of upholding and maintaining
Gods Holy Institutions, and the Ordinances of his House, verse 7 Hag 1 5, 6, 7,
8, 9 Set your (...) to your ways, be humbled for that sin that is the cause of
your scarcity, and curse in your enjoyments, viz the House of God lies waste.

Two evils the Lord is very angry with his people for, with respect to his
right in men's Estates*

1 Their laying it out upon False-worship, Hos 2 8

2 Denying it, or witholding that which is his due to his own Worship that is
charged here.

Q But what is Gods due, is there any such thing in New Testament Times.

Answ To avoid all Controversy, I shall not meddle with the measure and way:
but clear b^ the New Testament, that there is a due, and that which God
requires by the rule of Justice to be given

1 Cor 9 13.14 The Morality of that appointment is perpetual, that those that
serve in the House should be maintained in that service, as by attending the
Altar, so in Preaching the Gospel; now they should live of it, have their
outward sustentation by those to whom they Minister, Mat 10 30 there the Lord
has said it, and put it under a rule of Justice as due to that Service, Gal 6
6, 7 it is to be from all good things, those that here do partake in them
selves, and from all that have any thing of their own, 1 Cor 16 2 In proportion
to any man's increase, 1 timothy 5 17 must be that is honorable and becoming such a
Service, and may testify that you do esteem of it.

1 God has a right in every man's Estate, which is given to Jesus Christ, and
by him to his Officers, Psalm 16 3 He did reserve such an acknowledgment of his
Sovereignty in (...), one of the trees were his propriety, and forbiden to be
meddled with upon the highest penalty.

2 The further discovery my Text gives for your Conviction and Humiliation, is
that it is a very heinous sin.

1 Its a robbing of God, a sin of the highest injustice, a Theft, yea a
Violence and Fraud against the first Table, where God is more immediately
injured; which is called Sacriledg, Prove 20 25 its a snare a sin that entangles
him, and holds him under the guilt of it, Prove 5 22

2 Its against the light of nature, will a man that acts like a man in free use
of his reason do thus? sins against the light of nature, are very great,
especially in them advantaged with Gospel light, that which Heathens acting by
the sight of nature will not do, so the Lord exagerates the sin of Israel, Jer
2 10, 11 is then such a thing; will the Nations change their God, which are
now, yet Israel has changed their glory when they forsake his true Worship, so
it is in the undervaluing of it*

1 Nature dictates there is a God, Rom 1 20

2 This God is to be worshipped, Acts 17 23 whom they worship ignorantly, they
did worship, though ignorant what God was

3 That this worship be maintained and that honorably, and therefore though
Heathens were mistaken about the object of worship and means, yet what they did
think to be; so they by the light of nature were stirred up to a liberal
support of it, Isa 46 10 lavish gold out of the bag; and what a tumult was
there in Ephesus, Acts 19 24 when they feared their worship should be set at
naught.

So it is with Superstitious Persons that are wrong in the means of Worship,
though right in the object, Exodus 32 3 part with their Jewels to the worship of
Jehovah by a Calf, Judge 17 3 This sin then is worse then the Heathens that have
not extinguished the exercise of natural light to despise Gods own Institutions
that have them, and then those that are superstitious in this thing, Heb 12 15
(...) is called a Profane Person, that despised his birthright, that is such
an one that sober Heathen did Excommunicate from their Communion in their
Worship. Procul hinc estote prophani.

3 The greatness of this sin appears in this, that its from an evil root, an
heart of unbelief, Heb 3 12 where there is a forsaking God, and undervaluing
him, and overvaluing the Creature, Jer 2 12, 13 God and Christ are despised, in
contempt cast upon his Ordinances.

4 It is the cause of great and sore Judgments, this is or should be a sencible
evidence; its that brings the Curse of God upon all your blessings? as here you
are cursed with a Curse, that blasts your fairest hopes of increase, the Lord
sends his Devourets to take it away in the season of it: That God who has
blessed your Fathers, and taken your Children into a blessing Covenant; this
sin marrs all, and provokes him to curse your blessings, Jer 5 24 It is your
sin witholds good things from you, Deuteronomy 29 24, 25 and make you a reproach and
miserable to a Proverb.

5 It opens the door to all other evils, even spiritual judgments which are the
sorest, 2 These 2 12 because they love not the truth, so if you love not Gods
Holy and Pure Institutions, you may be given up to receive men's inventions and
temporal evils, Neh 13.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. where there was neglect of bringing the
Tithes into Gods House, those empty chambers were fit to be prepared for Tabiah
and his Goods, Be convinced its a grievous sin and justly provoking to God, yea
to such an heat of his anger; and labor to quench it with faith in the blood
of Christ, the fruit where of may appear in the tears of true Repentance.

3 That which may further lay this sin before you is, that the professing
People of God under the highest and purest Profession of Religion, are most
Prone to it, and this evil they are more fearfully under the guilt of, and it
is charged upon Israel, when under greatest Reformation, as here after their
coming out of Babylon, and when the Altar of God was set upon its Basis, and
they had been Purged from their Whoredoms, and Idolatry in false means of
Worship, that they did abhor it, that which was not found among them when
Idolaters, the abuse of Gods Portion was not by their using it themselves, or
withholding it from the Lord, but bestowing it on false Worship.

Luther when he read these Scriptures, urging the care of the Ministry, thought
there had been no need of it, he found people rather to exceed when he was a
Monk in maintaining Shrines to Diana, but when he was a Preacher of the Gospel,
he professed he saw need of all that was said, and that contempt of the Gospel
brought these sore judgments after his time, which he did foretell would befall
them upon that account.

Reason: And the Reason is, because true Worship is Spiritual and supernatural,
and cross to corrupt nature, whereas men's inventions are suited to it; hence
where men are not truly converted and spiritual, they see no beauty in them at
all, where they do keep up outward visible Ordinances, they will do no more
than that they may keep up the credit of such a Profession.

And where they are spiritual, its but in part, and unless it be in Eminency,
it will grow remiss here, where any declining in the power of Religion, there
is no love and esteem of Ordinances, as may be seen and found by sad experience
i^ New England Children; who do not rise up in the same spirit with their Godly
and Eminent Predecessors, the first Planters in this Country, who like Jeremiah
in the Wilderness, when newly freed from Egyptian-bondage, and had set up the
Worship of God, and when so ^^ee to the Tabernacle, that they needed a
Proclamation to restrain them, Exodus: 36.5. But as Love to God has declined, so
has this to his House.

The Errand into this Wilderness was for Purity of Worship, the Lord was highly
pleased with it, it was a Love of Espousals: but behold what degeneracy, many
can be content to live without them, those under them at great indifferency
about them. Let this be an awakening word, bring your hearts to the Bar of it,
for Conviction and Humiliation. The Lord may be at peace with you, and so Good
may come to you.

USE II. Of Exhortation.
To stir you up to a Reformation herein,

Two things wherein this will lie: As,

1. In giving your selves up to God, and so to his people, 2 Cor. 8.5. when he
had commended their liberality, he tells you the beginning of it, it was in
giving themselves to God, and to his people according to his Will; all our
offerings to God will not avail without this.

2 Then bring your offering, that which is yours, Mal. 3.10. bring your Tithes,
that there may be meat in my house: And let this be done,

1 Cheerfully, 2 Cor. 9.7. the Lord loves a cheerful giver, especially in this
case, 1 Chronicles. 29.16, 17, 18. that is of Gods giving, and is a singular mercy
where it is.

2 Faithfully; do not withdraw any of what is Gods due, let there be meat in my
house, let it be as the case needs. I might urge and move to this duty by
considering,

1 That it is the only wa^ now to preserve Pure Worship and Ordinances. God is
trying this Love, it is far more like that your want of Love to the House of
God will endanger your loss more than the hatred of the Enemy.

2 It is a way in which you most honor God with your Estate, which is your
Duty, Prove. 6.3.9.

3 It will manifest your real benefit by Ordinances, and they are blessed to you,
2 Pet. 2.3. Job 23.11, 12. that any love they will be at cost to enjoy.

4 Let not Heathens and Superstitious Persons out do you in their false way;
will you not show as much esteem to that God has Instituted? as men will to
what they have invented? if true Christians you will.

5 It will turn to your spiritual advantage, Romans 15 17. Gal. 6.7. It is
Spir^^^^l Trading, and your exchange and turning will be of Earthly Commodities
into Spiritual, brass into gold.

7 Nay it shall be your advantage to outward prosperity, and that is the
Argument in the Text which I shall a little enforce.

The Lord calls you to prove and try him, whether he will not be as good as his
word, and promise, you are willing to try other means if from skilful and
faithful men; try and prove the Lord.

There are three ways m^^ do try and prove the Lord, but one good one that is
here inte^^^d.

1 By sinful ways, whethe^ (...) will be as good as his threatening: so
Flagitious Sinners (...) him every day, Deuteronomy. 29.19.

2 By disapproving and despising the means God appoints for our Good, 1 Cor 10
2 see Number 21 6 Isai 7 12

3 There is a Proving of him by Obedience to his Command, and in that way
expecting the good of his Promises, and this is a way God would be ^roved, and
in which way he has abundantly approved himself Josh 23 14 Yea (...)
confidentl^ Joshua asserts that God had never failed in any thing he has
promised, Jer 2 5 the Lord challenges that Nation to charge him if the^ could
of any failure on his part.

1 To further your willingness to trust him and believe, you have not only his
faithfulness engaged, but the Lord obliges his power, and shows how able he is
to make good his word, what ever he promises, for he is the Lord of Hosts.

All Creatures are at his Command and are blessings or curses, as they are
Commissioned by him, and are absolutely under his Rule and Government;
therefore you have no reason to question the fulfilling what he promises.

2 That he is as willing as able, he satisfies in this, by his free engagement
of himself to Obedience in this thing.

Mal: 2.8.9 Let us then prove the Lord in way of Obedience to this Command,
especially when he has freely engaged himself by such Encouraging Promises.

As 1 That he will open the Windows of Heaven, this is the first Promise: that
is, he will give abundance, or plenty of the fruits of the Earth.

Gods ordinary way of blessing his people, is by ordering and governing second
causes, which he has ranked in their order, and set in subordination each to
other, of which he has the sole command, they are all his Host, and among
these the Heavens have the chief place, Hos. 2 18, 19, 20 when there the Lord
promises plenty of outward blessings, he does it in this way, the Earth shall
hear the Corn, the Heavens the Earth, and the Lord his people; so that the
opening Heaven, implies the fruitfulness of the Earth, when that gives full and
seasonable showers and benign influences; the Earth will yield its increase as
subordinate to them: Its an Hebrew Phrase and Figure for giving plenty of
Showers, and here in mercy not in Judgment, as Gen 7.11 but in fullness of mercy
to his Land and People, and withholding, is called a shutting heaven, the cause
of Famine, and giving Rain the opening of it, Rev. 11 6 and this the cause of
Plenty, and the Lord himself he explains it, and Pours out a blessing, that
there shall not be room enough to receive it, the like we have, Hag 1.17, 18.
and upon the same account, yea and has given proof of his faithfulness herein,
2 Chronicles 31 5, 9, 7, 10 As soon as Hezekiah that Eminent Reforming Prince did
provide for the maintenance of the Levites, and they brought their Tithes to
Gods House, the Lord blessed his People. It was the first Fruits did sanctify
the Lump; the Excuse and Plea of people, is that they are Poor, and their Land
does not yield its increase.

But whence is it, but for withholding Gods due, Hos 1* 8 put into a Bag with
Holes: the Turks have a Proverb in their justice to man, that if an Asper
deta^ned, or taken from another be in their bag, it will make an hole in it,
this is true in injustice to God.

But if you pay your Quit Rent to your great Landlord, you will find him a
beneficient one, Prov^ 3.9. honor the Lord with your substance, and your barns
shall be full, paying his reserved due, is that honor by which you acknowledge
him the great Proprietor and your dependence on his favor.

The other Arguments you look over with your harvest minds, here methinks you
should be fixed, that this is the only way to thrive in outward blessings, Joel
2 24, 25.26. if there be Repentance and Reformation of this Evil, Mat. 6.32,
33. seek first that is, to have chief respect to Christ's Kingdom, and these
things shall be added.

Obj. But temporal promises were indeed such as God did fulfill and deal with
the Nation of the Jews in, but under the Gospel he fulfills even those more
spiritually.

Answ It is true, to believers personally, it is so, and outward mercies are
promised more conditionally, so far as Gods Glory and their best good may be
promoted.

But to a Community and a Body of his People, and as such, so he does fulfill
outward Promises literally in the way of their visible obedience, as most
suited to them in their Community.

The second Promise is, the Rebuking the Devourers, that they shall not destroy
the fruits of the earth, when second causes have concurred to make the earth
fruitful, and there may be the fairest appearance of great increase, the Lord
can take it away in the season, send his Messengers and Army to gather in your
Harvest, Hos. 2.9 and that is a sorer Judgment; this the Lord threatened this
year: And it is credibly Reported, that a Person in one of these Colonies was
blessing himself in that appearance of a great Harvest, and said, now shall I
pay my Debts and get aforehand, for I shall have a full Crop, and am free from
paying any thing to the Minister; the Lord sent these Devourers upon his
field^, and destroyed his vain hopes.

But if God has his due, he promises that as a gracious Reward of their
Obedience, these shall be Rebuked, they shall not destroy their fruits, Isai.
65.23, 24, 25. shall not plant for others but themselves, they shall enjoy the
fruits of their own labor, Jer^ 2.3 When Israel was holiness unto the Lord he
suffered none to injure them, and when your Estates are so, they and you shall
be under Gods Protection, Isa. 54.13.

3 As the issue of all, you shall be blessed to a Proverb; yea, your Land shall
be desirable, God will delight in it, and dwell among you in and with his Holy
Ordinances, and have Communion with you in them, where you esteem and delight
in them, and others shall delight in it, and desire to dwell there as seeing
God among you, Zech. 8 ult Take hold of the skirts of a people under Gods
apparent and visible blessing, this is the way to true Felicity on earth; if
you do it in true Love to God and his House, Psalm. 144.14, 15. as abounding in
all outward blessings, so in spiritual and eternal. Oh then try the Lord and
prove him by this, and see if he make you not a people so happy that all
Nations shall call you so, Deuteronomy 33 29 Happy Israel who is like thee, a People
saved by the Lord.

FINIS.

