Work upon the Ark.

Meditations upon the ARK As a Type of the CHURCH; Delivered in a SERMON at
Boston, And now Dedicated unto the Service of All, (...) especially of those
whose Concerns Lie in Ships.

By Cotton Mather.

Ecclesiam pro Nav^ gero; mi^i ^^imata Mundi,
Sunt Mare; Scripturae, Retia; piscis, Homo.
(...). i. e. Quaero Ratem No^ae, ut mortis Discrimina Vitem, Naz. Carm in
Episc. Boston Printed by Samuel Green, and Sold by Joseph Browning at the
corner of the Prison Lane. 1689.

Quae Navis Vetustissima, Capacissi^^, Santissima, Ditissimaque omnium ^uit?
INgens illa Arca Noae, cui totius Orbis Homines, and Opes, inclusae fuerunt.
Nota hic TYPUM universae Ecclesia, -- in quam nos aggregemus, ut tuti simus a
venturo Irae Dei diluvio, Nam extra hanc Nulla salus and

Non Deus huic Pater est cui non Ecclesia Matter.

Heidfeld Sphin. P. 340.

THE Introduction
SECT. I.
AMong all the many Subjects which a Preacher of the Gospel has to insist upon,
I know not whether any would carry a greater mixture of pleasure and Profit,
than that of the Types which exhibited Evangelical Mysteries unto Israel of
old; in treat^ng upon which, the Advantage that we Now have ^o compare the
Shadow and Substance, will af^ord unto us a rich variety of Observations
there^pon, which none but one that shall come and see, ^an imagine the value
of. The Learned Rothwel, ^eing advised by a Clergyman mere Great than Wise, to
forbear meddling with the Types, as Themes not convenient for him to study upon*
^ade that very prohibition, but as an Invitation (...) expect, something of a
more than common Import in them; and accordingly falling upon the Meditation of
them, he found (I suppose) no part of his Ministry more satisfactory to
himself, or Savoury to others, than what he there Employed. It was not upon any
Apprehensions which I have yet seen cause to change* that I did my self, diverse
months ago, single ^ut the Types for one of my Two or Three or Four Weekly
Sermons ordinarily to be taken up withal; but having on Lords-Dayes in the
Afternoons, discoursed more than a few Times thereupon, I find them like the
Waters in Ezekiels Vision, Growing and Rising still, the further we wade into
them. I am convinced that the gracious Valerius Herbe^, g who has writ* Book
to prove, that in every Chapter of the Bible, there is to be found something of
our Blessed Jesus, might easily prove his Assertion, with a very great
Redundancy of Demonstration; and that every paragraph of the Bible is a spot of
Ground where before we dig far, we shall find the Pear^ of Great Price.

SECT II.
It was in This Course of Treating on the Types, That Noah's ARK was one of
them* which fell under my consideration: and more than a score of persons
professing a Trade not alto^gether unaccommodated in the Thoughts then
deli^vered, One of whom, namely Mr. Gill, is a person to whose pi^us expenses,
not a few of the Book* published among us, owe so much of the Light th^^ enjoy,
that His desire alone ought to have been gratified, though there had been no
more; These, before the week was out* sent me their Desires that I would give
them a Copy of the Sermon* which I now entertain them with: Imploring the God
of Heaven, That His Truths may have a due Impression upon them and their
Families; that they may never make Shipwreck of the Faith; but, that they may
for ever have a Room in the Ark of the Lord Jesus. It should be the care of
every Pastor, to lay Truth as much as he can in the way of his People; and when
we have an opportunity to PRINT as well as to Preach, it is an increase of our
Talents, to be humbly Received and Improved. Let none blame it, that so many
Books come abroad continually; for ^s Austin long since wished, That by many
Books the same Truth, not in the same Style, might arrive to the minds of many
men; so it is as reasonable for Husbandmen to complain of too much Corn, as for
Christians to complain of too many Books, which may bring the Food of Truth
unto them; the main thing Amiss is, that my Homely Composures trouble the
Press, while there are so many more Elaborate, Judicious, Useful Ones, of my
Fathers and Brethren, throughout this Country, that are suppressed by a
modesty as large as the measure under which men should not put a lighted
Candle: But it will often happen so* That (...) Best Work make^ the Leas^
Noise, a^o^t the Ark of God.

SECT. III.
As the greatest Changes in the World have had a Rise from Engines that seem^d
no less Trivial than Casual: Printing invented by a Soldier, Powder invented
by a Scholar, and the Lodestone, that common and almost contemptible Stone,
found out (I know not how) in these latter Ages, have in a manner turned the
World upside down, and inverted all the affairs of it; So the Great God who
formed all things, has the Interest of His Church, lying at the bottom of all
these Mutations. It Is from the encouragement of the Lodestone that we have our
Shipping, and by the advantage of our Shipping it is that the Gospel is now
arrived unto these Ends of the Earth. The Indians which this Land was once
filled with, use to pay no little Respect unto the Crow, because they report
that by this Bird the first Corn that ever they had was brought unto them;
though now the Crow be among the greatest plunderers of their Fields. There is
as much cause for us to bestow some great Regards upon a Ship; for by a Ship
(...) is that the Bread of Life is brought over* (...) the American Strand.
Behold, an English ^ative of America, here making some re^^ections upon the
first SHIP no doubt that ^^er was in the World; a SHIP to which (...) biggest
Spanish Carrack which carries not (...) 12 hundred German Lasts, is not to be
^^mpared; a SHIP out-vying that of Ar^^imedes, which contained twelve thousand
^^^ns, or that of Philopater, which was two ^^ndred and forty Holy Cubits in
Length, ^^th a Breadth and Depth not unproporti^^able. And we hope it bodes no
Ill to A^erica, that in the howling Deserts of it (...) begin to be thus
employed! May the Lord ^^sus have an Ark in these thus long unhap^^
Territories. God forbid the Ark should ^^at back again, and leave this vast
Continent ^^ain in the entire possession of its late Land^^rds, the Devils, to
make a Gog and ^^agog of it, in the latter Days.

SECT. IV.
It may justly be thought, that the Flood which Noah's ARK was provided against,
rea^ed unto America; though at that very point of Time when the other Hemisphere
was drowned, there seems to have been a Failure of the Waters here; and now the
ARK is also arrived hither, with Invitations unto us, to secure our own Eternal
Salvation, by a Lodging in the Antitype thereof. They that have written (as
Laet and Le^ius) concerning the Original of the Americans, do inform us, that
they had some knowledge of the Old Flood before any Europeans gave a visit unto
them yea, and of the Last Fire too, if Acosta deceiv^ us not; but we Europaeans
that are become Americans, have by our Sacred Histories, both more certain and
more useful Notions of it than could be found in the sorry Traditions, o^ them
that were here before us. Hence 'ti^ that we can publish a little Sermon* of
Wor^^ upon the Ark; and we can send word unto ou^ Friends in the other
Haemisphaere, that the people whom they esteem under the Earth, eve^ those that
are their Antipodes, are bowing the^^ Knees in the Name of the Lord Jesus, who
ha^^ bunt an Ark, a Church, for the Reception o^ them here: There is a Country
in America that has perhaps more than an Hundred Con^gregations in it, all
which, I have cause (...) think instructed with better Sermons ever Week, than
that which is here put into the Readers Hands; a Country filled with pur^
Churches, every one of which is an Ark, (...) ^n the same A^count that Pope
Benedict was (...) the Messengers of a famous Council mind^^ of, when he had
Challenged unto his own (...) Breast, that Honor, Hic est Arca Noae; (...) for
the Salvation of them that with a due ^^ncerity, repair thereunto. May none of
(...), want a place in such an Ark of the Lord ^^sus, when the Floods of Great
Water come nigh unto us.

SECT. V.
You that are concerned in SHIPS, whether (...) Building or the Sailing of
them, have this Little Treatise offered unto you, with a very ^articular, and
most affectionate Application. Work upon the Ark, is what you may count your
^elves concerned in; and O that the Truths ^ere tendered unto you, may Find you,
and ^rove the Power of God unto your Salvation!

My Wishes for you are, That Goodness and Mercy may follow you all the Days of
your Lives, and that you may dwell in the Ark of the Lord, unto Length of Days.
That None of you may be a Cham about the Ark, but that All of you may be bound
up in the Bundle of Life. Have I found any thing in Cham, to Deprecate on your
behalf? I have so in Noah too, in good old Noah himself. You know what Sin it
was that Noah was overtaken with. One o^ the Ethnic Names, by which Noah was
distinguished, was that of Saturn; whom the Ancient Pagans made the Praesident
of Drunkenness* and hence they had their Saturnalia, or Drunken Bouts,
dedicated unto his Memory. It Is not a thing which never happens, that they
whose Concerns Ly in Ships, have had more to do with Cups than has been for
their Good; and they plead for themselves, as in Salvians* complaint, they did
of old, Si Noah, cur non and Ego? Why may not I Drink to Excess, as well as
Noah? As well! Why it was not well in Noah; and though he had his Ignorance,
which you have not, for an excuse, yet this Drunkenness, has issued in a Black
Curse upon a great part of his miserable Family. But, blessed be God, the most
of you, that are personally known unto my self, are persons exemplary for
Sobriety. The Lord make you so, for every other virtue; and grant, That Denying
Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, you may Live Soberly, Righteously, and Godlily
in this present World.

Work upon the ARK.
1 Pet. III. 20, 21. (...) Ark was Building, wherein few, that (...) is Eight
Souls were saved by Water* (...) Like Figure whereunto, even Baptism (...) does
now also Save us.


THe Wise Men that of old were Traveling and Enquiring after the Lord Jesus
Christ, found Him a Babe in Swaddling Clothes and paid Respect unto Him, unto
the King of the World* As many of us as are, and God forbid that any should not
be Inquisitive after the Holy Child Jesus, may be hold Him in the Swaddling
Clothes, which the Types of the Old Testament Enwrapped Him in. When we there
Behold, let us there Admire, there Adore our Blessed Lord, and offe^ the best
of our Devotions to Him. It Is Re^marked by the great Apostle of the Gentiles in
Heb. 4.2. Unto us was the Gospel Preache^ as well as unto them. Those
Christians, for 'ti^ hardly a prolepsis to call them so, that Live before the
Incarnation of our Lord, had glorious Gospel, in Shadows of good Things (...)
come. A Type is in short, An instituted Resemblance of Gospel Mysteries. The
things which the Gospel gives us a naked Representation o^ were veiled under
many Signs and Seals, which God made unto his Ancient People as it were
Sacraments of Good Things to come. And no^ only the Person of the Messiah* but
his Conditions, His Endowments, His Benefits, and Hi^ Ordinances too, yea, and
the Miseries, and the Enemies, from which we are by Him deliver^ed; all of
these were Preached in and by those Types of old. Now this Good-speech have we
as well as They, by the Entertainment which the Types are every day giving to
our seriou^ Contemplations.

It was the Observation of the Apostle, con^cerning the memorable Events which
in the Bypast Ages had happened in the Church of ^od, 1 Cor. 10.11. All these
things happened ^^to them, for Types, they are written for our ^^monition.

As there were many Typical Men, to be ^^nd among the Saints of the Old
Testament; (...) Typical Persons, and Typical Orders; thus ^^re were Typical
Things, then likewise to be ^^madverted on. And those Typical Things (...) to
be divided into two sorts; they were ^^her more Occasional, or more Perpetual.
For the ^^re O^casional Typical Things, we may distribute ^^em into Typical
Objects, and Typical Actions. (...) the Fleet of Occasional Typical Objects,
methinks ^oahs ARK may ride Admiral; it is the first; and ^hold how the Apostle
here declares the Ty^^^al Nature and Import of it. The Apostle here ^^^tly and
fitly introduces a Discourse upon the (...) built by Noah long ago: in which
Eight (...) were Saved by Water; that is, Noah, and (...) Wife, and his Three
Sons, and their Wives ^^ing aboard, the Water of the Flood lifted up ^^e Ark in
which they were, so that they peri^^ed not. The History of the Flood, and so of
(...), is too well known to need any distinct ^^^petition in this Discourse.
But upon this (...) adds, in express terms, We have the AN^^TYPE thereof. And
what is that Antitype? Why, as Water buoyed up those that were in (...) Ark, so
Baptism does those that are in the Church toward Heaven; there is a blesse^
Help of Salvation in it.

Hence there is this Doctrine for us, That Noah's ARK was Type of Gods CHURCH

As a Ship is by Humane Ingenuity, ofter made a Resemblance of the Church; so
the Ark which was a sort of a Ship, is by Divine Authority, exhibited as a
Figure or a Shadow of it. They compare the ^ump in a Ship to Repentance, which
fetches out the Corrupti^on that endangers our Souls. They compare the Sails,
to our Affections; in which when the Wind of the holy Spirit ^lows, we are
carried swiftly on to the Harbor of Eternal Blessedness. The Rudder, that is
compared unto the Tongue of man; the Compass, that may be compared unto the
Word of God. But these comparisons are innumerable; as they that have read
Navigation Spiritualized, by some Worthy English Writers, must needs be
sensible; and I hope every Gracious Marriner^ does accustom himself to such
Reflections.

Well, that famous ARK which is counted (...) first SHIP that ever was, will
afford then, ^uch variety of Observations to us; and I ^^pose, you that follow
the Employments of ^hip-Carpenters, will give a very particu^^^ and profitable
attention thereunto. The ^est Method in handling of the Types, is to ^^se and
Prove proper Observations, with a^^eable Applications annexed unto them. Be^d,
that Illustrious and Renowned Ship-^^rpenter, our Father Noah, has in his Ark
^^vided these Observations for you.

OBSERVATION. I.
The Lord Jesus Christ has Built a (...) in the World, and this most exactly
and ^^^fully, according to the Mind of God.

Good old Noah was one of the most consi^^^able Men that ever was in the World.
The ^^cient Heathen themselves had some broken ^^membrances and Traditions of
him. Their ^^chus has the very Name of Noah in it, with ^^ery little variation
of the Letters. And (...) Janus too, was our Noah, having a Name ^^ved from the
Hebrew word [ Jajin] for (...), which Noah was the maker of: and as (...) was
with them, a man of two Faces, it intimated that Noah had the double prospe^ of
the Old and the New World before him. (...) for nothing was Noah more notable,
than (...) being a Type of our Lord Jesus Christ through whom, a R^st remains
for the people (...) God. And among all the Instances in which Noah was
Typical, there is none more obvio^^ and visible than this; That as Noah built
(...) Ark, so Jesus has built a Church in the wor^^ But how? when that Noah had
received th^^ Orders, Go build an Ark; it follows in Genesis 6^ 22. according ^o
all that God had commanded did he. It Is the Honor of the Ship-wright that God
himself was the first Master-Builde^ I suppose Noah to be directed and inspired
(...) God, for the Building of an ARK; an^ surely he so much as drove every
Pin, accor^^ing to the advice of God. Well, our Lord Jesus Christ, in the
Building of his Church has thus done all, according to the Will of Go^ It is
said in Heb. 3.2. He was faithful to (...) that appointed Him. The Will of God
is the according to which, all things are square^ and ordered by the Lord
Jesus, in the Chur^^ of God.

APPLICATION.
Let not Us then introduce any thing (...) ^he Church of God, of which we have
no^ His Allomance and Countenance for its being here. We are most, or all of
us, Vnder-^uilders about the Ark of God; we have ^ome work assigned us, in the
Edification of ^he Church. But let us keep close to the lord of God, in our
Building. Are there any ^aterials which we would build the Church (...) the
Admission of? Let them all be of ^ods Constitution. Let us not willingly lay
(...) Rotten Timber of either Heretics or Hy^^crites in the sides of our Ark,
nor allow ^^urch-priviledges with us to evidently un^odly men. We are
admonished in Heb. 12.^6. Look diligently, lest there be any profane ^^^son
among you. Even so, we are to Look ^iligently, that the Church which we more
^^mediately belong un^o, be not filled with (...) ungodly Company. Some Great
Men (...) God, have professed, That they would ^^oner Loose their Hands, than
with those Hands ^dminister the Sacraments to a visibly ungodly (...); and it
is a Golden Sentence, which ^^opt from the Pen of that Learned Scotch-^an; I
believe (says Mr Gilespy) no Con^^ientious Minister, would Baptize a man,
whose ^orks and words manifestly declare him to be (...) Unregen^rated, an
unconverted man; and (...) shall we then bring such an one unto the Table of
the Lord? No, they will be a sort o^ Barnacles, growing to the sides of the
Ark, with not a little prejudice to its Interest. Again, are there any
Exercises which we would Build the Church, by our attendance on? Let all them
too be of Gods Institution. Let us not perform any Worship, or Service, about
our Ark, but such as God calls for. Our Lord says in Mat. 15.9. In vain do
they worship me, teaching the Commandments of men. The Commandments of men,
must not be our Guide, in What we do in and for the Church. We should not fetch
a stroke there, of which God has not said, This do* Luther judciously reckoned
This, one of the three things which the Church would be fatally Endangered by,
Sapientia mundi, quae vult omnia redigere in Ordinem, and impjis med^is
Ecclesiae paci consulere; To follow the Dictates of Worldly Wisdom for the
maintaining of it. There are uninstituted Caeremonies brought into the House of
God; the bold Inventors whereof, resemble them to Pins in the Building; and
that of Pins, is a Name great enough truly to be bestowed upon them But I
assure you, They are Pins that produce Cracks and Leaks where they come; they
are dangerous to the Ark of God.

OBSERVATION. II.
The Lord Jesus Christ Himself, is most ^^timately Concerned and Embarked, in
^he Church of God. When the Ark was ^uilt, Noah the Builder Shipped himself
upon it; if the Ark had sunk, or Split Noah himself must have perished with it.
But (...) was well secured by the presence of No^h there; though it seems to have
drawn above sixteen foot of Water, as may be ga^hered from its resting on an
Hill when the Waters were above it, at least eleven cu^^ts. Thus, our Lord
Jesus Christ, having ^uilt the Church, He is now Himself aboard, and will be
so, To the end of the World. It (...) His promise in Isa 43.3. When thou
pas^est through the Waters, I will be with thee. And ^t is His pity in Isa.
63.9. In all their Af^lictions, He is Afflicted. If the Church mis^arry our
Lord Jesus Christ Himself will do (...) too; but there is no Fear of That!

APPLICATION.
Be not then Discouraged at the Dangers, the Tempests, which the Church of God
may meet withal. It Is the Name of the Church, in Isa. 54.11. O thou Tossed with
Tempests! and so it may have this Appellation, O thou Threatened with Dangers!
But be of good cheer. The Lord Jesus Christ Himself is exposed unto all the
perils which bear a terrible Aspect on the Church of God. Hence the Great
Reformer, in very perplexing Distresses would so comfort himself Si nos Ruimus,
Ruit and Christus; Christ Himself will Fare like us, and Fall with us: And this
may be our comfort, The Lord Jesus Christ Himself, must founder in the
Quicksands of that Corruption, or Oppression, in which the whole Church of God
shall be ever swallowed up. This was the Triumph of the Church, in Psalm 46.3,
5. We will not fear, though the Waters Roar, and be Troubled Why so? It
follows, God is in the midst of Her! Let never such Roaring, Dashing, Horrible
Huricanes arise, the Church cannot be cast away; the Reason is, God is in the
midst of her. When Caesar was in a little Boat at Sea, hattered and battered by
a violent Storm, which made the Mariners afraid, he merrily said unto them,
Come, Courage, brave Hearts, you carry Caesar, and the ^nterests of Caesar
here! Why, a better Fraighted Vessel is the Church of God: It has our ^lessed
Noah aboard; It carries Jesus, and ^he Interests of Jesus in the Bottom of it.

Niteris in c^ssum Christi submergere Navem;
Fluctuat, at nunquam Mergitur illa Ratis.
But before I pass to the next Stage, Be^old, an Advice here, which Mariners
are (...) be mindful of! You see the way to be ^ife in all your Voyages, Get
the Gracious ^resence of of the Lord Jesus, the true No^h, with you in your
Vessels, and you are ^rovided for a Storm. It Is likely that the ^rk, had no
Storms to Encounter with; ^or the Dry Land which may generate them ^as covered;
nor could the Flat Bottom of ^he Ark well bear too ruffling Tumults, and
swelling Billows, in the Waters under

But you must expect many a severe and ^ustring Storm in your Adventures;
where^n you will scarce be as many Inches from ^eath as the Thickness of your
Ships, but, ^am prope Mors urget, quam prope cernis aquam against which you now
see how to secure ^our selves. We have a Narrative, in Mat. 4.37, 38, 39. That
once arose a great ^^orm of Wind, and the Waves beat into the Ship; and He
arose and rebuked the Wind, and said unto the Sea, peace, be still; and the
Wind ceased, and there was a great Calm. Such a Friend, such a Guard at hand,
you will have, if you have the Presence of the Lord Jesus with you. Now, to
obtain That, Let your Prayers, be together every Day made unto God in Him;
therewithal joining your Cares, that no Vice be any more allowed there, than in
the purest Church in the World. If it was Enjoined on Masters of Houses to Pray
without ceasing: how much more ought Masters of Vessels to do the same? Let me
say, Masters, your Companies are your Families; you ought every day to see
Prayer attended with them. How can you Neglect Prayer in a Calm, without
expecting that when you Employ Prayer in a Storm, the Lord Jesus will be deaf
unto your Crier, and Reply upon them, I know you not? 'Twill be too late then
to begin your Prayers; Quid Juvat Errores mersa jam puppe fateri? It has been
said, Let him that would Learn to Pray, go to Sea; Alas, that so many persons
who go to Sea, are so impiously Prayerless there! and so like the Mariners
whom the Philosopher once with a sharp scoff, did advise to forbear their
Prayers! It was a seasonable Alarm once ^^ven aboard a Ship, Arise, and call
upon thy God. For indeed, The Lord is with you, while you are with Him.

OBSERVATION. III.
It should be Good Stuff which the Church ^onsisteth of. The Church Mystical
will ^ertainly do so, and they that make pre^^nces to the Church Visible are to
be solicit^^s hereabout. It was prescribed unto No^^, in Genesis 6.14. Make thee
an Ark of Go^^er wood. What Wood is that? Critics take (...) the Cudgel about
it and agree no bet^^r than to insist upon 6 or 7 various Inter^retations of
it: But it is abundantly clear that Cypress Wood is meant by Gopher Wood, (...)
very Names have something of affinity. (...) Ship-Timber else grew so
plentifully ^ereabouts; and this was the main Ship-Timber among all the
Ancients. Which ^lexanders Navy alone, of this Wood, may ^^nder evident. Hence
were (...) Boards ^ostly used for Coffins of (...) in commemoration of the ARK,
no doubt, where all Mankind was once coffined up. Now the Cypress Wood was good
Stuff: it would ^old and keep, and last sound, and breed no Worms, for a most
incredible while* Perpetual, was the Epithet which the ancient Poets put upon
it. Hence Epiphanius affirms, that in his days, which was near three thousand
years after the Flood, there were parts of the ARK still to be seen* This is an
Emblem of the Soundness which all Church Members ought to be studious of: a
Prayer fitted for their Lips* is that in Psalm. 119.80. Lord, Make my heart
sound in thy Statutes.

APPLICATION.
Let those who desire to join unto the Church of God, then Examine themselves.
There are some, and it procures the anger of the great God, that there are no
more, seeking after Church fellowship among us. To you in a peculiar manner
belongs that counsel in 1 Cor. 11.28. Let a man Examine himself, and so let him
Come. O make this enquiry into your own estate, Am I good Stuff or no? ask and
see, whether you have a Good Grain, or a True Grace? whether you are sound at
heart? whether you have the Root of the matter in you? Yea, and more than this,
is needful to be enquired; it should be tried, whether you are well He^^^ and
well Bowed, by the Word of God? whether the Word of God has had such an
In^luence upon you as to fit you for a standing ^n the Building of the Lord.

Many dejected Souls are terrifying them ^elves with a, May ^^venture? Now to
pu^^ out of Question, do but put these three Que^tions to your own Souls.

Q. 1. Is there no Lust that I do nourish a^^ ^ndulge in my self? But do I
count every Sin my ^urden, wretchedness and misery?

Q. 2. Is there no Duty which I allow my self ^n the Omission of? but have I
respect unto al^ ^he Commands of God?

Q^ 3. Is there no Office of the Lord Jesus Christ, which I am under the power
of prejudic^ against? but am I willing that he should be ^o me, all of that
which He is to any of his chosen ones?

If you can give a good Answer to these Questions, you may then venture to
come. Come and be compacted, and united, and ^ncorporated into the Church of
God, ac^ording to the Order of the Gospel.

OBSERVATION. IV.
Many persons instrumental about Building the Church of God, are yet Lost and
Damned for ever. There were many Carpenters no doubt, that wrought with Noah,
upon the Ark, which yet were Drowned among those doleful Creatures, whose
Foundation was overflown with a Flood. Even so, there are multitudes of
persons, whose Talents and Labors are Employed about Church Work, all their
Days; and yet these very Sersons go down to the congregation of them that Roar
under the Waters for ever. It is true, that the Ministry of a wicked
Clergyman, is not so frequently and so certainly blessed by God, as the
Ministry of a serious, Gracious, Heavenly Man, that can Pray as well as Preach.
Usually they are the Wise, the Good, who Turn many to Righteousness.
Nevertheless God may improve the Ministry of a Judas and a Demas, for the
advantage of His Church. It Is not the Instrument, but the Appointment, that
gives Efficacy to the Ordinance. We are told in 1 Cor^ 9.27. A man that has
Preached to others, may himself be cast away.

APPLICATION.
How much ought all Church Officers then (...) Work out their own Salvation
with Fear and ^rembling! As on the one side, No True ^hristian, should Despair
of his own Since^^ty, because the Minister that was the In^^rument of his
Conversion, has proved a ^icked man: so on the other side, No ^hurch-Officer
should Presume his Condition (...) be good, because of a sacred Function
^ertaining to him* We that are at work upon the Ark, had need to make sure of
(...), that we be not shut out, when the Floods (...) great Water do come nigh
unto us. Know (...), that Men of Renown in the Congregation, may go down into
the horrible Pits, the ^iery Vaults, of the lowest Hell. We shall ^e worse than
those that are already there, (...) we do not at this awful Intimation, Be^ieve
and Tremble. It is a Lamentable con^^sion which is instanced unto us in Mat.
^^22. Many will say, Lord, have we not Pro^hesied in thy Name? Then will I
profess unto them, I never knew you; Depart from me! Thus in the Dreadful Day
of God, we may ^ome to plead, Lord, Had not I the Office of Serving thy Table,
and Keeping thy Treasure in thy House? We may come to plead, Lord Did not I go
before thy People in singing of thy Praises? Yea, we may come to plead, Lord
was not I a Pastor, and a Preacher to a Flock (...) thine? Yet may he pass that
Ireful Direfu^ Sentence on us, Depart from me, I know yo^ not! O take heed of
Incurring such ^ Doom: Let us all carefully make our Calling and Election sure.

OBSERVATION V.
The Lord Jesus Christ is the Door, by which we are to pass into the Church of
God. It was said in Genesis 6.16. And the Door of the Ark shall thou set in the
side thereof. There was a Door by which the Ark was entered; which Door, if it
were in the lower part of the Ark, and not by Scaffolds ascended unto, required
an exquisite carefulness in the close and fast shutting of it; and it seems
Angelical Assistance, was afforded thereunto: for we read, God shut it. Well,
The Church of God has a Door too; but what kind of one? Our Lord Jesus has
said unto us, in John 17.9. I am the Door, by me if any man enter in, he shall
^^saved. The Lord Jesus must be profes^d and obeyed by all that would be Lodg^
here.

APPLICATION.
If therefore we would have any Room (...) the Church of God, Let us own
ourselves ^holden to the Lord Jesus for it. In the church it is eminently so,
that Christ is All! ^is by Confessing the Truth of Christ Je^^s, that we come
to Challenge a Room in (...) Church Visible. We must confe^s unto ^im, Thou art
the Son, of the Living God; ^id we must hold the Truth as it is in Jesus, (...)
we would not be excluded from all Inte^^st in the Church. A knot of men, that
^e not sound in the Fundamentals of the ^hristian Faith, are not a Church, but
a ^asps-Nest, as Tertullian expresses it, or, a ^^nagogue of Satan, as it is
called in the Sa^^ed Pages.

Again, It is by Receiving the Grace of christ Jesus, that we come to enjoy a
room (...) the Church Mystical. This Church is (...) this regard as it shall
be, when it shall ^rive to its New-Jerusalem condition here, nothing enters
into it that Defiles. It Is by having of Christ Jesus formed in us, tha^ we get
into this Holy Body; it is, The Body of Christ, and our Union with Him, by
Faith, brings us to belong unto it.

Once more, A Call from Christ Jesus, the Door, by which we are to enter upon
any special Employment in the (...) of God. They are but Intruders, who
pre^tend to be Overseers to the Church, an^ have no commission from the Lord
Jesus for it; Our Lord has truly said, in John 17.^ The same is a Thief and a
Robber. Let the Word of the Lord Jesus invite us, and in^duce us, to whatever
Office we expect abo^^ the Church of the most High; through the want of this,
the Son of God has a Qu^ Warranto for a great part of them, tha^ have made
themselves Rulers of the Chur^^ at this day in the world.

OBSERVATION VI.
The Church of God has the means o^ Light afforded unto it. The Ark had (...)
Window or a Casement in it; as we read i^ Genesis 6.16. Which was probably in the
Upper Story of the Ark; just below (...) Roof, which by the Declivity of a
(...) ^^rried off the Rain that fell upon it. It ^as made Strait without, and
Broad with^^, that the Light might thereby the better (...) diffused. No doubt
Noah by Cranes and ^^^pes and proper Engines pulling up the (...) Quantity of
Excrements in the Lower ^^ories of the Ark, did here turn them out. and it is
besides probable, that there were ^ere and there, Little port-holes in the
sides (...) the Ark, which conveyed Breath as ^ell as Light, unto the Animals
in the ^old. Well, The church of God is like^ise a place of Light; and a
twofold Light (...) find shining there. It is the Name of (...) Lord Jesus
Christ, in John 1 9. He is (...) Light of the World. Now it is in the (...) of
the Church, that the Sun of Righte^^sness is moving from Day to Day. It is
^oreover the Singular Quality and Excel^^nce of the Scripture, which is noted
in ^sal. 119.105. Thy Word is a Light unto my (...). Now it is the Church that
is the Can^^stick, in which this Candle ^s exhibited unto us; upon which
account it is also cal^^d, The pillar of Truth.

APPLICATION.
For shame then, let none of us that are (...) the Church continue Ignorant of
the Thing which we ought to be Instructed in. The Ordinances of the Lord Jesus,
are so man^ Windows or Casements, at which a Divine Light may come into our
Souls. O let u^ not then be in the Dark about our own work, or in the Dark
about our own state* or in the Dark about the Things which are eternal, and are
indeed out of sight. Indee^ the Apostatical Church of Antichrist, may have
Doctors declared and promoted as Most sufficient, though they never had read a
chapter in their Bibles; and it may have Preacher, who being asked whether they
taugh^ their People the Decalogue, discreetly answered, They never saw the Book
so called* But the sincere Church of Christ cannon nourish any such Barbarity*
Let us endeavou^ the fulfillment of that word, Thy people shall all be taught.
It was said in 1 Cor. 15.34. Some have not the knowledge of God, I speak this to
your shame. What! for them in the Church to want the knowledge of God! that is a
burning shame indeed! It will be a shameful thing, if any of Us have not the
Knowledge (...) those things, which to know is Life Eter^^l. The Church in
which we Lodge, is ^^uminated; yea, it is a Light-House to the ^orld about us.
We shut our Eyes against (...) Light, if we remain a people of no know^^^ge;
and then He that made us, will not ^^ve mercy on us, He that formed us, will
show (...) no Favor.

OBSERRVATION VII.
One Catholic Church has in it, many ^^rticular Congregations and Societies,
that ^^ree to worship God in Christ, according (...) His Gospel. There were
many particu^^^ Mansions, and Chambers in the Ark of ^^ah; yet they all made
but One Ark. It Is (...) in the Church of God; Only with this ^^^ference, That
I look upon the Church ra^^r as a Genus, than an Integrum. There (...) many
particular Churches, and yet they (...) make up One Church Catholic, which is
(...) Mystical Body of Christ. Hence our ^^rd says in Cant. 6.9. My Undefiled
is but (...). A particular Church is that Associati^^ of Believers, which
Assemble together (...) one place, with Engagements and Endeavors to carry on,
The Worship of the Gospel. I do not know, that the Word of God ever mentioned
any particular Church of another Species or Dimension.

Such a Church has in it the whole Essence of the Church, and it is it self a
complete Ark, before the Lord But all these Churches being together considered,
the Result will be one Church Catholic in the World.

APPLICATION.
This may Encourage us, both in Lovi^^ and in Serving of the Church.

Our Loving of the Church, is not to (...) confined unto this or that
particular Assembly. Indeed there is a peculiar Love du^ to that Assembly,
which we are in Covenant withal; and even in the Matters (...) Business, as
well as of Charity, this Lov^ may show it self. There are some Church^es in
England, where the Members are a^greed, That if there be any One of their ow^
communion which can furnish them with such (...) such a commodity, they will go
to him, before they go to any other. It Is a Loving practice* But our Love must
extend it self to the ^hole Household of Faith* And in ou^ Serv^^g of the
Church, we should Remember, ^^at when we do a Service for this or that
^^rticular Assembly, we do it for all the ^hole Community. Every Believer fa^es
(...) better, for every Prayer, every Sermon, (...) Book, which God helps us to
Edify (...) one Church withal. Wherefore, Let ^^ere be in us, What was in
Paul, in 2 Cor. ^^:28. The care of all the Churches.

OBSERVATION. VIII.
There are very Different and Various ^egrees in the Church of God. It was
En^^^ned concerning the Ark, in Genesis 6.16. ^ith Lower, Second, and Third
Stories, thou ^^alt make it. Thus after some sort, there (...) Three Stories in
the Church of God; ^^ere is the Visible Church, there is the My^^cal Church on
Earth, and there is the ^^iumphant Church in Heaven. These three (...) so many
Ascending Stories in the Ark (...) the Lord.

APPLICATION
Let not a Room in the Lower Story of the Church content any of us. Count it
not e^nough to be in the Church Visible; that (...) a part of the Ark, which
any sorts (...) Creatures a^^ often Crouding and Herdi^ together in. Doubtless,
Noah's Quarter* were Above ^^st under the Roof of the Ark. Let us ^^pire to be
in the Church My^stical* the Church of which it is said in M^^ 16.18. The gates
of Hell shall not prevail ^^gainst it. Ye^ Let us desire to be in the Chvrch
Triumphant; the Church describe^ in Heb. 12.22. The Innumerable Company (...)
Angels, the Spirits of Just men made perfe^^ and Jesus the Mediator of the New
Covenan^ Get first into the middle Story of Gra^^ and so you shall step up into
the upper Sto^ry of Glory, at the Last.

OBSERVATION. IX.
There are in the Church of God, Creature^ of all Natures, both good and bad.
We fin^ Genesis 6.19, 20. Some of every Beast and some (...) ^owl, were admitted
into the Ark. The ^istinction of Clean and Unclean, was it ^eems, then taken
up; and the Clean, which ^ight be Sacrificed, were by Sevens [Behold (...) Odd
One for a Sacrifice] The Unclean, which ^ight not be Sacrificed, were by
Couples ^ere* A very signal, special, and miracu^^us Providence it was, that
assisted Noah in (...) gathering together all sorts of Ani^als.

But there are two very Difficult Enqui^^es, which my Concern to prevent the
A^^eism of many that think the History of the ^rk incredible and impossible,
will cause (...) a little to insist upon.

Question 1.
How were the Creatures all Stowed in (...) Ark?

Answer.
You do not forget, that the Ark was ^hree Hundred Cubits Long, filty cubits
^^oad, and thirty cubits High; (the pro^ortion found in the Exact Body of a
MAN) (...) so it contained 450000 Square Cubits ^ithin the Walls of it, if we
don't abate what was taken away in the Sloping of the Roof. Suppose the cubits
to be the Holy, which were Seven Hands Breadth, where as the Vulgar was but
six, and you behold here a Vessel which might carry more than Forty Two
Thousand Tuns, allowing two thousand Weight unto the Tun.

Nor do you forget, that the Ark had Three Stories in it; each of them Fifte^^
Foot High apiece, abating the Sloping of one foot and an half at the Top, and
(it may be) some place for Ballast under a Floo^ at the Bottom.

You must allow, that the Lowest Story o^ the Ark, might be allotted unto
Beasts; (...) for Insects and Reptiles, they needed no^ considerable
Habitations; there were ^ thousand Corners for them.

You must allow, That ^he Highest Story of the Ark was allotted unto Birds; and
No^ah with his Family might be Nested among them there. You may allow that the
middle Story of the Ark was allowed for the Food needful to maintain these
Creatures* Now they that are well Studied in Natural History, will easily find
Stables enough (...) the Lower Story, for all the Beasts, and C^^ges enough in
the Upper Story for all the Birds* yet known unto us, and a great (...) (...)
Room to spare. They that reckon ^50 Species of Quadrupeds, 150 of Volatiles,
and 25 of Reptiles, have perhaps over^one in their Account.

Question 2.
How were the Creatures all Fed in (...) Ark?

Answer.
You may allow the whole Middle Story to ^ontain their Food; besides a deal of
spare ^^om in both of the other Stories for the pur^ose. Now, for the Birds
none will be ^^rupulous, where to supply them with Gr^^^ries: the same Floor
that held their Coops ^ould also hold more than enough to feed them all. But
for the Beasts, the way is to ^^ing them unto a certain Proportion. I say ^^en,
all the Beasts in the Ark, that feed on ^rass or Hay, would not require a
greater ^^oportion than 92 Oxen; all the Beasts that fed on Roots or Fruits,
would not re^uire a greater proportion than twenty one ^heep; all the Beasts
which devour Flesh, ^xceeded not the proportion of twenty se^en Wolves; though it
be questioned whether any Bruits before the Flood (or at least within the Ark)
were carnivorous at all. Now you may lay in, at the rate of forty weight of
Provender a Day, for every Ox, and a whole Sheep a Day for every Wolf, besides
a sufficient quantity of Provision for all that fed on other things; and yet by
computatation, I find the Ark affords room enough and enough to hold far more
tha^ thus would serve the turn, se^ the 375 Days that they were under their
confinement.

You will grow weary, if I descend into particulars. All that remains is to
observe, not, what Jerome absurdly enough, in his comparison for Caelibacy
against Matrimony here, but that which Tertullian elegantly did refle^^ upon:
to wit, That creatures of all Tempers were in the ARK, and are in the Church.
There are in the House of ou^ Lord Virgins both wise and foolish, and Servants
both wise and slothful. There are in the Field ^f our Lord, both Tares and
Wheat. And though there were no Fishes in the ARK, yet there are in the Church;
but of what kind we are told in Matthew. 13.48. Both good and bad are in the Net.

APPLICATION.
But let all Church Members among us, look to it, that they be not wild
Ravenous or Venomous creatures in the ARK of God. It seems probable, that the
fiercest Creatures were miraculously so Cicurated at their Entrance into the
Ark, that they expressed no Antipathies or Dissensions there: It Is credibly
Reported, That (...) sudden Flood in Somersetshire in England, produced such an
Agreement between the most quarlelsome Creatures, the Dogs and Hares, the Cats
and Mice that were driven into the Top of an Hill together. It should be thus
in the Church of God; even according to that in Isa. 11.6. The Wolf shall dwell
with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid. The Character which
the Lord would have Church Members ^o wear, What is it? It is that in Joh.
10.14. My Sheep. Or it is that in Cant. 6.9. My Dove. I beseech you, Let us not
have the Qualities of more Noxious Creatures in us. O let us not be Crafty,
like the Fox; nor cruel as the Bear, nor bloody as the Tiger. Let us not be
Blind like the Bat, or Owl; nor let us be Revengful, as the Crane, and let us
not like the Serpent, sting those that are about us. The Ark of the Lord Jesus
will not be opened unto us, until we have put off those cursed Qualities.

OBSERVATION. X.
Our Salvation depends upon our getting into the Church of God. They that were
in the Ark were in a safe and a brave Con^dition, when Desolation overwhelmed
the whole World besides; there sat good old Noah, Medjis Tranquillus in undis.
But what became of them that were not then sheltered in the Ark? Alas, they
fell into the Perdition of Ungodly Men. Of such concernment it is, to get into
the Church of God! When the Jews were the Church, our Lord said in Joh. 4.22.
Salvation is of the Jews. And it is a faithful Saying still, that Extra
Ecclesiam non est Salus. If a man be not a Member of the Mystical Church, he is
excluded from all Hope of Salvation for ever; he must for ever Ly and cry, and
be abhorred among them that are without. And whoever is a Member of the
Mystical Church, that man will be desirous and studious to join himself unto
one that is Visible ^oo; it is against his Will, against his Choice, if he
belong not unto some Society that profess the Truths, and practice the ways,
of the Lord Jesus Christ.

It is a considerable Remark, in Acts 2.47. There were added unto the Church,
daily such as shall be Saved. They that are in a State of Salvation, will they
not endeavor to be Added unto some particular Church, in which the Son of God
is Worshipped? See whether it be not so.

APPLICATION.
I pray, Why then do so many of you Stand without, and stay away, from the Ark
of the Lord Jesus? It was a smart Expostulation of the Apostle, in 1 Cor.
11.22* Despise ye the Church of God? O it is a fearful Impiety to despise a
place in the Church of the Lord Jesus Christ; and yet this is to be charged
upon multitudes of you, that every month turn your Backs upon the Table of the
Lord. Ye Inconsiderate people! Will you make your Minister complain to the God
of Heaven of you? O Lord I mourn. But shall I indeed go and say before the
Great God, Lord, I have spent some Hundreds of Sermons, to bespeak the Hearts
of these people for thee; and yet they have never so Repented of sin, they have
never so Believed on Christ, they have never so Covenanted with thy self, as
that they dare come unto thy Table in the full communion of any Church of
thine. Alas, what a complaint were this? But I beseech you to give no occasion
for it.

Consider 1. If you are not continually Preparing for, and perpetually Desiring
o^ a Room in the Ark of the Lord Jesus, there is no likelihood of Everlasting
Salvation for you. Many a good man is afraid o^ coming into Church Communion;
but the man who sincerely and earnestly takes pains to get himself ready for
it, it may be hoped will soon overcome those Fears. If you can go on
contentedly, without any comfortable and well-grounded persuasions of your
Interest in the Favor of God; if you can go on quietly, leaving the matters
between God and your own Souls at peradventures, I am to tell you, That you are
yet in the gall of Bitterness, and in the Bond of iniquity. Have you entered
into Covenant with God, or no? If you have done it secretly, then you may come
and do it openly, If you have not, then your Salvation lies at Stake; You may
be horribly astonished a^ the Hourly perils of your Immortal Souls, That man is
not in a State of Salvation who may not say, as in Psalm. 26.8. Lord, I have
Loved the Habitation of thy House. But how can you Love it, if you Do Nothing
to get into it?

Consider* 2. Though you may be Born again, yet the Affairs of your Everlasting
Salvation will meet with much obstruction and impediment by your not getting
far enough into the Ark of the Lord Jesus. If you come not unto a
Church Communion, with some company of Inchurched Believers, the least you do
is miserably to retard the progress of your own Salvation* We read it spoken of
some, in Psalm. 106.15. God sent leanness into their Soul. Alas, a Lean Soul, a
Lean Grace, a Lean Joy, is the Fruit of This Omission. You do but famish your
own Souls, while you thus deny to yourselves the Helps of your Salvation. What
can you Look for, but a Blast upon your unhappy Souls, while you practically
say, There are Ordinances of Jesus Christ, which I can do well enough without?

Consider 3. The Floods of Death, will shortly Roar and Roll upon you. It was
once an Outcry in Psalm. 69.1, 2. O God, The waters come into my Soul, the
Floods overflow me. That, That will be your Cry in the Dying Hour, which you
are now near unto; The Sorrows of Death (you will say) compass me, and the Floods
which terrify the Ungodly, make me afraid! But O what a sad thing, will it then
be, to be found out of an Ark? I have seen and Heard, more than once, this
bitter Anguish in Dying people, O that I had joined my self unto some Church of
the Lord Jesus! It Is a Load like a mountain of Lead upon me, that I kept out of
the Ark so long. If God will spare me, that I may recover Strength before I go
hence and be no more, the first thing I Will do, shall be to Reform the Omission,
which I now Repent. But as God was near killing of Moses for omitting of a
Sacrament; so it is possible, thy Omission may provoke Him to Kill thee without
Pity, (because not without Warning) When thou shall pour out these Groans
before Him.

Consider of This, and make no Heedless Needless Delays in the matter.

OBSERVATION XI.
It Is an Ill Bird that goes from the Church ^f God, without returning again
unto it any more. We read in Gen* 8.6. Noah o^ened a Window of the Ark, and
sent forth a Raven, which went to and fro, till the Waters were ^ried up: the
Raven it seems found Carcases ^loating here and there to live upon. But a Dove
being sent forth it is said it found no rest ^or the sole of her foot, but
returned into the Ark; of which the ancient Heathen have some very pretty
Footsteps. Their Xisuthrus and their Deucalion have such a Remark upon them in
their Histories. Now the Raven is an unclean Bird, a Bird of an ill Note,, and
an ill Fame in the common account. Why, there are many that thus go out from
the Ark of the Lord Jesus: they go out from His Church, and out from His
People, and out from His Institutions there; and this without Returning any
more. Many Professors become Apostates; and Finally, incurably, irrecoverably
so. Whither do these go? but unto that place whereof the Prophet says in Isai.
34.9, 10, 11. The Land shall become burning Pitch, the smoke thereof shall go
up for ever, and the RAVEN shall dwell in it.

APPLICATION.
Tremble, Every Soul, Tremble at Apostasy from the Ways of God. You that have
gone out from the Societies of them which together called upon God in Christ;
you that instead of your old Entertainments in the House of God, are now
Gormandising upon the Carrions of the world; O come back; do not play the Raven
so. You show what you are, if you can so satisfy your selves. Ill Birds
indeed! We shall say of you, They went out from us, because they were not of
us. It Is the Complexion and Character belonging to the Church of Rome, in a
peculiar manner. It Is a Raven: unless you will say, that the Bird which once
made such a Disturbance in one of their Councils, afford a fitter Name for it.
It has gone from our Glorious Noah, and never will Return unto Him. But let all
Apostates take that Advice, in Isa. 60.9. Return to your Rest as DOVES to the
Windows. O be those Doves, that cannot find a Rest for their Foot, any where
but in the Church of the Living God.

OBSERVATION. XII.
In the Church of God, a Sabbath will be kept Holy to the Lord. It is a
Remarkable passage in Genesis 8.8, 10, 12. Noah sent forth a Dove; and he staid
yet other Seven Days; and again he sent forth the Dove; and he staid yet other
Seven Days, and sent forth the Dove. Why did Noah keep a period of Seven Days
in this matter? Learned Men conceive that he had Respect unto a Sabbath in ^t;
and a Sabbath too, say some Critical Enquirers, on that very Day of the Week
which we count the First. It is thought, that on the morrow after the Sabbath
he still sent out the Dove. And why not? We are ^ssured in Genesis 2.3. That from
the very Creation of the Wo^ld, God sanctified the Seventh Day; that is, He
Commanded it to be ^eparated and Dedicated unto Sacred Servi^es among the
Children of Men. To say, That at the Creation, God Sanctified the Se^enth Day,
by ordering that it should be ^ept Holy by a little people four and twenty
^undred years afterward, is an unaccounta^le Anticipation, and a cruel Hardship
on the Text. No, It Is but R^^^^nable to think, That the Patriarchs* long before
Israel was Encamped at Marah, did use to keep an Holy Sabbath, in the
Hebdomadal Revolution. Hence the Apostle at Heb. 4.11. speaking of a Rest,
which Unbelievers are excluded from, he plainly enough says, They were not
excluded from the Rest (or Sabbath) which was from the Foundations of the
world; so that such a Rest (or Sabbath) men then had an Interest in. Indeed the
Sacredness of the Number, Seven, together with the Acknowledgment of it, as the
measure of Time, among all Nations, except a few barbarous Indians whose Time
is denominated only by Sleeps and Moons and Winters, cannot easily be ascribed
unto any other Original, but the mark which God at the Beginning did put upon
One Day in Seven, as Holy to Himself. A Seventh Day is to be kept as a Sabbath
Day, in the Ark of God; though it seems to be not THE Seventh Day, but the First
which our Sabbath is now tran^slated into. Our Savior Himself requires even
the Church of the New Testament to be solicitous, that nothing may hinder
(...), from keeping a Sabbath to the Lord. (...) Lord advised his Disciples,
about the Distresses which even after His Resurrection and Ascension, they
should be exposed unto, ^n Mat. 24 20. Pra^* that your (...) be (...) (...) the
Sabbath Day. Why so? The Jewish C^remonies were then Abrogated and Abo^ished;
and our Lord refers to a Time, when the Laws which made Sabbath-breaking fall
under a civil penalty, would be silent altogether; yet have we a Sabbath still,
which ^tis a grivous and a bitter thing to be disturbed in*

APPLICATION.
Remember now the Sabbath Day, to keep it Holy. If a Christian in the Primitive
Times were asked Dominicum serva^ti? Do you keep the Lord^s-day? He would
answer, Christianus sum, Intermittere non possum, I am a Christian, and I dare
do no other! Some Churches have had but poor Sabbaths, and such Sabbaths have
made but poor Churches. The Churches of God in Foreign Nations, have indulged
themselves in Loose Principles and Loose practices, about the Sabbath; and what
has come of (...) withered among them very miserably; and then Destruction has
followed thereupon; as They have broken G^ds Rest, so God has broken Theirs;
and ^stonishing plagues have made them very desolate. The Churches of God in
our own Nation, were once Defiled, with an Allowance for Sports on the Sabbath;
and what (...), but heavy speedy confusion upon the Invaders of this glorious
Day? Even some of themselves have made their considerate Reflections on it!
Know That our Churches will flourish, as our Sabbath^ do; and we shall not be
made Joyful in the House of Prayer, if we regard not the Sabbaths of the
Eternal God. Our Churches* yea, so will our Estates, and our Houses too It is
said in Isa. 58 13, 14. If thou call the Sabbath a Delight, and the Holy of the
Lord, (...) will cause thee to Ride upon the High places (...) the Earth. It
has been by some eminent and Judicious Observers noted; That their Success
usually is, as their Sabbath is; that by their carriage on the Sabbath, they
have bin able to make a conjecture at their Success ^n their whole Business all
the Ensuing Week. And a mean Tradesman, obliging himself to those Two Things;
First, To keep the Sabbath with a wonderful exactness; Secondly, To set apart a
Tenth of his Income for pious uses; has quickly come to Live upon his Rents.
Let us devote our Sabbaths to the Blessed God, with all our might; and believe
His Word in Isa. 56.2. Blessed is the man, who keeps my Sabbath from polluting
of it* But, woe, and woe ten thousand times unto us, if we do not so. It was a
speech to some, in Neh. 13.19. Ye bring fierce Wrath upon Israel, by profaning
the Sabbath. Man, The fierce wrath of God upon thy Person, and on thy Family,
and all thy Neighborhood, will thou pull down by this Abomination; but above
all, it will fetch down a fierce fiery wrath upon thy own unhappy Soul. It will
provoke the Almighty to Swear in his wrath, that thou shall never enter into
his Rest. The modern Jews have their Fable and Nonsense of a Sabbath in Hell;
but certainly they that would not have a Sabbath on Earth, shall have none in
Hell; no, they shall not Rest Day nor Night, but the Smoke with the Groans of
their Torments must ascend for ever and ever. We are plainly forewarned of it,
in Jer 17 27. If you will not hallow the Sabbath Day, then will I kindle a
Fire, that shall not be Quenched. The Day of the Lord will be a fiery Day to
them that shall Dishonor the Lord's Day.

OBSERVATION XIII.
The Church of God is Raised and lifted up toward Heaven, by the Baptism which
is used there. This is that which the Apostle here teaches us; as Water carried
up the Ark, so Baptism carries up the Church, toward the Heaven of the
Blessed. It is thus upon other Accounts; as now, the Water of Affliction, often
serves only to drown many ungodly Souls; they grow thereby more Angry at God,
more Fixed in sin; and as 'twas said of him, In the Time of their Distresses,
they Trespass yet more against the Lord* Thus at last, They perish in
Affliction. But this Water serves to Raise and Lift the serious Christian, up
to greater Degrees of Acquaintance with Heaven, and Communion with Him, whose
Voice is in the Rod. In like sort, The Water of Baptism, it Ruins many foolish
people, by Encouraging their Hopes of Salva^ion, while they Leave not the Ways
of Transgression before the Lord; they think, this Water will put out the Fire
that never shall be quenched; Whereas their unsuitable Hearts and Lives do but
turn it into the Water of Jealousy unto them. But by the Water a Good man is
Raised and Lifted up to such an Heavenly Fellowship with the Eternal One, that
one step more carrie^ him into Heaven it self. Hence in Romans ^^ ^, A Baptized
man, is called a Raised man.

APPLICATION.
Let this be the Happy Effect of our Holy Baptism. Are we Baptized? if we are
not* we are very criminal; and the Advice proper to us, is that Arise and be
baptized. But if we are, let our Baptism raise our Souls, with no common
elevations.

Let our Baptism elevate us to all heavenly Graces; and let us be very sensible
of the Obligatione which it la^es upon us; for it is said in Romans 6.2, 3. Shall
we live any longer in sin? so * many of us as were baptized. Let it raise our
Holiness; for it is said in Gal. 3.27. As many of you as have been baptized, have
put on Christ. Let it raise our Obedience; for it is said in Mat. 28.19, 20.
Baptize persons, teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I command you.

And let our Baptism elevate us to all heavenly Comforts too, and let us be
joyful at the Obsignations which it makes unto us. Look on it as, The mark of
the Lamb, and rejoice. It Is said in Romans 6.3, 4. As many of us as were baptized
are buried with Christ, that like as Christ was raised from the dead, so we
should walk in newness of life. Reckon it a sign of your Interest in, and Union
with the Lord Christ; and so let it raise us to a Triumph over Death and Hell
for ever. We may lay hold on Heaven it self, by the help of this Raising
Ordinance, if with ^t we give the complying and conforming Answer of a good
Conscience, to all the proposals of the Gospel. In the Gospel it is demanded,
Do thou renounce the World, the Flesh, and the Devil? and Do thou accept
the Lard Jesus, as the Lord-Redeemer of thy Soul? Now make such an Answer as a
good Conscience would give hereunto; uprightly say, Lord, I do, I will! Then
this Water will raise thee up into life eternal.

OBSERVATION XIV.
The great God will with a Fiery Flood one day take vengeance on a Wicked
World. It was thus when the ARK was made, a Watery Flood then swept a populous
World away: which unless we should rather admit the Learned Burnets Theory^ I
conceive was principally caused by the Earths changing of, and starting from
its Center; so that the unequal pressure of the Atmosphere caused the Ocean of
the Antipodes to send up vast inundations into the opposite H^m^spheres: Now
the Eternal has given us assurance that such a Flood shall never happen any
more. The Rainbow, which doubtless existed before the Flood, is now
consecrated by God as a Token of that Covenant; and it is indeed a very proper
Token, for the it appear in a cloud which argues a pluvious disposition of the
Air, yet the Sun must then also shine* which argues that there shall be no more
universal Showers. Hence a Rainbow is never to be beheld without an Hallelujah.

But yet, as terrible a Desolation is there still to come upon the World, by a
fiery Flood* celebrated by the Name of Diluvium Ignis, in the Writings of the
Ancients. The old Heathen themselves were not without Notice of this dismal
Event. Hence the Poets tell of Pyrrha (which Name carries Fire in it) the Wife
of their Deucalion; and the Philosophers not rarely speak of an (...), a
Conflagration with which the World shall be devoured. Josephus relate^ that
Adam himself left some predictions of it. But the Sacred Scripturess favor us
with fuller Accounts of this awful Thing. It Is a solemn Passage, in 2 Pet. 3.7.
The Heavens and Earth which are now, be reserved unto Fire against the day of
Judgment, and the perdition of ungodly men. Many curious Questions might indeed
be moved here about. It is one question, When this Conflagration is to be? To
this the Answer is, At the Day of Judgment: If any ask, whether it shall be at
the beginning, or the middle, or the ending of that Day? it is most like to be
before the ending of of it. Yea the final Destruction of Antichrist seems the
period at which it shall commence. It is also an other Question, How far this
Conflagration is to reach? To this the Answer is, I suppose it will reach no
further than this lower World: this lower Heaven, and all the Armies of Birds,
or of Devils in it; this lower Earth, and all the Works of Art or of Nature in
it, shall be concerned in this horrible Fiery Flood. Yet the World shall not be
Annihilated; it shall only be Refined and Purified, that it may be serviceable
unto some glorious ends, yet to be pursued upon it. But let our Enquiring of be
turned into preparing for this Day of the Lord, that shall burn lik^ ^n Oven.

APPLICATION.
There are two or three things now in cumbent on us.

First, Let our Thoughts be much set upon the Burnings of the World. Realize
the circumstances of the dreadful Day, when all these things shall be
dissolved. Think much of the Time, when our G^d shall come and a Fire shall
devour, before him, and it shall be very Tempestuous round about him. Think
much of the Time, when a Fire shall go before the Lord, that shall burn up his
Enemies round about, and lightnings will enlighten the Wo^ld, and the Earth
shall Tremble, and the Hills melt like Wax, at the Presence of the Lord. Think
much of the Time when the Lord shall come with Fire to render His Anger with
Fi^^ry, and His Rebukes with Flames of Fire. For we are told in Isa. 66.16. By
Fire will the Lord plead with all Flesh, and the slain of the Lord shall be
many. Let us blow up this direful Fire, in our daily Meditations on it^ O warm
your Hearts often, at this amazing Fire of the Lord.

Secondly, Let our Hearts be not set upon the Comforts of the world. The Day
will come, when an hideous Fire will sieze upon them all. Now let that Fire
cool our Love to all things here below. Our Lord said in Mat. 6.19. Lay not up
for your selves Treasures upon Earth, where Moth and Rust does corrupt. Even
so, promise not your selves Comforts upon Earth where the Fire shall carry all
away. One says well, The World shall one one Day be burned for a Witch. Let
not our Souls now be Bewitched with what shall one Day be Burned; and this the
rather, because as I am verily persuaded, this Burning is unspeakably nearer
than Mankind is well aware. I may say of it, It is Near, it is Near, and it
hastens greatly!

OBSERVATION. XV
There are but Few that shall be Saved. Says the Apostle here, In the Ark, Few,
That is, Eight Souls were saved. He that ponders the Longevity of the
Antediluvian Patriarchs, will not wonder at them, who affirm it probable. That
more people perished in the Flood, than are now alive in the world. For let us
make a Computation with as much Disadvantage to our own Assertion, as can
Reasonably be desired. We Will abate two or three of the first Centuries, by which
time the world might be supplied with people not a few; and we will suppose a man
to have Children at sixty, and in the Next Forty years, to have Twenty
Children. Now single out the shortest Liver of any mentioned (except Enoch)
before the Flood; and from that one Stock of seven hundred years, multiplying
still by Twenty, we shall find the product to be more than One Thousand, Three
Hundred, and Forty seven Millions; thus that One Family would long before the
Flood have afforded, it may be as many people as are now Living on the Earth.
Moreover, if we consider that within a very few Centuries of years after the
Flood, Histories tell us of one Army, in which were, Thirteen Hundred Thousand
Foot, Five Hundred Thousand Horse, One Hundred Thousand Chariots, and as many
Camels; and this Army Encountered by a greater Force; it may facilitate our
Belief of the wonderful populosity which might be before. But what became of
all that Mighty People? Truly, all were Drowned but Eight Souls! And though it
be not for us to Censure too far upon the Eternal Condition of that miserable
people: it being possible that more* than we know of might be Happy for ever,
notwithstanding their Drowning here; yet the Scripture speaks very sadly about
the Generality of them, whom the Waters did exterminate. We read in Job 22.15,
16, 17. That they were wicked men. Compare Mat* 24.38, 39. And we are told in 1
Pet. 3:19, 20. Their Spirits are now in Prison. The Jews themselves therefore
pass that Sentence on them, That they were punished with the ^calding Waters of
Gehinnom. Even so, They that shall be Saved, How many are they? They are as we
are informed in Luke 12.32. A Little, Little Flock! Divide all the World at
this Day into Thirty One parts, Nineteen are Idolaters, Seven are Mahometans,
and scarce Five are so much as called Christians. But of them that are called
Christians, how few have that Holiness, without which no man shall see the
Lord? how few have true Faith? Yet he that Believes no^ shall be Damned. It is
indeed a principle in the Turkish Alcoran, That Let a man's Religion be what it
will, he shall be saved, if he Conscienciously Live up to the Rules of it. And
they are Mahometans rather than Christians, who shall defend a principle so
derogatory to the virtue of the Gospel. The Articles of the Church of England,
very justly tell us, They are to be held Accursed, who presume (...) say, That
every man shall be saved by the Law or Sest which he professes; so that he be
Diligent to frame his Life according to that Law, and Light of Nature. For Holy
Scripture does set out unto us, only the Name of Jesus Christ, whereby men must
be Saved. But alas, how few are there that savingly Believe, Profess, Obey,
that Lord of Glory! This Gate of Life has that Motto on it in Mat. 7.14. Few
th^re be that find it.

APPLICATION.
Let us all make the Use which our Savi^ur made, of this astonishing Truth, in
Luke ^3 24. Strive to enter in at the strait Gate. Be ^ery anxious, I beseech
you, about your own ^alvation. When it was of old said, That (...) among twelve
should be a child of Perdition, ^hey all became inquisitive, Lord is it I?
Be^old, you are told now, That more than ^welve to one shall be the Children of
Perdition: O how should this make us to be solicitous, ^est We be some of them!
Remember, that (...) is a no less common than dreadful thing, (...) be deceived
in this matter. We are admonished in Prove. 12.14. There is a way that seems
right to a man, but the end thereof are the ways of Death. The biggest part of
them that go down to the Sulphurous Lakes of Hell make that one of their first
Shrieks at their coming there, We little thought of this!

O let every one of Us get into the ARK, and be extremely careful that we be
not among those who are Deceivers of their own S^uls. May the God of all Grace,
awaken us from our Lethargic Security, and to an extraordinary Sedulity, in
matters* of ou^ Eternal Salvation; may He help is to give all diligence in
making our Calling and Election sure; and to work out our own Salvation with
Fear and Trembling.

At the North Meeting House in Boston, Nov. 17. 1689. Afternoon.
FINIS.

