Sound Repentance the Right way to escape deserved Ruin; OR A Solid and
awakening DISCOURSE,

Exhorting the People of God to comply with his Counsel, by a hearty practical
turning from Sin to himself and his Service thereby to prevent their being made
desolate by his departing from them.

As it was delivered in a SERMON Preached at Hartford on Conecticut in
New England, May 14th: 1685. Being the day of ELECTION there.

By Mr. Samuel Wakeman, Pastor of the Church of Christ in Fairfield.

Ezekiel. 18. 3, 31. Repent and turn from all your Transgressions, so iniquity
shall not be your Ruin: Cast away from you all your Transgressions, whereby ye
have transgressed, and make you a new heart, and a new spirit; for why will ye
die, O house of Israel. Rev. 2. 5. Remember therefore from whence thou art
fallen, and repent, and do the first work, or else I will come unto thee
quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick out of its place, except thou Repent.
Zach. 1. 2. Thus says the Lord of Host, Turn you unto me, says the Lord of
Host, and I will turn unto you, says the Lord of Host. BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND,
Printed by Samuel Green, Anno Dom. 1685.

Christian Reader,
T He ensuing Discourse shows the great danger of a Peoples departing from God
by Sin; it will cause God to depart from them, as here we find threatened. The
way to escape this Judgment, is to be instructed Be thou instructed, lest. This
word of commination was directed and spoken first to Jerusalem, but reac^eth to
us now in N. E. who stand in like circumstances before the Lord, as Jerusalem
then did. A parallel People with them, both in respect of privilege and
provocation, Profession, and Prevarication. They were highly favored of God,
so have we been; they deeply revolted from God, so have we done. That faithful
City became an Harlot; and we in this Land are greatly degenerate. New England
Israel was once Holiness unto the Lord: What are we now? Whence it follows,
that (as persons concerned) what was spoken to them, we must take to our
selves. If the Lord by the Prophet thus instruct and threaten Jerusalem, he
does the same to us. What then is our duty? O be instructed, reformed, refined,
that we may yet be spared, and Gods presence among us continued. O for that
Reformation the Lord has so long looked for, has so often been attempted and
so much talked of, but not yet at^a^ned! What is it more than mere talk? where
is the thing? Is not all we have done but as the morning cloud and early dew
that goes away, passes soon out of sight and vanishes into nothing? O then
be instructed see and consider the great and many Sins so rife and common among
us: sigh, mourn, and lament over them, our own and others sins, by all which
our God is dishonored; and then every one to fall to our proper work of
repenting, returning, reforming with all spend and seriousness; and that the
Judgment threatened may not be executed upon us by Gods departing from us: Let
us labor with all our might, and by all means to keep God with us, to hold him
and not let him go; (...) if we let God go, we are not our own friends, nor
will it appear that we counted God our best friend, for such we will hug and
hold fast, and if possibly we can, will keep them with us: How loath were they
to part with their beloved Paul* O blessed Paul, they desire much his company
and presence; but what is the presence of Paul, though an Apostle, to the
presence of God himself with his People? And would we then keep God among us?
If so,

1. Put a due price upon Divine Presence, as Moses did, Exodus 33. 2, 3, 15. The
presence of an Angel will not satisfy him: If God himself will not go with his
People, what can an Angel do for them?

2. Plead hard for the continuance of Gods presence with us, as Moses there,
and so the Prophet Jer. 14. 8, 9. Let us show how we value, and esteem of our
God, even above all creature comforts in Heaven or Earth, Psalm. 53. 25. Say,
Lord, What are all these? They may go their way so thou will stay with us, we
can do well enough without them, but not without thee.

3. Put away that which would drive God from us, as they did, and retained his
presence, Judge. 10. 10. 15. and compassion also: true Repentance, and our
returning to God, is the best plea we can make for Gods returning unto us, and
continuing with us.

Consider what may encourage, and what should quicken us to labor to keep God
with us. 1. To encourage us, the thing is possible, God may be prevailed with
if due means be used. The Judgment threatened is not yet executed, nor has the
Lord cast us out of his presence as yet, 2 King. 13 23. yet in the midst of us,
Jer. 14. 9.

2. God is pleased to speak before he smite; yea, to speak and warn us, that he
may not smite us; but being penitent and reformed we may be spared, 3. God is
inclined to Mercy, willing to be reconciled to sinners, and easily entreated by
them, when they sincerely turn unto him. The Son came, the Father ran, Luke 15.
20. Again, 4. This Commination is under condition ( not absolute) that if we
repent God will repent; if we return God will return, as the Promise runs,
Zech. 1. 3. This should encourage, 2. What should quicken us? Consider, As 1.
If we do not repent, and do not what we do in good earnest, to do to purpose,
we shall find God in good earnest in doing as he has thought and threatened
against us, Zech. 8. 14. And 2. Consider what it is (...) God to depart from
us. When God goes, all goes, he being our All. 1. All God goes, his hearing
Ear* his pitying Eye* his shining Face and Countenance, his helping Hand, his
loving Heart, tender Affection, yerning Bowels, his glorious Attributes of
power, mercy, goodness, which were all for us are now gone from us. When Gods
Soul, which is himself, whole God or God thus wholly departs from a People. 2.
All good goes, for if God leave us* what good can be leave with us? Does not
his goodness influence all our good things, and make them such unto us? What
were Health, Wealth, Friends, all the World to us, if God be not with us? Yea,
what were Heaven it self if God were not there? 3. When God goes all evil
comes, as Deuteronomy: 31. 16. 18. And no other can be expected indeed, but when the
Sun ^ets* dark night will ensue. Take away the light and nothing but darkness
remains. The absence of all good (which is in God only) necessitates succeeding
evil, and is an inlet unto it. 4. Whatever evils befall us when God is
departed from us, will be turned upon us as the fruit of our own ways: and
what we have procured to our selves, Prove. 1. 31. Jer. 2. 17. and so they laid
the pleasant land desolate, Zech. 3. 14. A great aggravation of any affliction
when self-sought, or brought upon our selves by our own default, as Joab tells
David 2 Samuel 19. 7. If by his so carrying himself, he drew upon himself so
great a mischief and misery, as to cause his Associates, Soldiers and helpers
to withdraw from him: It will be worse unto thee, says he, than all the evils
that ever be^el thee from thy youth until now, to be left alone that night
destitute of a Guard about him, when danger surrounded him, and this through
his own default, would make it a dark and a dismal night indeed unto David: How
much more, when by our sinful folly we provoke God to depart from us i^ What
height of folly is this, and what depth of misery and distress does it bring
poor sinners into? But manum detabula; I may no longer detain thee (gentle
Reader) thus standing at the door, but send thee ^^to the house to partake of
the good things there prepared; that wholesome and good Word of the Lord there
opened. I commend it to thee as good in it self, and good at this time, a
seasonable word, an awakening Word, a soul-affecting Word, a good help among
many other of like sort, to make thee and others serious, which was and is the
design of this Sermon. The Reverend and Pious Author having the sense of what
he spoke upon his own heart, was willing also to affect the hearts of others,
and therefore (as you see) he used not only acceptable, but operative words,
even words like goads and nails; hearts piercing expressions, that they that
hear may feel also. But what will all avail, if the Lord set not in with it?
Let our eyes be therefore unto him. And now the Lord bless, let the blessing of
Heaven be upon this endeavor, and let One shepherd, the Lord Jesus Christ, by
the hand of his Holy Spirit, so fasten these awful truths upon all our hearts,
that the powerful effects of the same, may be seen in our reformed lives. Amen.
So prays

Thy Servant in Christ J. Bishop.

At the ELECTION, May 14. 1685.
Jer. 6 8. Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my Soul depart from thee, lest
I make thee desolate, a land not inhabited.
Whosoever shall view over and attentively consider the whole trace and series of
Gods dealing with, and dispensations toward his Covenant People (however as to
them they have sometimes issued very dreadfully) will find them giving in clear
and abundant testimony to the Truth of that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 145. 8. The
Lord is Gracious, and full of compassion, slow to anger, and of great mercy.
Among many other passages in the sacred story to this purpose (purposely kept
upon the File for the use of the Church in all Ages, and for ours upon whom the
ends of the world are come) (he whose compassions have been ever of old, using
the same tenor of tender dispensations toward his People now as then) the Text
now read, as also what we find in the foregoing Chapters, make this very
evident, and apparent. You may see in the first Chapter Gods calling,
instructing, and encouraging the Prophet, as to his Office and Work, or as to
his Office-work, he being one of those Messengers of whom you have mention
made, 2 Chronicles. 36. 15. That the Lord God of their Fathers sent unto them,
rising up betimes, and sending, because he had compassion on his People, and on
his dwelling Place. You may see in the second Chapter Gods earnest and
affectionate expostulation with his People by him, as to his ancient love and
kindness to them, and their notwithstanding causeless Revolt and Apostasy from
him: Go cry in the ears of Jerusalem, etc. Verse. 2. etc. God Rings such a peal
in Jerusalems ears by the Prophet throughout the Chapter upon this account, as
one would have thought, should have reached, and pierced, should have thirl'd
and thawed their very hearts; you may see in the third Chapter, God inviting
and persuading them to Repent and turn to him with Promises of gracious
acceptance, verse. 1. 12. Also pleading with them his Covenant Relation, and
merciful propention toward them, verse. 14. etc. You may see in the 4. Chapter,
God adding further to his former Promises, Promises to Promises, verse. 1, 2.
and threatenings to his Promises, as in the sequel of that Chapter, if by any
means, fair or foul he might induce or necessitate, draw or drive them to
Repentance: You may yet see in the fifth Chapter, Gods lothness to proceed
against them to destroy them; his exceeding readiness, his desirousness of
pardon and spare them: Run ye to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem* and
see now, and know, and seek in the broad places thereof if ye can find a man,
if there be any, that executes Judgment, that seeks the truth, and I ^ill
pardon it, verse. 1. God speaks as one agrieved to punish them, as one ready to
pardon them upon low terms; and earnestly looking about if happily he might find
something why he might do it: In this 6. Chapter, while yet there is any hope
we have God still pursuing the matter with them, laying close siege unto them,
putting home his threatenings, lowdly alarming them with his Judgments, plainly
warning them of the worst that was to be expected, and unavoidably coming upon
them, if not prevented solemnly, and earnestly admonishing them to bethink
themselves, be advised that it might not come to that. This is in general the
sense and intendment of the Text and Context, but to take a little more
particularly view of it we have here:

1. In the beginning of this Chapter an exceeding lively, sensible, starting
and awakening representation made of the siege and sack of Jerusalem, the
miserable destruction by the Babylonians, impending them, O ye Children of
Benjamin gather your selves to flee out of the midst of Jerusalem; he bids them
flee out of Jerusalem to escape the danger, or rather the sense of it seems to
be that they should gather themselves to go out of the City to make good their
fronteers, and stand upon their defense against the enemy; as it is said of the
Moabites, that when they heard the Kings were come up to fight against them,
they gathered all that were able to put on Armor and stood in their borders, 2
King. 3. 21. Blow the Trumpet in Tekoa, that is give the alarm, which as now
commonly by the beating of the Drum, was then done by the blowing of the
Trumpet, Ezekiel. 7. 14. And set up a sign of fire in Beth-haccorem, as is wont to
be done at this day to give notice of any sudden invasion, for evil appears
out of the north and great destruction. Under all these terms, rallying of Men,
sounding of Trumpets, firing of Beacons, Military usages, in such cases the
Prophet notably sets forth what a dreadful alarm the Nothern Army should give
them. The state of Jerusalem thus invaded, is expressed, verse. 2. I have
likened the daughter of Sion to a comely and delicate* Woman; as in respect of
Gods benign and gentle dealing with her, so in respect of her abuse of Divine
goodness, and indulgence to Pride, Luxury, Wantonness, etc. The Shepherds with
their Flocks shall come unto her, they shall pitch their tents against her,,
round about they shall seed every one in his place; the words either plainly
show Jerusalems utter destruction, she should be so destroyed, that sheep
should seed in her, jam seges est ubi Troia fuit, or under the similitude of
the Shepherds, and their Flocks pitching their tents against her, round about
the Caldeans with their Armies, the Captains with their Companies which should
begirt them round, and besiege and hem them in on every side is set forth and
expressed: It follows, prepare War against her, arise and let us go up at
noon; Woe unto us for the day goes away, for the shadows of the evening are
stretched out, arise and let us go up by night, and let us destroy her Palaces,
wherein is to the life described the zeal and spirit of the enemy to the work
their restless industry at it day and night, and their very impatiency with
themselves that they had not effected it; all tending to set forth the woeful
destruction that their enemies should work them.

But how does the Prophet thus speak, Gather, Rally, blow the Trumpet, fire the
Beacon, and. Was there any enemy in sight? Was the Babylonian Army now in their
borders* No, they probably enjoyed sundry years patience after this, and before
the destruction here spoken of came upon them; but the Prophet thus speaks all
along in the present tense, speaks as if the Caldeans were upon them, makes
such a presentation of things as if present, and even now in their eyes and
ears, that a dead, dull, secure, senseless people might be quickened and
awakened indeed. God would and we should make evil present in the threatening
that we may put away and avoid it; Noah being warned of God of things not seen
as yet, moved with fear prepared an Ark.

2. In what follows in the 6. and 7. verses, he lays forth the causes of this
sore impending destruction that he had described; it seemed unreasonable to
Festus to send a Prisoner and not withal to signify the Crimes laid against
him, Act. 25. ult. As God wants not, so he is not wanting to give (the
Scripture is full of it) the reason of all the evils that he threatens to do,
or does against any; so here (according to his usual manner elsewhere) he gives
the reason of that great destruction brought so near them in the threatening of
the former verses, viz. Jerusalems abominable and boundless wickedness. Thus
has the Lord of Hosts said, hew down trees and cast amount against Jerusalem,
this is the City to be visited, she is wholly oppression in the midst of her.
This is the City to be visited, not a City, but the City above all other
Cities, deserving and designed to be visited, but how visited? not in a way of
favor, and care, and kindness, as sometimes that term is intending not by
Prophets, and the tenders of grace and mercy, Jerusalem had been thus visited,
but she had not known the day of her visitation, but in wrath and judgment and
by a destroying enemy; but why thus visited? she is wholly oppression, in the
midst of her they are called not oppressing but oppression, to show how
superlatively oppressive they were, and not only oppression, but wholly
oppression, implying the general infection, the universal prevailing of this
sin, it is added in the in the midst of her; not in her suburbs, out-skirts some
odd and unobserved corners, was it thus; but it sought no covert, it was
visible, evident, and eminent in her; it follows, as a fountain casts out her
waters, so she casts out her wickedness; a Fountain casts out her waters
naturally, freely, incessantly, constantly, forcibly and abundantly; and thus
did Jerusalem sin as those accustomed, habituated, naturalized to sin, as those
that could not cease from (...), as those that knew no restraint nor bounds or
end of sinning; as is further set forth in the following words, violence and
spoil is heard in her before me. Continually is grief and wounds, the cry of
Jerusalem went up like that of Sodom; poor Jerusalem, how is the faithful City
become an harlot, it was full of Judgment, Righteousness lodged in it, but
now, murderers,

3. In the Text (which makes the third and last part of the Context) (having
thus realized to them that sore and certain ruin that was inevitably coming
upon them, if not prevented, as also laid before them, those great and
wrath-provoking-sins, the causes of so great destruction) he comes earnestly
and affectionately to call upon them, to be persuaded, cautioned and advised
for the preventing of it: Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my soul depart
from thee, lest I make thee desolate, a land not inhabited. This application
made to them in the Text, is the use of the whole Context, the drift and scope,
and design and tendency, and issue of all, is O that Jerusalem would be
instructed, lest her God leave, and leaving lay her desolate. To give you in
the sense and importance of the words we have in them: Two things to be
considered, 1. Who is here spoken to, 2. What is spoken.

1. Who is here spoken to, and that is Jerusalem; Jerusalem to say nothing of
its situation and outward strength and greatness) was the City of God, the City
of the great King* the Holy City, the perfection of beauty, Isreal's Glory, and
the joy of the whole Earth, loved of God in a special manner, and chosen to set
his Name there: There was his Presence, his Worship, his Ordinances, his
Oracles, his Prophets; there God shiped and was known in her Palaces. At the
first the Lord chose Israel from all the Nations of the World to be his People;
and after, when Israel ^ell and made defection from God he reserved Judah to be
the upholder of his true Religion; and in Judah chose Jerusalem as the place of
his Worship; so that as Israel was Gods peculiar People of all the World, so
Judah was the best part of Israel, and Jerusalem the chief place of Judah:
Jerusalem then was Gods special^ pecuculiar People under that notion as
appropriate to God, as ne^r to God as near might he. This Jerusalem God here
speaks to. And what says he to them? That Is the

2. Thing to be considered, be thou instructed, etc. The words are Hortatory
and Monitory, and Minatory; the Text in the run of it is mixed and made up of
these, it is an Exhortation, or if you will an Admonition rather, and that
under the severest commination. Note in it three things, 1. The Exhortation, or
Admonition it self, 2. The manner of expressing it, and putting it home to the
Persons concerned, 3. The Motives enforcing. 1. The Exhortation and admonition
it self, the subject matter of it, be instructed [it] The Word signifies to be
corrected, to to be instructed, to be amended in, and by being corrected, to be
instructed is to know, and yet more than barely, merely to know, to know (as
the use of the term in Scripture language commonly signifies) so as to be
affected and acted accordingly, to know not speculatively, notionally only,
with a cold, dry, barren, unpractical knowledge, but to know with a
conscientious feeling heart-affecting, operative knowledge to be instructed, is
so to know and understand, take in and lay to (...) the reason of things, as to
be convinced, affected, cautioned, advised, counseled, persuaded, and in every
respect accordingly concerned, and suitably wrought upon by it. We may fully
take it up in these three things.

1. It implies conviction, which is a right, true apprehension of things, as
indeed they are; a real understanding; how matters stand with us, or between
God and us, to know things with application to our selves, or for our selve s;
as the phrase is, Job 5. ult. which is, indeed, our wisdom, therefore it is
called the instruction of Wisdom, Prove. 15. 33. And we are called upon to hear
instruction, and be wise, Prove. 8. 33.

2. It infers Contrition, in case all is not well with us, or seeing our selves
(as it is said of Israel, Exodus 5. 19.) to be in evil case, Conviction works,
Contrition and Repentance; a true sight of things inferrs and draws after it a
due sense of things; hence that of Ephraim, after I was instructed I smote upon
my thigh, Jer. 31. 19.

3. It includes and takes in Conversion, Conviction, working Contrition,
Repentance works by (...) in the (...) of it unto Conversion, in respect of
which (...) of instruction (i. e. the Conviction and Contrition it works
rending to and ending in Conversion) are said to be the way of Life, Prove. 6.
23. This is to be instructed, which is the matter of the Exhortation.

2. The manner of expressing it; Thou, O Jerusalem, be thou instructed; the
terms are very Pathetical and full of affection: it is a passionate, quick,
powerful and very moving mode of expression, putting home what is spoken to the
Persons concerned; Be thou instructed, there is an emphasis upon thy s [Thou]
thou that art in a special manner appropriated to God, thou that art eminently
privileged above others, thou whom I have chosen, loved, set my heart, laid
out my care and kindness upon, etc. Be (...) instructed, O Jerusalem: Depth of
sorrow, and height of (...), when our affections and passions are up, bring us
in with our [(...)] our interjections and exclamations, as here, O Jerusalem,
which carries in it great affection, and earnestness of expression.

3. The Motives enforcing it; Lest my soul depart from thee, lest I make thee
desolate, a land not inhabited The Words hold forth (...) first and second, or
a double dreadful commination, in case the admonition given were not taken,
were not attended to, lest my Soul depart from thee: The Soul of God is God
himself, Job 23. 13. What the Soul desires, even that he does, i. e. What
himself desires. So* Judge. 10. 16. His Soul was grieved for the miseries of
Israel, i. e. He was grieved, so that to say, lest my Soul depart from thee, is
as much as to say, lest I depart from thee; and yet it is more than so to say,
for though that be the meaning of it* yet this manner of speaking carries more
in it; God so speaks as to affect them with a due apprehension of his deep
concernment in what he so speaks, as a matter that his Soul, his Spirit was
much in, when the soul is mentioned, a thing said to be done with the Soul, it
implies our spirits to be much in it, as Isa 26. 9. With my Soul have I desired
thee in the night, and with my Spirit within me will I seek thee early. So also
God thus speaks to set forth and signify to (...) the with (...) of his love
and affection from them, lest (...) thee, or as the Original, according to your
Marginal reading, ^e loosed or disjoynted from thee, that is, lest I withdraw
my love from thee, lest my mind be alienated; so it is rendered, Ezekiel. 23. 18.
My mind was alienated from her, my mind or soul was loosed or disjoynted from
her; the expression is the same with this of the Text cleaving or knitting of
Soul to or with any is expressive of love and affection: It is said of Shechem,
his Soul clave unto Dinah the Daughter of Jacob, and he loved the Damsel, Genesis
34. 3. So of Jonathan, that his soul was knit with the soul of David, and he
loved him as his own-soul, 1 Samuel 18. 1. Now I say, as cleaving and knitting of
Soul* to and with any, imports that we entirely and inwardly love and affect
them, so for the soul to depart from any, be loosed or disjoynted from then
implies disaffection, and an altogether alienation and estrang^^ of mind from
them, l^st my Soul depart from thee; then is, much as to say, lest I utterly
leave thee, lest I wholly withdra^ my affections, and totally and finaly take
off my heart from thee.

And as is further threatened, lest I make thee desolate, a land not inhabited.
The words are plain, and as plainly signify not those gentler and corrective,
but those consumptive, ruinating, destroying, desolating, Judgments, that God
taking off his heart from them, would bring upon them many afflictions; much of
correction may possibly consist with the love and favor of God toward a
People, or however, certain it is, that a People may severely smart under the
effects of his displeasure, while yet his heart may be toward them, at least
not wholly taken off from them; but when once it comes to this, that Gods Soul
departs from a People, he puts himself in to ways of destruction toward them;
when once his heart is taken off from them, his destroying hand is turned-upon
them: He first casts off, and then cuts off a People; casts them first out of
his heart, and then out of his sight.

It remains only to tell you that the [ (...)] here prefixed, Lest my Soul
depart from thee, lest I make thee desolate: This twofold lest has a twofold
look with it, as to either and both parts of the threatening; it looks both
ways. 1. Upon the prevention of it, that by* their being instructed what is
here threatened, might be obviated and prevented. 2. Upon the unavoidableness of
it, if they be not instructed, if they hearken not to counsel, no other is to
be hoped or expected but that it will certainly come upon them. This manner of
speaking, according to the common usage of it, see, Exodus 19. 22. Job 42. 8.
implies as on the one hand a possibility of escaping what is so threatened, so
be it that due use of means be attended to; so on the other hand, the
impossibility of avoiding it in case of neglect: it holds forth not a
probability, a danger only, but a certainty, that it means for prevention be
not attended^, (...) the evil threatened will be inflicted, if Jerusalem be not
instructed, Gods Soul will depart from her, etc. From the words* thus opened,
let me commend to you this great, considerable and concerning point of
Doctrine, so, in it self, tho it fall (the more the pity) to so inconsiderable
and ^eeble a hand to manage and improve it; namely.

DOCT. God so threatens to leave and lay waste, to take off his heart from, and
turn his destroying hand upon his own People, as that it may, and that it may
be prevented; yet so that if it be not, it will come to that: It concerns them
therefore to be instructed, to be advised, to hearken to counsel, to bethink
themselves, to be convinced, affected, repent, amend, convert and turn to God,
lest they bring it to that woeful pass. We have three things in the Doctrine
(and the Text is very full of them all) 1. That God so threatens to leave and
lay waste, to take off his heart from, and turn his destroying hand upon his
own People, as that it may, and that it may be prevented. 2. Yet God so
threatens it, that if it be not prevented, it will come to that, he will
certainly leave and lay them waste; take off his heart from them, and turn his
destroying hand upon them. 3. It concerns them therefore, or these things
considered* things thus standing, to be instructed, to be advised, to hearken
to counsel, to bethink themselves, to be convinced, affected, repent, amend,
convert and turn to God, lest they bring it to that woeful pass.

1. God so threatens to leave and lay waste* to take off his heart from and
turn his destroying hand upon his own People: i. e. His visible Covenant
People, as that it may, and that it may be prevented. The manner of God in his
threatenings, is to leave room for remedy; his end being that (if it may be) the
threatened evil may be prevented: God does not take a silent leave of his People
( Jacob like from Laban) upon displeasure, steal away from them and say
nothing, get him out of hearing before they hear any thing of it: He does not
break away from them suddenly and remedylesly, nor yet break in upon them
suddenly, surprise them (tho a sinful People) fall foul upon them in his wrath,
cast them off, cut them off; no this is not the manner of God, whose delight is
in mercy. But God threatens to leave his People, so that it may, and that it
may be prevented: God never leaves his People but he first threatens, warnes,
advises, admonishes them; but he first bespeaks them as his People here; O be
instructed: Our Bible so abounds with this, that it were endless and to men
acquainted with Scripture, it is needless to give particular instances, God long
and often threatened, and warned Israel and Judah of old, before he alienated
his heart from them; called them Loammi, and gave them a Bill of Divorce, nor
yet had Ephesus, and those other New Testament Churches (tho now God makes
quicker work than then) their Candlestick's removed, but after solemn and
signal warning, for the prevention of it. And the reasons of it are,

Reas. 1. From Gods lothness to leave his People, his own, his Covenant People;
the tender and indeared affection that he bears unto a People taken near unto
himself; Gods affections are stronger, and he stands in closer relation to his
Covenant People, than that he easily cast off and forsake them: The Lord will
not forsake his P eople, 1 Samuel 12. 22. And in very deed, their being his
People is founded upon such a bottom, even that of his free Grace, that is not
easily slighted, as the reason there added shows; the Lord will not forsake his
People, Because it has pleased the Lord to make you his People. God having
made any his People, and that of mere good pleasure, is not forward to cast off
and forsake them: God not willingly afflicts, Lam. 3. 33. but much more loathly
rejects his Vovenant People, as is notably set forth, Hos. 11. 8. How shall I
give thee up Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee Israel? How shall I make thee as
Adma, and set thee as Zeboim? My heart is turned within me, my repentings are
kindled together. The great God who here (as commonly in Scripture) speaks of
himself after the manner of men, to our understanding; gives us to understand
in this strange, passionate and Rhetorical language; how hardly he brings his
heart to it, to give up as to any more room in his affection, to deliver over
unto destruction his own People: God (as I may say*) is at a set when it comes
to this, it casts him into a deep deliberation and a sorely exercising conflict
in his own thoughts about it; how does he turn it with himself, and deeply, and
inwardly, revolving the matter, question with himself about it? What give up
Ephraim, deliver Israel, make Ephraim, make Israel as Adma and Zeboim? how can
I do it? what deal thus by thee Ephraim, by thee Israel, by thee discard,
destroy my own People as I have done? Sodom* how can I find in my heart to do
it? how does God roll this bitter pill in his mouth (with holy reverence be it
spoken) and as unable to swallow it, at last spit it out? I will not execute
the fierceness of mine anger, I will not return to destroy Ephraim; so
exceeding loath is God to give up, to give over his People to destruction and
therefore lays his threatening of it* so, as to leave room for remedy.

Reas. 2. That he might hereby try the love and affection of his People,
whether they will let him go: God intimates to a People his leaving of them,
threatens with it before he does, that he may feel how their pulse beats
toward him, what affections they have for him; how their love will strive and
work upon such an occasion before God quite leaves a People, wholly takes off
his heart from them; he is willing to sound theirs whether they have any
affections left for him. You may read, Exodus 33. (the People having committed
that great sin in making them Gods of gold) God tells them he will leave them,
he will go no more in the midst of them; and to make them the more sensible of
it, Moses takes the Tabernacle (the visible sign and token of Gods presence)
and pitches it without the camp afar off; and now God looks and listens what
they say to it, how they take it that he may accordingly deal with them: When
God is about to leave his People because they provoke and set light by him, he
is yet willing to try them to the utmost whether they will so part with him;
whether they will indeed let him go, or whether they will stir up themselves to
take hold of him. You may see in, Ezekiel. 9. 10, 11. Chapters, God so signalizing
^his departure from his People in those several, gradual, visible, and
observable removes of his Glory there mentioned, as if he had said, let them
see me going, that I may see if they have any love or regard for me; God stands
at every step, looks back, listens if there were any that minded or regarded.

Reas. 3. That they might have opportunity of striving to keep God with them,
and be quickened and stirred up to the improvement of it; that they might, as
the Prophet speaks, Isa. 55. 6. Seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon
him while he is near. God makes offer to go from his People, threatens to be
gone, speaks of leaving them that they may be effectually awakened to enquire
what is the matter, to reform what is amiss, to repent of and part with those
sins that are the causes of Gods threatened departure from them; by such
intimations also, lest I leave you, lest my Soul depart from you: God would
stir up his People, not to let him go, shake them up from their loose sitting
to him, and quicken them to lay faster hold on him.

Reas. 4. and last; That when God has left a People, and leaving them left
them to destrection, they may be lost inexcusable; that when God is gone he
has inded cast off a People, his Soul is departed from them, his heart and
hand turned against them (all means of precaution, prevention improved with
them proving unavailable) they may not have to complain but of themselves, and
their own wilful and remedyless self-destroying folly. God goes not from a
People but with observation, and after (...) and evident premonitions and
warnings, they shall not have (...) say, alas, how has God left u s? It was
sudden, unexpected, unthought of, else what would we not have done to prevent
it: But God will have to say, not only you gave me cause to go by your sins,
but (as it were) leave to go by your silence, your senselessness; you know, and
heard, and saw me going, and yet were no more affected, stirred, no more then
as those* wholly unconcerned about it, or well enough contented with it.

2. Yet God so threatens it that if it be not prevented, it will come to that,
he will certainly leave and lay them waste, take off his heart from them, and
turn his destroying hand upon them. If Jerusalem, Gods own People will not be
instructed, let God threaten, warn, call upon, admonish, counsel them, nothing
takes with them* they lay nothing to heart, apply themselves to no means of
prevention but remain unadmonishable, incorigible irreclaimable under all: God
will leave and give over such a People, though his own People: See, Jer. 32.
31, 32, 33. verses. God tells them he will remove them from before his Face,
because of all the evil which they did, and because though he taught them
rising up early, and teaching them, yet they hearkened not to receive
instruction, so 2 Chronicles 36. 14. etc. God had compassion on his People, and on
his dwelling Place: And hence hare with them, forbear them, continued with much
patience in the use of abundance of means to wait upon them, but they continued
to sin, and slighted all until the wrath of the Lord arose against his People,
till there was no remedy. God warns in mercy, and may continue to warn in much
mercy; but to sin, to continue to sin against warning, will at last bring wrath
without remedy: And the Reasons of it are:

Reas. 1. Because such is the nature of sin, such its contrariety unto God so
loathsome it is in his sight, that impenitently, irreclaimably persisted in, it
will work any People, even his own People out of his heart. God hates, abhorrs,
abominates sin as the Scripture abundantly witnesses; It is that abominable
thing that he hates, Jer. 44. 4. Sin finds so little favor in Gods heart, that
he cannot abide the sinner in his sight; he so hates the work that he hates the
worker of iniquity: The foolish shall not stand in thy sight, thou hate the
workers of iniquity, Psalm. 5. 5. Not only for sin did the Lord eject, abhor
these heathen nations whom he cast out before his People, for they committed
all these things, and therefore I abhorred them, Levit. 20. 23. But even his
own Israel they were defiled with their own works, and went a whoring with
their own inventions; therefore was the wrath of the Lord kindled against his
People, insomuch that he abhorred his own inheritance, and gave them into the
hand of the heathen, etc. Psalm. 106. 39, 40, 41. And what a fearful word is
that from God concerning his own People, the People of his choice and love,
Amos 6 8. The Lord has sworn by himself, says the Lord God of Hosts, I abhor
the excellency of Jacob, and hate his Palaces, therefore will I deliver up the
City and all that is therein: So much was the heart of God alienated from them,
so deeply was he disaffected to them by their sinful and unworthy deportments,
of which you have mention made in the foregoing Context. God loved Israel, Hos:
11. 1. Yea, but sin (that makebate sin that separateth chief friends) was of
power to expel them both, his heart and house for the wickedness of their
doings, I will drive them out of my house, I will love them no more, Hos. 9.
15. Never is God so wedded unto any People but they may sin so as utterly to
work themselves out of his affections.

Reas. 2. Because it is not for any worthiness in them more than in any other
People that God is taking them to be his People, and setting his love upon
them, as God tells Israel, Deuteronomy. 7. 7, 8. if they therefore forfeit
distinguishing grace and mercy by their unworthiness, they neither were, nor
are better than others, nor is there any reason why God should* continue them
to be his People, continue his love and affection to them; regard-them more, or
make any other or better account of them than of any other People: See, Amos 6.
1, 2.

Reas. 3 Because Gods free Promise and Covenant is conditional, if they will
be his People he will be their God, if they will own him he will own them* if
they will continue with him he will continue with them, but if they will none
of him, he will none of them; if they cast off him he will cast off them, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. The Lord is with you while ye be with him, and if ye seek him he
will be found of you, but if ye forsake him he will forsake you. God therefore
gives this as the reason of his deserting them, their deserting him, 2 Chronicles.
24. 20. Because ye have forsaken the Lord he has also forsaken you; So God
tells them, breaking with him that he will break with them, Nam, 14. 34. Ye
shall know my breach of Promise. Not that God breaks Covenant (never did he yet
suffer, nor never will his faithfulness to fail) but they failing forfeited (as
is the case in conditional Promises) the obligation on his part God keeps touch
with us as we keep touch with him: Not that this is so to be understood, as if
there were any thing in us. or doable by us to merit, deserve, or make due in a
way of Justice Gods gracious presence with us, nor yet as if an uncertain and
undetermined will and purpose in God, respecting his dealings with a People,
took its measures from them, were moved, changed, determined according to their
carriage toward him, nothing less; all is of him; who works all things after
the counsel of his own will; and of his free Grace (yea, the very condition)
whose it is to work in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure: Yet Gods
absolute will and purpose in: himself is conditional in the dispensation of it
unto us: He takes no conditions from us, but he gives conditions to us, and
still reserving to himself according to his own soveraign-pleasure, to work the
conditions in us which himself requires of us, he deals with us according to
them. And in very de^d in this way God wonderfully glorifies his Wisdom,
Goodness, Justice in his dispensations, in propounding the most reasonable,
equal conditions as what can be more than to be with them while they are with
him; to be found of them seeking him, not to forsake them, but forsaking him,
solemly advising them for the best, and then leaving a People to their own
choice and dealing with them according to it.

Reas. 4. Lastly. I might add, because God is most highly dishonored, most
exceedingly provoked by the sins of his own People; a Peoples being Gods own,
and the more he is owning of them, is so far from palliating and extenuating,
that it greatly aggravates and augments their sin against God, and their
Judgment from him. You only have I known of all the Families of the Earth,
therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities, Amos 3. 2. There is not
that in the sin of others that is in theirs; others may sin better cheap then
they may do, whom God has known and owned above others, they sin against
greater Light, and Love, and Grace than do others; the relation they stand in
to God, and the mercies that in that relation they stand under from him,
exceedingly aggravate their sin: do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish People
and unwise? is he not thy Father that has bought thee, that has made thee and
established thee, Deuteronomy. 32. 6. and besides by virtue of this relation, their
sin is more against God, and so more to him, more deeply resented by him than
the sin of others: God can much better bear the misbehaviours, and undutiful
carriages of persons at a greater distance than in his own family, his own
Children, this goes near him: When the Lord saw it he abhorred them, because of
the provoking of his Sons and of (...) Daughters, Deuteronomy. 32. 19.

3. It concerns them therefore, or these things considered, things thus
standing to be instructed, to be advised, to hearken to counsel, to bethink
themselves, to be convinced, affected, repent, amend, convert, and turn to God,
lest they bring it to that woeful pass, Zeph. 2. 1, 2. Gather your selves
together; yea, gather together a ^ation not desired, before the decree bring
forth, etc. how earnestly does God call upon them to recollect themselves (for
that seems to be the sense of it) so rally their thoughts to bethink
themselves; yea, to bethink themselves and be advised, before it be too late.
But this is so Consonant with, and evident from the whole current of Scripture:
See, Jer. 4. 4, 5, and 26. 2, 3, and 36. 2, 3. That it may suffice to have
pointed you to those places, in which, with many more, God manifestly
admonishes his People of this duty, and presses upon them the consideration
how nearly it concerns them to be instructed, warned, reclaimed, look about
them, bethink themselves before those threatened evils, as yet evitable,
unavoidably overtake them: It Is also so clear a consequent from, and the
grounds and reasons are so obvious in what has been already said, that I shall
not stand further upon it, but proceed to Application.

And, the only use we shall make of it is (according to the intendment and
scope, and spirit of the Text) for solemn admonition and awakening: Give me
leave (your call has done it; yea, the call of God necessitates it) to apply
my self to you with all possible plainness, and faithfulness in the Name of the
great God (whose unworthy spokes-man unto you this day I am) and in his w^^d,
according to the tenor (as we have it here) of his awful warning to his People
of old. Thus says the Lord, be thou instructed, O New England, Be thou
instructed, O Connecticut Colony, lest my Soul depart from thee, lest I make
thee desolate, a Land not inhabited: Jerusalem was, New England is, they were,
you are Gods own, Gods Covenant People, and what concerned them in that their
day, no less concerns you in this your day, this word that the (...) to Jacob,
and it lighted upon Israel, comes now to be applied to you; change but the
persons and the relation is the same, and as to condition it is so much the
same, that (as some have observed) never were any people more nearly to be
paralleled with them: put but in New-Englands name instead of that of
Jerusalem, and to you belongs, to you is the word of the solemn caution and
admonition sent; and O that you would be persuaded to take it home to your
selves that it might sink down into your ears, and take hold upon all your
hearts; And that it may so do,

1. Consider, it is possible that New England may sin away God; we may so sin,
as to provoke the Lord to leave and lay us desolate: What though we have layen
near Gods heart (as I persuade my self this poor Land has done) sin and
falseness to God may work us out of Gods affections, alienate his mind from us,
as it did from his dearest Judah of old; What? though God dearly affecting us,
has been tenderly and carefully protecting us (as is evident he has done) we
may by our sins so provoke, grieve, disoblige him, that he may change both
heart and hand toward us: Was it not so with his own People, the subjects of
his ancient care and kindness s: In all their afflections he was afflicted, and
the Angel of his presence saved them; in his love, and in his pity he redeemed
them, and carried them all the days of old; but they rebelled and vexed his
holy spirit, therefore he was turned to be their enemy, and fought against
them, Isai. 63. 9, 10. Never were any People so deeply fixed in the heart of
God, or so eminently privileged with the effects of his Love, but their sinful
ways, their unworthy and unsuitable deportments toward the God of their
mercies has wrought them out of his favor, and brought them under his ^orest
displeasure^ I have forsaken mine house, I have left mine heritage, I have
given the dearly beloved of my soul into the hand of her enemies, Jer. 12. 7.
Gods own People, how much soever he has owned them, or how tenderly affected
soever he has born himself toward them, may not conclude from thence (while
they take no care to carry themselves accordingly) that God will not forsake
and destroy them; indeed such a presumptuous confidence men may have, as they
had, Jer. 7. 4. etc. But as you may there see God rejects their confidence,
beats them off from it, bids them not trust in lying words, but bids them go;
go ye now unto my place which was in Shilo, where I set my Name at the first,
and see what I did unto it for the iniquity of my People Israel; and how many
after examples of a like nature has God added to that first president* so that
(as one says) we have more places to go to than Shilo. The Lord was very angry
with Israel, and removed them out of his sight; there was none left but the
Tribe of Judah only, 2 King, 17. 18. And the Lord said, I will remove Judah
also out of my ^ight, as I have removed Israel, and I will cast off this City
Jerusalem which I have chosen, and the house of which I have said my Name shall
be there, 2 King. 23. 27. And with like severity has the Lord (in
New Testament times) proceeded against Ephesus, and those other Asian Churches
to the utter rejecting and unchurching of them, according to what was
threatened, Rev. 2. 5. And are all these things nothing to us? can we look upon
what befell them and not be concerned, to think what may come upon our selves?
the Lord grant that by all these instructing examples we may be instructed,
lest it befall us as it has done them; be we awakenedly apprehensive that it
may so do, believe we that Gods Soul may depart from us, he may make us
desolate as he has done them.

2.* Consider it looks very threatningly lest it come to this; it is not only
possible that it may, but too too probable, exceeding tremendously suspicious
that it will come to it; to be plain with you (I dare be no other) according to
the present face, and frame, and posture of things amongst us, we are in a very
fair way (or more fitly to express a matter of that nature in a very formidable
way to bring it to that woeful pass, this is of sad, of very sad but of very
sensible consideration, to those whose thoughts are exercised about, and have
any discerning in matters of this nature, who sees not (and who that is awake
does not tremble to see?) that things are going, yea every day more than other
growing toward that fatal issue; Gods people are not wont to fall off from him
at once, nor he to take his farewell all at once; there are many dark, and
crooked, and winding, and downward steps before it comes to the bottom of this
break-neck hill, with a Godfor^aking and forsaken people; is it of no less
c^rtain than solemn observation that Gods New England People sit looser unto
God than they have sometimes done, and that he also sits looser unto them: it
looks alas, it looks as if those dear and ancient Friends were about to part,
and were even standing upon parting terms one with another. Consider we our
ways toward God and his ways toward us, and the one and the other, and both
together will present us with an aspect of a very threatening tendency toward
his utter-leaving of us.

1. Consider we our ways and our doings toward God, and see if we have not
cause, much cause to fear that God will leave us, take off his heart from us,
and turn his destroying hand upon us. And here,

1. More generally Consider, Do not our sinful ways and evil doings give us
cause to fear lest the Lord leave us; the evilness, sinfulness of our ways and
doings is so evident and apparent that there needs no secret search: how many
above-board instances might be given you, of which we may say, it is found upon
all these; our iniquities testify against us, our pride, and many other sins
testify to our faces the truth of this, beyond all denial, and being so, how
threatningly does it look, that God will leave us, taken off his love from us,
and lay a wrathful hand upon us (...) indeed sinners are prone to have slight
thoughts of God too as to his making so great a matter of it that he should
thus do; but if you will take up true Scriptural notions of it, and such as God
himself puts upon it, verily you will find that in it that will tell you that
it is a righteous thing with God thus to deal by a people so demeaning toward
him, and that they therein receive that recompense of their ways, that it
meet. What is sin (I mean not inevitable, unwilling and lamented weakness and
infirmities, but sin purposely committed, and impenitently persisted in) I say,
what is sin, such manner of sinning, in the true Scripture notion of it in the
judgment of God, which is according to truth? is it not a forsaking God? and
have we not cause to fear forsaking God, he will forsake us? is it not a
departing, a going away from God? and we leaving God, may we not expect he will
leave us? is it not a casting off God? and we casting off him? have we not
reason to think he will cast off us? is it not a revolting from God? a
revolting from under the Lord? a casting off his Government? a rebelling
against him? and what can we count upon or look for thus doing, but that God
should turn his back upon us, cast us out of his favor and protection, deal
with us as Rebels, become our enemy, and fight against us? yea, is it not a
hating God, an abhorring him in your souls. (whatsoever you call or count if
God calls and counts it so) and can you thus dealing by the blessed God hope
other or better than that his Soul should loath them whose soul abhors him,
that he should repay them that hate him to their face, to destroy them? in a
word, sin is a heart departing from God in the root of it, and a li^e departing
from God in the fruit of it: men having first withdrawn their love and
affections from God as the consequent of it withdraw their duty and allegiance,
and being thus revolted and gone from God in heart and life, in affection and
action, in spirit and conversation; have we not just cause to fear lest Gods
soul depart from us, and he withdraw all the outward effects of his care and
goodness toward us, and so make us desolate?

2. Consider further, and somewhat more particularly; are not those ^ins to be
found, yea, do they not abound and grow (...) amongst us, that are very
gravamenous, nautious distastful unto God that eminently te^d to disaffect God,
disjoynt his soul from us* and provoke his sorest Displeasure against us.

First, Let me lay my hand upon that that lies at the bottom of all our other
sins, and which of all our unkindnesses toward a good God he takes most
tenderly, and lays deepest to heart, and that is our unworthy entertainments
of the glorious Gospel of the blessed God; our receiving of the grace of God in
vain, the neglect of that great salvation, to continue impenitent, unconverted;
unbelieving under the Gospel is to sin to the outmost, being the outstanding of
uttermost grace and mercy, and brings wrath to the uttermost indeed; if
uttermost love, be slighted, uttermost grace rejected, what but uttermost wrath
is to be expected? in the Gospel God has made a way for his mercy, he has
poured forth all his grace, he has no more, he has drawn forth his soul, his
tenderest Bowels mercys to the other end to poor needy sinners, and for them to
set at naught and slight all thy s; this if any thing will make God forget to
be gracious: nothing wins upon the heart of God more than the hearty
entertainment of the Gospel, but nothing wounds God more, weans his Soul from a
people more than a regardless contempt of it: for a company of poor, miserable,
wretched, abject, undone, damned sinners to put a slight upon the strange,
wonderful, a^tonishing grace of the great God in Jesus Christ toward them, bid
him keep his Christ, his Pardon, his Grace, his Peace, his Life, his Salvation
to himself, as in effect they do that repent not, nor believe the Gospel; I
must leave you to imagine how God takes this; is not this the Salvation that is
by Jesus Christ? the thing that God has set his heart upon? is it not the most
pleasing, contentful design (to the utmost that we know) that ever he engaged
in? has not God laid out of the greatest Skill and Cost upon it? and has he
not projected and promised to himself the greatest revenue of glory from it?
and for us to slight and set at naught, and what in us lies wholly frustrate
it, will God, can God take this well? we worms can take it grievously enough to
have our design frustrated, that we have beaten our heads about, laid out our
selves for, set our heart upon, and promised our selves much from, think then
what a corrasive it is to the heart of God to be so dealt by in that which he
has set his mind upon, never any thing more: O sirs, would you study to
thwart, to cross God, to do him the greatest despite; there is no way like
this, and will God bear it to have the deep counsels of his Wisdom derided, the
great purpose, the pleasure of his will opposed, the wonder of his love
slighted, the riches of his grace despised, his Son the darling of his Soul
contemned and rejected, yea himself in all that he is, and has, and can do for
poor creatures (all his gracious and merciful overtures to them
notwithstanding) utterly set at naught; will not God visit for these things?
will not his Soul be disjoynted from, and avenged upon such a people as this?

Again, Are we not guilty of great Apostasy from God? a (...) greatly
distastful to him; If any man draw back my soul shall have no pleasure in him,
Heb. 10. 38. and are not we of those that draw back in such degree (the Lord
grant it may not be unto perdition) that we have much cause to fear lest his
soul depart from u s? is there not with too many of us too evident a defection
from God and the good ways of the Lord in their very judgments and opinions?
in their judgments they are not the men they were, they are not in their
judgments such fast friends to the power of godliness, as sometimes; they do
not lay that weight, that necessity upon a close walking with God, and serious
diligence in a way of duty upon Closet, Family or more public performances, as
sometimes, so that if men do not begin to cavil against, or question about
these things, where is the rule for daily secret Prayer, meditation,
self-examination? or where is the rule that a man must every day read a Chapter
or two in his Family? yet their Judgments are secretly, insensibly wrought off
from laying the weight and stress upon these things, as to the constant,
diligent, accurate, thorough attendance of them, as that they can go out with
many neglects, and many remiss, slight, hasty, hal^ performances, and their
Consciences not much reprove them; the working out their salvation with fear
and trembling, utmost care and diligence the striving to enter, and taking the
Kingdom of Heaven by violence, begins to look more than needs; and the exercise
of self-denial in the holding their senses under restraint, and government and
constant watchfulness over their hearts and ways, seems a kind of
overstrictness: Men are gone off in their judgments, stand not so clearly and
fixedly persuaded in their own minds of the necessity and importance of such
attendancies, and begin to take up an opinion that there needs not so much ado
that all this is not of that absolute necessity, but that it will be a
tolerable thing, at least to abate somewhat of it. And too evident it is that
we are much backsliden from God in our affections and conversations; we have
lost our first love and left our first works; if the love of New-Englands
espousals be now sought for, it will not be found, and if the footsteps of
those that first followed the Lord into this, as then unsowen Land, be enquired
after how dim and almost worn out will they appear? where is that ancient love,
desire, delight to and in the Ordinances of God, and all the means of Communion
with him, and that careful and exact walking with God in all those ways of
duty, both toward God and Man now become? Verily, we are gone backward,
backward and not foreward; and verily these backward retrograde God forsaking
Motions carry such hateful unthankfulness unto God, such to be abominated
falseness, perfidiousness to him; yea, they cast such reproach and contempt
upon God, put such a public slight upon him, put him to such open shame in the
eye of the world, for a People after some trial made of him and of his service,
thus to decline, shrink back from and forsake him, that we have cause to fear
God, will take himself in honor bound to right himself in the ruin of such a
People. I tremble to think (the truth of the charge there made considered) how
wishly that threatening looks upon us, Jer. 15. 6. Thou have forsaken me, says
the Lord, thou art gone backward, therefore will I stretch out my hand against
thee and destroy thee.

Again, Is there not amongst us that hypocrisy, formality, overlyness,
outsidness in the matters of God and Godliness? That God that searches the
heart, and desires truth in the inward parts, cannot but see and hate a form
of godliness, the upper Garment of Saintship (though even that now with many
grows thin, and threed-bare, is in fashion, and a great wear amongst u s; but
inside Christianity, the power of godliness is but here and there found: there
is an outside godliness, an external show still with us, we read, we hear, we
pray, we receive Sacraments, we have our Conference Meetings, our Lectures,
Fasts, and other Solemnities; we are conversant in external acts of Worship but
inside godliness, and that in which indeed the life and soul of it lies, the
loving God, ^earing God, trusting in God, delighting in and living upon God in
the ways and means of communion with him; these internal, vital acts of
worship, where almost are they to be found? of us may God revive the old
complaint, and say, this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their
lips, do honor me* but have removed their heart far from me, Isai. 29. 13. and
have we not cause to fear that God's soul, his affections, his Salvations will
be far from those whose hearts are ^ar from him* those that having a form of
godliness, but denying the power of it, God has bidden his own from such turn
away, and may we not expect that himself will much more do it; how can we say
we love him, when our hearts are not with him, or if we do so say, will God be
mocked? will he accept us? yea will he not detest us for a dissembled profession
of what is not, methinks destruction from God should be a terror to us when we
read what near neighbors a hypocritical nation,and the people of Gods wrath
are as we do? in that Isal. 10. 6. Again, a cold, dead, indeed indifferent
lukewarm spirit, a temper greatly nautious unto God, Rev. 3. 16. many may
their portion be made fat, and their meat plenteous, as to temporals little
mind or matter which end goes forward as to spirituals, or as to civils, in
order thereunto, methinks men seem to have spent (alas lamentably to have
misspent) their zeal about matters of Religion I cannot but remember what sad
and breaking contentions we have had not many years since about
Church Priviledges, and that earnest stickling that has been with men for the
obtainment of them, for themselves and theirs: A charitable heart would sure
have thought that men's souls had longed for those ways and means of communion
with God, and that a zeal for the enjoyment of God in all his Ordinances had
influenced those contendings for and about them: But alas, who can but be sad
upon it to see the end obtained, and a door set open to those enjoyments,and
such a dull spirit of indifferency as to these things, at least as to making
any real and answerable improvement of them: is this our zeal for God, his
Ordinances, the good things of his house, that chills and dies if it have not a
spirit of contention to cherish and keep it warm? this fire withdrawn, we
discover our selves, as indeed we are a cold, lukewarm people; verily it must
be some more kindly heat that must keep us warm upon the heart of God, or we
shall wamble upon his stomach and be in eminent danger to be spued out of his
mouth.

Again, Are we not guilty of great ingratitude unto God, of unworthy unthankful
slighting and undervaluing the great things he has done for us, the blessings
of the upper and nether springs, Spiritual, Temporal Mercies, with a liberal
hand bestowed upon us? Verily, I think we have run deep into Divine displeasure
upon this account; and that if ever People, New England has cause to ^ear,
lest wrath be upon them for their not rendering again according to the benefits
done unto them. Men have known too well how to be discontent, and repine and
murmr; but how to be thankful they have not known: If things have not gone
exactly according to their humor; if they have been ever so little crossed, or
pinched, or charged, the Magistracy has been discontentful, the Ministry
discontentful, they could even wish a change like pettish Israel, Let us make a
Captain and return into Egypt: Much alas, too much of the spirit of that
unthankful, untoward, froward, discontented murmuring generation that was so
grievous to God has been amongst us, and has given us cause to fear that
partaking of their sins; we shall partake of their plague s: Alas for the day
it looks, as if a provoked God were about to bring it upon an unthankful
People, when we shall know the worth of those mercies in their want, which we
have not known in their enjoyment, when Justice shall be turned into Gall, and
the fruit of Righteousness into Hemlock; when as Mic. 7. 3, 4. The Judge asks
for a reward, and the great man utters his mischievous desire; so they wrap
it up the best of them, and as a brier, and the most upright of them sharper
than a thorn hedge, In that day will unthankful New England be moved to know the
worth of their precious, but low pris'd liberties; as sensible as were the men
of Succoth under Gideons severer discipline.

Again, Our great pride prognosticates sadly; I do not mean only or mainly
those toys and unmanly vanities that the minds of younger, and too many older
persons are set upon, though sad and bad enough it be, that the hearts of Men
and Women, made for a better place, are got into their sleeves, but that
haughtiness of spirit that predominates amongst us, every no body would be some
body,and persons of a commoner rank, look but too earnestly toward the upper
end of the World: men know not their places, The Child behaves himself proudly
against the ancient, and the base against the honorable: Men's conditions sit
uneasy, and their callings suit them not, and they are cast upon many
occasions of temptation, and more especially that stout-heartedness that
transports men to an awlesness, not only of man, as vested with his authority,
they will bear no yoke in any relation; but even of God himself; they fear not
him in his Word nor Work s; and what shall we think of this pride? Is not pride
amongst those things; put first amongst those things that God hates? that are
abomination to him? Prove. 6. 16, 17. And will God (think we) love or loath a
proud People? Has God respect to the lowly? but does he know the proud afar
off? Psalm 138. 6. And may not our hearts ache to think how far we are from the
favorable and respectful knowledge of God? and how superciliously, and at what
a distance God holds us? Has God said, That to this Man will I lock, even to
him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and that trembles at my words? Isa.
66. 2. How are persons of a proud and contemptuous spirit, that are so far from
trembling at the Word of God* that they can freely, and fearlesly despise both
it and them that bring it resented by him; and to conclude, If pride goes
before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall, Pro. 16. 18. we have
cause from the consideration of what of it has been amongst us to fear what
will follow.

Again, Our great worldliness looks woefully upon us; the World, the love of the
world, the zeal of the World is so deeply gotten into the hearts and lives of
men, and has so thoroughly possessed them, that there is no room for any thing
else; their eyes and their heart are not but for their covetousness: There was
a Generation that first sought the Kingdom of God, but now with many it is the
world, the world that is first and last sought, or if the Kingdom of God and
his Righteousness have any thing from them, it is but the leaving of the world
they are put off with: Is covetousness, so Paul, Col. 3. 5. is the love of the
world spiritual adultery; so Jam. chap. 4. 4. And does God hate these sins as
much as in days of old? Can we think that such an Idolatrous, whorish spirit
that is found in the midst of us will not alienate the mind of God from us, is
the friendship of the worcester ld Enmity with God, whosoever will be a friend of the
world, is the enemy of God, Lam. 4. 4. is the love of the world and the things
of the world, exclusive of the love of God, If any man love the World, the love
of the Father is not in him, 1 John 3. 15. We may well fear, and not without a
cause, that the love of the world will leave us as little room in Gods heart as
it has done him in ours.

Again, That great sensuallity that is amongst us, and the therein high abuse
of Divine bounty: How can it but be very evilly resented by God, when (as one
aptly, and upon like solemn occasion expressed it to you, as indeed the matter
is) men fight against God with his own goodness, turn the edge to his kindness
against himself; not serving him with joyfulness and with gladness of heart in
the abundance of all things (but as much as in them lies) make his Power and
Providence, his bounty and care, to serve with their iniquities, when men grow
^at and kick* instead of having their hearts lift up in the ways of God, who
has made them to prosper; they lift up the heel against him, when Gods Corn
and Wine is made provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts of it: the better
God is to them, the more wanton, sensual, unclean, intemperate they are: O this
galls, this provokes; How shall I pardon thee for this, when I fed them so to
the full, then they committed adultery, etc. shall I not visit for these
things, etc. Jer. 5. 7, 9.

Other things might be mentioned (but the time would ^ail to insist upon
particulars) the want of love and peace (alas for the great decay of a spirit
of love amongst Christians) may make us fear that the God of love and peace
will not take up his abode with us; the want of Righteousness (who sees not
great unrighteousness amongst us) may make us doubt that the Righteous Lord who
loves Righteousness, and whose countenance does behold the upright will remove
his gracious presence far from u s; so want of Truth, unfaithfulness, men's
words, their promises, they are but like the hypocrites hope, they have no hold
in them, and do but deceive them that depend upon them; a great and common sin,
and we may well think greatly provoking and distastful unto him whose style is
the God of Truth; but I must not follow these things any further, enough has
been said to tell us that their is much of that of those sins found amongst us
that eminently tend to disaffect God toward us.

3. Consider yet again, as those are sins greatly nautious and distastful unto
God, eminently tending to disaffect him toward, and to take off his heart from
a People, so as they are found amongst us, they fall under such considerations,
such circumstances, such aggravations as cannot but render them exceeding
grievous to the very soul of God, and superlatively provoking; but to intimate,
in the Land of uprightness we have dealt thus wickedly: It Is the noble Vine
that God planted so lately that has brought forth such degenerate fruits, such
wild grapes as these: Can this but be greatly provoking?

Again, so have these roots of bitterness sprung up, that there by many are
defiled; these are not the sins of some few, but we are many that have
transgressed in these things: The evils mentioned (at least as to many of them)
are such as the body of this People are deeply leavened and tainted with, and
certainly when such sins grow common, we have cause to think what is coming.

But again above all, The impenitent persistance in these evils, after all that
God has said and done to reclaim us, looks dreadfully upon us: God has tried
us with enterchangeable dispensations, mercies and corrections, afflictions and
salvations have had their turns and returns upon us, yet we sin still, he has
smitten; yea, he has consumed us but we have not received correction; he has
knock us off with many a hard blow; yea, with blow upon blow, and breach upon
breach, but we hold fast deceit and refuse to return: What shall God do with
such a People? what may they expect from him? Because I have purged thee and
thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more
till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee, Ezekiel. 24. 13. Our ways toward
God then give us much cause to fear least God leave and lay us desolate.

2. Le^ us consider Gods ways toward us, and see if they also do not give us
ground of jealousy that the Lord is about to leave us: Evident it is that the
countenance of God is not toward us as heretofore; the face of Divine
Providence is full of awful indiciums that God is taking off his heart, and
withdrawing his gracious presence from us: What said poor Gideon, If the Lord
be with us why then is all this befallen us? and where are all his miracles
that our fathers told us of? May not we so say, if the Lord be with us, if he
be not about to leave us, have not begun to disaffect us and estrange himself
from us, why then is all this befallen us? and where are those signal tokens of
his presence, and all his wonder-working providence that our fathers have told
^s of? Is he with us as he was with them? Alas for the solemn and certain
symptoms that he is leaving and forsaking of us: Is God with us in his
Ordinances, or is he with us in the ways of his Providence as sometimes? Let
us a little consider of either.

1. Is God with us in his Ordinances as sometimes. Two Things here.

1. Is God hearing and answering our P rayers as sometimes; out former times
have afforded us many evident answers of prayer s; some memorable instances of
which are upon public record, to which more might be added; but how has it
been with us of latter day s? have not our most solemn addresses unto God
greatly failed us of those signal and speedy answer s? has not God shut out;
yea seemed angry against the prayers of hisPeople in the time of the Indian
War? and since have we not had matter of sorrowful observation as to thy s? To
omit other instances, that second and sorer flood that was upon this River, not
two years since, falling out presently upon a day of public fasting and
prayer, as it is published to the world amongst remarkable Providence, so
cannot but be to us of awful remembrance and remark as to what we are speaking;
God has been nigh unto us in all things that we have called upon him for; yea,
mercy has prevented u s; before we have called, God has answered, and while
we have been yet speaking he has heard; but now, alas, what cause to complain,
we fast and he sees not, we afflict our souls and he takes no knowledge.

2. Is God owning and influencing his Ordinances the means of his Grace as
sometimes? Was it once a truth (which that Reverend Person who Preached to you
now eleven years since, upon this occasion told you) that our Sion had
multitudes converted to ^er? Hartford had so, New Haven had so, Windsor had so,
and (...) had many other Churches in this Land, multitudes converted (...)
them: How is it now? are not our Converts comparatively (...) the
grape-glea^ings of the vintage, now and then one comes ^^opping in. And me
thinks also the word Sacraments and other Ordinances are deinforced as to what
they have been; God has ^nclothed them, left them in a degree forsaken of his
sometimes working power and virtue toward the souls of his own, they are not
affected, humbled, quickened, raised, warmed, comforted by them, as sometimes
they do not prosper, thrive, flourish and bring forth fruit under them as
heretofore; they do not find them such a feast of fat things, and so full of
marrow as in former days; and can we have sadder token of Gods withdrawing and
estranging himself from us than his failing his Ordinances of the wonted
influences of his spirit, both as to Conversion and Edification.

2. Is God with us in the ways of his Providence as sometimes? How many ways,
and for how long a time has God manifested his displeasure against us, his
dis-favour toward us: it is evident by the operations of his hand that the
affections of his heart are not to us as heretofore, for though it be a truth
that afflictions upon particular persons may have other causes, yet it
generally concluded that public calamities are certain tokens of Divine
displeasure: when God smites a Nation, a People, a Country with War, Sickness,
Famine, etc. They are undoubted testimonies of his anger: And how has God done
by us? has he not multiplied his witnesses* against us? has not the sword
gone through our Land? has not sore diseases had their annual returns upon us;
yea, of late both Summer and Winter abode with us to the taking of many from
us? and how sadly has God of late years smitten us in all the labors of our
hands by blastings, mildews, catterpillars, worms, tares, floods and droughts?
And truly not only for all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is
stretched out still; but in all this God seems to be making a way for his
anger, that he may pour forth all his wrath. Observable is the way and manner
of Gods dealing with his People of old, and the method of his gradual
proceeding against them, till at last he utterly rejected and destroyed them:
'Iis said, 2 King. 13. 23. God would not destroy them, neither cast them from
his presence as yet: He had not yet done it, neither would he yet do it, but
how even then he was making way for it; you may see, 2 King, 12. 1^. He began
to out them short. And 2 Chronicles. 28, 19. He brought them low; and has not God
begun to cut us short? and does he not go on to out ^s shorter and shorter?
has he not brought us low? and is he not still bringing us lower and lower?
how many ways has God been, and still is short-cutting, and low-bringing of u
s? He has cut us short of our numbers, brought us low by taking away many, and
many Righteous Ones from us: has he not (of late years especially) bereft us
of many Magistrates, Ministers, and other useful Persons, and added that late
sore breach, and causefully bitterly lamented loss to the rest? And has he not
cut us short in our comforts, brought us low by depriving us by one means and
other of so much of the fruits of the earth? We have sown much and brought in
little; sowe^ Wheat, Barley, good seed, but reaped Tares, Cockle and such like
trash: The ancient curse for sin is revived, and heightened upon us. Under the
rain that has come often upon us, and all the husbandry God has been at with
us, we have not brought forth fruit meet for him, by whom we have been dressed,
and what measure we have meated, it has been measured to us again: under much
means, and a promising, flourishing profession, little real fruit has been
brought forth to God; and how like to this have we found in that little good
grain under goodly appearances, and a great burden that the earth has brought
forth to us? and does not the hand of God upon this account grow very awful
toward u s? is not the meat cut off before our eyes? do we not see men's crops
fail them (at least in many places) year after year, and every year more than
other? should God go on to do by us a few years more as he has done for some
years past, it would look apace toward cleanness of teeth. And has not God
cut us short of our credit and estimation? brought us low upon that account
also: New-Englands name has been much set by, much more than now New-Englands
credit and repute is brought many pegs lower than sometime s; when we were
precious in Gods sight, we were honorable; but when he makes no such account
of a People, they soon grow out of credit; God has made us to know the truth
of that, 1 Samuel 2. 30. (the subject that was insisted upon by that eminently
holy man of God this time three year) them that honor me, I will honor, and
they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed; we have found the truth of
that, that them that honor God he will honor, and now God is verifying upon
us the truth of that also, that those that despise him shall be lightly
esteemed: Righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is a reproach to any People,
Prove. 14. 24. And New-Englands former and latter experiences may seal to both
parts of the truth of that Text. Under all these short cutting, lowreing,
afflicting dispensations, may we not say in this day, as 'twas said, Israel
should do in that, when many evils and troubles should befall them? Deuteronomy. 31.
17. Are not these evils come upon us because our God is not amongst us? is not
with us as he has been, nor favors us as he has done, But I must pursue
these things no further which I have been drawn forth to follow thus far, if
possible to make you sensible, both from the consideration of our ways toward
God and his ways toward us, that according to the present frame and posture
of things with us, it looks very exceeding threatningly upon us, least God
leave us and lay us desolate.

3. Consider, How sad would it be, should it come to this: it is evident from
the considerations mentioned, that it may be so, and also that it looks
exceeding threatningly, lest it be so: but what a dismal thing would it be,
should it be so indeed? to lose Gods love, his favor, his good will; to have
his soul depart from us, what a dreadful thing will it be? how emphatically
does God shut up sundry sore threatenings with this as the most miserable
complement of all? Yea, w^ also unto them when I depart from them, Hos. 9. 12.
that burden, Jer. 23. 33. (so it is there called) I will even forsake you says
the Lord: it is the most intolerable, crushing, back-breaking Burden that ever
was laid upon any people, for God to disaffect, reject, forsake a people, it is
the most formidable thing that can befall them; In his favor is life, his
loving kindness is better than Life: it is the foundation, fountain and
wellhead of all our good; all that good is, is originally, virtually and
eminently contained in it, founded upon, and flowing from it; but to be
rejected of God, cast out of his affections, it is in it self the forest
judgment; it has in it all that evil is, and it is the sourse of all that
does, or may, or can fall out sadly or unhappily to us: if we have Gods heart
we cannot want his hand; if he be with us, if he be for us, who or what shall
be against us? if he cause his Face to shine upon us, we shall be saved; but if
he take off his heart, forsake, hide his Face from us, we shall be devoured,
and many evils and troubles will befall us, all kind of calamities will cloud
in; mischiefs will be heaped upon us if God take his presence (and consequently
his peace) from us, even loving kindness and mercy s: what will follow but
that he will vex us with all adversity; our wisemen will be infatuated, our
men of courage and activity dispirited, our peaceable and guidable men froward
and headlong, nothing will prosper with us, but all things will conspire and
work together ruineward; counsel, strength, protection, sustenance, all will
fail us; Sword, Sickness, Famine, evils of all sorts grow in upon, pursue and
cleave unto us till they have consumed us.

And Further, let me here add that consideration, that should it come to this
with us, God should take off his heart from us, turn his hand against us, it
will certainly fall exceeding aggravatedly heavy upon us. It will so eminently,
in a two fold respect:

1. It will be a sad and a sorrowful thing indeed, when as it threatened, Josh.
24. 20. God shall turn and do us hurt, and consume us after that he has done
us good; Miserum est fuisse. There is no greater misery than to have been
happy; it is more to be brought than to be born low, to be degraded than never
to have been exalted; worse is so much the worse by how much we have known
better; Thou have lifted me up, and cast me down, says the Psalmist,
aggravating his affliction, Psalm, 10* 2. 10. How art thou fallen from Heaven, O
Lucifer, Son of the Morning? was the cutting question to the King of Babylon,
in the day of his ruin. Isai. 14. 12. and it was the depth of Jerusalem's woe,
that she came down wonderfully, Lam. 1. 9. know, if you lose God you will be
miserable above many, that never knew what it was to enjoy him as you have
done: when you have lost God, his love, his favor, and lost your all in that
loss, then to look back, aad bemoan your selves, O that we were as in months
past, when the Almighty was yet with us: then to remember in the days of your
affliction and misery all the pleasant things that you had in the days of old,
then to lament that once you had a God, what a bitter, bitter and
heartbreaking thing will it be.

2. When God turns to do a People hurt after he has done them good, they may
expect he will do them hurt according as he has done them good, De^t. 28. 63.
And it shall come to pass that as the Lord rejoiced over you to do you good and
to multiply you so the Lord will rejoice over you to destroy you, and to bring
you to naught; of whom God says, you only have I known: God has an evil, an
only evil for them, Ezekiel. 7. 5. For whom God has done* that which he has not
done, against them will God do that which he has not done, and whereunto he
will not do any more the like, Ezekiel. 5. 9. The punishment of the iniquity of
the Daughter of my People is greater than the punishment of Sodom, Lam. 4 6.
Under the whole heaven has not been done as* has been done upon Jerusalem,
Da^. 9. 12* There was no sorrow like that* of Sion, wherewith the Lord
afflicted her in the day of his fierce anger, Lam. 1. 12. Woe unto us when God
(turning to do us hurt) shall come to measure us by the same Rule that he has
done us good by: Will not New England then he made one of the blackest spots of
earth under the heavens of God?

4. Consider, It may yet be prevented; and what mercy it is that it may so be
that things come not to this woeful pass? will we yet be persuaded to hearken to
the counsel in the Text? will we yet be instructed, bethink our selves, repent,
amend, convert, turn to God, he will not leave us, he will not cause his anger
to fall upon us: and wherein he has so done, we returning unto him he will
return unto us: Doubtless God is spirited and acted toward us by the same Rule
that himself gives us, Pro. 37. 10. Thine own friend and thy fathers friend
forsake not: God has been our friend, and our fathers friend, we have had (as
I may say) his favor by inheritance; because he loved our fathers, he has
chosen their seed after them, and loath he is both for our own and their sakes
(his grace and mercy having thus descended upon us) to disinherit us, nor will
he do it, if after all we yet prove not utterly uncounselable and incorrigible:
The love and kindness of New-Englands first times stick by him; all our
backslidings, unworthy carriages, evil requitals have not so wholly razed out
the remembrance of it, but that God has sensibly manifested even in the way of
his judgments, many relentings of heart toward us, and would we yet be
persuaded to recede our pursuit of vain things that cannot profit not deliver,
for they are vain, and unfainedly, and with our whole heart return to him, how
would his bowels be moved for us? his compassions stirred up to meet us at our
coming* and his heart be knit unto us? And think also what an act of grace it
is that God will thus accept of, and re-entertain repenting and returning
sinners; it is a great act of grace for God to take any to be his People; but
it is a much greater to fall in again with those that have deeply revolted from
him: O methinks such peerless, unpattern'd, unparrallel'd mercy, as such it is
proposed in the third Chapter of this prophecy, verse. 1. should melt,
overcome, win upon the hearts of poor sinners; though we have played the harlot
with many lovers will God yet receive us. O will he methinks, as persons
overcome of mercy, our very souls, should say, behold we come unto thee; for
thou art the Lord our God.

5. And lastly Consider, That if we be not instructed, continue incorigible,
irreclaimable, God will certainly leave us, his soul will depart from us* and
he will make us desolate. We may flatter our selves in our own way until our
iniquity be found to be hateful; bless our selves in our hearts while Gods
anger smokes against us; cry peace, peace, until remediless ruin come upon us,
and there be no escaping: but assuredly, what God threatens, unless Repentance
intervene, he will accomplish: Methinks it fares between God and his
New England People, as between a tender hearted Parent, and an untoward,
stouborn and incorigible Child; the poor afflicted Father, with many yerning
bowels bespeak s; yea, begs, beseeches him, O my son be instructed, be
persuaded, bethink thy self, hearken to counsel; and in the issue begins to
tell him, well son, look to it, if thou go on thus, and nothing will do with
thee, thou will lose thy Fathers heart at last, as well as I have loved thee,
my affections will be wholly weaned off from thee; I will disown, dis-inherit;
turn thee out of doors; and shall it come to this between God and us, if we
continue uninstructed it will come to this, we shall lose Gods love, leave our
selves no more room in his affections, utterly harden his heart against us,
work it to that issue, that God will thoroughly disaffect us; and what then?
Why, when God thoroughly disaffects a People, then as in Chap. 15. of this
prophecy, verse. 1, 2. though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind
could not be toward this People, cast them out of my sight, and let them go
forth: such as are for death to death and such as are for sword to the sword,
and such as are for famine to famine, and such as are for captivity to
captivity: As if God should say, I cannot abide them, they have quite lost my
heart, I can no more affect them; let who will intercede for them, away with
them, let them (...), be slain, famished, captivated, no matter how many ways,
so they be any ways destroyed: This, even this will be the fatal upshot that
our sins and rebellions will bring it to between God and us if we be not
instructed. And now I beseech you reflect upon what has been said, lay
together the considerations that have been laid before you, and think whether
it be not high time to hearken to that awful, yet compassionate admonition in
the Text, Be thou instructed, O New England, lest Gods Soul depart from thee,
lest he make thee desolate, a l^nd not inhabited: Methinks we should find our
selves concerned, and that all sorts of persons, as those that came to John
Baptist, should be, asking what shall we do? and what shall we do; Magistrates,
Ministers and Masters of Families, men of all ranks and conditions, should be
earnestly enquiring what shall we do, and what shall we do as to the retaining
and regaining the good will of God, and keeping his gracious presence with us?
And possibly it is expected (according to the ordinary use upon these
occasions) that by way of answer I should apply my self to these and those, but
the time takes me off.

Much Honored; I know much lies upon you (and although my haste be great, let
me call at your door with that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 2. 10, 12. Be instructed
ye Judges of the Earth, kiss the Son; professedly and actually own Jesus
Christ, signalize your love and affection, your homage and subjection to him,
even in such a day as this; what difficulties or hazards this may cast you
upon, or what dis-favour it may work you, or with whom it is besides my
business to say, and I hope* will be besides yours to consider, suffice it me
to say, and you to think, that this is the way to the heart of God; the way to
get and keep in with him, which is the thing we are upon: O show your love to
Jesus Christ, your zeal for him, his cause, interest, ways, People, all his
concerns, and set your selves against whatsoever is contrary thereunto,
suppress sin, promote holiness to your utmost power. And let me only in general
further say, both to you Right Honorable, and to the Honorable Deputies with
you, that make up the grand Counsel of this poor Colony (I know you have not
been without deep thoughts of heart upon the account) if there be any thing yet
do-able as to these things, either by Law making, or Law executing, that may
conduce to keep God with us, let it be diligently done.

Nextly, I should have applied my self to you, my dear and reverent Brethren in
the Ministry you are set for the instruction of others, but it is not too much
to be said to you (however it may seem too much for me to say it) be you also
instructed. O look about you, it eminently concerns you, think what is yours to
do, that it may not come to the parting pull between God and this poor People:
I doubt not Brethren, could I lay my hand so near your hearts, I should find
them in old Ely's posture trembling for the Ark of God, the God of the Ark, God
and his Ark; his taking his presence from us, and the signal tokens of the
same: but what is ours to do that it may not be so, I know my self (though too
little) too well to take upon me to direct you; let me only say as the eyes of
that Cripple, of whom you read, Acts 3. were upon Peter and John, the poor man
looked wishfully upon them, hoping to receive somewhat from them; so my eyes,
and the eyes of this poor people are (under God) upon you earnestly, expecting
that you should do something for us, as the poor man in the Gospel, Mark 9.
once so^^cited your great Lord and Master in his day upon earth for his ^oful
Son; let me bemoan to you the lamentable condition o^ this miserable people,
thus and thus it is with us, and these and those means have been used with, and
improved for us, but to no purpose: if you can do any thing have compassion on
us, and help u s; I know you are not in Gods stead, but as I was saying, under
God our eyes are uyon you; and I beseech you remember that they are so.

Again* give me leave in passage to drop a word to the Freemen; be you also
instructed as to the work of this day, as you would not have God depart from
us, disregard us, do not disregard him in these grand motions* do not leave him
out in your Elections: surely it is not the ing^^^ating way with God to give
him cause to complain, as Hos. 8. 4. They have set up Kings but not ^y me and
have made Princes and I know it not: have a respect to God in your Elections in
having a respect to godliness s: not that every godly man is fit to make a
Magistrate, or every one that has grace is not qualified to Govern, you may
read, Exodus 18. 21. That they must be able men, as well as fearing God, not
only good, honest, well-minded, well-meaning men, but such as sit chief (that
you set* in that place) had need to be able to choose out the way of a People
for them, Job. 29. 25. yea, and then when it comes to a Day of Difficulty, it
is not only integrity of heart but skilfulness (...) that is requisite to the
well management of the reins (...), Psalm. 78. ult. yet surely Godliness is an
essential (...), nor can you disregard it without disregarding God in your
Elections, would you have Gods heart with you? choose men of David's character,
Act. 13. 22. Men after Gods own heart; it may be in such a day as this there
are many and great thoughts of heart, such a man is in favor, and such a man
is so and so: I have nothing to say against all prudential considerations
(provided always they be pious) upon these accounts, if policy were unlawful
Christ would never have bidden his Disciples to be wise as Serpents, Mat. 10
16. Policy and Piety, the Serpent and the Dove, do as well together as they do
ill asunder: but what I have to say, and what the Doctrine under hand loads me
to say, is choose Men in favor with the King of Kings, who has Kings hearts in
his hand to turn as he will, and can if men's ways please him, make even their
enemies to be at peace with them.

Heads of Families would have been next spoken to; there is more than a little
for them to do upon the great account we are speaking.

I would also have addres^ my self to Gods own dear ones amongst us (those few
names comparatively that are yet left us) that are great and gracious with him,
that they would have improved their outmost interest for (...) who can do great
things with God; that they would desire mercies of the God of Heaven concerning
this great matter of his still abode with us. Moreover, I would have begged the
very sinners of the times, that at lest they would not thrust away God from u
s: but the time bids me have done.

I shall conclude all with two or three more general words of Instruction and
Direction.

1. Let us make work unto a thorough Conversion unto God; surely the want of
this is our great wound, the core and root of all ou^ maladies; our not
complying with the (...) grace to a thorough, entire, irreserved closure with
himself: hence, ^ence have grown those estrangements between God and us, that
now begin to look threatningly as to an utter parting; and it is a (...)
conversion unto God that must lay the foundation of (...) I must confess the
sense of this has been so much with me (...) the call to this days work was
undoubtedly laid upon me, that I have had many thoughts to say neither of this
nor that, but to turn the whole stream of my Discourse into this channel; O
that you were but to be prevailed with as to this, our work were done at once;
and is there no persuading you? though not only God's gracious presence with
you in this world, but your everlasting enjoyment of him in glory in that other
World lies upon it; what shall I say to you sirs? I beseech you show your
selves men, act but the part of reasonable creatures (which looks like a
reasonable request) set but your understandings and thoughts seriously to work,
and I profess to you, it is beyond my conceiving (so doing) that you can be
other than through, down right Christian s: a thinking man cannot but be a
serious man; it is the want of this that ruins men, Israel does not know, my
people does not consider, Isai. 1. 3. in-consideration is the undoing of men
under means of knowledge; men know enough, would they but consider of what they
know, to make them in good earnest about matters of greatest moment. I have a
great request (to the unconverted, I especially intend it, knowing some will do
much more than I say) to make to this great Congregation, and every person, I
am under the present opportunity of speaking to, which I am never like to be
more in this world; I have a great request to you; indeed, as to the thing
desired, it is but a small matter, but my heart is much in it; and I shall
verily hope that this poor Sermon will not be utterly lost, if you will but
grant it; I beseech you deny me not, and it is this that you would take some
time to bethink your selves of your greatest concernments; and I would fain beg
some time every day, but I will bring my request very low that I may not be
(...) shall I obtain of you that you will constantly set apart one half hour in
a week; be it on the the Saturday night, or sometime, and getting alone, set
your selves to think with utmost seriousness about the matters of your souls
and your future and eternal states; would Persons be persuaded thus to do, I
(...) it would be impossible for them to stand before their own (...); I doubt
not but if men would give themselves leave to think what it will be to be in
Heaven of Hell, for ever, it would bring them to themselves: And, O were we
thorough here as to the work of Conversion, were the as yet utterly
unconverted, but converted; were the half converted, the almost persuaded, but
altogether, but thoroughly converted: were the slight and formal, and such as
have a name to live, the professionally converted, but sincerely converted:
were the converted, but so back-slidden, fallen, that they stand in need of
renewed conversions, but reconverted; this would lay a foundation for the
return, and still continuance of Gods gracious presence with us.

2. Let us mightily stir up our selves to lay hold upon a departing God: It is
a very lamentable complaint the Prophet makes, Isa. 64. 7. that at such a time
when God hid his Face from them, and consumed them because of their iniquities;
yet there was none that called upon his Name, that stirred up themselves to
take hold of him. Shall God go, and shall we be silent? shall we see him going,
and shall nothing be said to invite him back again? Methinks our hearts should
be at our mouths, our very souls should sit upon our trembling lips, and we
should even dissolve into sighs and supplications. O that we may humble our
selves, greatly mourning over all the provoking causes of Divine displeasure:
We may bemoan our selves, sensibly lamenting after the Lord under all the
hidings of his Face, and the estrangements of himself from us; we may awaken
our selves exceedingly, call up all our* powers, put to our utmost strength,
plead with God; yet thou Lord art in the midst of us, and we are called by thy
Name, leave us not; wrestle it out with God, and resolve we will not let him
go: thus do, and though you have gone far from him, return yet again to the
Lord, cleave to him with purpose of heart, and you shall find (though he has
made many offers that way) yet God will not leave you*

3. And lastly, Be on Gods side, espouse his interest, be you engaged in every
cause that is his, own what God owns, and whom God owns; be not afraid nor
ashamed to appear (...) his ways, worship, people, however it may befall; what
(...) the world turn a backside upon these things (you know Moses his choice)
let us cast in our lot here: when the Persian Emperor favored the Church, the
Samaritans would help build the Temple, and when Mordecai was great at Court,
many of the people of the Land became Jews; but God knows such
fair-weatherfriends, and makes reckoning of them accordingly; but that is the
Man that God will own, that Jesus Christ will own, that is not ashamed of him
nor of his words before a froward and adulterous generation; that I say is the
man that Christ will own at that day when to be owned by him, will be found
worth of now owning of him at dearest rates: Be it that the tempest-tost,
weatherbeaten, and well-nigh-shipwrack state of the Church of Christ in an
angry world, be as the Ship wherein himself with his Disciples were embarked,
when in that mighty storm that came down upon the lake, they were even filled
with water, and now ready to sink. My mite shall be cast in here, as the Lord
shall help me, my interest, my title, all what it is, sink or swim shall be
ventured in this bottom; and I beseech you, let us all put in here; have we not
much greater and better assurances than the trembing Mariner that was told he
carried Caesar in his Barge? Woe to us if an hour of temptation discover another
spirit in us; but if the Lord shall help us, owning, cleaving to and abiding
with him, to approve our selves in the day of trial; and though we have sat
too loose to him, and grown ^light and wanton in our prosperous times,
nevertheless in an evil day there shall be good things found in us, there will
yet be hope in our end.

FINIS.

