A VINDICATION of NEW ENGLAND, FROM The VILE Aspersions Cast upon that Country
By a Late ADDRESS of a Faction there, Who Denominate themselves of the Church
of England IN BOSTON.

Printed with Allowance.

A VINDICATION of NEW ENGLAND.
Poor New England:

THOU have always been the eyesore of Squinting malignity; the Butt of many
Envenomed Arrows, which from time to time have been Shot at thy Tranquillity;
but of none more wickedly Designed, than those late Addresses, which have
(after their fashion) Endeavored to alienate Their Majesty's Affections from
thee. However let it be known, Thou have friends in England who Sufficiently
know thy circumstances, to wipe off the Di^^ now cast upon thee; And give thee
a better and more faithful Carracter.

What sincere Protestant in the three Kingdoms can behold (without Regret) the
Inju^yes, and hard measures, which that Protestant Country has of late met
with all from their Tory Adversaries? A Protestant Country, it is, (we say) and
of the Church of England too, (whatever is bl^^^ered to the Contrary) in that
they acknowledge the Doctrinal Articles of (...) here professed, and that with
a greater sincerity, than many who have subscribed these Articles (for
prefermen^s) and after preached up and publ^sh^d P^lagiar, Armini^^, and
Soci^ian (...) (not without a spice of Popery) which are to them the most
palpable Contradictions.

The things wherein that Country Dis^^^^s from that which is Commonly called
the Church of England, is their (...) and form of Church Government; while in
the same time they Agree therein, not only with the Nonconformists of England,
but with all the rest of the Reformed Churches in Christendom: Let the matter
be throug^^ly scanned, and you will find very little Difference between the
Scotch, French and Dutch Churches, and the Church of New England: Perhaps
nothing but this, that the Church of New England chooses to do that more
Explicitly, which is done Implicitly in all those other Churches; And if the
Pastors and Elders of the Churches there have been a little more willing, to
manage their (...), than it is in some other Churches, (...) think they have
enough to say for it, to Excuse them from the Imputation of (...). Here then
the Difference between Presbyterian and Independent is wholly swallowed up in
that Country; and any one, having a Certificate of his Communion in any of
those Foreign Churches mentioned, is admitted into the like Communion there,
without any further Difficulty.

The first Planters of New England could not indeed comply, with several
things, Imposed in the Church of England for that they thought them
unwarrantable, and the Comp^yance therein, Unto them (Dissatis^^^^) Sinful. The
imp^^ers tho they confessed the things Indifferent, yet (so Rigid were they,
(...) to) (...) themselves even to destroy the Non-complyers. And this was the
(...), why a Company of (...) (then reproachfully called P^ritans) made a
peaceable Sec^ssion from the Page, where with they were every where (...). And
having Ch^^ined (...) and charters, from the King, which they hoped would have
been the perpe^uall Instruments, of their protection by the Crown of England,
3, or 4000, of them (of whom some were Honorable Persons, some Famous (...)
Learning) Transplanted themselves, from their desirable Native Country, into
that Howl^ng wilderness of America. And coming over with the Royal consent and
Church, they purchased their Possessions of the Native Proprietors, who were no
way damaged, but greatly Advantaged by their coming amongst them.

It Is impossible to Relate all the Hardships and sorrows, which they underwent
in subduing that horrid Wilderness: But the good providence of GOD to smiled
upon them, that in a little time that Wilderness was by their great Endeavors
and (...), improved into an habitable Country: And by the after Natives (...)
(who knew no other) accounted too pleasant a Land to be parted with upon (...)
accounts: And although in the last 50 years, more have gone out of it, than ever
went into it, Yet has New England encrea^^d (by the blessing of God) to a
people of (perhaps many more (...)) 100000 Souls.

The Settlement and prosperity of that Country has not a little contributed to
the Revenues, of the English Crown; for ^is from there chiefly the West Indian
plantations, have their Provisions, Timbertrade, Horses etc. so that in all
things whereby they do advantage the Crown, they must acknowledge they are
beholding to New England for it, without which they had hardly been capable of
Subsistence, or indeed of Settlement. The N-Englanders pay Customs in the
Southern plantations for all they fetch from thence into their own Country: And
when they bring them hither, they pay the same over again. Besides the vast
Returns they otherwise make into England, i. e. Plate, Oil, P^^try, Fishery
etc. Their Shipping has also been Considerable, for which they are (or may be
with Encouragement) so well furnished with All Materials, that the King may (if
He please, and as Occasion Requires) there build whole Naci^s, as well as
thence fetch a few Mas^s, and that at very easy (...), as is Judged by men that
understand those Affairs.

Notwithstanding these advantages, they have been no ways Chargeable to the
Crown of England, where they quietly enjoyed their Charters; what it has cost
the King force their disturbance, the Exche^^or Officers can best inform you.
Indians have more than once made Bloody Wars upon them, but (by Gods help) they
have with much Bravery and Gallantry, repressed and subdued the Salvages, though
met without considerable Expense, yet they never put a farthing to the Kings
Account though it were to maintain the Extent of his Dominion. This is far beyond
what any other such English plantations can pretend unto.

Add to this.

They have Erected a Considerable College amongst them for the Education of
their Youth in Piety and good Literature; Though they have had no Royal founders
(no Alfreds no Balliols, no H^urys 6 th or 8 ths, no Queen Elea^ors etc.) no
great prelates (Such as Chichley, Fox, Wi^lif, Woolsey etc*) to promote so
glorious a Work; No Extraordinary B^nefactors (Though they are not ungrateful to
the Memo^y^s of such as have freely Contributed to so great and Useful a
Charge) A College that has sent forth Able and Faithful Pastors, to more than
100, Christian Congregations, in that Country, besides the help they have
afforded to some other parts of the World. A College that has been supplied
with Students from free Schools ordered to be se^led in Every Considerable
Town of the Collonies. A College that has (...) Indians, to make them
serviceable to their own Country men; which Pagans, though they have often
molested, and some times sorely Distressed, the honest New-Englanders, yet
their Charity has so far Extended toward them, as to endeavor their Welfare
both Temporal and Eternal.

On all this the College by Ingenuous and Civil Education has had its proper
Infl^ence. The College which we say was a Noble and Necessary Work, and
therefore deserves all Encouragement and Promotion. Noble; for where is the
Like in all the English America? where, even among (...), that in wealth do far
Exceed the poor Lab^^^ous New-Englanders, is there any such thing? And
Necessary too; for else the Rising Generations would have soon become
Barbarous; because neither would their Estates reach to seek Education in
England; neither would any person of worth go^ from hence (unless driven by
Pe^^^cu^ion) so far of to seek Employment when he might have it nearer home.
'Twas therefore a brave and happy thought that first pitched upon this
College; Though at some times it has been unhappy in this, that it has bestowed
its favors (is A Ms.) on some ungrateful persons, who would now undermine that
Government upon which its foundations were laid; and by which for so long a
time its superstructure has been always sustained.

The Loyalty of that people to the Crown of England, and its Legal Government
is sound, whatever to the Contrary has been Asserted or Insinuated; not only
Interest obliges them, but Temper and Religion disposes to a Readiness, in
testifying their Allegiance to their King upon all occasions; some late
Instances may manifest it to be Signal; But we shall first hear what their
accusers say, and then convince them and the whole World, that the Adversaries
of New England have the least cause to B^a^t and Vaunt themselves in this
matter; as will appear in its place.

Upon Consideration of the foregoing particulars, we may well say, that man had
Reason, who formerly in Print published an account of that Country, to conclude
his Discourse with this passage.

One would think such a People should not find an Enemy among any sort of
Christians, but those called Papist, or else among such as Papist like, can
give up their Religion, Rights, Liberties and properties nay, their (...)
senses, to the Conduct of their fellow Creatures.

But it cannot be Imagined, that the Enemy of all good, should not always be
inspiring some or other to be molesters of such a people, and to endeavor
(...) Reproach and Ruin: they have been a People too like the Primitive
Christians to be any other wise used in the World, than those Ancient
Confessors of our Saviors time. Hence they have not only been frequently
Troubled by the Townyes among whom they dwell, but have also been continually
Bl^^kened by the Calumnies^ of some that dwell among themselves, who have been
willing to serve the Accuser of the Brethren: But God has paid them their
Wages: for it has been often observed that the Remarkable Judgments of Heaven
have first or last overtaken the Adversaries of that People; though God has for
a while Fatherly Chastised them, by th^se Rods, which he has afterward
consumed. 'Twe^e easy to fill ^ Volumn with Instances; from the P^s^ilent
MORTON (the Pe^ty fogger at the beginning) to the Infamous RANDOLPH (who comes
now in the Fagg (...) have generally been unhappy. And (...) Trouble-some
Tobiahs and S^nhallats, will not be sufficiently warned against following the
Steps of such unhappy Predecessors.

This people must be still Disturbed, Yea, Exterminated; Do they not see it?
They are the Sleepiest People in the World, if they do not perceive that there
was a Deep Design to Remove them out of their Country: The Late King told a
Gentleman of New England, He hoped be and now sent a Wise man amongst them
(R^lateing to their late Governor Sr. ^. A.) (...) indeed! for he had the
Wisdom to say (upon Occasion) That it would be for the (then) Kings Interest,
for that people to be removed, and another Introduced. And Chamberlain in his
Book (...) A^glie Notiti^e, had the vanity very broadly to Intimate, that
Policy made such a thing to be but necessary. But how should this be done? Why,
only send some French Dragoons amongst them to Teach them Succoths Lesson by
the Briars and Thorns of the Wild (...). Well, God with a miracle of Mercy,
has by the late Revelution, Re^^^ed them from some of those Dangers: And yet
there are a company of (...) amongst them, that are (...) to get them back into
what they have Escaped; And (...) are the Refuge unto which therein they have
had their Recourse.

There scarce ever went a Civil stranger into those parts, but he has Admired
and Predicated the Charity, Civility, and Hospitality of that People; yet some
III-minded men, who went ^^ther Poor Enough, and after grew Rich and Great
amon^t them, have been so Abominably ungrateful as to Revile that Country with
Clam^urs and Slanders, Purposely to procure them all manner of Oppressions. And
although (by the just judgment of God) some of those Male contents and III wilers
of their Neighbors, were of the first that smarted under Oppressions of their
late Arbitrary Government, yet they are (it seems) still Joging on in the same
Track of Malevolence, nor will the rest be warned, by this Experience.

But of all the Revilings with which that People have been abused, we know not
if worse Bears Skins have been at any time put upon them then those contained
in an Address lately made to the King by a small Knot of Male contents in
Boston, who injuriou^ly style themselves by the Name of the Church of England.

It runs in such Terms as these.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. The (...) Address of Your Majesty's most
Loy^ll and D^tif^ll Subjects of the Church of England in Boston in Your
Majestes Territory and Dominion of New England. Most Gracious Sovereign.
There has but few years past over our heads since by the Grace and Favor of
(...) Majesty's Royal Predecessor, we were livered from the Slavery and Thraldo
of a most Ext^avag^nt and Arbitrary ^^vernment, which ^ad long been Ex^^^ over
us, and many others of Your Majesty Subjects, under Corour and pretense a
Charter ( Wherein no part thereof, the Name, Was ever made use of or Regarded)
and by that means have been so happy as to enjoy the freedom of Divine Service
Worship after the manner of the Church of England; which was never until the
V^cati^^ of the said (...) Admitted or allowed to any; but all were forced by
their Penal Laws to frequent their Meetings; and be deprived of the benefit of
the (...) and other Sacred (...)* None being thereto but such as are in Church
Cov^^^^t and fellowship with them, and their Children, which does not include
the Youth part of Your Majesty's Subjects in these parts, to the great shame
and Sc^^dall of the Christian Religion and hinderance of the Propagation
thereof.

That though since we have had the Liberty of our Religion, we have endeavo^red
to carry our selves Void of Offense to those that Dissent from us, and have at
our own Charge Built and Err^ct^d a Convenient Church for the Public Worship
and Service of God: Yet such is the Mallic^ of our Dissenting Neigbours, that
we are become the Object of their scorn, and forced to take many Affronts and
Indignityes by them frequently, offered to our Persons and Religion, which some
of their principal Teachers have lately in a Printed Treatise charged to be
Idolatry and Popery.

We have lately to our great Horror and Amazement been forced to behold, A well
Established and Orderly Government here Subverted and Overthrown: the
Governor* several of the Council, and other principal Officers and Persons by
force of Arms Seized and kept under long and hard Imprisonment, Your Majesty's
Forts and Garrisons forced out of the hands of those Appointed to command them;
Your Majesty's Standing Forces and others, Raised and employed for the Defense
of the Country against our Indian and other Enemies disbanded, and their
Officers Cruelly Seized and Imprisoned and by that means an Advantage given to
our Enemies, who have since destroyed and laid wast a very Considerable and
gooal part of Your Majesty's Territory, with the loss of some Hundreds of Your
Subjects; many Forts and Garrisons in those Parts of considerable force and
Service which by the Disbanding of the Soldiers were left and deserted. Your
Maj^sties (...) here Ordered for the defense and security of the Coasts against
Pirates and other E^emyes Dismantled and made wholly unserviceable whilst
Pirates insisted the same; and Your Majesty's Revenue which accounted to about
12000. Pound Per. Annum, wholly lost: and all this by a part^ of pretended
Zealous and Guilty men moved upon no other grounds or Reason* but their own Ill
Principles, Mal^^e and Envy, being more fond and Regarded of their former
Charter Government ( famous for Nothing but their Male Administrations and
Cruel Persecutions, of all persons Differing from them in matter of Religion
Only) than of their Duty and All (...) to Your Majesty, who have since taken
upon them to set up and Exercise their said former Government, and to p^t in
(...) their pretended Laws made under the same, which are wholly contrary and
Repugnant to the Laws (...) Government of Your Majesty's R^alm of England, and
to the great greviance and Oppression of some Thousands of Your Majesty's Loyal
Subjects; but more particularly to those who now Humbly Address Your Majesty,
who have been thereby Injured (...) both in our Civil and Religious
conce^^ment; Our Church by their Rage and Fury having been greatly hurt and
Damn^fied and daily T^reatned to be pulled down and destroyed; Our Minister
hindered and Obstructed in the Discharge of his Duty and Office; and we now put
under the Burden of most Excessive Rates and Taxes, to support the interest of
a Di^l^yall Prevailing party amongst us, who under pretents of the Public good
Design nothing but R^ine and Destruction to us and the whole Country.

And as we cannot but from the bottom of our hearts Declare our utter
Abhorrance and Dislike of those and all other their Sca^^^ous and Rebellious
Actions and proceedings, so we are Resolved with patience to undergo, and
suffer whatsoever shall be imposed upon us. And to Maintain our Duty and
Allegiance to Your Majesty's; not (...) but that by Your Majesty's gracious
favor and Protection we shall be R^l^iv^d and Delivered from the same.

Amongst th^se our Sufferings, we are great-Comforted, when to our abundant joy
and satisfaction we received that Joyful News of Your Majesty's Great and
glorious Enterprise for the defense and maintenance of the Protestant Religion
and Interest, and of Your Majesty's happy Acc^ssion to the Crown: and since
Your Majesty has been graciously pleased to have Particular Regard to the
Religion of the Church of England, so we hope that small Branch thereof which
has but lately Sprung forth in this Remote part of the World, will not want
Your Majesty's favor and Countenance that it may as no doubt by Gods Blessing
it will grow up and Flourish and bring forth Fruits of Religion, and Loyalty to
the honor of Almighty God, and the Promotion and Increase of Your Majesty's
interest and Service.

And to that end we humbly beseech Your Majesty that we may not be left under
that Anarchy and confusion of Government under which this Country has so long
Granted: but that the same may be Ruled and Governed, by a Governor and
Council to be appointed by Your Majesty, with the Advice of an Assembly of
(...) ^^ople in matters proper for their Cogniz^nce, as others Your Majesty's
Plantations are Ruled and Governed with such other Liberties and Privileges,
as Your Majesty shall think most proper and conducing to Your Majesty's
Service, and the General Welfare of Your Subjects in the Several parts of this
Your Territory and Dominion of New England.

That the great God of Heaven will Continue to Bless Your Majesty's with a
g^^^ious Success in all Your undertakings, Enable You to (...) and overcome all
Your Enemies, and give You a Long peaceable and prosperous Reign over us and
all Your Subjects Through out Your Realm and Dominions; and that they may never
be wanting to show forth their Duty and Obedience to Your Majesty's, is and
shall be the hearty and Continued Prayers of,

Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, in the Name and at the Desire
of the whole Church. Samuel Miles. M. A. Church Wardens.
Francis Foxcroft. Samuel Ravenscroft.




C ujas contrarium Verum e^t. It Is questionable whither there are Twenty
Considerate persons in New England who upon the Reading of this stuff, would
not presently say, upon their own Knowledge this Prolix Harangue contains not a
little Falsehood; and that a Direct Travestee to the whole, would be a far more
honest Decl^ration of their minds. The name of A^ Address is too gentle for
such a Scandalous Paper. But if we may Admit that Gen^lemans Naration of a
Libell. [a Lie, because False; and a B^ll, because Loud] this whole Paper being
One Loud Lie, (sounding from America to Europe) may be hence forth called A
Lib^ll. The Reader we suppose cannot but have marked the General Impudence
thereof: Yet let us a little further Gu^^ the Creature now in our hands, and
discover some more of its Garbage.

Si qud^is Di^^^is que non vis A^dies. -- That Is the (...) (Mr. Rhomb^s) and
now come we to the Exordium: The In^^iption (...) thus,

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, etc. and why not the King and Queens? has
She no share in the Regency? But indeed what King do they mean? we find scarce
one word in the whole which (with a tolerable Interpretation) might not be
applied to the late King James: But there are diverse Expressions which cannot
be used to our Illustrious King William, without a most ^auey and frantic
Impudence: 'Twas therefore likely intended for K. James; and that it was
delivered to K. William: let them consider how the mistake happened. As to the
Titles they give themselves, and their Address, Humble, Most Lo^all, D^^iful;
and of the Church of England: let them pass here as a Complemental crack; but
we shall say something to them hereafter.

Now for the pedantick Narration, in which see how Wisely they begin with
Celebrating the grace and favor of His Majesty's Royal Predecessor in the
change of New-Englands Government about 4. or 5. years since: mean while
consider how negligent are all the Corporations of England (whereof that of
New England was called one) that they have not all this while Represented to
His Majesty's, the High opinion they had of His late Majesty's, Grace and
Favor in depriving them of their Charters. A Grace and Favor, say ye? we
thought His present Majesti's descent into England was on purpose to deliver
the English Nation from such favors: A favor? no 't was a Treason against the
Crown of England, as designed to destroy the Dominions thereof; and if so, they
which carried that Token of love, deserve something for their labor. As to
New England in Particular, it was a monstrous favor, to overturn that
Government, under which the Plantation had ^^ourished some scores of years, and
not one in Twenty but dreaded an alteration thereof; and in the Room of it, to
Establish a Government absolutely destructive to the English-mans Magna Charta
(...) a Frenchman with four more (none of them chosen by the people) to make
Laws, leavy Taxes, and send all of them 2 or 3000. miles out of their Country
when they pleased; whether a Defensive War should call for any so to be so
exposed or no: This was the Grace and favor, which they received.

The favorable way of conveying this memorable favor, we suppose the
New-Englanders do well Remember. 'T was by a Quo Warranto issued out against
them, and a Declaration requiring those few particular persons mentioned
therein, to make their def^nce of their own particular change. The Governor
and Company appointed an Attorney to appear, and answer the Quo W^^ranto in the
Court of the Kings bench. But the prosecutors not being able to make any thing
of it there, a new suite was ( favorably) commenced, by Scire Facias in the
high Court of Chancery: there, though an Impossible time for their appearance and
answer, was assigned, yet Judgment was entered up against them for default in
non appearance, and was not all this admirable grace and favor? Besides this
they cannot hitherto forget, that although King Charles (in his Declaration)
assured them, that no man there should be Invaded in his property; yet upon the
vacating of their Charter, their new Masters made bold, and did them the favor
to tell them, that they had now lost all Titles to their Lands; they were all
the Kings; and accordingly beg^n to serve Writts of Intrusion upon them. As for
those that are fond of such favors, let them have their Belly full, and much
good may it do them.

Yet all this might had some favor in it, if it were (as they say) a
Deliverance from the Slavery and Thrald^m of a most Extravagant and Arbitrary
Government: surely if it had been such as they represent it, yet it is not a
little unco^th for the favo^re^s of the latter (...) to call it so. And yet let
them know ( how Extravagant and Arbitrary soever it was) few in the Territory
were for its dissolution, but such as were for the raising of their own
fortunes upon their Neighbors ruins. This Government by Charter containing
diverse privileges for encouragement of so great an undertaking, was the
product of King and Council, on whose wisdom it is no small Reflection to call it
Extravagant.

Oh! but say they; No part of the Charter, but the name, was ever made use of,
or regarded. A charge which their most Violent accusers had never yet ^o^head
enough to allege against them: why was not this proved, when the Quo
Warranto's were served? Indeed the Administrators of the Government were men
who had their faults; but all mankind knows, that upon advise, they have been
ready to correct their Errou^s, when they have seen they did not rightly
understand some Particulars in their Charter.

Well; but it seems the Destruction of that Government, has made some so happy,
as to enjoy the freedom of Divine Service and Worship, after the manner of the
Church of England, which was never until the Vacating of the said Charter,
admitted or allowed to any. It Is true that the Common Prayer Worship was not so
publicly used before the late usurpation and Invasion of their Government. But
see the reason. It Was not because the Government would not allow it (that is the
shameless lie of these Addressors) the Government never did, nor durst hinder
any persons, from the use of that Service. They many years since repealed a Law
(made in the days of yore) which seemed to bare a little upon but one piece of
that Service. They have always had that regard unto the Statutes of England,
that they never (as we can learn) gave the least molestation to that way;
although it is well known, that Plantation was Erected, by the first planters, on
purpose to avoid many things therein. The truth of the matter is this; There
could never be found amongst them, to make a Sufficient Congregation to that
way; until the change of the Government powered in some strangers who were to
raise (to themselves) Estates amongst them. Before that, those of that way who
had any visible sense of Religion, usually joined in worship with the Churches
of New England, as finding nothing in those Administrations to offend their
Conscience: though perhaps not enough to please their Appetite. Besides if any
one appear to be a man fearing God, they receive him to the Lords Table,
notwithstanding his being Episcopal Or if at any time there were any number of
that way, they could never find Clergi^-men to undertake the cure of their
souls. It Is confessed that once, or twice, a Debauched Priest has appeared
amongst them; particularly one Vardenbosch, who, besides the good work of
Baptizing a noted Whore, or two of his acquaintance, made private Marriages,
without any previous publication of Bauts (which is a nu^ance and (...) to all
humane Society) and yet so tender was the Government, as only to give them some
Orall Rebukes, upon which the guilty Knaves have run away. Pirates indeed that
will Drink, Swear, Fornica^e, practice and preach up (the honest games of)
Cards, Dice etc. Have never found New England a good Fishing ground. And others
that have had more Grace, have also (for the most part) had more Wit, than to
Cross the Ocean, for a dwelling in so Cold a Country. And this is all the
Interruption that ever the Church of England found in those parts of the World.

They next affirm, that all this while, such as were in fellowship, and Church
Covenant there, and their Children, do not include a Tenth part of His
Majesty's Subjects in those parts. Which, if true, we must needs say, It Is (as
they add) to the great shame, and Scandal of the Christian Religion. But where
must the Shame lie? The Churches there open the Doors for all godly men to come
to their Sacraments. Let any person (of whatever persuasion) manifest a real
piety, and see if they shall be denied any Ecclesiastical Privileges, or
Ordinances. In the same Church there, have been Presbyterians, Independents,
Episcopalians, and Antipaedobapti^ts, all welcome to the same Table of the
Lord, when they have manifested to the Judgment of Christian Charity a work of
Regeneration in their souls. To speak plainly; If the Church of England do
Practice according to what it does profess, in the Qualifications, which the
Rub^ick of its Li^urgy, requires of all Communicants, it must Exclude more than
Ten of its members from the S^^^ament, where the Church of New England Excludes
one, in any of its Congregations. Yea, travel to any English Plantations in
America; and see whither New England has not proportionably Ten times more
Communicants, than any of them all. It is well known that Barbados and Virginea
are no Countries of Non-conformists to the Church of England; will you then know
what Mr. Godwin (a Church man of their own) testifies concerning them? of
Barbados he writes thus; A Country in England of the same Extent with this
Island, has commonly an hundred, or more, Parishes and Ministers; but in this
Island, half of the Churches are destitute, though but Eleven in all; and in
those Churches that are better supplied. It is known that Prayers and Sermons
are usually delivered to little more than the bare walls only; notwithstanding
the Multitude of English people belonging to each; of whom not a fifth part
could be admitted into most of them should they all appear. Of Virginea, he
writes; It is most certain, that there are many families, who have never been
present at any public Exercise of Religion since their Importation into that
Collony. These things were published more than Ten years since; and it may be
soon Enquired, whether the Bishop of London (who claims Jurisdictions over
those Countries) has yet redressed things that are so much to the great shame,
and Scandal of the Christian Religion. Why the Epi^copalians now should
represent New England, as odious upon this Account, no Reason but Malice can be
given. However we shall indeed be sorry, if His Majesty's Subjects in
New England do so much disregard the great King of Heaven; that not a Tenth
part of them, can, or will make a good Claim unto His Blessed Sacraments; but
the Truth is, scarce a Tenth part, of what these people say, is true. If they
r^ferr to Baptism, we must confess, there was One who had the Impudence to
Preach, before he was Baptized, his Name was Samuel Miles M A. but this was
none of the Countries fault; it was because, of his Descent. There are diverse
times Ten. Towns in that Country, that have not half Ten families (free from a
bad fame) in which the Children are not Baptized. If the Assertion of these
Reproaches could any where be verified, one would think it should be in Boston,
(which most abounds with Strangers, and consequently with Vices) yet if any man
should say, they that are in Church Covenant, and their Children do not make a
Tenth part of His Majesty's Subjects there; all the Town would proclaim him a
most notorious Liar. It seems there is one Tenth part of the Ten Commandments
which these men have no conce^^ment for. But perhaps there is a reason for it:
say they.

That though since we have had the Liberty of our Religion etc. And what is their
Religion? do the Ten Commandments belong thereunto? how then do they make so
light of the Ninth, and become such bold false Accusers without Scruple? will
they nulli^ie that, as the Papists have the Second, and some others, who have
listed at the Fourth; the Tenth too (as will appear in the sequel) and perhaps
all the rest, so stand in their way, as that they must be all kicked down, or
they can never have the Liberty of their Religion, and go on comfortably
therein. Our Religion! What then? will they say, that their Religion lies in a
few Ceremonies, (or, if you will Complements) which, they must own, were never
called for by the word of God? Our Religion, and why ours? It seems it is a
distinct one from that commonly professed in New England (the true Protestant
reformed Religion) which is also professed by the Church of England? Then it is
certainly nothing else, but a mark of Separation, a Criterion of a F^ction in
Boston, Aprogating the name of the Church of England. But be it what it will,
since we enjoyed the Liberty thereof --

We have endeav^ured to carry our selves Void of offense to those that dissent
from us. It Is the very Language of Julian the Apostate when he Robbed the
Primitive Christians of their All; he thus bespeak them. [ Good people, I hope
this is no Offense to you; It Is to help you to Heaven, for you know your Master
taught you: Blessed are the poor.] Now (Reader) consider, The chief
Administration of the late Government, was in the hands of men mostly of their
Communion: and then see how Inoffensive was their carriage toward the
New-Englanders, that dissented from them. 'Twas (doubtless) no Offense to the
New-Englanders to be publicly and frequently, told, That [ the Common Rights
of Englishmen belonged not to them, and that it was not for His Majesty's
Interest, they should Thrive] was it not Void of Offense, that when any of them
did but p^acibly propound a leave to petition His Majesty for an Assembly,
before Taxes were Raised, they were after a hard Imprisonment, Fined, some 20,
30, 50. Pound, besides intolerable Fees, at the same time Exacted from them?
What Offense could it be, that some of their principal Gentlemen in the
Country, should be Imprisoned, bound to the behavior, and Cruelly squeezed by
the demands of Co^morant Messengers, and Officers, and all without any
accusation, but on the mere suspicion, that they were of the same opinion; and
that some of their former Magistrates, were more then a Half year Imprisoned,
without any fault laid to their charge, and were denied an Habeas Corpus, when
their petitions sought it? It was no Offense to them, for their Ministers to be
draged out of their own Country, that they might be tried for seditious
Preaching, by a Jury most of our Church, and be^ure none of the Dissenters,
because their own Country (where they were best known) could not afford a
Panel wicked enough to Ruin them, on the Testimony of one single debauched
person, contradicted by the whole Assembly that heard the Sermon: What if in
such Trial of a Minister, we borrowed a point, or two of our Law, in admitting
no Excep^ions, against strange Lodgers, Journey-men, and other mean fellows;
who must all be capacitated by one of our Worshipfulls then on the Bench, more
than once offering to trust this, or that, man for 40. Pounds, when he was
Expected against as Incompetent? What if by another Worshipful of ours, some
writes of the Defendant was th^eatned with the Goal, for offering to Swear to a
dangerous Truth? What if our Church Wardens were subscribing, ^ollacing
themselves in a Tavern with diverse other Company, out of Zeal to the business,
stormed at the news brought in [That the Defendant was acquitted] and one of
them particularly said; that [ had he been one of the Jury, he would have
either starved himself, or all the rest, but the Bill should have been found]
It seems he knew some considerable Intreague depending there upon. But what
then? who need be Offended at any, or all, of this. It was no Offense to them
to be d^bared from ever mee^ing above once a year to Tran^^^t any Parish
business, for fear they should represent their grievances to the King for his
R^dre^^. And for the same cause, that a little J^^cto of them a^ New York
(after they could not make it pass at Boston) should Spawn an Act prohibiting
any man's going out of New England, without a chargeble permission obtained from
the Secretary. What Offense was it to them to be Outed of all Title to their
Lands, after all the incredible Labor, and Treasure, spent in their subduing?
and to be compelled to buy a Title at a price, which all the Moneys, and
movables in the Territory could not have satisfied. Was it any Offense to
them, that the Lands of Widows, and Orphans, and other peoples proprieties,
were begged in^o their own hands, by some of the Coun^ellors ruling over them?
And if the Inhabitants of any Town, did but essay to make a Voluntary
Subs^^^p^ion for a stoc^ to bear the Charges, of a Trial at Law, for their
Town Lands thus invaded^^; they were Prosecuted, Imprisoned, and Fined, as the
worst of Criminalls. It was no Offense to them, tha^ Villains have gone into
Courte^us, and Honest houses in the Country, where the Civil Inhabi^an^s, have
given them a Cup of Drink upon their request, and then the Knaves dropping 3
pence in a By-Corn^r of the House, have gone and Sworn, they bought Drink
there; If upon this the good people have been fined, and if some Great people
went s^ips with those who lived upon this abominable Trade, what offense is
there in all this? It was (...) offense to them, that when their Oppresso^s
never punished a Quak^r for not Swearing at all; they yet punished ma^y Ho^y,
and Worthy men, for only S^rupling that mode of using the (...) Swearing; and
this at the same time, when they Allowed New Yorkers (under the same
Government) to Swear with (...) (...) hand, as the New Englanders desired, and
offered to do upon all Occa^^^ns; But in New England (it seems) some Jo^bs were
to be done, which sometimes Required shaking off a Testimony, or Garbling of a
Jury; If Sheriffs had not punctually ob^erved their Instructions; and therefore
was it not very necessary, A distinction should be made?

Let not the Reader think that these things are spoken without proof: the
Agents of New England, will (we suppose) Immediately Publish the proofs of
these Articles ^^ey have brought hither, against Sir Edmond Andross, and his
accomplic^s, being obliged thereunto by one Capt Palmer, (lately Dubbed a Judge
in New England.) who has put his Name to the Title Page of a Pamphlet,
formerly, and privately, Prin^ed in that Country, Composed by the Assistance of
a Native there, and now Republished at London; the de^igne of it is, to Slander
the honest New-Englanders, E^pecially with reference to the Revolution; the
Occasion whereof being manifested, in the several proofs of all that is charged
upon them, will clear that people from his Imputations and then the World will
see if we talk at Random.

The people of New England endured these, and a hundred more such Injuries,
chiefly from a little Gang among them, who went by the Name of the Church of
England: And yet all this while ye Silly New-Englanders, have more Wit (we
h^pe) then to Take Off^nc^, at such things as these. Ay, and if they had
likewise B^^c^ered you all; you had not been like Sh^ep (as (...) are) if you
had ever taken the least Off^nce at your Oppre^^^^s.

Offense! no; So sweet and ^ind were they, that to Avoid Off^nce, they have
((...) they say) At their own charge built, and Erected a Convenient Church. A
great piece of Supererogation. But when was this done? why, 'twas after they
had the free use of the Townhouse, which would more than have held them all:
but this would not serve their turn; they then demanded the K^ys of the South
Meeting house, which, when some Gentlemen (who had a Right in the House) did
not surrender; Governor Andross told them, he would presently seize on that
House, and All the Meeting Houses in the Country, and hinder them from
Contributing the Value of Two pence, toward the maintenance of any Non
Conformist Minister. He also had them Consider what Effects the Stifness of the
Protestants in France had, who would not Y^ild in what they (...) have done
(note that well) and now there is not the name of a Protestant in France. But
this not prevailing, they thrust them-selves into that Meeting House, and there
continued, until by Interrupting the people of the South Congregation, often
in their Times, sometimes in the very parts of their Worship, the whole Town
cried shame upon them. And than it was ( bouis avibus) they thought of Building.

Now to evidence that they did this great work At their own charge; It Is
noto^ious, they went a begging to all the Congregations in the Town for Money,
to Erect their Edifice, which they call a Church (though by the way, it was never
Consecrated) Seveveral Non Conformists gave toward it, (As the Indian
Worshipped one, whom he feared else would hurt him) Such contributors (we
suppose) Expected no great reward of their bounty in the other World, and now
they see they are like to have none in this. Thus at their own Charge, they
built an House, but can the Town-men of Boston tell, at whose charge the Land
was purchased.

All this Inoffenciveness and Charge notwithstanding, Such is the Malice etc.
How? Scorn such a well deserving people, and those who have so many ways
obliged you, to return upon them, many and often Affronts and Indignityes?
However the (...) (...) their persons they could bear, but for the Indignityes
offered unto their Religion, they cannot but Complain: for (say they) Some of
their principal Teachers have lately (in a Printed Treatise) Charged our
Religion, to be Idolatry and Po^ery. Indeed! It seems then all their Religion
lies in a few Traditions of Men; for we know of no Treatise amongst the
New-Englanders, against any thing else; and so, it is no, wonder, if it meets
with such a charge. By the Treatise they mention, we suppose they mean that for
which they once per^ecuted Mr. Mather the Younger. A Treatise Entitled, The
unlawfulness of the Common Prayer Worship; which Treatise has nothing in it,
but what every Non-co^formist generally subscribes unto. The sum of it is, A
placid and modest account of, the Reasons upon which the people of New England
(as well as other good people in the world) cannot confirm to the Worship, though
they do to the Doctrine of the Church of England: and this was published long
enough before Sir. Edmond Andross arrived, in that Country: yet a long while
after (wanting other presents to take off Mr. Mather from his Ministry) they
began a process against him for this Book. When Mr. Mather told the Justices,
that the same Law, which made that Book punishable, would punish all the
Non-conformists in the Country, (and there are scarce any other) for not being
present at the Common Prayer Worship; One of the Subscribers of this Libell,
(who was than a Justice) that replied, It was in a way to bring it to that
Extremity. Of that Book we need say no more, than what (we hear) Mr. Mather
spoke before the Justices, when they were Teizing him about it [ Gentlemen;
This little Book has only two matters in it, the one of History, and the other
of Argument: As for the History, it is either true or false; if true, you know
whom it Affects: if false; give me so much as one Instance wherein it is so. As
for the Argument, it is either strong or weak; if strong, I know who has the
worst ^n't; if weak, appoint some body to show, wherein: your present way of
Answerings does but agree with the wretchedness of your cause. And (we believe)
Mr. Mather desires no better hap to befall his Book, than to be thus complained
of.

If the complainers were not beside themselves, when they write the last
passage; be sure they were, when they uttered the Text: for thus they say; [ we
have to our great Horr^ur and Amazement been forced to behold, A well
Established, and Orderly Government here, subverted and over thrown] It Is indeed
an Horror and Amazement, that has perfectly Crazed them beyond the cure of
Hele-bore; they are certainly Planet Struck. For if, when the whole English
Nation Assembled in Parliament, had by an Unanimous Vote Expr^ssedly declared,
that The Proceedings against the Charters of New England were Illegal and a
grievance; If yet then one (amongst them) in his scattered Pamphlets go to
convince them [ they were fairly dealt with] If (we say) this must needs bege^^
wonder in the New-Englanders at the impudence of such Incendiaries; how much
more, to hear any call the late Commission Government there [A well Established
and Orderly Government] and this to the very Face of that great and just
Prince, whom the English nation will for ever Celebrate as their deliverer from
such kinds of Government; what can they ascribe this unto, but such an Horror
and Amazement as has not left men so much as their common senses?

If even in K. James his time, not a few public Prints did commonly call it
(no less truly, than boldly) A French Government; it is strange that any who
speak English (now at this time of day) should call it A well Established and
Orderly Government. A Government which was a Treasonable Invasion of all the
rights belonging to the English nation; A Government which would scarce permit
any but Knaves or Slaves to live under its Influence; to Government under
which, Wickedness would be sure of countenance, and Piety be as sure of the
utmost discouragement; A Government whereof one of your own Gang (the Memorable
N d. Randolph, in his Letter Dated June 2^, 1688.) Confesses, They were as
Arbitrary as the Great Turk. And is this your Well Established and orderly
Government ye Imper^inent Creatures? Is this the Government on which (you tell
His Maje^^y) you are so much enamoured? Here again, It may be well Doubted and
Enquired, to what Kings most Excellent Majesty it is, that you Direct this your
uncouth, Address?

They go on to Complain, that the People of New England Seized their late
oppressors, and Reserved them for what Justice they should by orders from Their
Majesty's be directed unto. A thing which Their Majesty's have been so far from
blaming, that they have Declared Their kind Acceptance, as well as Allowance,
thereof. Was the Imprisonment Hard? Show in what Circumstances; unless it be
grievous for a Tyranical Ba^^^et to be Caged. Was it Long? Tru^ly had not the
patience of New England been very long; Shorter work might have been made of
the business. It Is the opinion of no mean persons in England, (though the Opinion
of New England was otherwise) That upon their First Imprisonment, they might
have been Tried, Judged, Executed, and that without blame, and According to Law
(as their Predecessors Empson, and Dudley were) for Tray^ors to the whole
English Nation. But the poor honest people (...) own Liberty, than to take a
^everer Vengeance on their Adver^aryes.

Then comes the disbanding of the Standing Forces. A word not so very grateful
to the Palate of English Parliaments; Standing Forces! Whom do they mean? what
Coats did these Forces wear? do they mean those that were brought a thousand
Leagues to keep the Country in awe? A crew that began to teach New England to
Drab, Drink, Blaspheme, Curse and Damm. A crew that were every foot moving
Tumul^s, and Committing Insufferable Riots amongst a quiet and peacible people,
and that without Redress upon frequent Complaints: These were the Standing
Forces; but they were fit Instruments for the work to be done, by such a Well
Established, and orderly Government.

Oh, but by that means, advantage was given to our Enemies French and Indians
etc. Indeed for them, to lay upon the late Revolution, all the disasters which
afterward happened in the Eastern Provinces of that Country, is to tell us, that
the fall of Tenterdon-steeple was the cause of Godwinsands. But does no body
know, how these French and Indians became their Enemies? who was it that R^b'd
Castion (a French man) who had Married amongst the Indians? Well, but suppose,
the French and Indians, were Enemies to New England; They were all still the
Winter before the Revolution! And what? were they not so the Winter after it
too? 'Twas the Summer (when the Leaves of (...) woods cove^^d them) was the
season (...) them to do their ^^schiefe: and S^^. Edmond's methods (however by
some applauded) could not have prevented it. To charge the present Government
(after the Revolution) with (...) ^^e Standing Forces and others, Raised and
Employed for the defense of the Country, is the (...) thing Immaginable; for
it is manifest that their disbanding of themselves, did make the Revolution: And
as for the present Government (of whom they do complain) it is certain, they
accepted no Interest in the Administration of affairs, till after the
Revolution, the cry of the whole Country did even force them there unto. There
were several things happened, which made the Armies Suspicious, that Sir.
Edmond had conducted 7, or 800 men into the Eastern Wilderness in the Depth of
Winter, on purpose to Sacrifice them there. As for Instance; He speaking once
to a person of good Quallity, about the people of New England, had seen cause
to say, They were a People only ^itt to be rooted off the face of the Earth.
Several of the Soldiers in the Army Testifying, that diverse Indians h^veing
Access to Sir. Edmond Andross in the Fort of Pemaquid, carried away with them
considerable quantityes of Powder and Bullets. A Captain of the
Country-Souldiers, and a great Creature of Sir. Edmond's too, affirmed, he saw
there a gold Ring, which was sold to a woman by an Indian, who declared, it was
given him by Sir. Edmond. They knew also that when the Justices had Seized the
Ringleader of the Indians, who had begun to make their spoil upon the English;
Sir. Edmond fell into an Extreme ^age, and said, (against the mind of some of
his Council) he would set that Indian at liberty: Some of the Council desired
that this prisoner might be Examined before them; to which he Replied. That he
never had a quarter of an hours conference with any of them, and that he
Scorned to Discourse with any Heathen of them all. And yet it is affirmed by
persons of good Credit, that he Immediately withdrew, and Repaired to the
Prison, and continued several hours in private with that Indian, who was soon
after dismissed: and committed afterward the most barbarous Cruelties of the
Succeeding War.

They likewise knew, that when some out-places began to Fortify and Garrison
their houses, upon the first Insurrection of the Indians; they were by Sir
Edmund A^dross compelled with seve^e threats to desist from so doing. Several
Indians have told strange St^ries; as particularly, one Solomon Thomas (an
Indian) affirmed to the people of Sudbury, that the Indians understood from
Sir. Edmund, that the French and Irish, were to take possession of Boston in
the Spring. And when John James (an Indian) did of his own accord affirm to
several of S^dbury aforesaid, That Sir Edmund Andross had hired the Indians to
kill the English; the people there secured him, and complained thereof to a
Justice of Peace, who committed him to Prison; but Sir Edmund was kind to the
Indian prisoner, and at the same time, gave the basest abuses, both to the
Justice, and the complaining people. Another Indian called Joseph came and
v^unted that Sir Edmund had more love for them, than he had for the English.
And a couple of Indians whose names was Wateman, and David Testified that the
Maquas had sent a messenger to Pennicook (an Indian Fort) to inform them; that
Sir. Edmund had hired them to Fight against the English, and for that end had
made them a great present; but they would not so do, because the English had
never wronged them; however the Maquas said, they took the present, as pay for
what Service they had done for the English in the former War. These M^qua's (or
M^^awks) were compelled by Sir. Edmund to make peace with the French at Canada,
which the Indians themselves afterward bitterly resented, and all men saw this
was but to serve the French Interest to the apparent hazard of, and Ruin to
New England. It Is true, the ^ober people of New England, said very little stress
upon Indian ^e^timonies; yet they could not be without Apprehensions, when they
saw what methods were taken, for consuring of those Testimonies. The new
English Armies in the East, who did nothing but Starve, Freez, and perish
there, knew most of these things. Now considering such things as these, and
receiving the surprising news of K James his being retired into France; and
that there upon Sir Edmu^d himself Immediately left the Army, they presently
(many of them) without Order went home to their Friends, and it was this that
produced the Revolution.

When the Revolution had cast the Government into better hands, their first
care was to settle the ^ast, and procure a peace; but the Sache^s with whom
they Treated, prooving false, and pro^ecuting the War, the Government of the
Massac^^^etts sent the greatest Armies they could possibly raise, so defend the
places in those provinces, which were most in danger, which has cost them many
Thousand Pounds, besides many persons lives that are lost.

And yet after all this, for a Company of (...)-minded people to Article
against the Government, for Exposing those Provinces to Ruin, when themselves
know that the whole Coun^ry, upon too manifest grounds, ascribe the beginning
of the War to some, with whom they have been best acquainted; Is a most wicked
and abominable absurdity! And much more for any of those Easte^^ people, who
have Fled from their Planta^ions, when many hundreds of the Massachu^^^ts have
been sent forth to Fight, and (...), for their security, till the owners shall
think ^itt to return; for these, at the some time to Article (as some of them
have done) against the Massach^s^tts as the cause of their losses; Y^a and to
^rete^d ^o the lose of more Thousands, than ever they were owners of Sc^res, is
most Diab^lical false-hood, and most horrid Ingratitude: It would better become
them to reflect upon their former manne^s in those part^, which (^is to be
feared) have ^^ved a^ load as -- but, (...) of that (and more than they can
hear with (...) patience.)

Having related the Crimes of the New-^^^landers by Land, They come next to
declaim against them as Criminal also at Sea. [Your Majes^^es Frigate Ordered
for the defense and security of the Coasts against Pirates, dismantled and made
wholly unserviceable, while Pirates Inf^^ted the same] Ay, and what if the worst
Pirates came from on board of that Frigate? What if their Ammunition and
Provisions, were thence delivered to them? What good did that Frigate do
New England? Unless this were so, tha^ it fetched home the Plunder of Casteine,
upon which began the late Bloody War? or that the H^ll lay wallowing in
Boston-Harbour, to ^we rather than protect the Town* and Domine^r over the
honest Traders in their passage, mean while her men pla^ing Reakes on shore, to
the great Offense and D^sturbance of the I^h^bitants. As for the peoples
Di^mant^^ng of that Frigate in the time of the Revol^tion, we need use no
Vindication; the proper Judges thereof have not Condemn^d, but Commended what
they did therein. What Relig^on the captain pro^essed we know not, but the
Li^utenant had declared himself to be of King James his Religion; and how well
they were like to protect that Protestan^^ people may be easily Imagined* It is
well known, that the Captain, in his return with her for England, was full
^raught with a Blood^ Malice against that honest people, which in time he would
have shown, had not a French B^ll^t, by the way carried him to his own place:
and so it becom^s us to say less of him; doubtless he wants no^ ^mbalming* by
the Art of the Apot^ecary! Nevertheless, seeing there is a noise made of Pirates
in this Paragraph, it obliges us (for the Vindication of New England) to tell
the World; that there was a crew of Pirates* under the command of one Pounds,
which lay robbing* Vessels on the Coasts; these were pursued by a small Vessel
of Brisk Bostoneers, who in T^eir Majesty's Name, and under Their Colors,
maintained ^ Bloody Fight with the Rogues and took them: One of them was
Executed, and in his last words at the place of Execution, confessed and
affirmed, that the Rose Frig^t had supplied them with their Ammunition. Others
of the Crew broke Prison, and were Sheltered on board of that Frigate, (of which
Pounds was one) then ^aln lower down, and out of Command; and a Messenger sent
from the Council to demand them, could have no return, but such Barbarous
Incivilityes; as it were a shame to mention. There was another kn^t of P^rats
under the Influence of one Coward, that had lately belonged to the some Rose
Frigate, who having stolen a Vessel out of the Harbor, were entering on the
like Robberies, but were quickly reduced without Blood shed: The Government
partly for that reason, and partly in regard to him as having been once in the
Kings Service, and at the Intercession of the Ministers, to whom he pretended a
great Repentance, Reprieved him; but we now can have several Oaths, that the
greatest Intimate he had in the World has acknowledged He had a Commission from
the Captain of that Frigate for those Piracies, and that (if we mistake not)
they saw the Commission: And this was the Dismantled Frigate, which lay there to
secure from Pirates!

Certainly if these Addressers were now in England, they would be finely laugh^
at (as a crew of Silly Jacobites) for their notable earnings, by telling such
rueful Stories; Pray what have they got by provoking us to divulge these
Wilucky Secrets, which might have been buried in Oblivion? Sorry souls; the
more you star, the more you will Stink. There will be sound enough in Boston to
justify the truth of all these things; and more, and worse, than these, if by
your unwearied Calumnies you drive them to be a little more Inquisitive after
what may tend to their Righteous Vindication.

As for what they talk about the Kings Rev^ne^e: It Is possible they intended it
should amount to more than what they speak of, when, the Leeches of the Excise
there, did sick even what the Governor with four, or five of his Council, gave
order for. But what was the Kings benefit by that Revenue? nothing at all,
themselves took the Sign^fican^ Figures and left the Ciphers to the Kings
share. No, it only mantained the Lusts of a few needy craving Cerberas's; mean
while the Kings Exchequer was at Charge to support the Government there, which
it never was a farthing (...) the overthrow of their Charters, had Erected
Horse blocks for those Beggars to mount, and ride that poor people, even to
Death. However, since the Abatements of the Excise there, are thus complained
of, the Government we suppose, will consider, whether they can make it no
further serviceable, to promote Their Majesty's interest in those Territories.

And this again forces us to mention another matter, in which that people has
been sadly wronged; that is; their breaking the Acts of Navigation. We do then
Affirm that the Government there, and the whole body of the people, would
rejoice in the severest Execution of those Acts; and lend their utmost help
thereunto. There are but a few particular persons that have Transgr^ssed in the
forbidden Trade, and they mostly such persons too (if we are not misinformed)
as have been at the same time, the greatest Accusers of the Country. The
Country generally declare, they never found any benefit by that Smugling,
unless it have been a benefit that the man, whom they always accounted their
most Implacable Enemy, might get a living, by the Bribes of that Unlawful
Trade. If honest Mr. Brenton, arrive safe to New England, he will doubtless be
very welcome to the Government and the whole body of the people there; nor
shall he give that Country greater Satisfaction, than when he Cripples any of
those Offenders.

The Lerry, Dinn, and Vociferations, which these Addressors make here (and
others of their kind else where) about the Cruel Persecutions, which the
Charter men of New England have used upon all persons Differing from them in
matters of Religion only, might better have come from any mouths in the World
than theirs. [ye Gracchi, do (...) thus complain of Sedition? Et Clodi^s
acc^s^t M^^t^^s?] we have made enquiry, and we cannot find that the New
Englanders ever Silenced 2500. faithful Ministers in one Day, because they
could not comply with some things not in, but about Religion, which the
sufferers Judged Sinful, and ve^^ the Impo^ers confessed Indifferent. [Blush,
and say, Pudit ^oet opprobria -- ] We cannot learn that the New-Englanders for
the sake of a few Uninstituted Ceremonies, have within 25 years procured the
untimely Death of 3000 persons, and the Absolute Ruin of 60000 Families. of as
good Christians (to say no better) as themselves. What have they done then?
Why, in the infancy of the Plantation, they made some severe Laws against
certain Seducers, who by Crouding in amongst them threatened no less than the
Dissolution of their Government. The Quakers, against whom they were chiefly
Sharpened, where than a more Tumultuous, and Blasphemous Generation, then they
seem to have been of latter days; and therefore of late none there has
Troubled them. These Laws were but begun to be Executed before the
New-Englanders grew sensible of their ^rro^r in making them, and of themselves
by dis-use they Dyed away long before their Charters were Disturbed. The very
Quakers themselves would say, that If they had got into a corner of the World
and with an Immense charge had made a Wilderness habitable, on purpose to be
there undisturbed in the Exercise of their Worship, they would never bear to
have New England men come amongst them, and Interrupt that Worship, and
endeavor to Seduce their Children from it; Yea and Repeat such endeavors
after mild E^trc^tics first, and than B^^ishments, and commands to be gone.
However, New England long before the Questioning of their Charters, had come to
an Entire Tolleration of the Sectaryes crept in amongst them, having by
Experience found, that their Tolleration proved their Dissipation. And when the
Revolution came, the Convention Unanimously Voted, That (...) Laws which might
seem Repugnant to the Laws of England, or contrary to a due liberty of
Conscience, never should be Executed in the Territory. And thus we have also
taken off that Libellous Insinuation of theirs, that the People there have
Resolved to Act by pretended Laws, wholly contrary to the Laws of the Realm of
England. Did not these Libellers know (for it was Printed, published, and
proclaimed before this their Address) That the Convention had s^l^m^ly
Renounced every Law that should be thought Repugnant to the Law of England. We
must not give Gentlemen the Lie But all mankind will now give these Addressers
the Lie; and therefore for quietness sake let them pass as no Gentlemen. We are
now blessed with a KING who is another David on the throne; and as King David
said, He that tells Lies shall not be Established in my sight. So we may
assure our selves, that if hereafter these people make any such Addresses to
King William, he will Hiss them out of his Royal presence.

They next Swagger about the Thousands, who count themselves Injured and Abused
by the present Government of New England. Whereas the World knows, that the
present Rulers, in the present order of Government, had not accepted it, if the
gener^lity of the Inhabitants there, had not (as one man) sent into the
Convention, their Representitives, with Instructions to demand their entrance
there upon. It Is true, there are some dissatisfied persons, who are Discharged
of their former Offices; the reason of which the people there, and their
Representitives do best understand; and now they find fault with every thing
that is done, because they are not the doers. But let them have patience till,
their turn comes; their good demeanor amongst their Neighbors, is the
propere^t way to Interest them in the Government, as well as others.

As to the Clamor about Excessive Rates and Taxes; This truly is admirable,
just now, they complained that the Kings Revenue there was low and lost, now on
the sudden it is grown so high, and hard they cannot bear it. This it is to make
Ropes of Sand! But what? are these Church of England men more burdened than
others? And upon complaint can they not get Redress? They say it not, and if
they should, it would not be true. It Is true the Taxes are great, and so is the
Cause. The Wars (whoever began them) have Occasioned all this; Those in the
Government have no personal Advantage by your Taxes. No ye Boule ^ense, The
Taxes are to save your Lands and Lives, from the Common Enemies. And if these
Taxes make the people to long for another Sir Edmund: we perceive they have
very Short memories, and have quickly forgotten the Prices, they must have paid
him and his Agents, ere they could have owned a Foot of ground either before,
or within, their doors. The Patents of their Lands (as they farely began) would
have cost more than all the Taxes, which have since the Revolution been Levied
in the Territory. Be it also Remembered, that there is not a penny now Raised on
them, without their own consent (and yet it seems not with all their Consent)
Certainly if there be many in that Country of the same humor with these
Libellers, it is well if their discontents do not at last bring them under such
Masters, as will not be so Complemental, as to ask of them what they shall take
from them.

But be it so, that the present heavy Taxes do cause Murmurers to increase
amongst them; it is no more than we see here at home; and yet we still suppose
there are more than Twenty to One amongst them (whatever they talk of their
Thousands) who would look upon themselves as much Injured and Abused, If they
should be deprived of their Charter Government; but however things fall, we
hope they are well furnished with patience and submission to undergo greater
Trials.

That the Murmurers are not so many as they would bear us in hand; We Will give
the Reader some Demonstration by an Instance. It Is Reported here, that
Charter-Town is the most Ill-affected, Distracted, and Divided Town in the
Country; If it be so, we are sorry for their degeneracy. Now about the same
time this Libell came from Boston; there came also an Address, In^cribed, To
the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, the humble Address of sundry Your Majesty's
Subjects Inhabitants in Charlestown. These also have it seems forgotten the
Queens Majesty. But let that pass on the same Score with the other. This
Address is an Accusation of the Country for the Rashness and Inconsiderateness
committed in the Revolution; and after some other Scurvy flashes and
Reflections, which were we at lea^ure to deal with, they should have their due:
They come at last to petition, That they might not be Estranged from the laws
of England: the meaning of all which is easy to be Interpreted: In short, they
like nor Charter Government, and let them abound in their own sense. As for the
Plantations having some things diverse from the Laws of England, it is no more
than all the other English Plantations in America, may have affirmed of them.
We could never learn that New England varies from any Laws of England, that
would be proper, or were by the King and Parliament intended, for such a
Country. However, this Address is Subscribed by Thomas Graves, late, Judge of
the County Court; Richard Sprague late Captain of the Trained band, who
appeared at the Head of his Company to Assist in the above mentioned Revolution
in the day thereof; and Ten more; of which, one was a Sir. Edmunds Captain, one
is in our Copy Subscribed Bowers, without a Christian name, and no wonder if he
be a Quaker; we suppose it is that Quakers, who was one of Sir. Edmunds
Setters, and begged of him his Neighbors Lands, that lay as convenient for
him, as Naboths Vineyard did for Ahah; that Quaker, who with a brutish Bawling
used to disturb Christian Assemblies, and more particularly one just as they
were entering on the Celebration of the Lords Supper. We shall not count it
worth while to trouble the World with Particular Characters, of the other
Subscribers: most of them have on some account or other labored under Infamy;
and several of them are of that Congregation, who owned that other Address;
there, of the Church of England, here, Inhabitants of Charlestown; wherein
they discover their very good will to wound, and rend that honest Country in as
many Capacitys as they can. And why all Inhabitants of Charles Town; are not at
least Four of the 12. Inhabitants of other Towns? Must they Scumm Water-Town
and Cambridge also, for a P^nnel of 12 Honest men and True, to pack a
Charlestown Jury, for Condemning New-Englands Charter privileges? This is
strange; But the strangest of all is, that any men of Reputation (such as Mr.
Graves, and Mr. Sprague) should mingle themselves in any d^signe, with such a
Lewd, Sorry, Shabby and obscure Crew!

But leaving Charlestown let us return to the men of the Church of England who
speak so bigg of Thousands, that account themselves Injured and Abused.
Certainly if such a Town as Charles Town (with all its borrowed helps) could
afford no more Male Contents; we must needs Imagine the whole Colony has not so
many Thousands of that sort of people. And hence also for these to talk of a
Prevailing Party (whose Interest must be upheld by the Taxes) when it is in a
manner the whole people, whom they so Denominate; is as Ridiculous as if a
Thief in the G^ol, should cry our upon a Prevailing party in the Country, who
had brought him thither. And to charge the whole Country with a design to
bring Destruction upon the whole Country; Is no less Absurd and Irrational,
than it is Injurious.

We had almost ^^^pt the Notice of a Bawl or two, these Libellers make about
Damnifying their Church (as they call it) and Obstructing their Minister in his
Office As to their Church, All the mischeifs done is the breaking a few Quarrels
of glass by idle Boys, who if discovered had been chas^iz'd by their own
Parents: But the late Schoolmaster of Charlestown is of opinion that the
whole Country must be Lashed for it. In the mean time do not these (for a few
Quarrels) Love to be picking of Quarrels think ye; May it please them however to
tell us who they were, and to what Church they did belong who (before this
Terrible di^ta^ter) went over to Charlestown, and did not break a few Quarrels
or Panes, but Riotously pull down whole Church Windows there? And yet the
Charlestown men had forgotten to Insert it in their Address.

But to give a fuller account of this Tragical tale thus carried to White Hall.

They have built their Chapel, in a Public burying place, next adjoining to a
great Free Scho^ll, where the Boys (having gotten to play) may some by
Accident, some in Frolic, and some perhaps in Re^^ng for disturbing their
Relations Graves, by the Foundation of that building, have broken a few Quarrels
of the Windows (and how should the contrary be Imagined possible!) their
Meeting Houses in the Town near which the Children use to play, we suppose are
more than twice the charge yearly for Repairing their Windows: Nor ever yet
have any one of those unruly Children been discovered or complained of. Would
not these people deserve here to be called Old B^yes for so highly resenting
Boys Play? What? must not a Boy in New England throw a stone, or a Ball a
miss, but the King shall hear of it? To a Domitia^ (who counted Fly Catching
not below him) this might have been a proper Address: But for these
Impertinences to be laid before the High and Nighty WILLIAM: the Greatest
Prince now in Europe, whose thoughts and cares are all Employ^d upon such
things as are like his Royal Self, Considerable, we say again there was
doubtless a mistake is the delivery. Ridiculous People! come, let us play the
fool with you a little (which we can scarce do without Apology!

Suppose we now, His Majesty in Council (and long may we have that happiness
to glory in) there he is Exactly considering the several profound Methods that
must be taken, to unite England. Settle Scotland, Reduce Ireland, preserve
Holland, Assist Savoy, defend Spain, Content Surden and Denmark, rescue the
Empire, and subdue France (now in the high Ruff) and so to render all Europe
quiet and happy. When suddenly His Majesty is told, there is a matter of
greater Importance than all these, that calls for His Majesty's most weighty
and Royal consideration; for that some of his Royal Subjects, are come 1000
Leagues about their business, and they have brought an Address -- Which may be
this.

May it please Your Majesty.
We Your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects, knowing well that You are managing
glorious undertakings, against the Enemies of the English Nation in General,
and of the Church of England in particular; thought it needful to Repre^ent to
Your Majesty; that there is a number of Boston Boys who having got loose from
the Tyranny of their School have Routously, Riotously, and with force of Arms
(that is to say) with Balls and Stones, Violently Assaulted our Church Windows,
to our unaccountable damage, and to the Tirrour of Your Majesty's L^ig people;
We therefore implore Your Majesty's utmost Assistance against these Unlucky
Boys.


Moreover, as they inform His Majesty that some Boys have Assaulted their
Church, so some Men they say hindered and Obstructed their Parson, in
Discharging of his Duty and Office. For at the Funeral of one Mr. Lilly (who
never signified to any of his Friends his desire to have the Service Book used
at his Burial) their Officer, would needs (for their Edification) impose it
upon them; the Relations it is true, before hand Unanimously informed him that it
would be very ^ffencive to them to be so Imposed upon therein: yet such was his
Zeal, that he came with Gown and Book, to settle a Laudable custom in that
Barbarous Country: One Mr ^rayray (a Relation of the Deceased, in the name of
the rest) only with fit words, desired him to for-bare, but he was bound over
to the Court, where they intended to have Ruined him, had not the Unlucky
Revolution ^ubuer^ed these designs; and therefore they thought fit here to
mention it as some of the Effects of that wicked Revolution; for though the thing
was done before, yet the prosecution of this (and diverse others of the like
nature) was not ended till that Unhappy day.

And that there is something Serious in this Merriment, he pleased to consider
the next Paragraph of their Address, in which there is somewhat Notoriously
false, and something wherein you may believe them. The False hood is in their
pretenses to Abundant Joy and Satisfaction, when they received the Joyful news
of His Majesty's great and glorious Enterprise. If this be true, our
Dictionaries have all this while deceived us; what we have heretofore called
Wrath and Consternation, you must now by Antiphrasis. Interpret Joy and
Satisfaction. When you see men Storming and Rageing, and Expressing themselves
in such Diabolical Terms, (the Subscribers of the Address, may know whom we
mean!) as, that they hope such a Prince is hanged by this time, and all such
Rognes with him; you must take this to signify Abundant Joy and Satisfaction,
or else you will be obliged to call some folks most Egregious Liars. The
Subscribers of this Li^ell will find those in Boston who will (...) Rubb up
their Memorys upon (...) particulars, and remind them of Time and Place and
after what manner, their Joy and Satisfaction Vented it self. We will not here
Rip up their usual talk upon the Exchange and else where; but certainly it will
vex Mr. Foxcroft (one of the Subscribers, and a Representative of his Church)
to be Reminded, that when one Mr. Winslow brought thither the (then) Princes
Declaration (which he knew would be welcome to all true New-Englanders) this
Foxcroft was one of the Three Justices, who sent the above said Mr. Winslow to
Prison, for bringing a Traiter^us and Treasonable L^bell (as the Mittimus
Expressed it) into the Country. And although he offered them 2000. Pound
Security, yet nothing would do, but to Goal he must. It was (we suppose) from
the like Abuxdant Joy and Satisfaction, that these pretended Church men in
Boston (when they po^^e^t the Government) sent forth a Proclamation, charging
all Officers and people to be in readiness to hinder the Landing of any Forces,
that the Prince of Orange might send into those parts of the World. Certainly
we must here after take heed of wishing Joy and Satisfaction to our Friends and
Neighbors, nay to these their very Enemies: It would be very Uncharitable in
the New Englanders to with their belly full, of such joy and Satisfaction, as
they enjoyed upon the News of the Kings descent into England. In this therefore
they are Notoriously false, as was most Visible to the World.

But there is something wherein you may believe them, namely their Transport,
that His Majesty has been graciously pleased to have particular regard to the
Religion of the Church of England. Doubtless, that is true. They had got news
of a D^stinction in England, of a King De jure, and De facto; and they cared
not a Straw which Sank or Swam, provided the most potent would be their
up-holder.

O this sweet [ Particular Regard!] it is Sugar to the Vinegar; that helps them
to Swallow and digest many things, that else would shreudly rise against their
S^omacks They say this Joyous Particular Regard to the Religion of the Church
of England; is that which Revives them at a Strange Rate. But yet, here our
credence must H^ult a little; for certainly if the Religion, were so dear unto
them, one of these Subscribers, would never have declared to his Friend, that
were their Church but a Mile from Boston (so as he might have a (...) pretense
for absence) he would never come at it. Is it Religion? Here, what some of
their principal persons have said upon their Death beds (in the hearing of more
than one or two) with great bitterness of Soul, that there is not one amongst
them that a body may Reasonably think to have the fear of God in him. A more
Uncharitable Censure, than ever their N. C. Neighbors yet passed upon them!
And are these the fruits of Religion and Loyalty to be Expected from such a
branch? Surely they are such Harsh fruits of which we have had a Taste, and may
still be seen in the Faction there, who wear the Name of the Church of England,
that there is no great fear of many New Englanders to be united to their
Assembly. Alas, poor souls, many of them upon the Rising Light of Sir. Edmunds
glory, did in a Huff run thereunto: and now upon his Setting they are left in
the Dark, how to get fairly off without damage to their Reputation. But N^^quam
(...) ^st etc. Ask your M A. the meaning of it. We think therefore it was some
thing else than Religion, that was Aimed at, and which perhaps we may find
pointed to, in the next particular:

Which is

A grave advice they give the King, That the Country may be Ruled by a
Governor and Council to be appointed by His Majesty. Ay, take heed to the
peoples Election, for then these Advisers may miss it; and than the Country
will be still in a bad case, and may suffer Shipwreck, if the Two only
Churchwardens of the Country have not their hand at Helm. But they go on [ And
with the Advice of an Assembly of the people in matters proper for Cognizance]
Advice, by all means, but no Authority; and what are the matters proper for
their Cognizance? Perhaps those blades (if any of them can make an Interest to
get into the Appointed Council) will tell you, it is only to see how much Money
is to go from them; but not whither it goes; they shall do but what the Select
men do in making Rates; let them but bring their Flieces to be shorn, and they
have done all their business, as well as any Parliament in France.

There new Scheams and Representations of Government and Jurisdiction (as their
Charlestown Friends express it) must be, (...) as other Your Majesty's
Plantations are Ruled and Governed. But what if their cases vastly differ? what
if the peoples maine design in diverse other Plantations be only to raise
Estates to be Transmitted to England, where the chief Planters or Tr^^lers
Intend at last to settle their Familyes? No wonder therefore, they are not so
much concerned, to fix orderly Town Ships, and Churches, Erect Schoolls, and
Colleges, and such other things as relate to (...); you know (Mr. Rombus)
Agricolae and Pastoris, contrarium^est proposition. And why as other
Plantations? Is there amongst them, more Exact Justice, and better Order kept
in respect to Moralls? As to Religion and the Profession thereof, does it
Flourish more else where? Are Sabbaths better Sanctified? Are there more, and
more able, Pious, Painful Preachers of the Gospel, in the other Plantations,
than in New England? And has their different kind of Government, had its
special Influence upon these matters? There are some in the World (as Wise as
these worshipful Advisers) who think, there was not a spot upon the face of
Gods Earth (all circumstances considered and humane Infirmi^ys abated) was
better settled for the time, and better ordered, than New England, when they
did freely enjoy their Charter Powers and Privileges without In^erruption. But
if indeed, these Advisers (being mostly Strangers, for their profit, lately
cr^pt in amongst the New Englanders) are so fond of other Plantations
Government; they may (in our opinion) do far better to remove themselves
whither, and settle where, they do best like; than abide to be (...) in the
sides of their quiet Neighbors, who have no great Obligation much to desire
their Company.

But how come it to pass that these Addressers or A^^^sers so horribly forgate
themselves, as to begin with Commending A well Established and orderly
Government: In which there was not Admitted such an Advising Assembly of the
people, and now in the close they are for a Government of as quit another
nature, as Englands is to that of France. Possibly they began at Evening, and
after a while, they played a game or two at Cards, Drank a few Healths and then
went to Sleep; next Morning their last Dreams suggested to them, what they had
been about over night; than (after a mornings Draught) they are at it again;
and now being a little Wiser, they stumble upon another Model, never minding
what they had writ before.

Reader you may Remember (though they did not) that their well Established
Government made Laws, Raised Taxes, Levied Armies, or any thing else ( qu^lque
those) without the least Advice of any Assembly of the people. But what have we
here? It seems now they would have the King set up for them, an Ill Established
and Disorderly Government, (for of Cont^a^ys is the Contrary reason) which if
He do, would not the King put them into the same Horror and Amazement they
were in, at the late Rev^lution? However (in a complement) they say, they
desire He should; and (in Reality) we hope that He will.

But be Their Majesty's pleasure, concerning New England, what it will; we are
well assured, they will approve themselves a Loyal, Q^ie^, and Virtuous
people: they are none of those Beasts or Birds, who if the King do but Muzzel
their Cha^^s, o^ Pare their Claws, to keep them from devouring more harmless
Creatures, will presently Curse him to his Face. Such there are in the World;
and for a small matter we could Inform the Reader w^^t e^ (...) (...),(and that
not far) to see some of their Names. New-Englanders are of another Kidney; and
it is no small Demonstration of the goodness of that people, that though they are
thus prosecuted by a pity Crew (who bear not the proportion of One to Seven
Hundred, either in Number or Figures amongst them,) yet we are well assured
they will take no further notice of all, than to pray that God would pity,
pardon, and convert such besotted Adversaries [ God forgive them, they know not
what they doe] However, it must needs fill that people with Sorrowful thoughts,
if they sh^u'd see His Majesty (which God forbid^) take only such Methods for
their Settlement, as, are wished by a (...) Knot of their most Implacable
Enemies (...) with God and the King they entirely leave their Affairs, and
with composed minds wait for a blessed issue.

Being now even g^u^ted with the Joy and Satisfaction where with this (...) has
(...) entertained us: We willingly pass over ^^me other observables therein,
and come to the Close of all.

It Is a passage in Sacred Scriptures, The Prophet that T^acheth L^^s be in the
Tail. It is but an Agreeable thing to find in the Tail of this Dragon (for it
(...) a long speaks like a Dragon) a Person (or a Piece of (...)) Subscribing
to Lies. This Youth is an Un-fledgd Bi^d who thus defiles the Neast in which he
was Hatched. What think you? Had this Yonker, been Long Exercised under the most
Extravagant, and Arbitrary Government; and so had he such Lamentable cause to
complain? It Is but Yester-day that his M. A. had Recommended him to the School
of a Neighbor Town; for which he was pretty well Qualified (for he writ a
good hand, and. made good peons, and was able to Con^true a sentence in
Corderius) We most readily own a good School Master to be one of the most
Honorable and Valuable sights in a Country, and wish New England fuller of
them. But if any of them, after a while Swaggering amongst Boys, comes out into
the World and will be Domineering amongst men, and prescribing them Scheams and
Representations of Government, and take up and (...) whole Countries; bring that
Lads Fingers to the Fer^la, and let the calling go free.

As for the other Subscribers, if they hope to see Altars in their Church, and
Candles set upon them, it is no wonder a Shrine-maker does plead (...) his D^^^^.

After these Leaders follow the whole band: At whose Desire, and in whose Name
(as well as their own) these Subscrib^^^ are said to have Spit all this Venom
at poor honest New England. But certain^^, to for^ear that which we have newly
called. A^ (...), if those in whose (...) this Address comes, do not manifest a
sense of their having done much amiss, they will not show themselves to be so
much (...) by the fear of God as good men use to be; if they do not, they may
assure themselves that they have given a (...) wound to their own society
amongst the people of New England; (...) man of so much as common Sobriety will
after this Join himself to a Society of men, that shall (...) commit such
things, as of which those people are now Convicted; nothing but a Candid
Repentance can preserve them from being perpetually Odious to that Country
where they have began to Hire themselves, [ Faciunt ^aves et (...)]

The good people of New England want not a kindness for the Church of England;
though they cannot be satisfied with these pre^enders thereunto; they Believe
there are Thousands in that Communion with whom they Expect Eternal happiness
in the same Heaven. Such Renowned Names, as those of (...), Tillo^son, and^.
are as precious and as Valued amongst the people of New England, and there
Books as much Read, and Loved and Lived, as with any here at home. All the hurt
they wish to the Church of England, is, to see it Reformed in some things which
the Reformed Churches (...) do account none of it is Beauties; but these New
England Episcopalians are utterly a discredit to the whole Body whereof they
pretend themselves to be the Members.

We are very well Satisfied the present Government of New England Intend not to
molest these odd people for any of these Extravagant matters; but if Strangers
may Advise the said Government (and why may we not, as well as these people
presume to Advise their King?) we would than Council them to be no ways
Discouraged from the Service of Their Majesty's. Certainly if any of the
Tory-masquerade Jacobites (who endeavor to Enfeable them and Weaken the hands)
shall cause them to for-bear any thing, that must be done to maintain
Government, Virtue, Order, and Peace, in that Country; they will not find Their
Majesty's to Thank them for it. Their Majesty's own them for a Government,
their Charter is as much Restored, as any of the Kingdom of England (Except
that of London) All the World will wonder at them, if they do not use it, since
it is all the Government they have, until Their Majesty's shall please to give
them further Orders if any of the other Corporations here in England should
hear, that the New Englanders refused to act upon their (lately Incommoded)
Charters, they would Hiss at them, as the Common Enemies of the English Nation,
should the Freemen here forbear their Elections, or the Tories here tell them,
they might not go on in all things as they were, they would be the Ridicule of
the whole World. For any to declare for the late Commission Government (being
so directly against the Native Privil^dges of English men) is a sort of
Treason; and it tends to Alienate the minds of Their Majesty's Subjects, from
their Subjection to the Crown of England. It is little less Treasonable to say
that their Majesty's have left that Country without Government; for that would
be to say (what New England abhors) that they might dispose of themselves to
any Prince or Potentates in the Earth (by a Client lary Subjection) for their
own Security; according to that Rule of the Civil Law [ Sirvus D fer^as a
Domino Liber^sto] They have therefore a Government for, and under Their
Majesty's; and what is it? Unless it be their Charter (...) which Their
Majesty's do Invite them to Act upon; and Expect they should, as the rest of
the Nation do, till they are farther Settled. Let the People therefore (if they
know, and have sense to perceive, their own Interest) proceed in their free
Elections of honest men, and such as they can trust, to take care of the whole;
and the Magistrates (so Elected) act Vigorously according to Law, till a full
Settlement shall come to them, which we hope will not be long; And we doubt not
but the fav^ur of both God and Their Prince shall be their Encouragement.

In fine, Let the people of that Country all Unite for the Common Safety. The
Revolution once, and Two Miracles more since, have kept them from Anno^^nces by
French Fleets, which were coming out against them: They must quickly Expect
farther Alarms, and it is now no time for them to Quarrel amongst themselves.
New England has diverse times been on the borders of Ruin, by those two Vices
of Covetousness and Ingratitude; which are things that agree but ill with their
high Profession. If any Number amongst them should at this time study to
withold or hinder the Taxes necessary for the common safety. it will be a
piece of Covetousness; (not Loyalty) in which they may see their Error when it
is too late; if the French once become their Land Lords, they will see some one
Town, if not some one Man, affording a bigger booty, then Ten of their Supposed
heavy Country Rates. And if they ill requi^e any of their Public Servants,
they may live to confess their Ingratitude, as much as ever unthankful Israel
in distress. But now, Contention is the Vice, that most Threat^ns that Country.
We wish we knew how to compose any differences that may be amongst them; but we
cannot fully inform our selves in all the Occasions of the diverse sentiments,
that we hear are amongst that people: Only we are Jealous that one Pe^tilent
Principle, Advanced by Captain Palmer, in his late Pamphlet against New England
has been too much Imbibed by some, and granted by others to their Litigious
Adver^aryes, and has had some Influence thereupon.

This Palmer has, the Impudence and Folly to Assert, that [ The English
Plantations (and New England in particular) are no parts of the Empire of
England, but like Wales and Ireland, which were Conquered, and belong to the
Dominion of the Crown of England, and that therefore he, that wears the Crown,
may set up Governments over them, which are Despotick and Absolute, without any
regard to (the English man's) Magna Charta. And where as in Barbadoos, Jamaica,
Virgin^a, etc. They have their Assemblies, that is only from the favor of the
Prince, and not that they could pretend any Right to such Privileges of
English m^n] You see (poor New Englanders) whither this Quondam Judge amongst
you, and the rest of his Crew, were bringing you. It is upon this principle
that New England has been Torn in pieces by salvage Oppress^rs; It is upon this
same principle, that they have been Railed at for a R^b^llion like the Sin of
witch craft, for Dismounting these Rank R^d^rs, who Spurred them on to their
own Destruction. But Certainly the man that Publishes this principle never more
Intends re Visit the English Plantations in America, having thus foolishly and
wickedly Exposed himself to the ^ust Indignation of them all; how can they
(...) him otherwise, than as a Common Enemy, that shall thus openly deny them
the precious English Liberties? No English men in their Wits will ever Venture
their Lives and Estates to Enlarge the Kings Dominions abroad, and Enrich the
whole English Nation, if their Reward after all must be, to be deprived of
their English Liberties. And pray, let all the English American Plantations now
take notice, That the NewEnglanders in their late Revolution did but act in a
Quarrel wherein they and, all English men had an Interest. Gentlemen, you that
so much Love to hear New England Reproached, it was for you, as well as for
themselves, that the New-Englanders acted in their Revolution.

Moreover, Will not the Curse of St. David, and St. Patrick, fall upon the Head
of this man, for making the Welsh and (...) such a Conquered people, as that
the Welsh (since their Incorporation) have but a preca^ious claim for their
Representatives to ^itt in the English Parliament; and the Irish (or rather the
English in that Kingdom) are but meet Slaves and Villains, for all their
Parliament at Dublin. As for the the Colonys of New England in particular If
they be not Esteemed as parts of England, why were Quo Warr^^to's Issued out
against the Government in Boston as belonging to Westminister in Midlesex; and
their Tenures settled in free Soccage as of the Manor of East Greenwich (as we
think it is mentioned in their Cha^ter.) Were those ever a Conquered people
like the welsh, and the Irish? No, they C^^quered many Enemies of the (...)
Crown, but were never yet Co^t, Unless that must be called a (...) when their
late Oppressors (before (...)) had them in their Clutches.

We shall Conclude this matter with a ^^^orable passage of that Accomplished
(...), Sir. William Jones, who was, (...) General in the Reign of King Charles
(...) Second, and knew as much of the (...) as any Pal^^r or B^lkl^y of them
all. (...) Excellent Person, (when it was Proposed by some, that the
Pl^^tations ^^ght be Govern^d without an Assembly) ^old the King* That [ He
could no more grant a Commission to Leavy Many on His Subjects th^re, without
their Consent by (...) Assembly, than they could Discharge them^^^v^s from
their All^gi^nce to the English Crown.

And now we hope the people of New England will not Suffer themselves to be any
more Deluded by the Common Adversarys of all the English Nation, in any part of
the World; But will approve themselves a people, at onc^ both Sincerely Loyal
to T^eir Maje^^^^s (whom God grant long (...) Reign) and with all Faithful to
true English Li^ertyes; whatever ba^e Para^ites and Sycoph^^ts, shall at any
time Prate, or (...) unto the Contrary.

FINIS.
advertisement.
(...) this Compo^ure, the Reader is beholden to the Pen of O^e, who, although he
never spent Seven Years of his Life, in any part of (...), yet has been so
Inqu^sitive after the Affairs of New England, had so much Acquain^ance with the
Worthy Agents of that Coun^^y, (...) has been able thus to Write in the
Vindication of a People (...) a^used, as that People have been. Let that People
(...), that when some Natives amongst themselves are playing (...) upon them,
God ^tirs up such as were not born within a (...) Leagues of them to be their
Advocates.


