Good Order Established IN Pennsilvania and New Jersey IN AMERICA, Being a true
Account of the Country; With its Produce and Commodities there made.

And the great Improvements that may be made by means of Public Storehouses
for Hemp, Flax and Linen Cloth; also, the Advantages of a Publick-School, the
Profits of a Publick-Bank, and the Probability of its arising, if those
directions here laid down are followed. With the advantages of public
Granaries.

Likewise, several other things needful to be understood by those that are or
do intend to be concerned in planting in the said Countries.

All which is laid down very plain, in this small Treatise; it being easy to
be understood by any ordinary Capacity. To which the Reader is referred for his
further satisfaction.

By Thomas Budd.

Printed in the Year 1685.

Those that have ^enerous Spirits, whose desires and Endeavors are to bring
the Creation into Order, do I dedicate This, the first Fruits of my Endeavors.
I Taking into consideration the distressed Condition that many thousand
Families lie under in my Native Country, by reason of the deadness of Trade,
and want of work, and believing that many that have great store of Money that
lies by them unimpl^y'd, would be willing and ready to assist and encourage
those poor distressed People by supplying them with Moneys, in order to bring
them out of that Slavery and Poverty they groan under, if they might do it with
safety to themselves. These Considerations put me on writing this small
Treatise, wherein I hope the Reader will have full Satisfaction, that the Rich
may help to relieve the Poor, and yet reap great Profit and Advantage to
themselves by their so doing, which if it so happen that Rich and Poor are
benefitted by following the Advice here given, then will be answered the hearty
Desires of

Your True and Well-wishing Friend, THOMAS BUDD.
It is to be noted, that the Government of these Countries is so settled by
Concessions, and such care taken by the establishment of certain fundamental
Laws, by which every Man's Liberty and Property, both as Men and Christians,
are preserved; so that none shall be hurt in his Person, Estate or Liberty for
his Religious Persuasion or Practice in Worship toward God.



P Ennsylvania and New-Jersy in America lies in about forty and forty two
Degrees of North Latitude, and is severed the one from the other by the River
of Delaware on the West, and separated from New York Collony by
Sandy-(...)-Bay, and part of Hudsons River on the East. The days in the Winter
are about two hours longer, and in the Summer two hours shorter than in
England, the Summer somewhat hotter, which causes the Fruits and Corn somewhat
to ripen faster than in England, and the Harvest for Wheat, Rye and Barley,
being about the latter end of (...). In the Winter season it is cold and
freezing Weather, and sometimes Snow, but commonly very clear and Sunshine,
which soon dissolves it.

The Country is well Watered, the River of Delaware being navigable for Ships
of great burden to B^rlington, which from the Capes, or entrance, is accounted
an hundred and forty Miles; and for Sloops to the Falls, which is about ten
Miles farther.

The Bay of Sandy-hoock on East-Jersy is a safe and excellent Harbor for any
Fleet of Ships, which can lie there in all Weathers, and go in and out to Sea
in Winter, as well as Summer, and Ships of great Burden can lie close to the
Town of New-Perth; which renders it a good Situation for Navigation, from
whence in six Hours time at most, Ships can go out into the Sea; and close by
the Town of Perth runs up Rariton River. From the Falls of Delaware River the
Indians go in Cannows up the said River, to an Indian Town called Min^sincks,
which is accounted from the Falls about eighty Miles; but this they perform by
great Labour^ in setting up against the Stream; but they can come down with
ease and speed; the River from the Falls runs from the North and North-West
about twenty Miles, as I my self observed in my Travel so far by the River, but
by the Indians Information, it comes about more Easterly farther up. I have
been informed, that about Minisincks, by the Riverside, both in New Jersey and
Pennsylvania is great quantities of exceeding rich open Land, which is
occasioned by washing down of the Leaves and Soil in great Rains from the
Mountains, which Land is exceeding good, for the raising of Hemp and Flax,
Wheat, or any other sorts of Corn, Fruits, Roots and c. Where in time may be
conveniently settled a Manufacture for the making of Linen Cloth, Cordage,
Twine, Sacking, Fishing-Nets, and all other commodities commonly made of Hemp
or Flax: And after great Rains, we may bring down great quantities of Goods in
flat-bottom-Boats, built for that purpose, which will then come down, by reason
of the Land-floods with speed.

And into this River, betwixt the Capes and the Falls, run many navigable
Rivers and Cricks, some of them fifteen or twenty Miles, and others less, which
Rivers and Cricks are made by the plenty of Springs and Brooks, that run out of
the Country, many of which Brooks are so considerable, as to be fit to drive
Mills. And above the falls, in traveling of twenty Miles by the Rivers side, I
went over twenty runnings of Water, five or six of them being fit to build
Mills on.

The Country for the most part is pretty leavel, until we come about ten Miles
above the Falls, where it is Mountanious for many Miles, but interlaced with
fertile Valleys. The Bay and River of Delaware, and the Rivers and Cricks that
runs into it, are plentifully stored with various sorts of good Fish and
Waterfowl, as Swans, Geese, Ducks, Wigeons, etc. And a considerable
Whale-Fishery may be carried on in the Bay of Delaware, and on the Seacoasts
of New Jersey, there being Whale-Fisheries already begun, plenty of Whales
being by experience found there, and the Wintertime being the time for the
catching them, they will not thereby be hindered of raising there Summer-Crops;
and the Oil and Bone being good Commodities to be sent for England, there also
being in the Bay of Delaware and Sandy-hoock, Drums, Sheeps-heads Bass, and
other sorts of large Fish, which may be fit to salt up in Casks to keep for
use, and Transportation also. There are great plenty of Oysters, which may be
pickled and put up in small Casks for use. Likewise, on Delaware River are
great plenty of Sturgion, which doubtless might be a good Trade, if managed by
such Persons as are skilful in the boiling and pickling of them, so as to
preserve them good to Barbados, and other adjacent Islands. There are also in
the Springs great quantities of a sort of Fish like Herrings: with plenty of
the Fish called Shads, but not like the Shads in England, but of another kind,
being a much better sort of Fish; the Inhabitants usually catch quantities,
which they salt up, and pack them in Barrels for Winter's Provision.

The Lands from the Capes, to about six Miles above NewCastle (which is by
estimation ninety Miles) is for the most part very rich, there being very many
navigable Cricks on both sides of the River, and on the River and Cricks are
great quantities of rich fat Marsh Land, which causes those parts, to some
fresh People, to be some what unhealthful in the latter part of the Summer, at
which time some of them have Agues: Also in and near these Marshes, are small
(...), called Musketoes, which are troublesome to such People as are not used
to them; but were those Marshes banked, and drained, and then plowed and sowed,
some Years with Corn, and then with English Hay-seed, I do suppose it would be
healthful, and very little troubled with M^sketoes; and if Cattle did commonly
feed on this Ground, and tread it as in England, I suppose it would not be
inferior to the rich Meadows on the River of Thames; and were quantities of
this Land laid dry, and brought into Tillage, I suppose it would bear great
Crops of Wheat, Pease and Barley, Hemp and Flax, and it would be very fit for
Hop-Gardens, and for English Grass, which might serve for rich Pastures or
Meadow. Also these Marshes are fit for Rape, and were RapeMills built, and the
design managed, so as it would be if it were in England or Holland, a great
Trade might be carried on, and many hundred Tuns of Rape-Oyl might be made
Yearly, and sent to England, to the Planters inrichment; and not only so, but
would be for Merchants advantage, they thereby having Goods to freight their
Ships, which would tend to the benefit of the Inhabitants in general.

And if those Trades and Designs are carried on to effect, as are mentioned in
this Treatise, there would naturally follow Trade and Employment for
Ship-wrights, Boat-wrights, Coopers, Carpenters, Smiths, Ropers, Mariners,
Weavers, Butchers, Bakers, Brewers; and many other sorts of Trades would have
full Impoyment.

From six Miles above New Castle to the Falls of Delaware (which is about sixty
Miles) and so to the Head of the said River, the Water is clear, fresh, and fit
for Brewing, or any other use.

The Air clear and good, it being supposed to be as healthful as any part of
England

The Land is in Veins, some good, and some bad, but the greatest part will bear
good Corn, as Wheat, Rye, Barley, Oats, Indian Corn, Buck-Wheat, Pease and
Indian Beans, etc.

Fruits that grow natural in the Countries are Strawberries, Cramberries,
Huckleberries, Blackberries, Medlers, Grapes, Plums, Hickery-Nuts, Walnuts,
Mulberies, Chestnuts, Hass^^nuts, etc.

Garden Fruits grows well, as Cabbage, Colworts, Colliflowers, Sparagrass,
Carrots, Parsneps, Turnups, Oynions, Co^cumbers, Pumkins, Water-Mellons,
Musk-Mellons, Squashes, Potatoes, Currants, Goosberries, Roses, Cornations,
Tulips, Garden-Herbs, Flowers, Seeds, Fruits and c. for such as grow in
England, certainly will grow here.

Orchards of Apples, Pears, Quinces, Peaches, Aprecocks, Plums, Cheries, and
other sorts of the usual Fruits of England may be soon raised to good
advantage, the Trees growing faster then in England, whereof great quantities
of Sider may be made. And were Glass-houses erected to furnish us with Bottles,
we might have a profitable Trade, by sending Sider to Jamaico and Barbados,
etc. ready bottled, which is commonly so sent from Herefordshire to London.

It is supposed that we may make as good Wines as in France, (if Vineyards were
planted on the sides of Hills or Banks, which are defended from the cold
North-West Winds) with such Vines as the Frenchmen commonly make those Wines
of; for the Climate is as proper as any part of France, therefore it is
rational to believe, that the Wines will be as rich and good as in France.
There are some Vineyards already planted in Pennsylvania, and more intended to
be planted by some French-Protestants, and others, that are gone to settle
there.

Several other Commodities may be raised here, as Rice, which is known to have
been sown for a trial, and it grew very well, and yielded good increase.

Also Annis-Seeds I have been informed grows well, and might be a profitable
Commodity, there being great Quantities used in England by Distillers.

Liquorish doubtless would grow very well. And I question not but that Mather,
Woad, and other Plants and Roots for (...) use might be raised. Shuemack
grows naturally. Also several useful Durgs grow naturally, as Sassafrass,
(...), Callamus Aromaticus, Snake-Root, Jallappa, etc.

The Pine Tree grows here, out of which is made Pitch, Tar, Rosin and
Turpentine: In New England some make quantities of Tar out of the Knots of Pine
Trees, with which they supply themselves and others.

There are many other sorts of Plants, Roots and Herbs of great Virtue, which
grow here, which are found to cure such Distempers as the People are insident
to.

Hops in some places grow naturally, but were Hop-Gardens planted in low rich
Land, quantities might be raised to good advantage.

There is no Lime Stone as we yet know of, but we make Lime of Oyster Shells,
which by the Sea and Bay side are so plentiful, that we may load Ships with
them.

There are several sorts of good Clay, of which Bricks, Earthen-Ware, and
Tobacco-Pipes are made; and in some places there are Quaries of a ruf hard
Stone, which are good to wall Cellars, and some Stone fit for Pavement.

The Trees grow but thin in most places, and very little under-Wood. In the
Woods grows plentifully a course sorts of Grass, which is so proving that it
soon makes the Cattle and Horses fat in the Summer, but the Hay being course,
which is chiefly gotten on the fresh Marshes, the Cattle loses their Flesh in
Winter, and become very poor, except we give them Corn: But this may be
remydied in time, by draining of low rich Land, and by plowing of it and sowing
it with English-Grass-seed, which here thrives very well.

The Hogs are fat in the Woods when it is a good Mast-Year.

The Woods are furnished with store of Wild Fowl, as Turkeys, Phesants,
Heath-Cocks, Partridges, Pigeons, Blackbirds, and And People that will take
the pains to raise the various sorts of same Fowl, may do it with as little
trouble, and less charge, then they can in England, by reason of what they find
in the Woods.

Bees are found by the experience of several that keep them, to thrive very
well.

I do not question but that we might make good strong found Beer, Ale and Mum,
that would keep well to Ba^bado^^ the Water being good, and Wheat and Barley in
a few Years like to be very plentiful: Great quantities of Beer, Ale and Mum is
sent yearly from London, and other places, to Barbados, Jamaica, and other
Islands in America, where it fells to good advantage; and if Beer, Ale and Mum
hold good from England to those places, which it is said is above one thousand
Leagues; I question not but if it be well brewed in a seasonable time of the
Year, and put up in good Casks, but it will keep good to be Transported from
Delaware River to those Islands aforesaid, which by computation, is not above
half so far. If Merchants can gain by sending Beer, Ale and Mum from England,
where Corn is dear, and Freight dear, by reason of the length of the Voyage, we
in all probability must get much more, that buy our Corn cheap, and pay less
Freight.

Flower and Biscuit may be made in great quantities in a few Years, the Wheat
being very good, which seldom fails of finding a good Market at Barbados,
Jamaica, and the (...) Islands: great quantities are sent yearly from Lon^on,
and other places, which if they can make Profit of it, we much more for the
Reasons already given.

Pork is but about half the price as in England, therefore the Inhabitants will
seldom have their Market spoiled by any that come from England, of which
Commodity the Inhabitants in a few Years will have Quantities to ^ell to the
Merchant, which is salted, and packed in Barrels, and so transported to
Jamaica, Barbados, Nevis, and other Islands. Hams of Bacon are also made, much
after the same manner as in West-^alia and the Bacon eats much like it.

Our Beef in the Fall is very fat and good, and we are likely in a few years to
have great Plenty, which will serve our Families, and furnish Shipping.

Our Mutton is also fat, found and good, being only fed with natural Grass; but
if we sprinkle but a little English Hay-Seed on the Land without Plowing, and
then feed Sheep on it, in a little time it will so increase, that it will cover
the Land with English Grass, like unto our Pastures in England, provided the
Land be good. We find the Profits of Sheep are considerable.

Our Butter is very good, and our Cheese is indifferent good, but when we have
Pastures of English Gass, (which many are getting into) then I suppose our
Cheese will be as good as that of England.

Our Horses are good serviceable Horses, fit both for Draught and Saddle, the
Planters will ride them fifty Miles a day, without Shoes, and some of them are
indifferent good shapes; of which many Ships are freighted yearly from
New England with Horses to Barbados, Nevis, and other places; and some Ships
have also been freighted out of Pennsylvania and New Jersey with Horses to
Barbados; but if we had some choice Horses from England, and did get some of
the best of our Mares, and keep them well in the Winter, and in Pastures
enclosed in the Summer, to prevent there going amongst other Horses, we might
then have a choice breed of Horses, which would tend much to the advantage of
the Inhabitants.

The Commodities fit to send to England, besides wh^^ are already named, are
the Skins of the several wild (...) that are in the Country, as El^s, Deer,
(...), Fisher, Bear, Fox, Rackoon, Marten, Otter, Woolf, M^skquash, Mink, Cat,
etc.

Potashes may be here made, and Soap, not only to the supply of our selves, but
to sell to our Neighbors.

Also Iron may be here made, there being one Iron-Work already in East- Jersey.

Likewise, we may furnish Merchants with Pipe-Staves, and other Coopers Timber
and Hoops.

The Woolen Manufacture may be managed in Pennsylvania and New Jersey, to good
advantage, the upper parts of the Country being very fit for the keeping of
Sheep, the Wool being found to good, and the Sheep not subject to the Rot: The
Ewes commonly after the first time, bring two Lambs at once.

But it may be queried, How shall the Sheep be preserved from the Woolf?

I answer; Get such a Flock as it may answer the charge, for a boy to make it
his full Employment to look after them, and let them be pend at Night in a
House or Fold provided for that purpose. If one man have not enough to employ a
Shepherd, then let several join their Stock together.

But it may be queried, Where shall Wool be gotten to carry on the Woollen
Manufacture, until we have of our own raising?

I answer; in Road Island, and some other adjacent Islands and Places, Wool may
be bought at six Pence a Pound, and considerable Quantities may be there had,
which will supply until we can raise enough of our own.

Also, we may have Cotton-Wool from Barbados, and other adjacent Islands in
returns for our Provisions that we send them. So that the making of
Cotton-Cloth and Fustians may be likewise made to good advantage, the
Cotten-Wool being purchased by the growth of our own Country; and the
Linnen-Yarn being spun by our own Families, of Flax, of our own growth and
ordering.

The Tanning-^rade and Sho-making may be here managed to good advantage, Hides
being plenty, and to be had at moderate Prices, and ^ark to be had for only the
charge in getting it.

A Skinner that can dress Skins in Oil, may do very well; for we have Elk
skins, and plenty of ^uck and Do skins, which the Inhabitants give (at New
York, where there are such Trades) one half for dressing the other.

There ought to be public Store - Houses provided for all Persons to bring
their Flax, Hemp and Linen Cloth to, where it may be preserved clean and dry
at a very small Charge, and the owner at liberty to take it out at his own will
and pleasure, or to fell, transfer or assign it to any other. Now the Hemp,
Flax and Linen Cloth being brought into the public Storehouse, and the
Quantity, Quality and Value of it there registered in the Book, to be kept for
that purpose; and the Person that has put in the said Hemp, Flax and Linen
Cloth, taking a Note under the ^and and Seal, from the Storehouse Register, of
the quantity, quality and value of the Hemp Flax, and Linen Cloth brought into
the public Storehouse, with the time it was delivered; these Notes will pass
from one man to another all one as Money: As for Example, Suppose I am a
Merchant, that am furnished with diverse sorts of goods, I fell them to a
Planter, and receive their Notes which they had from the Storehouse Registry,
in pay for my goods, to the value of one hundred Pounds. I buy of the Clothier
in Woolen Cloth to the value of sixty pounds, and of the ^oper in Cordage to
the value of forty pounds; I pay them by these Notes on the Storehouse; the
^lother he buys Woolen Yarn of the Master of the Spinning School, to the value
of sixty pounds, and pays him by these Notes on the public Store; the Master
of the Spinning-School buys of the Farmer in Wool to the value of sixty pounds,
and pays him by these Notes; the Farmer buyeth of the Merchant in Goods to the
value of sixty pounds, and pays him by these Notes; the Merchant receives on
demand, from the public Store, in Linen Cloth to the value of sixty pound, at
receiving thereof he delivers up the Notes to the Register of the public
Store, which are cancelled, and then filed up as Waste paper. The Roper, when
he pleases, receives on demand, in Hemp to the value of forty pounds out of
the public Store, by which he is made capable of imp^^ying his Servants in
making of Cordage; but he that has no occasion to take out this Hemp or Flax,
or Linen Cloth, may pass these Notes from one man to another, as often they
please, which is all one as ready Money at all times.

Were the Flax and Hemp Manufactuaries carried on to that height as it might
be, it would greatly advance these Countries; for did we make our own
Sail-cloth and Cordage, we could make Ships, Sloops and Boats at much easier
Rates than they can build for in England, the Timber costing us nothing but
Labor. And were more Saw-Mills made (of which there are diverse already) to cut
Planks, and other Timber, both Ships and Houses might be built at easy Rates.

Many Ship Loads of Hemp is brought yearly from the East Countries to England,
which is afterward there made into Cordage, Twine, Sacking, Fishing-Nets etc.
and then transported from thence to Jamaica, Barbados, Virginia, New England,
and other parts of America, so that doubtless materials made of Hemp, must be
sold in America by the Retaler, at double the price as it cost where it grew;
By which it appears that at those prices we should have double for our labor
to what they have, and our Provisions as Cheap as theirs, it being raised on
Land that cost us little.

1. Now It might be well if a (...) were made by the Governors and general
(...) of (...) and NewJ^rs^y, that all Persons inhabiting in the said
Provinces, do put their Children seven years to the public School, or longer,
if the Parent^ please.

2. That Schools be provided in all Towns and Cities, and Persons of known
honesty, skill and understanding be yea^^y chosen by the Governor and General
Assembly, to teach and instruct Boys and Girls in all the most useful Arts and
Sciences that they in their youthful capacities may be capable to understand,
as the learning to Read and Write true English, Latin, and other useful
Speeches and Languages, and fair Writing, Arithmatick and Book-keeping; and the
Boys to be taught and instructed in some Mystery or Trade, as the making of
Mathematical Instruments, Joynery, Turnery, the making of Clocks and Watches,
Weaving, Shoe-making, or any other useful Trade or Mystery that the School is
capable of teaching; and the Girls to be taught and instructed in Spinning of
Flax and Wool, and Knitting of Gloves and Stockings, Sewing, and making of all
sorts of useful Needle Work, and the making of Straw-Work, as Hats, Baskets,
etc. or any other useful Art or Mystery that the School is capable of teaching.

3. That the Scholars be kept in the Morning two hours at Reading, Writing,
Book-keeping, etc. and other two hours at work in that Art, Mystery or Trade
that he or she most delights in, and then let them have two hours to dine,
and for Recreation; and in the afternoon two hours at Reading, Writing, etc.
and the other two hours at work at their several Employments.

4. ^he seventh day of the Week the Scholars may come to school only in the
fore-noon, and at a certain hour in the afternoon let a Meeting be kept by the
Schoolmasters and their cholars, where after good instruction and admonition
is given by the Masters, to the Scholars, and thanks returned to the Lord for
his Mercies and Blessings that are daily received from him, hen let a strict
examination be made by the Masters, of the Conversation of the Scholars in the
Week past, and let reproof, admonition and correction be given to the
Offenders, according to the quantity and quality of their faults.

5. ^^t the like Meetings be kept by the School Mistrisses, and the Girls apart
from the Boys. By strictly observing this good Order, our Children will be
hindered of running into that Excess of Riot and Wickedness that youth is
incident to, and they will be a comfort to their tender Parents.

6. Let one thousand Acres of Land be given and laid out in a good place, to
every public School that shall be set up, and the Rent or incom of it to go
toward the defraying of the charge of the School.

7. And to the end that the Children of poor People, and the Children of
Indians may have the like good Learning with the Children of Rich People, let
them be maintained free of charge to their Parents, out of the Profits of the
school, arising by the Work of the Scholars, by which the Poor and the Indians,
as well as the Rich, will have their Children taught, and the Remainder of the
Profits, if any be, to be disposed of in the building of School-houses, and
Improvements on the thousand Acres of Land, which belongs to the School.

The manner and Profits of (...) Spinning-School in Germany, as it is laid down
by Andrew Tarenton in his own words, in a Book of his, called, England's
Improvements by Sea and Land, take as follows.

In Germany, where the Thread is made that makes the fine Linnens, in all Towns
there are Schools for little Girls, from six years old, and upwards, to teach
them to spin, and so to bring their tender fingers by degrees to spin very
fine; their Wheels go all by the Foot, made to go with much case, whereby the
action or motion is very easy and delightful: The way, method, rule and order
how they are governed is, 1 st. ^here is a large Room, and in the middle
thereof a little Box like a Pulpit: 2 dly, There are ^enches built round about
the Room, as they are in Play Houses, u^ on the benches sit about two hundred
Children spinning, and in the box in the middle of the Room, sits the grand
Mistress with a long white Wand in her hand; if she observe any of them idle,
she reaches them a tap, but if that will not do, she rings a bell, which by a
little lord is fixed to the box, and out comes a Woman, she then points to the
Offender, and she is taken away into another Room and chastized; and all this
is done without one word speaking: In a little Room by the School there is a
Woman that is preparing, and putting Flax on the Distaffs, and upon the ringing
of a Bell, and pointing the Rod at the Maid that has spun off her Flax, she
has another Distaff given her, and her Spool of Thread taken from her, and put
into a box unto others of the same size, to make Cloth, all being of equal
Threads. 1 st. They raise their Children, as they spin finer, to the higher
Benches:

They sort and size all the Threads, so that they can apply them to make equal
Cloths; and after a young Maid has been three years in the Spinning-School,
that is taken in at six, and then continues until nine years, she will get
eight pence the day, and in these parts I speak of, a man that has most
Children, lives best;

Now were Spining-Schools settled in the principal Cities and Towns in
Pennsyvania and New Jersey, and a Law made to oblige the Parents of Children,
to put their Children to School, we should then soon come into such a way of
making Linen Cloth, as that we should not only have sufficient so our own
supply, but also should have quantities to fell to the Inhabitants of our own
neighboring Provinces, where it will fell at considerable Prices, they being
usually supplied from England, where it must be dear, after Freight, Custom,
and other charges at Importation, with the Merchants profit considered; and yet
nevertheless this Cloth, thus dear bought will fell in New England, Virginia,
and some other places in America, at thirty Pound per Cent profit, above the
first cost in England, and the Moneys paid by Bills of Exchange, and the
Retalier makes commonly on Goods thus bought not less then twenty Pounds per
Cent. profit: So that if all things be considered, the Cloth is sold in
America, to the Planter at full double the price as it cost from the maker in
France or Germany, from whence its brought to England, by which it does appear,
that if we do get such Prices for the Cloth that we make, then we shall have
double for our Labor to what they have; therefore it may be well that a Law
were made for the encouragement of the Linen Manufacture by the Governors and
General Assemblies that all Persons inhabiting in Pennsylvania, or New Jersey,
that keep a Plow, do sow one Acre of Flax, and two Acres of H^mp, which would
be a means of supplying us with Flax and Hemp, to carry on the Manufacturies of
Linen Cloth and Cordage; and also would be very profitable to the Planter, by
employing his Family in the Winter season, when they would have otherwise but
little (...) do, viz. the Men and Boys in Breaking and Dressing of it, and
making it sit for use, and the Women and Girls in pining it, and nevertheless
they may carry on their Husbandry (...), as if nothing of this was done; the
Husbandry -(...) being chiefly but (...) the Spring and (...).

Now to that ^ be in (...) and New-(...), (...) made, that all Moneys ^ent on
Interest be at 8 ^. per Cent. by the year, and that all Bills and Bonds be
entered on the public Registry, and by Act of Assembly be made transferable by
Assignments, so as the Property may go along with the Assignment; thereby a
Bond or Bill will go in the nature of Bills of Exchange; and so A. owing 200 l.
to ^. he assigns him the Bond of C. who owed him 200 l. and C. owing D. 200 l.
assigns (...) the Bond of E. who owed him 200 l. and so one Bond or Bill would
go through twenty hands, and thereby be as ready Moneys, and do much to the
Benefit of Trade. Also, that all Lands and Houses be put under a public
Registry, and entered in the Book, with an account of the value of them, and how
occupied and tenanted, a particular there of being given under the Hand and
Seal of the Office to the Owners. We having thus fitted our selves with a
public Registry of all our Lands and Houses, whereby it is made ready Money at
all times, without the charge of Law, or the necessity of a Lawyer; and a Law
being made for the payment of such large Interest for Moneys lent, and the
security being so undeniably good, a Bank will in time arise, and such a Bank
as will be for the benefit and advantage of Pennsilvania and New Jersey, and
Trade universal.

Suppose my self, and some others have in Houses and Lands in Pennsilvania or
New Jersey, worth 3000 l. and are minded to manage and carry on the Linen
manufacture, but cannot do it, without borrowing on Interest 2000 l. therefore
we come to the Bank in Pennsilvania or New Jersey, and there tender a
particular of our Lands and Houses, and how occupied or tennanted, being worth
3000 l. in Pennsilvania or New Jersey, and desire them to lend us 2000 l. and
we will Mortgage our Land and Houses for it; the answer will be, We will send
to the Register's Office your particular, and at the return of the Messenger
you shall have your answer: The Registors send answer, it is our Lands and
Houses, and occupied, and tenanted, and valued according to the particular,
there needs no more words but to tell us the Money, with which we carry on the
Trade briskly, to the great benefit and advantage of some hundreds of People
that we set to work, and to the supplying of the Inhabitants with Cloth made of
Flax, grown, dressed, spun and wove in our own Provinces; which Trade we could
not manage and carry on without this credit, but having this credit, we go on
with our Trade comfortably, and the Lender will have his ends answered, and his
Moneys well secured. And its certain, such an Anchorage, Fund, and Foundation,
will then bring out the Monyes unimployed from all Persons in these Provinces,
even People of all degrees will put in their Monyes, which will be put out
again into Trade to Merchants, and such as stand in need of ready Monyes; and
thereby Trade is made easy, and much convenienced.

Suppose ten Families purchase in Pennsilvania or New Jersey five thousand
Acres of Land, and they lay out a small Township in the middle of it, for the
convenience of neighborhood, to each Family one hundred Acres for Houses,
Gardens, Orchards, Cornfieldsd and Pastures of English Grass, the remainder to
lie in common, to feed their Cattle; and suppose that by that time they have
built their dwelling Houses, Cowhouses, Barnes, and other Out houses, and have
made Enclosures about their home-lots, that their Monyes is all expended and
without a further supply to buy Oxen and Horses to plow their Land, and Cows to
find their Families in Milk, Butter and Cheese, and Sows to breed a stock on,
they will live but meanly for some time, therefore to amend their condition
they come to the Bank, and there tender a particular of their Lands, valued to
be worth 1500 l. on which they desire to take up 1000 l. to purchase a Stock of
Oxen, Horses, Cows, Sows, Sheep and Servants, by which they will be enabled to
carry on their Husbandry to great advantage, and the benefit of the Province in
general; and it may be that in two or three years time, they may be able to pay
in this Money, with Interest, to the owner; and in two or three years more may
be able to bring into the Bank, to be lent out to others, one thousand pounds
of their own Estates.

As to the benefit of public (...) on Delaware River, to keep the Corn for all
merchants, Bakers and Farmers that please to send it thither, that so the
destruction and damages occasioned by Rats and Mice, may be prevented. In this
Granary, Corn at all times may be taken in, from all Persons that please to
send it, and the Corn so sent may be preserved sweet, safe, and in good Order,
at a small change for a whole year, and the owner at liberty to take it out at
his own will and pleasure, or to sell, transfer or assign any part of the said
Corn to any Person or Persons for the payment of his Debts, or to furnish
himself with Clothing, or other Necessaries from the Merchant; and the
Granary-Keepers to give good security that all things should be faithfully done
and discharged. Now the Corn being brought into the public Granary, and there
registered in the Register-Book, to be kept for that purpose; and the Person
that has put in the said Corn, taking a Note under hand and seal, from the
Granary-Register, of the quantity of Corn brought into the Granary, with the
time it was delivered, and the matter and kind of the Corn, then these
Advantages will ensue:

First, Preservation from the Rats and Mice, Straw to supply his Cattle, the
Chaff for his Horses, and the light ^orn to seed his Pigs and Poultry; his
Husbandry managed with rule and order to his advantage; no forced haste, but
thrashing and carrying the o^n to the Granary in times wherein his servants
have leisure; so in seeding time and harvest all People are freed from that.
Besides, there being at all times sufficient quantities of Corn in the
Granaries to lead Ships, Merchants from Barbados and other places, will come
to buy Corn; of one Farmer he may buy one hundred Bushels, of another fifty,
and so he may buy the Corn that belongs to sixty or eighty Farmers, and receive
their Notes which they had from the Granary-Office, which Corn he ^^tteth lie
in the Granary until he have occasion to use it, then he olders his Bake^ to go
with those notes to the Granary-Office, and receive such quantities as he has
a mind shall (...) made into Flower and Fisher, which the Baker does
accordingly, and gets it packt up in Casks, and sent to Barbados; the
remainder, it (...) please, he may sell to some other Merchant that lives at
Barbados; or some other place, and when sold, may deliver the said Merchant
the Notes on the Granary-Office, at sight whereof the may receive their Corn,
if they please, or they may pass those Notes from one to another, as often as
they please, which is all one as Money, the Corn being ledged safe, and kept in
the public Granary, will be the occasion of employing much of the Cash of
Pennsilvania and New Jersey; most People near these public Bank-Granaries,
will be dealing to have some Corn in Bank-Credit; for that cannot miss of
finding an increase and benefit to them in the rise of Corn.

The best places at present for the building of Granaries are, I suppose,
Burlington in West-Jersey, Philadelphia and New Castle in Pennsilvania, and New
Perth in East-Jersey, which places are excellently situated, there being many
Navigable Rivers, whereby Trade is very commun^cable, and the Corn may be
brought in Boats and Sloops from most places now inhabited, by water to these
public Granaries, for small change, and from the Granaries may be carried to
WaterMills to grind, which are some of them so conveniently situated, that
Boats may come to the Mill-Tayl, which is also a great conv^mency to those that
trade much in corn.

Now I will demonstrate, and show you the length, breadth and height the
Granaries ought to be of, to hold this Corn; as also the Charge of building one
of them, and the way how it should be built for the best advantage, with the
way of ordering and managing the Corn, that it may keep good, sweet and clean,
eight or ten Years. The Granaries must be three hundred Foot long, eighten Foot
wide betwixt inside and inside, seven Stories high, each Story seven Foot high,
all to be built of good well burn Brick, and laid in Lime and Sand very well;
the ends of the Granaries must be set North and South, so the sides will be
East and West; and in the sides of the Granaries, there must be large Windows
to open and shut close, that when the Wind blows at West, the Windows may be
laid open, and then the Granary man will be turning and winding the Corn, and
all Filth and Dross will be blown out at the Window. When the Weather is fair,
then throw open the Windows, to let in the Air to the Corn; and in the middle,
there must be Stoves to be kept with Fire in them in all moist or wet times, or
at going away of great Frosts and Snows, to prevent molstness either in the
Brick-walls, Timber, Boards or Corn. There must be in each side of the
Granaries, three or four long Troughs or Spouts fixed in the uppermost Lost,
which must run about twenty Foot out of the Granary; and in fine Weather, the
Granary men must be throwing the Corn out of the uppermost Lost, and so it will
fall into another Spout made ten Foot wide at the top, and through that Spout
the Corn descends into the lowermost Lost, and then wound on the inside of the
Granary, by a Crane fixed for that purpose, and the Corn receiving the benefit
of the Air, falling down thirty Foot before it comes into the second Spout,
cleanses it from its filth and Cha^^; these Spouts are to be taken off and on,
as occasion requires, and to be fixed to another of the Losts, that when Vessels
come to load Corn, they may through these Spouts convey the Corn into the Boats
or Sloops, without any thing of Labor, by carrying it on the Backs of men.

The charge of one Granary three Hundred Foot long, eighteen Foot wide, seven
Stories high, seven Foot betwixt each Story, being built with Brick in England,
as by the Account of Andrew Tar^nton, take as follows; Six hundred thousand
of Bricks builds a Granary, two Bricks and a half thick the two first Stories,
two Bricks thick the three next Stories, Brick and a half thick the two
uppermost stories; and the Trick will be made and delivered on the Place for
eight (...) the Thousand, the laying of Trick three Shillings the Thousand,
Lime and Sand two Shillings the Thousand; so Brick-laying, Lime and sand will
be thirteen Shillings the Thousand, one hundred and fifty Tuns of Oak for
Summers-Joists and Roof, 170 l. Boards for the ^ix Stories, sixty thousand
Foot, at 13s. 4d. The one hundred Foot and ten thousand Foot for Window-Doors
and Spouts at the same rate, 48 l. Laths and Tiles 100 l. Carpenters work 70 l.
I^on, Nails, and odd things 60 l. So the charge of a Granary will be 800 l.
There will be kept in this Granary fourteen thousand Quarters of Corn, which is
two thousand Quarters in every Lost, which will be a thousand Bushels in every
Bay; six laboring men, with one Clerk, will be sufficient to manage this
Granary, to turn and wind the Corn, and keep the Books of Accounts; fifteen
pounds a piec^ allowed to the six men, and thirty pound a year to the Clark
(...) Register, will be Wages sufficient; so the Servants Wages will b^ (...).
per annum, which is 80 l. so the charge will be yearly 200 l. Now if the
Countryman pay six pence a Quarter yearly for keeping his Corn safe and (...)
in the Granary, fourteen thousand Quarters will come to 350 l. for Granary-Rent
yearly.

Admit I have a Propriety of Land in Pennsilvania or NewJersey, either place
then allows me to take up five thousand Acres, with Town or City-L^^s, upon
condition that I settle ten Families on it, therefore I send over ten Families
of honest industrous People, the charge of each Family is 100 l. as by the
account of particulars appears, as follows. l. s. d. For one hundred Acres of
Land, 05 00 00 For the Passage of the Famil^ five persons, 25 00 00 For fresh
provisions to use on S^up (...), over and above the Ships allowance, as R^ce,
O^meal, Flower, Butter, Sugar, Brands, and some odd things more, which I leave
to the discretion of those that go, -- 05 00 00 For 3 hundred weight of six
penny, eight penny and ten penny Nalls, to be used on sides and Roof of the
House, -- 05 00 00 For a Share and Coulter, a Plow-Chain, 2 Sythes, 4 Sickles,
a horse Collar, some Cordage for Harness, 2 Stock Locks, 2 weeding Hoes, 2
grubbing Hoes, one cross-cut Saw, 2 Iron Wedges, 1 Iron Pot, 1 frying Pan, 2
falling Axes, 1 broad Ax, 1 Spade, 1 Hatchet, 1 Fro to cleave Clapboard,
Shingle and Coopers Timber, -- 05 00 00 For Portridge, Custom-house charge and
freight, etc. on the goods, -- 02 00 00 For (...) of the one hundred pound 03
00 00 In all 50 00 00

The remaining fifty Pound, may do (...) to lay out in th^^ goods, which are
the most (...) in the Country, (...). l. s. d. Ten pieces of serge, at 20 00 00
Six pieces of (...) bl^w Lianen, containing about seven hundred yards, 05 00 00
200 Else of brown (...)brigs, at about 07 10 00 Half a piece of three quarters
Dow^^s, 05 10 00 Two pieces of Yorkshire Kerseys, 04 00 00 One piece of red
Peniston, above 40 yards, at 18 d, per Yard, -- 03 00 00 One piece of Demity,
00 15 00 In Buttons and Silk, Tape and Thread suitable to the Clothes, 03 15 00
In All 50 00 00

And when you come into the Country; you may lay out the abovementioned goods
to purchase a stock of Cattle and Provisions, and c. which for goods at the
first cost in Englands, will buy at the prices under-mentioned, viz. l. s. d.
One pair of working Oxen, at 60 00 00 One Mare 3 ^. and four Cows and Calves,
12 ^. 15 00 00 One Bull 2 ^. ten Ewes 3 ^. 10 s. 05 10 00 Four breeding Sows,
and one Boor, 04 00 00 One fat Ox to kill for winter Provisions, 03 10 00 400
Pound of Pork, at 3 half pence per pound, 02 10 00 24 Pound of Butter, at 4 d.
per pound, 00 08 00 One Barrel of salted Fish, 00 10 00 One Barrel of Malassas
to make Beer, 01 08 00 40 Bushels of Indian Corn, at 1 s. 8 d. per Bushel, 03
06 08 20 Bushels of Rye, at 2 s. per Bushel, 02 00 00 20 Bushels of Wheat, at 3
s per Bushel, 03 00 00 6 Bushels of Pease and Indian Beans, per Bushel, 00 18
00 2 Bushels of Salt, at 2 s. per Bushel, 00 04 00 50 Pound of Cheese of the
Country-making, at 3 d. per pound, 00 12 06 12 Pound of Candles, at 5 d. per
pound, 00 05 00 In All 50 00 00

Note, That the above (...) Prices is for goods at (...) cost in England, which
in Country Money would be something above one third higher, viz. a Cow and Calf
valued in goods at first cost at 3 l. is worth in Country Money 5 l, and other
things advance much after the same proportion.

My five thousand Acres of Land cost me 100 l. I had of the ten Families for
the one thousand Acres disposed of to them 50 l. my Town or City Lots will
yield me current 50 l. by which it appears I am nothing out on the four
thousand Acres that is left.

I get my five thousand Acres surveyed and laid out to me, out or which I lay
out for the ten Families one thousand Acres, which may be so divided, as that
each family may live near one to the other; I intend with them to let the Money
lie in their hands six years, for which they to pay me each family, 8 l a year,
in consideration of the one hundred pound a family laid out for them, and at
the expiration of the six years, they to pay me my 1000 l. viz. each family 100
l. as by agreement; my Money being paid me, I am unwilling to let it lie dead,
therefore I lay out in the middle of my Land one thousand Acres, which I divide
into ten lots, in form and manner as before, then I intend, with fifty Servants
to serve me four years a piece, I place them on the Land, viz, five on each
lot. Their Passage, and in goods to purchase Cattle and Provisions, etc. is to
each five servants 100 l. as before is explained; Now I order a House to be
built, and Orchards, Gardens and Enclosures to be made, and Husbandry affairs
to be carried on on each lot; so that at the four years end as the servants
time is expired, I shall have ten Farms, each containing four hundred Acres;
for the one thousand Acres being laid out in the middle of my Land, the
remaining three thousand Acres joins to it.

My servants time being expired, I am willing to see what charge I am out upon
these ten Farms and Stock, in order to know what I have gained in the ten years
past, over and above 8 l. per Cent. Interest, that is allowed me for the use of
my Money: I am out by the first charge 1000 l. and the Interest thereof for
four years, at 8 l. per Cent is for the four years 320 l. so that the whole
charge on the ten Farms, Prinicipal and Interest, comes to 1320 l. Now if value
my ten Farms but at 400 l. each, which is 20 s. per Acre, one with another;
then the whole will be 4000 l. besides the first Stock of Cattle and Hogs, etc
to each Plantation, with its Increase for four years, which Stock cost at first
to each Farm 30 l. in goods at first cost, but is worth 40 l. sterling, at
which rate the Stock on the ten Farms cost 400 l. and if we account the four
years Increase to be no more than the first Stock, yet that is 400 l. by which
it appears that the ten Farms, and the stock on them is worth 4800 l. out of
which deduct the Money laid out, which with Interest in 132^ l. So the the Neat
profit, besides 8 l. per Cent, allowed for Interest, is for this ten years
improvement, 3480 l. and twenty Families set at liberty from that extreme
Slavery that attended them, by reason of great Poverty that they endured in
England, and must have so continued, had not they been thus redeemed by coming
into America. It may be thought that this is too great an undertaking for one
man, which if it be, then I propose that ten join together in this community,
and each man send over five Servants, of which let one of them be an honest man
that understands Country business, as an Overseer, which if we allow him over
and above his Passage and Diet 20 l. a year for his four years service, this
amounts to 80 l. which is for the ten farms 800 l. which being deducted out of
the 3480 l. there only remains 2680 l. clear profit to the ten men, which is
for each man 268 l. for his ten years improvement of his 100 l. and his 100 l.
back again with Interest for all the time at 8 l per Cent. per annum, the whole
producing 448 l. for his 100 l. first laid out.

Some may object and say, They cannot believe the Land of each farm, with its
Improvements, will sell at 20s. an Acre, that is, at twelve years purchase ^s.
8d. per Acre per annum. because three hundred Acres of it is as it was, viz.
Rough Woods.

I Answer; That although it be so, yet these Woods are made valuable by the
twenty Families that are seated near them, the first ten families having been
settled ten years, the last four years; for some are willing to have their
Children live near them; and and they having but one hundred Acres in all, it
will not be well to divide that, therefore they will give a good price for one
hundred Acres, to settle a Child upon, to live by them, as experience shows;
for in Rhode Island, which is not far from us, Land rough in the Woods, not
better than ours, will sell at 40 s. an Acre, which is 3 s. 4 d per Acre per
annum. Therefore, Reader, I hope now thou art convinced that there is a
probability that what I here inform thee of, will prove true, casualties of
Fire, etc. excepted.

The Indians are but few in Number, and have been very serviceable to us by
selling us Venison, Indian Corn, Peace and Beans, Fish and Fowl, Buck Skins,
Beaver, Otter, and other Skins and Furs; the Men hunt, Fish and Fowl and the
Women plant the Corn, and carry Burdens; they are many of them of a good
Understanding, considering their Education; and in their public Meetings of
Business, they have excellent Order, one speaking after another, and while one
is speaking all the rest keep silent, and do not so much as whisper one to the
other: We had several Meetings with them, one was in order to put down the sale
of Rum, Brandy, and other strong Liquors to them, they being a People that have
not Government of themselves, so as to drink it in moderation, at which time
there were eight Kings, (and many other Indians) one of the was Ockanickon,
whose dying Words I writ from his Mouth, which you shall have in its order.

The Indian Kings fate on a Form, and we fate on another over against them;
they had prepared four Belts of Wampum, (so their current Money is called,
being Black and White Beads made of a Fish Shell) to give us as Seals of the
Covenant they made with us; one of the Kings by the consent and appointment of
the rest stood up and made this following Speech; The strong Liquors was first
sold us by the Dutch, and they were blind, they had no Eyes, they did not see
that it was for our bur^; and the next People that came amongst us, were the
Sweeds, who continued the sale of those strong Liquors to us: they were also
Blind, they had no Eyes, they did not see it to be hurtful to us to drink it,
although we know it to be hurtful to us; but if People will ^ell it us, we are
so in love with it, that we cannot forbear it; when we drink it, it makes us
mad; we do not know what we do, we then abuse one another; we throw each other
into the Fire, seven Score of our People have been killed, by reason of the
drinking of it, since the time it was first sold us: Those People that ^ell it,
they are blind, they have no Eyes, but now there is People come to live amongst
us, that have Eyes, they see it to be for our Hurt, and we know it to be for
our Hurt: They are willing to deny themselves of the Profit of it for our good;
these People have Eyes; we are glad such a People are come amongst us. We must
put it down by mutual consent; the Cask must be sealed up, it must be made
fast, it must not leak by Day nor by Night, in the Light, nor in the Dark, and
we give you these four ^elts of Wampam, which we would have you lay up safe,
and keep by you to be Witness of this Agreement that we make with you, and we
would have you tell your Children, that these four Belts of Wampam are give^
you to be Witness betwixt us and you of this Agreement.

A Letter from New Jersey in America (...) Friend in London.
Dear Friend;
I Having this short opportunity, (...) to present thee with, but the Dying
Words of (...) King, who died in Burlington, and was buried amongst (...)
according to his desire; and at his Burial many Tears were shed both by the
Innians and English; so in Love, and great haste, I rest thy Friends,

John Cripps.

The Dying-Words of Ockanichon, spoken to Jachkursoe, whom he appointed King
after him, after him, spoken in the Presence of several, who were Eye and Ear
Witnesses of the Truth thereof.
It was my desire, that my Brother's Son, Jahkurs^e should be sent for to come
to me to hear my last Words, Whom I have appointed King after me. My Brother's
Son, this day I deliver my Heart into thy Bosom, and would have thee love that
which is Good, and to keep good Company, and to refuse that which is Evil; and
to avoid bad Company. Now inasmuch as I have delivered my Heart into thy Bosom
I also deliver my Bosom to keep my Heart therein; therefore always be sure to
walk in a good Path, and never depart out of it. And if any Indians should
speak any evil of Indians or Christians, do not join with it, but to look to
that which is Good, and to join with the same always. Look at the Sun from the
Rising of it to the Setting of the ^ame. In Speeches that shall be made between
the Indians and Christians, if any things be spoke that is evil, do not join
with that, but join with that which is good; and when Speeches are made, do not
thou speak first, but let all speak before thee, and take good notice what each
man speaks, and when thou have heard all, join to that which is good. Brother's
Son, I would have thee to cleanse thy Ears, and take all Darkness and Foulness
out, that thou may take notice of that which is Good and Evil, and then to
join with that which is Good, and refuse the Evil; and also to Cleanse thy
Eyes, that thou may see both Good and Evil; and if thou see any Evil, do not
join with it, but join to that which is Good. Brother's Son, Thou have heard
all that is past; now I would have thee to stand up in time of Speeches, and to
stand in my Steps, and follow my Speeches as I have said before thee, then what
thou do desire in Reason will be granted thee. Why should thou not follow
my Example, inasmuch as I have had a mind to do that which is Good, and
therefore do thou also the same? Whereas Schoppy and Swanpis were appointed
Kings by me in my stead, and I understanding by my Doctor, that S^hoppy
secretly advised him not to cur^ me, and they both being with me at John
Hotlins^ead's House, there I my self see by them that they were given more to
Drink, than to take notice of my last Words, for I had a mind to make a Speech
to them, and to my Brethren the English Commissioners, therefore I refused them
to be Kings after me in my stead, and have chosen my Brother's Son Jahkurosoe
in their stead to succeed me.

Brother's Son, I desire thee to be plain and fair with all, both Indians and
Christians, as I have been. I am very weak; otherwise I would have spoken more;
and in Testimony of the Truth of this, I have hereunto set my Hand.

The Mark ^ of Ockanickon, King, now deceased.

Henry Jacob Falckinbery, Intrepreter.

Friendly Reader, when Ockanickon had given his Brothers Son this good Counsel,
I thought meet to speak unto him as follows; There is a great God, who
Created all thing, and the God give^^ M^n an understanding of what is Good, and
what is Bad, and after this Life rewards the Good with Blessings, and the Bad
according to their Doings; to which he answered and said, It is very true, it
is so, there are two Ways, a broad Way, and a strait Way; there be two Paths,
a broad Path and a strait Path; the (...) and the greatest Number go in the
broad Path, the best and fe^est go in the strait Path.

T.B.

Something in Relation to a Conference had with the Indians at Burlington,
shortly after we came into the Country.
THe Indians told us, they were advised to make War on us, and cut us off
whilst we were but few, and said, They were told, that we sold them the
Smallpox, with the Match Coat they had bought of us, which caused our People to
be in Fears and Jealousies concerning them; therefore we sent for the Indian
Kings, to Speak with them, who with many more Indians, came to Burlington,
where we had Conference with them about the matter, therefore told them, That
we came amongst them by their own consent, and had bought the Land of them, for
which we had honestly paid them for, and for What Commodities We had bought at
any time of them, We had paid them for, and had been just to them, and had been
from the time of our first coming very kind and respectful to them, therefore
We knew no Reason that they had to make War on us; to Which one of them, in the
behalf of the rest, made this following Speech (...), saying, Our Young Men may
Speak such Words as we do not like, nor approve of, and we cannot help that:
And some of your Young Men may speak such Words as you do not like, and you
cannot help that. We are your Brothers, and intend to live like Brothers with
you: We have no mind to have War, for when We have War, we are only Skin and
Bones; the Meat that we eat does not do us good, we always are in fear, we
have not the benefit of the Sun to shine on us, we hide us in Holes and
Corners; we are minded to live at Peace: If we intend at any time to make War
upon you, we will let you know of it, and the Reasons why we make War with you;
and if you make us satisfaction for the Injury done us, for which the War is
intended, then we will not make War on you. And if you intend at any time to
make War on us, we would have you let us know of it, and the Reasons for which
you make War on us, and then if we do not make satisfaction for the Injur^ done
unto you, then you may make war on us, otherwise you ought not to do it. You
are our Brothers, and we are willing to live like Brothers with you: We are
willing to have a broad Path for you and us to walk in, and if an Indian is
asleep in this Path, the Englishman shall pass him by, and do him no harm; and
if an Englishman is asleep in this path, the Indian shall pass him by, and
say, He is an Englishman, he is asleep, let him alone, he loves to Sleep. It
shall be a plain Path, there must not be in this path a stump to hurt our feet.
And as to the Smallpox, it was once in my Grandfathers time, and it could not
be the English that could Send it us then, there being no English in the
Country and it was once in my Fathers time, they could not send it us then
neither; and now it is in my time, I do not believe that they have sent it us
now: I do believe it is the Man above that has sent it us.

Some are apt to ask, How we can propose safely to live amongst such a Heathen
People as the Indians, whose Principles and Practices leads them to War and
Bloodshed, and our Principles and Practices leading us to love Enemies, and if
reviled, not to revile again; and if ^mitten on the one cheek to turn the
other, and we being a peaceable People, whose Principles and Practices are
against Wars and Fightings?

I Answer: That we settled by the Indians consent and good liking, and bought
the Land of them, that we settle on, which they conveyed to us by Deed under
their Hands and Seals, and also submitted to several Articles of agreement with
us, viz. not to do us any Injury; but if it should so happen, that any of their
People at any time should injure or do harm to any of us, then they to make us
satisfaction for the Injury done; therefore if they break these Covenants and
Agreements, then they may be proceeded against as other Offenders, 6 viz. to be
kept in subjection to the Magistrates Power, in whose hand the Sword of Justice
is committed to be used by him, for the punishment of Evildoers, and praise of
them that do well; therefore I do believe it to be both lawful and expedient to
bring Offenders to justice by the power of the Magistrates Sword, which is not
to be used in vain, but may be used against such as raise Rebellions and
Insurrections against the Government of the Country, be they Indians or others,
otherwise it is in vain for us to pretend to Magistracy or Government, it being
that which we own to be lawful both in Principle and Practice.

Q. Whether there be not Bears, Wolves, and other Ravenous Beasts in the
Country?

I Answer: Yes. But I have traveled alone in the Country some hundreds of
Miles, and by missing of my way have lain in the Woods all night, and yet I
never saw any of those Creatures, nor have I heard that ever man, woman or
child were hurt by them, they being afraid of Mankind; also, encouragement is
given to both Indians and others to kill Wolves, they being paid for every
Wolfs head that they bring to the Magistrate, the value of ten Shillings; and
the Bears the Indians bill for the profit of their Skins, and sake of their
Flesh, which they eat, and esteem better than Deers (...).

Q. Whether there be not Snakes, more especially the Rattle-Snake?

Ans Yes, but not many Rattle-Snakes, and they are easily discovered; for they
commonly lie in the Paths for the benefit of the sun, and if any Person draws
nigh them, they shake their Tail, on which the Rattles grow, which make a noise
like a child's Rattle; I never heard of but one Person bitten in Pennsilvania or
New Jersey with the Rattle-Snake, and he was help of it lay live Chickens slit
assunder and applied to the place, which drew out the Poison; and as to the
other Snake, the most plentiful is a black Snake, its bite, it is said, does no
more harm than the prick of a Pin.

I have mentioned before, that there are a sort of troublesome Files called
(...) (much like the Gnats in England) in the lower parts of the country, where
the great Marshes are, but in the upper parts of the Country seldom one is seen.

There are Cro^s and Back-birds, which may be accounted amongst the
inconveniences, they being destructive to the Indian Corn, the Crows by picking
up the Corn just as its appearing in the blade above ground, and the
Black-birds by eating it in the Year, before it be full hard, if not prevented
by looking after; but other sorts of Corn they seldom hurt.

It is rational to believe, that all considerate Persons will sit down and
count the cost before they begin to build; for they must expect to pass through
a Winter before a Summer, but not so troublesome a Winter as many have imagined;
for those that come there to settle now, may purchase Corn, Cattle, and other
things at the prices mentioned, and may have Houses in some of the Towns of
Pennsilvania and New-Jesey on Rent, until they build for themselves, and
Water-Mills to grind their Corn, which are such conveniences that we that went
first partly missed of.

Thus, kind Reader, I have given thee a true Description of Pennsilvania and
New Jersey, with the Rivers and Springs Fish and Foul, Beasts, Fruits, Plants,
Corn and Commodities that it does or may produce, with several other things
needful for thee to know, as well Inconveniences as Conveniences, by which I
keep clear of that just Reflection of such as are more apt to see faults in
others, than to amend them in themselves.

T.B.


Whereas I unadvisedly published in Print a Paper, dated the 13th of July,
1685. entitled, A true and perfect Account of the disposal of the one hundred
Shares or Proprieties of the Province of West New Jersey, by Edward Bylling: In
which Paper I gave an Account of the purchasers Names, and the several
Proprieties granted to them, part of which I took from the Register, the
remainder from the List given in by Edward Bylling, to the Proprioters, as
mentioned on the said Paper, which Paper I find has proved Injurious to the
aforesaid Edward Bylling, although not so intended by me. Therefore in order to
give him Satisfaction, and all others that are concerned, I do acknowledge he
has, since the publishing of that Paper, showed me some Deeds, wherein he has
several Proprieties conveyed back to him again, from the original Purchasers
and Judge, he may make good Titles to the same.

A Letter by Thomas Budd, sent to his Friends in Pennsilvania and New Jersey.
Dear Friends;
YOu are often in my Remembrance, and at this time I feel the tender Bowels of
our heavenly Father's Love flowing in my Heart toward you, in a fence of those
great Exercises that many of you have, do and may meet withal in your Spiritual
Travel toward the Land of Promise.

I am also sensible (...) the many Exercises and inward Combats that many of
you met withal, after you felt an inclination in your Hearts of (...) your
selves into America: Oh the Breathing and (...) Prayers, and earnest Desires
that were in your Hearts to the Lord, That you might not go except it was his
good Pleasure to remove you, for a purpose of his own: This you earnestly
desired to be satisfied in, and many of you received satisfaction, that it was
your places to leave your Native Country, Trades, and near and dear Relations
and Friends to transplant your selves into a Wilderness, where you expected to
meet with many Trials and Exercises of a differing kind, than what you had met
withal in your Native Country; but this you contentedly gave up to, but not
without earnest desire, and fervent Prayers to the Lord for his Wisdom to
govern you, and his Fatherly Care to preserve you, and his comfortable presence
to be with you, to strengthen and enable you chearfuly to undergo those new and
unaccustomed Trials and Exercises, that you were sensible would attend you in
this weighty undertaking the Lord heard your Prayers, and answered your
Desires, inasmuch as that his Fatherly Care was over yo^, and his living
P^e^ence did accompany you over the great Deep; so that you saw his wonderful
Deliverence, and in a ^ence thereof, you praised his Name for the same.

The Lord having thus far answered our Souls desire, as to bring us to our
desired Port in safety, and to remain with us, to be a Counselor of good
things unto us, let us now answer this Kindness unto us by a righteous
Conversation, and a pure, holy and innocent Life, that others beholding the
same, may be convinced thereby, and may glorify our heavenly Father.

The Eyes of many are on us, some for Good, and some for Evil; therefore my
earnest Prayers are to the Lord, That he would preserve us, and give us Wisdom,
that we may be governed aright before him, and that he would give a good
Understanding to those that are in Authority amongst us, that his Law may go
forth of Sion, and his Word from Jerusalem Be not backward in discharging that
great Trust committed to you in your respective Offices and Places, that you
may be help-meets in the Restroration.

And be careful to suppress, and keep down all Vice, and disorderly Spirits,
and encourage Virtue, not only in the general, but every one in his particular
Family; there is an incumbant Duty lies on all Masters of Families over their
Family, therefore my desire is, that we may call our Families together at
convenient times and Seasons, to wait upon the Lord, and to seek to him for
Wisdom and Counsel, that his Blessings may attend us and our Families, and our
Children may (...) about our Table as Olive-branches full of Virtue, then shall
we be full of Joy and Peace, and living Praises will spring to the Lord, in
that his Blessings and Fatherly Care has been thus continued toward us.

Dear Friends; be tender and helpful one toward another, that the Lord may
bless and fill you with his divine Love, and sweet refreshing Life, which
unities our Souls to each other, and makes us as one Family of Love together:
Let us not entertain any hard Thoughts one of another, but if difference should
happen amongst us, let a speedy and peaceable end be put unto it; for if
Prejudices enter, it will eat out the precious Life, and make us barren and
unfruitful to God. We are not without our daily Exercises, Trials and
Temptations, therefore do desire the Lord may put it into your Hearts, to Pray
for our Preservation, and our safe return to you, that we may meet together
again in the same overcoming Love of God, in which we parted from you.

My Heart is full of Love to you, and do long to see your Faces, and to enjoy
your Company, that I may more fully express that pure Love of God that Springs
in my Heart unto you, then I can do by Writing. Therefore I desire you may rest
satisfied with these few Lines, and receive them as a token of unfeigned Love.
From

Your dear Friend, Thomas Budd.
London, the 29th of the 8th Month, 1684.
Some material Things omitted in the foregoing part.
IT is to be noted, that the Tide runs to the Falls of Delaware, it being one
hundred and fifty Miles from the Capes, or entran^^ of the said River (which
Falls, is a ledge of Rocks lying a cross the River) and also it runs up in some
of the Cricks, ten or fifteen Miles, the said River and Cricks being navigable
for Ships of great Burden, there having lain over against Burlington, a Ship
of about the burden of four hundred Tuns afloat in four Fathom, at dead low
Water, and the Flood ri^eth six or eight Foot; and there being no Worm that
eats the bottoms of the Ships, as is usually done in Virginia and Barbados,
etc. which renders the said Countries very fit for Trade and Navigation: And in
the said River and Cricks are many other sorts of good Fish, not already named,
some of which are Cat-fish, Trout, Eales, Perch, etc.

ERRATA.
Page 13. line 16 after often, read as. Page 25 l. 3 for seven, r. two hundred.
line 19.f. 60 r.6, l. 31 after Beans, r. at three shillings. Page 26 l 14 f. I
intend, r. I indent. l. 22 f. intend, r. indent. Page 28 l. (...) dele and.
Page 17 f. ths, r. this. l.21 after in, r. the.


