THE MYSTERY OF CHRIST OPENED AND (...) In Several SERMONS, (...) Person,
Office, and Glory of (...)

By INCREASE MATHER

Teacher of a Church at Boston in (...)

Phil. 3. 8. Yea, doubtless, and I count all things but loss, for the
excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. Col. 2. 2. -- And unto all
the riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgement of
the Mystery of God, and of the Father and of Christ. 1. Joh. 5. 13. These
things have I written to you that belive on the name of the Son of God, that
you may know that you have eternal life, and that you may believe on the name
of the Son of God. Evangelizo manu et Scriptione.

Printed at Boston in New England Anno 1686,

I Am unfit and unworthy to pass any Judgment upon these excellent Sermons,
which I have read over and over with much Delight and Satisfaction. I shall
only say, that, they are in my opinion very much to the purpose, recommended to
intelligent Readers by their S^lidity and Succi^^tness, comprizing in a little
room the choicest Notions that refer to the Subjects discoursed on: They are
also well levelled to the meanest Capaci^yes, and thereby singularly fitted to
the ends de^igned.

Urian Oaks.

ERRATA.
PAge 22. line 20. for said not r. not said. p. 49. l. penult. add Loves him
that. p. 72, l. 16. for eternal r. external. p. 78. l. 3. r. the nature of man.
p. 83. l. 16. r. signified. p. 105. l. 11. for the man, r. this man. p. 114. l.
5. before the, add, guilty of the blood of him who is. p. 138. l. 16. for is,
r. of. p. 139. l. 9. dele by. p. 166. l. 15. after to. r. the clearing of. p.
207. l. 8 and 9. r. no mortal eye.

To the Second Church and Congregation, at Boston in NEW ENGLAND.
My Dearly Beloved,
O Ur LORD in His last and must heavenly Prayer for His Disciples, Has said,
that this is life eternal to know the only true God and Jesus Christ whom He
has sent. I have therefore in the Course of^ my Mininstry among you (you know)
pre^ched concerning Christ more than on any other Subject. And I have singled
out the few Sermons emitted herewith, partly because the Truths insisted on are
of the highest importance; but also in that they are much opposed by men of
corrupt minds in this evil and adultrous Generation. It was the Dying Complaint
of a late Worthy, 'Never ( says he) was there an Age since the Name of
Christian was known upon the earth, wherein there was such a direct opposition
made unto the person and glory of Christ, as that wherein we live. We have now
a great number who oppose the Person and Glory of Christ under a pretense of
Sobriety of Reason, as they vainly plead. Yea, the Disbelief of the Mysteryes
of the Trinity and the Incarnation of the Son of God, the sole Foundation of
the Christian Religion, is so diffused in the world, as that it has almost
devoured the Power and vitals of it. -- Of all the evils which I have seen in
the days of my pilgimage now drawing to their close, there is none so grievous
as the public Contempt of the principal Mysteries of the Gospel. Thus Dr.
Owen of the glory of Christ. p. 4. 5. and p. 87.
that excellent man. It is not impossible but you also, may be tried whether
you will hold fast what you have received. I have therefore thought it my Duty
to endeavor that you who are my Flock, may have that by you, which will ( by
the help of Christ) be a mea^es to settle and establish you in the present
Truth.

Moreover, I verily fear that many Professors of Religion are not so clear and
well grounded in these great Principles of Christianity as ought to be. Some
years ago^, there was a man who came to me expressing his desires of
satisfaction about a momentous Truth of the Gospel. He told me, that he was not
clear in his understanding concerning the Eternal Sonship of Christ: he
thought Christ was the Son of God only in respect of his humane Nature: and
therefore ( (...) said) when he learned his Children their Catechism, he taught
them only to say, that Christ is the Son of God, but not that he is the eternal
Son of God, (as others were wont to instruct their Children) for he supposed
that he was not God's Son before his In^arnation. I did from the Scriptures
reason with him, and endeavored to convince him how great an Error he was in:
He seemed to receive some Satisfaction, and did with many tears declare unto
me, that he had for some time been afraid lest his Error in Judgment should be
fundamental and so his soul perish. I shall conceal the Persons Name; he was
not only a Churchmember, and an aged Professor, but of special Note and
Improvement in the Town where he lived. He is since dead, (and I hope at rest)
for he was not obstinate in his Error but willing to receive Light. Now if such
a man were in the dark concerning so great an Article of Faith, I doubt there
are many among us who need Information and Confirmation in the Doctrine of
Christ The way to be preserved from Apostasy in hours of Temptation, is to be
well settled in Principles. Nor is any thing of greater concernment to the souls
of men. Hence Par^us did exceedingly rejoice when he had completed his
Explication of Ur^in' s Catechism; saying; Now Lord, let thy servant depart in
peace since I have lived to finish what I so much desired. And he professed
that he look'^ upon all his other books as unprofitable compared with that. A
great Divine said of Luther' s Catechism, that One little Book is a Gemm to be
valued above six Thousand worlds. But especially to have the loy^s of ^he mind
girt about with those principles of Truth which concern the Person and Office
of Christ, has a tendency to confirm Believers in Faith and Holiness, which is
the thing that I have been willing to aim at.

As for the manner of handling what is here delivered, it would have bin easy
to have discoursed on such mysterious subjects, after such a Metaphysical
strain as none but Scholars should have understood any thing, but in so doing I
should neither have pleased God nor edified the souls of many among you. see
Mr. Gowers preface to Dr. Ushers 18. Sermons. p. 9.
The most learned and pious Dr. Usher did, even in Oxford it self, d^^^y such
Corinthian Vanity. And in a Sermon preached to a great and Sermon before K.
James. p. 34-35.
Princely Auditory, he has this notable passage; Great Scholars ( said he) may
think it stands not with their credit to stoop so low, but let the learnedest
of us all try when ever me please, we shall find, that to lay this ground work
right, that is, to apply our selves to the capacity of the common Auditory, and
to make an ignorant man understand these Mysteries in some good measure, will
put us to the trial of our skill, and trouble us a great deal more, than if we
were to discuss a Controversy or handle a sub^ile point of Learning in the
Schools.

I have in these, as well as in other Sermons, endeavored to make the truth
plain and easy to be understood, hoping that both the learned and unlearned
among you may reap some benefit thereby. I have bin with you now for the space
of more than 25 years, during all which time, the Lord Jesus knows what my
Difficulties have bin. But the mercy I have enjoyed in the advantage for
service which God has graciously favored me with, has more than compensated
for all my outward afflictions and pressing oppressing Temptations; especially
considering that I have had an opportunity of speaking to the world not only in
the Pulpit, but by the Press, and by means thereof, to leave something behind
me, (a thing which I have a 1000 times prayed for) which (I trust in Christ)
will be of use to some of God's Elect, when I shall be seen no more: and in
which thing I hope I may use the Apostle's expression, and say, I have not
sought my own profit, but the profit of many that they might be saved: But in a
more peculiar manner I have designed your Edification. And I will confess to
you, that no Subjects ever insisted on by me, have had so much of my heart, as
these which I now present unto you; the most of which were, as you may
remember, preached some years ago; only the last discourse was more lately
delivered. That concerning the D^ity of Christ was preached when I handled the
Body of Theology: That concerning his Sonship fell in my Course as I went over
the 2d. Chapter of the Revelations. All the other were Sacramental Meditations
on Christ. There are sundry among you who have bin blessed with not only a
religious, but a learned Education, being by your Relations designed for the
special Service of God, in the Gospel of His Son: I can give you no better
advice than this, Above all things, study Jesus Christ. You may know much in
the Tongues and Arts (as the Devils do) yea, and have a doctrinal historical
knowledge of Christ too, and yet not savingly know the truth as it is in Jesus.
But then you will be very unfit to teach others. I commend unto you the serious
perusal of the Books written by those honorable men of God, Dr. Thomas
Goodwin, and Dr. John Owen, in whose writings there is more of the spirit of
the Gospel, and of the Mystery of Christ, than in the books of any Authors in
the world that I know of: they are Vol^mino^s, and in many places very
profound, and in those respects not so proper for the ordinary sort of Readers
to converse with: but such of you as are Scholars may be greatly edified by
them.

And unto you all, I cannot give a better Exhortation than that wherewith the
Apostle concludes his last Epistle; Grow in Grace and in the Knowledge of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To him be glory both now and for ever Amen!

So prays your ever-loving (tho unworthy) Teacher INCREASE MATHER.
October. 25. 1686.
There is a Covenant of Redemption.
ISAI. LIII. 10. When Thou shall make His soul an offering for sin, He shall
see His seed.


IT has been observed by some, That of all the Prophets Isaiah is the most
Evangelical. Nor is there any part of his Prophecy that has more of Gospel in
it than this Fifty third Chapter; wherein he speaks as if he wrote rather an
History than a Prophecy. He speaks as if he had lived in the days of the
Gospel, and been an eyewitness of the sufferings of Christ and of the Glory
which followed thereon.

In this verse the Death of Christ is set forth from the Grounds, and also from
the Effects of it.

1. From the Grounds from whence it came to pass: 1. From the Pleasure of the
Allmighty, It pleased the Lord (...) bruise Him, He ^ath put Him to grief. 2.
Another ground of the Sufferings of Christ, is the Covenant of R^demption,
which was between God and Christ concerning the Salvation of the Elect; When
Thou shall make His soul an offering for sin: according to the Hebrew, the
words run thus, If He shall put His soul an offering for sin. [IM-TASIM] Si
POS^ERIT. So Ari^s Montanus and others. Which words evidently imply a Compact
or glorious Agreement between God the Father and the Son, about this Matter.
The Prophet in the ninth verse had declared the Innocence of Christ, He had
don't no violence, neither was any D^^^it found in His mouth. But then it may be
said, Why was the Lord pleased to bruise Him? How could that stand with
Justice? Answ. Because there had been a voluntary Agreement between GOD and
CHRIST concerning this matter; Christ undertaking to do the work of a Redeemer,
and to Satisfy the Demands of Justice, and so it might please the Lord to
br^ise Him, and no inju^y done neither But then there must be another Cause
assigned as (...) the sufferings of Christ. T^e^^for^ 3. The Sins of the Elect
were the procuring Cause thereof. He made his soul an offering for Sin. h. e.
not any ^n of his own, which he was absolutely free from, but the sins of His
people.

2. The Death of Christ is here described from the glorious Fru^^s and Effects
of it: viz. The Meriting of Conv^^^ion and Salvation on the behalf of his
Elect, which is intimated in that Expression of seeing his seed.

There are Three Doctrines which we may take notice of from the words.

DOCT. 1. That There is a Covenant of Red demption.

DOCT. 2. That The sins of the Elect were the procuring cause of all those
Sufferings, which Jesus Christ was exposed unto.

DOCT. 3. That Jesus Christ by His death has merited the Conversion and
Salvation of his Elect.

Doct. 1. That there is a Covenant of Redemption.

We have formerly spoken of the Covenant of Grace made with Believers. There is
some Difference between that and this of Redemption, which is the Subject of
our present Discourse; in that the Foederates are God and the Believer, in this
the Foederates are God and Christ. In that, the Condition was free and
absolute; In this, the Condition is Subjection to the Law, yea, to the Penalty
of the Law. In that, the promise was Life and Glory; In this the Promise is a
Name above every Name. So then there is some Difference between the Covenant
which God made with men concerning Christ, and which He ^ath made with Christ
concerning men:

This is a glorious Mystery, and the knowledge of it is purely Scriptural and
Evangelical: We shall endeavor by the help of Christ to set before you what
the Scripture speaks concerning this Mystery, in sundry Propositions which
may serve to expli^^^e and Demonstrate the Truth before us.

Propos. 1. There have been eternal Foederal Transactions between God the
Father and the Son concerning ^he Redemption of the Elect. This Proposition is
expressive of the Nature of the Covenant of Redemption, showing what it is.

And there are three things contained therein. 1. That there has been a
Transaction between the Father and the Son concerning the Redemption of the
Elect. 2. That this Transaction was from Eternity. 3. That it is Foederal.

1. There has bin a Transaction between the Father and the Son concerning the
Redemption of the Elect. It is true, that there were Transactions and
Consultations concerning Mankind, before Man was made. Genesis 1. 26. God said,
let us make man in our Image after our likeness. Who are the Per^^ns here
spoken of, as creating Man? Even the Father, Son, and Spirit. For none but the
LORD alone did or could Create man. So then the Sacred Trinity did as it were
sit in council concerning the Creation of Man, but besides that, There have
been glorious Transactions between the Father and the Son concerning the work
of Redemption. Thus some interpret that Scripture in Zech. 6. 13. The counsel
of peace shall be between them both. h. e. between the LORD JEHOVAH, and Him
that is called the BRANCH: God and Christ did (as it were) consult together how
Peace and Reconciliation might be Ob^ained for Sinners, so as might consist
with the honor of Justice, Hence Christ is called God's Companion, Zech. 3. 7.
Awake O sword against the Man that is My Fellow. Now Companions are wont to
consult together.

2. This Transaction was from Eternity. For God from Eternity knew that Man
would fall, and though it be true, that neither the Divine Pras^^ence, nor any
thing else is or can be a Cause of GOD's Will (which is Himself) either
Electing or Reprobating, nevertheless, we may from that Consideration argue and
conclude, that He did from E^ernity contrive a way for man's Recovery. It is
true, that the Revelation of this Contrivanc^ was not before Time: it was first
dis^o^ered presently after the Fall, Genesis 3. 15. and it was not put in
Execution until the Fullness of time came ( Gal. 4. 4.) that is to say, when
the Son of God became incarnate; Nevertheless, the thing was agreed upon, by
the Father and the Son, before the world began, we may see by those Scriptures,
Viz. 2. ^im. 1. 9. and Tit. 1. 2.

3 This Transaction was Foederal. It was managed and concluded in a Covenant
way; There was a glorious Compact or Agreement between the Father and the Son
about this matter: For whatever is required to a complete formal Covenant, we
may ^ee here. E. G. Where there is a Covenant there are two distinct persons,
as it is said, (...) ^. 20. A mediator is not of one. There must be more
persons than one, where there is a Mediator; so such a Covenant as we are
speaking of, is not of one person. Thus the Father and the Son are two distinct
Persons, although essentially One, yet personally Two. Again, Covenants are
voluntary Transactions; so it is here, God the Father was voluntary therein,
for He might have chose whether He would have accepted of satisfaction for sin
from any but the Sinner himself. It was not any necessity of nature, but an Act
of His holy Will and Pleasure, to propound terms of Reconciliation. The Son was
likewise voluntary in this matter; for He might have refused to have accepted
of the Terms of this Covenant, but it pleased Him to accept thereof. Moreover,
where there are Terms and Articles of Agreement accepted of, on both parts,
there is a proper Covenant: So it is here (as afterward will appear.) God
says unto His Son; If Thou willt become a Redeemer of My Elect, Thou must go
into the World, and take on Thee the Nature of Man, and in that Nature do and
suffer all that is needful to be done in order to Salvation; I will do it All,
says Christ. Here now is a glorious Covenant.

Propos. 2. GOD has made glorious Promises to Jesus Christ, on condition of
His undertakeing the work of a Redeemer. e. g. God has promised that He should
be every way fitted and qualified for that Undertaking, and therefore that an
humane nature should be created for Him, that so He might be in a Capacity for
the management of that Undertaking, Heb. 10. 4. A Body have Thou prepared Me, O
God. And that Gifts and Graces of the holy Spirit should be poured upon Him,
according to that great and unparalleled Undertaking. He was anointed with the
oil of the Spirit above his fellows, Psalm. 45. 7. Yea, He received the Spirit
not by measure, Joh. 3. 34. i. e. above ^^^asure; there are no known Limits set
to that Portion of the Spirit which Christ as Man received. It is an higher
Expression than can be used concerning any man or Angel, or Creature, but only
is it spoken concerning Christ (who is more than a man or Creature. Also, God
promised to assist Him in his work, Isai. 42. 1. Behold my servant whom I
uphold, and ver. 4 th He shall not be discouraged, till he has set Judgment in
the earth. This is that which encouraged Christ in His work notwithstanding the
Difficulties and Sufferings, which he was on the account thereof exop^ed unto,
Isai. 50. 7. 9. And God promised him blessed Success in his undertaking, even,
that the pleasure of the Lord should prosper in his hands, as the Context
expre^^eth. Yea, Success in respect of those He undertook for, That his Elect
should be converted, and therefore he shall see his seed. Yea, not only the
Elect among the Jews, but the Gentiles also. Therefore look into the 49th
Chapter of Isaiah, where this Covenant of Redemption which we are now
discoursing of, is likewise intimated: In the two first verses Christ speaks
of his Call to the work of a Redeemer; in the third verse there is a promise
that the elect Jews should be converted to Christ. Nay but says Christ ( v.
4.) I must have more than that, My blo^d is of greater value than to be given
for them only. Those that make bargains, begin low at first, so God bids Christ
low comparatively at first, (you must always remember that these things are
spoken after the manner of men, that so we might be able to conceive and
understand something of these Mysteries) Well, says the Lord, if that be not
enough, thou shall have more, if the conversion of the Jews be not enough,
elect Gentiles shall be converted also. v. 5. 6. And now says the Lord that
formed me from the womb to be his servant, to bring Jacob again unto him -- Is
it a light thing that thou should be my servant to raise up the tribes of
Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel? I will also give thee for a
light to the Gentiles. Again, The Justification of Believers is promised to
Christ; In this Context is promised, that he should justi^ie many. And their
Sanctification Heb. 10. 10. By the which Will we are sanctified through the
offering of the Body of Jesus once for all. What Will is that? That Will has
Respect to the Covenant of Redemption, even the Will of God concerning Christ's
Coming into the world to do the work of a Redeemer. The Sanctification of
Believers does originally flow from thence. And their eternal Salvation was
promised to Jesus Christ, Heb. 9. 15. God promised that Incase Christ would
become subject unto Death, all Believers on Him shall receive an everlasting
inheritance. There are also promises made to Christ of Victory over all His
Enemi^s, Isai. 50. 9. Psalm. 100. Yea, over Death it self, Psalm. 16. 9. God
promised that if Christ would become subject to death, in order to the
Salvation of his Elect, he should not continue long in that state of death, but
should have a glorious Resurrection to life and immortality. Therefore well
might the Apostle say, It was impossible for him to be held under the pains of
death, Act. 2. 24. And God promised that a glorious Reward should be given to
him, as we see in the last verse of this Chapter. And accordingly God has
exalted Jesus Christ to sit at his own right hand, and has made not only men
but Angels and Authorities and Powers to subject to him, because He has been
obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross, therefore God has exalted
him, and given him a Name above every name, that at the Name of JESUS every
knee shall bow in Heaven, and in the earth, and under the earth.

Propos. 3. Jesus Christ the Son of God has accepted of this undertaking
according to the terms propounded by the Father. Hence it is that God is ^^iled
the God of Jesus Christ; and the Lord of Christ, Psalm. 16. 2. and 45. 7. Mic.
5. 4. Joh. 20. 17. Ephesians. 1. 17. Rev. 3. 12. Viz. in respect of the Covenant. As
the Lord is said to be the God of Believers in respect of the Covenant of
Grace; so he is said to be the God of Christ in respect of the Covenant of
Redemption. On this same account also, God is said to be greater than Christ,
Jo^. 10. 28. and 14. 28. viz. In that by voluntary Dispensation, Christ has
^^ken upon Him the work and Office of a (...), and is become subject to the
Fat^^^ therein; and thence also is said to be His ^^^vant, Isai. 52. 13. Yea,
His willing and obedient servant, Chapt. 50. 5. The Lord God has opened mine
ear and I was not ^^bellio^s, neither turned away my back. And if we call to
mind the Terms of the Covenant of Redemption but now hinted at, we shall see
the Truth of this. One Article of it was, that the Son of God should become
incarnate; hence Christ in respect of his Incarnation, is said to be s^nt of
God. Romans 8. 3. Now this the Son of God did readily comply with, Heb. 10. 5. 7.
Sacrifice and Off^ring would^st tho^ not, but a Body have thou prepared me;
then said I, (...) I come, (in the volume of thy book is it written of me) to
do thy will, O God. The Son of God there speaks, Father, (says, he) (...)
thy Will that I should go into the world, that I should assume the Humane
Nature, and in that Nature do the work of a Redeemer? If that be thy Will, Lo,
I come to do thy Will, O God. Again, According to the Articles of Agr^^m^nt in
this covenant, the Son of God was to become subject to the Law, and this
Article he ^ath complied with, Gal. 4. 4. God sent his son, made of a woman
made under the law. So that the Eternal Son of God has condescended not only
to become incarnate, to be made of a woman, (although that Conde^cention was
infinite,) but also to be made under the Law, and this not only the general (or
moral) Law, which all Mankind, yea, all rational creatures are subject unto,
and Christ has exactly observed, ( Mat. 5. 17.) but also that especial Law of
the Church wherein he was born. Hence he was circumcised, baptized, and kept
the Passover, and subjected to other Rites of the Jewish Church, which were
then of Divine Institution, Mat. 3. 15. and also the Singular Law of a Redeemer
which is expressed in the Text. Viz. that He shall make his soul an offering
for Sin. If Christ would become a REDEEMER, He must subject Himself to the
Penalty of the Law, He must yield Passive as well as Active Obedience. This is
there called the Commandment of the Father, Joh. 14. ult. -- and the Father
gave m^e COMMANDMENT. -- And this has CHRIST complied with, and submitted to,
Gal. 3. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a
curse for us. -- Yea, and he was willing and hearty in this Compliance, His
heart was in it. 30. 29. Joh. 10. 18.

Propos. 4. God and Christ do exactly observe the terms of this covenant. Yea
(to speak after the manner of men, and with humility and Reverence) they hold
each other to the agreement which has been between them: the Father holds
Christ to the Terms of the covenant, He has bated him nothing of what he
engaged to perform, Rom, 8. 32. God spared not his own Son. Nor did Christ ever
desire to have any abatement thereof, which would be derogatory from the glory
of God. Joh. 12. 27. Christ does also hold the Father to what He has promised,
and therefore we do find him professing to the Father that he does expect that
he should be as good as his word, Joh. 17. 4. 5. Father, I have glorified thee
on the earth, I have finished the work which thou gave me to do, and now O
Father, glorify thou me with tine own self, with the glory which I had (...)
thee before the world was. Q. D. I have (...) the work of a Redeemer, and now I
(...) the wages of a Redeemer, according to (...) Covenant which has from
Eternity been between us. Yea, Christ holds the Father unto what he had
promised not only (...) himself, but also with respect respect unto all that
shall believe on him, as in ver. 24. of that Chapt. Father, I will that they
also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my
glory. The Father has promised that it should be so, and now Christ does will
and demand it should be made good

Propos. 5. God and Christ do confide in one another. They do as it were take
one another wo^d. The Father trusts Christ. Hence the Patriarchs and Saints
(...) before the Coming of Christ (...), Heb. 11. ult. They without us were no
(...) perfect: they were not brought to (...) in one way and we in another, but
were saved by the Merit of Christ as well as we. But how could that be, since
Christ had not died before their souls were saved? Well, but God took Christ's
word for it, that he would in the fullness of time go into the world and dye
for them. Hence the Death of Christ was effectual before it was actual, Rev.
13. 8. He is said to be the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. How
was Christ slain from the foundation of the world? Not only in respect of the
Decree of God, but in respect of the efficacy of Christ's death: For the Death
of Christ was efficacious ever since the first Believer that ever lived in the
world, and this was because the Father took the world of the Son concerning his
Coming into the world to do the work of a Redeemer. Also Christ has taken
God's word: Hence he came and died before such a time as half of the Elect were
saved, or had any actual being in the world. In the Old Testament, the Father
did trust the Son, in the New Testament the Son does trust the Father.

Propos. 6. God and Christ had glorious End, in making this Covenant of
Redemption. The great and ultimate end, was his own Glory. Not that there could
be any real access or addition of Glory beyond what he alwaye^ had: only a
Discovery of that Glory. Here by the Glory of the Divine Attributes is
manifested. e. g. The Sovereignty of God. That God should elect some and
reprobate others, and find out a way for the Salvation of fallen Men but not of
fallen Angels, is a glorious Manifestation of the absolute Sovereignty of Him
who is GOD MOST HIGH. And the Glory of his Justice is also here to be seen. The
Apostle insisteth upon that Romans 3. 25. 26. To declare his Righteousness, To
declare his Righteousness. Indeed if God had pardoned Sin without Satisfaction,
Mercy had been seen, but then God would not have had the Glory of his Justice.
Likewise, Divine Grace is hereby glorified, ^^ Tim. 1. 9. According to his
grace which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began. Herein God
commends his Grace, in that he should be contriving a way, and such a way, to
bring us to Salvation before the world began. And the grace of the Lord Jesus
was exceeding abundant, in that when Man had dashed himself to Ruin, and the
everlasting Father was coming out against him with Arrows dipped in blond, that
now the Son of God should step in and undertake to satis^ie Justice. And the
Wisdom of God is also hereby discovered to Saints and Angels, Ephesians. 3. 9, 10.
The Mystery which from the beginning of the world hat^ been hid with God, to
the intent that now to the principalities and powers in heavenly places might
be made known to the Church the manifold Wisdom of God. And the truth is, that
nothing but Infinite Wisdom could ^ave contrived such a way as this for
accomplishing of Salvation, where Justice and Mercy so meet together, and
Righteousness and Peace do kiss each other.

USE. Let it be a word of CONSOLATION to those that are concerned in this
Covenant.

1. It is a comfortable Consideration to think on the Ancient Love of God. If
thou art concerned in this Covenant, God loved thee before ever thou loved^t
Him; yea, before ever thou had^t any Being; thy Name was written in the Lamb's
Book of Life before the foundation of the world, even from all Eternity.
Therefore David faith, Thy loving Kindness is ever of old, Psalm. 6. 25. God
has had Designs of Grace toward thee, from Everlasting.

2. If thou art concerned in this Covenant GOD who has an absolute Dominion
over his Creatures, has given thee to Jesus Christ, Joh. ^7. 6. 10. Thine they
are and thou gave the^ one, and all mine are thine, and thine are mine* God
has given thee to Christ to redeem and save thee: There is such a poor
Creature I give him to thee, do thou take him, save him, bless him forever,
says the Lord.

3. Hence thy Salvation is Certain. As sure as the Covenant of Redemption, as
sure as that Christ has made his soul an offering for sin. This is a suitable
meditation to be (...) the heart at the time of Receiving, when we are at the
Lord's Table. Is there Bread and Wine here? As sure as this is Bread and Wine
so sure is it that Christ has died, and so sure it is that thou shall be saved,
and behold the Glory of Christ in Heaven, if thou art one Concerned in this
Covenant of Redemption. You will say, This is Comfortable if I did but know
that this belongs to me; How shall I know that? Answ.

1. Do thou believe on Jesus Christ? No man can know his Interest in this
Covenant before he does believe. Ha^t thou an heart-purifying, an heart
sanctifying Faith? Ha^t^ thou accepted of Jesus Christ upon His own Terms? Has
God given thee to see the glorious Loveliness and Excellency of the Son of God,
so that there is none in Heaven, nor any on the Earth whom thou do desire in
Comparison of Him? Have thou received Christ as Prophet, Priest, and King? then
This belongs to thee.

2. Are you the Seed of CHRIST? Are you become His Children in respect of
spiritual Regeneration? If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature, 2. Cor,
5. 17. Have thou a new heart, a new head, a new tongue, a new Life and all? Art
thou become the Workmanship of God created in Christ Jesus to good works? if so
then this belongs to thee.

3. Have thou felt the blessed Power and Efficacy of the Death of Christ in thy
own soul? Is Sin mortified in thy soul Through the blood of Christ? And is thy
soul mortified to the world thereby? then this belongs to thee. Can thou say
after the blessed Apostle, By the Cross (i. e. the Death) of the Lord Jesus
Christ I am crucified unto the world, and the world unto one, Gal. 6. 14. If
Sin be indeed mortified in thy soul, then Christ has made His Soul as Offering
for thy Sins.

Jesus Christ is the SON of GOD.
REV. 11. 18. -- The Son of God:


IN the second and third Chapters of the Revelations, we have those Seven
Epistles which the Lord Jesus Christ sent from Heaven to the Churches in Asia.
These words are part of that which is in order the 4 th of these Epistles, the
Preface whereof is contained in this verse: which does signify

1. The Person to whom this Epistle was written, viz. The Angel or principal
Officer in the Church of Thyatira.

2. The Author or Sender of it, viz. Jesus Christ, who is here described,

1. From His Relation unto God the Father, whose Son he is.

2. From his Omniscience, he has eyes like a flame of fire.

3. From his (...), his feet are like fine brass.

At present we shall only speak to the First of these, viz. That RELATION
which Christ does sustain toward God, And the Doctrine to be insisted on, is,

That Jesus Christ is the Son of God.

Now in the Doctrinal handling of this great Foundation-Truth we shall

1. Lay down some Propositions for Explication. 2. Mention some Arguments for
Demonstration.

For EXPLICATION.
Propos. 1. Christ is said to be the Son of GOD in a Personal respect. Not His
Essence but his Person is begotten of the Father. Christ is said not to be the
Son of God in respect of his Humane Nature Its a sure Principle of Truth,
Filiation is of the person, not of the Nature. Christ in respect of his humane
Nature is styled the son of man. Mat. 16. 13. but not the Son of God; for He
was the Son of God before the Assumption of his humane Nature. God sent his Son
into the world, Joh. 3. 17. Therefore he was the Son of God before his coming
into the world. 1. Joh. 3. 8. The son of God was manifested. Now Manifestation
is of that which was extant before. So that the Person of Christ did exist
before He was manifested in the flesh. Agur lived many Ages before the humane
Nature of Christ did actually exist, yet he acknowledges that God had a Son,
Prove. 30. 4. Yea, and so did (...), Dan. 3. 25. Christ is said to be the son of
the Father, 3. Joh. 3. whenas the Humane nature was from the Holy Ghost Matt^.
1. 18. If Christ were the Son of God in respect of His Incarnation, He should
be the Son of the Holy Ghost rather than the Son of the Father, whenas the
Scripture speaks otherwise, calling Him only the Son of the Father, Joh. 1.
14. He is the only begotten of the Father. Not begotten of the Holy Ghost. To
beget is the Relative property of the Father, to be begotten is the Relative
Property of the Son. Christ's being the Son of God, is a proof of His being
equal with God, Joh. 5. 18. When^s if he were the Son of God in respect of his
humane Nature, or considered as Mediator, that would be no proof of His
Equality with God, for on these Accounts he (...) to and (...) equal with the
Father, Joh. 10. 28. Nor is Christ said to be the Son or to be begotten in
respect of his Godhead absolutely considered, for then every Person in the
Godhead should be so. Christ is not said to be the Son of the Godhead, but
the Son of God, where God is taken personally for God the Father. The Divine
Nature absolutely considered is from It Self, i. e. from none other, but the
Son of God is from another i. e. from the Father, He is God of Himself, but not
a Son of Himself. He reciveth not his Being from the Father, but only His
Personality. The Son of God is a Divine Person begotten of the Father.

Propos. 2. Christ is the Son of God by Divine Ineffable Generation. That
Divine Generation which the Sonship of Christ does intimate, is ineffable. As
it is said in another respect, Who can declare his Generation? Isa. 53. 8. So
as to this Generation, who can declare it? Yet must we know and believe that
the Son is begotten of the Father. The Scripture (which is the ground of Faith
in all divine Mysteries) is clear for this Joh 3. 17. If Christ be the Son of
God after an higher manner than the Angels, He is so in respect of divine
Generation; But He is the Son of God after an higher manner than the Angels.
Heb. 15. Unto which of the Angels said He at any time, Thou art my son? Christ
is so the Son of God as no one else is, and therefore is said not only to be
begotten, but the only begotten Son of God. Joh. 1. 14. We beheld His Glory, as
the Glory of the only begotten of the Futher. There are sons of GOD in Respect
of Creation: So Adam was the Son of God, Luc. 3. ult. There are sons of God in
respect of Adoption; so all Believers are the sons of God. Joh. 1. 12. Gal. 4.
5. There are sons of God in Respect of Imitation and Similitude; so the holy
Angels are styled sons of Elohim, Psalm. 89. 6. Job. 38. 7. And Godly men are
styled His sons, because they bear His Image, and are in some measure like Him,
as Children are like their Father. Mat. 5. 45. Luc. 6. 35. Ephesians. 5. 1. As Wicked
men are called the Devil's children on the same account of Likeness and
Imitation, 1. Joh. 3. 10. And there are sons by Nature, so Christ alone is the
Son of God. See what is written Exodus 23. 20, 21. I send an Angel before thee,
to keep thee in thy way, and to bring to the place which I have prepared: obey
HIs voice, and provoke him not, -- for My Name is in Him. That Angel of the
Lord is indeed the Lord of Angels; Jesus Christ the increated Angel of the
Everlasting Covenant. God's Name is in Him, because He is God's Son. As a Son
has the Name and Nature of his Father belonging to him; so has Christ the
Name and Nature of God in Him. Hence He is said to be God's own Son Romans 8. 3.
God sent His own Son [^on (...) Huion] the Son of Himself and in the 32 verse
of that, Chapter it is said, God spared not His own Son, [ho^idios Huios] h. e.
His Son in a proper or a natural sense. And God is said to be Christ's own
Father, Joh. 5. 18. And therefore is He (as but now was intimated) said to be
equal with God, Phil. 2. 6. He thought it not Robbery to be equal with God. If
Christ had not been God's own Son, for Him to have given out that He was equal
with God would have been the greatest Robbery and Sacrilege that ever was. If
He were only the adopted son of God, that would not prove His Equality with the
Father. But an own son (though he may be inferior, or it may be superior to his
father in respect of Office, or o^ other accounts) in respect of Nature he is
Equal with his father: A son is not of an inferior Nature to his Father. Christ
(then) is God's Son as to Nature, therefore his Son in Respect of Generation.

Propos. 3. The Generation of the Son of God is Eternal. They err fundamentally
who imagine that the Son of God had no Existence before his Incarnation. The
world was created about four Thousand years before the Son of God came into it,
nevertheless He made the world, Joh. 1. 3, 10. Therefore He did exist before He
became a man. God had many adopted sons in the daye^ of the Old Testament,
therefore He had an own Son for whose sake they were adopted. The Hebrews do
sometimes call the Messiah by that Name of [Jinnon] which signifies a Son, and
is the word used Psalm. 72. 17. which place may be thus read, before the sun,
Jinnon is His Name, Intimating that the Generation of the Son of God was from
Eternity, even before there was any Sun in the Firmament or any Creature that
had a Being, yet then the second person in the Trinity is the Son of God. All
other Generations have a Beginning and Ending, but this has neither, Psalm. 2.
7. Thou art my son this day have I begotten thee. That day as it has respect
to Christ's being manifested in the sight of Heaven and Earth to be the Son of
God, is to be applied to the Time of His Resurrection; but as it respects
Christ Generation Generation, it is to be understood concerning the Day of
Eternity. God's Day is ETERNITY, There is no Yesterday nor Tomorrow with Him,
but an Infinite NOW, which never goes away. The Scripture does expressly
declare that the Generation of the Son of God is an Eternal Generation.
Wherefore Wisdom (that is Christ the Eternal Essential Wisdom of the Father)
has said, The Lord Possessed me in the Beginning of his way, before his works
of Old, I was set up from everlasting, from the Beginning, or ever the Earth
was. When there was no Depths I was brought forth, when there were no fountains
abounding with water; before the Mountains were settled, before the Hills was I
brought forth, While as yet he had not made the earth, nor the Fields, nor the
highest part of the Dust of the world, etc. Then was I by Him, and I was daily
his Delight, rejoicing always before Him. Prove. 8. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. -- 30.
What can be more plain to prove that the Generation of the Son of God is
Eternal? See also what is spoken by the Prophet Micah (Cap. 5. 2.) -- Thou
Bethlehem Ephrata, -- out of thee shall He come forth, that is to be Ruler of
Israel, whose goings forth have been from of Old, from Eternity. So that there
are two Goings-forth of Christ there spoken of, one out of Bethlehen^ in
respect of His Birth, the other from the Days of Eternity in respect of that
Generation we are discoursing of. Hence also it is said, In the Beginning was
the Word, Joh. 1. 1. Those words do allude to the first words in the Bible, and
they show that Christ was when the World first began. It Is not said that Christ
was made then (as it is said, Genesis 1. 1. that in the Beginning the Heavens and
the Earth were made) but that He Was then. The Son of God had real Existence
when the World began to be Created. (Now) There was nothing but Eternity before
the world began.

Once more,

The Son of God is styled, the Brightness of His Father's glory Heb. 1. 3. The
sun and that Brightness, that Refulgency, or Beaming forth of Light which
proceeds therefrom, are Coetaneous: so God the Father and the Son are
Co-eternal^ The Son is only in order of Nature and not in Time before the
Beams issuing therefrom; so is God the Father only in order of Nature and not
in Time before God the Son. Had it been possible for the Sun in the Firmament
to be Eternal, the Beams and Brightness thereof would have been eternal too.
Thus, inasmuch as God the Father is Eternal, the Son of God, who is the
Brightness of His Glory, is eternal also.

Propos. 4. The Generation of the Son of God is a spiritual and an intellectual
Generation. God is a Spirit, and therefore all carnal Imaginations about this
Generation are to be abhorred. This Divine Generation concerning which we
speak, is by the (...) Understanding of God reflecting upon his own Beauty, and
conceiving an Image of Himself. Hence Christ is called the Image of God. Col.
1. 15. Not an accidental but essential Image. ^ as the son does bear the Image
and Nature of his father. Divines are wont thus to express it, God may be
considered as understanding and knowing Himself, That is God the Father, and as
understood and known by Himself, That is God the Son. And the Scripture does
set forth the Generation of the Son of God by such expressions as show that it
is spiritual and intellectual. e. g. He is called the Wisdom of God. 1. Cor. 1.
24. Now Wisdom is of the Understanding.

Again, Christ is called the Word of God. Rev. 19. 13. 1. Joh. 5. 7. Now there
is not only a sensible word which is pronounced, but intelligible word which is
brought forth in the understanding. Words are the Birth of the Understanding:
so the Son of God is begotten by the Infinite Understanding of the Father.

Propos. 5. Though God the Father and the Son are personally distinct, they are
essentially One. Therefore the Son is called the express Image of his Person,
Heb. 1. 3. If a man see an Angel, he may behold the Image of God, His Wisdom,
Goodness, Power etc. but not the Express Image of His Person. But he that sees
the Son of God, sees the Person of the Father in His Son: yea, the Character
(as the Greek has it) of his Person. A son is sometimes very like his father,
the Picture of his Father, and so the Image of his person: but never any Son so
like the father, as the Son of God is like His Father. There is an essential
Likeness of God in Christ. Phil 2. 6. Who being in the Form of God. The Father
and the Son are personally two, Joh. 8. 16. I (says Christ) am not alone, but
I and the Father that sent me. and in verse 18. I am one that bear witness of
my self, and the Father that sent me ^eareth witness of me. where there is one
sending, and another sent, there are two distinct Persons: And two Witnesses
are two Persons; so are God and Christ; yet are they essentially One. Joh. 10.
30. The Father and I are One. If they were not Essentially One, there would be
more Gods than one, which is Heresy and Blasphemy to imagine.

Propos. 6. The Generation of the Son of God is a wonderful and
incomprehensible Mystery. That Particular insisted on in the former
Proposition, manifests the Truth of this. That two Persons should be
essentially One! That more Persons than one should be in the same individual
Nature! Among created Beings it is not so, nor can it be; They that differ
personally have not the same individual Being, But God the Father and the Son
have the same indivisible Essence. A Father and a Son have the same generical
Essence, but not the same numerical Essence, but God the Father and the Son
have so. And how wonderful is it to consider, that there should be a Father no
older than his own Son, and an own Son no younger than his own Father! And how
wonderful is it, that the same Person should be both God and Man! So is Christ.
In that Vision to which my Text has Referrence, He is called the Son of man.
Rev. 1. 13, 14. and here the Son of GOD, because he is both God and Man in one
person. That there should be more Natures than one in the same individual
person, is wonderful.

These are glorious Mysteries, that we should with humble Adoration think of.

Thus for Propositions tending to explain the Truth before us.

We proceed in the 2 nd place, To mention some Arguments Demonstrating, that
Jesus Christ is the Son of God. Briefly; 1.

Arg. 1. We may argue from that Testimony which has been given to the Sonship
of Christ^ Even Christ's greatest Enemies have been forced to confess this. The
Devil once cried out, What have I to do with thee, Jesus thou Son of God most
High! Luc. 8. 28. And we have upon Record in the Word of God, the Testimonies
which those that knew Christ have given to this great Truth. John Baptist
saith^ I saw and bear record, that this is the Son of GOD, Joh. 3. 34.
Nathaniel also, ( v. 49.) said to Him, Rabbi, thou art the Son of GOD^ Peter in
the name of all the Disciples, professed, We believe, and are sure that thou
art Christ the Son of the Living God, Joh. 6. 69. And an Archangel from Heaven
said to the Virgin Mary, that holy thing which shall be born of thee, shall be
called the Son of God, Luc. 1. 35. Christ Himself bare witness to this Truth,
concerning his own Sonship. Joh. 10. 36. Say ye of him whom the Father has
sanctified and sent into the world, thou blasphemest, because I said, I am the
Son of God? And God from heaven has preached this Truth; At the Time when
Christ was baptized, Lo, a voice from Heaven saying, this is my beloved Son,
hear ye Him, Mat. 3. 17. Also at His Transfiguration, unto which the Apostle
Peter has respect when he says, We were eyewitnesses of His Majesty, for he
received from God the Father honor and glory, when there came from the
excellent Glory (i. e. from God, whom the Hebrews are wont to call by the Name
of Glory) this is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased: and this voice
which came from Heaven we heard when we were with him in the holy Mount, 2.
Pet. 1. 16, 17. 18.

Arg. 2. From the Miracles which happened at the Time of Christ's Passion. I do
not mention the Sufferings of Christ to prove His Relation to God. His state of
Humiliation was the great Objection which the Jews had against His being the
SON of the Blessed. Hence Christ became became a Rock of offense to them that
would not believe that he was the Son of God except He came down from the
Cross, Matthew. 27. 42, 43. So the Heathen world; What! He be a God that was
Crucified! they thought that incredible. But there were such Miracles attending
the sufferings of Christ, as did plainly manifest that he was none other but
the son of God. From the Sixth to the Ninth Hour of the day, there was Darkness
all the Land over, This was no ordinary Eclipse of the Sun, for it was at the
Full of the Moon, being at the Passover, whenas ordinary Solar Eclipses we know
are at the New Moon Moreover, the Vail of the Temple was rent in twain, from
the Top to the Bottom; and the Earth did quake, and the rocks rent, and the
graves were opened, and Bodies of Saints which slept arose. These Solemn
Providence were so convictive as that the Captain who commanded the Soldiers
the day that Christ was crucified, cried out, Truly, this was the Son of GOD.
Oh the Jews have killed the Son of God. Mat. 27. 45, -- 51, 52, 54,

Arg. 3. From the Resurrection and Exaltation of Jesus Christ. He was declared
to be the Son of God, by the Resurrection from the Dead, Romans 1. 4. Christ said
that he was the Son of God before he suffered on the Cross; now if he had not
been so indeed, we may be sure that God would never have raised him out of his
grave. Also Christ raised Himself: Therefore did he say to the Jews, destroy
this Temple, (meaning the Temple of his Body) and in three days I will raise it
up. Joh. 2. 19.

Nor would God have Exalted Him so as He has done, even to sit at His own
right hand, had He not been his own Son: For unto which of the Angels said He
at any time, sit -- at my right hand? God has exalted him very highly giving
him a Name above every Name. And we may therefore conclude, that Jesus Christ
is the Son of God.

Arg. 4. From the powerful quickening voice of Christ. Joh. 6. 63. The words
(says Christ) that I speak, they are spirit and life. and ver. 68, 69. Thou
have the words of eternal life. Peter might well therefore add, we are sure
thou art the Son of God. God is known by His voice, Job. 40. 9. Have thou an
arm like God? can thou thunder with a voice like Him? The voice of the Lord
is powerful, the voice of the Lord is full of Majesty; the voice of the Lord
breaks the Cedars, the voice of the Lord divides the flames of fire. So is
the Son of God known by his voice: The hour is coming, and now is, when the
dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live.
Joh. 5. 25. Certainly, He that can by his voice make the dead to live, is more
than a mere son of man, He is the Son of GOD.

USE.
Let me conclude this Doctrine with a word of Exhortation. And there is a
threefold Exhortation before us,

1. To endeavor after Knowledge and good Understanding in this glorious
Mystery, concerning the Sonship of Christ.

2. To believe this Truth.

3. To Practice accordingly.

Exhort. 1. Endeavor we after Knowledge and good Understanding in this
glorious Mystery. Therefore,

Consider. 1. That there are but few (...) have this Knowledge. At leastwise
not in that degree and measure which ought to be; yea and which might be,
considering the means which are plentifully afforded. As the Apostle speaks
speaks to the Hebrews, When for the time you ought to be Teachers, you have
need that one teach you again which be the first principles of the oracles of
God. Cap. 5. 12. It is mavelous to consider what Ignorance is in many that
call themselves Christians. As an holy man once complained, (not without too
much Cause) that Christ is but little known amongst Christians. Yea, some that
are very knowing in other matters of Religion, yet if they be examined about
Christ, they are found exceeding ignorant.

Consid. 2. The surpassing Excellency of this Knowledge. Hence the Apostle
says, Yea doubtless I count all things but loss, for the Excellency of the
Knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. Phil. 3. 8. Knowledge is an excellent and
desirable thing. Knowledge of the Creature is so; which caused Solomon to say,
that Wisdom excels Folly, as far as Light exc^ls Darkness. Much more is the
Knowledge of Christ excellent and desirable, whereby all other Knowledge is
sanctified, and without which all other Knowledge will never save a man's soul.
Hence the holy Prophets of old were very diligent in end^avouring after this
Knowledge; as we see 1. Pet. 1. 10, 11. of which salvation the prophets have
enquired, and searched diligently, searching what, or what manner of time the
spirit of Christ which was in them did signify, when it testified before hand
the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should be revealed. Nay the
blessed Angels admire and seek after this Knowledge. The things of Christ are
things which the Angels desire to ^ook into. And if Prophets, if Angels have
desired to search into the Mystery of the Incarnation of the Son of God, much
more into that of His eternal Generation. The truth is, that this Knowledge is
not had but by Divine Revelation. Christ is not known by the Light of Nature,
but by the special Revelation of the Holy Ghost, held forth in the Gospel.
Wherefore the Apostle says, It pleased God to reveal his son in me. Gal. 1.
15. And when Peter made that glorious Confe^^ion, Thou art Christ, the Son of
the living GOD, it was said unto him, Flesh and blood has not revealed it unto
thee but my Father which is in heaven. Mat. 16. 16, 17. Hence the whole
Doctrine concerning Christ is called a Mystery, Ephesians. 3. 4. Ye may understand my
knowledge in the Mystery of Christ. A M^stery is a Divine Secret which is not
known but by Revelation: So is the Truth concerning Christ. And as all Truths
which reveal Christ are excellent; so there is a special Excellency in those
which concern the Person of Christ.

Consid. 3. That Though this Knowledge be Excellent and rare, yet it is
attainable; that is to say such a measure thereof as is necessary in order to
Salvation. Indeed a comprehensive Knowledge of this Mystery concerning the
Sonship of Christ is not to be attained by any man or Creature. There are many
external works of God which we are not able to compre^end. If we look into the
works of Creation we soon see more than we can compre^end. Job. 37. 16. Do
thou know the Ballancings of the clouds, the wondrous works of Him that is
perfect in knowledge? So concerning the works of Providence, Romans 11. 33. O the
depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! how unsearchable
are his judgments and his ways past finding out! Much less can we comprehend
the immanent and eternal works of God: such as Election and Reprobation, and
such as that which is employed in the Text, respecting the Eternal Generation of
the SON of GOD. The most knowing in the world must needs confess his own
ignorance when such Myst^ryes are spok^n of. As Zophar said to Job, O that God
would show thee the secrets of Wisdom, they are double to that which is, can
thou by searching find out God? can thou find out the ALMIGHTY unto
perfection? what can th^^ (...) etc. Chapt. 11. 6, 7, 8. And David confe^^eth
with Respect unto a Knowledge far less mysterious than what we are speaking
of, Psalm 139. 6. Such knowledge is too wonderful for me, it is high I cannot
attain unto it. Yet such a knowledge of Christ as is necessary unto salvation
may be had, especially in these Gospel Times, when that promise is eminently
fulfilled Jer. 31. 34. -- they shall all know me, from the least of them to the
greatest of them. Such a Knowledge of Christ as is essential to salvation,
every true Believer has. The Gospel does reveal Christ much more clearly than
ever the Law did Hence it is said, that He that is least in the Kingdom of
heaven (h. e. the least Minister of the Gospel) is greater than John Baptist.
not in respect of degrees of grace, but as to a more clear and abundant
discovery of Christ. There is no Minister of the Gospel, but knows more of
Christ than John Baptist did, that is to say, he knows more concerning His
Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, Sitting at the right hand of God, Coming to
judge the world, than John was acquainted with. Matthew. 11. 11.

Consid. 4. That, Ignorance about Christ in these days of Gospel Light, is
exceeding dangerous. A man had better be ignorant of every thing than of
Christ. It is said, Hos. 4. 6. My people are destroyed for lack of Knowledge.
If any Ignorance be destructive, Ignorance of Christ is so. Men may know much
in divine things and yet perish, because they know not Christ. So the
Pharisees, they had great knowledge in the Letter of the Scripture, and yet
because they knew not Christ they perished to Eternity. Joh. 17. 3. This is
life eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Him whom thou have sent,
Jesus Christ Then they that remain ignorant of Christ, must needs be in danger
of death, yea of eternal Death.

By way of Direction here observe these Rules.

1. If we would have a right understanding in those Truths which concern the
Person of Christ the Son of God, We must Attend the Mean^s which the Lord has
appointed in order to the attaining that Knowledge. e. g. Searching the blessed
Scriptures: therefore Christ said, Search the Scriptures for they testify of
me. Joh. 5. 39. And Solomon shows, that the way to know Wisdom is to seek
and search after it, Prove. 2. 4. h. e. We must digg and dive into the rich
Mines of Scripture. In things of this nature, we must take heed of our own
Conceits, but be sure to keep close to the Scriptures. And Attendance to the
Word preached is also the way to gain and grow in the Knowledge of Christ. For
it is the great work of the Ministry to preach Christ, to open the Mysteryes of
Christ. We read in Genesis 29. 3. How the Shepherds rolled the Stone from the
Wells mouth, and watered the Sheep; So Ministers are to open the Mysteries of
Christ and Salvation by Him. The Lord does bestow gifts of Knowledge upon some
above others for this end in special, that so they might be fitted for the work
of the Ministry and might bring to the Knowledge of the Son of God, Ephesians. ^. 13.
Prayer also is a means to attain this knowledge: If thou criest after
knowledge and liftest up thy voice for understanding, then shall thou find the
knowledge of God, Prove. 2. 3, 5. We should pray for the illumination of the
Spirit, and the rather because the Lord Jesus has promised to send His Spirit
to guide us into all Truth, Joh. 16. 13. Let us be earnest in Prayer that we
may receive that Unction from the Holy One that shall make us know all things,
that are necessary to be known in order to our Salvation and Consolation.

2. Beware of Presumption and Curiosity. We must not be wise above what is
written. It is good to enquire into these divine and holy Mysteries, so far as
God has revealed, but no further: If we do, not Knowledge but Blindness will
be the effect of those Enquiries. A Vehement Object we say destroys the
sense: If men come too near the Sun, their eyes are dazzled that they cannot
see. A Moth by aproaching too near the Light destroys it self; so many a
proud Presumer by too bold prying into these glorious Mysteryes has destroyed
his own soul.

Exhort. 2. Believe this Truth, that Jesus Christ is the Son of GOD. It is not
so easy a matter to believe this as many think for Reason cannot comprehend
this Mystery, and thence it is not ea^^^ after a right manner, with the heart
to believe it. Yet It is necessary to be believed, as being a fundamental
Principle in Religion. Therefore when Peter in the (...) of the Disciples
professed that Christ is the Son of God, the Lord replied, upon this rock I
will build my Church, Mat. 16. 18. so then they that believe not this, do not
belong to Christ, nor to the Church of Christ. All Religion, yea whole
Christianity would fall to the ground if this Principle should be plucked up.
The Sum of the Gospel is contained in this great Truth. Hence Paul's
Preaching is summarily expressed by saying, He preached Christ that He is the
Son of God. Act. 9. 20. There are many Truths of lesser Concern, which through
Ignorance may be disbelieved or denied, and yet a man's Salvation not hazzarded
thereby: But it is not so as to this Truth respecting the Sonship of Jesus
Christ; whosoever disowneth it, will miss of eternal Salvation, 1. Joh. 2. 23.
Whosoever denies the Son, the same has not the Father. Hence Satan has made
it his great design to oppose this Truth. The Devil said to Christ, ( Mat. 4.
3.) IF thou be the son of God. The wicked Devil would feign have that
questioned. Wherefore in the days of the Apostles, he stirred up Ebion and
Cerinthus, and other He^eticks who denied the Deity, and so the eternal Sonship
of Christ, which is thought to be the occasion of John's writing his Gospel
wherein he does most plainly and abundantly assert the Godhead of Christ.
Afterward, Satan stirred up Arius, who maintained that Christ was only a
Creature and not the eternally begotten Son of the Father; and the Church was
in danger of being carried away with that flood of Arian Heresy which
overwhelmed the world Rev. 12. 15. The whole christian world (as one of the
Ancients speaks) sighed and wondered to see it self become an Arian. Thus we
see Satan lays Battery against this Truth, because he knows the souls and
Salvation of men are concerned in the Belief of it. Therefore let us firmly
believe it.

By way of Direction, here remember these two Rules.

1. We must set this down for a Principle, that we are to believe beyond
Reason. Albeit the great Truths of the Christian Religion are not contrary
unto, yet they are above Reason. Therefore must we believe what we are not able
to comprehend. Pagans of old, were wont scoffingly to call the Christians
Credentes, that is believing persons, because they were such as would believe
beyond the comprehension of Reason. And one reason why Socinians in these late
days have had such gross and damnable mistakes about the Person of Christ,
has been because they would not believe beyond Reason; whenas the great and
glorious My^^eries respecting the Son^hip and the eternal Generation of
Christ's Person are beyond what any man's Reason can ^athom* Therefore we must
set Faith on work, and though we cannot conceive how this or that should be,
yet we are to take Divine Testimony for it. Take the Word of God for it that it
is so, and there rest satisfied.

2. Let us not content our selves with a mere notional Belief about this
matter; but see that our Faith be sincere and cordial. Let us see that this
Truth be not only in our heads but in our hearts also. If men have only a
notional Belief concerning this, that is no more than what the Devils have. Jam.
2. 19. Thou believe that there is one God, thou do well, the Devils also
believe and tremble. So do the Devils believe, that JESUS is the SON of GOD,
(...) and tremble at the Apprehension of His Infinite MAJESTY. A whole Legion
of Devils fell a roaring at the presence of the Lord Jesus, Crying, Jesus, thou
Son of God, art thou come to torment us before the time? Mat. 8. 29. But hearty
Belief of, and Closure with this Truth is another thing. Philip said, If thou
believe with all thine heart, unto him that professed, I believe that Jesus
Christ is the Son of God Act. 8. 37. That Is necessary in order to Salvation:
Romans 10. 18. With the heart man believes unto Righteousness, and with the
mouth confession is made unto SALVATION. When a man does so believe this Truth,
as that he could gladly lay down his life for Confessing and Bearing witness to
it, that is hearty Believing. As in the primitive (...) it was as much as a
man's Life was wort^ to Confess this Truth. The Infidel Jews and Heathen of
those days would be ready to kill any one that should profess such a Belief.
In which respect the Apostle might well say as the 1. Joh. 4. 15. Whosoever
confesses that Jesus Christ is the SON of God, God is in him, and he in God.
This is to be understood, not of a mere notional but of a cordial, yea and a
Practical Believing.

We proceed therefore to

Exhor. 3. Practice according to this Truth. Let every one look to it, that
they carry toward Christ as becomes toward the Son of God.

Quest. How is that?

Answ. 1. Attend to whatever He shall say. That may be the special Reason why
Christ in the Preface of his Epistle to the Church in Thyatira, mentions His
being the Son of God, viz. that so He might stir up Attention. And if Christ
has any thing to say to us, we may be sure that it is well worth the harkening
to, because He is the Son of God, Prove. 8. 6, 7, Hear, for I will speak of
excellent things, and the opening of my mouth shall be right things, for my
mouth shall speak the Truth. O then hearken to the Son of God! The Father of
Glory has said from Heaven. This is my Son, Hear Him, Matthew. 3. 17. It is as
much as a soul is worth not to regard what Christ the Son of God shall say. It
shall come to pass, that every sou^^ that will not hear Him shall be destroyed
from among the people, Act. 4. 23.

2. Love the Lord Jesus Christ. Certainly, we do not carry toward Christ as
becomes toward the Son of God, if we do not love Him. For He is the most
lovely Person, that we can set our ^earts upon, Cant^ 5. ult. He is altogether
lovely. Nor can we love God ex^^pt we love Jesus Christ. Every one that
(...)(...) him that is begotten also. He that lo^eth the Father will love the
son that is like the Father. Oh how vile are they that do not love Christ!
What a dreadful Scripture is that, 1. Cor. 16. 22. If any man love not the Lord
Jesus Christ, let him be ANATHEMA MARANATHA. If any man live and dye without
Love in his heart toward the Lord Christ, he will be cursed and cursed yea and
the Curse will remain upon him until the Lord Jesus shall come to Judgment.

3. Honor Jesus Christ the Son of GOD. When God sent His Son into the world,
He said, They will reverence my Son, Matthew. 21. 37. Sure it is, that upon that
account Reverence and Honor is due unto Him. Christ considered as the Son of
God, does partake in the same Nature with the Father, and so is equal with God,
and thence is to have equal Honor with Him. Joh. 5. 22, 23. The Father has
committed all judgment to the Son, that all men should honor the Son, as they
honor the Father. It is storied concerning the Emperor Theodosius, that at a
time when he was too favorable to the Arians, he made a Decree that as much
respect should be put upon his son as upon himself; and a godly Minister whose
soul hated the Arian Heresy coming into the Emperors Presence, did him great
Obey^ance, but took no notice of his Son, whereat the Emperor was highly
displeased; Oh, (says the Minister) cannot you bear it, that less Honor and
Respect should be given to your son than is manifested toward your self, and
do you think the God of Heaven will bear it at your hands, that you should give
less Honor to His Son Jesus Christ than you do unto God Himself? At the
hearing of which words, the Emperor was stricken with Conviction, and after
that was no more so favorable to the Arians. God requires men and Angels to
worship His Son Jesus Christ, which is the greatest Honor that can be put upon
any Object: Heb. 1. 6. When he brings the first begotten into the world, he
says, let all the Angels of God worship Him. And this is certain, that they,
that will not honor the Son of God now, shall be fain to honor Him one Day,
when they shall see Him come down from heaven in all His Glory. Then shall
every knee in heaven, and on earth, and under the earth bow at the Name of
JESUS, and every tongue shall confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory
of God the Father.

4. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ. Since He is the Son of GOD, He is the
Object of Faith. Ye believe in God, (says Christ to His Disciples) believe
also in me. And it was said unto the man that was born blind, Do thou
believe on the SON of GOD? We may safely venture our Souls upon HIM. Indeed, if
He were only the Son of Man, it would be dangerous and de^tructive to put the
Trust and Confidence of our souls in Him, but since He is the SON of GOD, we
may and must do so.

The Lord has therefore revealed the Truth, that so we may be encouraged in
BELIEVING. Joh. 20. 31. These things are written that ye might believe that
Jesus is the CHRIST the Son of God and that believing ye might have Life
through His Name.

Know it, (yea, you that live under the Gospel cannot but know it) That there
is no SALVATION but by CHRIST, and there is no Salvation by Christ but in a way
of BELIEVING on Him. Joh. 3. 36. He that believes on the SON has everlasting
life, and he that believes not thy Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of
God abides on him. And having FAITH, let us live the life of Faith, that so we
may be able to say after the blessed Apostle, I live, yet not I but Christ
lives in me, and the life which I now live in the ^lesh, I live by FAITH on
the SON of GOD.

Jesus Christ is over all, God blessed for ever.
ROMANS IX. 4. -- Who is over all, God blessed for ever.


THe Apostle having in the preceding Chapters of this Epistle, handled the
Doctrine of Justification, he proceeds in this (with several other Chapters
following) to discourse concerning the Mystery of Predestination. He had before
asserted, that the Elect of God could not perish; against which Assertion it
might have been objected, That the Jews who were an elect Nation perish in
their Infidelity: To this he Answers, That not Elect but Reprobate (whether
amongst Jews or Gentiles) are the persons that shall fall short of Salvation.

In the beginning of this Chapter, Paul expresses his exceeding great Sorrow,
for the Unbelief of the Jews, and for their being thereupon rejected of God:
And he mentions several things which were the springs and Aggravations of his
sorrow. One thing that made him grieve the more, was, In that the Jews were his
Brethren and Kinsmen, and therefore their misery could not but go the more near
to his heart. Another thing which aggravated his grief, was, the Consideration
of those peculiar Privileges and Glories which are to be affirmed of the
Jewish Nation. Two of which are mentioned in this verse:

1. Theirs are the Fathers. h. e. They were descended from those blessed
Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Now it is a very sad thing to consider,
that the Children and Post^rity of those blessed Ancestors, should become the
subjects of so great Misery and Ruin as is now come upon the Jews.

2. Of them, as concerning the flesh, Christ came. Christ was as to His humane
nature an Israelite: which is the greatest glory the Jewish Nation can speak
of; and therefore that is mentioned in the last place. Christ came of them only
in respect of His flesh, i. e. His body or human Nature. He has another Nature
which did not come of them, but is eternal.

Words cannot be expressed which do more clearly and fully declare the God head
of Christ than these do. And therefore let the Doctrine from them be in the
words of the Apostle,

DOCT. That Jesus Christ is over all, GOD blessed for ever.

It will be good for us to be established in this great Truth, the firm Belief
whereof is neces^ary in order to Salvation. The Argumen^^ which the Scripture
affords for the Confirm (...) of this fundamental Principle in the Doctrine of
Christ, may be reduced to Four Heads.

1. The Names and Titles which are peculiar unto God, are in the Scripture
given to Jesus Christ. e. g. He is expressly and frequently called GOD, and that
not only in the New Testament but in the Old. It is said that the Angel spoke
unto Jacob, saying, I am the God of Bethel, Genesis 31. 11, 13. Now God the Father
is no where styled an Angel, wherefore that Angel who is the God of Bethel was
none else but Christ the increated Angel of the everlasting Covenant. Again,
when Jacob blessed Joseph's Children, he thus expressed himself, God before
whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac did walk, the God which led me all my life
long unto this day, the Angel which Redeemed me from all (...), bless the lads,
Genesis 48. 15. 16. This Angel is called God, and the Redeemer, which is God's
Title, Isa. 47. 4. The words cannot be applied unto any created Angel, for
^acob prays for a blessing from Him, as the Author of Redemption from all
Evil. This then clearly proves that Christ is God, and that Jacob did so
believe. And Job was of (...) same Faith, Chapt. 19. 26. -- In my flesh (...) I
see God, whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold. God the
Father cannot be seen with bodily eyes; He is the invisible God. The Divine
Nature can not be seen, but Christ by reason of his being Flesh, may be seen;
and at the latter day every eye shall behold Him: Then shall Job (and every one
else) in his Flesh see God. Now Christ is not said to be God in respect of
Similitude, as Angels are; or in respect of Office, as Magistrates are; but in
respect of Nature. Christ Himself Himself argued against the Jews, That i^ was
necessary that the Messiah should be (...) another and an higher sense than
(...) o^ Judah (who were but (...) of him) are (...) Gods; and therefore God by
Nature Joh. 10. ^^* Hence He is said to be the true God, 1. Joh. 5. 20. We are
in him that is true, even in his son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and
eternal life. We may not Affirm concerning any (...) man, but only the Man
Christ Jesus that he is the true God. He is also styled the Mighty God, Isai,
9. 6. And the great God, Tit. 2. 13. which Titles cannot without Blasphemy be
given to any mere man or Creature, (...). 10. 17. Again, That glorious and
fearful Name JEHOVAH is peculiar unto him who is the only True and Living God,
That men might know that thou whose Name alone is Jehovah, art the most high
over all the earth. Psalm* 83. 18. Yet that very Name is frequently in
Scripture, given to Jesus Christ the Son of God. Jehovah ^aith, They shall look
upon (...) whom they have pierced. He that pours a spirit of Grace upon the
house of David (which none but God can do) says, they have pierced me Zech.
12. 10. See also Genesis 16. 10, 13. and 18. 16, 17. and 22. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
16. In all which Scriptures Christ the Son of God has the Name of Jehovah
given to him. And in the New Testament Christ is described by a Name which
answers the Name Jehovah, for he is there said to be, He which is, and which
was, and which is to come, Rev. 1. 8. which words are an interpretation of the
Name Jehovah. Again, That Name Ehjeh, or as it is Englished I AM, is proper to
God, Exodus 3. 14. -- thou shall say to the Children of Israel, I AM has sent
^e unto you. But this Name belongs to Jesus Christ the Son of God; who
therefore said, before Abraham was I AM, Joh. 8. 58. Whence the blinded Jews
thought that Christ had blasphemed, because He being a man attributed to
Himself the proper Title of the eternal GOD. And that Title of the Lord of
Glory. is peculiar to God. Who is the King of Glory? The Lord of Hosts is the
King of Glory, Psalm. 24. 10. But Jesus Christ is so. The princes of this world
crucified the Lord of Glory, 1. Cor. 2. 8. He then is the Lord of Hosts. And
that Title of the Most High, may not be given to any besides God. None but He
is the most High over all the earth, Psalm. 83. 18. But Christ is the Most High;
therefore He is in the Text said to be God over all, that is to say, God Most
High; a Style ^it for none but the true God only; And Scripture says of Him
that He is above all, Joh. 3. 31. He is above the Patriarks, above the
Prophets, above Moses, yea above all creatures. He is Lord of all, and
therefore GOD.

2. The Essential Incommunicable Attributes of God belong to Christ. There are
some Attributes whereby the Nature of God is in part discovered, which
creatures do partake of, such as Mercy, Goodness, Wisdom, Holiness,
Right^ousness, etc. Albeit these Excellencyes are not in the Creature in such
an eminent manner and infinite degree as they are in the Creator. But there are
other Divine Attributes which are incommunicable to any creature, being the
absolute Properties of the Divine Nature. Now these are Affirmed concerning
Christ the Son of God. e. g. Eternity is an essential incommunicable Attribute
of God. He is the eternal God. Yea, Eternity it self, Isai. 57. 15. But Christ
is in respect of His Divine Nature, eternal. Hence John Baptist said that
Christ was before him, as well as after him. Before him in respect of His
divine nature, though after him in respect of His humane nature, Joh. 1. 15. He
was before Abraham, Cap. 8. 58. He was with God before he became Flesh, Cap. 6.
62. yea, before the world began, Chap. 17. 5. Even from Every (...), Prove. 8.
23. Mich. 5. 2. He is before all things, Col. 1. 17. To signify his Eternity,
He appeared unto John, with his hea4 (...) his hairs white like wool, and as
white as Snow, Rev. 1. 14. Eternity is that which has neither Beginning nor End
of Days* which is true concerning the Son of God. Heb. 7. 3. He is Alpha and
Omega, the Beginning and the End, the First and the Last, Rev. 22. 13. Again,
Omnipresence is an incommunicable Attribute or Property of the Livine Nature:
None but God is or can be in all places (...) same time: But this is true of
Christ. And therefore at the same time when he conve^^^d (...) men in this
world, it was said of him, He is (...) Heaven* Joh. 3. 13. And He (...) in all
places where his servants are (...) in his Name, Mat. 18. 20. And (...) his
Churches every where (...)* And Omniscience is peculiar unto (...), (...) is
(...) in Knowledge: But so is Christ. Therefore Peter said to him, Lord, thou
(...) All things. Joh. 2^. 17. It is God's (...) to search and know the hearts
of the children of Men. Solomon in his Prayer at the Dedication of the Temple,
said unto God, thou only know the hearts of the Children of men, 1. King. 8.
39. Yet this is most truly affirmed of Christ: He needed not that any should
testify of man: for he knew what was in man, Joh. 2. 25. The Scripture says
that the Son of God has eyes like a flame of fire, i. e. like unto Lightning,
to note that his eyes see what is in the hearts of men; for these flames of
fire reach unto the bowels and pierce the Inside. And He says, All the
Churches shall know that I am he which searches the Reins and Hearts, Rev. 2.
18, 23. By this Argument was Nathaneel convinced of the Deity of Christ, when
he perceived that the Lord Jesus looked upon him whilst he was alone and no
mortal eye beheld him, he concluded that this Jesus must needs be the Son of
GOD, the King of Israel. But thus for the second Argument.

3. Divine Worship does belong to Christ. GOD alone is the Object of Religious
worship Mat. 4. 10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God and Him only shall thou
serve. But such Worship is due to Christ. Therefore Joshua fell on his face and
did worship, when Christ appeared unto him as the Captain of the Host of the
Lord, Chap. 5. 14. And the Wise men of the East fell down and worshipped him
Mat. 2. 11. And the Disciples when they saw that he was more than a mere man,
they came and worshipped him saying, of a truth thou art the Son of God Mat. 14.
33. Therefore we read of the Servants i. e. Worshipers of Christ, Jam. 1. 1^.
Rev. 1. 1. and 22. 3. And men are commanded to Kiss the Son of God, Psalm. 2.
12. which Kissing implies Adoration. Hence Idolaters were wont to kiss their
Idols which were worshipped by them, 1. King. 19. 18. Job. 31. 27. A little
further to enlarge here,

Baptism is a religious Ordinance; and Christ is the Object of it Act. 2. 38.
Christ is indeed the Institutor of all Religious Ordinances, and therefore the
Object of Religious Worship. Baptism, the Lord's Supper, the Christian
Sabbath, He is the Lord of those holy Institutions, and thence is religiously
acknowledged in them all. Again, an Oath is a religious thing; so that it is
unlawful to swear by any Creature: But when a man is called to take an Oath, he
may solemnly invocate the Name of Christ. For so did Abraham, Genesis 22. 15. 16.
and so did Paul in the beginning of this Chapter, I say the truth in CHRIST I
lie not. Prayer is a part of religious Worship: But Christ is an Object of
Prayer, Jacob wept and made supplication unto him, Hos. 12. 4. Stephen, when
dying prayed unto Christ to receive his soul, Act. 7. 59. All the Disciples in
Jerusalem called upon the Name of Christ, Act. 9. 21. Yea, all true Believers
are described to be such as call upon the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord 1. Cor.
1. 2. Once more, Believing is an Act of internal Worship: No creature may be
believed on. Cursed is he that puts his trust in man. But Christ is the Object
of Faith, Joh. 14. 1. The Apostle says, I trust in the Lord Jesus CHRIST, In
Him shall the Gentiles trust, Romans 15. 12. Often in the Scripture we are
commanded not only to believe Christ, but to believe in Him, and to believe on
Him; which if he were not God we might not do. Yea, Christ is the blessed
Object of the eternal Praises of Saints and Angels: Therefore He is here said
to be God blessed for ever, which is also a Description of the true God, Romans
1. 25. unto whom even lasting praises are due. The Host of Heaven worship Him,
saying Blessing be to the Lamb for ever and ever. Rev. 5. 13.

4. The proper Works of God belong to Christ There are Immanent Acts of God.
Election is ^^ and that is ascribed to Christ, Mat. 24. 31; None but God can
say of all that do or eve^ shall believe, that they are his Elect. And there
are external works of God which cannot be affirmed of any other. e. g.

(1) The work of Creation is peculiar to God, Isa. 44. 24. I am the Lord that
ma^eth all things* that (...) forth the heavens alone, that spreads abroad the
earth by my self. No finite or second Being ever was or can be the Author of a
work of Creation: But Christ is so. Joh. 1. 3. All things were made by Him, and
without Him was not any thing made, that was made. Words cannot be more express
and full than those are, declaring Christ the Son of God to be the Creator of
the world. Hence He is said to be the beginning of the creation of God. Rev. 3.
14. not that He was the first creature, as Arius did most corruptly interpret,
but because the Creation of God did receive its beginning from Him.

(2) To Preserve and Govern the whole Creation is the proper work of God. Neh.
9. 6. None but One of infinite power and wisdom is able to govern the world.
One of the (...) speaks truly in saying, that If God should give unto any one
of His creatures all the wisdom that is in all the Angels in heaven, and then
commit the Government of the world to him, but for one hour, he would bring all
to confusson and ruin in an hours time. But Christ upholds and Governs the
world. By Him all things consist, and are upheld by the word of his power, Col.
1. 17. Heb. 1. 3. And therefore it is said, He works hitherto, Joh. 5. 17
viz. as to that work of Preserving and Governing all things which He has made.

(3) To Forgive Sin is the proper work of God. The Pharisees, held a true
Principle (tho by them misapplyed) when they maintained, that none can forgive
sin but God only, Mare. 2. 7. Mich. 7. 18. But it belongs to Christ to do this.
Exodus, 23. 21. Math. 9. 6. Again,

(4.) The Sending of the Holy Ghost, is a work peculiar unto God. It is high
Blasphemy to say that any mere man or creature has power to send the Holy
Ghost. But this is most true of Christ: He says, I will send the Comforter, He
shall glorify me, He shall receive of mine and shall show it to you. Joh. 16.
7, 14. Hence the Apostle speaks of the Supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ,
Phil. 1. 19. None but God can bestow the gifts and graces of the Holy Spirit,
yet these does Christ confer upon whom He will, and in what d^gree and measure
he will. He batizeth wi^^ the Holy Ghost and with fire, Mat. 3. 11. Therefore
He is GOD.

(5) Miraculous works are proper unto the great GOD to effect. Psalm. 72. 18.
Blessed be the Lord God who only does wondrous things. Nothing less than the
Arm of OMNIPOTENCY can produce a Miracle. But Christ was the Author of many
Miracles, the like wher^^unto were never wrought in the world, Man. 9. 33. As
for the holy Prophets and Apos^les they were not the Authors of those Mi^^cles
which were wrought by their hands: (...) Christ was Himself the true Author of
the Miracles wrought by Him. Hence when the Apostles wrought Miracles, they did
it in the Name of Christ; as in Act. 3. 12, 16. and 9. 34. which, if Christ had
not been God, they could not have done. But He did Miracles in his own Name and
by his own power* I will, be thou clean, Mat. 83.

(6.) To Raise the dead is the work (...) God. Which may be one reason why He
is styled the living God. It Is God and (...) else that raises the Dead: But
Christ (...) the Author of the Resurrection. As the Father rai^eth up the dead;
even so the (...) ^^ickneth whom he will, Joh. ^. 21. He rai^eth up Believers
on him, at the last day, Cap. 6. 4^. Therefore He said, I am the Resurrection
and the life, Cap. 11. 25. No ^^er man or creature can say so. It is then
necessary that we should know and believe, that Jesus Christ is over all, God
blessed for ever.

The great Objection which the Jews make against this glorious Truth is, that
Christ is a man, and therefore cannot be God. But we must believe that Christ
is God and man too, both God and Man in one Person. The Jews themselves dare
not say that God is not able to take an humane nature into personal Union with
Himself: And if God in His Word has declared that He has done this wonderful
thing, wo^ be to that man's soul that will not believe Him. The Scrip^^res of
the Old Testament which the Jews own to be the Word of God, expressly testify
that a Man should be in the world who is God's Equal, and therefore God and man
in one person, Zech. 13. 7. Awake, O sword against my shepherd, against the man
that is my Fellow, says the Lord of hosts. The Jews crucified Christ because
he being a man said he was the Son of God, and so equal with God: yet their own
Prophets had spoken of such a man as should be Fellow to the Lord of Hosts.

The chief Objection which Socinians make against this Article of Faith, is,
that the Father ^s said to be greater than Christ, Joh. 14, 2^. If Christ be
inferior to God, how then is he ^in respect of nature God?

Answ. One may be inferior to another i^respect of Office and yet equal to him
in respect of Nature. A Son in respect of Office may be inferior (or superior)
to his Father^ so Christ as Mediator is inferior to the Father, and yet in
respect of Nature is equal to Him, and One with Him.

USE I.
If Christ be God, then He is a fit Person to be a Savior and Mediator for
Sinners. The The Salvation of the Elect proceeds from the Mediatorial Office of
Christ, in respect whereof, He is a Prophet Priest and King, as we shall (by
the help of Christ) more fully declare from another Scripture. Our Redemption
does not depend merely upon this, that There is One given to be a Prophet,
Priest and King of His Church, but that ^^ch an one as is God, is the Person
vested with those Offices: For if any other Person in the world (if any mere
man or creature) had been constituted a Mediator for Sinners, none would have
been saved by him. The Power and Efficacy of Christ's Office, whence it does
become effectual to Salvation, arises from his being GOD blessed for ever. He
has undertaken and discharged his Office not merely as man, but as God over
all. Christ could not have been such a Prophet as he is, had he not been God.
For he was to be a Prophet to the whole Church in all ages and in all places of
the world. Christ as man whilst he was on Earth did personally declare the
mind of God to Jews, being made a Minister to that Church Romans 15. 8. but his
prophetical Office was not confined to them. The Church never was without a
Prophet since the world began, nor ever shall be, and this Prophet is Christ.
And therefore Christ was said to be sent of God, (as Prophets are) before his
^ncarnation. The LORD of Hosts that by the shaking of his hand can destroy the
Nations, was sent of God, Zech. 2. 8. It was necessary that Christ as Prophet
should have a full Comprehension of the Mind and Will of God which no mere
creature was capable of Joh. 1. 18. No man has seen God at any time, the only
begotten Son who is in the bosom of the Father He has declared Him. No man,
no not Moses himself, the greatest Prophet, has seen God or lain in his bosom,
so as to know all that is in his heart; this is peculiar unto CHRIST who is GOD
blessed for ever. The Prophets and preachers in the days of Old were inspired
by the Spirit of Christ. Noah was so, 1. Pet 3. 19. And all the holy Penmen of
the Bible were so, Chapt. 1. 11. It was necessary in order to Christ's being
the great Prophet of the Church, that he should have power to send the Holy
Spirit to illuminate the minds of his Elect. Joh 16. 13. 14. 1. Cor. 2. 10, 16.
Christ as man has not this power; but being God over all, he was a fit person
to undertake this glorious Office. And Christ being such a person as is GOD, is
the reason why his Priestly Office was effectual unto Salvation. He is such a
Priest as did by one Offering perfect for ever them that are sanctified, which
if he had not been more than a man could never have been. The blood of Christ
who through the eternal Spirit offered Himself shall purge the conscience, Heb.
9. 14. If that Offering had not been sanctified through the eternal Spirit, it
could not have purged the Conscience. All the Sufferings of the humane Nature
of Christ would not have expiated the guilt of Sin. If Christ had not an
eternal Spirit, i. e. a divine nature, which caused the Sufferings of his other
nature to be infinitely meritorio^s. The blood of Christ is the blo^d of God,
and therefore it has an Infinity of Value and Worth in it; so as to be able to
purchase Redemption and eternal Salvation for all that shall obey him. And the
reason why Christ is a fit person to be the Churches, Head and King, is,
because He is GOD over all. His Government is not only Eternal, but In ternal
in the hearts and consciences of men. If Christ would undertake to be the King
of the Church, it was necessary that he should influence the hearts of
Believers, and that he should subdue their Corruptions, and that he should
vanquish Death, which things a mere man could never do. So that Christ's
Fitness for the Work of a Mediator, does depend upon his being over all God
blessed for ever.

USE II.
Let every one of us give unto Jesus Christ that which is due to GOD. As it is
said in Psalm. 29. 1, 2. Give unto the Lord, O ye mighty, give unto the Lord
glory and strength, give unto the Lord the glory due unto his Name. To worship
the Lord in the beauty of holiness. So let us do to Christ. We are to honor
Jesus Christ, as much as we honor God Himself; for He is God. The Father will
not be offended but well pleased with us, if we do so. He would have all men to
honor the Son even as they honor the Father. Joh, 5. 23. Thy heart is God's
due. He says give me thy heart. Let Christ have thy heart, give thy whole
heart to him, that he may rule as God there. Give thy soul to Jesus Christ.
None of us may bequeath our souls to any but unto God; yet unto Jesus Christ we
may bequeath them, as dying Stephen did, who said, Lord JESUS receive my
spirit. Let us love Jesus Christ with such a Love as is due to none but God.
Love him with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy mind and with
all thy strength. And Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in
sincerity. Amen. To HIM be Glory both now and for ever,

AMEN.

Jesus Christ the Son of God, is Man as well as GOD.
JOH. 1. 14. -- The Word was made Flesh.


J Ohn wrote his Gospel after the rest of the Evangelists. When the Apostles
were most of them dead, there arose certain Heretics who denied the Godhead of
Christ; which is thought to be the occasion of John's writing his Gospel; that
so he might bear witness against that which was the grand Error of the time
wherein he lived. He does most plainly assert and prove the Deity of Christ:
for which cause he has been commonly styled John the Divine. And that is in a
special manner the Scope of this Chapter, which does contain a Description of
the Person of Jesus Christ, in respect of both his Natures Divine and Humane.
The Divinity of Christ is asserted and proved from ver. 1. to 14. His Humane
Nature is declared in this verse and in these words; wherein we have

1. The Person Assuming, called the Word. h. e. the Son of God, or second
Person in the Trinity, who is called the Word. In the Old Testament Christ is
called the word When David said before God, For thy Words sake thou have done
all these great things. 2. Sam. 7. 21. his meaning may be, that all was done
for the sake of Christ. And the Jews of Old were wont to term the Messiah the
Word of God. So the Chaldee Paraphrase frequently calls the Messiah [MIDBAR]
i. e. the Word. Now the Messiah being commonly styled the Word of God, the
Apostle speaking of him gives him that Name. He may be so called, (1) In
respect of the eternal generation of his Person. The Son of God is essential,
in^ernal and eternal Word of the Father: that as Words are the Birth of the
mind; so is the Son of God eternally begotton by the infinite understanding of
the Father reflecting upon his own glory before the world began. (2) In respect
of his Office. As words discover what men will and desire; so it is the Office
of Christ to discover the Will of the Father. The Word of God is that which
reveals his will to the Children of men: this is true of Christ. (3.) He is
the great Promise. The Promise is called the Word in Scripture. Now Christ was
the first and great Promise. The Patriachs of old did long for nothing so much
as the fulfilling of that Word or Promise, that the Messiah should come into
the world and redeem his people. Among men Word is often used for Promise. As
when we say, I Will give you my Word, and I Will make good my word, i. e. Promise.

In these respects then is Christ styled the Word.

2. We have the Nature Assumed, noted by that of Flesh, whereby the whole
humane Nature of Christ is signified. Man is by a Sy^^cdoche called Flesh, in
the Scripture. Psalm. 56. 4. So is the human nature of Christ ^l^where
expressed. Joh. 6. 51. 1. Tim. 3. 16.

3. The Union of the two natures of Christ is here noted by that of the Word's
being made Flesh. It is not only the Word was Flesh but that he was made so.
[Egeneto] i. e. he took the Nature into personal Union with himself. So that
these words are Declarative of two great Mysteries of the Gospel. viz. The
Incarnation of the Son of God, and the personal Union between his two natures.

Accordingly there are two Doctrines to be insisted on.

DOCT. I. That Jesus Christ the Son of God is man as well as God.

DOCT. II. That There is a personal Union between the two natures of Christ.

Doct. I. That Jesus Christ the Son of God, is Man as well as God.

In the doctrinal handling of this great Truth, two things may be enquired
into. (1) How it does appear that the Son of God became Man. (2) The Reason why
he did so.

QUEST. I. How does it appear that the Son of God is Man, and not God only?

ANSW. 1. The Scripture does expressly and abundantly bear witness to this
Truth. Christ is expressly called the MAN Christ Jesus, 1. Tim. 2. 5. He said to
to the Jews, ye seek to kill a Man that has told you the truth. Joh. 8. 40. And
he is styled the Son of Man. Mat. 16. 13. He is set forth by that Name about
forty times in the New Testament. And he is said to be the son of David, Mat.
1. 1. And the son of the Virgin Mary. Christ as God had no Mother. As man He
was without Fatuher, as God without Mother. Inasmuch therefore, as the Virgin
Mary is said to be his mother, he is man as well as God. And the Scripture
says that he was born of a woman Gal. 4. 4. And he is called the seed of the
Woman, Genesis 3. 15, And he is called by the name of Adam: He is the last Adam,
1. Cor. 15. 45. And it is said, the second Man was the Lord from Heaven, ver.
47. Therefore he is as truly man as the first Adam was. The Scriptures affirm
of him, that He became Flesh. Without Controversy, great is the mystery of
Godliness, God manifest in the flesh, 1. Tim. 3. 16. Christ is God incornate.
When the eternal Son of God did assume the humane nature, then was God manifest
in the flesh.

2. The Essential parts of a man are affirmed of Christ, therefore it is most
true that he has an humane nature belonging to Him. A man does consist of two
essential parts, viz. An humane Body, and a rational Soul; both which do belong
to Christ. He has an humane Body; We are sanctified by the offering of the Body
of Jesus Christ, Heb. 10. 10. His own self bare our sins in his own body on the
tree, 1. Pet. 2. 24. When Christ had blessed the bread at the Lords Supper, He
brake it and said this is my Body, Mat. 26. 26. The Members of an humane Body
belong to him, Hence we read of His Eyes, Joh. 17. 1. And of his Hands and his
Feet, Psalm. 22. 16. And that too after his Resurrection, because Jesus Christ
has hands and feet now in his State of Exaltation. He has his humane nature
still, and will have so to all Eternity: which humane nature of His shall be
seen by every Eye at the last day. Luc. 23. 39, 40. Rev. 1. 7. And he has a
rational Soul, which is the other essential part of humane Nature. His SOUL was
made an Offering for sin. Isa. 53. 10. He complained that his SOUL was
sorrowful unto death, Mat. 26. 38. And when he was dying he said, Father, into
thy hands I commend my spirit. Luc. 23. 46. The proper Facultyes of a
reasonable soul are ascribed unto Christ. e. g. That of Understanding. When he
was about 12 years old, he did so reason with the learned Doctors, as all that
heard him were a^toni^ht at his Understanding, and he increased in Wisdom, Luc.
2. 46, 52. Another Faculty of the Soul, is that of the Will: which is also
affirmed of Christ. Luc. 22. 42. Not my Will but thine be done.

3. Humane Actions are affirmed of Christ. e. g. Natural and common Actions
performed by men in common with other creatures: such as Eating and Drinking.
These actions did Christ do when in this lower world. Luc. 22. 15. 16. 18. To
sit and stand, and walk from place to place, are things not to be affirm^d of
the divine nature in propriety of speech; because that is infinite and always
in all places. But Christ went up and down doing good. Act. 10. 38. And we read
in the Scripture of his Sitting and of his Walking, and once of his Riding to
Jerusalem. Moreover, to speak and teach and write, are Actions proper to men:
and these things did Christ do. Luc. 4. 15, 16. Joh. 8. 6. 7, 8.

4. Humane (sinless) Infirmities are affirmed of Christ. Therefore he is man as
well as God. Indeed, as for those sinful Infirmities which we are so miserably
subject unto, Christ had none of them; but other Infirmities he once had, Heb.
4. 15. We have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of
our infirmi^ies, but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without Sin.
It is therefore also said, that God sent his own son in the likeness of sinful
fl^^h, Romans 8. 4. The Son of God is not only in the likeness of flesh, for he
is made real flesh but only like sinful flesh: As the Brazen Serpent was like a
Serpent, but had no poison in it; so Christ was like unto sinful flesh, but
never had the least degree of sin in his holy nature. Only as to other
Infirmities he was as all other men are. Its true, that there are many personal
infirmityes of men which Christ had not experience of: there are many Diseases
which particular persons are afflicted with, that Christ was never subject to,
but the general infirmities of humane nature, he did subject unto. e. g. To
Hunger, Thirst, Weariness, etc. which are the general Infirmities of our
nature. And so it was with Christ when in this world. Mat. 4. 2. Indeed now he
is entered into his glory, he is not subject to any infirmity; but during his
state of humiliation he was so. Hence that state is expressed by the days of
his fllesh. Heb. 5. 7. i. e. the time when he was subject to humane sinless
infirmities. And Christ has not laid aside the essential propertyes of his
humane nature. Though such in^^rmityes as were accidental thereunto and necessary
for his state of Humiliation are not consistent with his glorified estate; yet
he carried to the right hand of God in Heaven his humane nature, even a soul
and body, the very same that once suffered for the Sins of his people. He has
flesh and bones, ( glorified flesh) now in heaven: And therefore a glorious
body; for so does the Scripture declare and teach us to believe. We have a
Savior in heaven, who shall change our vile bodies* that they be fashioned
like unto his glorious body. Phil. 3. 21.

5. We may for the further Confirmation of this Truth, take notice how it has
been mysteriously signify. In the days of the Old Testament, the Son of God
did sometimes appear in the form of a man to the Patriarchs; So he did to
Abraham; and so to, Jacob and to Joshua and others (and some think that he
appeared in the likeness that he was to take) we do not read that God the
Father or that God the Holy Ghost did ever appear in a humane shape to the
Fathers, only God the Son did so: thereby to signify his future Incarnation;
that in due time he would really be, as then he seemed to be.

Moreover, The Tabernacle was a Type of Christ's humane nature, which is
therefore called the true Tabernacle which the Lord (...) pitched and not man.
for the humane nature of Christ came not into the world by means of any man,
but was conceived by the power of the Holy Ghost: and is therefore said to be
the great and perfect tabernacle. Heb. 8. 2. and 9. 11. And when John
prophesyeth in the Revelations (Chapt. 13. 6.) that the time should come when
men would Blaspheme God's Tabernacle, He does ^oretel the gross Idolatry of the
Papists in their Mass, and their blasph^mous Doctrine about Transubstantiation,
b^ which the highest abuses that can be are offered to the humane nature of
Christ, in which nature God dwells. In my Text it was said the Word was made
flesh, and the next words are, and dwelt among us. The Greek word is [es^enose]
which the Ancients are wont to interpret [ shenos anel^be^] i. e. Corpn^^
assumpsit; He tabernacled among us. The Feast of Tabernacles did typify the
Incarna^^on of Christ, whence the Jews suppose that Christ will be born at the
time when that Feast is by them observed; and they de^^de at Christians for
keeping the Feast of Christ's Nativity in the tenth Month of the Year, saying
that they place the Birth of Christ in the mon^th, wherein they ought rather to
(...) his Conception. However, the Feast of Tabernacles which the Children of
Israel kept in the seventh month, did signify that God would appear and dwell
in our nature. The Temple was also a Type of Christ's body. Joh. 2. 19. Jesus
said, destroy this Temple (probably Christ did with his hand point at his own
body as he spoke these words:) in ver. 21. it is said, He spoke of the Temple of
his body. The Temple was the most costly, excellent, glorious, House in the
world; thereby figureing the humane nature of Christ, which was adorned with
graces and spiritual excellencies beyond any other man or creature.
Particularly the Veil of the Temple typified the humane nature of Christ. He
has consecrated a new (Christ was then newly slain, and there is no other way
after this, and therefore it is still and always new) and living way for us,
through the veil, that is to say his flesh. Heb. 20. As there was no entering into
the Holy of Holies but by the Veil; so there is no entering into Heaven but
through that Sacrifice of the flesh, i. e. the humane nature of Christ. And
this Truth is still mysteriously signified by that Ordinance of the Lord's
Supper. The bread signifies the Body and the Wine the Blood of Christ: And that
Sacramental Action of Taking the Bread in order to the Consecration thereof,
puts us in mind of Christ's taking our nature. That Is a Meditation which should
be in our hearts, as we see the Minister take the bread in order to the
Blessing and Breaking of it, we should then think of Christ's Incarnation, that
the Son of God has assumed our nature, that so he might dye for our sakes

We come therefore to enquire into the Reasons of the Doctrine.

Reas. 1. The Word was made flesh, because it was the Will of the Father to
have it so. We have formerly treated of the Covenant of Redemption, and then
was showed that this was one Article i^ that Covenant, that the Son of God
should take unto him the nature of Man. The Father said to Him, If thou willt
be a Redeemer for sinful Man, thou must thy self become a man, and in that
nature do what concerns a Redeemer to perform. In Compliance with this Will of
the Father, the Son of God was manifest in the flesh, Heb. 10. 5, 7. Joh. 14.
ult*

Reason 2. That so he might be a fit Mediator between GOD and the children of
men. There is one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus. 1. Tim.
2. 5. Hence Christ was fit to be a days man (as Job speaks) Between them
both. It was altogether necessary that the Mediator should be Godman. If Christ
had been man only he could not have been a Mediator; He could not have saved
one sinner, nor satisfied for one sin. And if he had not been a man, but God
only, He could not have been a Mediator. He that sanctifyeth and they that are
sancctify ed, are all one, i. e. of one and the same nature Heb. 2. 11. Since
the Elect are partakers of flesh and blood, He Himself took part of the same:
Otherwise he could not have dyed, nor have made Reconciliation for the sins of
his people. Except he had been made Flesh, He could not have shed His blood to
make atonement for sinners.

USE. 1. We must conclude that Ignorance or Error about this great Truth; is of
dangerous Consequence to the souls of men. It is indeed a Fundamental Article
in our Christian Faith, the Knowledge whereof is necessary to Salvation. It is
strange to consider, that any who live under the Gospel, should be ignorant of
such a plain, easy, common principle of Religion: nevertheless there are such.
I have discoursed with some that go under the name of Christians, that yet
could not tell whether Christ were God or man, but when asked the question,
have replied that he was only God, as supposing that a man could not save them.
But such dark and horrid Ignorance will be destructive to the souls of men.
There are also, who though they do in words acknowledge it to be a great Truth,
that the Son of God became a man; Nevertheless they hold such, errors as are
not well consistent with the Truth which they profess. So do they who maintain
the real Presence of the Body of Christ in the Sacrament: which is to say that
Christ's Body has not the true nature of a Body, and in effect to say, that He
has only a divine nature. He that takes away the Propertyes of an humane nature
denies that nature. A (...) if Christ has no other nature but that which is in
all places, then He has only a divine nature. There are also a sort of men in
the world, who hold that there is no Christ but what is within; and that
Salvation is to be had, not from a Christ without, but from at Christ within.
My Brethren, take heed of such errors, they that maintain them, let them
pretend what they will, they deny the Humanity of Christ, and so overthrow the
Faith, and subvert the souls of them that shall be so miserable as to give any
Credit to their strong Delusions.

USE 2. Hence may we be humbly familiar with the Lord Jesus, and with God
through Him. Indeed, we must carry our selves humbly and reverently before him,
because he is GOD as well as man, yet may we be familiar with him, because he
is man as well as God. He is become our near Kinsman. Under the Law, He that
had right to Redeem, was a near kinsman; so the Son of GOD, the Redeemer of
Souls is become our near Kinsman: as Boaz told Ruth he was to her. He is not
ashamed to call us Brethren; as being in our nature, a man as we are, though
not a Sinner as we are. Heb. 2. 11. And therefore He bids Believers come and be
familiar with Him; and that the Terror of His infinite Majesty should not make
them afraid. When Joseph's Brethren being Conscious to themselves of their own
great Guiltiness, were afraid and troubled at his presence, He said to them,
Come near to me I pray you, I am Joseph your Brother. Genesis 45. 4. When
believers have an humble sense of their sin and guilt, the Son of God says to
them, Come near to me, I am Jesus your Brother: I will make your peace with my
Father, and therefore be not discouraged. Hence Christ causes Believers to fit
down with Him at his own Table. If a great man invi^e^h those to his Table who
are much his inferiors, tho he expects that they should know their Distances,
yet he aloweth of Freedom and Familiarity in their communion. And the Son of
God who is made man does therefore invite us to his blessed Table, because He
would have us humbly Familiar with him, yea and with God through Christ.
Without Christ we may not draw near to that God who is a Consuming fire. But
having such an one as Jesus the Son of God to lead us by the hand into the
presence of the Father of Glory, we may come boldly to the Throne of Grace. We
have boldness of access through Him, Ephesians. 3. 12.

USE. III. O Love Jesus Christ. Believers have infinite Cause to love Him.
Should there not be Love between Kindred and near Relations? Christ is our
Kinsman (as but now was ^hewn) our elder Brother, our Father, our Husband. And
He is an Obeject worthy to be loved. He is altogether lovely. If thou can^t set
thine heart upon a more amiable Object, or a more lovely person, never think of
loving him more: But that cannot be. And He deserves all our Love, by what he
has done for us. He has loved us, and that with an everlasting Love. Before
the world began he took pleasure in thinking of us, and in the Communion which
he should forever enjoy with his Redeemed Ones. Wherefore he faith, I was from
everlasting, rejoicing in the ha^^table part of the earth, and my Delights were
with the sons of men. Prove. 8. 23, 31. And therefore was he willing to to be
made flesh. His Love moved him to that infinite Conde^cention. That the blessed
Son of God who ^umbleth him self to behold the things in Heaven should
condescend to assume our Nature into personal Union, that he should be willing
to be clothed with Flesh! What wonderful Love was that! And he does continue to
love his saints throughout the days of Eternity. Joh. 13. 1. Having loved his
own which were in the world, he loved them to the end. That fire of Love which
is in the heart of the Son of God toward believers, it was kindled before the
world began, and will burn world without end. The choicest blessings that ever
we did, or shall, or can partake of, we are beholding to Jesus Christ the Son
of God for them all. It is in Christ that God does bless us with all spiritual
blessings, Ephesians. 1. 3. And if it had not been for Christ, we had never had any
spiritual blessing. He is our Righteousness, he is our Life, he is our All. O
then let us love him. Never any one did for us as Christ has done. Nay, no one
in heaven (...) earth would or could have done so much so us as Christ has
done. He dyed for us (...) suffered the most bitter death that ever (...)
known. Ignatius was wont to say, my (...) is crucified. Has Christ been
crucified to (...) us from being broken for ever in the place of Dr^gons, and
that we might not be covered with the shadow of eternal death! and shall we
(...) lo^^ Him! We cannot exceed bounds in our Love to Christ; as we may in our
love to the world and the things thereof: which indeed is the Cause of all the
misery we are subject unto. It is all because we love other things (...) much,
and Christ so little. The more we delight in Christ, the more will God delight
in at, Joh. 16. 27. The Father Himself loved you, because you have loved me,
and have believed th^^ I came out from God. Therefore let us Love the Son of
God, who has loved us, and assumed our nature, and in that nature dyed and
given Himself for us.

There is a personal Uunion between the two Natures of CHRIST.
We proceed now unto the Second Doctrine viz.

DOCT. II. That There is a personal Uni^n between the two natures of Christ.

THe Scriptures make known this wonderful Mystery unto us. Wherefore its said
of Christ, that in Him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. Col. 2. 9,
because he is God and man in one person. He is God manifest^d in the flesh, 1.
Tim. 3. 16. So that the same person who is God, is also Flesh.

For the further opening and Confirmation of this Doctrine, we shall (1.) Lay
down some Propositions for the clearing of the Truth. (2) enquire into the
Reasons of it.

Propos. 1. The personal union of Christ two Natures is that whereby the Second
Person in the Godhead has assumed the individual ^^mane Nature of Christ to
subsist inseperably in (...) same Person.

In this Description we have (1.) The Assumer. (2.) The Assumed (3.) The manner
of Subsistence.

1. The Assum er. Viz. The second Person (...) the Godhead: Who is here called
the Word So in 1. Joh. 5. 7. There are three that (...) record in heaven, the
Father, the Word and the Holy Ghost, and these three are One. It is only the
Word, or Son of God, and not the Father or the Holy Ghost that is made flesh.
It Is true that every Person in the Godhead hat^ an hand in the Incarnation of
Christ. God the Father had so; who is said to prepare a body for his Son, Luc,
^. 30, 31. Heb. 10, 5. And God the Holy Ghost had an hand in framing the humane
nature of Christ. The birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When his mother
Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came together she was found with child
of the Holy Ghost, Mat. 1. 18. And this was accor^ing to what the Angel had
spoken, who said unto her, -- the Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the
power of the Highest shall over shadow thee; therefore also that holy Thing
that shall be ^orn of thee, shall be called the Son of God. Luc. ^. 35. But
only the Second person of the ^odhead can be said to assume or to be uni^ed to
the humane nature. As when three persons join together in making a Garment,
only (...) puts it on; every one has an hand in the efficiency of the Garment,
yet but one wears it; (...) in the Efficiency of the humane Nature of Christ,
All the Persons in the sacred Trinity (...) concur, yet it is only the Word or
Son of God that takes that nature into personal Union. It is only the Second
Person of the Godhead, and not the Godhead that does immediately assume; for
then every person in the Godhead should assume humane nature, which we may not
affirm. It is Sabellianism and Heresy to maintain, that the Father and the Holy
Ghost are incarnate, as well as the Son.

2. Here is the Thing Assumed. viz. The Singular humane nature of Christ. The
Son of God has taken humane Nature into his own Bo^ome, into nearest Union
with His own Person. Hence he is said to assume flesh i. e. humane nature and
none other, Heb. ^. 14. 16. Forasmuch as the children are partaken of flesh and
blood, He also Himself took part (...) the same; for verily he took not on him
the nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed cmay be affirmed only of
(...) individual humane nature of Christ. It can^^ without Blasphemy and Heresy
be affirmed (...) the individual humane nature of Abraham, (...) Peter or David
or John, or any particular Saint that it is personally united to the Son of God
He has taken them into mystical Union (...) himself, but not into personal
Union; (...) that is the Prerogative Royal of Jesus Christ Nor indeed was it
meet that so great a Dig^^ty should be common. As Divines right observe, It
becomes not the great GOD, who ONE in nature, to communicate his Dignity (...)
to One:

3. In this Description of the Personal Union, we have expressed the Manner of
the Subsisting of the humane Nature thus united to the Divine Nature of the Son
of GOD. (1.) It does subsist in the same Person. (2.) Inseparably.

(1.) In the same Person. For the humane ^^ture of Jesus Christ is not a Person
it self (...): it is a mystery which all men had bin ig^orant of had it not
been for the humane nature of Christ, that its possible for humane nature to
subsist without it Personality. All other humane natures are distinct persons
of themselves, but the humane nature of Christ is not so: For then there would
be Four Persons in the Godhead; Three of them eternal, and one of them made of
a woman in the Fullness of time. We must therefore know, that there is in
Christ, a personal Union, but not an Union of Persons; and a Union of natures,
yet not a Union of Persons. The Humane Nature of Christ did not subsist one
moment, before its being united to the Son of God, the second Person in the
Trinity.

2. The human Nature of Christ does subsist Inseparably as well as personally
with the Son of God. This Union is an everlasting Union. The humane Nature
never did exist one moment before its being united to the divine, nor ever
shall be disunited from it. As long as God shall be God, so long shall the
personal union of Christ's humane nature with the divine continue. When Christ
dyed and his soul was separated from his body, yet his humane nature was not
separated from his divine; but when his body say in the Grave and his soul in
Paradise, both body and soul were united to the Divine Nature. As Death
di^^olveth not the mystical union which is between Christ and the Believer, so
neither did it the personal Union between the two natures of Christ. Hence
Christ's Incarnation is not properly any part of his Humiliation: For his state
of Humiliation is laid down, whe^as his humane nature i^ not laid aside, nor
ever shall be.

Propos. II. By Reason of the Union of the two natures of Christ, There is a
Communication of Properties. This follows unde^^ably from the Hypostatical
union of the two Natures of Christ, and is also a Demonstration of the truth of
this Doctrine, that there is a personal Union. Hence that which does belong
properly to the Person of Christ, is ascribed to either nature. e. g. Mediation
with the Father belongs to the Person of Christ: nevertheless it is ascribed to
the Manhood. It Is said, the Man Christ Jesus is the Mediator, 1. Tim. 2. 5. Yet
Christ is not Mediator as man only, but as God-man. Likewise that which does
belong to either nature is affirmed of the person. Eternity, and Immunability
are essential propertye^ of the Divine Nature: And yet these propertyes are
affirmed of the Person of Christ. Heb. 13. 8. Jesus Christ the same yesterday,
to day and for ever. Again, Mortality or Subjection to Death was proper to the
humane nature, Joh. 6. 51. The bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will
give for the life of the world. It was only the flesh of Christ that dyed: yet
this is spoken of his Person Romans 8. 32, 34. God spared not his own son, It is
Christ that dyed. Hence the Scripture speaks of God's Suffering and Dying. God
bought the Church with his own blood. Act. 20. 28. Hereby perceive we the Love
of God, because he laid down his Life 1. Joh. 3. 16. The Personal Union is the
reason of such Expressions. For because of that the ^loud of Christ is truly
said to be the blood of God; and the Life of Christ to be the life of God. That
Person who is God, laid down his Life and shed his blood to save Sinners. Were
not the Humane nature of Christ one in person with the Divine nature, it could
not be said that God laid down his life.

Propos. III. The two natures of Christ remain really distinct from one
another. It was the He^esy of Ea^iches that he did confound the two natures of
Christ. And there are Millions (...) men in the world at this day, who Call
themselves Christians that are infected with that Error. But we must know, that
tho there be an Union, yet there is no Confusion of the natures of Christ. And
although there be ((...) as has been showed) a Communication of Propertyes by
reason of the personal Union (...) nevertheless the natures of Christ remain
distinct in their propertyes. Christ has tw^ Understandings, a Divine
Understanding which is Infinite; in respect whereof He knows all things; yea,
what grace is in the hearts of men Joh. 21. 17. And an humane Understanding
which is not Omniscient; (tho now in glory Christ understanding as man^ is
enlarged so as to be next to Infinite) Marc. 13. 42. Hence Christ in respect of
his humane understanding, he was said to grow in Wisdom Luc. 2. 52. As man, he
knows more now in heaven, than he did when on earth. Rev. 1. 1. He has two
Wills, really distinct (tho not Contradictory) the one from the other, Luc. 22.
42. Hence that may be affirmed of one of Christ's natures which can not be
affirmed of the other e. g. It may be said of the humane nature of Christ, that
it was, Conceived, born, ^^^^ifyed, buried, ascended into Glory, none of which
things can be said of the Divine Nature. Of the humane nature of Christ ^e may
say, there was a time when it was not. (...). 4. 4. Time began when the World
be^an, and the world was near four thousand years old before the humane nature
of Christ was made: but we cannot say of the Divine Nature of Christ, that once
it was not. Joh. 1. 1. In the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was with
God, and the Word was God, We may now say of the humane Nature of Christ, that
the Heavens do contain it, and shall do so till the time of Restitution of all
things. But as for his Divine Nature, the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain it.
We may say and must believe, concerning the (...) nature of Christ that it is
omnipresent, Mat. 18. 20. Where two or three are gathered together in my name,
there am I in the midst of them. But we cannot say so of the humane nature;
for that were to make finite Infinite: and in effect to say, that Christ has
only a Divine, and not an humane nature: It were in say, that the Word is not
made flesh.

Prop. IV. The Assumption of the humane Na^^^e, has caused no real Change in
the Person of the Son of God. Tho the Word was made flesh, there was no real
Change wrought in him thereby; (...) a new Respect, a new Relation: That Person
which before was only God, is now man as well as God. As a man that is clothed,
is the same that he was before he put on his clothing; (...) the Son of God is
the same that he was before he put on humane nature. Indeed the humane nature
is changed, being meliorated and gloriously advanced by this Assumption into
^ersonal Union with the divine nature, but the Son is the same. He is an
unchangeable person. Heb. 1. 8, 12. As when God created the world, there was no
Change in God, but in the Creature only. So it is here.

Propos. V. This Personal Union is a great Mystery. The whole Doctrine of
Christ (...) Mysterious. Ephesians. 3. 4. Ye may understand my knowledge in the
Mystery of Christ. So in special the Doctrine of Christ's Person, and of the
Union of His two natures, is very mysterious. That which is not known but by
divine supern^^ural Revelation is called a Mystery in Scripture. Now all our
knowledge in this personal Union, is from the Gospel. If men have only the
Light of Nature and the Book of the Creature to inform them, they will never
know any thing of this glorious mystery. It is a wonderful Union. There are
three Uni^ns spoken of in the Scripture which are wonderful. (1.) The mystical
union which is between Christ and the Believer, which was mysteriously
signified by Eve's being taken out of Adam's side, and then being married to
him by the Lord Himself, as the Apostle ^heweth, Ephesians. 5. 30, 31, 32. (2. ndly)
The Union of Diverse persons in one Nature; The Father, Son, and Spirit, tho
three distinct Persons, have but one Name or Nature. Mat. 28. 20. They are
three Witnesses, and therefore three Persons; yet but One in respect of Nature
and of Being. 1. Joh. 6. 7. The mystery of the Trinity, is a wonderful Myste^y.
(3 dly) The Union of diverse natures in one Person; which is that we are
speaking of. This is not only a Mystery, but a ^reat Mystery. It must needs be
confessed, that Great is the Mystery of Reli^n, GOD manifest in the Flesh. 1.
Tim. ^. 16. The holy Angeis bow down their heads to search into this mystery,
which will be the Wonderment of Saints and Angels, throughout the Days of
Eternity. 1. Pet. 1. 12. Hence the Devil has set himself to oppose and darken
those Truths which concern the Person of Christ. Most of the Here^yes whereby
Satan has troubled the Church, have proceeded from Ignorance in the Mystery
about Christ's Person. Either by dividing his Person which is but one (as the
Nestorians, who make two Persons of Christ) or by confounding his Natures,
which are two, or by denying one of his natures. Therefore, it is most
necessary, that we should have a distinct and clear Knowledge about this, since
it is a great Mystery. Ignorance here, Error (...) may prove destructive to the
souls of Men.

Quest. But, For what Reasons did the Son of God assume humane nature into
personal Union with Himself?

Answ. 1. That so the Sufferings of that nature might become infinitely
meritorious. The Death and blood of all the men in the World, would not
satisfy for one sin, nor redeem one Sinner. Will the Lord be pleased with
Thousands of Rams, or ten thousands of Rivers of oil? If they give the fruit of
their body for the sin of their soul, will that appease him? No verily, It was
then necessary that Christ should b^ both God and Man in one Person. The Value
of the Obedience of Christ is augmented and aggravated from the dignity of his
Person. The Obedience of an infinite Person, is of infinite worth and value.
Now, Tho the humane na^^re of Christ which suffered is not Infinite, (...) the
Person to which that nature belongs, (...) so. Hence, For Christ to dye, is
more than if all the men on earth, and all the Angels in heaven had dyed; for
they are not God, but Christ is so.

Reas. 2. The Son of God did assume humane nature, that Satan might be so much
the more crushed and confounded. 1. Joh. 3. 8. For this purpose the Son of God
was manifested, that he might de^^roy the works of the Devil. It was man that
^^tan envied and murdered from the beginning Therefore God would punish his
malice by ^ushing his head with that very nature which he had envied, and
sought the Destruction of. God delights to meet with Sinners by suta^^e
punishments, and so to make that sin most ^eavy, which was at first most
delightful. Satan rejoiced to think that he had destroyed humane nature, but
therefore God would meet with him for it, and make that very na^^re, light
heavy upon him, which he hoped (...) endeavored to destroy.

Reaf. 3. The Word became Flesh, that (...) He might the better Sympathize with
His people in all their Afflictions and Temptations, He^. 2. 17. and 4. 15.
Yea, therefore the Son of God did not only assume our Nature, but became
subject to the sinless Infirmities thereon Heb. 5. 2. It had not been possible
for Him to have had such a Sympathizing with his people as now he has, if he
had not partake^ of the same nature.

USE,
Instruction. 1. Hence Jesus Christ is the great Wonder of the world. Jesus
Christ is a None such. There is no such person in heaven (...) earth concerning
whom it may be said, Th^^ Person is both God and man, excepting only the Man
Christ Jesus. Men are apt to be taken with Wonders: As the King of Babylon sent
to Hezokiah to enquire of the Wonder Here is a Wonder for us all to be taken
with that the Word should be made flesh. If we do a little meditate on (...)
Incarnation and the Personal Union of the two Natures of Christ, we shall see
that which is Wonderful. What (...) Wonder is (...) that two natures, so
infinitely Distant should meet together in one Person The Divine Nature is
infinitely above the (...) glorious Creatures. GOD humbles Himself is behold
the things that are done in heaven, ^sal. 113. 5, 6. And the Humane Nature,
what a poor thing is it in it self considered! One may even wonder that GOD
should so much as look upon man. What is Man that Thou art mindful of him, or
the son of man that Thou visitest him! But, That GOD should become one with
man, yea, that GOD should become a man, that the Word should be made Flesh, how
wonderful is it! In former Times, the Saints have been afraid to behold the
Glory of GOD sparkling in the Countenance of an Angel, but behold and wonder,
Here is an humane Nature not only Seeing the Glory of God, but United to Him.
An Immanuel, GOD dwelling in our Nature. That MAJESTY and meanness should thus
meet together! Is it not a Wonder, that One and the same person should be
capable of a double Generation, one Eternal, and the other in Time? But this is
true concerning Jesus Christ. He is the eternally begotten Son of of GOD. It is
a Generation which never had a Beginning or Ending. Psalm. ^. 7. Yet was He
brought forth in the ^^lness of Time, in Respect of His being made flesh, Gal.
4. 4. Is it not a wonder that a man should be his own mother Maker and Father?
Yet this may we affirm of Christ. The Virgin Mary was his own mother, in
respect of his being made flesh; (...) He was her Father in respect of Creation
(...) the power of his divine nature. The Son of God made her of whom it is
said, He Himself was made. He is styled the everlasting Father. Isai. 9. 6. He
is the Father of all B^lievers who are called his seed; and therefore he is his
mothers Father. And is (...) not a wonder that a Woman should he the Mother of
God! yea a poor, mortal, sinful woman: yet because of the personal Union of the
two Natures of Christ, this is true. The Virgin Mary was, tho a very holy
woman, yet not without Sin. Did not (...) die to save her? And who did he die for
(...) only for Sinners? yet she was the mother of the Son of God. Therefore
Elizabeth said Whence is this, that the Mother of my Lord should come unto me!
Luc. 1. 43. So then, Christ is the most wonderful Person, His Name shall be
called Wonderful.

Instruct. 2. The human nature of Christ, must needs be most pure and sinless
altogether. Adam was innocent at his first creation. He had ^o sin as he came
out of God's hands. Yet there was a possibility of his Sinning; but it was
impossible that the nature of Christ should become sinful; that being
inconsistent with the grace of personal Union. This Nature was united to the
Godhead, from the first Mo^ent of its Conception. Hence the Angel said to the
Virgin Mary, The Holy Ghost shall ^^me upon thee and the Power of the Highest
shall (...) shadow thee; therefore also that Holy thing that shall be born of
thee, shall be called the Son of God. Luc. 1. 35. So that he was free from
Original Sin, that Corruption of Nature, which (...) in^ected all Mankind
besides. For Adam stood in the Capacity of a public person, on the behalf of
such only as should come into the world by Generation, which Christ did not;
(...) by (...) Conception from the Holy Ghost, Nor did he ever become guilty of
(...) Sin. Tho he lived in the world thirty two years, he never ^pake one
sinful word, not ever had one sinful thought in His Heart all that while. He
kept the whole Law perfectly, to as never to fail in so much as one particular.
There never was any other man that did so, or that could do so since Adam
sinned. He is, and always was Altogether lovely.

In^tr: 3. Humane Nature is Dignifyed about any Created Nature. For the Word
has not assumed any other nature but that. It is true that of all created
natures, the Angelical is the most excellent and glorious. Angels are better
than men simply considered. Psalm. 8. 9. Yet in respect of the Word's being made
flesh the humane nature is exalted above the Angelical. The Son of God is made
a man but he is not made an Angel. By reason of this personal Union, diverse
things may be said of a man, that cannot be affirmed of the most glorious Angel
in heaven. (...). It may be said of a man, that he is God as we as Man. The
soul of that Man is the soul of GOD, and the body of that man is the body of
God. 1. Cor. 11. 24. It may be said of Him that is a Man, that he is (tho not a
man) equal with God. It cannot be said of any one among all the Angels in
Heaven, that he is equal with God. It may be said of One among the Sons of men,
that He is Fellow to the Lord of Hosts, Zech. 13. ^* And equal with God. Joh.
5. 18. Christ counted it no Robbery to say, that he was equal with God. Phil^
2. 6. If any Angel in Heaven should say that he is equal with God, it would be
the Highest Robbery, the most sacrilegious Impiety so to ro^b God of His Glory.
There is none among the Sons of the mighty that may be compared with him.
Again, It may be said of Him who is a man, that He did create the world: Tho
the world was created Thousands of years before he became a man; nevertheless
it is a Truth, that he who is now a man, did create heaven and earth. A Saint
in Glory may point into the man Christ Jesus and say, That man there made all
the Creatures in the world. Joh. 1. 3. All things were made by Him, and without
Him was not any thing made that was match. This is more than can be affirmed of
any Angel or Archangel. Once more, A Man shall be the Judge of all the Earth.
Act. 17. 31. God ^ath appointed a day in the which he will Judge the world in
Righteousness, by the Man whom He has ordained. This cannot be affirmed of any
Angel. The world to come is not ^ut in subjection to the Angels. Therefore
humane nature is advanced above Angelical Nature: and so above all Created
nature. As the Jews were advanced above all Nations in respect of Christ's
Being of them; (Romans 9. ^.) so indeed, Men are respected above all Creatures,
in that the Son of God is become (...) man, not having assumed any other nature
but this into personal union with Himself.

Instruct. 4. Hence, To abuse humane nature especially the humane Nature of
Christ, may needs be a very great evil. The Son of GOD has dignified humane
nature, and therefore for any to abuse or abase it, must needs be an horrid
thing. This shows us how great an evil it is to wrong any man. Tho he (...)
the meanest man in the world, yet he was made after the Image of GOD. And the
eternally ^^essed Son of God has taken the same nature into personal Union.
Therefore, to wrong any man in his soul or in his body, (...) great Iniquity,
Especially when men abuse and abase themselves, when they make their own
natures vile by sins there is no small evil in what they do. In a peculiar
manner, Sins against the Body, vilify the nature of man. The Apostle
aggravates the Sin of Uncleanness from that Consideration, 1. Cor. 6. 15, 18.
And this is a suitable Meditation to be in the heart at the Lords Table; to
think, Has Christ dignifyed humane nature so as to take it into personal Union
with Himself! then let me not abuse that nature. Is the Word become flesh, then
let not me abuse that flesh by any vile Lusts. I say, Injuries to humane nature
have no small evil in them. But above all, Abuses offered to the humane nature
of Christ are an exceeding provocation to God. Hence the Wicked^^^s of the Jews
in Crucifying Christ was so (...) and horrid; and God's Wrath is come upon them
to the uttermost for it. God has punished them, so as the like never was, nor
ever shall be, Mat. 24. 21. Surely they must be guilty of some extraordinary
Wickedness, worse than all the Idolatryes of their Forefathers. For they have
been the miserablest Nation under heaven for these Sixteen hundred (...). Never
was there Nation so plagued once the world began: and what is it that they have
done worse than their Fathers, except^ng this one thing of the Shedding the
precious blood of the Son of GOD? And hence it is, that Coming unworthily to
the Lords Table as such a dreadful evil. 1. Cor. 11. 27. Whosoever shall eat
this bread or drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the
body and blood of the Lord. What, Shall men disregard such a Body as is
personally united to the Son of GOD! Do we not Discern that it is the LORD's
Body? He ^^at does not is guilty of the Blood of the Lord; yea of Him who is
the LORD of Heaven and Earth. To be guilty, of (...) blood of any man is a sad
thing, much more to be guilty of the blood of a worthy person: But what is it
then to be guilty (...) the LORD of Life and and of Glory, and (...) is God and
man in one Person!

Jesus Christ is the Mediator.
HEB. XII. 24. -- Jesus Christ is the Mediator.


THe Apostle having in the fourteenth verse of this Chapter exhorted the
Believing Hebrews to follow Holiness, he does urge that Exhortation by an
Argument taken from the Consideration of that better state, which Believers
under the New Testament are in, compared with those of the Old. More Holiness
should be the fruit of all gracious Dispensations. The more God does for us,
the more ought we to do for Him Now He has done more for New than for (...)
Testament Believers: Therefore they ought to be more holy in heart and life,
and to a bound in those fruits of Righteousness which are by Christ to the
praise and Glory of God. That gracious State which Believers under the Gospel
are in, is set forth;

1. Negatively, in the 18, 19, 20, and 21. verses of this Chapter; the Scope
and Sum^^ whereof amounts to thus much: We are not now under the sad, severe
and servile Dispensations of the Law, but under one more gracious, and
therefore we ought to be more holy. Holiness was required under the Law. When
that was prom^^ged, the Children of Israel were to purify themselves, and to
(...) their clothes; by which Ceremonies they were taught inward Holiness. Much
more should they to whom the Gospel is made known, follow Holiness.

2. The happy State of Believers is described Affirmatively in this with the
two Preceding verses: Wherein is showed that believers now are in a more Filial
yea and Coele^tial state than formerly. Mount Sion is far more excellent than
Mount Sinai. The City of the living GOD, than the Wilderness. It is better to
have to do with the holy Angels as fellow- Servants, than as when the Law was
given in that dreadful manner by the Disposition of Angels. The Church of the
Firstborn, is better the Jewish Synagogue. The Manifestation of God as the
Judge of all the world, does exceed the manifestation of God as a Lawgiver to
the Children of Israel only. The Saints in Heaven are more perfect than they on
Earth. JESUS is better than Moses. The New Testament than the Old. The blood of
Christ is better than that which is offered by Abel, or by the Fathers of Old:
Even so and therefore the state of Believers under the New Testament, is much
more desirable than that of Believers under the Old Testament Its better being
a Christian than a Jew; and thence more Holiness is required.

From the words considered both in th^^selves, and as they lie before us in the
Context, there are especially Three Doctrines ob^ervable.

DOCT. I. That Jesus Christ is the Me^^ator.

DOCT. II. That There is a New- Testament, whereof Jesus is the Mediator.

DOCT. III. That The Knowledge and Consideration of this Truth, that Jesus
Christ is the Mediator of the New Testament, does oblige Christians to
endeavor after a great measure of Holiness.

Only to the first of these Doctrines at present. viz.

That Jesus Christ is the MEDIATOR.

This great Gospel Truth may be Explained and Confirmed in several Propositions,

Prop. 1. That Sin has made a breach between the blessed GOD and the Children
of men. This is evidently ^mplyed when it is said, there is a Mediator. If Adam
had not fallen, and so fallen out with the Holy and glorious Majesty of heaven,
there had been no need of a Medi^^our. The Apostle says, a Mediator, is not of
One, Gal, 8. 20. If God and man had Continued to be at one, there would have
been no Mediator. Mediation presuppose^h a Breach. If man had not sinned and so
broke with God, the eternal Son of God had not taken on Him the Office of a
Mediator. Sin has bred a woeful Distance and Separation between God and the
Sinner, Isai. 59. 2. Yea, Sinners are Enemies to God, Romans 3. 7. And this is
true concerning all by Nature. Every man considered as out of Christ, he is an
Enemy and a Rebel against Heaven; and under the Di^-favour of the Most High.
The Elect themselves are by nature the children of wrath even as others, Ephesians.
2. 3.

Propos. II. Jesus Christ has on the behalf of his Elect, undertaken to make up
the breach between the Lord and them. Christ has taken up the Controversy
between the blessed GOD and poor Sinners, and is under engagement to reconcile
them. Therefore is he said to be a Mediator. A Mediator [Mesites] is a middle
person which comes between two differing parties to set them at one again. It
is noted concerning Moses, when he saw two persons at variance, he would have
set them at one again. Act. 7. 26. he offered to be a Mediator between them. He
was in that a Type of Christ who has not only attempted, but gloriously
accomplished a Reconciliation between Heaven and earth, God and the world. When
the First Covenant was broken, and thereby God and man set at variance; the
question was, Who shall make up this breach? The Son of God steps in and
undertakes to do it. Therefore He is said to be the Media^or of the New
Covenant. Hence he is in the Scripture styled the Prince of Peace. Isai. 9. 6.
And so to be our Peace, i. e. our Peace- maker Ephesians. 2. 14. And the Reconciler
of God to the world, and of the world to God. Col. 1. 20. 2. Cor. 9. 18, 19. He
does concisliate, h. e. obtain the favor of God for his people. He causes
Believers on him to become Favorites in the Court of Heaven. Hence we often
read of the Grace of Christ; thereby is meant the Favor of God obtained by
Christ.

But, How does Christ do this? Answ.

Propos. III. Christ is invested with a S^cred Office. He stands under
Office-Relation. And is said to be a Mediator, not merely in that he is a
middle person in the sacred and eternal Trinity, but because he does by virtue
of Office Relation interpose between God and perishing Sinners. There are many
Names and Titles given to Christ in the Scripture, whereby His Office-Relation
is signified. This Name of a Mediator is a name of Office. So He is Called
God's Servant, Zech. 3. 8. I will bring forth my Servant the branch. Christ is
called a Branch in respect of his humane Nature, a Servant in respect of His
Office-Relation. Hence He is styled the Angel of the Covenant, because he is
the Mediator of the New Covenant, Mal. 3. 1. Christ is not called an Angel in
respect of Nature, so indeed he is called God, and so he is called Man, but not
an Angel. He took not on him the nature of Angels. Therefore he is said to be
an Angel, to denote his Office. Hence he is styled an Apostle, Heb. 3. 1. A
Bishop, 1. Pet. 2. ult, A Minister, Heb. 8. 1, 6. A Priest, a Prophet, a King.
(as afterward may more fully be declared.) Now all these Names are of Office.
Moreover, those things which are required to constitute an Officer, are hereby
truly affirmed concerning Christ. Three Things have been observed as Requisites
in one that is invested into Sacred Office.

1. Qualifications. God does first Fit men for their Work before he puts them
upon it, He never sent any man upon an Errand, but gave him legs to go upon.
Now thus it is true, concerning the man Christ Jesus. He, (and he only) is
wonderfully qualifyed for the Work of Mediation which my Text speaks of. In
the Temple (which was a Type of Christ) there were Utensils for every Service
required therein. This signifying, that Christ. (the True Temple) was every way
furnished for all that work, which as a Mediator is incumbent on Him. Hence he
is said to be Anointed, Psalm 45 2. The Signification of the Hebrew word
Messiah, and the Greek word, Christ, is Anointed. How? not materially but
Spiritually; h. e. in respect of spiritual Qualifications and endowments
fitting him for his Work. The gifts of the Holy Spirit were most plentifully
poured on Him. Isai. 11. 1, 2, 3. There never was man or Angel, that had such
gifts of the Spirit as Christ (considered as man) has. And as to Grace and
Holiness, he is admirably endowed and qualifyed, He is full of Grace, so as
that of his fullness we have all received, and that grace for grace: for God
gives not the Spirit by measure unto him. Joh. 1. 14, 16. and 3. 34.

2. Another thing required to Constitute an Officer is an outward Call. Inward
Qualification without external Vocation is not enough to make an Officer. No
man ought to take that Honor to himself except he be called of God, as was
Aaron. Heb. 5. 4. Ordinary Officers have their Call from God by man: and
Extraordinary Officers have their Call immediately from God: as the Apostle
does distinguish, Gal. 1. 1. Christ had his Call from God, who did (to speak
after the manner of Men) give Him a Commission, as it were under hand and Seal,
to undertake the Work of a Redeemer. Joh. 6. 22. for him has God the Father
Sealed. And of him does God say, I the Lord have called thee in Righteousness,
and will give thee for a Covenant to the people. Isai. 42. 6. Therefore he may
be well called the Mediator of the new Covenant.

3. In order to Consummating sacred OfficeRelation, Consecration, and solemn
Separation is necessary. Aaron and his Sons were to be consecrated to the Lord,
that they might minister in the Priests Office. Exodus 30. 30. And the Holy
Ghost said, separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called
them. Act. 13. 2. God Himself has Consecrated his Son Jesus Christ to the work
of a Mediator. The Son is consecrated for ever more. Heb. 7. 28. Him the Father
has Sanctified and sent into the world. Joh. 10. 31. Yea, and Jesus has set
Himself apart for the Work of a Mediator between God and the Elect. Therefore
he says, For your sakes I sanctify my self, Joh. 17. 19. There is a
Sanctification in respect of Consecration and Separation to the Service of God:
which glorious Mystery is indeed declared in the Administration of the Lord's
Supper. For when the Elements are separated and solemnly consecrated, we are
thereby taught that Christ has been set apart as the Mediator of the
New Covenant.

But this will appear further by speaking to the next Proposition.

Propos. IV. The Father has committed the Work of Redemption to the Son of God:
who has accordingly undertaken that Charge.

(1.) I say the, Father has committed that work of Christ. God has said to his
Son, As for the work of Redemption, I leave that to thee do thou take care of
that matter. Upon this account it is, that Christ is said to receive a
Commandment and Charge from God the Father. Joh. 14. 21. As the Father gave me
Commandment (said Christ when he was going to die for the Redemption of his
Elect) even so do I. He neither Did nor Suffered any thing in order to the
Salvation of his people but what God bid him do. Hence all the work which
Christ did in the world, is said to be, the work which the Father gave him to
do. Joh. 17. 4. On this account he is said to be inferior to the Father; not in
respect of nature, as he is the Son of God, but as he is the Mediator. Joh. 10.
29. Yea, he is God's Commissioner. (To express heavenly Mysteries by earthly
Similitudes) He has the great Seal of Heaven to Authorize him to act as
MEDIATOR. Hence he is called the Lord's Messenger, Mal. 3. 1. And in John's
Gospel Christ is said to be sent of God, no less than twenty times over.

(2) Jesus Christ has accepted this Charge. Tho it be the greatest Work, and
weightyest Charge that ever was, yet Christ (who alone was able) has
undertaken it. This might serve for a Description of Christ's mediatorial
Office, It is that Charge which He has undertaken in order to the Salvation of
the Elect. Tho he be in respect of nature, equal with God, he took upon him the
form of a Servant. And being found in fashion as a man, he became obedient unto
Death, Hence Christ is styled a Surety. Jesus is made a Surety of a better
Testament. Heb. 7. 22. which implies the same thing with this of his being the
Mediator of the new Covenant. God says, My Law must be fulfilled, and my
Justice must be satisfied: now Christ the Son of GOD comes in, and says, As
for those things, I Will undertake to see them alone. He engages to do that for
them, which they are never able to do for themselves. There was a personal Debt
of perfect Obedience unto the Law, owing to God: Th^^ Christ has performed.
Therefore he put his Name into the Covenant. He was made under the Law. And
that he might be so, he was made of a Woman. Gal. 4. 4. So he has discharged
Believers on him from being under the Law as a Covenant. There was also a Debt
of Satisfaction to Offended Justice, necessary to be discharged: this was such
a Debt as all the world was never able to pay. Men and Angels and all Creatures
would have proved Bankrupts for ever, had this Debt (...) charged upon them.
But Christ who alone could make Satisfaction has undertaken it. A learned
Annotator on Isai. 53. 7. ha^^ well observed that that Scripture is a most
pregnant place for the Satisfaction made by Christ's Sufferings for our Sins,
were the Text (...) rendered and rightly understood: For their words, He was
oppressed and he was afflicted, should be read, It was exacted and He answered.
You know that Discharging a Debt, is called Answering it. Thus our Debt was
exacted of Christ our Surety, and He answered, and so has caused our Bond to be
canceled that it shall not be put in Suit against us. Col. ^. ^4. Christ says
unto God concerning the believer, as sometimes Paul wrote to Philemon
concerning Onessimus, If he has wronged thee or owes thee ought, put that on
my account, I will repay it. So has He discharged the Office of a Mediator.

Propos. V. That Jesus Christ, as Mediat^r, as Prophet, Priest, and King. The
Mediatorial Office of Christ comes under that threefold respect, it is
prophetical, Priestly, Kingly. Christ has the Wisdom of a Prophet, the
Holiness of a Priest, the Power of a King. This threefold Office may be
par^icularly hinted at in that Scripture, Joh. 14. 6. where Christ says, I am
the Way, the Truth, and the Life. As Priest he is the way unto the Father, as
Prophet he is the truth, as King He is the life. The Elect of God, by reason of
the Fall, are laboring under a threefold Malady, and Misery, viz. Ignorance,
Alienation from God, and Utter Inability to help themselves. To the first of
these the propheti^^l Office of Christ does mediate or bring a Remedy, to the
second, his Priestly, to the third his Kingly Office is a ^overaign Help. He is
that Prophet which the Lord spoke unto Moses saying, I will raise up a Prophet
like unto thee, and it shall come to pass, that whoever will not hearken unto
my words which He shall speak in my name, I will require it of (...) Deuteronomy. 18.
19. So did the Disciples upon Knowledge and much Experience testify, that
Knowledge and much Experience testify, that Jesus of Nazareth was a Prophet
mighty in dee^ and word before GOD, and all the people. Luc. 24. 19. Now,
Christ is said to be a Prophet not in respect of Nature, but Office; not as God
absolutely considered, but as Mediator. And God does not reveal his Will
immediately but mediately by Jesus Christ. Heb. 1. 1^. God has in these last
days spoken to (...) by his SON. Rev. 1. 1. The Revelation of Jesus Christ
which God gave unto Him (...) show unto his servants. Christ as the Prophet of
his Church has revealed all necessary Truth. So the holy Scriptures are from
him. The blessed BIBLE is the Word of Christ, in special, Christ as the great
Prophet of his people, has made known the Mystery of the New Covenant. Likewise,

The mediatorial Office of Christ is Kingly. It is most true, that, There is an
eternal essential Soveraingty which belongs to Christ, as God coeternal and
coequal with the Father, but there is moreover, a Donative Kingdom, which
belongs to him as Mediator under the Father. Psalm. 2. 6. Mat. 28. 18. Joh. 5.
27. God rules over all: but by Christ, into whose hands all things are
committed by the Father. Therefore Ezekiel in that glorious vision, Cap. 1.
ver. 26. saw a Throne and a man upon it. Signifying that Christ as man and
Mediator has the Government of the world put into his hands, to dispose of all
affairs so as shall be to the glory of the Father, and the good and Salvation
of his people. But eminently

Christ is said to be a Mediator in respect of his Priestly Office. Hence he is
called Jesus the Mediator. Why Jesus? because the great design of the Apostle
in his Epistle to the Hebrews is to describe the Priesthood of Christ. Now,
Jesus is a Name which does respect and note Christ's priestly Office. Heb. 4.
14. We have a great high priest that is passed into the Heavens, [JESUS] the
Son of God. The Priest under the Law, did two things especially.

1. He did by offering Sacrifice make an Atonement for the People. Lev. 7. 7.
When God was offended, if the Priest did offer Sacrifice for the people, He was
pacified toward them. Now that was with respect to the Sacrifice of Christ.
For it was not possible that those other Sacrifices should of themselves
expiate the guilt of the least Sin. Heb. 10. 4. Christ then is said to be a
Mediator inasmuch as he has by the Sacrifice of Himself purged away our Sins,
and obtained our peace with God, Romans 5. 10, 11.

2. The priest offered Incense. So Christ has not only made Satisfaction, but
He does make Intercession 1. Joh. 2. 1, 2. He is gone to Heaven for that end,
which was Typified by the Priest's entering into the Holy place, there to
present Incense before the Lord If the Priest should have only offered
sacritice, and not gone into the Holy place to offer Incense, he would not have
done His whole work; so if Christ had not impetrated the Mercy of God for
Sinners by Intercession as well as Sacrifice, He would not be a perfect Priest:
which thing is intended by the Apostle, when he says concerning Christ, If He
were on earth he should not be a Priest, Heb, 8. 4. Because should he have
continued on earth and not gone to heaven there to intercede for his people, He
would have done but half the Work of a Priest.

But thus Christ is a Mediator, inasmuch as He does Intercede, and so mediate
with the Father on the behalf of those that have sinned.

Propos. VI. Jesus Christ is the ONLY Mediator. It is not only true that He is
a Mediator, but that He alone is so. 1. Tim. 2. 5. There is one God, and one
Mediator between God and man, the Man Christ Jesus. Wherefore my Text does not
only say that Jesus is A Mediator, but that He is the Mediator of the
New Covenant: Implying that He, and He only is so. To be a Mediator, is a
Godlike Royalty, and can belong but to one. Indeed Moses in respect of his
standing between the Lord and his People was a Typical Mediator: Deuteronomy. 5. 5.
Gal. 3. 19. But the Mediator is here in my Text set in opposition to Moses.
There neither is nor ever was nor ever shall there be, such a Mediator as
Christ is, besides himself alone. This Mysterious and glorious Truth of the
Gospel is evident from several Arguments.

1. It was signified by Types in the days of the Old Testament. Moses alone
was (...) come near the Lord Ex^d. 24. 2. There might not be any Man in the
Tabernacle of the Congregation when the Priest went to make Atonement, Lev. 16.
17. The High Priest went alone into the second Tabernacle, Heb. 9. 7. Moreover,
There was to be but one High Priest at the same time. By all which things are
signified, that there is no mediator to be acknowledged besides Jesus Christ
alone.

2 None but Christ is fit to be the Mediator. No one else in Heaven or in earth
is both God and Man. He is the true Immanuel. He is Immanuel not only in Name,
as Isaiah's Son was, (being in that respect a Type of Christ) but in Deed. He
the true God being made man, dwelt with us and among us men. Christ is God
manifest in the flesh. and there is no God-man but He. And therefore, none but
He was fit to come in as a Days-man between the Holy God and offending Sinners.
Job. 9. 32. There is none else fit to be a Mediator of Satisfaction besides
JESUS. If he had been GOD only, he could not have Sati^^yed Divine Justice in a
way of Suffering. The divine Nature can not suffer. The eternal Godhead cannot
dye. Had Christ been Man only his Sufferings would not have been Satisfactory.
They would not have been of sufficient value to compensate for the infinite
wrong which has been done to GOD by the Sins of men. For Christ who is God to
suffer, though but for a few hours, is more than if all men and Angels had we^red
under the Wrath of GOD to Eternity. Moreover, The weight of the guilt of Sin
which was imputed to Christ, and the Wrath of the Father which lay upon him,
would have crushed Him under the insupportable burden of it had he not been
more than a man; so that it was necessary that he should be both God and man,
that his Sufferings might become Satisfactory. And this Jesus the Son of God is
the fittest to be a Mediator of Intercession, because He is most dear unto God,
He in whom His very soul does delight. The Son of His Love. God's ear is
always open to Him. Father, I thank thee that thou have heard me, and I know
that thou hear me Always, (said Christ,) Joh. 11. 42.

3. That has been required of the Mediator, which none but Christ was ever
able to perform. He must become a Surety for miserably indebted and undone
sinners. Heb. 7. 22. He must therefore in all respects become subject to and
fulfill the Law. He must satisfy all the righteous Demands thereof, both in
respect of active and passive Obedience, Gal, 3. 13. Meriting Salvation was
required of him. Christ's Mediatorial Obedience is (and 'twas necessary it
should be) meritorious. If he could not have merited life for sinners, he could
not have been a Mediator. When there is a Work done that according to the Rules
of Justice such a reward is due for it: That Is Merit. No Man or Angel was ever
able to merit heaven at the hands of God, but only the man Christ Jesus.

By these things then it does appear, that He is the only Mediator.

Propos. VII, Jesus Christ is a Mediator on the behalf of all those that belong
to the Cov^nant. The Elect of God, the Church of the firstborn, are all
concerned in the Mediation o^ Christ. They are the seed of Christ, for whom his
Soul has traveled, Isai. 53. 11. Hence his Mediatorial Obedience is said to be
for many. Romans 5. 19. By the Obedience of one shall many be made righteous. The
Elect of God though but few compared with others, yet in themselves considered
they are many, And He is said to be a Mediator for all. 1. Cor. 15. 22. In
Christ (h. e. in and through him as Mediator of the new Covenant) shall all be
made alive. All in that Scripture must be understood in a restrictive sense sc.
for all such as are there spoken of: all that are made alive. It is in Christ
that they are so. He tasted death for every man: that is to say, every man
among those Sons whom Christ will bring to Glory, He has tasted death for him.
Heb, 2: 9. 10. He is Mediator on behalf of the world: yea, of the whole world.
1. Joh. 2. 1. that is, for all the Elect of God among Gentiles as well as Jews.
There is not one elect soul, but Christ is a Mediator for that soul; even for
as many as the Father has given to him. He will not suffer so much as one of
them to be lost, if his own blood and Intercession can (as most certainly it
can) save them. Joh. 18. 9. and 17. 10. And Christ is a Mediator for the elect,
not only after they believe (tho then in a peculiar manner; If any man that has
fellowship with him fall into sin, Jesus Christ the righteous is an Advocate
with the Father for Him) but before they believe Christ has been a Mediator on
their behalf. Cap. 17. 20. Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also
which shall believe on me. Otherwise they would never believe. Hence it is that
the Covenant takes hold on all the house of Israel. h. e. the elect of God. It
cannot be but that a new heart should be given to them. They must repent and
believe. Christ has dyed to purchase Grace as well as glory for their souls.
Joh. 10. 18. Nor is Christ a Mediator for any else but only the Elect of God.
He is a Mediator of Intercession for none else. Chapt. 17. 9. I pray not for
the world, but for them which thou have given me, for they are thine. We may be
sure then that He has not been a Mediator of Satisfaction for them. If Christ
had dyed for them that perish, then Satisfaction is required twice for the same
Debt. If Christ has undertaken and satisfied for them; why then are they made
an eternal Sacrifice to the Justice of God. We may not think that Christ has
dyed in vain Gal. 2. 21. Yet so it would be, if His blood has bin shed for
those that shall have no benefit by it.

Propos. VIII. Jesus Christ is an eternal Mediator. There was before the world
began an eternal Transaction between the Father and the Son concerning the work
of Redemption, wherein the Father agreed with the Son, that if he would satisfy
divine Justice, that then the Elect should be saved; and the Son engaged that
he would do it: And in order thereunto would become a man, and make himself an
Offering for Sin. Isai. 53, 10. In this Respect He was set up as a Media^or
from everlasting. Prove. 8. 23. Also the Mediation of Christ has taken place in
all ages of the world, from the very Beginning of it. He was slain from the
foundation of the world. Rev. 13. 8. He was so Typically in respect of those
Sacrifices which were once of Divine Institution, and began with the first ^ge
of the world, and in respect of the De^ree of God; also in respect of the
Efficacy of his Death. Indeed, The Son of God actually began the work of a
Redeemer when he became Incarnate, and first entered upon his (...) of
Humiliation. But before that God took the Word of his Son concerning this
matter: so that his Mediation was effectual before his Incarnation. And thence
the sins of the Elect who dyed before Christ came in^o the world were pardoned,
as well as those who have been born since that. Heb. 9. 15. He is the Mediator
of the New Testament, that (...) means of death, for the Redemption of the
Transgressions that were under the first Testament, they which were called
might receive the promise of eternal Inheritance. It is therefore also said
concerning Old Testament Believers, that they without us should not be made
perfect. Heb. 11. 11. 40. The meaning of which may be, that they were not
brought to h^^ven and happiness in one way, and we in another; but both we and
they are made perfect by the Death and Mediation of Christ. So that the first
Believers that ever were is the world, had their sins pardoned and their souls
saved by virtue of the Merit and Med^ation of Jesus Christ. And He will
continue to mediate to the end of the world. He is a priest for ever, after the
Order of Melchizedeck, Psalm. 110. 1. Whatever Christ does as Mediator, is done
either in a state of Humiliation or Exaltation: the first of these is finished.
The Work designed for his state of Humiliation is blessedly accomplished. The
other part is his Mediation, He is now, being exalted to the right hand of
Majesty on high, in the actual performance of and will be so as long as this
world shall endure. Heb. 7. 28. Wherefore he is able to save to the uttermost
them that come unto God by him, since he ever lives to make intercession for
you. Christ now that he is in heaven does present before God the virtue and
value of his blood: So is he a Mediator before the Throne of Grace. Hence his
blood is said to speak. We are come to the blood of sprinkling which speaker
better things than that of Abel. There is now before the Throne a Lamb as it
had been slain. Rev. 9, 6, And when God look^^^ upon him, it speaks for
Mercy, Pardon, Life, Salvation to be bestowed upon all them, for whom the Lamb
has been slain: and this Jesus declares it to be his mind and Will, that for
His Sake they should be pardoned and saved.

So then by being reconciled to God by the death of his Son, we are saved by
his life.

USE. 1. By way of Instruction or Information.

Instruct. 1. Hence we must conclude, that Jesus Christ is most worthy of
Honor. Its a blessed and most honorable thing to be an Instrument of making
peace between Bre^^ren, between man and man who are at variance; How much more
is it honorable to be the great Instrument of Settling an ever^^^ting peace
between God and man! The Office of a Mediator is in it self honorable. So does
the Scripture speak of it as a great matter. Isai. 49. 6. Is it a light thing
that thou should be (...) Servant, to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to
restore the preserved of Israel? I will also give thee for a light to the
Gentiles, that thou ^^yst be my Salvation to the ends of the earth. To be an
Instrument of saving one soul, (...) a great honor: But what then is it to be
the great Cause of the salvation of millions of souls! even of all the Elect,
as Jesus Christ is, without whom never any of them had been saved. Christ as
Mediator, has honourab^^ Titles given to him in the Scriptures. Those Names of
Prophet, Priest, and King, are all of them honorable Names. He is also, as
Mediator styled the everlasting Father Isai. 9. 6. The Greek Interpreters
render those words, the Father of the world to come. Christ as Mediator is the
Father of the new world: Adam is the Father of the old, ruined world. But
Christ the second Adam is the Father of the restored, Redeemed world. His
People especially have cause to honor him. They can never honor him enough
who has ve^tur^d Himself; yea, and has cast his own Body and soul into the
flames of divine wrath, that so he might appease that Wrath and quench those
Flames on their behalf. Christ as Mediator, is indeed inferior to the Father,
but He is superior to every Creature in earth or in heaven. Therefore they all
worship the Lamb that was slain, because He is worthy. And the Day is coming
when every knee shall bow to the Authority of Christ, and that considered as
JESUS the MEDIATOR. It has been disputed among Divines, whether Christ as
Mediator be an Object of divine Worship; I see not how this Argument for the
Affirmative can well be answered. The Object of Faith is an Object of Religious
Worship, for Faith is internal Worship: nor may we believe or place the
Confidence of our Souls in any other object besides what we may pray unto: But
Christ as Mediator is the proper and immediate Object of Faith: It is not
enough for men to believe in God, except they believe in Christ, and so in God
through the Mediator. Joh. 14. 1.

Instruct. II. Great is their Sin who make into themselves other Mediators
besides Christ. They robb Christ of his chief Glory. Herein was the great and
grose^t Superstition of the Gentiles of Old, that they phansyed and worshipped
many mediators, Demons or middle-gods. They looked upon the souls of their
Heroes or deceased Worthyes, to be Demons, or Agents between the Sovereign
Deity and them. And this is the great (...) of the apostate Christians, h. e.
the Papists; Their Idolatry does consist chiefly in their Doctrine of Demons 1.
Tim. 4. 1. Indeed, they do in world acknowledge that there is no Mediator of
Redemption or Satisfaction but Christ, and yet they think to satisfy for their
own sins themselves, by their doing Penance: and they pray for Salvation on
account of such a Saint, or such a Martyr. And they Teach that their is more
Mediators of Intercession than one. But that is contrary to clear Scripture.
Hence the Apostle having him speaking about Intercession, ^aith, there is one
Mediator. Cap. 2. 1, 5. None but Christ fits in the Throne of God. Though
Believers shall sit in Christ's Throne at the Last Day, yet none but Christ
shall sit In God's Throne. Rev. 3. 21. Hence none else is to be the Agent
between God and all the Elect. It Is an encroaching on Christ's
Prerogative-Royal, and therefore derogatory to exalt any other to that Dignity.
It belongs to Christ as exalted to the right Hand (of Throne) of the Father,
there to present our Devotions to the Father of Glory. Romans 8. 34. As none but
the High Priest might enter into the Holy Place; so it belong s to Christ alone
to be a Mediator in Heaven. He appears for us, as our Agent. We have no other
Agent in Heaven but Christ: None else to appear for us there. Heb. 9. 24. Rev.
8. 3. Therefore for men to offer up prayers to any (...) Christ, and to God in
Him, is heinous Idolatry. Its true, that we may desire good men on earth to
pray for us, but it does not therefore follow that we may pray to them, as
Prayer is taken for Religious Worship. Nor does it follow, that because we may
desire men on earth to pray for us, we may desire those in Heaven to do so; for
they in Heaven cannot hear us: If we desire them to do this or that, they know
not what we say. As for the Papists, there are Thousands, it may be Millions of
them, praying at once to the Virgin Mary; its impossible that she being a
Creature only should hear all those prayers at once. This is to turn Christ out
of his Office, and to place another in his Room.

USE. 2. Let it be for Conviction and A^akening to all Christless ones. They
are without a Mediator. There is none to stand between their Souls and Infinite
Justice, betwixt them and everlasting Burnings. Therefore Christ^ess Sinners
are in a miserable perishing estate.

For Awakening here,

1. Consider, That No one can know that Christ has or will mediate for him,
till he does truly believe. Tho it be true, that Christ does mediate for his
Elect before their Conversion (as was said) and hence it is that they are not
cut off whilst in a state of unbelief; yet they cannot know nor be assured of
this as long as they remain without Christ. For the Elect of God are visibly in
the same state with Reprobates until Christ be formed in them, 2. Cor. 13. 5.
Nor can they know their Election before their effectual Vocation. 2. Pet. ^.
10. A poor Christless Creature, when he lies down at night, he knows not but
that he may be in Hell before morning when Morning comes he knows not but that
he may be in Hell before Night: how sad is that! For a man to have the life of
his Body hang in doubt is very uncomfortable, but the man is a Thousand times
more miserable, the life of whose immortal SOUL is uncertain.

Consid. 2. Every Christless Sinner is under a Sentence of Death and wrath. He
is a poor condemned creature. Joh. 3. 18. He that believes not, is condemned
already. So that if death come upon him while^t in his Christless estate, he is
as sure to be damned as if he were already in Hell. O Christless Sinner, look
about thee and see where thou art! Thy soul is hanging over the mouth of hell
by the rotten thread of a frail life: if that break, the de^ouring Gulf will
swallow thee up for ever. The Sentence is already passed upon thee by that God
who is the Judge of all; and that which thou art senten^'d unto, is, to lie and
dye under infinite wrath throughout the ^ayes of Eternity. Joh. 3. 36. He that
believ^^ not, the wrath of God abides on him. And ^an^t thou bear that wrath?
Who can stand before his indignation? They that have felt only a few scalding
drops of that wrath falling upon their souls have thought it intolerable. A
wounded spirit who can bear? If drops be so terrible, what will it be when a
Sea of wrath shall overwhelm the soul! If a few sparks of this wrath are so
fearful, can thine heart endure when thou shall be thrown in the Ocean of Fire
never to be quenched? Yet this is that which every Christless Sinner is doomed
unto.

Consid. 3. There is no escaping this wrath without an Interest in CHRIST. None
but JESUS can deliver from the wrath to come. 1. These. 1. 16. All the World
cannot ^ave thee without Christ. They that were stung with the fiery deadly
Serpents in (...) Wilderness, except they looked unto the brazen Serpent dyed
of their wounds: The deadly Stings of Sin are in thy soul, If JESUS the
Mediator does not heal thee, there is no Remedy, but thou must dye. In vain
will it be to hope for Salvation in any other way Men that are dying, are ready
to catch at any thing to save their lives; So it is with poor, perishing,
damning Souls, they are ready to lay hold on their Duties, good Meanings, any
thing to save them. But in vain is Salvation hoped for from the hills and the
multitude of mountains. Nothing without Jesus the Mediator ever did or can
save a soul from Death and Wrath.

Consid. 4. They that have heard of a Mediator, and yet live and dye in a
Christless Estate, will, of all creatures in the world, be most miserable for
ever. They are most inexcu^eable. They have no clock for their Sin. Their souls
are naked to the Lashes of Divine Vengeance. Joh. 15. 22. There have been
Thousands of Millions that have gone down into eternal Darkness, who never
heard of JESUS the Mediator, but their Condemnation will not be so dreadful at
the Last Day, as of them that lived under the Gospel; and had the Of^er of
Christ and Life set before them, but they chose death rather than life, Sin
rather than Christ. It will be more tolerable for the vilest wretch in Sodom at
the day of Judgment than for such Christ-Despisers, Mat. 10. 15. O to despise
a Mediator is such a sin as there is none like unto it. He that despised Moses
Law dyed without mercy, of how much sorer punishment suppose you shall he be
thought worthy, who was trodden under foot the Son of God? If they escaped not
who refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape if we turn
away from him, that speaks from heaven.

Do'nt think now to ward of the blow, and (...) ^tave of Convictions by saying,
We are all Christians, we have all an Interest in Christ. O that it were so! O
that there were not one Christless sinner in the Congregation! But for the
Lord's sake deceive not your own souls. What Communion has Christ with Belial?
If (...) say they have Fellowship with him, and yet walk in darkness, the Truth
is not in them. They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts, Yea, If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature. Let
every soul then that is not become a new creature, receive conviction and be
awakened with the sense of their misery. Awake thou that sleep, an^ rise
from the Dead, and Christ shall give the Light

USE. 3. Here is matter of glorious Cons^lation, and Encouragement unto those
that come to Jesus Christ. There is admirable Sweetness and Consolation in
these two or three words. JESUS THE MEDIATOR. The Sum and Sweetness of the
Gospel is contained in this, that, Jesus is the Mediator. I shall mention here
some (and but a few of many) comfortable Considerations, which flow and follow
from the Doctrine of Christ's Mediation.

Consid. 1. It is hence evident that the work of Redemption and Salvation is
put into a sure and able Hand. Into an hand that is able to go thorough with
it. He is mighty to save; He is able to save to the uttermost. Thou a sinner
have destroyed thy self to the uttermost, thou have stabbed thy soul to death,
a Thousand times over. How long has thy soul lain dead in Hell! Well but Christ
can save thee over and over again, notwithstanding all those Deaths which thy
Sins have brought upon thee. Indeed, If the work of Salvation were in any other
hand it would miscarry: No mee^ man or Angel could go through with it: But
since it is in the hand of Jesus Christ the Son of GOD, there is no fear of
miscarriage. If it were trusted in any other hand, woe would be to thee and to
me, and to all the world for ever. But it is not possible it should miscarry in
Christ's hand. Act. 2. 24. Now this is a great Comfort. Suppose a man to be
miserably in Debt; If a Surety interpose that is able to pay the Debt, that is a
Comfort to him: even so is the Case here.

Consid. 2. Jesus Christ is a Willing Mediator, Poor souls are apt to be
discouraged, not so much in respect of the power of Christ, which they doubt
not of, as from his Will to save them. They are ready to say as the Leper did,
Mat. 8. 3. Lord, if thou will thou can make me clean. But know, Christ is
willing to reconcile thee to God, if thou art willing to be reconciled to him.
Christ by his Messengers, beseeches Sinners to be reconciled unto God. He
began the work of Mediation at first most Willingly: He has gone through the
greatest and heaviest part of his Work with much Willingness. He laid down his
life of Himself, there was none took it from him against his will. That work of
Suffering for Sin, and Satisfying divine Justice is done: and therefore we may
besure, he is willing to attend what remains respecting the work of
Intercession. If thou are a comer to him, He is willing to intercede for thee.
He is ready to put in a good word for thee in heaven before the Father of
Glory. He lives for that end. Heb. 7. 25.

Consid. 3. Now there is a Mediator for poor Sinners whose Mediation is
Meritorious. It is so because, Jesus is the Mediator. There Is Merit in the
Blood of Christ, for he is the Son of GOD. Had we none but saints or Angels to
Mediate for us, we were in a said case, because they cannot merit. But Christ
has merited all saving good for all his. He is a Redeemer by Price. As for the
Elect, He has bought every one of them, body and soul, 1. Cor. 6. 20. Yea, and
he has bought Heaven for them too, which is therefore called the purchased
Possession, Ephesians. 1. 14. And Christ is now Interceding in Heaven through the
Merit of his blood. Hence his Blood is said to speak; so says the Apostle
here, It speaks better things than the blood of Abel. It has a loud Cry with
it; a louder than that of Abel's blood; and yet that cried so as that it was
heard from earth to heaven. Abel's blood ^ryed for Vengeance, Christ's Blood
cries for Pardon. The blood of Christ cries loud^r than the Law, or than Sin
the strength of the Law; which if it were not for Sin would be able to hurt no
man. The Law cries and says, This is a poor guilty sinner, let him be
condemned for ever. But if he be a believing sinner, the blood of Christ cries
louder and says, All his sins are satisfied for, and therefore let him be
pardoned, and his soul live for ever.

Consid. 4. That Both the Person and the Prayers of the Comer to Christ, shall
find Acceptance through him who is the MEDIATOR. His person is accepted in the
Beloved. Christ has brought him to be one of heavens Favorites. By Him we
have Access unto the Father. Jesus the Son of GOD does as it were take the
believing soul by the hand, and leads him into the Presence- Chamber, He
opens the door for him, and presents him before the Father of Glory; and says,
Behold O Father, Here is a soul that I dyed for, this soul is washed in my
blood, and therefore do thou look upon him with a favorable eye for my sake.

And the Prayers of one that comes t^ Christ, and unto God by Him, will find
Acceptance in Heaven. GOD says to such a soul as that great King said to
Esther What is thy Petition, and it shall be granted to thee, what is thy
Request, and it shall be performed. Chapt. 7. 2. Indeed, If a man come to God
without Christ, let him not think that he shall receive any thing. Under the
Law, if a Sacrifice was Offered, and not first brought to the Priest, it would
not find Acceptance; so if men offer up Prayers or praises, and not by Christ,
they will never be accepted by God. But come in CHRIST's Name, and then ask as
great things as you will or can (according to the will of God) and you need not
doubt acceptance with him. The Children of God are many times much discouraged,
because of the Weakness of their prayers: But as long as we have such an one as
JESUS to be our MEDIATOR, we may humbly hope for Acceptance in Heaven. Our
Prayers are poor vile Things as proceeding from us, but the Intercession of
Christ is perfect and glorious.

Let us therefore come boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy,
and find grace to help in a time of need.

USE. 4. Let us Bless God for Christ, Bless God for the MEDIATOR. This is the
Most gladsome Tidings that ever was heard of in the world. How did the Angels
rejoice and glorify God when Christ was born! One of them said to the
Shepherds, Behold I bring you good Tidings of great joy, unto you this day is
born a Savior which is Christ the Lord: and suddenly there was with the Angel
a multitude of the heavenly Host, praising GOD, and saying, GLORY be to GOD in
the highest, and on Earth Peace; Good Will toward men. Luc. 2. 13. 14. Shall
they bless God because there is a Savior come into the world; and shall not
men do so much more, as being more concerned in this good news than the Angels
are? This world is full of Troubles: sad News comes from day to day. But
here is Good News from the Heaven of Heavens, that there is a JESUS, that there
is a MEDIATOR. Had it not been for this Mediator, every soul of us must have
perished. There Is no ascending into Heaven but by Jacob's Lad^^r, whose Bottom
was on earth, and the Top of it in heaven, Gen 24. 14. This is true concerning
the Mediation of Christ. Had not the Son of GOD taken upon Him the Office of a
Mediator, it would have puzzled men and Angels to have answered Eli's Question
1. Sam. 2. 25.) If a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? When
Man had forsaken God, Heaven and Earth forsook him, and left him to shift for
himself: Now that the LORD should look after lost man, when Sin and Guilt, and
Wrath and Hell, and Devils, and all the Powers of Darkness had fallen upon him,
is wonderful to consider. O bless His Name; The Mediator has stepped in between
our souls and everlasting Burnings. So that now we who have been great sinners
may draw nigh to GOD with an humble Boldness; and commune with Him who is upon
the Mercyseat. If thou are a true believer, thou may think of the Day of
Judgment with unspeakable Joy. 1. Joh. 4. 17. Why? He that shall be thy Judge
is thy Savior thy Redeemer, thy MEDIATOR. Though we have to do with GOD the
Judge of all, we need not fear, since we are come to JESUS the Mediator of the
New Covenant. What shall I say more? By means of Christ the MEDIATOR,
Believers are made happier than Adam was. One of the Ancients said truly, that
Job on the dunghill was happier than Adam in Paradise. Adam lost his happiness,
but this the Believer can never do. That Heaven which Christ has prepared for
Believers is a far better place than the earthly Paradise was. Adam in his
first estate was made lower than the Angels: he stood in need of meat and drink
and sleep: and so should all his Children have done, in case he (and they all
in him) had never sinned. But as for Believers, er'e Christ has done with
them, He Will make 'em equal with Angels. At the Resurrection their Bodies shall
be spiritualized, and immortal^zed, that they cannot die any more. And their
souls shall be filled with Divine Know^edge and Grace, beyond what the soul of
Adam was in his first estate. And their glory shall never fade away. An all
this because of JESUS THE MEDIATOR of the New Covenant. O then Bless God for
Jesus Christ; which to do will be the work of Heaven throughout the Days of
Eternity.

God the Father has received full Satisfaction in the Obedience of His Son
Jesus Christ.
MATTHEW. III. 17. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.


IN this Chapter, there are two Things contained.

1. A Sermon preached by John Baptist: whereby he does prepare his Auditors for
Christ.

2. The History of Christ's Baptism: and under that the Evangelist has recorded
three miraculous Providence, which did at that time come to pass.

1. The Opening of the Heavens, ver. 15. No doubt but the Heavens were really
opened, by the infinite power of the Almighty: whereby may be signified, that
Heaven which was shutt against all the Children of fallen man is opened to them
now, in and by Jesus Christ.

2. Another miraculous Thing which did attend the Baptism of Christ was, that
the Holy Ghost did visibly descend upon them like a Dove. (ibid.) And this
might be, that so the Prophesy of Isaiah might be fulfilled literally as well
as spiritually, Cap. 61. 1. The Spirit of the Lord is come upon me. Also there
by to Intimate, how Christ was filled was the Spirit of Innocence and Meekness.

3. There was a miraculous Voice which came from God out of Heaven; and that is
expressed in this verse, wherein we have a most glorious, Divine Testimony
concerning Christ: GOD from Heaven does here testify two things of Him:

1. That He is His Son, yea, His Beloved Son. He is so His Son, as none else
is; so Beloved, as none else is. Angels are the sons of God, but they only in
respect of Creation. Believers are the Sons of God, but in respect of Adoption:
Whereas Christ is not the son of God on those accounts, but in respect of
nature. And therefore Jesus Christ is more dear to God than all Saints and
Angels.

2. God does here testi^ie concerning his Son Jesus Christ, that he is well
pleased In Him: Now this pleasure of the Father in Christ, does intimate not
only, that GOD takes infinite Delight in Christ, (though that be part of what
is intended, these words alluding to Isa. 42. 1. and 62. 4.) but also that the
Father has received Satisfaction in and by Jesus Christ. Hence, It is not said
I am well pleased with him, but (...) him: That is to say God is paci^yed in
and by Jesus Christ. When he beholds Christ, he lays aside all his
Indignation, and looks upon his people with a most favorable Aspect. These
words do show, that the re^enging Wrath of God is for ever appeas^d, and his
Justice fully satisfied, by the interposition and Mediation of Jesus Christ.

DOCT. That God the Father has receiv^^ full Satisfaction in the Obedience of
his Son Jesus Christ.

In order to the Clearing of this Doctrine. Three Things may be attended.

1. To show that there is a Necessity of this thing, that God should be
satisfied for the Wrong done to him by the sins of his people. 2. That Jesus
Christ has satisfied the Father. 3. The Reasons of this Doctrine; whence it is,
that the Obedience of Jesus Christ is Satisfactory.

1. There was a Necessity of this Satisfaction. Super hac quaestione, legantur
Grotius de Satisfact: Christi. Vo^^ius in Respons^ ad Ravens p^rgerum Voetius
indisputat. de jure et justitia Dei. Owen, diatrib. and Expos. in Heb. 3.
exercit. 5. and 6. and Expos. in Heb. 2. 10. mr. Burgess of Justification
Sermon of Heb 4. 13. page 99. 100. and on Romans 3. 26. Sermon. 11.
We shall mention 2 Heads of Arguments which do evince the Truth of this.

1. It is evident in that God has decreed and declared that Sin shall be
punished. There is an Eternal Decree concerning this Thing. Now upon a
supposition of the Decree of God, that Sin shall be punished, it necessarily
follows that the Event will be accordingly. For the Decrees of God are
unchangeable: Hence are they fitly compared to mountains of brass. Zech. 6. 1.
Also this Decree is published, viz. In the written Law, Gal. 3. 10. Yea, When
God made man at at first, He did peremptorily declare that Sin should be
punished with Death. Genesis 2. 17. Wherefore the Apostle says, that It is
appointed unto men once to dye, Heb. 9. 27. There is a Statute law which must
take place, sc. that in Genesis 2. 17. So that it cannot stand with the Wisdom
nor with the Veracity of God to pardon sin without Satisfaction; He having
decreed and declared otherwise.

A Second Demonstration is, that God's pu^ishing Sin does proceed not only from
his Will, ^ut from his Nature. Hence there was a necessity of Satisfaction, If
God punish sin only voluntarily, there would not be such a necessity of
Satisfaction as indeed there is. Wherefore it is from the Nature and essential
Justice of God that Sin is punished, as appears

1. In that when the Scripture speaks of God's Punishing Sin, it is ascribed
not only to his Will, but to his just Nature. Psalm. 11. 6. 7. The Psalmist
gives it as the Reason why God does punish the Wicked, even because he is
righteous. The Nature of God is such, as that he cannot but love Righteousness,
and so hate and punish Wickedness. Rev. 16. 5. 2. These. 1. 6.

2. It is Evident in that God is the SUPREME Governor and Judge of All. Genesis
18. 25. Romans 3. 5, 6. God has not only an absolute Sovereignty over his
creatures, in respect whereof He may punish or spare, kill or keep alive; but
He is moreover a Judge, in respect whereof it is necessary he should punish the
guilty. It is necessary to a Judge to punish where the Law requires him so to
do. Now what Law is to another Judge who is to proceed by it, that is the
infinite Rectitude of God's own Nature to Him. Though the Lord's Dominion be
absolute, yet he does not rule (as it were) arbitrarily, without Respect to any
Rule or Law. But that God should have any external Law prescribed to him in the
Government of the world is infinitely impossible; therefore His Law is the
Righteousness of his own Nature. Hence it is necessary, that in (...) with his
Creatures, He should act according to that, and therefore manifest (...)
against Sin. GOD in punishing Sin, is Considered not only as an offended (...),
but as an offended Judge, which cannot but do that which is right, and ought to
be done.

3. The Infinite Holiness of the blessed GOD does punish sin not only from his
Will but His Nature. 1. Sam. 2. 2. Rev. 15. 4. Hence God is said to hate Sin.
Psalm. 5. 4. Yea, and this Displicency against sin is natural unto the Blessed
God. He cannot but hate (...). It is inconsistent with the holy Nature o^ God,
to love any sin, or not to hate every sin. Hab. 1. 13. It is not said that God
will not, but that He can not took upon iniquity. He cannot approve of it;
which evinceth that sin is contrary to the Nature of God, and that the pu^ity
of His Nature does require that Sin should be duly punished. And on the account
of the infinite Holiness of God it is that He is com^ared to a consuming fire
etc. Isai. 33. 15. because it is natural to God (acting nevertheless as a free
and intellectual Agent) to hate and punish sin.

4. The common Suffrage of Mankind does give in Evidence to this Truth, That
such is the Nature of God, that sin must of necessity be satisfied for. There
is such an innate principle as this engraven upon the very Conscience of men,
that God will punish sin. Hence the Apostle speaking concerning the Generality
of the Gentiles says as in Romans 1. 32. Who knowing the judgment of God, that
they which commit such things are worthy of death. They knew- that God judged
this meet to be done, even that Sin should be punished with death. Hence even
those Barbarians could say, (as in Act. 28. 4.) Vengeance will not (...) him to
live. They looked upon Vengeance [(...)] us a Deity that would surely find out
(...) that deserved Death, but escaped it from the hands of men. Such a notion
was implanted in their minds, that, there is a GOD who will take Vengeance for
Sin. From this it came to pass that the Gentiles had so many Sacrifices,
thinking that this would pacify a provoked God. And from this principle it is,
that the Consciencies of sinners do secretly sting them and condemn them, when
they do evil in the sight of God, Rom^ 2. 15. Now Conscience is a man's Judging
of himself, as God will judge him forever. Yea, and from this principle it is,
that when men do apprehend themselves any ways injured, they appeal to God to
right them. Surely, there would not be such a presumption in the minds of all
men that God will punish sin, if his punishing thereof did proceed merely from
an Act of his Will, and not from an essential property of His Nature. For the
Acts of God's Will which are merely such) are not known but by Revelation;
whenas this, That God will punish sin, is known by the Light of Nature without
any special Revelation, which shows that it proceeds not merely from the Will,
but from the righteous Nature of God.

5. If God's Punishing Sin be merely from his Will, then it would follow, that
he is as free to reward sin as to punish it. That Sin or no Sin is all one him:
for all the meerly-free Acts of God's Will might have been otherwise. And then
whereas he does will men to love and serve him, He might have willed them to
hate and oppose him, and that no punishment should have been due to them on the
account of any Disobedience: but this cannot stand with the nature of God.

6. God would not have caused Christ to have suffered such bitter things, if
there had not been a necessity of Satisfaction. Would God have caused his only
begotten Son to come into the world and to dye such an accursed death to save
sinners, if there had bin a possibility of pardon and Salvation without
Satisfaction. Romans 8. 32. These things then make it appear that God does
naturally and necessarily punish sin. Only we must know, that when God is said
naturally to punish sin, natural is not to be taken in every respect in that
sense as when it is said, that it is natural for the Fire to burn, or the like:
as if God should necessarily punish sin as soon as it is committed or to the
utmost of His Power etc. but natural is taken in that sense as when we say it
is natural to a man to speak, or laugh, or weep; but the exercise of these
properties which are natural is subject to Wisdom and Liberty. Also, One may be
said to act freely, that yet upon supposition of this or that does act
necessarily. God always acts freely in whatever he does. It is free to Him to
speak to his Creatures or not to speak to them, but upon Supposition that he
will do so, it is necessary that he should speak Truth, nor can he speak
otherwise. 2. Tim. 2. 13. Tit. 1. 2^ Heb. 6. 18.

We come now to the second Thing propounded in order to the Doctrine before us,
That is to show,

That Christ has satisfied the Father for the Wrong that has been done by the
Sins of his People. This is a great Mystery of the Gospel* all the Knowledge we
have about it is supernatural. The Light of Nature discovers nothing about
this, tho the Light of nature discovers, that Satisfaction is necessary, yet
not how or which way this should be effected: thence the Gentiles knew the
former, but were Ignorant of this latter, albeit some of them thought it must
be Cruore h^mano, by the death of a man. Only the Scriptures do most clearly
and abundantly reveal this Truth: we shall therefore keep close to the
Scripture in producing Arugments for the Confirmation of the Doctrine before us.

Arg. I. All those Sriptures which speak of God being pacified by Christ, prove
that he has satisfied the Father. For that is intended by the Satisfaction of
Christ, viz. That He has done that whereby God is pacified toward His people;
all their sins and Injuries offered to him thereby, notwithstanding. But this
the Scripture speaks abundantly of. Hence God is said to be pleased in and by
Him, as as we have heard the Text before us expressing. Hence we read of
Reconciliation by Christ, 2. Cor. 5. 19. Romans 5. 10. And of Peace with God
through Christ. Cap. 5. 1. Col. 1. 20. And of Atonement by Christ. Romans 5. 11.
And of Christ's being a Propitiation, Cap. 3. 25. 1. Joh. 2. 2. Because in and
by Jesus Christ, God does become propitious, i. e. Favorable toward sinners.
God had a controver^ie with all the world for Sin; but as for the Elect of God,
Christ has come and taken up that Controversy, and appeased the Wrath, and
obtained the Favor of God, therefore we are said to be reconciled and at peace
with God by Jesus Christ.

Arg. II. All those Scriptures which speak of Jesus Christ's being offered on
the account of the sins of his people, evince the Truth of this Doctrine of
Christ's SATISFACTION. For that was the end of Christ's being made an Offering
for Sin, that Satisfaction to divine Justice might thereby be accomplished. In
the Scriptures Christ is said to be an Oblation, Heb. 10. 10 and 9. 28. And
Sacrifice, ver. 26. 1. Cor* 5. 7. On the same account Christ is called a Lamb,
Joh. 1. 29. And an Altar, Heb. 13. 10. And this was the great intendment of all
Sacrifices under the Law, even to hold forth the Satisfaction of Christ. When
they were offered God was pacifyed toward his Sinning people: see 1. Sam. 26.
19. If the Lord have stirred thee up against me, let him accept an offering. q.
d. Let Him be appeased or satisfied therewith: see also 2. Sam. 24. 25. Genesis 8.
20. 26. The Lord smelled a sweet savor. The Expression intimates that God was
well pleased with that Offering. Now those Sacrifices could not of themselves
satisfy or appease the the wrath of God, it was not possible that they should,
Heb. 10. 4. only as they were Types of Christ, and did put the Lord in mind of
the Sacrifices of the New Testament in due time to be offered. God was pacified
toward Believers under the Old Testament on the account of this Sacrifice
which was to take place when the Fullness of time should come, Heb. 9. 15.

Arg. III. All those Scriptures which speak of Christ's bring a Redeemer, do
evince the Doctrine of His Satisfaction to Divine Justice. Tit. 2. 14. For
Christ is a Redeemer, not only by Power but by Price. Hence his people are said
to be bought by him, yea, bought with a Price. 1. Cor. ^. 20. and 7. 2^.
Nothing can be spoken more clear and express to prove that Christ is a
Redeemer, not by Power only, but by Price also. Hence the Elect of God are said
to be ransomed, Matthew. 20. 28. 1. Tim. 2. 6. The Greek word [antilutron] there
used, signifies the laying down of a just valuable price, even as much as the
Thing is worth. JESUS CHRIST the Son of GOD has given as much as all the Lives
and the Souls of His People are worth, that so He might Redeem them from that
mi^ery which they were justly condemned unto.

Arg. IV. All those Scriptures which speak of Sins being done away by the blood
of Christ, prove that his Death was Satisfactory. Hence the Sins of his people
are said to be purged away thereby. Heb. 1. 3. And washed away, Rev. 1. 5. And
their souls sprinkled therewith to the cleansing of them from the Guilt and
Filth of sin, Heb. 10. 22. That which does avail to the removing of the Guilt
of sin, and so of the punishment due thereunto, is satisfactory to Divine
Justice, but this we see is true of the Death of Christ.

Arg. 5. All those Scriptures which speak of Christ's standing in our stead
prove the Doctrine of His Satisfaction to Divine Justice. He stands in our
stead. He is called a Surety, Heb. 7. 22. And is said to dye for us. 2. Cor. 5.
14, 15. h. e. not only for our benefit but in our room. For us, i. e. instead
of us. 2. Sam. 18. 33. Romans 5. 6, 7. Hence Christ is said to dye not only for
us, but for our sins, ^. Cor. 15. 3. A Substitution of one in the room of
another is noted by that Expression. The Apostles and Martyrs all dyed for our
good, but not for our Sins; as it is said of Christ. Therefore that Expression
of Christ's dying for us, implies more than his dying for our benefit only. An
he is said to be a Curse for us, ( Gal. 3. 13.) the Curse which was due to us
fell upon Him. And to bear our Sins, 1, Pet. 2. 24. Isai. 53. 11. The Hebrew
word [Sabal] signifies such a bearing as implies Burden, or Punishment, and
is never used in any other sense. If we consult the Scriptures we shall find
that the meaning of Bearing sins, is to undergo the punishment due for sin.
Lam. 5. 7. Numb. 14. 33. Ezekiel. 18. 26. Hence it is that we escape destruction,
and this is all that is intended by the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction, Viz.
that He has undergone the punishment which was due to us, whence God is
satisfied so as to let us escape with our lives. Thus is the word Satisfaction
used in the Scripture. Numb. 35. 31, 32. And it is a full Satisfaction which
Christ has made. He has cleared all Accounts between God and his Elect.
Therefore he said the Spirit shall convince the world of Righteousness: because
I go to my Father and you see me no more. Joh. 16. 10, We may be sure that
Christ has done the work which God sent him into the world for, to the full
Satisfaction of the Father: That he has made Reconciliation for sin, and
brought in everlasting Righteousness; otherwise when He came to heaven, His
Father would not have entertained Him at His own Right Hand, but have sent him
into the world again.

We come in the Third place to enquire into the Reasons of this Doctrine: We
shall mention but Two. The First shall be taken from the Dignity of Christ's
Person; the Second from the perfection of His Obedience.

Reas. 1. From the Dignity of Christ's Person. He is the SON of GOD, as the
Text, expresses; and thence a Person of Infinite Worth and Dignity, which does
add value to His Sufferings and Satisfaction. It is true that the Humane nature
only suffered, (if we speak strictly) all Passion being incompatible to the
Divine Nature, nevertheless by Reason of the personal Union between the two
Natures of Christ, that which does properly belong to one nature is truly
affirmed of the Person. It is therefore most true that the Second Person of the
Trinity, even the Son of GOD Himself, became subject to the poenalty of the
Law, in order to the appeasing of the wrath and satisfying the Justice of the
Father, who was the Person directly offend^^ sin. What Christ has done in
order to Salvation, He did as Mediator; and therefore not as God only nor as
man only but as God-man. Now for such a Person to become subject to the
poenalty of the Law, and to the Wrath of God, is (as I have elsewhere
expressed) more than if all Men and Angels had ^ay'n under His Wrath, through
out the days of Eternity: therefore well might the Lord say that He was
pleased in, or pacifyed by his Son Jesus Christ.

Reas. 2. From the perfection of Christ's Obedienc. His active obedience was
perfect, He did fulfill all that the Law required to be done, Mat. 3. 15. He
never did transgress the Law in any one particular. Though he lived in this
world for the space of Thirty years and upwards, yet he never did commit the
least sin, in Thought, Word, or Deed. Such an High Priest became us, who is
holy, harmless, separate from sinners. And as to that singular Law of a
Redeemer, he did yield perfect Obedience thereunto. Hence was his passive
Obedience. It was not the moral Law but that special Law of a Redeemer which
required that Christ should become subject unto Death. And thus was He Obedient
to the very utmost extent of this Law. Phil. 2. 7.

Some have Objected,

But, We are saved by Grace, How th^^ is Satisfaction made for the wrong that
we have done? Is the Debt paid and then Forgiven? This is strange kind of
Grace: say the Socinians.

ANSW. Grace may well stand with the Satisfaction of Christ, the Apostle
thought so when he said that, we are justified freely by Grace, and yet that it
is in a way of Redemption, (or that a Price is paid for it) through Jesus
Christ, Romans 3. 23, 24, 25. Not only Justice but Grace is set in the Throne in
this way of Salvation by the Obedience and Satisfaction of Christ. Chapt. 5.
ult. For it was Grace to accept of the Satisfaction of another. In that respect
there was some Relaxation of the Rigor of the Law. It was from the Grace and
Loving kindness of God, that he found out this way of Salvation; Men and Angels
could never have found such a way; if the Lord Himself had not done it. It was
infinite Grace that sent Christ into the world; that so He might Satisfy and
Merit on the behalf of those for whom he dyed. We must not under pretense of
exalting Free Grace, rob God of the Glory of his Justice and Righteousness.
When men say that God is merciful, and therefore they may be said though they
should not repent and believe, they do under pretense of magnifying Mercy robb
God of the glory of his Truth and Holiness. So it is when men deny the
satisfaction of Christ, under pretense of being saved by Mercy.

USE. Let it be a Word of Exhortation.

Let us make sure of an interest in the Glorious Satisfaction which Christ has
made.

Therefore,

Consider 1. That an Interest herein is absolutely necessary. For GOD is
Displeased and his Wrath incensed by the sins of men. That Wrath which burns
to the Bottom of Hell is kindled against thy soul, and nothing but the blood of
Christ can quench that infinite Flame. God has said The soul that sins shall
dye. There never was one sin committed since the world began (nor ever shall be)
which shall escape un-punished. But it has been punished either in Him who is
the Surety for Believing sinners, or in the sinner himself to Eternity.
Satisfaction is necessary, nor is there any other way of Satisfaction to the
Justice of God, but only this. All a man's own Righteousness will avail nothing
as to Satisfaction for Transgressions that are past. Prayers and Duties can do
nothing as to this matter. Though the Prayers and Services of Believers please
God, yet they do not appease Him. Mich. 6. 6, Nor Tears neither, Jer. 2. 22,
Though a poor creature should wash himself in tears, could he bathe his soul in
tears, all would not avail to purge away so much as one sin. Chapt. 12. 1. The
sin of J^dah is written with a pen of iron, and graven with the point of a
Diamond. Letters which are written in glass with the point of a Diamond, all
the Washing in the world cannot get them out again; So are the sins of men
engrave^ upon their souls in black and bloody Characters, nothing but the blood
of Christ can wash away the stain and guilt thereof. All men and Angels can
never satisfy for one sin.

Hence it comes to pass that the misery of the damned is ETERNAL, because they
are never able to make full satisfaction to the glorious Justice of the Holy
God, who has been wronged and offended by the sins of men.

Consid. 2. The blessed Condition they are in ^ho have a real Interest in this
Satisfaction. God is pleased with them; for he is more pleased with the
Righteousness of Christ, than ever He was displeased with the Disobedience of
men. Christ has pleased God more than all the sins of the Elect have provoked
him, Romans 5. 19. Joh. 10. 10. It is a full and perfect Satisfaction which
Christ has made, so as that he has left nothing for any one to come and do
after him, Heb. 7. 25. The Bill is canceled even the Hand-Writting which was
against us Col. 2. 14.

Rule. 1. Look for Salvation no where-else but in Christ. Isa. 55. 3. Don't
think by future Duties to make God amends for former Iniquityes. The Papists
teach men to look for Satisfaction through their own works; in Poenances,
prayers, Fastings, self Macerations* Supererogations etc. But as the Apostle
said to the Galatians, If you be circumcised, Christ will profit you nothing:
So I say, If you think to satisfy the Justice, or appease the Wrath of God, by
any Righteousness of your own, the Satisfaction of Christ will profit you
nothing.

2. Believe on Jesus Christ the Son of God, and then you shall have an Interest
in His Righteousness and Satisfaction. Romans 3, 25. From the Moment that the
soul does truly close with Christ by Faith unfeigned in His Name, Christ and
all His redeeming Benefits becomes his for ever. He has then an interest in
the Obedience, Merit, and Satisfaction of the LORD JESUS. And that God who said
from heaven concern, Jesus Christ, He is my beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased, says to every such soul, I am well pleased with thee, in and through
JESUS CHRIST.

The Humane nature of Christ, is, of all created Objects the most excellent and
glorious.
PSALM. XLV. ^. Thou art Fairer than the Children of men.


COncerning the Penmen of this Psalm there is nothing certain to be
determined. Some conjecture that Solomon wrote it as an Epitome of his Song of
Songs: This being altogether of the same nature with that. It is in the Title
said to be a Song of Loves, h. e. a Love-Song. The Hebrews of old had their
Epithalamia. 'Twas a Cu^tome with them, that when Persons of Note were married,
some composed Songs in praise of the Bride groom and the Bride. The Title of
this Psalm alludes to that Cus^ome, so that what is here written is a spiritual
Lovesong, setting forth the praises of Christ and of his Church.

After the Title we have

1. The Preface. 2. The Matter of the Psalm.

1. The Preface in ver. 1. Wherein are three Particulars.

(1.) The Quality of the Matter here contained, it is called a good matter. The
Hebrew phrase [dabar Tob] signifies a good word: Intimating that the Things
contained therein are of singular Worth and Excellency.

(2.) The Subject of this good Matter^ Touching the King: which Interpreters
generally expound of King Solomon, but of him, only as a Type. The Hebrew
Doctors themselves acknowledge that the King Messiah is here principally
intended. And there are diverse passages in the Psalm which cannot be applied
to Solomon, nor to any other person besides Christ And therefore the Apostle in
the first Chapter to the Hebrews quoting some Expressions in this Psalm says
they are meant of Christ the Son of God.

(3) He declares what were the Instruments communicating this good Matter
concerning the King Christ. Viz. his Heart, and his Tongue. My Heart is
enditing. The original word [Racash] signifies to Boil up; alluding (as it
seems) to the [Mincah] or Meat Offering under the Law, which was boiled or
fried with Oil, and so offered to the Lord. Thus the Holy Spirit did as it were
set the heart of the Psalmist on fire, and made it to boil up with holy and
heart-ravishing meditations concerning the glory of Christ. And then his Tongue
became as the Pen of a ready writer. h. e. like one that writes Short ^and;
and so will take every word that the Enditer shall speak. His Tongue would
express all that the Holy Spirit should endite in his Heart. Thus for the
Preface.

2. As for the Matter of the Psalm, It does contain, A Description of Christ in
His Glory and of the Church in her Beauty.

In the words before us (which begin the Matter of the psalm) Christ is
declared a superlatively excellent person, to be one of incomparable beauty and
glory. Thou art fair^^^ The Hebrew word [Jophjaphitha] is of a double form to
note a (double that is a) perfect Beauty, or Beauty in the highest degree. And
whereas the Beauty of Christ is compared with and preferred to that of any of
the Children of men, that shows that the words are not to be interpreted of
Christ in respect of his Deity, for so His Excellency admits of no Comparison,
but of him as the Son of man, It Is meant of a communicated Beauty, even a glory
which the humane nature of Christ is for ever blessed with, as the last words
in the verse intimate.

The Doctrine at present to be insisted on is,

That The humane Nature of Jesus Christ, is of all created Objects the most
excellent and glorious.

Here, Two Things may be enquired into. 1. How it does appear, That the humane
Nature of Christ, is, of all created Objects the most excellent and glorious.
2. The Reason whence it is so.

QUEST. 1. How does it appear, That, The humane nature of Christ is of all
created (...) the most excellent and glorious?

ANSW. The Scriptures do abundantly bear Witness to the Truth of this Doctrine.
Hence Christ is said to be anointed above all others. In the seventh verse of
this Psalm. it is said. God thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness
above thy fellows. The humane Nature of Christ, is a Creature, but it has an
Anointing which makes it excel all its fellow creatures. Hence the Man Christ
Jesus is said to be. The Prince of the Kings of the earth, Rev. 1. 5. i. e.
More excellent than any of them: never any of them was to compare with Him.
Therefore also, he is styled the KING of Kings, and LORD of Lords; that is to
say, of all Kings, and of all Lords the most excellent and glorious One. Chapt.
19. 16. And the Scripture says of the man Christ Jesus, that he must in all
things have the preemi^^nce. Col. 1. 18. And that God has made him his
Firstborn. Psalm 89. 27, Yea, that he is the firstborn of every Creature. Col.
1. 15. The Firstborn had a privilege belonging to him above the rest of the
Children: so has the man Christ above all creatures; yea, above all men and
Angels. As the Elect of God are styled the Church of the firstborn, Heb. 12.
23. importing their Dignity above others, so the Man Christ Jesus is indeed the
firstborn of the firstborn; the most excellent one of all those that are near
and dear to God.

2. Christ as man has a larger measure of the Holy Spirit than ever was
communicated to any Creature. In that respect He is said to be anointed with
oil above his follows: as in the Scripture but now mentioned. The oil which the
LORD CHRIST was anointed with, was none other but the oil of the Holy Spirit.
Act. 10. 8. God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with power.
And another Scripture says God gives not the Spirit by measure unto him. Jo^.
3. 34. Christ, considered as God has not received any thing, but as man, the
Spirit is given to him, and that without measure. Not that infinite perfections
are communicated to the humane nature, (for that is not compa^ible to a
Creature, nor is it possible that Finite should be infinite) but there are no
Limits set thereunto. None can say in how great a measure Christ has received
the Spirit. He has received thereof in such a measure as no man ever did; as
large a measure of the Spirit as is possible to be communicated to a man or
Creature. Hence it is said that, all Fullness dwells in him. Col. 1. 19. For it
pleased the Father that in Him all Fullness should dwell. As for that Fullness
which dwells in Him as God, it cannot be said properly, that it was the
pleasure of the Father that it should be in Him. But this is true with respect
to the Fullness, which dwells in him as man and mediator. There is a Fullness of
spiritual Gifts in the man Christ Jesus. He has a geater measure of Wisdom and
knowledge than ever man or Angel did attain unto. Col. 2. 3. In whom are hid
all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge. Treasures of Wisdom, yea, all
Treasures thereof are in him, i. e. not only objectively in that the wisdom of
God does appear in the Mystery of Christ more than in any thing, but all
Treasures of Wisdom are in Him subjectively: As man he has the vastest measure
of Knowledge that ever was contained in a finite Understanding. It is written
concerning Solomon, That he was wiser than all men, and that GOD gave him
Understanding exceeding much, and Largeness of heart even as the Sand that is
on the Seashore. (1. King. 4. 29.) Intimating that his enlarged Understanding
did comprehend a multitude of Notions and Conceptions in number like the sand
of the Sea. In that^ Solomon was a Type of Christ. Yet let me say, Solomon had
a very shallow understanding and Comprehension of things, if compared with the
man Christ Jesus. Christ's Wisdom is a thousand times greater than ever
Solomon's was, or than ever any other man attained unto. And the Soul of Christ
is endowed and adorned with all spiritual Graces, in the Highest degree that
can be. The prophet Isaiah saw the Lord sitting upon a Throne, and his train
filled the Temple: There are a train of glorious Graces which fill the Temple
of Christ's humane Nature. There is no other man on earth or in heaven has so
much grace but it is possible for him to have yet more; but the man Christ
Jesus is so full of Grace, as that it is impossible for him to have more. Joh.
1. 14. The Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us full of Grace and truth.
Yea, and of his Fullness have all we received, and grace for grace. ver. 16.
What aglorious and inexpressible fullness of Grace is that! To have so much
fullness of Grace, as to be able to impart thereof to all the Elect of God.
Christ is as full of Grace, as a Fountain is full of water. Yea, as full of
Grace, as the Sun is full of Light: for which cause He is styled the Sun of
Righteousness. Mal. 4. 2. And he said of himself, I am the Light of the world.
Joh. 8. 12. There are some Believers who have received a large measure of
spiritual gifts and graces, but have it all from Christ. How full is He then!
We read in Zech. 4. 11, 12. Of two Olive trees by the candlestick, which empty
the golden oil out of themselves. In the Type, Jushua and Zerubbabel were the
sons of oil, who did improve the gifts and graces which they had received, for
the benefit of the Candlestick of the Jewish Church: So Christ is always
imparting of that fullness which he has received to Believers, and to His
Churches, through the golden Pipes of his Ordinances. Then what an
unmeasureable Fullness of the Grace of the Spirit has the Lord Jesus received!
There is in Christ an inexhaustible Ocean of Grace. Believers are said to have
Rivers of Grace flowing into their hearts, Joh. 7. 38. But Christ has an Ocean
of Grace flowing in His blessed heart. As all Rivers come from the Sea; so all
those Rivers of Grace in the souls of believers are derived from that Sea of
Grace which is in Jesus Christ.

3. The Man Christ Jesus is more like unto God than may be affirmed of any
other man or Angel. And indeed it must needs be so, because He has a greater
intimacy of Communion with God, than ever man or Creature had. We read
concerning Moses, that GOD spoke with him face to face, as a man speaks with
his Friend; and the Lord said of him ( Numb. 12. 8.) With him will I speak
mouth to mouth, and the (...) of the Lord shall be behold. Moses was in that
thing a Type of Christ, who has such Familiarity with GOD the Father of Glory
as never any one else had. He is (to speak after the manner of men) God's
Privy-Counsellor. Wherefore it is said, no man has seen God at any time. (No
not Moses himself so as Christ has seen Him) The only begotten Son who is in
the bosom of the Father, He has declared Him. Joh. 1. 18. Now Moses by
conversing with God became more like him than any other man; Impressions of the
Divine GLORY were left upon his Countenance. How much more is it true
concerning the man Christ Jesus, who ^ieth in the Bo^ome of God the Father!
This man was counted worthy of more glory than Moses Heb. 3. 3. Hence the
Apostle speaks of, The Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. 2 Cor. 4* 6.
Sa^es he, The glory of God did appear in the face of Moses, but how much more
in the Face of Jesus Christ! Yea the man Christ Jesus is so like unto God, as
that he is said to be his very Image. Col. 1. 15. who is the image of the
invisible God. There is a double Image of God; His Essential Image. so Christ
as Second Person or Son of God is the Image of the Father: And a manif^stative
Image, so Christ as man is the Image of God. See Dr. Goodw^^ of the Knowledge
of Christ. Lib. 3. Cap^ 2.
The end of an Image is to make a Thing apparent which otherwise would not be
seen. Now the Godhead which is in (...) self invisible is made manifest in the
humane nature of Christ, Hence He is said to be the Image of the invisible God.
Intimating that the Divine Perfecttions are made visible in Christ so as is no
where else to be seen. Of all those perfections which are in the Godhead,
Christ is the complete Image above what Angels and men are; and He makes those
perfections visible to us, so as no mere creature does the like. Though the
humane nature of Christ does (and shall for ever) remain in its properties
really distinct from the Divine nature, yet it does in divine propertyes and
perf^ctions resemble the Godhead more fully than any Creature does or ever
shall do. e. g. Omniscience is a Divine property: Now tho the humane Nature of
Christ is not (as Lutherans suppose) Omniscient with the Omniscience of the
divine Nature, yet there is a Similitudinary Omnisciency belonging thereto.
That which I intend is this, The humane nature of Christ now glorified, Knowe^^
all things that ever GOD has done since the World began; yea, and all that God
will do; which is more than can be said of any other Man or Creature. There is
not one Believer in the world, no nor one elect vessel in the world, but Christ
as man and not as God only has the Know^^^ge of Him. Wherefore the Scripture
says that the Father reveals all things to the Son; and shewe^^ him whatever
he does, Joh. 5. 18. Christ as God has nothing revealed to him, but as man all
things are now showed unto Him. Again, Omnipotence is a Divine Property* and
there is a Similitudinary Omnipotence to be affirmed of the man Christ Jesus.
Hence He is said to be the Power of God. 1. Cor. 1. 24, And the Arm of the
Lord. Isa. 53. 1. All that God means to do in the world, the man Christ Jesus
is the Instrument of effecting it. We may say the like with respect unto other
Divine Attributes, they shine forth in the humane nature of Christ more than
any where; yea, more than in all the Creatures in the whole world besides.

4. Christ as Man is made Lord of all. Heb. 1. 2. whom He has appointed heir
of all things. Christ as God has not an Heir^hip or Lordship appointed to him:
so He is Heir of all things without any Designation from the Father, but as man
and Mediator He is the appointed Heir. God the Father has put the Government of
the whole world into the hands of that one man. Joh. 5. 22. The Father judges
no man; but has committed all Judgment ( i. e. all power of Government) unto
the Son. It is true, that this Power does not belong to Christ as man only, yet
as man and not as God only. Therefore in ver. 27. it is said, He has given him
authority to execute judgememt because he is the son of MAN. The Lord Christ
has, (it is true) a peculiar Dominion over his Church, which is therefore by way
of Eminency called His Kingdom: But He has moreover a Providential Kingdom,
which does appertain unto Him as God-man. Hence Ezekiel in his vision of the
Wheel (by which we are to understand the wheel of Providence) saw a Throne and
the likeness as the appearance of a man above upon it. Chapt. 1. 26. The Man
Christ Jesus is Co-partner with God in the Government of the World. This
Mystery was signified by Solomon's sitting upon David's Throne while^t his
Father was yet living, 1. King. 1. 48. Therein he was a Type of Christ who sits
upon the Throne of God his Father, as Himself declares, Rev. 3. 21. (saying) I
-- am set down with my Father in his throne. That this Dominion does belong to
Christ as Man, is evident inasmuch as the Scripture says it is given to Him,
Mat. 28. 18. Christ as God has no power given to him, but as Man, all power in
heaven and earth is given to him. Cap. ^1. 27. Joh. 3. 35. This Dominion was
his due, as soon as ever he came into the world. He was born a King. Mat. 2. 2.
But the Man Christ Jesus did upon his entering into heaven actually undertake
the Government of the world. He does (to speak after the manner of men) ease
the Father of that Burden, and undertake to manage the Government of the world
for Him. This is a Thing which no man nor Angel but only the man Christ Jesus
could undertake. nor was it possible for any other man to bear such a Glory.
Hence in Rev. 5. 2. There Is a Proclamation to see who would take the Book out
of the hand of him that sits upon the Throne. That Book is a Commission to
fulfill and execute all the Decrees of God which respect the Government of the
world until the day of Judgment. None but the Lamb was found worthy or meet
for this. But He took the book: h. e. He has undertaken the Government of the
world until all that God has decreed shall be accomplished: And in ver. 5. He
opens the Book^ h. e. He sees to the fulfillment of all according to the mind
of the Father. Hence all Creatures are made subject to this Man. The Angels of
Heaven are the most glorious of all created Beings, yet they are made subject
to this Man. Jesus Christ is gone into Heaven; Angels, Authorityes, and Powers,
being made subject unto Him. 1. Pet. 3. 22. The highest Angel in Heaven, is no
better than a Servant to the Man Christ Jesus. They go upon His Errand
wheresoe^er he is pleased to send them. And He declares from Heaven to all the
world, that the holy Angels are His Subjects and Servants. Rev. 22. 16. I Jesus
have sent mine Ange^* And this is a mystery which only the Scripture reveals
unto us. The Light of Nature discovers unto us that God Governs the world, but
that God- man does so, is not known but by the Gospel.

5. Christ as man is the Head of the Elect. 1. Pet. 2. 6. Behold I lay in Sion
a chief corner stone, elect, precious, and he that believes on him shall not
be confounded. Christ is the elect corner stone in Sion. The Man Christ Jesus
is as truly an Object of Election as any other man. He verily was fore
-ordained before the Foundation of the world. Chapt. 1. 20. Only He is the Head
of the elect-world which is a Glory not to be affirmed of any other. When God
from Eternity resolved to choose some to be the Subjects of his Grace and Glory
for ever, the man Christ Jesus was first in his View, and others as members
belonging to that Head. Therefore the Apostle ^aith, God has chosen us in Him
before the foundation of the world. Ephesians. 1. 4. The Meaning of which is not,
that Christ is the meritorious cause of Election; for indeed there was no cause
of that but the mere Grace and Pleasure of the Infinite MAJESTY, who saw good
to single out some to become his Favorites; but when we: (...) to be chosen in
Christ, in implies that Christ is the Head of the Elect. He is not in time,
but in Order of Nature the First Elect; though not the Cause of Election. Hence
he was able to speak as in Joh. 17. 9. I have manifested Thy Name to the men
Thou gave me out of the world; Thine they were and Thou gave them me. Hence
Christ does become an ^ead not only by way of Emineney, but of real Union to
all elect called ones. All true Believers are actually united to Him, as
members of the Body are to the Head. Now this is a most wonderful Glory. To
this sense Some interpret that Scripture. Ephesians. 1. 22. And gave him the head
over all things to the Church; The words may be read thus, And gave (...) above
all to be Head to the Church: as if the Apostle should say, God has given
Christ to be above Principalities and powers, but above all the rest, there is
this Dignity conferred upon him, that he is made Head of the Church. However,
it is a Truth, that this is a fare greater glory than to be Ruler of the whole
world besides.

6. The Man Christ Jesus sits at the Right Hand of GOD. It was by the Spirit of
Prophesy fore told that so it should be, long before the Son of of God became a
man. David ^pake of Christ, when he said, The Lord said to my Lord, sit thou at
my right hand. Psalm. 110. 1. And the two last verses in the 16 th. P^alm are
meant not of David, but of Christ. Thou will not leave my soul in Hell, neither
(...) suffer thine holy One to see corruption, tho^ (...) snew me the path of
life: in thy presence is ful^^ss of joy, at thy right hand there are pleasures
for ever more. Says Christ, though I shall be laid in the grave; I shall not
continue there so long as to see corruption, but God will make me alive again,
and bring me into His presence in heaven, there to enjoy everlasting pleasures
at His own Right hand. And the Gospel gives us a clear information concerni^^
the accomplishment hereof; and when it was that the humane nature of Christ was
thus glorified* viz. after he had suffered for the sins of his people. Heb. 10.
12. This man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, forever sat down at
the right hand of God. And in Chapt. 1. 3. When he had by himself purged our
sins, He sat down on the right hand of Majesty on high. The High Priest after
he had offered a solemn Anniversary Sacrifice, went into the Holy Place but did
not sit down there; wh^nas the man Christ Jesus (the great High Priest of our
Christian Profession) after He had offered himself a Sacrifice for sin, went to
heaven and is there sat down at the right hand of Majesty that is of God, whom
the Hebrews are wont to call by the Name of Majesty. Now when it is said that
Christ (...) at the right hand of God, we are not to think (as ignorant people
do) that this is to be understood literally, or as if the Expression were a
proper Form of speech: for GOD is a Spirit, and has not a right hand and a
left, as men have. Nor may we Suppose that the Man Christ Jesus is always
Sitting now he is in heaven. Hence sometimes in the Scripture He is represented
as standing at the right hand of God. Steven being full of the Holy Ghost,
looking up steadfastly into heaven, saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at
the right hand of God. Act. 7. 55. 56. Nor are we to believe that the Man
Christ does always abide just in the same place, but that he moves to and fro
commanding over the Host of Heaven as plea^eth Him. But when it is said that
the Man Jesus sits at the right hand of God, the meaning of that Expression is,
that that Man is next to God in Glory. Heavenly Mysteryes are in the Scripture
expressed by earthly Similitudes, that we may be able to conceive something of
them. Amongst men when a King sits on his Throne, the man that sits on his
right hand is in Dignity next to him, he is the Second in the Kingdom; Thus
there is none in heaven above the Man Christ Jesus except only God the Father.
As the King of ^^gypt said to Joseph (the true Type of Christ) Genesis 41. 40.
Thou shall be over my house, and according to thy word shall all my people be
ruled, only in the Throne will I be greater than thou. After the like manner
does God speak to the Man Christ Jesus saying, My whole Family in heaven and on
earth shall be ruled according to thy word, only in the Throne will I be
greater than thou. In this respect the Man Christ Jesus is more glorious than
any of the Children of men: yea, than all the Angels in heaven. Heb. 1. 13.
Unto which of the Angels said he at any time, sit thou at my right hand until I
make thine enemies thy foot stool. This Session at the right hand of God, is
the highest degree of glorious Exaltation. The first degree of Christ's
Exaltation was in his Resurrection from the dead; this is common to all
Believers, with and for the sake of Christ their Head. The second degree of
Christ's Exaltation was in his Ascension to heaven; this also may be affirmed
of all the Elect after the day of Judgment: But it cannot be said of any man
except Christ alone, that he ever did or ever shall sit at the right hand of
God. To sit at his right hand is to be en^talled into the very Throne of God.
Hence is that Expression, Heb. 12. 2. Jesus is sat down at the right hand of
the throne of God: which shows, that Christ's being at the right hand of God,
implies his being set down on the same Throne which God is said to sit upon.
This is peculiar to the man Christ Jesus. Glorified Saints sit upon Christ's
Throne, but only Christ sits upon God's Throne. Rev. 3. 21. When the Lord Jesus
ascended into heaven, God did (to speak after the manner of men) set a Crown
upon his head. Heb. 2. 9. We see Jesus who was made a little lower than the
Angels, for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor. Now that
which the Spirit of God helps us to believe, that which we see by Faith; holy
Angels and glorified Saints which were then in heaven, saw really done and
acted before their eyes, after a blessed and heavenly manner. They saw that
very Jesus who was once a Babe lying in a Manger on the earth, that Jesus who
was once, bleeding and dying on the Cross, that Jesus they saw crowned with
glory and honor in the highest Heaven: and they heard the word come out of the
mouth of the most high God, requiring all the host of heaven to worship that
very Jesus. Heb. 1. 6. -- let all the angels of God worship him. Christ the
King of glory was no sooner got within the everlasting gates of heaven, but
God set him at his own Right hand, saying, Here Is my Son, all ye glorified
Saints and Angels adore him. Here Is my Son (^a^^s the eternal God) come to
heaven, behold all you Angels of mine, I (...) him above you all, and see that
you worship him.

7. The blessed Body of Christ now in Heaven shines with unconceiveable Glory.
There was a glimpse of this appearing at the time when Christ was Transfigured
before Three of his Disciples, and His face did shine as the sun, and his
raiment was white as the light. Matthew. 17. 2. Unto that glorious
Transfiguration the Apostle John (no doubt) has respect when he ^aith, we
behold His glory, the glory as of the only begotten son of the Father. Chapt.
1. 14. For at the same time God said from heaven, this is my beloved Son. The
bodies of Saints shall have a mavelous Lu^tre upon them after the
Resurrection. (1. Cor. 15. 43. It is raised in glory.) But the Body of Christ
is far more glorious than theirs shall be: For indeed it is the Exemplar which
the bodies of glorified Saints shall only hold some pr^p^rtion with Phil. 3.
21. The Lord Jesus Christ shall change (...) vile body, that it might be
Fashioned like unto His glorious body. -- There is one glory of the Sun, and
another glory of the Stars (as the Scripture speaks) Such a difference there
is and will be to eternity, between the glory of the humane nature of Jesus
Christ and what Believers shall in the world to come attain unto: Their glory
will fall short of Christ's, as much as that of the stars comes short of the
light and glory of the Sun. The blessed Body belonging to the Son of God, is
now brighter than ten Thousand Suns would be. Hence when Christ appeared to
Paul as he was in the way to (...), Though it was midday, he saw a light from
heaven, above the light of the Sun, shining round about (...). Act. ^6. 1^.
That body now fills the Third Heaven with glory. And shall at the day of
Judgment fill all this visible world with glory. Its said of the
New-Jerusalem, that it has no need of the Sun neither of the Moon to shine in
it, for the glory of God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the Light thereof.
Rev. 21. 23. When the souls which are now in Heaven shall come down from thence
with Jesus Christ, and be reunited to their b^dyes, and continue in this lower
world as long as the Day of Judgment shall last, then does New-Jerusalem come
down from God out of Heaven. There will be no need (...) the Sun to enlighten
that world, the Lamb even the Man Christ Jesus will be the Sun, the Light
thereof. (...) then might the inspired (...) say, He is fairer then the
Children of men.

But Whence is all this?

I shall mention but one Reason of it, which indeed is the true and great
Reason of all those glorious Royalty^s belonging to this man who is fairer than
the Children of men.

Reas. It is because The Humane Nature of Jesus Christ is personally united to
the eternal Son of GOD. The Angel Gabriel said to the Mother of Christ, That
holy Thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of GOD. Luc. 1.
35. The Man Jesus is personally One with Him who is over all God blessed for
ever. So that whoever looks upon Jesus Christ must say that Man there is God.
The Fullness of the Godhead dwells in Him bodily, that is personally. Col. 2.
9. And thence the Man Jesus when he conversed among mortals in this lower
world, He was wont to speak like a God. He did ordinarily express himself after
such a manner as never man did the like. Speaking of God he said, My Father
works hitherto, and I work, Joh. 5. 17. Did God make the World? So did I, said
Christ: Does God preserve the world? So do I: does God quicken whom He will?
So do I, says Jesus. When the Jews heard him that was a man talking after
such a rate, they thought he was the greatest Blasphemer that ever breathed.
And the Truth is, that if any other man that ever lived on the earth, should
have expressed himself as the Man Christ Jesus was went to do, he would have
bin guilty of the highest Blasphemy: but because the Man is God as well as Man,
all that he spoke was true, and could not but be true; because of His being One
in person with God. It was no more possible for that man to speak Untruth, than
for God to lie. If the Man Jesus had sinned, it might have been said God has
sinned, which to imagine is high Blasphemy. A man's Soul is not more truly
united to his Body, than the Godhead is united to the humane nature of Jesus
Christ: which is more than can be said of any creature excepting only the
singular humane nature of Christ. Now by virtue of the Hypostatical union, that
Man becomes the Son of GOD. And because He is the Son of GOD, all the Glory
that possibly can be, becomes His Due: That indeed, when the Man Christ Jesus
ascended into heaven, and there sat down at the Right hand of God, He did but
take his place according to the Dignity of his person. And because of this it
is but meet that all the Angels in heaven should be made subject to that Man:
Yea, and that all creatures in the whole world should be put under his Feet.

USE.
Let it affect all our hearts, to Consider of the Glory of Christ.

Something by way of Motive, and by way of Counsel: Let me briefly speak to you.

Consider 1. It is not possible for any of us to set our hearts upon a more
glorious Object than Christ is. The most glorious Persons and Things that ever
have been in the world, were only Types of him, and did but show a faint
Resemblance of his Glory. Was not Joseph a Glorious Person when he said to his
Brethren, you shall tell my father of all my glory, Genesis 45. 13. He was but a
Type of Christ. When the High Priest appeared with glorious holy Garments upon
him, how glorious was he! yet but a type of Christ. Behold King Solomon upon
his Throne, the most excellent person in the whole world, only a Type of
Christ. As the Lord speaks concerning the Lilly, Mat. 6. 29. Solomon in all
his glory was not arrayed like one of these. So I say, Solomon in all his glory
was not ara^ed like this Man: He was not aray'd with MAJESTY and bedeck't with
GLORY as the Man Christ Jesus is. His humane nature is now so glorious as that
(...) mortal eye is able to look upon it. The Apostle Joh, whilst Christ was in
his state of Humiliation lay in His Bosom, being admitted into the greatest
Fam^^iarityes o^ Love; yet this Apostle when he had a miraculous, sight of
Christ in Glory, he says, when I saw Him, I fell down at his feet as dead.
Rev. 1. 17. If Christ as he is now in Glory, should appear to any of us, we
should fall down dead before him. But what then is the Glory of Christ
considered as GOD! So he is the Lord of Glory. What a glorious Person is Jesus
Christ, in whom created glory in the highest degree, and increated GLORY meet
together! All the Angels in heaven are amazed at His Glory. The Seraphims when
they behold his Glory cover their Faces as acknowledging their unworthiness and
their inability to look upon that Glory: and one cried unto another and said,
Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord of Hosts, the whole earth is full of his Glory.
Isai. 6. 2, 3 So there are Thousands of Angels and ten thousand times ten
Thousand of those ministering Spirits, who are all saying to Christ, O Thou
Holy, Holy, Holy Son of God, the whole heaven is full of thy Glory.

Consid. 2. It is the property of a true believer to be much affected with the
Glory of Christ. The Spouse in the Canticles ^aith, My Beloved (i. e. Christ)
is the Chief of Ten Thousand. When some said, What is thy beloved, more than
another Beloved? The Reply is, He is altogether lovely. Chapt. 5. 10. 6. As for
Unbelievers, they never had real visions of the Glory of Christ. The very
Language of their hearts is, He has no form nor comeliness: and when we see
him, there is no beauty that we should desire him. Isai. 53. 2. But Believers
(who know best) are of another mind. God has opened their (...) to see that
Beauty in the Person of Christ that their souls are e^amour'd with him. 1. Pet.
2. 7. To you that believe He is precious. This is the Chief Reason why
believers are willing to dye and to leave this world, it is because they would
fain see the Glory of Christ. Phil. 1. 23. I desire to ^epart and to be with
Christ. Ay, that is the Reason their eyes behold the Glory of Jesus Christ. With
those very eyes which have behold the Tokens and Signs of his body, in that
Ordinance of the Lords Supper, they shall look upon him in all his Glory for
ever. And their souls will be Satisfied with that Blessed Sight. As Jacob said,
It is enough, Joseph my son is yet alive, I will go and see him before I die.
Genesis 45. ult. So the Believer when he comes to heaven, ^aith, Now I have
enough: I see the Glory of Jesus Christ, and now I have enough. That blessed
Glory is a soul- satisfying object. Hence David said, When I awake, i. e. at
the Resurrection, I shall be satisf^ed with thy likeness. h. e. with beholding
the Glory of Christ; for He alone is the Likeness of God. Psalm. 17. 15. And yet
glorified Saints will never be weary with looking upon the Glory of Christ in
Heaven.

By way of Counsel.

1. Think often upon Christ and his Glory. The more a man thinks of it, the
more will he be affected with it. Occasional thoughts of this should very often
come into our hearts. If a Christian have a^ any time lived many hours in a day
and had no thoughts in his heart, concerning Christ and His Glory, he has cause
to be humbled. But besides that, It is good and exceeding profitable to set
time apart, solemnly to meditate on the glory of Christ. A Christian shall
(...) by experience that such meditations will wonderfully take his heart off
from things here below. What is all the world, when a man by Faith looks upon
the Glory of Christ, in comparison of whom Ten Thousand worlds are all as
nothing. What are Riches? What are Honors? What are Friends? What are
Relations? One View of the Glory of Christ drowns them all, and makes them to
vanish into nothing.

And such Meditations tend to make the heart more Holy. Beholding the glory of
the Lord we are changed into the same image, from Glory to Glory 2. Cor. 3. 18.
He that uses himself to such Meditations will certai^ly be a very holy man.
Remember the Apostles Exhortation, 2. Pet. 3. 18. Grow in grace and in the
Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. He that grows in the
Knowledge of Christ, will grow in grace.

2. Prize those things which (...) the Glory of Christ. If we are duly affected
with His glory we shall do so. The Gospel and the Ordinances of it reveal
Christ. We behold as in a glass the glory of the Lord. The Gospel is a
Perspective glass, and if we have an ey of Faith we shall see the glory of
Christ therein. And in special manner in that blessed Ordinance of the Lord's
Supper: There we see His glorious Love. That the eternal (...) GOD should
become a man, and in our nature make himself a Sacrifice to divine Justice,
Suffering in his Body and in his soul the pains of the first and of the Second
death, that so he might rede^^ us from (...) Death, What glorious Love was
this! Here Is a (...) of Loves indeed. Let Us sing this new Song both now, and in
Heaven for ever.

3. Go to God for His Spirit. There is much of the Spirit of God in those
Truths which concern the glory of Christ. It Is the Holy Spirit that does reveal
them. It is the Holy Spirit that does affect the heart with them. Hence Christ
said, as in Joh. 16. 14. The Spirit of truth shall glorify me, for he shall
receive of mine, and shall show it unto you. And if the Holy Spirit make a
saving Revelation of Christ's glory to our souls now through faith, it will not
be long before we shall see him as he is, and for ever behold his glory. In the
mean time, Let every true Believer, to his everlasting comfort remember that
Scripture with which I shall conclude Isa. 33. 17. Thine eyes shall see the
KING in His Beauty. Amen! Even so Come LORD JESUS!

THE CONTENTS
I. THere is a Covenant of Redemption. II. JESUS CHRIST is the Son of GOD. III.
Jesus Christ is over all, God Blessed for ever. IV. Jesus Christ is Man as well
as God. V. There is a personal Union between the two natures of Jesus Christ.
VI. Jesus Christ is the Mediator. VII. God the Father has received full
Satisfaction, in the Obedience of His Son Jesus Christ. VIII. The Humane nature
of Christ, is, of all created Objects the most excellent and glorious.
Books printed for, and sold by Joseph Brunning at his Shop at the Corner of
Prison Lane next the Exchange.

A Discourse Concerning Comets, wherein the Nature of Blazing Stars is enquired
into, by Mr. Increase Mather.

-- An Essay for the Recording Illustrious Providence.

-- The greatest sinners exhorted and encouraged to come to Christ, and that
NOW without delaying. Also the exceeding Danger of men's Deferring their
Repentance. Together with a Discourse about the Day of Judgment. And on several
other Subjects.

-- The Doctrine of Divine Providence opened and applied. To which is annexed

A Sermon wherein is showed, That it is the Duty and should be the Care of
Believers on Christ to live in the constant Exercise of Grace. by Mr. Nathaneel
Mather, Minister of the Gospel at Dublin in Ireland.

Self-Employment in Secret, containing Evidences upon Self-Exmination, Thoughts
upon Painful Afflictions, Memorials for Practice. by Mr. John Corbet.

An Arrow against Profane and Promiscuous Dancing. Drawn out of the Quiver of
the SCRIPTURES. by the Ministers of Boston.


