ERRATA
THere are Literal faults and mispointings which if the Peader's Curiosity
observes it is hoped his Candor will pardon. Such as are most material may be
thus attended,

Page 28. Line 4. for these read they. p. 29. l. 10. dele and, p. 31. (...) for
Breath r. Breast. p. 32. l. 17. for and food so r. food, and so. p. 36. l. 6.
for Bonds r. Bands. p. 82. l. 3. for Denunciation r. Denomination. p. 95. l.
ult. and penult. dele the Tautology. p. 96. l. 11. dele about. p. 100. l. ult.
r. Look for p. 109. l. 20. dele At.

A PRACTICAL DISCOURSE CONCERNING THE CHOICE BENEFIT of Communion with GOD in
His HOUSE, Witnessed unto by the Experience of Saints as The best Improvement
of TIME. Being the Sum of several Sermons on Psalm. 84. 10.

Preached in Boston on Lecture-Dayes

By JOSHUA MOODY Minister of the Gospel.

Psalm. 27. 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that I will seek after,
that I may dwell in the House of the Lord all the days of my life etc. Psalm.
63. 2. To see thy power and thy glory so as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary.
BOSTON IN NEW ENGLAND Printed by Richard Pierce for Joseph Brunning. And are to
be sold at his Shop at the Corner of Prison-Lane next the Exchange. 1685.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader
T He Ensuing Sermons are such for the exacellent Matter and Usefulness of them
that they will sufficiently commend themselves to the judicious: It being of
great and universal Concern to Rational and Intelligent Beings to be directed
and helped in Improvement of Time to the best Advantage. The Labors of the
Reverend Author for the Clearing and Furthering this in the following
Discourses upon that Subject, need no Letters of Commendation; He did therein
Commend himself to the Consciences of many in the Preaching of them, of whom I
profess my self one, and such an one who is sensible that his Candlelight will
not further, nor Contribute any thing to the clear and powerful Demonstrations
and Evidences you will find in the serious Perusal of them. Yet being desired
to say something, I was willing to testify my Esteem of its Usefulness and
Seasonableness to our present Time, which not only commends things to us for
our delightful Use Eccles. 3 10. by the wise overruling Providence of God, but
Instruments ^oo, as fitted for Ministerial work Isa. 50. 4.

The great Evil that is most provoking to God among a Professing People (
especially sincer Christians) even the root-evil whence all other a issue is
that which Christ charges upon the Church of Ephesus Rev. 2. 5. the want of
first-Love. Though true Converts have not a defect of a principle of Love, which
may distinguish them from the most specious Hypocrites; yet may not be so warm
and fervent as in their first union to Christ, and Communion with God in their
Pardon and Holiness. This is more offensive to Jesus Christ in true Saints than
the open out-breakings of those that are profane sinners, and for which he
threatens Removing the Candlestick if his Warning and Advice be not attended.

What can be more suitable then such Truths, whose Tendency is to further us in
our Compliance with the mind of Christ to such a people where their and our
condition is so like, non ovum ovo similius. As,

1. To put us in mind whence we are fallen. It is Communion with God in his
Ordinances that makes Time there so valuable above all other 1. Pet. 3. 8. This
one thing is that the Apostle would not have us ignorant of viz. that one day
with God is as a Thousand years, and a 1000 years as one day: It is true there
he Speaks of God's Eternity which is not measured by Time, nor is any Time
considerable with it; yet it may be improved with respect to Believers being
with God, here is such an immense and universal good that we have more true
soul-pleasure with God himself in an Hour, than if we had the quintessence of
Created Good all our Days, therein we are tru^ly happy, it is our Heaven upon
Earth. But if these be Ordinary days and under common Esteem with us, that we
go not to his House to enjoy God as our Exceeding Joy, we have lost our
Communion with God (and so far our Happiness) that we are herein like other men.

2. If this were practically remembered, it might have its Influence to promove
our Repentance in bewailing those sins and that bitterly that have caused our
Beloved to withdraw. It is not that Ordinances are not as precious in
themselves as they have been to us and other Saints, nor is it that they are
not as suitable means to convey those Blessings, nor is it want of kindness
and love in God and Jesus Christ who have the same delight in and desire of
Communion with Believerse and the design of his Grace in us, and his Ordinances
to us is that he might enjoy us (...) but our carnally-secure Hearts in
withdrawing from him have provoked him to withdraw from us Cant. 5. 2, -- 6.
It began in our low esteem of Christ and his Fellowship, bemoan it heartily and
labor to recover it.

If this be also attended with suitable Reformation in a diligent Frequenting
the HOUSE of God, and pressing after Fellowship with the Father and the Son
(the great design of Ordinances) and that we will not be satisfied without Him,
then shall we again have our best days returned to us. All these may be
furthered by our diligent Perusal of the Sermons here presented us, that show
what the benefit is that Saints do experience in Ordinances so improved.

That it may be accompanied to thee in reading with the gracious presence of
the Holy Spirit that breathed in its Delivery, for ends forementioned, that so
the joy of his Salvation may be restored, and House of God continued to us, is
my earnest Prayer, to which I desire thy AMEN, who am thy soul's well-wisher

JAMES ALLEN.

Psalm. 84. 10. For a day in thy Court is better than a Thousand: --
AFter the many Anxious Enquiries and Debates about the Summum Bonum, or
Chiefest Good of the rational Creature, (...) more Ancient and darker Times; It
has been at length, by Him that brought Life and Immortality to light, clearly
evinced, and among Christians put beyond dispute, that This is life eternal to
know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. Joh. 17. 3.
Hence in all Ages those with whom this Doctrine has effectually obtained, have
held themselves obliged highly to prize, and conscientiously, constantly and
carefully to attend upon all those ways that have been recommmended to them by
the Stamp of Divine Institution, as means of growing in the knowledge of, or
getting, maintaining, and increasing their Communion with this God in Christ,
whom they do value as their Happiness. And for this very reason it is that all
pious souls have ever had so venerable an Esteem of the House of God, and the
Ordinances or Instituted Worship thereof, as ways and Means appointed unto
the End proposed: which by their Encomiums of, Joyfulness in, and Thankfulness
for while they have had the liberty of enjoying the same, together with
vehement Pantings, and insatiable Longings-after (when bereaved of them) they
have plentifully discovered. Insomuch that true Love, and hearty unfeigned
Devotion toward the House of God has been looked at as a Mark of Sincerity
where it has been found. Thus David when making his appeal to God about his
Integrity Psalm. 26. 8. brings this for one Argument, viz. his Love to the
habitation of His House, and place where his Honor dwells. And on the other
hand the decay of love to God's House appearing either in a total neglect
thereof, or Slightiness and Indifferency thereabout, among the Professors of
Religion has been accounted a sad Symptom of the decay of the power of
Godliness, a sign of great Degeneracy, and an Introduction of Apostasy; as also
an awful Prognostic of great Judgments if not ruinating Calamity hastening on
such a People. This is one of the most bitter provocations of the Lord's Sons
and Daughters when they have lost their Affection to their Fathers house, and
either care not to come there, or if they do, it is with such coldness
formality and Slightiness, and with so little heart and hungring after
Fellowship with Himself there, that he accounts himself rather Mocked than
honored by such Spiritless and Truthless Performances. this kindles such a
fire in his Anger that nothing but the blood of Christ in a way of unfeigned
Repentance and Reformation can put out.

If I mistake not in mine Observation there seems to be a great falling short
in that Love and Zeal for the Worship of God, and that Labor and Frequency of
waiting upon Him in his House, both on Sabbath days and Lecture days, that
has been formerly observed in those that have professed Christianity in Truth.
Men do not make so great, o^ Momentous and Necessary a business thereof, as
heretofore. A dangerous condition! both as it intimates a Decay in the very
Vitals of Religion, and as it makes way for God's Anger to come upon such a
degenerate Generation.

Our Fathers have told us how precious the Word of God was in their days, and
proved their high Esteem thereof by the pains they were wont to take in
traveling many a mile to a Sermon in there own Land; as also by their Leaving
All to follow the Lord some Thousands of Miles into a Wilderness, that they
might freely Enjoy the liberties of his House, and obtain Communion with Him
there.

With what an ill face then it does look, that we should flagg in our
Affections to, and grow Cold in our Attendance on those high and valuable
enjoyments that our Fathers purchased at so dear a Rate, I leave to the sad and
serious Consideration of all thinking Christians. Sundry proffitable Lectures
round about us quite laid down! And some who keep up Lectures (especially in
Country-Towns, where the Arguments of a Market and other secular Business do
not induce People to afford their Attendance) are ready to think whether they
were not better lay them down also than preach to bare walls, or at least to
such thinn Congregations.

My Aim in choosing this Text, at this Time, and in this Place, of general
Resort is to bear my Testimony against this growing and dangerous Evil, and to
endeavor the reviveing of the first Love and ancient Affection to the House
and Word of God, as not knowing wherein I may do better service for our God,
and for the People of our God, than by raising the Reputation of the House of
God among us.

And the words read furnish me with a suitable Medium unto such an end, taken
from the Topic of Gain and Profit that will redound unto the behoof of them
that are serious therein. An Argument which if it be Demonstratively urged, and
God shall please to set in therewith, we shall not need doubt of some good
Success. Gain smells sweet in most men's Nostrils. He that baits his hook with
Profit, may expect not to toil in vain, provided it be understood and realized.
So sweet and allureing a sound does Gain make, that he who can harp well upon
that string may hope for an attentive Auditory. Therefore does the Lord bait
the net of his Gospel which he lets down in his House with a promise of a great
Reward unto all that shall be drawn thereinto. Would men be convinced that
there is no way of spending Time so much to advantage as in the House of God,
it is to be hoped that the end would be answered. When matter of Gain was
discoursed by Demetrius and the Craftsmen on the one hand, and Danger of Losing
their Religion (though indeed it was no Religion) on the other hand ( Act. 19.
34.) it drew the whole City together, and made them continue for two hours
space in one constant Cry to proclaim their Devotion toward Diana of the
Ephesians. Mee-thinks the greater Gain to be gotten by waiting on God in his
House, with the danger of losing our Religion (which by the neglect of that
duty is eminently endangered,) should have a greater Influence, and oblige us
to attendance, and that with all Seriousness and Joyfulness. Why should not the
whole City come together, and spend the two hours allotted for this Exercise in
the Worship of the true God, with as great readiness and as little weariness as
they did in the service of an Idol?

There needs not much to be said to the Context in order to the clearing of the
Text. Briefly, the Psalm seems plainly to have a Reference to some Time wherein
the Psalmist was deprived of the Liberties of Gods House, which he looks at as
a sore Affliction, and does very Pathetically and feelingly bewail the same,
adding vehement Soul-longings, even unto fainting, with reiterated and sundry
ways enforced supplications that he might be repossess'd of those (at present
lost) Privileges.

Take the Text as related to the Context and it Contains one Reason of the
abovementioned Longings and Cryings after the House of God, viz. because he
saw it to be a place far more for his advantage to dwell in, it was by many
degrees better being there than elsewhere. And there to be where it is best to
be, should be every man's desire.

Take the words seperatly considered in themselves and they are a comparison
between a Day spent in the Courts of God's House, and ^^^where; and the
preference is given to a day there, and that by the difference of a Thousand to
One.

A Day in thy Courts is better than a Thousand,] Or it may be read A Day is,
good in thy Courts above a Thousand. The Comparative degree [ better] being so
rendered good before. Or I know not why it may (...) ^e as well read [A good
day in thy Courts is before a Thousand.] The House of God is a good place, and
all our days there are good da^es in themselves, and its our own fault if they
be not so to us.

But I shall not Criticize upon it, the sense comes all to one.

[ A day] and by like reason a part of a day when we spend not the whole day
there; there being no Necessity of taking [ Day] here for a day in propriety of
speech, either natural or Artificial: But it may intend any part or portion of
Time, less or more that is appointed for that Employment.

[ In thy Courts] A Court is a place or space of Ground, more peculiarly
impropriated and belonging to the use of an House, sequestered or distinguished
from that which lies in Common, and through which we have admittance to the
House. Take it as referring and belonging to the Temple, and then it intends
that place adjoining to the same, into which the people might come to worship
God, and to hear his Word read and expounded, and so the Court by a Metonymie
may be put for the Worship there performed, and the Fellowship with God there
obtained. So that when David speaks of his faintings for God's Courts, and his
longings to be there, he intends to intimate his great Affection for, and
desire after drawing near to God in the Public Instituted Worship of his
House, from which he was now banished. And as their Temple Worship was a Type
of our Gospel Worship; So to us it (...) signify (and we may improve the whole
Psalm to teach us) the worth and glory of the Worship of God in his House, how
it is to be valueed or esteemed by us.

Better than a Thousand] i. e. abundantly better, many degrees better, a
certain number being put here for an Uncertain, and it is to show that there is
as Vast and Inexpressible Difference between them, and that the Preference is
by many degrees to be given to the House of God: and that there is no
Comparison between spending of time there and elsewhere. He instanceth in a
Thousand, and yet tells us that does not reach it, for one day there is beter
than a Thousand, and if you should Add a Thousand more, it would still hold
true.

The Words then contain this Doctrinal Conclusion, viz.

Doct. That it is an exceeding profitable way of spending Time, to spend it in
the Public Worship of God in his House. The best way by a Thousand to one of
improving Time, is to Improve it in the way of public instituted worship.
There is more than a Thousand to one difference between Time spent in God's
House, and spent any where else. Excellent is the advantage that we may make of
Time by using it in the Public Worship of God, above any other way imaginable.

Time is one of the rarest Jewels and most precious Talents, with which the
Lord is betrusting us in this World, our Felicity both here and hereafter
depending upon the well-improving, of it, and man's Misery arising from hence,
because he does not know his Season.

Then of excellent use must this Truth needs be, which tells us how to husband
our Time after the best manner, so as (...) make it turn most to account. They
that have but little Time had need enquire how they shall do to make the most
of it, why the Doctrine directs in that great Enquiry, Spend as much of it as
you can in the House of God, Visit God at his House as often as you may, Lose no
opportunity of being with God there; Nothing will be so beneficial to you as
your so doing.

And the Doctrine speaks of Public Worship in Gods's House, for it is that
which the Text and Context intend.

For the proof of this Assertion, there needs the less to be said, because it
is so plainly and positively affirmed in the Text, being Commended to our
belief not only by the Testimony of David, (a man so able to judge of the worth
of a day in God's House, unto which both by the Enjoyment and Want thereof he
had been advantaged,) but also coming to us with the stamp of Divine Authority
upon it. The Spirit of God in David gives this Price of a Day in Gods House,
and therefore we may take it so, and be assured it is not overprized.

Yet because it is so little practically believed it may not be amiss to spend
some Time in the Demonstrating thereof.

Now the Text says that a day spent in the House of God, is better than a
Thousand days, it does not say where, or how spent, but leaves it
indefinitely, and may be understood of so many days spent any where else that
we may imagine; and we shall find that Time spent in the House of God is better
than any other where.

We may therefore illustrate and prove this Truth by considering the various
ways of Spending Time, and comparing the advantage gained by being in the
House of God, above what is to be gotten other where, the difference will
appear, and the Preference be found where the Doctrine places it.

Time is spent either in Idleness or Action, in doing Nothing (if at least it
be possible for a man at any time not to do something, as in a sense it is) Or
Something.

1. Then, To spend Time in the House of God is a Thousand times better than to
spend it in Idleness; For of Idleness comes no goodness. In all Labor there is
profit, but the talk of the lips tends only to Poverty. Prove. 14. 23. And I
fear many an hour that should be spent in God's House is spent so. He that is
doing nothing, is getting nothing; for of nothing comes nothing. If Conscience
tell thee thou have been standing Idle in the Market place, or doing nothing in
thine own house or elsewhere, thou had a Thousand times better been at a
Sermon, for there thou might have done and gotten something. A day in the
House of God is a Thousand times better than doing (and so getting) nothing,
there being no Comparison between something and nothing. Tho also it is worse
than so because it is a sin to be Idle, Yea and a most pernicious and ruinating
evil; that which exposes men to Tentation, and is the occasion of any thing
that is sinful. Idleness was one of the sins of Sodom (Ezekiel. 16. 49.)

2 If men are doing something and not utterly idle, yet if not well employed,
it is a Thousand times better to be in the House of God. They may not be
Sleeping, Idleing, Sitting still, but very busy, and yet if not a doing good,
but evil, the dreadful wages that will surely be paid to such in the issue,
will plentifully evince this Truth. Every sinner shall one day say, I have
sinned and perverted that which was right, and it profited me not. Job. 33. 27.
Sin may be sweet in the committing, but bitterness in the end. Stolen waters
are sweet, -- but -- the dead are there. (Prove. 9. ult.) Is not much of that
Time which is by some spent in the House of God to their great Advantage, by
others elsewhere misspent in Drinking, Carrousing, Gameing, in Riotting and
Drunkenness, in Chambering and Wantonness? And what profit will you find in
these things when your account comes to be made up? The Apostle makes that
Appeal to them after they were enlightened and sanctified, (and so best able to
judge Romans 6. 20, 21.) What fruit had ye while servants of Sin? what wages for
your service? Shame and Death being the end of those ways; Then you had a
Thousand times better been in the House of God, seeking Glory and Life.

3 Time spent in God's House is better than spent about any secular Business or
Worldly Concerns. It Is Lawful, yea a Duty to be diligent in your particular
Callings, God has Commanded us in the sweat of our brows to get our Bread, and
enjoined us six days to labor and do all that we have to do, and he has
promised us if we acknowledge him in our ways, to direct our paths, to
prosper us whithersoever we turn our selves, to bless our Labor in the House
and Field etc. In all this our Labor there is Profit, but yet no such Profit
or gain as is to be had in the House of God. Let men be in their Fields,
Gardens, Orchards, in their Shops and Warehouses let them be Laboring,
Merchandising there, and have never so many advantages before them to get by
their Commodities, let them buy and sell and get gain, and as much gain as they
would propose to themselves, or could wish; yet still one day in God's House is
better than a Thousand thus improved. God gives greater wages for working in
his House than can be gotten with all our pains and Contrivance in our own. If
Farms and Merchandise interfere with your Call of the Gospel, if worldly Cares
and Business prove Thorns to Choke th Word, to deaden your Affections thereto,
draw away your Spirits therefrom, and hinder your fruitfulness under the same;
they are to be looked upon as Snares and Traps and Cheaters, and to be treated
accordingly: But use these things how you will, with never so much Care and
Circumspection, still your Time in the House of God will be found your best
Time.

4. I may add, that Time is better spent in God's House, than in Religious
duties in a private way; Nor can one spend that Time lawfully, much less,
profitably in private devotions, which is appointed for public Worship, if God
gives him an opportunity of enjoying it.

Going to the House of God with the Company that keep Holy day, is far more
eligible and profitable than tarrying at home though a man should read a better
Sermon in his own House than he may hear in God's House. Doubtless David had
his ways of secret Communion with God while in the Wilderness, but he was so
far from being satisfied therewithal, that those Tastes he had there served only
to increase his hungerings, pantings, breathings after (...) Sanctuary, and
seeing the Glory of God in the beauty of Holiness, which he had seen there. And
that is indeed one principal use of private Devotions, to prepare us for, and
increase our desires after Public Ordinances and Fellowship with God in them.
To take up with them in the Neglect of the other, is cross to one of their
main ends, and very injurious to our selves.

For the further proveing of this Doctrine, See Gurnal' s Epist. Dedicat. to
his Spiritual Armor. pt. 1. page 3.
I shall give these 2 reasons

Reas. 1. Because there are a Thousand times better things to be gotten in the
House of God than els-where; and therefore a Day there, is better than a
Thousand.

Reas. 2. Because the attending on God in his House, is the only sure way to
get not only those things so much better in value, but even those other things
also over and above, for the getting of which the House of God is too
frequently neglected.

If these two Things be demonstrated, the Doctrine will be abundantly evinced.

The former Reason or Argument may be thus framed.

That place where there are things to be seen and enjoyed that are a Thousand
times better than those to be had else where, is the place in which to be one
day is better than a Thousand,

But the House of God is the place where there are things to be seen and
enjoyed that are a Thousand times beter than those that are to be had
elsewhere; -- Therefore one day there is better than a Thousand.

Of the former.

Here be the best things to be seen and gotten, Profit, Pleasures, Honor are
the Idols that the world wonders after, that they sacrifice their Time,
strength and spirits unto: Now that which is true Profit or Gain, real Honor,
substantial Pleasure is here, and here only to be had.

Here are true Riches, the Jewel of inestimable value, which he that gets, gets
more than the whole world is worth, and this Pearl is hid in the Field of the
Gospel, enclosed within the Pale of the Courts of Gods House. The product of
the Toil and travel of many a day, is only a little earth. let a man search
(...) and down the world, Compass Sea and (...) Ransack the Bowels of the Earth
for the hidden Treasures that are there, Tire out himself in the Multitude of
his way, Waste away his Time, and wear away his strength, rise up early and go
to bed late and eat the bread of Carefulness, and when all is done, what has
he gained? why a very small portion, a poor pittance, that which is so far from
deserving the Name of profit that it is a mere vanity and vexation of spirit.
Solomon looked upon his Houses, Lands, Gardens, Orchards, Men-ser-vants, and
Maidservants, with whatever else he had spent so much time about in the world,
and finds that there was no profit under the Sun; but in this Market is that
rich Commodity to be had which he is a wise Merchant who sells all that he has
to purchase. It is the Scope of Christ ( Prove. 8.) to prevail with men to
hearken to his voice, come to his House, wait daily at his Posts, that being
instructed by him they might be followers of him; Now because he knew men would
object the necessity of attending their worldly Business, Farms and
Merchandise etc He therefore obviates that Objection, that there was more Gain
to be gotten at his house than in their own Farms, more profit by hearing his
voice than by tilling their Fields, plowing their Land, or by buying and
selling, and lets them know (...) his Revenues and Merchandise was better than
choice Silver or fine Gold, that all the wealth of the world was not to be
compared therewith. ver. 10, 11, 12. with Chap. 2. 13, 14, 15. It is Rational
that men should lay out their money where they may have the most suitable
Commodities and best Peniworths, then come to me (faith Christ) to my House,
the Gospel-market, hear and your souls shall live, do not lay out your money for
that which is not bread Isa. 55. 1, 2, etc.

As for Pleasures and Delights there are none like those that are to be had in
God's House. There is more Sweetness in one hour's Fellowship with God in his
House than in all ^he pleasures of sin for a whole Lifetime. (...) what
plentiful Provision the Lord makes and invites us to there Isa. 25. 6. fat and
^narrowed things and wine upon the lees. No Cook dresses such meat, no Tavern
sel's such drink. The Lord in his House makes such provision as abundantly
exceeds what is to be found in any other, and those that seriously attend
there, do find abundant satisfaction therein. Psalm. 36. 8. -- And as for matter
of Honor, none like that which God puts upon them who honor him, as all
diligent conscientious waiters upon him in his House eminently do. It is their
glory to come near him and behold his Glory, and there (as in the Context ver.
11.) he gives glory and that is true Honor indeed. It is the Honor and Glory
of Angels to be waiting upon God in his upper House of Glory, and of Men to
wait upon him in his lower house of the visible Church, where we may both see,
speak of and partake in his Glory. To be admitted unto near approaches to God
in his House is a greater Honor and dignity than to be admitted to stand
before and converse with the greatest Potentates upon earth. If men account
themselves much honored by the Company of great men, much more Honor is it to
be in the Company and dwell in the House of the Great God.

And that which commends the good things of God's House to us above all other,
is that they are soul-Blessings, soul-profit, soul-pleasures etc. Now as much
as the Soul is better than all the world, so much does soul-profit exceed all
other profits whatsoever; A little soul-good is infinitely better than a great
deal of worldly good, and consequently soul-loss is the worst loss. Suppose you
should gain a little worldly profit or pleasure while you migh have been at a
Sermon, yet you lose soul-profit and pleasure (...) while, and then your loss
exceeds your gain. Suppose you should be filling your purse by the one, you are
thinning your souls by the other; you get bodily refreshment, comfort etc but
you lose soul-benefit, and souls-pining will not be recompensed by your
estates-thriveing. Isa. 55. 3. hear and your souls shall live, work, toil,
labor, and your bodies may live (though possibly they may not neither) but hear
and your souls shall certainly, assuredly, everlastingly live. If men would but
consider that they have souls, and thereupon study the worth of them til they
find the preference of their souls to their bodies, they would then prefer
soul-enrichments in God's House above all worldly profit or pleasure in their
own, but while men are carnal sensual and brutish, minding only their bodies,
and those things that do concern their bodies, this Argument will neither be
understood by them nor be prevalent with them.

Oh pray the Father of spirits, the God that has made us these souls, that he
would also make us to know what our souls be, and what is the Concernment of
our souls, above all other Considerations in the world, and then we should
realize that the enlightening of the soul, converting of the soul, restoring of
the soul, Satisfying the hungerings and thirstings of the foul, strengthening
us with strength in our soul, communion with the dearly beloved of our souls,
and making our souls to rejoice in Him, the universal prosperity of our souls,
and Salvation of our souls at last, all which good things are to be attained in
God's House, are the Best of all blessings and consequently the attending on
God there the most profitable and delightful of all duties, and by many
Thousand degrees eligible before all other Employment whatsoever.

More particularly these that follow are some of those things to be gotten in
the House of God that are a Thousand times better than what are to be had else
where. e. g.

1. He re is the word of God, the powerful enlightening, converting,
sanctifying, saving word of God to be heard, and the efficacy of it to be felt
and experienced, the Word preached which is the wisdom of God and the power of
God to salvation. Rom, 1. 16. 1. Cor. 1. 18. 24. The Word by which blind eyes
are enlightened, deaf ears opened, dead souls quickened, unconverted ones
converted, unbelievers brought to the Faith of Christ, Act. 26. 18. Days of
being in the House; of God are days of power, in which God is wont by his Word
to speak to the Hearts of poor needy waiters upon him, and makes sinners a
willing people, psalm. 110. 3. Here David met with that Word which was more
worth to him than Thousands of silver and Gold, and more sweet than the Honey
and the Honey comb. Psalm, 19. 10. with 119. 103. He that brings his Heart (not
his body only, as many do) to the House of God, and lays it under the
droppings of God's Word there, he by so doing lays himself in the way of Light
and Life, and puts his soul under the Influence of an Ordinance appointed by
God for the conveying of all spiritual good to him, it being the Lord's way to
do all by his Word. If any of you come to the House of God on a Sabbath day,
and there God meet with you and bring your souls within the Net of the Gospel
and save you, then you will say it was the best way of spending Time that ever
you met with. If the Lord shall please to draw you off from your worldly
Occasions and allure you into his House upon a Lecture-day, and there speak to
your Hearts, and by his Spirit work upon you for your souls everlasting Good,
you will then be as so many living Monuments of the Truth of this Doctrine, you
will have the Witness in your selves and be able to set your seals to the
experienced verity thereof.

2. Here is the best Company to be had, and such as is a Thousand Times better
than what you will meet with else where. And Company is a very attracting
thing; for the sake of good-fellowship (falsely so called) is many an hour and
many a good day in God's House lost, whereas here is that which is truly and
deservedly called Good-fellowhip. Here God Father Son and Spirit are to be seen
and Conversed with, the Vision of and Fellowship with God are the great things
here to be enjoyed. Its true, God may be seen and conversed with elsewhere, but
not in that manner and measure as here, nor at all savingly by those that may
but will not wait upon him here. They have seen his goings in the Sanctuary
Psalm. 68. 24. and so may we, the sight of that Beauty which David there desired
Psalm. 27. 4. is free for us also. This is eminently a Place of drawing near to
God, and if you engage your hearts to draw near to him there, he will there
meet you and bless you Exodus 20. 24. Now if you can fare so well in the House
of God as to get a fight of him, a good look from him, you will account that
Time spent unto unparalled Advantage. The beholding of God's Beauty (not
gazeing on other vain beauties as too many usually do) to be our errand hither,
and will be an Heartravishing and transforming Sight, and so a blessed sight
indeed. Here may you see (the Beauty of Jehovah, the manifold and matchless
Beauty of the LORD, the beauty of his holiness, this is to be seen in his House
which is the Habitation of his Holiness. The Grace, Mercy, Wisdom, Power, Love,
and Faithfulness of God are all of them most beautiful things, and these are
here to be seen. To see the Lord smiling upon a poor Creature and lifting up
the Light of his Countenance over him, Oh how beautiful! Why this is eminently
to be seen in his House, Temple-loving kindness worth seeing, and worth
thinking on Psalm. 48. 9.

Especially here is the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ to be seen 2.
Cor. 4. 6. and be sure Christ has a very beautiful face, He is altogether
Lovely and every part of him excellent Cant. 5. 10, 16. and in all his Beauty
does he appear in his House, and there is but this one place where he delights
in such a glorious manner and in such a measure to show himself. Something of
God's Glory and Beauty does appear in the works of Creation and Providence
Romans 1. 20. but above all does he unveil his Glory in Jesus Christ and in that
great work of Redemption wrought out by him, in the other we may see his
Footsteps but in this his Face, and this is a fight to be seen at his House.
This glorious, beautiful Draught of the great work of Redemption is hung up in
his house, his Presence Chamber, and exposed to the view of all comers. Here
may you see all the Attributes of God concurring and Cooperating in the
Contriveing and bringing about man's Salvation through a Redeemer; The Mystery
of God manifested in the Flesh which the Angels stoop down to look into (as the
Greek word imports 1. Pet. 1. 12.) And this manifold Wisdom of God in Jesus
Christ is made manifest unto Principalities and Powers by the Church Ephesians. 3.
10, 11. there they see it, thence they learn it.

There be two Seasons when especially men desire to be and appear to be
beautiful, and do therefore set forth themselves accordingly viz. in their
wooing Time, and on their Espousal or Marriage day; So it is with Jesus Christ:
Lords Days and Lecture-dayes, when the Gospel is publicly preached, are
Christ's wooing days and therefore does he then deck and array himself with all
the Glory and Beauty that he may allure and prevail with men to have him, that
being ravished with his Beauty they may consent to his motion. And
Sacramentdayes are more eminently the days of his Espousals wherein the
Covenant that was before secretly made between Christ and the Soul when there
was a mutual Consent and promiss passed between them, is now more solemnly
Renewed Sealed and Confirmed: Now as a Bride cannot forget her Attire, no more
will this great Bridegroom of our Souls neither. This therefore makes being in
the Lords House so much better than being elsewhere, because there is Christ
thus to be seen: And a far greater sight it is than that which (though great) was
but a shadow of this Cant. 3. 11. viz. King Solomon in the day of his
Espousals, a greater than Solomon being here. On those Festival days does the
Lord Jesus put on all the Robes of his Grace, Love, Righteousness, Meekness etc
that he may appear in some measure as he is among them. He puts on his red
Garments, comes in his Blood and Wounds, shows the scars of his Combat with
the Enemies of our Salvation, which though heartbreaking sights too, yet in
these are his Love and Good Will to his people gloriously discovered. Thus
their eyes are blessed with beholding the King in his Beauty Isa. 33. 17. To
see a Church of Christ assembled together in the Exercise of the Ordinances of
his House in their Temple-Robes, Sanctuary-dress, Holyday-garments, regular and
exact in their Attendance according to the Order of his House (which is far
above the Order of Solomon's servants that helped to ravish the Queen of Shoba
1. King. 10. 4, 5.) And further to see Christ come in among them according to
his promise in the Riches of his glorious Grace manifesting himself to them; I
say to see this, is to see the most glorious sight on this side of Heaven, yea
it is Heaven it self, though Heaven upon earth. Hence it is that Sion is said to
be Beautiful Psalm. 48. 2. yea and the Perfection of beauty Psalm. 50. 2. And we
may thank our selves if when ever we come to the House of God we do not see
these matchless Sights, for Jesus Christ has promised his Disciples Mat. 28.
20. to be always with them while preaching, and consequently with those that
are hearing, In the midst of those that are gathered together in his Name. In
the Ordinances of God's House does he bring us to Jesus, and to the aloud of
sprinkling, one drop of which if it light on thee there, if being called
thither thou have Communion with Christ there, no created good can match it.
Here also the Spirit of Christ is present who lists to be bearing witness to
his own Ordinances, here you may meet with him speaking to you and in you, and
helping of you, here you may experience the enlightening, teaching, quickening,
sanctifying and comforting presence of the Spirit of Christ. And he that sees
and converses with God in Christ in his Houses, he see and enjoy^^ even all
that is worth seeing and enjoying, he may say to his soul, Return to thy rest
-- for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee Psalm. 116. 7. This is such a
filling Comprehensive enjoyment that it leaves no room for any thing else. When
Christ was disposed to make an eminent discovery of his Glory unto meet
witnesses who might afterward give Testimony to the world of what they had
seen, he chose Peter (who had made such Confession of him and was to suffer
such great things for him) and James (who was the first of the Apostles that
that we read of that laid down his life for Christ Act. 12. 1.) and John the
beloved Disciple, who was to Live long and do much service for him, and was
favored with this Vision as a special evidence of his Love to him) I say he
took these three and brought them up into the Mount and was transfigured before
them Matt. 17. 1, 4. upon the sight of which Excellent glory (as he calls it 2.
Pet. 1. 17.) they presently cry out it is good being here, and they might have
said (for they meant as much) it is a Thousand times better being here than
elsewhere, here let us dwell -- (the very Language of David in Psalm 27. 4.)
They never concerned themselves about what they should eat or drink or
wherewith they should be clothed, had forgotten all their secular business and
enjoyments, (...) Company and Comforts, their Friends and Families, nay they
took no care for so much as a place where to lay there Heads, did not once
speak of a Tabernacle for themselves, only for Christ and each of the glorious
company these would build a Tabernacle, and as for themselves they accounted
Christ meat and drink and Tabernacle too, so were they transported and filled
with that ineffable Glory of Christ who is all in all. Thus in the Mountain of
the House of God does the Lord Jesus reveal and Communicate himself as the
soul-satisfying, allfilling Good. Hence in the close of that Psalm where you
have a Record of the Glorious things spoken of in God's House Psalm. 87. 8.
there is this Epiphonema added [ All my springs are in thee] They are either
the words of the Spirit of God speaking in his own Name, to show us that in his
House are laid up and in the Word and Ordinances of the same are held forth
and conveyed the waters of Life, all the springs of Grace, Peace, Comfort, yea
of all Good whatsoever are there to be had, All is there, Or they are the words
of a gracious Heart spoken by the same Spirit implying thus much, that all the
springs of his Edification and Consolation as well as of his Regeneration are
there; Or that he has no Gift or Grace, Joy or Comfort or any Good worthy of
his notice or mention save what he has there* and are conveyed to him from
thence. Other men have other Comforts, and in other ways, they have other
Cisterns and Wells (I cannot call (...) springs, at least not living springs
because they often fall and will utterly fail in their greatest need) but here
the sincere believing soul finds all his Springs, and such as yield him all
desirable Good.

Of this same spirit was devout old Simeon Luke 2. 25, 30. who when by the
Spirit's conduct he was brought to the Temple and there met with Jesus Christ,
he took him in his Arms and and blessed God and said now -- let me depart in
peace etc. As if he had said with Jacob when he heard of Joseph, It is enough,
now let me die, I am satisfied, farewell vain world with all the seeming
splendour and pretended glory of the same, let me now close mine eyes, after
this sight I care for nothing else, nor is there any other object that I can
now be willing to lend so much as a look unto, this Glory of the people Israel
(as he calls him ver. 32.) has eclipsed the luster and stained the beauty of
all other glory, I am abundantly replenished with this Sight, so that my full
soul loathes all other sweets whatsoever, the whole world, yea and life it self
is now nothing to me, let me now go immediately to the place of perfect Vision
and Fruition, where I shall everlastingly and uninterruptedly be satisfied with
his likeness.

Here also may you enjoy the Communion of (...) Psa. 122. 4. and you will meet
with to such Company else where.

3. Here is Grace to be gotten, first-Grace, after-Grace, more Grace, renewed
Grace, restoring Grace, all manner of Grace, and such measure thereof as the
Lord has in his Infinite Wisdom and Counsel appointed the Subjects of Grace to
attain to. The Ordinances of this House of God are ordained and blessed by him
both for the gathering in or bringing home of the Elect, and also for the
perfecting of the Saints and edifying the mystical body of Christ Ephesians. 4. 12,
13.

Here Faith is infused by the word of Faith ( precious Faith as it is called 2.
Pet. 1. 1.) and by the same means nourished, strengthened, and increased; the
like we might say of Love, Hope, and the rest. Now Grace is the best good, one
drop of Grace better than an Ocean of Wealth, and consequently a day where
Grace is going, better than a Thousand days in the Midst of the Confluence of
all other Good things.

Here are those born that are newborn Psalm. 87. 5. Jerusalem is called the
Mother Gal. 4. 26. and there God does the part of a Father to beget souls to
Himself; there the Spirit (who breathes where it lists) lists to breathe unto
Regeneration Joh. 3. 5, 8. and the place of a man's New Birth is to be
preferred before the place of his Birth: men naturally love their Native Soil,
but much more does the spiritual man affect and delight in the place and means
of his Conversion. God values the Gates of Sion beyond all Comparison more than
he does any or all other places, (See Psalm. 76. 2. with 87. 2. and 132. 12,
13.) and not without just cause, it being dignified with his Presence,
beautified with his Grace, and filled with his Glory above all other places.
Now the Saints bearing the Image of their Heavenly Father by whom they are
there of his own Will by the word of his Truth begotten Jam. 1. 18. have like
Affection for and set like price upon the same.

And being begotten here they are maintained here also. All the good of the
world is no better than Husks to the Prodigal, Soul-bread is only to be had in
the Father's house. As the Breast is the life of the new born child, and by a
natural Instinct he hunts and winds and cries after it; so Word and Ordinances
in God's House are the nourishment, the food, the life of the New Creature,
which he therefore prizes and desires after 1. Pet. 2. 2, sets his Heart unto,
and deservedly because they are his very life Deuteronomy 23. 47. And indeed could we
but realize that the Word of God is (as most certainly it is) our Life, we need
no other conviction of the worth of it above all other things, and consequently
that being in the House of God where that is despensed is many a Thousand times
better and more advantageous advantageous than to be any where else. The world
finds us variety of, Business and Avocations, but if the Word preached be seen
to be of such Concernment, we have a ready Answer to to give, here is this and
that may be done, but we must live, Life is better than food and raiment and
Estates. Tell an hungry or a thirsty man that is ready to perish never so many
fair stories, set off with the highest Rhetorical flourishes, embellished with
oratorical Elegancies, and sweetened with the most pleasing strains of Wit; play
him a fit of Music, sing him the most pleasant song you can think of, he will
tell you the Belly has no ears, all this is not meat, I must eat and drink or
dye. The right understanding of the worth of God's Word in his House as it is
our appointed and food so our life, would make us deaf to all the Syren-Songs
that the world or the Devil the prince of it could sing us, whose design is
only to delude and destroy us, we should despise and with indignation turn away
from that business that would draw us away from a Sermon. I am born would the
New Creature say and I must be kept, I must have food or I cannot live, much
less grow, and I must do, both, or never be everlastingly Saved, and in my
Father's House is my appointed food prepared for me, and thither must I go
that I may feed and live. And hence this is the Return he makes to any petty
inconsiderable matters that would take him off from this (and all other secular
Affairs are but little things and inconsiderable matters compared with this) I
am going about a great work, about a matter that concerns my life, and that is
and must be the Ruleing matter with me, unto which all other things must be
subordinate and give place.

Had it not been a Birthright (which was of a spiritual nature, and preferible
to Life it self) or somewhat of like sort, and had the Case been indeed so that
he must have purchased that portion of food or immediately have died without
any Remedy, Esan would not have been counted a profane person or a fool for
letting it go for a mess of Pottage, that being universally owned Skin for
skin, yea all that man has will he give for his life, The life being more than
meat, and the body -- than raiment. Joh. 2. 4. with Luke 12. 23. But justly
will they be accounted fools that for the sake of Food and Raiment or that
which is of far less importance part with or slight that which is their Life.

4. Here are all the Benefits of Christ held forth, the rich Wares not to be
matched in all the world freely tendered in this Gospel-market, here is Wine
and milk without money and without price Isa. 55. 1. Here is Pardon, Peace,
Reconciliation, Adoption and Sanctification Christ made of God to us wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption 1. Cor. 1. 30. Such Commodities as
your Ships bring not home, no^ are your shops furnished with. The Sea faith of
these things they are not in me, the Earth faith they are not in me Joh. 28.
14, 19. You may with much hazard and difficulty go down to the Sea, and dig
down into the earth and yet meet with none of these things. That Peace is here
preached which all your Estates cannot purchase, that Peace which the world can
neither give nor take away.

5. I may add this further that is to be gotten in the House of God viz. a
satisfactory Resolution of those Enquiries, an Answer to those Doubts and
Scruples which pious, serious, thinking souls are often exercised and puzzled
with, but by waiting upon God in his House are enlightened and relieved. Hence
David renders this as one of the reasons why he made Dwelling in the House of
God his one thing viz. because he accounted it a good Enquiring-place Psalm. 27.
4. besides that there was the Lords Beauty to be seen, there also was a place
for enquiring. A child of God is the most inquisitive Creature in the world,
something he has seen, but withal he sees that there is a great deal more that
he has not seen, and hence is for enquiring. Persons that are studying for
Knowledge meet with many questions that they cannot answer, many Riddles,
Knots, Difficulties, that they cannot understand, untye, see through, and
therefore choose to live near such persons to whom they may repair for
Information. Hence young beginners are trained up in Schools under exp^^^enced,
knowing Teachers, by whom they may be instructed as there is occasion. Now the
House of God is the School where the Lord trains up all his Children, there he
teaches them what they know not, and resolves them in what they are at a stand
about. More than a few are the Reasonings that a Believer has in himself, he
lives and walks in the midst of a multitude of Thoughts (especially at
sometimes, as Psalm. 94. 19.) has many scruples in his mind, spends many a
solitary hour in inward doubtings and arguings pro and co^^, and comes often to
an Ordinance with his head full of enquiries, and his Heart full of care and
fear thereabout; but when he comes to the House of God (and thither he goes to
enquire) he is there satisfied, God suits a word to his Case, orders an Answer
to that question which he had been long poreing upon to little purpose, speaks
to the secrets of his Heart, clears up his doubts and quiets his spirit; A
notable instance whereof we find in Psalm. 73. 17. the psalmist there had been
woefully plunged and dangerously foiled, in so much that he was almost gone, was
ready to repent him of all his Religion, and that from the Prosperity of the
wicked whom he saw spared, enriched, free from Troubles in their lives and
Bonds in their Death, while himself (though he had cleaned his Heart and washed
his hands in Innocence) was plagued all the day long and chastened every,
morning; Now about this he was at an utter loss, could not unriddle this
Mystery of Providence, it proved a work too hard for him, to the Sanctuary
therefore he goes, and attending upon God there, met with that which answered
and settled him. There he learnt that no m^n knows love or hatred by all that
is before him. Eccles. 9. 1. There he understood that God might out of this
absolute Sovereignty, and for other Reasons best known to himself both
outwardly proper the worst, and forely afflict the best of men, a Truth which
probably he had the notional Knowledge of before but had it not born in upon
his Heart with particular application to the present Case unto his Satisfaction
and Comfort till he came into the Sanctuary. Those that have Christ formed in
them are often exercised with the like strugglings within them as Rebeka had
Genesis 25. 21, 22, 23. insomuch that they are ready to say, if it be so, why am I
thus? abrupt expressions importing Anxiety and perturbation; But the Word
cleares up the matter by telling them that there are two men in every new Man,
and those painful plunges shall have a comfortable issue in the end. By
enquiring of God she got her Answer, and so may we, and the best place for
Enquireing is the House of God. Satan cannot make more doubts, the Old Man
raise more storms, the unbelieving Heart cause more perplexities than the Lord
in his House can answer, allay and extricate out of, and the experience of
troubled souls will testify that he is wont so to do, without which there
would be no carrying on with Comfort.

In sum then, as much as God is more worth than the Creature, Christ than the
world, Grace than Gold, Pearls than pebles, Spirituals than Themporals, Wisdom
and it. Merchandise than all the Traffic on the Earth, as much as Heaven is
more worth than Vanity, and the House of God which is an Inlet into Heaven
exceeds any thing, all-things that this World can produce or afford; so much is
a day spent there in and about these more Excellent Things to be rated above a
day (...) proved on any other Account, and so the Assertion is proved that One
Day in the House of God is better than a Thousand.

To conlude this Argument, I shall a little further enforce and illustrate it
by making this threefold Appeal,

1. To those that have been and are negligent in giving their attendance in the
House of God, cannot spare the Time from their worldly occasions, some keep
open their shops at Lecture-time, others come into Town and make their market
in the morning and away again before the Sermon, others walk the streets, sit
in Taverns or stay in their own Houses while the Sermon is Preaching, and I
would ask you what do you gain? what profit do you make of this two Hours Time
in a week thus saved from the Public Worship of God, ask your selves seriously
and answer truly what is your gain? how much does it amount to in a day's nay
in a year's Time? why one takes a few pence in his shop, another earns a few by
a small Jobb of work done the while, another redeems an hour or two from a
sermon and gets so much the sooner about his occasions at home another gets a
little ease, a little sheep a little drink, and idle, vain Chatt together with
it, and I beseech you what does it come to* what is your estate advanced or
your (...) any way bettered at the years end? Nay are you not losers every
manner of way? Did they who neglected God's House whom the Prophet Hagga^
reproves Chapt. 1. gain any Thing by their labor in or about their own houses,
or in their Fields while plowing sewing or gathering in? No they were c^rsed in
their Employmemnt, blasted in their Labors, the Lord did blow upon their
Harvest and the wages they earned was put in a bag with Holes, all that they
did turned to little or no Account, nothing succeeded with them. God is the
same and the Concerns of his House of as great values as ever, and his Anger as
hot now for slighting and neglecting his Ordinances as then; so that could you
take an exact account you would see cause to own your selves losers even in your
outward estate, and if Blastings, Mildews, Losses by Sea and Land,
Disappointments, Impoverishments many ways were looked at as a just punishment
from God for the great Coldness, dead-heartedness and indisposedness, to the
Worship of God in his House in special, among other sins that are to be found
among us, there would be good Scripture warrant for our so reckoning. Men
complain Trading is dead, they do not thrive, they go behind hand, cannot make
both ends neet, they rise early, go to bed late, eat the bead of Carefulness
and all will not do, No wonder while God's House is under-valued and neglected.

But suppose thou may gain a small matter wh^le thou ought to have been
at a Sermon, and for the gains thereof did omit an opportunity of seeing and
Conversing with Christ in an Ordinance, be judges your selves in the Case
whether you are Gainers o^ losers. A few pence gaind! a goodly price that I was
valued at will Jesus Christ say: And take this for an everlasting Truth, the
same price we put upon the Word of Christ, we put upon Christ himself. We
condemn Judas for betraying his Master for Thirty pieces of Silver,. But who
art thou O man that judge another and do the same thing? He that cannot
find in his heart to come to a Sermon for fear to miss the taking or earning a
little money would sell Jesus Christ himself at a cheaper Rate than ever Judas
did, if he had the like Temptation before him, Nay he does part with him, let
him go (yea and that for ought he knows irrecoverably and forever) for the
love of that which he proposes to himself to gain in (...) mean time. If you
will not now believe it a little Time will put it beyond dispute. When an evil
day comes, and you want those words to live upon that you might have then
heard, and that Instruction and Edification that you might have gained,
Conscience will then tell you that sinned by such Negle^t and got no profit.
Martha got a severe Reproof by being careful and cumbered with many things,
while she should have fate at Christ's fee^ and been hearing a Sermon; and such
Reproofs shall you have from your own Consciences one day, and should take them
now. No man shall ever gain in the winding up by that Time that he pinches out
of the Service of God whether Public, Private, or Secret.

2. My second Appeal is to those that have subordinated all other things to the
Service of God, and can make their secular Occasions give way thereunto, and
consequently have been and are Careful, Faithful attenders on His Word and
Ordinances; and I would ask you, Did you ever lose, did you not (...) gain by
being so employed? Have you not cause to account those your best Hours? Had
you ever any just Cause to repent of your Time so spent? Would you part with
what you have met with in the House of God (...) Thousand Worlds? Are not all
other pleasures and profits most inconsiderable and contemptible things
compared with what God's House has afforded you? Say, speak out, that others
may be informed and confirmed by your experience or Have you not found that
Illumination, that Quickening, that Edifying power and Grace, accompanying
Divine institutions that was no where else to be found, and that you could
never ^^^tend to any thing like there to from all your Labors about the World?

Is not this Doctrine true, have you not found and felt it true? cannot you
give your Evidence in the Case? Then speak for God and for his House, stand up
for the Honor of the same. Tell one another as you have opportunity of the
Good things there, discourse together of the rich Entertainment you have met
with, and as you meet with others to whom such discourses may be of use, let
them know how you have fared there. The world does not believe that the
foolishness of Preaching has such virtue in it as the report of the Word
attributes to it, any more than Nathanael could believe that any Good could
come out of Nazareth, do you therefore testify to what you have seen, and
advise them also to come and see.

3. My third Appeal is to those that after they have sometimes enjoyed, have
again lost the Liberties of God's House (and those that have experienced both
the sweetness of the enjoyment and the bitterness of the bereavement are best
able to judge in this Case) Now they will all tell you with one mouth that
there is no place to spend Time in like the House of God. And such is the
Testimony of David in the Text; He had lived at the Wellhead, been often
drinking of the waters of the Sanctuary, and abundantly satisfied with the Good
things thereof, he had lived near the green Meadows and still waters, and
frequently taken his sweet repast there, he had seen the Lord's Glory and
Beauty in the Sanctuary and had been enlightened, quickened mind comforted there,
for which Favors you have him in sundry Psalms tuneing his. Harp and Psaltery
and fixing his heart to the Praises of God, and blessing himself and the people
is those high enjoyments, in respect of which God had so dealt with Israel as
with no other people. But now you find him in quite another Frame, longing,
fainting, Crying out like a person in great distress, fareing like a poor
forlorn, miserable wretch, in a state most sadly afflictive and deplorable,
intimating that the could have been glad to change Conditions with the Swallow
and Sparrow, to whom he seems to envy that privilege which they enjoyed and he
was bereaved of go what was the matter? what all'd him? why alas this was his
Case (a woeful Case indeed!) that sweet, precious, beloved place the House of
God he could not come at, those Glorious and gainful days which he had with so
much pleasure and advantage spent were now past and gone with him, and when or
how to be recovered he knew not, and he so demeans himself as one that both
understood what he said, and said as he meant when he set so high a value upon
one of those days.

Of like nature and scope is Psalm. 42. and had you seen him at that Time when
he Composed it, you would have found him in a most solemn frame, his eyes
weeping and himself making meat of his tears when he had wept them, his Heart
beating and panting, his soul fainting and poured out within him, and had you
consulted with him he would have told; you this lamentable story, and I once
dwelt (...), and had mine Habitation in Jerusalem, that pleasant place where
the Eines were be fallen me, and where I had a goodly Heritage and had free
access to the House of God, and thither was wont to go with the Company that
kept Holyday, but now I am an Outcast from the Temple in the land of Jordan
and the Hermonies, I cannot come to Meeting, I cannot hear a Sermon as I was
wont by the loss of which Mercy I have learnt (somewhat more than ever) the
worth of it, a loss that can by no other attainment be compensated. -- This was
the cause of his mourning, and the inward disquietment and casting down of his
soul, and this also caused him to make that Prayer in the following Psalms ver.
3, 4. that God would conduct him back to his Holy Hill and to his Tabernacles,
that he might again go to the Altar of God his exceeding Joy, and promises his
praises for the hearing of his prayer, no^ would any thing (...) his down-cast
soul but the Hopes that those prayers should be heard. And it is to be noted in
both these Psalms (the like also may be observed else where) when bemoaning his
Exilement he never once mentions his own House or his Relations or family
Concerns all which were (beyond dispute) according to the value of each very
dear to him, but this is the matter with him, the House of God! And so when he
was driven out of Jerusalem, he says nothing of his Kingdom, or Palace, or any
Relations he left behind, only the Ark and its Habitation, the House of God
where the Lord dwelt and afforded his Presence, This, this I say he thought and
discoursed of, and thereby showed what lay at his Heart, and how much he prized
them above other Things which he accounted not worthy to be mentioned the same
day with these. Thus also when sick Hezekiah had the Sentence of Death (that
was upon him) reversed, and an Addition of fifteen Years promised, he asked a
sign whereby he might be assured about his going up again to the House of God,
as if he had valued his Time of going thither more than all his* Time besides,
or as if his reprieval from the Grave were therefore principally grateful to
him because he might have the liberty of rendering the Lord a further visit
there Isa. 38. 22. the fear of seeing the Lord no more (probably he means in
his House the chief place for seeing God) having been most grievous to him in
his sickness ver. 11. whereupon he engaged that he would not only go up
thither but dwell there to praise him all the days of his life.

And at this day how many just and Righteous ones are there in the world that
are begging on their knees with Tears in their eyes that they might enjoy one
of these days of the Son of Man that we have plenty of, they would wonder to
see the streets and shops so full of people while a Sermon is a preaching which
they would gladly leave their very meat to hear. What a Pathetical lecture
would they read you of the worth of Sermons and Ordinances! How feelingly would
they discourse of these things and tell you that whatever outward good things
are left them they do all avail them little or nothing while banished from the
House of God, and how affectionately would they exhort and beseech us to know
in this our day the things of our peace, to improve every inch of Hearing-Time,
and that with utmost Seriousness and Intensness, to believe them while they do
give evidence to the Truth of this Doctrine, and in so doing speak what they
have seen and felt, lest we also pay dear for our learning (as they have done)
that one day in the Courts of the Lord is worth a Thousand.

So much may serve for the first Reason or Argument.

The second follows.

Reas. 2. One day in God's House is better than a Thousand, Because serious
waiting there is not only the way to have these unparaleld Blessings already
mentioned, but also the surest and safest way to obtain all other Good things
which we need, and for the getting of which the House of God is too often
neglected, yea and to have them sanctified and secured too. This being cleared
will evince the Truth* of the Doctrine against all Gainsayers.

This is the common Objection, Men cannot come to Meeting on a Lecture-Day
because their business will not give leave, this and that work calls for their
presence, or else they shall be great sufferers. The Husbandman (especially in
seed-Time and Harvest) has no leisure, he must get his seed into the Ground and
his Harvest into the Barn. The day-Labourer gets his Living by the sweat of his
Brows, and has but from hand to mouth, and therefore he can spare no time for
the Worship of God. The Handicraft's man has work bespoken* and must keep
touch, lest he lose his Custom, The Shopkeeper will tell you Rent is high,
Trading dead, he has a Family to maintain and therefore must lose no
opportunity of taking Money, and Lecture-dayes are his Market-dayes and he
cannot leave his shop, though if none did appear to buy (as me thinks none
should that did consider that the doors of Christ's House are then open, where
better Commodities are to be bought viz. Wine and milk, soul-maintenance, and
that without money and without Price) there would be no occasion for him to sit
there to sell. Thus when men want an Heart they never want an excuse, those
that have no mind to a Duty will find pretenses enough to color over their
neglect of it: But it were an easy matter to Retort the Argments upon
themselves and they would argue more strongly the other way. Is not your
business for Heaven of as great Concernment and Have? are you so forward, so
much before hand therein as that without any considerable Damage you can spare
ever and anon a Sermon and not miss it? Is not a Seed-time and an Harvest-time
for your meat that endures to eternal Life as busy a time with you as that
wherein you are laboring for the meat that perishes? Is not the Lords care in
rising betimes and fending to you, and that both in season and out of season an
Intimation that the Lord sees you need such Dispensations, for he does no
needless thing. Have you not as much need to take every season and lay up for
endless Eternity as to provide against a long Winter? Especially when you
consider that you are going toward, and know not how soon you may come to the
place where there is no Work, Device nor Invention Eccles. 9. 10. Have you such
a measure of knowledge as that it needs no Augmentation? such a stock of Grace
lying by you that you need no increase of it? Or are your Graces so active as
that you have no occasion for Word and Ordinances to excite them and keep them
in exercise? Is not Trading for Heaven very dead also, so that there is much
cause for the Lord to complain as of old I have labored in vai^ Isa. 49. 4^?
and will not the loss of Gospeloffers (as punishments for the slights you put
upon them) be a greater Detriment than the loss of a good Customer for want of
complying with him? Nay should not your Care and Thoughtfulness, Labor and
Diligence about the things of this Life teach you that then much more ought
your Activity to show it self about Things of a better? Might not such
considerations as these afford you a silencing Answer to such Excuses?

But let me further add

That even this is the way to promote your worldly Advantage too, the words
immediately following the Text are a proof of it. After the Psalmist had given
his judgment upon a day in God's House above a Thousand, and made his Choice of
being a doorkeeper there rather than a dweller else where, he gives the reason
of his so choosing, and its taken from the Good things there to be had, viz.
Grace and Glory, but lest any should say what shall we do for other things, he
adds, No good thing will he withold etc. Christ speaks the same thing Mat.
6. 33. Seek first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all other
things shall be added unto you. Whatever else is wanting shall be given into
the Bargain, cast in over and above. That Kingdom which you principally,
firstly seek shall be given you, and all other things shall be supplied also.
Honoring the Lord with our substance (and by the like reason with our Time
spent in his Service as we have an Opportunity) is the way to have the Barn
filled with plenty etc. Prove. 3. 8, 10. To promote this search after Wisdom (
and waiting at Wisdom's posts is the way to find Wisdom Pro. 8. 34.) he tells
us that Riches and Honors are in her left hand Chapt. 3. 16. It is not
Laboring or Contriving, but God's blessing that makes Rich. Now the daily
Waiter and Watcher at Wisdom's Gates to hear Christ is pronounced Blessed, he
is the man that is under God's blessing and therefore shall have so much of
other things also as is convenient for him. In Commendation of Godliness, and
to promote the practice of it, it is said to be great Gain and the promise of
the life that now is as well as that which is to come made to it 1. Tim. 4. 8.
And he that has any Good Thing in the Promise is as sure of it as if it were
in his hand, yea coming in a Promise it is far more sweet and safe than if it
came in the way of common Providence. That known Text Mal. 3. 8, 12. does
abundantly answer the Objection and prove the Position before us, they are
faulted ver. 8. for Robbery in the matters of God's House, they brought not in
their Tithes and Offerings, the reason of their withholding them is hinted at
viz. because they accounted the Worship of God to be too chargeable for them,
they could not afford to go to the cost of it. Nay (says the Lord) if that be
the Reason, do you fill my House and see if I will not fill yours and
abundantly make up to you what Expense soever you shall be at by serving me.
While you Robbed me I cursed you, and if you will obey me in the matters of my
House I will bless you.

From this Text these things are Evident

1. That men are prone to deal very unworthily with God in the Concerns of his
House and are apt to be too strait-handed there.

2. One Reason of their so carrying it is for fear they should lose in their
outward Estate thereby, they cannot tend it, they cannot afford it is the
pretense, though its true they have no heart to it lies at the bottom.

3. That so to do is in God's account Robbery, and is punished with a Curse,
the Vine casts her fruit, the Devourer cats up their Labors and instead of
saving they are great losers thereby.

4. That the only way to be blessed in their Labors and to thrive in the world,
is to fill God's House, to give their attendance there with their Tithes and
Offerings let them not be wanting in their duty to him, and he would abundantly
make up to them what they laid out for him: And though the Lord is worthy to be
believed upon his word, yet he condescends so far as to put things upon the
Trial Prove me says the Lord, if you will not believe me try me, and you shall
find it true, while my House was empty so were yours also, and what you pinch't
from me you lost, and a great deal more with it, but upon your amending see if
I will not proportionably and observably bless you.

You never knew any man impoverished by spending two hours in a week at a
Lecture, nor enriched by the Contrary.

I have heard of a poor man being asked by a pious Minister why he came not to
Lecture, answered not want of will but mere Poverty hindered him, for that day
in which he did not work his children must not eat, being advised by the
Minister to come to Lecture, and promised to be paid for his days work he
readily came to Meeting, and as constantly for his Pay at Night, but after a
little Time being asked the Reason why though at Lecture he came not for his money
as formerly, he said that he found God had so blessed him that he could maintain
his Family, by his labor and spare a Lecture time too. -- And if others will
try in like manner they shall have the like blessing.

It is said Money answers all things Eccl. 10. 19. yea but the Blessing of God
in the way of serious attending on him in his House will answer money also, will
supply that too. God has many secret ways to bless his servants, and does
abundantly send in what we lay out for him. Our Fathers in this Wilderness
experienced this, they came for the sake of God's House, and he soon filled
theirs, turned the Wilderness into a fruitful Land, gave them what they denied
and left behind them for his and the Gospel's sake. And while the first love
and zeal for Christ and the things of his House were kept up they had much
outward prosperity; our coldness there has brought thinness and leanness both
outward and spiritual upon us.

This also is the sure way to have all our other good things sanctified to us:
By the Word and prayer are all our outward blessings sanctified 1. Tim. 4. 5.
and without this they are a snare and Trap. If men would observe, there is none
but loses as much and more than he gains by robbing God of his Time, or at
least he loses the blessing, and what is the outward enjoyment without a
Blessing? why, it is for his hurt rather than for his good, and its better to
want such things in mercy than to have them in wrath.

Thus much may serve for the Confirmation of the Doctrine.

We come now to the Application or Improvement,

And this word is profitable for Information or Instruction Reproof or
Correction Exhortation and Direction.


1. by way of Information and Instruction

1. See here the Wisdom of God in providing so well for the promoting of his
own public Worship while he orders so much profit to attend the waiters upon
him therein, hereby obviating the objections that may be made against it, and
that great one especially Mal. 3. 4. what profit is it that we have served God
and kept his Ordinance? What profit? more than Cent. per Cent. profit, even a
Thousand to one profit, and that is great gain indeed. The Lord out-bids all
that ever the world, or the Devil the god of the world can do for his
followers. Reason should teach us to go into his vineyard where we may have the
most pleasant work and best wages. Did men understand and believe, there would
be no great difficulty in this matter.

Saul to weaken David's Interest in the people and draw them off from him,
intimates that they could not expect much profit or high preferment from the
son of Jesse (1. Sam. 22. 7.) insinuating that where there is an expectation of
the greatest Reward, there men would be most like to be found. Then God may
well expect that we should prefer his House before our own houses, Fields,
Ships or Shops, because all of them cannot yield the like profit by more than a
Thousand to one Difference. He must needs account God not worthy to be
believed, or Fellowship with him in his House not worthy to be enjoyed, that is
not persuaded (its pity any should need to be compelled) there to dwell, and
to Improve all opportunities of Seeing and Enquiring there. Wisdom invites men
to her House Prove. 9. and the foolish one calls upon Simple ones that are going
right on, to turn in thither, the former invites to beasts slain, Wines mingled
and Table furnished, and promises life upon obedience ( hear and your souls
shall live Isa. 55. 3.) The latter speaks only of water and bread, and that
stolen and in secret too, concealing in the mean time Death and depths of Hell
the punishment of deluded fools. Me thinks none need be at a loss at which
house to turn in. Christ would be no way offended for turning our backs upon
his Ordinances if we knew any place where to mend our selves, but to leave him
for lying var^ities makes him angry.

There is nothing but Atheism and Unbelief that keeps any poor creature from
making this his One thing to dwell in the House of God.

2. Hence we are further Informed how careful the Lord is of us also and of our
Good as well as of the promoting his own service, in that he does not oblige us
to do any service for him, nor to spend one day or hour but so as shall be to
our own highest advantage. No Worship of God shall interfere with our profit,
He will dispense with his Worship when works of necessity and mercy for our
selves or others bespeak our Attendance, and he never enjoins it but it is best
for us and most for our good. This is great kindness indeed to poor Creatures
that He will not be served but when we shall be profited, and has so disposed
that it is always for our profit to (...) Him. If we were rightly affected
toward God we should need no more or other Argument than this to bring us to
the House of God and oblige us to the most serious attendance viz. that we are
about God's work, doing Him service, that he will be glorified thereby, would
be enough to us; but the Lord will have us to know that we are then about our
own work also, and that which most nearly concerns us and will unspeakably
advantage us. Although we must deny our selves and take much pains to serve God,
if we do it acceptably, yet all this while we are working for our selves, and
the Harvest will be our own, and that a Thousand times more than we could have
gotten else where. You will say when the Beggars that lay by the Highways and
Hedges were invited to the Marriage Feast they were not bidden to their loss,
no, nor they that had Farms and Merchandise neither they never had such Incomes
nor made such Bargains as they might have had and made there. Let none think it
hard that God requires one day in seven for the more immediate service of
Himself, nay if he should require six of the seven and leave us but one, while
he gives us the profit of more than a Thousand days in one, there is no color
for any Complaint. The Lord commanded them in the Wilderness to rest on the
Sabbath day, and gives this as a reason why they should so do, because he had
on the sixth day given them the Bread of two days Exodus 16. 29. So when he
commands us to wait on him in his House on a Lecture-day (and by the way do not
account that attending on Lectures is merely a free will offering, though if it
were so, God's people should be a willing people, and willing in their
free will Offerings, but that General Rule of taking all Opportunities of doing
and consequently of getting Good is not without its Consideration here, and if
the Minister be charged to preach -- in season and out of season 2. Tim. 4. 1.
2. by like reason the people are obliged to hear) do not think we are hardly
dealt with, straightened in our time, abridged of our liberty to labor and do all
that we have to do on the six days seeing our own profit is propounded and
such profit as has been mentioned, to induce us thereunto.

If a company of poor indigent people should be (...) by some great Person to
wait at his Gate two hours on such a day in the week, there to receive a
liberal Dole from his bountiful Hand, they would account themselves bountifully
dealt with while they had so much more given them than they could have gotten
by their own industry in the mean Time; And that is the Case before us.

3. This also Informs us how much we stand Debtors in God's Account for every
day's Liberty in his House, he sets down a Thousand for One and after that Rate
will reckon with us, and therefore we should reckon so also, and hold our
selves engaged to make an Answerable improvement of them that we may render
proportionably. This is the (...), the Cream, the Quintessence of all our Time,
for this especially are we bound to lift up our eyes and souls and bless the
name of the bountiful God, and that a Thousand times more than for any other
Time. Thanks are to bear a proportion to the quantity of the Kindness received:
As they that have much forgiven will love much, so they that have much given
should thank much, praise much, which they will do if they love much. We should
bless God heartily every morning we rise, for bringing us to the Light of
another day, but we shonld bless him a Thousand times more for a day in his
Courts, because it is a Thousand times better. It was an exceeding great and
precious Promise that the Lord gave to his People Isa 30. 20. a rich and high
Cordial fitted on purpose for an evil day that tho their meat should be bread
of Adversity and drink water of Affliction yet their eyes shall see their
Teachers, they shall have Preaching and Ordinances among them. Alas, how many
have bread of Adversity and their Teachers removed too! How should the scarcity
of that Best of all Commodities serve to enhaunce the price of it! All our Time
is precious, but this part of our Time much more precious than the rest. Many
account Sabbath-dayes lost-dayes, and Lecture-dayes broken days, no, they are
good days and full days, days full of Blessing, one of them has the Good of
a Thousand days in it. Some had rather sickness or Foul-weather should fall
out an a Sabbath Day or on a Lecture-day than any other, and secretly think it
is so much Time saved, not considering how much the Wisdom and kindness of God
is thereby Reflected upon, and themselves prejudiced.

4. Hence we may learn what is the best Course to redeem Time, which is a duty
incumbent upon all Christians Ephesians. 5. 16. The spending as much of it as you
may in the House of God is the best way of Redeeming it. If men were good
Husbands of their Time, it were an easy matter to save ever and anon a Day for
the Service of God and yet not strike one stroke the less about their other
ordinary Occasions; and one day thus Redeemed, provided it be rightly improved
so as to become a good day to them, is more than a Thousand days.

5. From hence also it follows, that it is a greater Blessing to a People to
have the Liberties of God's House than to have a Confluence of all this World's
Good flowing in upon them. They are better that enjoy the House of God among
them, though they are straitened in other outward Things, than they which have
the greatest outward Enlargements without it.

God so orders it, that the Richest places in the World (as to Things of the
World) are very poor upon this account, while his People though dwelling in a
Barren Land have the Riches of Earth and Heaven both, in having the House of
God among them. These Gleanings of Ephraim are better than the Vintage of
Abiezer. Suppose a Place in a Temperate Zone, that is an healthy Climate, has a
sweet Air, pleasant Situation, fertile Soil, Havens for Ships, a place of great
Trade and much Resort, so that what they have not of their own they may bring
home (though from far) out of other places; Imagine an Eden of all manner of
pleasures and Delights, yet under all these Considerations and Circumstances it
is a miserable place if the House of God be wanting. That poor so^^tary Pilgrim
Jacob, lying in the open Air, having the cold Earth for his Bed, and a stone
for his Pillow yet the place being turned into a Bethel, an House of God he
fared better than if he had been acommodated with all the Entertainment that a
Princes Palace could have afforded him. Israel in the Wilderness though dwelling
in Tents, fed with bread and Water without the Fleshpots of Egypt and other
good things they so much longed for, yet being the Church in the Wilderness,
and having God's Tabernacle in the midst of them, were in a far happier
Condition than the Canaanites who dwelt in a land flowing with Milk and Honey
but no House of God near them.

Our Fathers coming into this Wilderness, and bringing Christ and the
Ordinances of his House along with them, never repented them of the Exchange
they had made, nor were so mindful of the pleasant Land from whence they came
as to return thither again, though they had opportunities of so doing See Heb.
11* 15. Nay the Lord prevented them by turning the Wilderness into a fruitful
Land, and the House of God set up and attended will make any place so. After
the large Description of that great City given by the Prophet Ezekiel, we find
its real Glory contained in the name by which it was called viz. Jehovah
sh^mma. The Temple of the Lord and his presence in the Temple renders a place
glorious. Never complain of Hardships and Difficulties, the Consideration of
the Transcendent Goodness of God to be enjoyed in his House should swallow up
all Difficulties whatsoever. Dwelling in Tents of wickedness, nay in the
Palaces of the World is to be despised in Comparison of dwelling here. He that
for Elbow-room in the World removes from under Word and Ordinances makes a very
imprudent Choice. Its Religion, not any nor all other things that makes a
place. It was the Presence, House and Worship of God in the Land of Canaan
principally that made it the Glory of all Lands, the Land of Glory or the
glorious Land (as it is called Ezekiel. 20. 6. Dan. 11. 16, 41.) Its therefore
glorious because it is Immanuel's land Isa. 8. 8. This Mount Sion so beautiful
a place, because out of Sion the perfection of beauty God has shined Psalm. 50.
2.

Prize Gospel Ordinances and Christ's presence in them as the chiefest Glory of
our Land, and evermore pray that such Glory may always dwell in our Land.

6. Then we should above all other Things fear losing a day in God's House, yea
fear losing the House of God and being outed of our Possession thereof.
According to the value of a thing is our Love to it, Desire to keep it, Fear to
lose it. Now if being in God's House is a Thousand times better than
other-where; then we should be a Thousand times more afraid about that than any
thing else. It is now a Time of Fear with us, some fear they shall lose this
thing, some that, and some another, but above all, fear and tremble for the
Ark, fear for the House and Ordinances of GOD, there is most Cause of Fear, we
have a Thousand times more cause to fear for God's House than for our own
houses, lands etc.

And if we are providentially kept from the House of God by Sickness or
otherwise, it should afflict us more than being kept from our own business. To
have lost a day through any inadvertency or neglect of his own, or through any
Adverse Providence that has disappointed him in his Expectation or blasted his
Endeavors, is afflictive to an industrious man: but to have lost a day from or
in the House of God, should be by many degrees more grievous to a serious soul;
nor should our being driven out of our own houses be so yrksome to us as the
Lord's plucking up stakes, or breaking up house among us. We live in Times of
Plucking up and pulling down, to be now seeking great Things for our selves in
the world would be absurd and blame worthy ^er. 45. but to be seeking the
greater things of God's House, and to be most Thoughtful about the Continuance
thereof, and our dwelling therein all the days of our life, is very becoming
in us, and will be no less acceptable unto God. The only way to secure what is
our own is to be most solicitous about the concerns of God's House; let our
Hearts be mainly there, and then we may roll the Burden of all other Cares upon
him.

7. This Doctrine does intimate to us with what spirit and Frame we should go,
when ever we go to the House of God viz. with an high esteem of it, and
Expectation of great things in and from it. Value an hour there worth a
Thousand, and expect to receive accordingly. They had no more because they asked
no more Jam. 4. 2, 3. and we have no more because we expect no more. There is
ordinarily some proportion between our Receivings and our Expectations; and the
Reason is because Expectations arising from the sense of our need and the
reallizing that there is a supply to be had, and being accompanied with
answerable preparation and Attention, bring us under a promise. The Text tells
us there is a Thousand times more to be had in the House of God than
elsewhere, then we should expect as much as the Word says, and the Lord is
not wont to fail his people of their Expectations Psalm. 9. 18. The Expectation
of the poor shall not perish. But we may add something further to this in the
sequel.

8. Is one Day in God's House better than a Thousand, then the Lord expects
that they who dwell in his House should be better and do^ better than other
men. Where much is given much is required. They who live in His House fare
better than any others, are known above all the families of the earth Amos 3.
2. He has not dealt so with any other Nation Psalm. 147. 20. Such have better
Liberties, better means, better opportunities, (a Thousand times better) than
those who ar^ ^ot thus favored; and therefore their knowledge, their
principles, their Hearts and Conversations should be better. If any Heathen
have more moral Honesty, Sobriety, Love etc. than we, beware such do not rise
up in Judgment against us, condemn and triumph over us in the Day of Account.
The Lord does (and justly may) look for better Grapes from his Vineyard upon
which he had bestowed such costly and careful Husbandry, and in the midst of
which Himself dwelt, than he could have expected from the Wilderness Isa, 5. 1,
-- 4. Hence that chideing and stinging Interrogation, implying great
disappointment of just expectation in himself (the Lord speaking there after
the manner of men) and unreasonable, unaccountable Ingratitude in them ver. 4.
Wherefore when I looked it should bring forth Grapes; brought it forth wild
grapes?

We that have all the Precious and Pleasant things of God's House ^forded, and
at this time continued when it is not so with others, are better dealt with,
and at a Thousand times more chargeable rate maintained than they; if our
Returns be not somewhat singular, we shall never be able to hold up our Heads
when God shall thus interr^gate us as he did them, and if he should take away
our Hedge and break down our stone wall, and leave us to be eaten up and
trodden down, and forbid the clouds to rai^^ upon us so that in the Issue we be
laid waste as he adds ver. 5, 6. If he should take away the Vineyard from us,
and let it out unto others that should render him the fruit in their seasons as
Mat. 21. 41. and when he had done all this, refer the matter to our own
Judgment as he did to theirs Isa. 5. 3. our Consciences would constrain ^is to
say Righteous art thou O Lord. God was angry with Hezekiah not because he made
no Returns at all (that sanctifying Grace he had in him would not let him be
altogether unthankful) but it is said Hezekiah rendered not -- According to the
benefits done, and hence (...) as Wrath upon him 2. Chr^n. 32. 25. His Returns
were not according to Expectation so proportionable to his Receivings as they
might have been, and there lay the Controversy. We wrong and reflect upon the
Name and House of God and the privileges we enjoy there, under so (...) better
days and better things* for want of (...) Conversations, with which though the
Lord may bear long, he will not always.

USE. 2. By way of Reproof

If One day in God's House be worth a Thousand, then they are blameworthy who
in their Judgment or practice, or both, are guilty of (...), Undervalueing or
Neglecting the same, and what is lightly esteemed will be neglected. Now these
are faulty, not only for want of due respect to an Institution of God or
instituted Worship (which ought always to be observed with great Veneration,
as that (...) which the Lord is wont more especially (...) show himself a (...)
God) but they are to be reproved from the Text under that Notion as not
consulting their own interest* while they put a slight upon that wherein their
greatest Profit and Advantage is concerned, herein they miss it in not doing
well for themselves.

And here we may take notice either of a Total (or at least very frequent)
Neglect in some, so as not to come at all, or if they do its very rarely; or
else when they do come it is not in such a manner as they would i^ they
believed there were such profit there. Non-Attendance, rare-Attendance,
superficial and slighty Attendance are all of them very unsuitable and
unbecoming such a place and such Ordinances.

There are some whom you shall seldom (...) at a Sermon, at least upon a
Lecture day, are strangers to the House of God, I cannot say do not know, but
may say are very rarely found in the way thither. A most unworthy thing! that
God should set up an House among us, and promise to afford us his Presence, and
give us a meeting there, and men cannot find in their Hearts to wait on him at
the Time and Place appointed. That God should make such preparation for us in
his House, and send to invite us, and tell us he will make us very welcome
there to the best he has, and that he is there waiting to entertain* us and be
gracious to us, and any should send him that Answer that they have no mind to
come, or if they do come, it is in such a manner (which the heartsearching and
all-seeing God observes) as does declare that their whole heart is not in the
work.

To see the Highway to the House of God mourn in a day of Contradiction and
treading down in the valley of Vision because men are through Persecution by an
Hand of Violence hindered from walking therein, is a great Affliction, and
matter of sore Lamentation; but to see the Highway thither mourn in a time of
Liberty and Encouragement, either because when they may they will not walk
therein, or if they do, it is with much Formality and Indifferency, this is
much more a Lamentation as being the great sin and provocation of the Lords
Sons and Daughters. When the way is blockt up by Persecution it is but the
Suffering of Professors (though the sin of Persecutors) but their own declining
when the way is open is the great sin of Professors. If when God sets and holds
open the doors of his House (which are the Gate of Heaven) they put away
Eternal life from themselves, that is far worse than to have others keep them
off from it, and the means of attaining it. For themselves to bid God depart
from them is a sorer evil than for others to bid them depart from God. And
indeed such do as it were say concerning God, he may be gone from them if he
will, they care not for the Knowledge of his ways, nor do they desire to see
or be acquainted with him.

Some do this out of Opinion, pretending to have found a better Rule and
greater light within, and thereupon despise external Ordinances, lay them aside
as things beneath themselves, calling them Forms which persons of their
Seize have no need of, though it is much to be doubted that while they cast
off Instituted Forms (there is a Form of wholesome Words, and a Form of
wholesome Worship also) they leave themselves without Form and (its to be
feared) will be found (as the ancient Chaos was) also void, and darkness over
the faces of them too, notwithstanding all their pretenses to a
more-than-ordinary Degree of Light.

Of these I shall say little at present, because I presume there are few or
none here this day to ^ear me: Only this word or two viz. That is a false and
unfreindly Light within that bereaves men of the Light of the Word and help of
Ordinances from without, from whence sincere souls have always found (through
the Concurrence of the Spirit) the greatest Quickings and safest Conduct. If
the Light within (...) darkness, (or lead men into darkness, and keep them out
of those ways wherein they might meet with enlightening) hom great is that
darkness! It little availes to dispute with men that are wise in their own
eyes, and wedded to their own ways; our best way of Argueing with such is
practical, viz. by so Prizeing, Valuing, Using the Ordinances of God's House,
as that our Proficiency under them and Benefit by them may be even in their
Consciences a Testimony for them, which will be wanting if we that use them
live no better than they that use them not. This only I shall say that David (a
man full of Light and Love) desired that he might take a lease of the House of
God to dwell in for his Lifetime Psalm. 27. 4. And Christ pomised that in the
way of Preaching and Baptism (and by like reason all other Ordnances of his
House) he would be with then to the end of the world; and therefore the Conmand
to wait on him in such Institutions, and the promise of his presence and
Blessing upon so waiting concerns us in these days, and will those that shall
succeed us so long as the world lasts. Know also that no Christian is or shall
be (really and according to Rule I mean, what ever he may through any mistake
conceive) above Ordinances whilst beneath Heaven

Others see no Glory in God's House, find (...) Good, Get no profit thereby,
and therefore neglect it, an Objection long agone made by them, and Answered by
the Prophet Malachi Chapt. 3. something has been already spoken thereunto, I
shall add a few words more. Possibly their own experience may tell them so, they
using Ordinances (when they did use them) with their wonted slightiness and
Formality, found no profit in them, and thereupon gave over; laying the blame
upon the Ordinances which was only justly chargeable upon their Formality and
Hypocrisy in the use of the Ordinances.

And here note that Christ himself gives that as the true Reason of their
worshipping God in vain Mat. 15. 8, 9. not because it was a vain thing to
worship God, but because they did not worship him in a right manner, they were
Hypocrites ver. 7. and they did (...) him with their mouth and honor him with
their lips but their heart was far from him, and therefore did they worship him
in vain. It is no sign that the Things in God's House are not Good Things, best
Things, yea a Thousand times better than other things, because they are not so
to thee, No, no, it remains an everlasting Truth that there are fat and
marrowed Things in the House of God, though they may seem to be dry, sapless and
unsavory Things unto thee There is Divine Glory and Beauty there though thou see
it not, and if it be hidden from thee thou may with trembling Heart and Hands
turn to the 2. Cor. 4. 3. and there read thy present Condition at least
(however God may in mercy enlighten thee afterward) If our Gospel be hid it is
hid to them that are lost. Thou go up and down the world with the black mark
of a lost man upon thee. If that he true that God's word does Good to them
that walk uprightly Mic. 2. 7. what may thou judge of thy self to whom it
does no good? Do not therefore forbear to come because thou have hither^^ found
no profit, rather prepare thy self so to come as that thou may find that
profit which is there to be had, and which others have experienced.

Same out of sloth cannot endure to take pains to come, at least if they are at
any considerable Distance, or if there be any thing of Difficulty therein. A
little Indisposition of body (especially if it meets with a great Indisposition
of spirit) shall be excuse enough, and so a little unseasonableness of Weather
etc. I know God will have mercy and not sacrifice, but let men beware they do
not put a cheat upon themselves: Self-deceivers are the worst Deceivers, and
that principally in such momentous matters as these are. Sloth is full of
excuses, and Listlessness furnished with pretenses. A Sluggard is wiser in his
own conceit than seven men that can render a Reason. Prove. 26. 16. Do thus in
thy outward Concerns and see if thou be not clothed with rags Prove. 23. 21. Do
not plow by reason of (...) Cold, refuse to sow because of the Wind, and to
Reap from regard to the Clouds, or to go to Sea for fear of a Storm and try
what will come of it. If trifleing excuses shall keep men from the House of God
while they can run all Hazzards for accomplishing their worldly Designs, think
what God now does and an enlightened Conscience one day will judge of such a
Frame.

Others (if they would speak it out, which for shame they dare not in words,
though their practice speaks it loud enough) love vain Company, Drinking,
Gameing, etc. better than a Sermon. Alas for the Atheistical blindness and
brutish Sensuality that appears in such an Humor! Is any Company better than
that of God Father Son and Spirit? is any Fellowship in the world like the
Communion of Saints? Any drink like the wine and milk and Water of Life that is
here freely offered to thee? Is there any Game so pleasing and profitable as
that Work whereby thou may win Christ? Is there not more refreshment and
Sweetness in a Sermon than in a Napp? Propound these and such like Questions
seriously to thy self, and then see if thine own Conscience will not be thy
Reprover and Judge.

Some plead Business, Farms and Merchantdize, they have many things to do and
cannot tend to hear the Word of God. We have spoken something to this Objection
already, and therefore shall pass it briefly now. Only consider, If a King or
chief Ruler should come to our Town, and send for us immediately to come before
him. and we should send him word we could not ^end to come, think how he would
take it; especially if he assured us that he came out of great kindness and
respect to us and that he had great preferment and gifts to bestow upon us,
that he sent for us out of good will, and that our waiting upon him should be
unspeakably to our advantage, how should we befool our selves for losing such
an opportunity! Why so it is, and infinitely more than so. I^ would be dreadful
if it should be any man's lot under the Gospel to be damned because he could
not tend to be saved, and yet undoubtedly it will be the case of many who will
everlastingly perish because they could not spare the Time from then secular
affairs and sensual pleasures to work out their own Salvation by industrious
applying themselves to the Use of all means that God has appointed for the
same. The promise in the Text of the getting the good of a Thousand days in
one does fully answer the Objection, and leave no room for an (...).

If a man that were gathering of chips or picking up straws should say he were
so buisie that he could not afford the Time to come and receive his loading of
Gold and Jewels which he might have for the fetching, we should say of him he
were penny wise and pound foolish. If you do not believe the Word of God is
better than Thousands of Silver and Gold, (...) do you with your Bibles? why
do you hear and read such Books, that ye account full of Fables and Untruths?
If they be true why do you not act accordingly? you must deny the Scriptures or
you must value and attend upon the Word preached.

You say you would come but your worldly business will not suffer you; it seems
then that if you had a prospect of worldly Profit before you, you would put in
for a share. And I verily believe that i^ every person in Town might be well
assured of receiving Ten or Twenty shillings a day that comes to Lecture, and
were present before it began; continued till all the service were over, and
kept wakeing all the Time too, the money to be paid him as soon as he went out
of the door, we should have our Houses crammed and Seats crowded, every vacant
corner filled, you should scarce find a man in the streets, nor Taverns, nor
private houses; nor would men have their Children or servants to play or work
at home, if there were such Gain to be gotten in two hours time here. Now what
a low, earthly spirit does this discover, and how unkindly must Christ needs
take it to have his House and Ordinances thus basely undervalued! should not
men's Greediness of worldly Gain and Intenseness thereabout convince them of
this Duty?

You open your Shops every day, you rise in the morning (or should do Psalm.
104. 22, 23.) and go to your labor until the evening; you go to 'Change every
day, and observe your hours there to meet and confer about your Occasions, to
enquire News, discourse of Affairs and dispatch Business, and surely your
Business for Heaven deserves as much Time and Thoughtfulness.

And it heightens the matter of Reproof when men will not only not come to a
Sermon, but sit in (...) shops (perhaps in a worse place) and that (...) view
of the place of Worship, will be walking the streets, and driving their Teams
to and fro just by the Meeting House side, and that^n the sight of the
Congregation that are assembled to worship God, to the great dishonor of God
and Grief of tender Consciences: surely it is not a Thing comely nor of good
Report, (and such things we ought to follow Phil. 4. 8.) This casts a
Reflection upon our Worship in the sight of the Heathen among whom we dwell, it
puts a very low esteem upon it, and is matter of Scandal unto the profane and
carnal ones, who are hardened in their evil way and confirmed in their
Atheistical Opinions about God and his Worship, when they see us who profess
higher to carry it with such unseemliness and disrespect toward the same.

If there were no open vision among us the Word would be more precious as it
was with them 1. Sam. 3. 1. If the Enemy were between us and the water (yea and
bread too) of Bethlehem we should long more for it, and take more pains after
it. But the Word is commonly preached and so lightly esteemed, easy to be had
and therefore low-prized. So was the Manna (though Angels food) when rained about
the Camp every day, and called light Manna. The Lord grant that our making so
light of it may not provoke Him to send a Famine of Hearing the Word among us
Amos 8. 11.

Obj. I know what some will object here Viz. that I lay (...) stress upon
Lectures than is due, and urge the Attending them with more strictness than is
necessary, are they not to attend their particular Callings diligently and
laboriously? do they not serve God there as well as in their General Calling?
what, may they not upon any account miss a Lecture etc

Answ. Do I say more than my Text says? One day is better than a Thousand, and
is not Time best spent where there is such odds in point of profit? will not
Prudence direct every man to do the best he can for his own best Advantage? I
know there may be just reason to absent from a Lecture, as the Case may be, and
would not therefore make that absolutely necessary which God, has not made so.
All that I would is that men beware they deal not deceitfully with God nor
fallaciously with themselves by alleging that for a Cause which is not so, and
will not pass with God for a Cause now, nor with their own Conscience when it
comes to be awakened. Let all men in these matters so deal as becomes those
that make the Knowledge of God in Christ their Life eternal, Communion and
Fellowship with Him in all the ways of his appointment their Happiness, that
have subordinated all other things to his Glory, and made Dwelling in his House
their One thing: and so as they may practically demonstrate that they do
un^^i^nedly believe and realize the Truth of this (...)

Let them see that under any pretense whatsoever they do not grati^^e a
profane, (...) sensual or covetous spirit in themselves, not justly grieve the
good Spirit of God in themselves or others. Be sure that the House of God and
the Concerns thereof have in our Hearts (and let it also be manifest in our
Action) a deserved precedence before our own houses and the Affairs thereof. So
live, so act as that it may be evident that God's Worship has the preeminence
with us. Keep up the Honor of his House by longing and panting for it, and
rejoicing in heart when it shall be said to us Come let us go up thither.

Do but show such an Affection to and Delight in God's House as God's people
have been all along Characterised by, and our Souls good and Edification may be
promoted by, and that is the sum of what is intended by this Discourse, and
with any thing les^e than this we shall not be able to approve our selves to
the Heart-searching God that we do truly, cordially love the habitation of his
House and the place where his Honor dwells Psalm. 26. 8

Further, Here (...) are to be reproved those that if they do come, they come
with their bodies only without their Hearts, let their Hearts run after their
Covetousness while with their Bodie^ they fit like God's people: Such do the
Work of the Lord deceitfully and their own unprofitably. Such heartless
(however they may seem specious) Services will not excuse them from that
Denunciation and Curse of Deceivers Mal. 1. 14. who have a Male in the Flock
but sacrifice a corrupt thing. The Excellent things that are there deservedly
call for all the Soul, Heart, Mind and might to be employed thereabout, and the
contrary is very foolish and unworthy.

Again, If one day in the House of God be worth* a Thousand they may not pass
without Reprehension who for want of Care and Heed lose (...) of this precious
Time by coming late, (...) that so profitable Worship of God is begun. Did men
indeed believe and cons^e^ that there is so much good to be gotten, the
Consideration of the profit should make every one strive to be foremost, to be
at the beginning of so good an Exercise. We are all here present before God
well became those Hearers Act. 10. 33. and they got well by their ready
Attendance, the Holy Ghost fell on all them that heard the Word ver. 44. To be
watching and waiting at Wisdom's gates and posts has a Blessing promised Pro.
8. 34. Not to be at the beginning of a Sermon is a great disadvantage to him
that makes Information and Edification his Business: And to be absent from the
Prayer before the Sermon is to miss an Ordinance that fits us for Hearing; and
by which the Word heard comes to be sanctified to us. If the Whole be so good,
he consults ill for himself that loses any part of it.

Again, Sleeping at a Sermon is hereby condemned, the worth of a Day or an Hour
in God's House affords matter of sharp Reproof to them that can sleep away any
part of it. What can you not watch with Christ one hour? Men do not use to
sleep when they are receiving money. A man that is standing before the Judge
while the Sentence of Absolution or Condemnation is pronouncing will certainly
keep his eyes open (...) why, of no less importance is our being at a Sermon,
where we are before God the Judge of all, and hearing those words by which we
shall be judged at the Last day. How they can be said to take heed how they
hear who hear themselves asleep, would be good for them to consider when they
are awake, and might help to keep them so. They that sleep out a Sermon will be
like the barren Heath of the Wilderness that does not see when good comes. And
it is to be feared that he has but little sense of the Worth of that Ordinance
or expectation of benefit by it that can allow himself in such a Deportment
under it; a due Esteem of it, with suitable Expectation from it would teach him
better, Sitting asleep while the words of eternal life are dispensing is not
Sitting like God's people. Men may be awake and yet little the better, but they
may conclude that what time was slept away was lost Time. He that gazes or
sleeps away some few Sentences, may thereby incapacitate himself for
understanding the whole Discourse. However, possibly that word may then be a
speaking which would have suited thy case and reached thy Heart if thou had
been awake to hear it, and such a Word it may be thou shall never have an
opportunity of hearing again. You have or may have in your hands Mr. Mather' s
Sermon upon Act. 20. 9.
an awakning Discourse of God's exemplary Justice upon sleeping Eutichus. God
may do so by thee, when he finds thee in a deep sleep at a Sermon, he may make
it a dead-sleep to thee, and may sufficiently vindicate himself by rendering
that Reason I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, and before all the
people I will be glorified. Levit. 10. 3. How that Word should prove a Savor
of life to thee which thou did sleep at the hearing of I cannot imagine, and
if not a Savor of life, whether it is not like to be a Savor of death, do
thou consider. Did you ever hear of a poor Indigent person, that being sent for
by some great rich man to receive some bountiful, liberal Dole at his hands
fell fast asleep while taking it? no, the Hopes of a small Alms will make a
man watch and look.

Again those that are quite tired if the Sermon exceed somewhat the usual
length, and inwardly think if they do not openly say what a weariness is it!
Such do not carry as if they believed and realized this Text.

If you were brought to an heap of Gold and licensed for an hours time to tell
it over, and were to have for your own as much as you could tell, you would not
think the Glass too long, nor account your selves wronged if permitted to take
part of another Glass, nay a whole one; is not God's word better than Thousands
of silver and Gold? Can you sit hour after hour in vain Company drinking and
telling stories and never think the time long, and is a Sermon too long for
you? I remember a Solemn Word once delivered by that great man of God, now with
God, Mr. Richard Mather, You (said he) that think the Time long at a Sermon,
will think the Time long in Hell.

And hence it is viz. because men are weary, they cannot stay till Sermon be
ended, or at least withdraw before the prayer after Sermon, and the Blessing
in the close of all. Does this become those that think one day in God's House
worth (...) Thousand? Is Christ speaking to you, and have you not the patience
to hear him out? Has Christ procured a liberty for us to come before God and
say all that we have to say (which is the import of the Greek word. Heb. 4.
16.) and shall we reckon it enough to hear part of what he has to say? Beware
that because he speaks and we regard not, he do not retaliate to us
accordingly, that we should speak and call and cry, and he not regard or hear
us. Remember the forementioned Example Act. 10. Cornelius and his Company were
not only got together and waiting for the coming of Peter ver. 24. But they
looked at themselves as Assembled before God, and their Business was to hear all
that the Lord had commanded to be spoken.

It is a great slight put upon a Friend that out of compassion to us, seeing us
in a dangerous condition has studied a way for our Relief, and is very
seriously discoursing us thereabout, and we tell him he must cut short or else
we must be gone, and in the Issue go away before ^e has done. If a man should
be telling a tale of more than an hour long, especially if there be any thing
of Wit and pleasure in it, you cannot choose but hear out his story; and if a
by-stander should add a parallel as much longer many persons would hardly get
away till he were gotten to the further end of it. Does not a Discourse of God
and Christ and thy great Salvation, deserve the best (...) Attention?

Or i^ men make a shift (and an hard shift it is through their uneasiness and
weariness) to stay till the Sermon be ended, then what tumbling out of the
Meeting House, as if it had been a Prison to them, and they were glad of a
Jail-delivery! what clattering and noise, to the great disturbance of those
that fain would but by your means cannot join in the remaining Exercise!

To such let me say, What have you no need of a prayer after Sermon that God
would write in your hearts what has been sounding in your ears? Does not God
deserve to be acknowledged and praised for the liberty of a Sermon, and do not
your souls need a prayer to him that alone is able to teach you to profit, that
his labor in speaking and yours in hearing may not be in vain? And in special
how dare you turn your backs upon the Blessing, has the Lord appointed and
Authorized his Ministers to bless you in his Name, and are you in so much have
that you cannot stay to hear it and share in it? Beware lest God say of you (as
of him Psalm. 109. 17.) because you delighted not in Blessing, so let it be far
from you. Why the good of all you have done depends upon a Blessing, and can
you be content to go away without that?

See what a great Thing the Lord makes of the Priest's pronouncing a Blessing
Levit. 26. 22. to 28. On this wise shall you bless the Children of Israel
saying etc. and after the Blessing adds, They shall put my Name upon them and I
will bless them. Note also how Solomon in that great Solemnity 1. King 8. and
after prayer, stood (...) -- the Congregation, and (...) said he blessed all
the Congregation, then they did not crowd out as soon as the prayer was ended,
but they all stayed to hear and partake in the same, and it was worth their
labor. To be commended to the Grace, Love and Fellowship of God Father Son and
Spirit is certainly worth the staying for, and that minute while you are
waiting for and receiving the Blessing will bring them a Thousand times more
profit than those that slight and neglect the blessing usually get the while.

Let me further ask such persons

What (...) you to the House of God for? what was your Errand thither? and have
you got that you came for, that makes you with-d^aw before the Worship of God
be finished? Did you come to draw near to God, to sue his (...) in the
sanctuary, and to have Fellowship with him there, did you see and believe that
one day in God's House is worth a Thousand, and have you found it so? why so
weary then, why in such Have to be gone? those that have met with some Tastes
would be for more, if the Beginning was sweet you would have stayed to the
latter (...). He that comes for Christ to an Ordinance, whether he meet him or
meet him not at his Entrance thereupon, he will stay by it; if he meet him, the
sweetness of the enjoyment will detain him, if he meet him not, the hopes that
he may enjoy him will keep him waiting. If Christ appear to him in his glory,
he will say it is good-being here, if Christ as yet appear not, he will account
it worth his Labor to continue his attendance in expectation that he may. The
sincere seeker cannot be satisfied without finding, the true finder will think
he has never found enough, and therefore will not go away so long as there is
any hope of finding more. He will say with himself, who can tell but the last
word in the Sermon, the last clause in the prayer, or the Blessing in the close
of the whole may be intended by God as a special Blessing to me? and
accordingly during the whole time of the Duty will keep himself in the way of
the Blessing.

Again if any should come to Meeting only for a name, to get and keep a
Reputation for Religion, truly if you think you have made your market and done
your errand I doubt you will find your selves mistaken; (...) such a disorderly
and unseasonable Withdrawing will crack your Credit and lessen your Esteem
among them that are serious and judicious.

They are to be Reproved who though they pretend to much Devotion, come to the
House of God and sit there like Gods people, yet while they offer the lame and
the blind unto God, reserving the Male in the flock for their better friends,
discover their Insincerity unto the Heart-Searching God, who curses such
deceivers ( Mal. 1. 14.) however cunningly and fairly they may carry it before
men. The Lord tells the Prophet Ezekiel Cap. 33. 31. what a sort of Hearers he
had, who both looked and sat, spoke and in their outward behavior carried it
like his people, but their Hearts went after their Covetousness. Their Hearts
were in their Houses, Fields, Shops, in close pursuit of their worldly Concerns
under the Cloak of External Worship. God expects the Heart, if we give him not
that, he reckons he has nothing; if he has the Heart he can overlook many
Infirmities and Defects, while the most specious Appearances and fairest
Performances without the Heart, are but bodily exercise and Lip^abour, little
profitable to themselves, but highly provoking unto God. Such Persons give God
only the Skin for the Sacrifice, the lame, lean, seeming Services instead of
the fat of heart-Obedience, and the Lord gives them as good as they bring,
rewarding empty Professions professions with as empty Expectations. They are
deceived that think God will be mocked; he does not only see men, but see into
men and through them, and all those duties will be found too light for his
acceptance that have not the heart going with them in the performance.

It was a pleasant sight Luke 12. 1. to see the people crowding together to
hear the Word of God, insomuch that they trod one upon another (and one would
think it should be common among us where the people are so numerous, and the
access to the Ordinances so easy) but yet even then it is obseryable that
Christ began with a caution against Hypocrisy. [ Beware of Hypocrisie] is a
Text fit to be preached on before the most zealous and full Auditory. Look
diligently that the snake of Hypocrisy lurk not, lie not hid among the tallest
and rankest herbs of a forward Profession. Worshipping of God and coming
constantly to his House is like the Apothecaries Ointment, very odoriferous and
grateful, only the dead Fly of Hypocrisy will spoil the Savoun of it, and make
us to lose all that we have wrought thereabout.

USE 3. In the last place this Doctrine may be improved by way of Exhortation,
and we are from hence excited unto these three Duties, (...).

I. To Prize the House of God after the rate given in the Text.

II. That we thereupon carefully attend the same, and this will follow on the
former.

III. That we so carry it toward and under those Ordinances as that we may
find the Truth of this Text in our own Experience, which is the genuine fruit
of our being sincere in the two foregoing duties.

1. Thus prize the Liberties and Privileges of God'd House, labor to believe
that One day in God's House is worth a Thousand, in so doing thou will show a
David-like heart, an heart after God's own Heart. Indeed David was taught the
worth by the want of God's House: the Lord grant we may learn at a cheaper
rate, usually our Dullness puts him upon such kind of Discipline. We may well
and safely take them at the price God has set them, they are not prized too
high.

2. So prizing the House of God, attend it accordingly, Here is most profit to
be had and therefore omit no season of being here, Wait daily at Wisdom's
posts. You may buy Gold too dear, but the Liberties of God's House you cannot
buy to dear, their fruit is better than Gold, and their Revenue than choice
Silver Pro^. 8. 19. with 34. Though you should be at great pains and expense you
will have a good Penniworth.

Let not any Ordinary Business divert you from a Sermon. Make Conscience of
taking every Opportunity to work while the Day lasts.

And here let me say, If that Business hinders you from a Sermon that would not
hinder you from a Feast, a merry-meeting, from receiving money, from spending an
hour or two with a friend that had sent for you, or come to visit you, from
making a good Bargain etc. I say if kept from a Sermon by those occasions which
would not have kept you from these, you will not be able to answer it to God
nor to your own Judgment and Consciences neither, when they come to be Serious
and Considerate.

Then call upon one another, exhort and encourage one another, say come let us
go to the House of God, you that have ever tasted the sweet of God's Word, or
been made joyful in his House of Prayer tell others what you have found, your
Example and Council may be of use of draw others along with you, for which they
will thank you, and God will reward you another day.

3. So attend upon God in his House as that your own Experience may testify to
the Truth of this Text and Doctrine, viz. That One day here is worth a
Thousand, that you may be able to say as we have heard, so have we seen in the
House of God, we have heard that there is great profit and Gain there to be
gotten, and we have found it so. Do not content your selves (as many do) that
you have been there but enquire what you have done and gotten there. To go in
a Round of Duties, Secret, Private, Public without making any progress or
getting any profit, is in it self irrational and unto God very provoking. You
are going up to the House of God to spend a day before him there, now see that
it prove a good day to you, that you may have the good of it to your selves,
this ought to be every one's Care.

You would think your selves much to blame if being in extreme Want you should
come to a plentiful market where all manner of supplies are offered you freely,
and you carry home nothing with you: And yet how often has many an Hearer come
into God's House and tarried till the Sermon was ended, but carried away not
one penniworth of spiritual good, soul-benefit, and it may be not so much as
afflicted or troubled to think on it.

How did the Spouse behave her self when her Beloved was withdrawn ( Cant. 3.
1, to 5. she rises, goes about, seeks, enquires of the Watchmen, never rests
till she had found him; and then held him fast and brought him home with her.
It Is Finding Christ in his House that is the profit of our day's work, that
renders Time so advantagiously spent, and therefore this should be sincerely
aimed at, and strenuously endeavored by every one that comes thither. This was
Mary's Case Joh. 20. 1, -- 16. she got up early and her business was not to see
the Sepulcher where Jesus was laid, or the linen Clothes and Napkins in which
he was wrapped, but to see Jesus himself, her Lord was in her heart, and to see
Him was her Errand, hence when others went away with no other sight than the
Grave and linen, she waits and weeps and looking into the Grave there sees
Angels, unto whom she gives this reason of her weeping because her Lord was
carried away, and turning about enquired of the supposed Gardener for her Lord,
and being thus earnest and unsatisfied in her Enquiries at last she found him.

Thus should every one behave himself having realized to himself that the
Ordinances of God's House are ways of Communion with Christ and that there
lies the good of them, he should make that his business and be contented with
nothing unless he attains his end: It should not satisfy him that he has been
at the place where Christ is wont to appear, and that he has been at the place
where Christ is wont to appear, and that he has been under Ordinances in which
Jesus Christ is wont to be conveyed, but he must go and wait with an heart
fixed for Christ himself, and sadly bemoan himself under a disappointment there,
and unto such the Lord will make good that word Isa. 45. 19. I said not to the
seed of Jacob seek ye my face in vain.

In no Duties is the Word of God more solemn than about those of his House. See
the dreadful charge to him that preaches 1. Tim. 6. 13. I give thee charge in
the sight of God who quickens all things, and before Jesus Christ etc. So
again 2. Tim. 4. 1, 2. I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his Kingdom, Preach the
Word, be instant in season and out of season etc. In obedience to which Command
are Lectures set up; and can you think that you which hear are not under a like
Charge? Shall they that preach be so charged to preach and so preach as in the
sight of him that will judge them for their preaching, and may you that are to
hear think to escape the Judgment of God if you hear without Seriousness and
Profit? Does not his Strictness with them that preach, more than intimate that
he will also be exact with them that hear? If they must take heed to themselves
and their Doctrine, you must take heed to your selves and your Hearing. If they
must speak so for matter, and manner, and end, as they that look to answer it
at the great and dreadful Day; you must hear upon the like peril.

There is no serious preacher of the Gospel but goes with an akeing heart about
his work, and when he has preached is ready to condemn himself for fear lest he
has not so spoken as he ought to have spoken; and I believe that there is no
serious Hearer but will see cause to ask himself, and have I so heard as I
ought to have heard?

Let us pray for David spirit, Affection and Experience, of which there is but
little now a days to be found.

Take a few Directions.
1. Be well acquainted with the Being, Nature, Worth, and Need of your souls.

Know that you have souls, how many live as if they had none? Consider also
they are immortal Existences and must live for ever. Theu (...) your selves
with their Needs, listen to their Gravings, and think of what a necessity they
are in, of a Supply.

Your souls are a Thousand times better than your bodies, and therefore
Providing for them of a Thousand times more Concernment. Oh, an immortal Soul,
eternal Estate, and endless Life are momentous Considerations, and should be
attended accordingly.

2. This being supposed, it will necessarily follow that you are indispensibly
bound to attend all means that God has appointed for the Salvation of your
Souls. Neglecting means for outward Subsistence, or bodily Maintenance will
bring you to Penury; then neglecting means for your soul's maintenance will
issue in Ruin and Misery.

3. Press on your souls the stamp of Divine Authority that is upon the
Ordinances of his House. Here God will be found, and if you slight these ways
of his appointing, he will not be found else where. And be assured that God
will not deceive you. Here, he has recorded his Name, and if you wait here,
you wait under a Promise of a Blessing, and shall not wait for nothing.

Then come to the House of God out of Conscience, not out of Custom, nor for
any byEnds, and if you come conscientiously, you will come constantly, I mean
as often as God gives you an opportunity.

To omit one Duty does but make way for our omitting another. Once give way to
Hindrances and you will never be without them, but they will come in upon you
like a flood: Make but a Gap once, and you will scarce know how or when to stop
it. And who can tell but that season which you lose might have been for your
Everlasting Advantage? The diseased persons not knowing when the Angel would
come down and move the waters, lay there always waiting to prevent the loss of
an opportunity; and so should we.

A pious soul if providentially detained from God's House grows the more
hungry after it, the want of one meal sharpens his stomach and increases his
Appetite for the next; but a carnal heart who out of sloth and slightiness
neglects it; will grow every day more carless and unconcerned than other, like
a weak stomach; the more it fasts the more it may.

4. Get suitable preparations for such a Solemnity. When Jacob was commanded by
God to go to Bethel to worship, he advises his people to put away the strange
Gods; wash their garments and be clean Genesis 35. 1, 2, 3. Every busi^^ (...)
moment and Importance bespeaks Preparation. A Journey by land, a Voyage by Sea,
Entertainment of a great friend call for Preparation; much more then when our
work (...) to meet with and entertain the Lord of Glory at his House which is
appointed for a place of meeting with God Exodus 20. 23. Hence that charge Eccl.
5. 1. Keep thy foot when thou go to the house of God, and be more ready to
hear etc. When there we must be ready, then there must be some time taken to
make ready, and that on penalty of offering the sacrifices of fools. He that
has so great a work to do, and does not prepare for it, does egregiously play
the fool. They that observe their own Hearts will find that they are not
ordinarily so ready for so great a work of drawing near to God as they ought to
be; then either (...) must prepare, or rush in without preparation, and what
ill music must that needs be in God's ear where the Instrument is out of tune?
the danger of which we had better believe and prevent than experience.

6. Go thither with answerable Expectations: We fare no better in the House
God because we expect no better. Aiming too low is the way to miss the mark. If
after humble Preparation our hearts are big with Exqectation the Lord will not
suffer our Hopes to be abortive. The expectation of the poor shall not perish
Psalm. 9. 18. Such profit as you have heard of is to be had in God's House,
believe it, prepare for it, carry your empty vessels, open your mouths wide,
expect to have them filled and they shall be filled. Look what you need and God
promises, and you shall not look in vain*

7. Let your attendance when there, be proportionable to your expectations in
going thither. Serious Preparation and great Expectation will occasion vigorous
Attendance. To come with a sense of great need to a place of full supply, with
up-raised Expectations, will oblige a man to look diligently lest he go away
without his Errand.

The servants of Benhadad (1. King. 20. 31, 32, 33.) saw what an ill case there
master was in, and had heard that Israel's Kings were merciful, this gave them
encouragement, they prepared themselves accordingly, in the capacity of humble,
perishing, self-judging Suppliants, and in most submissive Language presented
their Request before Ahab, and then it is said they did diligently observe
whether any thing would come from him, and did hastily catch it, and accordinly
obtained their Desire. Why know that we have far greater encourragement to wait
upon God in his House, we have an Invitation which they had not, we have a
Promise to go upon, whereas they went at a Peradventure, upon an it may be
only: Our necessities also are greater viz. not for the saveing of our bodily
lives, but for preservation of the lives of our immortal Souls, that should be
ten Thousand times more dear to us; then let us prepare thoroughly, come
expectingly; and then attend diligently, and catch up every word greedily,
withal waiting for the breatheing of the Spirit in an Ordinance, and we shall
find that the King of Heaven is far more gracious and bountiful than the Kings
of Israel were merciful.

8. Beware how you spend your Time afterward. When men have been warmed in an
Ordinance they had need see that they do not catch cold. Watching after Hearing
is as needful as Watching unto Hearing. It Is noted of the Thorny Hearers Luke
8. 14. that when they have heard they go forth, and are choak^ with cares and
riches and pleasures. Many a precious Sermon is thus lost. As they are like to
get but little good by coming to the House of God who come reaking out of their
worldly occasions without any prae-consideration or preparation; so they are
like to lose or lessen what they have got who rush into the world again without
after-consideration of or meditation on what they have met with. The World was
ever a great Enemy to the Word. Communing with our own Hearts and Discoursing
one with another about what we have heard and seen in God's House, will notably
promote our proficiency under the same.

When the Lord spoke so loud to Pharaoh in that dreadful Judgment of the
turning the Water into Blood, it is said, Exodus 7. 23. that he turned and went
into the house, and so it never went to his Heart. Had he not turned away his
eyes from, but kept them fixed on that solemn object, it might have reached his
Heart. And thus often it proves; many a word, many a Conviction, many a good
Beginning is lost in the House. From God's House men turn into their own, and
there in the Business of the House, in the Cares and Pleasures of the House, in
the Company of the House, in the various Diversions that they meet with there
and elsewhere, all is lost as though it had never been.

By way of motive take A few Considerations.
1. Consider whether thy own Judgment and Conscience be not convicted of the
Truth of this Doctrine. Does not Conscience proclaim aloud (or at least
secretly whisper in thine ears) that all this is is true? Is not God better
than the world, and Communion with him than any worldly Gain? And then is it
not better for thee to lock up thy doors, shutt up thy shop, and go to the
House of God in the season of it, yea and carry thy people with thee too, and
if they gain thou will gain too, if they gain not thou shall not lose because
thou have done thy Duty. Now if thou art convinced, think how it will look in
an evil day, to have gone on in the neglect of a duty of which thou have been
convinced, especially so profitable a duty as this. Thou may possibly silence
Conscience for a while, but can not always; it will one day cry like a
travailing woman, and all the worldly Gain thou have gotten the while will not
stop the mouth of it.

2. Know that God will call us to a Reckoning for all the Opportunities that we
have had, and for all that we might have had, whether we took them or no. You
shall be accountable not only for all the sermons you have heard, but also for
all those that you might have heard, and nothing but a carnal, careless, vain,
earthly Heart kept you from. Especially you that have been idleing, fitting
still, drinking, gameing etc. the while; God will assuredly set you down in his
Book Debitors for such a Sermon, and he will be sure to reckon with you when
the Books come to be opened. Here is the Provision made, the Table furnished,
your selves invited, your Trencher laid, your portion carved out for you, and
you must pay whether you eat or no; and is it not then best to attend and take
your share in the Gain, seeing you must bear your part of the Loss?

3. Contempt of God's House and the precious Ordinances of the same will be
very grievous and offensive unto God, and such neglect will be called Contempt.

For God to set up his House among us, and be at the charge of continuing to us
the Ordinances of the same, and yet for us to despise and under value them will
be highly provokeing. Indeed it is a sin that has all other sins in it, or
attending on it. No duty is well done if this be omitted: You cannot rightly
serve God in your own Houses if you do not while and when you may, attend Him
in his.

4. By this sin we provoke the Lord to shut up the doors of his House among
us, to pluck up stakes and be gone from the midst of us. If you refuse to hear,
God may justly refuse to speak. Ezekiel shall be made dumb to a rebellious
people.

Let us be awakened, God is threatening to break up House among us, and if ever
he so does, our undervaluing of his House will be the cause of it. That Nail in
God's House which has been hitherto left us seems to be shaken and loosened,
the Lord looks as if he were de parting from us, there be many awful Symptoms
of his Departure, and (...) unto us if he depart from us Hos. 9, 12.

Our Father's Love to the House of God above their own houses and all outward
Concerns, Occasioned the bringing of his Tabernacle into this Wilderness; see
that the coldness of our Affection thereto does not prevail with him to remove
it again. There is a beginning made among us already, Judgment is begun at the
House of God, let us take warning and receive Instruction. the master of the
House is risen from his place, and has begun to shut the door, and if men
either care not to come in, or venture to come carelessly in, he (...) shutt* it
quite.

New-England's Name and Glory has been Jehovah-Shammah [the Lord is there] His
House and Ordinance in a place give that name to a place. But what if he should
take away the Vineyard from us for our want of rendering him the fruit of it?
Why then call them Ichabod, for the Glory is departed from Israel. The Glory of
the Lord seems to be standing at the Threshold of the door. To look upon God
and see him going, upon Ordinances and see them going is a most awful sight,
for when they go the true glory of a place goes, nor will our other good things
stay behind, as wof^l experience does abundantly testify. If we come (...)
lose God's House and the glorious privileges of the same we shall be the most
miserable people under Heaven: As none have been so privileged, so none will
be so miserable as our selves.

It sorely aggravated Jerusalem's misery in the day of her Affliction Lam. 1.
7. that the Enemy ^mockt at her Sabbaths, and for our making a mock of Sabbaths
(which we do whi^^ we make a light matter of them, under-value and get no good
by them) God may justly leave the Adversary to mock at our Sabbaths. Surely the
Lord has been long threatening, but now he is in the way of Execution it is
high time for us to awake, and awaken one another.

And if it will be so bitter to remember the good things of God's house when
they be lost, i^ it not better to consider them, love, prize, and improve them
while they are present? which they that do rightly shall never have that
Occasion to remember them when they are gone.

God does not easily give up, or depart from a people that he has once visibly
and signally owned; no although he may observe a great deal of sin and
backsliding among them Hos. 11. 8, 9. Where he has once built his House God
delights to dwell, and is not for removing till there be no other remedy 2.
Chron. 36. 15, 16, 17. But if they either Idolize the House of God, (as Israel
did the Ark 1. Sam. 4.) and grow secure and wanton by reason of it, a^ they did
Jer. 7. 8, -- 12. or do not prize it as they ought, nor make such Returns as
may be expected, but contrariwise profane and pollute it; Then Go to my place
at Shile and see what I did to them, and so will I do to you.

To be deeply humbled for, and hasten to the ^lo^d of sprinkling for pardon and
cleansing of these provoking Evils that have been and are among us, and to get
an up-raised Esteem of and Affection to the House of God is the only way in
which we may hopefully and comfortably meet the Lord while he is yet in the way.

To conlude --

If one day in God's House here upon Earth be so much worth, what is a day, yea
the DAYS of ETERNITY worth in that upper House, that Presence Chamber, (...)
Father's House, where the Lord will exhibit all his Glory before and solace
himself with his Children for ever! Think what a sweet time that will be. If
now and then a Glimpse of his Glory be so taking and ravishing, what will
near, intimate, familiar, uninterrupted and endless Fellowship with Father and
Son be! If they be blessed that may dwell in this House, and should still praise
him for the same, how will they be blessed that shall for ever dwell in that
House? and what soul-delighting Hallelujahs will be everlastingly sung by those
to whom the Lines shall fall in that pleasant place, when they shall be
possessed of that goodly Heritage! This where we now are is but the Gate of
Heaven, the Porch, the Courts belonging to that House of Glory, what then is
the inmost Room, the Holy of Holies! If a day in these Courts be worth a
Thousand, how many Thousand yea Millions of days and years is a day, an hour
there worth! If this place be so beautiful and Admirable, oh how Amiable is
that Dwellingplace! Surely it is good dwelling there. If obscurer Glimpses of
God's Glory in his House be so precious and pleasant, what will the Beholding
of him face to face be, and that for ever and forever too!

Oh then prize this House as the Gate of that, and as the way that leads us
thither, and attend upon God therein accordingly, until we can experience the
Truth of what David here expresses. And be we well assured that God will sooner
or later give every sincere AtAttender on him here just cause to set his hand
and Seal to this great Truth One day in thy House is better than a THOUSAND.

FINIS.
Books printed for, and Sold by Joseph Brunning at his Shop at the Corner of
the Prison-Lane next the Exhange.
A Discourse concerning Comets, wherein the Nature of Blazing Stars is enquired
into, by Mr. Increase Mather.

-- An Essay for the Recording Illustrious Providence.

-- The Doctrine of Divine Providence opened and Applied. To which is Annexed

A Sermon wherein is showed That it is the (...) and should be the Cars of
Believers on Christ to live in the constant Exercise of Grace. by Mr. Nathanael
Mather, Minister of the Gospel at Dublin in Ireland.

Self-Employment in Secret, containing Evidences upon Self-examination,
Thoughts upon Painful Afflictions, Memorials for Practice. by Mr. John Corbet.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is intended for the Press a Discourse Concerning the Person, Offices,
and Glory of Jesus Christ; being Sacramental Meditations on Christ: by the
Reverend Mr. Increase Mather.


