A CALL From HEAVEN, To the PRESENT And SUCCEEDING GENERATIONS OR A DISCOURSE
WHEREIN is SHOWED I. That the Children of Godly Parents are under special
Advantages and Encouragements to seek the Lord. II. The Exceeding danger of
Apostasy, especially as to those that are the Children and Posterity of such
as have been Eminent for GOD in their Generation. III. That Young men ought to
remember God their CREATOR.


The Second Impression.

By INCREASE MATHER, Teacher of a Church in Boston in N. England.

Psalm. 45.17. I will make thy Name to be Remembered in all Generations.

Psalm. 71.17, 18. O God thou have taught me from my youth, and hitherto have I
declared thy wondrous works. Forsake me not etc.

Hac casti maneant in religione nepotes,
Et nati natorum, et qui nascentur ab illis.
Boston, Printed by R. P. for I. Brunning 1685.

To the Reader.
THe wise Man does justly condemn the folly of those, that are always saying
and complaining, what is the cause that the former days were better than
these? Not that he does approve of a spirit insensible of the evils, Sins,
Judgments, Degeneracy of the Times wherein we live; only there is in men an
aptness to morose Repinings, like the Poet's Old man, Laudatur temporis acti,
se puero; which is not from wisdom; such complaints often proceeding from
Ignorance in History, or non-observation of the vices in those of former, and
the Virtues in some of the present generation, who are endued Antiqua side,
priscis moribus. And for any upon this ground to murmur at yt Providence of God
for casting their lot to fall into an age of troubles, as if the Most High did
not balance humane affairs with such an equal distribution of Blessings (...)
ought to be, is foolish arrogance in wretched mortals, so to take upon them to
teach him whose ways are unsearchable. Well may the wise man say to such
Quaerulists, Thou do not wisely enquire concerning this matter. All this not
withstanding, some Times are more corrupt* dark and miserable than can be said
of all; Nor did Solomon ever say or think otherwise. As Nebuchadnezzar's Image
had a golden head, and iron feet, so there are golden and iron Ages. Albeit
golden times are a coming, when Jerusalem shall be holy, and strangers pass
through her no more; when David shall be Prince for ever: yet are we upon whom
the ends of the world are come, in an iron age; the Divine Oracle having told
us that in the last days perilous times shall come; Yea the dreggs of those
times are now at hand. They that have their thoughts exercised to discern
things of that nature, feel it, and bewail it, that there is a woeful Decay of
Religion throughout the world, yea throughout the Protestant world. The
Professors of this Age have more of Light and Notion, but less of Love and Zeal
and Power, than did appear in the Martyrs and blessed Puritans (for time was
when the Saints were known by that honorable Nickname) that are gone before
us. And let it be our prayer and Endeavor, that they who shall stand upon the
stage of this world as soon as we are gone, may be and do better than their
predecessors, that there may be no cause to think of what sometimes an Heathen
expressed, Aetas parentum pejor avis, tul^t nos nequiores, mox daturos
progeniem vitiosiorem.

What shall come on the Rising generation in N. England, is with Him that
knows all things. The present aspect of Providence is dismal on more accounts
than one; especially in that God has been removing the Pillars of this
Generation, even those that have stood in the Gap, and would have done much
toward keeping out a Deluge of overflowing Judgments. It is not eleven years
since Mitchel dyed (not to speak of others whom this Generation lost at that
time, for one such stroke seldom goes alone) and all New England shook when
that Pillar fell to the ground. For all this his anger is not turned away, but
his hand is stretched out still: Of late, He that holds the stars in his right
hand has caused some of our brightest Lights to set; and is not that a sign of
darkness to follow? Such Rebukes of God make the Pillars of Heaven to tremble.
And what shall we say, when the Lord is threatening to dry up that Fountain,
whose streams have made glad the City of God! Poor New England! Shall the day
come when there will be none to guide thee, of all the sons thou have brought
forth? Doubtless the Lord will not as yet wholly cast off a generation that are
the Posterity of his faithful Servants, that forsook all for Christ, and that
they might leave their Children under the Blessed wings of the Lord Jesus.
Nevertheless, how low he may bring this Generation, and how long it shall
continue, who can say? Only it is like to be until men shall say, Blessed is he
that comes in the Name of the Lord.

Advertisement.
There is now ready for the Press, A Discourse concerning the Person, Office,
and Glory of Jesus Christ: being Sacramental Meditations on Christ. By the
AVTHOR of this Book.

A CALL TO THE RISING GENERATION.
1. Chron. 28.9. If thou seek him, he will be found of thee.


GOd in his Providence does many times so order, as that the last words of his
eminent Servants shall be of most weighty Consideration. The Scripture sets a
special Emphasis and Remark upon the last words of David 2. Sam. 23.1. now
these are the last words of David the sweet singer of Israel; not that he never
spoke any words after those, but they were expressed by him toward the Close
of his days, not very long before he left the world. The same is to be said
concerning the words now before us; They are amongst the last, yea, the dying
speeches of that holy man of God; who perceiving that the time of his departure
was at hand, lays a most solemn Charge upon his son Solomon, that he should
endeavor to approve himself a faithful Servant of his Fathers God. Several
Arguments are made use of to back this Charge; one is in these words, taken
from the benefit which would attend a sincere seeking the Lord. If thou seek
him, he will be found of thee; that is to say, thou shall then be made happy in
the enjoyment of God for ever. If others seek God in sincerity of heart, they
shall find him, but (says David) it is eminently true concerning thee, because
the Lord has been thy Fathers God. Thou art a Child of a Father that had a
special interest in God, and therefore if thou set thy self to seek him, know
for thy encouragement, that he will be most ready to show himself favorable to
thee. Wherefore the Doctrine which may at present be insisted on from the
words, is,

DOCT. That The Children of godly parents are under peculiar Advantages and
Encouragements to seek the Lord.

For the Clea^ing of this Doctrine, 2 Things may be attended. 1. To enquire
what is employed in this Seeking the Lord which the Text speaks of, 2. How it
does appear that the Children of godly parents are under peculiar Advantages
and Encouragements so to do.

QUEST. 1. What is Employed in this seeking the Lord?

ANSW. 1. It does imply that men by nature are such as have lost God. The
sinner has lost himself, Luke 15.32. this thy brother was lost, and is found.
Yea, and he has lost God too, He is wandered from his Fathers house. Hence the
Apostle said to the Ephesians, they were without God in the world. Yea, it is
true concerning children of godly parents as well as others Ephs. 2.3. we
(says the Apostle) were by nature the Children of wrath even as others. We
that are Jews and descended of holy Ancestors, we that are now converted, and
made Apostles of Christ, by nature were Subjects of the wrath and righteous
displeasure of God* Not but that some of the Children of godly men have Grace
wrought in them whilst in a state of Infancy, as John Baptist was filled with
the Holy Ghost from his mothers womb, but they do not derive that grace from
their parents, and therefore it is not natural, but supernatural, when any of
the Children of sinful men are made gracious.

2. Seeking the Lord does imply a sense of this lost condition. Sense of want
puts men upon seeking. The Prodigal was hunger-bitten before he would seek to
be reconciled to his Father, when he saw that he was fain to live upon husks,
and that there was no way but he must perish with hunger, except he sought unto
his Father for a supply, he would do so. If a man has lost a thing, except he
know that he has lost it, he will not seek after it. Hence in the Parable
concerning the lost piece of silver, it is said, what woman if she lose a piece
of silver, does not light a candle, and sweep the house, and seek diligently
till she find it, Luke 15.8. So that there must be sense of Loss before there
will be seeking or finding. Nor will men seek the Lord except they be by his
Spirit made sensible, that they have lost his favor, and are through sin and
the Fall become miserable.

3. This seeking does imply earnest desire to find God. That which a man
seeks after he would be glad to find. When Job fought after Communion with
God, he makes enquiry, where shall I find him? Chapt. 23.3. No one will seek
after that which is not an object of his desires, Psalm. 27.4. One thing have I
desired, that will I seek after. If thou seek him, that is to say, if thou
earnestly desire to find the Lord, then so it shall be. If God be the chief
Object of thy desires, if the desire of thy soul be toward the remembrance of
his Name, then he will be found of thee. As it was with David himself, Psa.
63.^1. O God thou art my God, early will I seek thee; my soul thirsts for
thee, my flesh longs for thee, in a dry and thirsty Land where no water is.
How are the desires and affections of a thirsty man carried out after water, in
a thirsty Land where no water is? When the desires of the soul are in like
manner carried out after God, that is seeking him.

4. Seeking the Lord does imply Diligence in the use of means in order to
obtaining the favor of God. The end implies the means which is necessary in
order to obtaining that end, now the favor of God is the end of this seeking.
Hence it is called a seeking his face, i. e. his ^avour. Psalm. 10^.4 Seek the
Lord's face. and the means in order to obtaining that end is Repentance of
former sins, Faith in the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, ( Jer. 50.5.) walking
according to the holy Rules of the Word of God, which is therefore called a
walking in all well pleasing before the Lord, Inasmuch as so to walk is the way
to find the continuance of Divine Favor.

5. Seeking the Lord does imply the worship and service of God. As they that do
not worship God are said to be such as seek him not, Isai. 65.1. I am found of
them that sought me not, meaning that the Gentiles who in former times did not
own and worship the true God, should be brought to the knowledge of him. So to
seek God is to worship him, 2. Chron. 11..16. It is said, that such as set
their hearts to seek the Lord God of Israel i. e. to worship him, came to
Jerusalem to sacrifice to the Lord God of their Fathers. It is true, that in
special that great duty of prayer (which is a special part of religious
worship) is ^^^nded, yet not that only; all other parts of Divine Worship are
comprehended under this expression, Hence it is in the Context noted by that of
serving the Lord. Now to Serve GOD is to worship him aright. We (said they in
Ezra) are the servants of the God of Heaven, meaning that they did worship none
else but him, so that a Servant of the Lord is the same with a worshiper of
him. This seeking is here set in in opposition to forsaking God. Now Forsaking
has a special respect to that sin of Idolatry and false Worship. David was a
man that was very faithful to God in the matters of his worship: As for Idols
he would not so much as name them Psalm. 16.4. And we read in the Sacred history
of David, that when he had subdued his Enemies, he burnt their Images and
Idols, in an holy indignation at the sin of Idolatry: Now he does exhort his
son Solomon to follow his Father's steps, in being Loyal to God in the matters
of his worship. All these particulars may be intended here. If thou seek the
Lord h. ^. if thou art sensible of thy left estate by nature, so as to desire
reconciliation with God in the first place, and do therefore repent of Sin
and believe in Christ, and continuest to worship and serve God according to his
own will, then be assured that thou shall enjoy his favor, and be
everlastingly blessed.

We come now to the second thing propounded, viz.

QUEST. 2. How does it appear that the children of godly parents are under
peculiar Advantages and Encouragements to seek the Lord?

ANSW. 1. In that the vein of Election do run through the loins of godly
Parents for the most part? Tho it be not wholly and only so, that Elect Parents
have none but elect Children, or that elect children are always born of elect
Parents See Mr. Carter of Abraham's Covenant, p* 38.30. and Dr. Winter of
Infant Bapt. page 37*
yet God has seen meet to cast ye line of election so, as that generally elect
Children are cast upon elect Parents. John directs one of his Epistles, To the
elect Lady and her Children, whom he also found walking in the Truth: Not only
the Mother but the Children did belong to God. As usually so it is, that if the
Mother be elect, at least wise some of the Children are so too. There are many
Scriptures which do intimate this Truth, Psalm. 105.8. He has remembered his
Covenant forever, the word which he commanded to a thousand generations.
Intimating both that the longer a ge-Generation does continue godly, the more
gracious will the Lord be to the seed and posteriity, and that there are some
that in a continued succession for many generations the Lord has chosen, Hence
Psalm. 103.17. The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon
them that fear him, and his righteousness unto childrens Children. Showing that
God from Eternity has designed mercy to some Parents and to their children,
and their Childrens Children, Isa.. 59. ult. My Spirit which is upon thee, and
any words which I have put into thy mouth shall not depart out of thy mouth,
nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed says the Lord, from hence forth and for
ever. To the same purpose is that, Ezekiel. 37.25. What more plain can be spoken,
to show that God does many times cast elect children upon elect Parents in a
continued succession from generation to generation? See also Isa. 65.22, 23.
Mine Elect and their offspring with them are the blessed of the Lord. So that
when Parents are Elect, usually their Children are so too. Hence it was said to
Zacheus, Salvation is come to thy house, Luke 19.9. Not only to his Soul but to
his house. Usually if God intends to save a man, there are some of his house i.
e. posterity that are heirs of Salvation also. And therefore the Apostle said
to (...) Jailer, believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and (...) shall be saved and
thy house, Act. 16.31. How did Paul know that if the Jailer bebelieved his
Children should be saved? was it from any special Revelation concerning those
Children more than with respect unto others? no; but he knew that when God
brought the Father into a state of Salvation, he was wont to save however some
of his Children and Posterity. Hence also Paul said to Timothy, when I call to
remembrance the unfeigned faith in thee, which dwelt first in thy Grandmother
Lois, and thy mother Eunice, and I am persuaded in thee also. 2. Tim. 1.5. he
does probably and hopefully conclude that Timothy did belong to God, because he
was the son of a godly mother and Grandmother. Moreover, Experience and
observation does confirm this Truth, that de facto it has been so. For the
Elect are not found in all places alike, but in some Nations more than in
others, and that for many generations successively. And in some Families more
than in others: There are some Families in the world, that God has designed to
show peculiar mercy to them, from generation to generation. And if an account
should be taken concerning all the godly men that are now alive in the world,
doubtless it would be found that the greatest part of them are sprung from
godly Parents. Though there may be many converted ones in the world, whose
Parents did not fear God; yet for the Generality of true believers they are
such as have descended from believing Parents.

2. The Lord has established his Covenant not only with Parents, but with
Children also. Genesis 17.7. I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and
thy seed after thee, in their generations, for an everlasting covenant, to be a
God to thee and to thy seed after thee. The Saints in all Ages are concerned in
Abraham's Covenant, under which Children are Comprehended. To say that the
Covenant was extended to Children under the Old Testament, but not under the
New, is to lessen the Grace of God in these days of the Gospel. Yea then the
Jews would have been great losers by believing on Christ: If they could have
said, in former times our Children were interested in the gracious Covenant of
God, but if we embrace the Gospel they shall have no part in the Lord, this
would have been such an objection against believing as could never have have
bin answered. Wherefore, we shall find that those Scriptures which relate to
Gospel times, expressly declare, That not only Believers themselves, but their
Children also are subjects of the Lords gracious Covenant with his People.
Isai. 61.8.9. I will make an everlasting Covenant with them and their seed
shall be known among the Gentiles, and their Offspring among the People; all
that see them shall acknowledge that they are the seed which the Lord has
blessed. And Chapt. 65, ver. 23, They are the seed of the blessed of the Lord,
and their offspring with them. Now this Consideration is a great encouragement
to seek the Lord; So it was to them. Jer. 3.22. We come unto thee, for thou art
the Lord our God. We are thy Vovenant People, and that does encourage us to
come unto thee. And this did encourage David to seek and hope for the Lords
Salvation Ps. 86.16. Save the son of thine handmaid. And the Apostle did
encourage the Jews to repent and return unto the Lord (...) this Argument, viz.
in that they were the childr^n of the covenant Act. 3.19, 25. From thence it is
Evident that the Children of godly Parents stand in a peculiar relation unto
God, and that therefore he will not cast them off, except there be great cause
for it: Not surely as long as they seek him, and desire to return to him and
serve him.

3. There are special promises belonging to such Children. Not only the
Covenant in general which is, as it were, a Constellation of glorious Promises,
but there are peculiar Promises made concerning them. There is a promise that
they shall be blessed above other Children ^sa. 112.1, 2. Blessed is the man
that fears the Lord, his seed shall be mighty on the earth, the generation of
the upright shall be blessed. And that successively from one generation to
another, Psa. 102.28. The children of thy servants shall continue, and their
seed shall be established b^, are thee. In another place, David speaking
concerning the Children of God's servants, and that in the days of the
Messiah, says A seed shall serve him, it shall be accounted to the Lord for a
generation. Psa. 22.30. intimating that the Lord will uphold among the Children
of his people a certain number that shall be owned as a race of Gods Children.
And therefore we have a Promise of converting grace to be bestowed on such
children, Deuteronomy. 30.6. The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart
of thy seed. There is a promise for grace as well as to grace, as to those that
belong to the Election of Grace. Circumcision of heart implies Regeneration,
which is promised to the Lords servants with respect unto their Children; And
that was one reason why the Lord did of old appoint Circumcision to be applied
to the Children of his people, that so this promise of converting Grace in due
time to be vouchsafed, might be sealed. The same thing is promised Isai. 44.3.
I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring. And
the Lord has made a blessed promise of salvation to such children, Isai.
49.25. I will save thy Children. Hence it is. promised that the seed of the
Lords servants shall inherit Sion Psa. 69.36. Which word is made good in these
days of the Gospel, by giving Heaven to the Children of believers as their
everlasting Inheritance. Now albeit these promipromises do not absolutely
respect all the children of every godly man, only the elect among them, yet
they are generally and indefinitely propounded; and that is encouragement as to
Parents to pray for their children, yea for all of them, as it was to David 1.
Chron. 17, 3 last ver. O my God, thou have told thy servant that thou will
build him an house, therefore thy servant has found in his heart to pray
before thee. And now Lord, thou art that God that have promised this goodness
to thy servant; now therefore let it please thee to bless the house (i. e. the
Family and posterity) of thy servant that it may be before thee for ever; for
thou blessest O Lord and it shall be blessed for ever. So it is a wonderful
encouragement to the Children of holy men to seek unto the Lord for grace and
Salvation for themselves: The Child of a godly man may come before the Lord,
and say Lord thou have promised to bestow Grace, and give eternal blessings
unto those that are the Children of such as fear thy Name, my Father, my Mother
thou know did fear thy Name, why then may not that promise belong to me?

4. The children of godly parents are the subjects of much faithful prayer.
David prayed earnestly for his son Solomon, 1. Chron. 29.19. and 22.16. So did
Isaac for his son Jacob, Genesis 28.1, 3, 4. Now it is matter of great
encouragement that prayer is going: especially the prayers of godly parents
will do much in order to obtaining mercy for their children. For they have a
great natural affection toward their Children, which when it is sanctified,
makes them to be the more earnest with God for them. If a child were to ask
prayers for his Life, let him desire the prayers of his Father, if his Father
be indeed one that has an Interest in Heaven. It is said in the fifth
Commandment, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in
the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee. Exodus 20, 12. because as for
dutiful Children, their parents are engaged to pray much for them, and by that
means do lengthen out their days. In the Hebrew it is they shall prolong thy
days h. e. thy Father and thy mother shall do so. How should they do it? See
Dr* Owen on Psa. 130. page 218.
even by praying for their Posterity, and blessing them in the Name of the
Lord, and by that means prolonging their days not only upon the Earth, but to
Eternity in Heaven, of which the Land of Canaan was a Type. The Prayers of
godly Parents have a great Influence and Interest for the obtaining blessings
temporal, spiritual, and eternal for their Children. Abraham's prayer^ for
Ishmael prevailed far, and his prayers for Isaac prevayled further, Abraham
said unto God, O that Ishmael might live before thee, and God said, as for
Ishmael I have heard thee, behold I have blessed him, but my Covenant will I
establish with Isaac: Especially if parents pray in Faith. As sometimes a
father has a particular Faith for such a child. As to those that have much
Communion with God and know much of his mind, many times it is so, that a
believing parent can say, as for such a child I know he shall be blessed and
made a blessing, I have surely prevayled with God for him. As Isaac said of
Jacob Genesis 27.33. I have blessed him and he shall be blessed; so a godly parent
can sometimes say, such a child of mine, Christ has blessed him, yea, and he
shall be blessed for ever. Now this is a great encouragement to children, that
Prayer and Faith has been acting for them: Yea that a Stock of Prayers has
been laid up for them. Is it not a great encouragement unto a child when he can
say, my g^^cious Father has carried my name before ^od in secret many a
Thousand time, even every day and night since I was born into the world?
certainly these prayers shall not fall to the ground.

5. Such Children have blessed Examples set before them. Now that is a great
advantage. That wise Seneca
Heathen could say, plus vivitur exemplis quam praeceptis. Examples will do
more then precepts, upon young ones especially. A Father that walks with God,
may say to his Children as Paul to the Corinth-Corinthians unto whom he was a
spiritual Father, 1. Cor. 5.15, 16. In Christ Jesus I have begotten you through
the Gospel, wherefore I beseech you be you followers of me. And again, Cap.
11.1. Be you followers of me, even as I also am of Christ. So may a Father that
walks before God as he ought to do say to his Children; Observe my example,
and follow me as I follow Christ. Or as the same Apostle said to Timothy, Thou
have known (...) Doctrine and manner of life, 2. T^m. 3.10. Timothy was
Intimate with Paul and therefore doubtless knew more of his secret way of
walking and Communion with God, than was known or imagined by the world; so do
children observe more of their Parents holy Course of life than others do,
which is no small advantage. A Child is witness of his Father's Zeal, Faith,
Patience; he sees that his Father is conscientious and holy, and much in
prayer to God. Now what an advantage is this? He needs not go far to see how
he ought to walk and please God, for he sees it before his eyes every day, by
the Example and Copy his Father sets before him. Moreover, it is a great
encouragement unto the Child of a godly Parent, when he can think and say, my
Father did serve God, and the Lord accepted of him, therefore if he serve God
he will accept of me. My Father did repent and believe and walk in the way of
holiness, God blessed him and his family; theretherefore if I walk in the steps
of my Fathers Faith and Obedience, the God of my Father will bless me and mine
for ever.

6. The Children of wicked men fall under heavy curses and Threatenings;
Therefore they are godly men's Children unto whom peculiar Encouragements to
seek the Lord do appertain; As for wicked transgressors, they are cursed not
only in their persons, but in their Posterity, even cursed in the fruit of
their body, Deuteronomy. 28.15. The house (i. e. the Children) of the wicked shall be
overthrown. Prove. 14.11. The seed of evil doers shall never be renowned,
prepare slaughter for his Children for the iniquity of his Fathers, Isai.
14.20, 21. It is true, that if a Child do unfeignedly repent and turn to God,
though his parents should have been never so wicked, God will accept of him;
The repenting son shall not be damned merely for his Father's iniquity, Ezekiel.
18.14. But it is more rare for such Children ever to repent; and if they do not
repent, they shall be punished for their Fathers and Mother's sins as well as
for their own, because they justify them by doing like them. How many Examples
are there Recorded in the Scripture of God's punishing Children with their
Parents and because of their Sin? So Achan's Children, and Dathan's and
Abiram's; yea, Millions of Children that were drowned and damned with their
cursed parents in Noah's Flood; and when Sodom and Gomorrah was destroyed, not
only the parents but the Children perished, and now suffer together the
vengeance of eternal fire; and was not an express Charge given Concerning the
little ones of the Amalekites, Midianites etc. that they should be destroyed
with their Fathers? Thus does the Lord recompense the iniquity of the fathers
into the bosom of their Children.

7. We find in the Scripture that the Children of holy men have bin encouraged
from this consideration, That they were so related to such as had a special
interest in God. -- So Jacob, Genesis 31.5. The God of my Father has been with
me. and ver. 42. except the God of my Father and Fear of Isaac had been with
me, and Chapt. 32.9. Jacob said, O God of my father Abraham, and God of my
father Isaac. He was greatly encouraged in looking up to God from that very
Consideration, that the Lord was the God of his Father, and God of his
Grandfather. So Moses Exodus 18.4. The God of my father was my help, and
delivered me from the sword of Pharaoh. and David Psa. 116.16. O Lord, truly I
am thy Servant; I am thy servant, the son of thy Handmaid: Inasmuch as his
mother was a precious godly woman, he was encouraged to plead his Interest in
God. So Solomon, 1. King. 8.15. The Lord our God be with us, as he was with our
Fathers, let him not leave us nor forsake us. Inasmuch as the Lord was their
fathers God, Solomon and the Lords people with him had their hearts drawn forth
to hope that he would be their God also, so as never to forsake them. And
Daniel's heart was enlarged in giving praises to God, since he could say, I
thank thee O thou God of my Fathers who have given me wisdom. Dan. 2.23.

These things then make it evident that such children are under peculiar
encouragement to seek the Lord.

USE. 1. Hence it is a great mercy to be born and brought up under godly
parents. Though some make a light matter of it, like Esau that said what good
shall this birthright do me? he despised his birthright; but the things
mentioned make it to be a mercy indeed. To be under the wing of the covenant
tho but as to the external dispensation of it is it self a mercy. To have the
means of Grace vouchsafed, (which is ever wont to follow upon a
covenant interest in God) is mercy: Wherefore the Apostle having propounded
that question, What advantage has the Jew above the Gentile? makes Answer,
much every way, chiefly in that to them are committed the Oracles of God. Romans
3.2. Next unto Christ and the Spirit of grace, the blessed Bible is the
greatest gift that See Dr. Tuckney on Phil. 3.8. page 66.67*68.
ever was bestowed on the world; now this the Children of godly parents are
wont to enjoy. Timothy being descended from a godly mother and grandmother,
even from a child knew the Scriptures, ^. Tim. 3.15. To enjoy the Word and
Ordinances of God publicly dispensed is a great mercy; it is therefore
mentioned as such a blessing as is enough to make amends for many sorrows and
afflictions, Thine eyes shall behold thy teachers Isa. 30.20. This is wont to
be the portion of godly men's Children. And to have the benefit o^ private
instructions, admonitions, exhortations is a great mercy; Solomon confesses
that his father and his mother taught him good doctrine; Prove. 4.2. It was good
because for his everlasting benefit and advantage. Nor are the children of
godly men without this benefit, Psalm. 34.11. Come you children hearken to me,
and I will teach you the fear of the Lord. It is a great mercy to be taught and
principled in the fear of God, and that betimes: to be told of the evil of sin,
the infinite danger of dying in a natural, unconverted estate, the necessity of
obtaining an interest in Christ, and to be directed in the right way to
salvation. Also to be the subjects of much prayer is great mercy; It Is
mentioned concerning Solomon as a special Favor God would vouchsafe to him,
Psalm. 72.15. Prayer shall be made for him continually. Thus concerning the
children of the Lords people, the public prayers of the Church reach them;
and their godly parents are daily praying for them; so that prayer is made for
them continually. Moreover such children experience outward blessings and
preservations for their parents sake. It is said concerning him that fears
God, his children shall find a place of Refuge Pro. 14.26. And the Lord said to
Abraham concerning Ishmael Genesis 21.13. I will make a nation of him because he
is thy seed. And God spared Solomon for his father David's sake, -- 1. King.
11.34. And as for Jehoram, all his children were destroyed save one, and that
one had been cut off too, had it not been for the respect which the Lord did
bear to his blessed fore-Father 1. Kin. 8.19. Yea, and such children have a
greater blessing with that outward state which God in his Providence shall see
meet to cast upon them, than the Children of wicked men usually have, though it
may be they have not so much of the world as some others, yet since what they
have was gotten in a way of righteousness, a Blessing comes along with it. For
this cause David says, a little that a righteous man has is better than the
Riches of many wicked. Psalm. 37.16.

Use. 2. Hence we ought to nourish hope concerning such children, and that
above what can be said with respect to the Children of other parents. But some
one may object and say, Have not good men bad Children? Godly men ungodly
Children? How then is there Ground of Hope with respect unto such Children in
Peculiarwise?

Answ. This is sadly true; the Most High to show the sovereignty of his Grace,
sometimes chooses some of the Children of a wicked parent, and refuses some
of those who are the offspring of godly parents; Also to show that it is not
in the power of men to give grace, no not in the power of godly men, so much as
to their own Children; sometimes such children prove very unlike unto their
godly parents. It was therefore said to Samuel, thy sons do not walk in thy
ways, 1. Sam. 8.5. And that profane Je^oiakim* how unlike was he to his
blessed Father Josiah? It is noted concerning Josiah, that when the word of God
was read to him, he rent his clothes, humbled himself, and was afraid of the
Lords holy displeasure; but Jehoiakim after three or four leaves were read, he
took his penknife, and cut the Roll in pieces, and burnt it in the fire, he
was not afraid nor rent his Clothes, Jer. 36.23, 24. Yet this is further to be
added and considered that when the Children of good men are unlike their
parents in grace and Holiness it proceeds not from any unfaithfulness in the
blessed God as to his Covenant with such parents, or with their children. for

1. Usually it is some evil in such parents (though otherwise godly) which the
Lord does punish in their Children; either they were not so diligent in
teaching and instructing them as they ought to be; If we must judge all those
parents ungodly whose Children are miserably instructed I am certain that many
amongst us who have a name to live, and would be thought to have the root of
the matter in them, will be found among the ungodly: Or parents are sinfully
indulgent toward their Children; so was Eli, indeed he instructed them, told
them of the evil of those ways they walked in, and exhorted them to reform but
he corrected and restrained them not: Isaac was too indulgent toward his
profane Esau; So was David toward Absalom, that afterward proved a Rebel,
rising up in arms against his own Father: And he did sinfully indulge
Adonijah, the Scripture takes notice of it, that his father had not displeased
him at any time, in saying why have thou done so? 1. King. 1.6. No wonder he
came to such an unhappy End, for usually such children are first or last a
shame to the father that begat them, and bitterness to the mother that bare
them. Or it may be parents do not pray and believe for their Children as they
ought to do; God in this case sometimes faith unto parents, according to your
faith be it done unto you: If you pray much, and believe much for your
children, you shall obtain much Mercy from the Lord for them, Psalm. 33. ult.

2. Many times the Children of godly men are like their parents. In some godly
families all the children thereof are made partakers of converting saving
grace: So in Jacobs Family; there is reason to believe that his twelve sons did
repent before they died and they are now in Heaven, considering that they were
Types of the Elect of God, and their names were written upon the breast of the
High Priest, when he entered into the Holy of Holies. So concerning Job's
children, the Scripture says, that after the death of his Children and the
loss of his estate, the Lord gave Job twice as much as he had before, yet he
had but ten Children after that, which was the number he had before, wherefore
Interpreters probably conclude that his other Children were not lost; they
might all go to Heaven notwithstanding the sad and sudden death which befell
them. And Experience confirms the truth of this, we see that in some Families
God is pleased to bestow converting Grace upon all the children therein,
especially if their parents be very much in prayer to God for them. I remember
I once heard an holy praying man say, my Father had six children, and they are
all either with Christ, or in Christ; and he has given me six children, three
of them are already with Christ, and the other (I bless his name) are in
Christ. And I have read of one See Fulfilling of the Script. page 442.
who held much Communion with God, that once said to an intimate friend, I have
this day obtained mercy from God, not only for my self, but also for all mine,
and evident signs of regenerating grace did afterward appear in all his
Children.

3. God is w^nt to remember and establish his covenat with some of the children
of his Servants however; if not to all yet with some of them. It Is commonly
seen that as for wicked parents, though they have many children* they are all
ungodly, like their Parents; but it is seldom known that if a godly man has
many Children that they all prove wicked; first or last God converteth some of
them. If their be an Ishmael in Abraham's Family, there is also an Isaac: if
there be an Esau in Isaac's Family, there is also a Jacob: If there be an
Absalom in David's Family, there is also a Solomon; nor ought we to doubt but
that Nathan and many more of David's children are now in Heaven, albeit three
of them perished.

4. If the Lord cast off the Immediate seed he remembers his Covenant to others
that are more remote: Esau was hated, yet it is conceived by learned men that
Job and his godly friends were of Isaacs posterity by Esau. Samuels son Joel
was not like his father but his grandchild Heman was an excellent Prophet,
like his blessed Grandfather; yea, and many of Samuel's great grandchildren
were faithful Ministers in the House of God, 1. Chron. 6.3. and 25.5, 6. The
Lord has sometimes cast off a few generations, and yet at last remembers his
Covenant made with blessed Ancestors, J^^. 31.17. There is hope in thine end
(h. e. as to after generations there is hope) says the Lord, that thy Children
shall come again to their own Border. There is then cause to nourish hope
concerning such Children; there is so with respect to succeeding Generations in
New England: Albeit there is doleful Degeneracy appearing in the face of this
generation, and no man can say but that a considerable part of the present
generation will perish both temporally and eternally, yet there are some that
the Lord will remember his Covenant with, even a remnant according to Election
that shall be saved. We may say of New-England's Children (many of them) as the
Apostle speaks concerning the Jews, however the case may be with them at the
present, they are beloved for their Fathers sake, Romans 11.28.

USE. 3. Hence Parents should be careful how they approve themselves for their
poor children's (as well as for their own) sake. There are especially Three
things that Parents should be careful about for their Childrens Sake.

1. That they be in a state of grace themselves; that they have a special and
saving interest in God. As David said to his son Solomon, 1* Chron. 28.20. The
Lord God, even my God will be with thee; So if you can upon good grounds say,
The Lord is my God, you may the better hope he will be with your Children. If
you be indeed righteous in the ^ight of God, 'twill be your poor childrens
advantage Ps. 37.25 I have been young and now am old, yet have I not seen the
righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread. But if you be unconverted, and
Christless, what a case are your Children in? that if they be in any distress,
they have a father that cannot Pray for them, or if he do, his prayers find no
acceptance with God, because they proceed from one that has not an interest in
Heaven. Remember that Scripture Deuteronomy. 5.29. O that there were such an heart in
them, that they would fear me, and keep all my Commandments always, that it
might be well with them, and with their Children forever! plainly intimating
that if Parents truly fear God, their children shall fare the better for it;
Yea, let me tell you, that then if any of them dye in their Infancies See Mr.
Whiston's Primitive practice* of Infant Baptism.
you need not doubt of their salvation, Deuteronomy. 30.19. Thou and thy seed shall
live. God having taken your Children into a Covenant of life, if they never
break that Covenant, shall they not live for ever? yea, they shall live for
ever,

2. Parents should be careful what opinions they embrace, for oftentimes the
poison of a corrupt Opinion in the Father proves baneful to the child; as
Naaman's Leprosy went down from Generation to Generation; so the plague of
spiritual Leprosy in the Head. is sometimes propagated from the Father to the
Son.

3. Parents should be careful of their Conversation; because their Children are
apt to follow their example, especially in that which is evil. As it is noted of
Ahaziah, that he walked in the way of his father and of his mother 1. King.
22.52. And of those superstitious persons 2. King. 17.41. They served their
graven Images, both their Children and their childrens childrens; as did their
Fathers, so do they to this day. If the Father follow superstitious or profane
practices, it is most likely that the children will do so too. Therefore you
that are parents, in the fear of God look to it that you do not scandalize your
children by an evil example: If your Children see you in drink sometimes, will
they not be Drunkards too? If they hear you swear, will not they swear also? If
they see you carless in the observation of the Sabbath, will they not likewise
be guilty of Sabbath-breaking? And if they see you live in the neglect of holy
duties, no Prayer in the Family, how shall they be seekers of God? It will be a
wonder if such Children do not prove Atheists, that are brought up in Families
where they never see any prayer or acknowledgement of God. O think with your
selves, if you that are Parents should any of you perish, and your miserable
Children should follow you to Hell, how will they curse you there? If thy
Children perish throw thy evil Example, they will follow thee up and down in
the ever-burning Lake crying out See Mr. Bolton of Walking with God. p. 249*
Woe to us that ever we were born of such Parents that had no grace to teach us
the ways of God, and lead us in the paths of Godliness! If you that were our
parents had discharged your duty toward us, we might have been in the JOYS OF
HEAVEN, but now our damned souls must live for ever in these everlasting
flames; Thus will thou hear thine own Children yelling in thine Ears, world
without end. Can thou think of this and thy heart not break? then thy heart
is an Adamant, and thy heart strings made of Iron sinews.

USE. 4. Of Exhortation.

1. Let godly Parents that are here before the Lord this day, suffer the word
of Exhortation, Do you endeavor to the utmost of your power, that your
Children may become seekers and servants of the only true God in Jesus Christ.
And indeed when you present them to the Lord in Baptism, you promise to do your
utmost that they may become faithful servants of that God who is Father, Son,
and Spirit; take heed that you do not become guilty of violating that
engagement. God has committed children unto you, that so you might bring them
up for him, The children which thou have born unto me, Ezekiel. 16.20. If a man
had the Children of a Prince or great man committed to his Care and Charge for
Education, would he not be careful about that matter? It is a solemn thing,
which it may be you have not duly considered, that the great God has entrusted
you with those that are his Children that so you may nurse them up for him: O
then bring them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. It is not enough
for Parents to serve the Lord themselves, but they must use utmost endeavors
that after they are dead, their children may walk in the waves of God. And if
they be duly careful in that matter, they have reason to expect that God will
remember and establish his Covenant with their Children. For is it noted
concerning Abraham, that his care was that his Family after him, (viz. after he
should cease to be in the world) might keep the way of the Lord, and so did the
Lord bring upon him the thing which he had spoken and graciously promised with
respect to Abraham's posterity. And in special you that are mothers have a great
advantage put into your hands to be instilling See Mr. Firmin's Real Christian.
page 8.
good principles into your childrens souls betimes. Solomon's mother taught
him: We do not read that Absalom's and Adonijah's mother taught them, as
Bathsheba did her son Solomon. And it is not for nothing, that when children
have proved thus or so, particular notice is taken in Scripture, that such or
such were their mothers: Rehoboam did not prove well, and it is noted that his
mother was an Ammonitess. On the other hand, Hezekiah, Jehoshaphat, Josiah were
eminent Servants of God, and the Scripture does mention who were their mothers.
O then you that are mothers should endeavor that your children (as Luther
speaks) may suck in Religion from their mothers Breasts.

And let all godly parents earnestly seek unto the Lord for their poor
children. You ought to do so daily and particularly, and by name before the
Lord, and thus should you do every day: As we read concerning Job, that he
offered burnt Offerings for his children according to the number of them all,
thus did Job continually. Chapt 1.5. Remember that you are under peculiar
encouragement so to do: if the Children of godly Parents have special
encouragement to seek the Lord, then the same thing must needs be true
concerning Parents themselves, with respect to their children: And it is
eminently true with respect to the Children of New England, inasmuch as they
are the posterity of such as have been sufferers on the account of the Name and
Truth of the Lord Jesus. Are not such Parents pronounced blessed twice over?
Mat. 5.11, 12. even blessed in themselves, and in their posterity? Who knows
but God may remember the kindness of the Fathers in these Chu^ches (who
followed him into this Wilderness* whilst it was a land not (...)) unto their
Children after them? Plead it with the Lord; if you that be godly Parents lay
up a stock of prayers for your children, it may stand them in more stead than
if you should leave them never such an Inheritance as to the things of the
world; when you are dead your prayers shall live. There is many a Child whose
Father and Mother is now in Heaven, that fares the better and will do so for
ever, on the account of prayers made for him by his blessed Parents while they
were in this world. And this further let me say for your encouragement, that if
the Lord stir up your hearts to be importuimportunate with him for your
Children., it is a sign that God intends mercy to them. That instance of
Monica, Austins gracious mother is known and famous; when she made her
Complaint and wept to a faithful Minister, because her son did for the present
follow ungodly Courses and Companions; vade a me (inquit) ita vivas. Fieri non
potest ut filius istarum lacrimarum pereat. August. Confess. Lib. 3. Cap. 12.
Be of good Comfort (said that holy man) for it cannot be that a Child of so
many prayers and tears should perish.

Say not, Oh! but I have prayed, and yet see no answer to my prayers! well! but
continue seeking the Lord still, despair not of a good answer at last. That
famous Mr. Rogers of Dedham would sometimes say, If I see a Child that has
either a godly father or a godly mother, I shall have hope for him a long time,
but if he has a godly father and mother too, I Will never leave hoping for him
until I see him turned off the Gallows.

2. Let me direct my Exhortation to the Children of godly parents: There are
many such that hear me this day:

Be you exhorted to know, and serve, and seek the God of your Fathers.

Consider therefore,

1. That the Lord is your Father's God. Know the God of thy Father says David.
Prove. 27* 10. Forsake not thy fathers friend. And will thou forsake thy Fathers
God, who is the best friend that ever thy Father had? Children are loath to part
with other things, because they were their Fathers; As Naboth said concerning
his Vineyard, God forbid that I should part with the Inheritance of my Father,
1. King. 21.3. The Lord was the Inheritance of thy Father, and will thou let
go thine Interest in Him Remember and consider that Scripture, Exodus 15.2. The
Lord is my Father's God, and I will exalt him. So say thou, the Lord is my
Fathers God, and therefore I will fear and seek and serve him.

Consider. 2. The Good and Benefit that will follow upon a (...) seeking to the
Lord. If there were nothing more to be said but only this, it should be a
prevailing Motive, viz. That then your Parents will have Joy in you; A wise son
(i. e. a godly son) makes a glad father. The Apostle John has such an
expression as this I have no greater joy than to hear that my Children walk in
the truth, 3. Joh. 4. Nor is there any greater Joy to a godly Father than to
see truth of grace in his children; this comforts him more than to see that his
Children are become rich or great in the world, know also for your
encouragement that, if you seek the Lord with your whole heart, He will be
found of you, yea, tho your sins and provocations have been never so great. Was
there ever a greater sinner than Manasseh, the son of blessed Hezekiah, yet
when he besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before the Lord
God of his Fathers, and prayed unto him, he was entreated of him, 2. Chron.
33.12, 13. O think of it you that (though the Children of godly Parents) have
bin heinous sinners before the Lord, seek him sincerely, and he will pardon all
your sins and save your souls form eternal death. I remember I have read
concerning the Imperial Hist. page 223.
Emperor Otho the 2 d. That having a son whose name was Luitolp, an haughty
young man, that rebelled against his Father, and for safety betook himself to
the City of Mentz, which being besieged by the Emperor, Luitolp fled to
another place, and on a day when his Father was in the Field, his son
unexpectedly came to him, and keeling before his father humbly begged for
pardon, with tears acknowledging his Offenses, and that he was worthy of a
thousand deaths, but if it would please him to give him his life, he should
ever be a loyal and obedient son for the time to come; presently his Fathers
Bowels yerned over him and he restored that prodigal son to his former place
and dignities, who ever after approved himself as became a Loyal subject and
dutiful Son.

How much more will the blessed God pardon you and accept you into his favor,
all your Rebellions notwithstanding, if indeed you sincerely seek unto him!
Yea, and God will bless you when your parents shall be taken from you, he will
then be a Father to you, Psalm. 27.10. When my father and my mother forsake me,
the Lord will take me up. viz. as a tenderhearted Father takes his child up
into his arms and bears him in his bosom. It is therefore said concerning
the just man that his Children are blessed after him, Prove. 20.7. And Jacob
told his sons that though he died, God would be with them, Genesis 48.11. It is also
noted concerning Isaac, that God blessed him after the death of his Father
Abraham, Genesis 25.11. Not but that the Lord blessed him before that, only after
his Fathers death the blessing of the Lord was upon him more then ever.

Consider 3. The evil that is in your not seeking the Lord. What a grief of
mind will this be to your godly parents? The Father of a Fool has no Joy.
Alas! there is many a poor parent may say to their children as Jephtah upon
another account spoke to his Daughter, Judge. 11.35. He rent his clothes, and
said Alas my daughter. thou have brought me very low, thou art one of them that
trouble me. Why should you bring your parents down with sorrow to their graves?
How did it go to the Heart of David when Absalom died and was cut off in his
sins! 2. Sam. 18.33. He was much moved, and as he went, thus he said, O my son
Absalom, my son, my son Absalom: would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my
son, my son. As if he had said, Had I died my soul had been happy, but now thou
art dead, I have no other hope but that thy soul is suffering the vengeance of
Eternal fire. Remember that this will aggravate your sin and condemnation That
you were born of godly parents and you did not walk in their steps. Jer. 50.7.
They sinned against the hope of their fathers; it is mentioned as the great
aggravation of their sin. Such children roll reproach upon the Covenant of God,
they cause men to say, there is nothing in being in Covenant with God, nor* is
it any mercy to be born of parents that fear the Lord; And will not the Lord
judge you for causing such a vile Reproach to be cast upon his holy Covenant?
you will be most inexcuseable before the Lord another day. If a righteous man
beget a son that becomes a Robber, or an Adulterer, shall he live? he shall
not live but die, and his blood shall be upon him, Ezekiel. 18.10, 13. The blood
of thy soul shall be upon thine own head: All the Instructions, Exhortations,
Admonitions, Prayers, Examples of thy godly Parents, will be brought in as so
many witnesses for thy Condemnation at the last day: yea, the tears of thy
blessed parents will be as oil to make the everlasting flames of Hell burn the
more vehemently upon thy soul, throughout the days of Eternity; The Lord will
cast thee off forever. Thy Father that begat thee, thy mother that bare thee,
will not pity thee when thou shall be sentenced to eternal death at the last
day. Remember Dives; in Hell he lift up his eyes being in torments, and cried,
Father Abraham have mercy on me, but all the mercy his Father Abraham would
show to him was, Son, Remember that in thy life time thou had thy good
things; As if he had said, nay, thou art justly dealt with. So will thy parents
say to thee, Remember that in thy life time we instructed thee, and thou had
good Counsel given to thee many a time, but thou would not regard it. O
consider of it, yea know, that if thou die in thy sins, thy godly parents
will stand forth, and testify against thee, before the Lord Jesus at the last
day: As that blessed Mr. Bolton would sometimes solemnly profess to his
Children, (...) Mr. Bolton's life.
Children, let any of you meet me at the day of Judgment in an unregenerate
Christless estate if you dare, I will then testify against you before the
Lord. Yea, thy gracious parents will join with the Lord Jesus in passing a
Sentence of Eternal Condemnation upon thee. We read in the book of the
Revelation, how the Saints say, Hallelujah, our God has judged the great
whore, righteous are his judgments, and when the smoke of her Torment rose up
for ever and ever, they worshipped God and said, Amen, Hallelujah: Even so when
the Son of God shall say to thee, Depart thou cursed wretch into everlasting
fire, thy father will say, Amen, Lord Jesus! This is the son, this is the
daughter that I have so often instructed and warned, and told them if they did
not repent of sin, and get an interest in Christ, they should certainly perish
for ever, but they would not hear, therefore let thy Justice be glorified for
ever in their eternal Confusion. O what an heart have thou, if this break it
not! Nevertheless,

Consider, 4. There are many Children of godly parents to be seen, that do not
seek the Lord God of their Fathers. Yea, how many such are there in New England
that are not of their Fathers principles? If a Temptation should come it is to
be seared that the greatest part of th^s Generation would comply, and disown
that Cause which their Fathers suffered for. How many that are not of their
fathers spirit, not heavenly minded, but p^^suing worldly interests with their
who^e hearts; Nor zealous for God and his Glory, but luke warm and woefully
indifferent in the matters of Religion: Nor in Practice and Conver-Conversation
like their Fathers; Not of an holy Girt Conversation, but Loose and vain, and
Vile and vicious; Swearers, Gamesters, given to rioting and drunkeness,
Chambering and Wantonness! Nay, how many are there before the Lord in this
congregation, that never sought the God of their Fathers, even to this day!
Some that never prayed in their lives, or never in earnest: You, Children, it
may be you say a prayer a few words that you have been used to, but are you in
earnest? do you cry to God as for your lives? do you take the Kingdom of Heaven
by violence? O but few such!

Consider, 5. You know not how soon your finding time may be past and gone,
therefore NOW seek the Lord; up and be doing lest thy Sun go down at noon and
God make the day dark over thy soul: Do not thou know that the Lord uses to
make quick work with the children of his servants, when they will not seek him,
albeit they have been brought up under the solemn warnings of God? It may be he
will give thee up to a reprobate sense, and (...) Spirit for ever cease
striving with thee; then woe, woe be to thee, says the Lord. Remember how it
was of old, when the sons of God (even the Posterity of godly Seth) the
posterity of eminent professors of Religion did degenerate, God said his Spirit
shall strive no longer with them, Genesis 6.3. my Spirit shall not always strive.
-- Or death may come upon you; how many young men that have fallen down slain
of late? The Sword is raging, and how are they that are of the Rising
Generation numbered for the Sword! Deadly Arrows are flying over your heads,
yea, Death is climbing in at windows, and carrying away young men apace; now if
death overtake thee before thy soul be got into the City of refuge, it had be
good for thee never to have been born; It will be too late to seek the Lord
then; If thou should seek him early, thou can not find him; when once the
gates of death are shut upon thee, and thou locked fast under the bars of the
pit; when once thy soul is out of thy body, in a moment it shooteh the Gulf of
Eternity, and then though thou should seek and cry till Heaven and earth
shakes; and pray and weep Seas of tears of blood, all will be in vain. O thy
soul, thy soul must lie weltring in a fiery Ocean, as long as the Eternal God
shall have any Being! Can thy heart endure to think of this? No, O then seek
the Lord while he may be found, Call upon him while he is near.

Something let me speak by way of Direction: briefly.

1. Be thankful to the Lord in that he has given you to be born of godly
parents: in that you have bin (as David speaks) cast upon the Lord from the
womb, and he has been your God from your mothers belly, Psalm. 22.10. You might
have been born of such Parents as would have nursed you up in ignorance,
Profaness or Idolatry, and so your souls have been under a necessity of
perishing for ever; but the Lord has given you to be born of parents that have
designed you for God, and for his Glory. Yea it was for your sakes especially,
that your Fathers ventured their lives upon the rude waves of the vast Ocean.
Was it not with respect unto Posterity that our Fathers came into this
Wilderness, that they might train up a Generation for Christ? Bless God that
ever you had such Fathers.

2. Plead the Lord's gracious Covenant with him, He is very willing that you
should do so: Ask me concerning my sons, and concerning the work of my hands
command ye me, Isai. 45.11. You say you cannot give grace to your own souls:
True, But has not the Lord in the Covenant of Grace said I will give you a new
heart Ezekiel. 36.26. Plead that promise, you especially that have had the
Covenant sealed to you; why should you let your Baptism lie by you as if it
were of no use? Go to God in secret, and say, Lord thou have promised to give a
new heart to the Children of thy servants, and thy Covenant has been sealed to
me in my Baptism, Oh give me a new Heart.

3. Do not rest in any thing that is external: Not in your relation to godly
parents, and visible relation to God on that account; it is not your parents
seeking unto God will save you, except you seek Him your selves also. Did not
the Lord say to the children of Israel, Are ye not as the Children of
Aethiopians unto me? Amos. 9.7. They vainly trusted that no Destruction should
ever come upon them because they were descended from blessed Ancestors: You may
be as far from eternal salvation as the Children of Ethiopians for all that, if
you do not serve the God of your Fathers. Therefore John Baptist said, Think
not to say, We have Abraham to our father, Mat. 3.9. I have known some that
have been so foolish as to think they should be saved, only because they were
the Children of godly parents, tho* they lived in the neglect of God, and of
their own souls. Beware of so perverting the Truth delivered unto you: And rest
not in being outwardly civil and blameless; was not Paul so before his
conversion, Phil. 3.6. And they that have been advantaged with a religious
Education oftentimes are so, though never truly converted. Beware also of taking
up a form of Godliness without the power of it. O You that are the Children of
godly Parents, if you outwardly observe the Sabbath day, and pray in secret,
and read the Scriptures, (all which things I charge you in the Name of the
Lord, that you attend unto them whilst you live) you will be apt to rest here,
without an Interest in the glorious Righteousness of the Son of God; but for
the love of your immortal souls* I beseech you, deceive not your selves; build
not upon a false foundation, look to it in the fear of God that your hearts be
perfect before him.

4. Never leave seeking God until you find him. Seek, and seek, and seek again,
until you know that you have obtained a saving interest in Jesus Christ, and in
the favor of God through him. O make thorough-work of it in the matter of your
Conversion; be not almost but altogether Christians, so shall you find that the
blessing of all the Prayers, and Covenant of your gracious Parents will come
upon you for evermore.

A DISCOVRSE Concerning the Danger of APOSTASY Especial as to those that are
the CHILDREN and POSTERITY of such as have been eminent for God in their
Generation.

Delivered in a Sermon preached in the Audience of the General Assembly of the
Massachusetts Colony, at Boston in New England, May 23. 1677. being the Day of
Election there.

By INCREASE MATHER. Teacher of a Church in Boston in New England.

Jer. 23.28. He that has my word, let him speak my word faithfully.

1. Tim. 5.21. I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the
Elect Angels, that thou observe these things, without prefering one before
another, doing nothing by partiality.

Tit. 2.15. These things speak and exhort and rebuke with all authority.

Printed by R. P. Anno Domini. 1685.

To the Reader.
THe Title Page prefixed to this Discourse, intimates the Time and Occasion of
its delivery. I had no cause to (nor did I) expect that it would fall to my Lot
to speak, before the Choice was made; if I had I would have used means to
prevent that trouble from coming upon my self or others. But it may be God did
it to prove me and see whether I would please men or Christ. And I hope I may
(in some measure) say after the Apostle, We are bold in our God to speak. Our
Exhortation was not of Deceit, but even so we speak not as pleasing men but
God, which tries our hearts. For neither at any time used we flattering words,
nor of men sought we glory. That great Reformer in Scotland, when upon his
Deathbed, could say with comfort, That I did forbear none of what Condition
soever, I did it out of the fear of my God, who has placed me in the Function
of his Ministry, and I know will bring me to an account. Even so I must
confess, the awful sense of the great opportunity which the Lord put into my
hands to discharge my Conscience, in being witness to His Name and Truth, and
of the account which I certainly know I must give to Him, caused me to speak as
I did. (And to avoid more controversal discourses) There is indeed one
particular insisted on, which is now become a matter of Scruple and distaste to
some amongst us, viz. that which concerns the Magistrates power in matters of
Religion. But as it was by me either intended or expressed, I know not to this
hour why any one should be offended at it. I may better speak in this cause
than some others, as having my self had experience what it is to have
Conscience imposed on, and therefore would be loath that any truly conscientious
should be burdened; and it is sufficiently known that I have a greater latitude
and Indulgence in the point of Toleration, than many better than my self have.
Nevertheless I judge it most unreasonable that pretended Liberty of Conscience
should be an Asylum for the profanest errors to take Sanctuary in: As though
men must therefore have Liberty to profane Sabbaths or Sacraments, or set up an
Altar against the Lord's Altar* and their Threshold by his Threshold, and their
Posts by his Posts, when and where they please: It cannot be but the Lord will
be provoked at such things, especially in New England where men are not under
such temptations to forsake their Assembling themselves together, as in some
other places: And where Zeal on the other hand has been notorious, so that
such Lukewarmness will in a People circumstanced as we are, be an evidence of
Apostasy.

I remember I had once the Happiness to be acquainted with an eminent Divine in
another part of the world, who having an opportunity to give his Testimony
against a prevailing Evil which the greatest in that Nation were at that time
too far carried away with, in his Sermon had this expression. What I have to
say, if it were in a Church full of Kings I would speak it. Such a spirit I
believe does become an Ambassador of Christ, when delivering the message of
his Master Jesus. I shall therefore add no more at present, only conclude, that
i^ what is here expressed be but my own words or thoughts, it is no great
matter what is said, but if it be (as I am persuaded it is) the word and mind of
Christ, then that God whose I am and desire to serve, and in whose Name I have
spoken will surely confirm his word.

Boston, 22. day of ye 2. Month 1678. INCREASE MATHER.

1. Chron. 28.9. But if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever.


AS there is a peculiar Excellency in all the Books of Scripture, becoming the
Majesty of their Author; so it is in special manner true with respect unto this
Sacred Book of Chronicles: which is See the English and Dutch Annot.
not the same with those Chronicles we sometimes read of in the King's, those
being civil Records, but these wholly of a divine Inspiration, containing the
History of no less than three Thousand and five Hundred years; even from the
first man Adam unto the Jews Return from the Babylonish Captivity, and many
years after that also. The Hebrews suppose it (or at least some part of it) to
be the last Book of Scripture that was written, and therefore they are wont to
place it last in their Bibles, as the concluding Book of the Old Testament. The
Greeks entitle it [ ton paraleipomenon] Because diverse things most worthy of
eternal Com^^moration are related in these books, which are no where else to be
found. So in this Chapter we have David's Solemn Dying Exhortation: words which
deserve to be recorded, and yet are no where else seen (at least wise not in
that ample mann^^) but in this Chapter. And it was in a very solemn Assembly
that these words were spoken, indeed in a General Assembly, when all the Lords
people both as to Civil and Ecclesiastical order were come together for the
Establishment of another Ruler amongst them; accordingly David does here direct
his Exhortation, first to the representatives of the people, ver. 1. And David
assembled all the Princes of Israel, the Princes of the Tribes, and the
Captains of the Companies unto themselves etc. Hence they are said to be all
Israel, ver. 8. in the sight of all Israel h. e. the Heads and Representatives
of all Israel, and therefore are said to be the Congregation of the Lord. Often
in Scripture by the Congregation, the Heads and Rulers of the Congregations are
meant. Now the Exhortation unto them is that they would keep and seek all the
Commandments of the Lord, h. e. that they would observe what they did know, and
se^k to know more of the mind of God. The motive whereby he urges this is,
because the Lord had promised the good Land to them; but it was upon that
condition of their keeping his Commandments, therefore it did highly concern
them to be careful in that matter. 2 dly, he directs his Exhortation to him
that was to be estabished as chief Ruler, scil. to his son Solomon, whom God
appointed to succeed his Father in the Government: Now Sincerity was the main
thing which David his Father did exhort him unto, in the beginning of this
verse, And thou Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him
with a perfect heart and with a willing mind. This is further urged from three
motives,

1. From the Consideration of the divine Omnisciency, For the Lord searches
the hearts and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts.

2. From the benefit and good which would follow upon seeking to the Lord, if
thou seek him he will be found of thee.

3. From the evil that is in forsaking him; In the words now before us; which
though they were spoken to Solomon, yet were they of equal Concernment unto
others, being circumstanced as he was, h. e. that were of the younger
succeeding generation, being also the Children and posterity of godly Parents.
Especially the words did and do concern those that are the Posterity of David,
that is to say, of those that have bin eminent Servants of God in their
Generation. The Doctrine which I would therefore (by the help of Christ) insist
on as Conceiving that it may not be altogether unsuitable for this great
Audience, is this,

Doct. That if they who are the Children and Posterity of God's eminent
Servants shall forsake the Lord, he will cast them of for ever.

In the doctrinal handling of this Truth, there are four things which may be
briefly enquired into. 1. When men, especially the Children of Gods servants,
may be said to forsake him. 2. What is employed in this casting off for ever? 3.
What forsaking of God that is, which will be attended with such Casting off. 4.
The Reason of this dreadful Procedure of the Most High toward the Posterity of
His People.

Quest. 1. When may men be said to forsake the Lord?

Answ. 1. When they depart from the blessed Truths of God, then they may be
said to forsake him. Hence the Apostle charge it upon the apostatizing
Galatians that they were removed from him that called them Chap. 1.6. h. e.
they had forsaken God himself, because they had corrupted and forsaken the
great Truths of the Gospel. All Truth is from God, therefore he is styled the
God of Truth, Did. 32.4. (...), Truth, it self, 1. Joh. 5.6. And Truth is said
to be his Name. Christ said to his faithful ones in the Church of Pergamus,
thou hold ^^st my Name. Rev. 2.13. The Truths of Christ were much opposed by
the Infidels, and by the Heretics of those days, only some did faithfully
adhere thereunto; and these are said to hold fast his Name. so then to forsake
the Truth, is to forsake the Lord's Name. Especially when there is Apostasy
from great foundation-Truths in Religion, the Lord is forsaken. Albeit every
truth has the Name of God stamped upon it, yet there are some Truths which
have more of his Name on them than others have, that the disowning of them is
absolutely to reject the Lord, namely Fundamental Truths, which indeed are not
many nor hard to be known. Moreover when those Truths are disowned by children,
which their Fathers were eminently engaged in the profession of, (though they
should not be fundamental as in their natures) such Children may be said to
forsake the Lord.

2. When men Deifie any other Object besides the Lord. They that set up other
things in God's stead, in their so doing forsake the Lord; so it is when men
give religious worship to any other besides him, who alone ought to be feared.
Thus the children of Israel because they did worship Baal and Ashtoroth, h. e.
the Corn. a Lapide in locum Lucian de deo Syria Herod. Lib* 5.
Sun and Moon (for those were the first Creatures that the Gentiles Idolized,
and the Syrians called the Sun Baal and the Moon Ashtereth) they are therefore
charged with Forsa^^^ God, Judge. 2.12.13. Idolatry is the gr^^^^est Apostasy in
the world: Such are by (...) of eminency styled forsakers of God, Deuteronomy. (...)
15. He forsook God, meaning that they did (...) ^^postatize to Idolatry,
therefore in ver. 16. it (...) added that they provoked him to Jealousy wit^
their strange gods, that is to say with new gods or Idols, (for new things are
strange) ver. 17. they sacrificed to new gods, which came newly up, whom their
Fathers feared not. And this is true not only with respect unto that more
gross Idolatry when men shall avow the service of Idols, but also Conc^^^ing
secret, spiritual, Heart-Idolatry, even worldliness, Mat. 6.24. Ye cannot serve
God and mammon. The servants of Mammon h. e. of the world, are forsakers of
God, when men pour out ^he strength of their affections upon worldly objects,
Or place their chief Delight and Confidence in these things, it argues an heart
departure from the Lord J^r. 17.5. If Fathers have sought Christ and the things
of Christ in the first ^lace, and their Children shall come after ^^em, and
espouse a worldly Interest, it is a (...) God-forsaking.

There is a forsaking God in respect of his (...) ^^st^tutions, Hence a people
that are without (...), are said to be without God, 2. (...). 15.3. it is there
mentioned that Isra-Israel had for a long season been without the true God,
because they had been without the Ministry and without Ordinances. If these be
not duly observed the Lord is forsaken, Isai 65.11. but ye are they that
forsake the Lord, and forget my holy mountain, so that to forget the holy
Mountain h. e. the neglect of Divine worship and Ordinances, is a Forsaking of
the Lord. Look as when the Lord does deprive a people of his Ordinances, He is
said to forsake them, Jer. 23.33. I will even forsake you says the Lord; the
meaning is (says Calvin) you shall no more have Ministry and Ordinances among
you; so when they are willing to be deprived thereof, they may be said to
forsake him, Judge. 10.6. they forsook the Lord and served him not. Not to
regard the Service of God is to Forsake him. For in Ordinances we have to do
with God, Heb. 4.13. in Hearing the Word, in Prayer, in Sabbaths, in Sacraments
we have to do with God.

Or if his holy Ordinances be Corrupted, then the Lord is forsaken. And it is
so when men will be adding their Inventions to Gods Institutions. Psalm. 106.39.
Thus were they defiled with their own works, and went a whoring with their own
Inventions. When men follow their own inventions, they go a whoring from the
Lord* of this nature were the high places of Old, 2. Chon. 33.17. The people
did sacrifice in the high places, yet to the Lord their God only. See Engl.
Annot. on 1. Sam. 6.14.
Those high places were lawful to worship God in until the Temple was built,
but after that, it was a breach of the second Commandment to place any religion
in them, and therefore in some Degree a Departure from the Lord. If Fathers
have prized Ordinances above the world, and endeavored to uphold them in their
power and purity, but their children after them shall not regard whether they
enjoy the ordinances of Christ or no, or if they do, shall not be careful and
studious to keep them pure, according to Scripture Rule, they fall under this
dreadful Charge o^ Apostasy from God.

4. There is a forsaking of God in respect of Conversation. There are that by
works deny God, Tit. 1.16. An holy Heavenly Conversation is expressed in the
Scripture by that of walking with God, Genesis 5.24. and 6.9. Therefore an evil
Conversation is a departure from God. It is called a forsaking the Law of the
Lord, Jer. 9.13. By a corrupt Conversation men deviate from the Law, and are
such Apostates as the Text speaks of: In this respect those wicked men whose
foundation was destroyed with the flood, (as Elipha^ speaks) even the sinners
of the old World were Apostates from God. We do not read of (nor do I believe
that there was) any Idolatry in the old World, but they were over run with
Atheism, Pride, Sensuallity, Uncleanness, Oppression, and the like scandalous
Enormities. And the Apostasy of the Children of Israel did Consist partly in
this, as we see in that woeful instance of the Benjamites, the greatest part of
whom the Lord cast off for ever. Yea, and the Antichristian Apostasy predicted
in the New Testament does consist partly in this: We know that the
Antichristian Generation (Papists I mean are generally not only (as all of them
are) horribly superstitious and idolatrous, but of most debauched and profane
consciences and conversations: In the Revelations were ad of their Murders,
Sorceries, Fornications, Thefts, Chapt. 9.21. If then the Children of the
Covenant shall not walk worthy of God, but in the ways of Pride, Sensuallity,
Unrighteousnes; if when Fathers have been of an holy, exemplary Conversation,
their Children shall be unholy and profane, they are forsakers of God,
concerning whom he has threatened to cast them off for ever, 1. Sam. 8.3.

5. When the Fear of God is wanting in the hearts of such as are above others
bound to fear and serve him, They are Forsakers of the Lord. For there is an
inward heart-departure from God, as well as that which is outward and visible:
So it is when there is no Faith nor fear of God in the heart, Heb. 3.12. Take
heed lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from
the living God. Infidelity in the heart is the Root of all Apostasy. If the
Children of godly Parents shall not endeavor truly to fear and serve the Lord
God of their Fathers, they are such as do forsake him, yea, and such as he will
cast off for ever. And therefore in this Context David did intimate unto his
son Solomon, that if he did not serve the Lord even with a perfect heart, he
should be cast off for ever.

We proceed therefore to the second Question, Viz.

Quest. 2. What is implied in this Casting off for ever?

Answ. 1. It Implies a Change as to divine Dispensations. In the Scripture,
when the Lord threatened to cast off his people, that is intended viz. that he
would make an alteration as to the tenor of his Dispensations toward them:
here it is set in opposition to finding God, if thou seek him, he will be found
of thee, but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off: Now finding God does
Imply the enjoyment of his favor, and therefore in casting off is employed the
Deprivement of the Lords favorable presence. It is indeed most true, that the
special favor of God is unchangeable, Romans 5.2. This Grace wherein we stand.
He that has once access into the special grace and favor of God, stands and
abides therein for ever, in respect of that there is no casting off for ever:
In the Covenant of grace the Lord has promised saying, I will not cast of the
seed of Israel for all that they have done, Jer. 31.37. But then there is
common favor, in respect of outward blessings, which are the effects of common
love, and that may utterly cease Hos. 9.15. I will love them no more. I have
loved them, (faith the Lord, h. e. bestowed outward mercies on them, but I will
do so no more. They shall have no more such days of peace, no more such
plenty, no more such means of grace as once they did enjoy. Thus of a friend,
the Lord may turn to be an enemy, Isai. 63.10. Put they Rebelled and vexed his
holy Spirit; therefore he was turned to be their enemy, and he fought against
them. Whilst a Covenant people carry it so as not to break Covenant, the Lord
blesses them visibly, but if they degenerate, then blessings are removed, and
woeful Judgments come in their room, and that is employed in this Casting off
which the Text speaks of, scil. that mercyes shall be taken away: As it was
said of Saul that when God cast him off, he took away his mercy from him, 1.
Chron. 17.13. because he was deprived of that great outward Blessing* and
Dignity which once he did enjoy. And the sending of contrary miseries to those
mercies, that instead of peace, there shall be wars, instead of plenty poverty,
instead of health terrible sicknesses, instead of Planting, Plucking up and
destroying, these things are employed in this Casting off; thu^ psalm. 89.38. But
thou have cast off and ab^horred, thou have been wroth with thine anointed* I
conceive the Psalmist in those words has Foord in locum.
respect to the sad Change of Providenc^ which befell the Lords People in
Rehoboam'^ time, for that psalm was written by Ethan* who was contemporary with
Solomon, and probably lived to see the woeful Changes which happened five years
after Solomon's death, when the Land was invaded and sorely wasted by Heathen
Enemies, and some (tho not all) of the wrath of God Poured out upon his people,
and upon the apostatized Children of David* Strong holds were brought to ruin,
and they did not stand in the day of Battle as in former times they had done,
now these temporal Judgments are called a Casting off.

2. It does Imply a discovenanting and unchurching. If the Children of godly
Fathers shall forsake the Lord, he will cast them off, h. e. It will at last
come to this, that the Lord will disown them, and excommunicate them, and say
they are none of his; for although there is no falling from a state of Saving
grace, yet they that have only a visible Interest in God, may fall from that
Estate, what they have shall be taken from them. They that are internally and
sincerely in Covenant with God, shall never lose their interest in the
Covenant, for they are betrothed unto the Lord for ever, Hos. 2.19. But they
that are externally in Covenant may cease to be the Lords visible people; Thus
it came to pass Concerning the Ten Tribes. Hence the Lord speaks as Jer. 3.8.
Backsliding Israel committed adultry, and I had put her away and given her a
bill of divorce. so that the marriage Covenant which was between the Lord and
them them was disolved, this is confirmed by the Prophet Hosea, Cap. 2.2. where
the Lord says plead with your mother, plead for she is not my wife, neither am
I her husband, so in Chapt. 1. ver. 9. Call his name Lo-Ammi for ye are not my
people and I will not be your God, therefore also the Lord by the Prophet
Ezekiel calls the ten Tribes by the name of Aholah. The two Tribes, the Jews,
were then called by the name of Aholibah, which signifies my Tent, because as
yet God had not rejected them. But the ten Tribes are called Ahola which
signifies a Tent, as if the Lord had said, they are none of mine, now I have
done with them and utterly rejected them, Ezekiel. 23.4. Afterward the Jews also
were discovenanted and unchurched. The Prophet Zechariah had fore told, that
upon their unbelief* in rejecting Jesus Christ the only true Mess^as, it should
be so, I took my staff Beau^y and cut it assunder, that I might break my
Covenant which I had made with all the people, Zech. 11.10. And Paul tells us,
that sad prediction was fulfilled, therefore Romans 11.12. he speaks of the
fall of the Jews, meaning that they were fallen from their visible
Church Estate to be in the same condition which the Gentile World was in before
the coming of Christ, so that they were fallen from Heaven to earth; and in
ver. 20, 21, 22. he speaks of their being broken off and cut off, h. e. cut off
from the visible Church. The Apostle See Mr. Cotton of Infant Baptism.
in that Chapter does compare covenanting Abraham to a Root, and the visible
Church to an Olive tree, of which there are two sorts of Branches, First
Natural, viz. the Jewish Church, Secondly Ingraffed, i. e. the Church among the
Gentiles. Now the natural branches were broken off: and therefore in the New
Testament they are declared to be none of the Lords people Rev. 3.9. They call
themselves Jews, but are not so, but are of the Synagogue of Satan. They say
they are Jews, h. e. they boast of their being the Lords people, but in truth
they are not so, (says Christ) they glory in the Name of a Synagogue, but now
they are not God's Synagogue but Satan's. And in these days of the New
Testament the Lord has disowned and unchurched these and those that once were
his own people, Rev. 2.5. I will remove the candlestick out of his place. that
threatening is not only fulfilled on Ephesus, but on all the Churches in Asia;
there have been in former Ages bright and glorious Candlesticks in that part of
the world, but they are long since all broken to pieces. Also the Romish
Antichristian Idolatry has greatly prevailed amongst Christians for above
these Thousand years, and as for them that are over^^n there with, Christ does
declare them to be looked upon as Gentiles, as Heathens, and they are not to be
looked upon as within the Temple, or as indeed appertaining to the visible
Church, Rev. 11.2. And this disowning and unchurching a people is called a
Casting off.

3. The Expression here does Imply everlasting Rejection im the other world.
The Hebrew Phrase [ jazni chaka lagnad] Arias Montarus translateth execra^iter
te in aeternum, if thou forsake him he will make thee an eternal execration.
Though it be a deep truth that the line of Election See the preceding Sermon
page 39.
does for the most part run through the loins of godly parents, yet not only
so, for men may be desce^^ed from godly Parents and progenitors, and ^et be the
subjects of eternal Reprobation and Damnation Mat. 8.12. The Children of the
Kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness. We read of on^ that could call
Abraham his Father, and unto whom Abraham said Son remember that in thy Life
time thou had thy good things, that nevertheless when he died went to the
place of Torment. If such Children forsake the Lord it is not the prayers nor
tears of godly Fathers that will save them; Nay these will be an infinite
aggravation of their misery. The tears of a godly father, if his Children
forsake the Lord, will make the flames of Eternal fire burn the more fiercely
upon their souls for ever. Therefore well might David say to his son Solomon If
thou forsake the Lord he will cast the off for ever.

We come in the next place to enquire

What Forsaking of God is that, that will be attended with this Casting off?

Answ. In two words, 1. This must be understood concerning deep departures from
God, and from his blessed ways, Hos. 9.9. They have deeply corrupted
themselves, therefore he will visit their sins. The Lord is the God of
Patience, and of all grace, and thence is very slow in rejecting utterly a
people (or their posterity) whom he has once taken into Covenant with himself:
Hence it is not lesser Departures, but high and great Offenses against the Lord
that provoke him to cast off his people, E. G. Idolatry is a sin that causes
the Rejection which the text speaks of. Yea, it is true with reference unto
that Idolatry which is against the Second Commandment: When the Children of
Israel committed that Idolatry respecting the Calf in the Wilderness, they
sinned against the Second Commandment, for they would worship the Lord still,
only they would do it in such a way and by such means as God never appointed,
and they were in great danger of being cast off for this sin. Hence the Lord
said to Moses, Thy People have corrupted them selves, Exodus 32.7. The Lord
does not say my people as he was wont to do, but thy people, as if it were
said; Now they have violated my Covenant, and deserve that I should for ever
disown and reject them. The Asian Churches have been cast off for this sin
especially; we may read the sin of those Churches written in dreadful
Characters, upon the Forehead of that Judgment that has destroyed them all:
God has let loose the barbarous Turks upon them, who hate and destroy no men so
much as those that worship Images. And as for the Church of Rome, the Apostle
Paul did solemnly predict that they should be cast off Romans 11.22. Now it is
for this sin principally that the Lord has cast them off. Again Heresy
causes this Casting off which the Text speaks of, Societies consisting of
such as disown the Fundamental Truths of the Gospel, the Lord Jesus disdisowns
them. Hence the Jews are disowned and rejected by the Lord, for although they
own some fundamental truths in Religion, indeed all Jac. Capellus in Hebr. 6.1.
those six principles mentioned by the Apostle to the Hebrews ( Cap. 6.1, 2.)
the Jews acknowledge; yet there are other fundation Truths which they reject;
That Jesus of Nazareth is the true Messiah, That Messiah is God as well as man,
The Doctrine of Original sin, and of Salvation by Imputed Righteousness, all
which things are necessary to be believed in order to eternal Life, these do
they reject and disown, and therefore the Lord ha^ cast them off When a people
shall be so far degenerate as to lose the Essentials of Religion, they are the
Lord's no longer. Heretical Assemblies may be the flocks of those that pretend
to be Christ's Companions, but they are none of Christ's flocks Cant. 1.7. So
for scandalous miscarriages in life and conversation, these provoke the Lord to
cast off a professing people. In a Building, if once the materials be rotted
and Corrupted, the house will moulder away, the matter being an Essential
Cause: And in Church building we know that Saints are the material Cause and
therefore Scandal in Life does destroy the Essentials of a Church, and so
brings along with it this Casting off spoken of in the Text.

2. It is an Impenitent, Incorrigible Forsaking God, that does cause him to
cast off a people or person. Solomon was guilty (notwithstanding the solemn,
dying charge of his Father to the Contrary) of dreadful forsakings and
Apostacies from the Lord but he repents of them, as we see by the Book of the
Ecclsiastes, and therefore ye Lord did not wholly cast him off for ever.
Notwithstanding great degeneracy in a people the Lord is not wont to Cast them
off until he has used all means for their Recovery; so it was with the
Children of Israel of old 2. Chron 36.15. The Scripture has recorded the names
of above Twenty Prophets which the Lord sent to his people of Old to tell them
of their backslidings, and call upon them to repent and reform, before he
would cast them off. And though in these days of the new Testament, because
men sin against greater light and grace than in former times, the Lord Jesus
makes Quicker work with an apostatizing people, than in the days of Old, and
in the years of ancient Generations; and therefore he said to the Church in
Ephesus, except thou consider whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the
first works, I will come against thee quickly and remove the Candlestick out of
his place: Nevertheless he uses means to reduce and recover a backsliding
people before he casts them off, so he did with the Asian Churhes, and so has
he done with the Anti-Antichristian Generation, and therefore raised up great
Instruments, who have preached the everlasting Gospel with a loud voice and,
called for reformation; and might therefore say Notante Parkero, de Polit.
Eccles. ^t Rainold de Idol. Romanae Ecclesia.
as Jer. 31.9. We would have healed Babylon and she is not healed, therefore
her Judgment reaches unto Heaven, and is lifted up even to the skies. The Lord
does give a first and second Admonition before he does reject: He tries what
his word will do, what lesser and greater Judgments will do, yea and what
mercies and deliverances will do, and if nothing will prevail then he casts
off for ever. If a generation be Apostate, and incorrigibly Apostate, it will
not be long before the Lord does cast them off for ever, Jer. 15.6.7. Thou have
forsaken* me says the Lord, thou art gone backward, therefore will I stretch
out mine hand against thee I will destroy my people since they return not from
their ways. In a word, when Apostasy is total and final, then the Lord does
reject men, yea, though the Children and posterity of his own servants, he casts
them off for ever.

QUST. But why so?

ANSW. For such Reasons as these.

REAS. 1. Because the Transgressions of such Children as the Doctrine speaks of
are peculiar provocations; if the children of David sin, their Iniquity is
attended with special aggravations: They sin against greater light, and love,
and grace, than may be said of any persons in the world besides: They that
rebel against the light, do at last provoke the Lord utterly to reject them.
Hence it is that refusing Instruction, is mentioned as the grand procuring
Cause of this Rejection, Jer. 6.8. Be instructed O Jerusalem lest my soul
depart from thee, and thou become desolate. Now thus it is when the Children of
Godly parents forsake the Lord, as Solomon does acknowledge, how diligent and
faithful his blessed Father had bin in instructing of him, Pro. 4.3, 4. I was
my Father's son, he taught me also, and said unto me keep my Commandments and
live. And sins against grace and peculiar mercy do without Repentance end in
everlasting Rejection, Amos 3.2. You only have I known -- therefore will I
punish you for all your Iniquities. Who ever escape (says the Lord) to be sure
you shall not, because you sin against greater grace and favor than any others
in the world ever did. For these causes the Lord threatened Eli that he would
cut off his Arm, and the Arm of his Fathers house, inasmuch as he had sinned
against peculiar mercies and favors. Especially, sins against Tenders of
Gospel Grace provoke the Lord to cast men off, Mat. 23.37, 38. O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered you, as a Hen gathers her Chickens
under her wings but ye would not, and now your house is left unto you desolate.
And this is sadly true concerning the children of godly parents, they sin
against special favors from the Lord, the means of grace is vouchsafed to
them, they have many blessed strivings of the Holy spirit with them which
others have not, therefore if they forsake the Lord, no wonder if he cast them
off for ever.

Reas. 2. Because such Children are guilty of lamentable Covenant Breaking
before the Lord for the Covenant is with Children as well as parents, Deuteronomy.
29.10, 11, 12. You and your little ones do enter into Covenant. Upon this
account David says that the Lord was his God from his Infancy, yea, from his
first coming into the world, Psalm. 22.10. And the like is noted concerning
Solomon, and therefore his Father said to him, My son build the house of the
Lord thy God 1. Chron. 22.11. The Lord is not only my God, but in respect of
his gracious Covenant he is thy God also. And this seems to be the reason why
Abraham is styled the Father of the Faithful. See Mr. Carter Abraham's Covenant
opened.
Not merely on the Account of the eminency of his faith, for we read of others
in Scripture whose faith was not inferior to his, but in that he was the first
unto whom God expressly declared, I will be a God to thee and to thy seed, and
withal appointed a sacred sign and fear of this Covenant. Now Abraham's
Covenant is as to the substance of it Everlasting: And therefore the Children
of the faithful in all Ages, are wrapped under the Bond of the Covenant,
otherwise there would be a substantial Change of the Covenant from what it was
at first, than which nothing can be more contradictory to the whole tenor and
current of the Scripture. The Apostle therefore testifies that the blessing of
Abraham is come on the Gentiles, through Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.14. As God said
unto Abraham, I take thee and thy children into Covenant with my self, so does
He through Jesus Christ say the like to every believing Parent among the
Gentiles: And therefore the Lord Jesus did did affirm concerning Children, of
such (...) the kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 19.14. Mr. Buroughs on Matthew. 5.3. page
61.
It is not only true (says Christ) that Children did belong to God under the
Old Testament, but now, that the Kingdom of heaven is at hand, now that the
Church is to be under the Heavenly Dispensation of the Gospel, Children must be
acknowledged there also. And it is for ever to be observed, that when the New
Testament dispensation was ready to be established, the Ancient Grant
concerning Childrens interest in the Covenant is expressly confirmed, Act. 2.39.
The Promise is to you and to your Children. Hence then, if such Children do
forsake the Lord, they are guilty of violating the Covenant. Now that is an
Iniquity which does provoke the Lord to cast off those that are deeply guilty
of it, Isai. 24.5, 6. They have broken the everlasting Covenant, therefore they
are cursed, burned, desolute. In old time it was the manner when a Covenant was
made, some creature or other was killed, and cut in pieces, by which Rite was
signified, that the Lord would kill and cut off him, that being in Covenant
with God, did not make conscience faithfully to keep and observe that Covenant
inviolable for ever.

Reas. 3. From that infinite Indignation which is in the Lord's Heart against
Apostates. They are Fugitives from Christ, and diserting their Captain the Lord
himself will execute Martial law upon them: No sinners are greater objects of
Divine hatred and indignation. Hence the Apostle said to the Hebrews, when some
of them were ready to apostatize from Christianity to Judaism, If any man draw
back the soul of God shall take no pleasure in him. Heb. 10.38. meaning that
such creatures are vessels of dishonor, and the most loathsome Objects that
can be thought of. Hence the Lord does pursue them with infinite vengeance, he
cuts them off and casts them off for ever. As that miserable Spira at the very
moment, when he had renounced the Truth, thought he heard one say to him, Hence
thou Apostate, and receive the Sentence of thy eternal Damnation. The Lord is
wont to leave marks of his wrath upon such sinners. He brands them that all,
the world may be afraid of that Iniquity: Seldom has it been known that any
have notoriously turned away from the Lord, but visible wrath from heaven has
fallen upon them. Jehoram had been religiously educated under his godly Father
Jehoshaphat, but he proved the Apostate Child of a Gracious Father; and what
came on him? God let loose the Heathen Arabians, who wasted his estate and
murdered all his children save one: Thus did the Lord cast him off* Joash was
religiously educated under his uncle Jehosada^, but he forsook the Lord,
therefore the Assyrians with a small Army destroyed a great Hos^ (...) his own
treacherous servants (...) him. The like we read concerning (...). And
Histories (besides what is recorded in Scripture) are full of awful and amazing
Examples of the Lords indignation against Apostates, and therefore since if
David's Children do forsake the Lord, they are to be reckoned among the number
of Apostates, no wonder that He does threaten to Cast them off for ever.

We proceed now to a word of Aplication, and shall insist upon one only

Use of Exhortation.

Let us be exhorted in the Name and Fear of God this day, to endeavor that it
may not be with us as the Text and Doctrine expresses; let us every one in our
several places and Capassities endeavor that the present and succeeding
Generations in New England, may not forsake the Lord God of their Fathers, and
so endanger their being cast off for ever.

Wherefore Consider. 1. What Fathers and Predecessors have been, they were
such as did seek the Lord. As for the body of the present Generation in
New England, It may be said to them, your Fathers were such as did serve the
Lord: yea, it was love to God and to Jesus Christ which brought them into this
Widerness as the Lord speaks Jer. 2.2. I remember the kindness of thy youth,
the love of thine Espousals, when thou wentest after me in the Wilderness, in a
Land which was not sown. Our Fathers did not in their coming hither propound
any great matter to themselves respecting this world; only that they should
have liberty to serve God, and to walk with him in all the ways of his
Worship. As one of our Worthies has aptly expressed, God sifted three Nations,
that so he might bring over choice Grain into this Wilderness. Let us then
remember what New England has been: It has been a noble Plant, Jer. 2.21. J
plantted thee a noble Vine, wholly a right seed. It has been Cedar, our eyes
have seen the Lord fulfilling that Scripture literally and gloriously, Isai.
41 19. I will plant in the wilderness a Cedar. The chief of the Fathers in
these New-English Churches they were Abraham's: He, when God called him removed
out of Vr of the Chaldees to the place which the Lord would show him, and there
built an Altar to the everlasting God; so did our Fathers remove out of their
own land when God called them, and came hither to build an Altar here to the
Everlasting God, yea, and they have set the Altar upon its right Basis too. Our
Fathers have been David's, that is to say, eminent Reformers. Let me speak
freely (without offense to any) there never was a generation that did so
perfectly shake off the dust of Babylon, both as to Ecclesiastical and Civil
Constitution, as the first Generation of Christians that came into this Land
for the Gospels sake. Where was there ever a place so like unto New Jerusalem
as New England has been? It was once Dr. Twiss his Opinion See Dr. Twiss's
Letters printed in Mr. Medes works. Lib. 4. Epist. 42. page 979.
that when New Jerusalem should come down from Heaven America would be the seat
of it. Truly that such a Type and Emblem of New Jerusalem, should be erected
in so dark a corner of the world, is matter of deep Meditation and Admiration.

Consider, 2. How subject men are, yea the Children of blessed parents and
Predecessors, to apostatize from God. It is possible that the Children of
David may forsake the Lord, and that in a short time too: when Predecessors
have been eminent for God, their Successors have been most degenerate, Jer.
2.21. I planted thee wholly a right seed* how art thou turned into the
degenerate plant of a strange vine unto me! Isai. 1.21. How is the faithful
City become an Harlot! it was full of Judgment, Righteousness lodged in it,
but now murderers. It was sometimes said unto good Samuel, Thy sons walk not in
thy ways. And it is noted Concerning Nabal (a drunken Sot) that he was of the
house of Caleb, 1. Sam. 25.3. That ever such a branch should spring out of such
a stock! The Ephraimites were the vilest Idolaters of all the apostate Children
of Israel, yet they were the posterity of Joseph, the best of Jacobs twelve
sons. The Perfidious and ungrateful Ziphites were also the posterity of that
blessed Caleb but now mentioned. Yea, it is a sad Truth that Religion has
seldom been upheld in the power of it, for above one or two Generations
together. Therefore it is recorded concerning the Children of Israel, they
turned quickly out of the way which their Fathers walked in, obeying the
Commandments of the Lord, but they did not so, Judges 2.17. The Fathers and
Leaders both of the first and second Generation were for purity of worship, but
their children were not so. Their Fathers did endeavor to uphold Religion in
the Power of it, but their children did not so. Their Fathers did order their
Conversations according to the holy Rules of the word of God, but their
children did not so. Hence is that sad Complaint by the Prophet, they rose
early and corrupted all their doings, Zeph. 3.7. And if we look into the
Scripture and view the Story of former Ages, we shall see this to be true. The
posterity of the Lords Servants, the Children of the Church have in a little
time so forsaken him, as that solemn Reformation has been necessary: Look
beyond the Flood and we shall see it so. One of Adam's children with all his
numerous posterity forsook the Lord: Cain was Excommunicate out of the Church
and became the Father of an Excommunicate Race and Generation. The first Church
that ever was in the world, even that in Adam's Family continued in some
measure pure, about the space of Owen de Theol. Lib. 2. Cap. 2.
an Hundred and thirty years, ( h. e. until Seth was born) but then great
Apostasy prevailed. When the Church was small in one Family it was more easy
to keep it pure, by casting out the Apostates, but now the world grew numerous,
and a multitude of sinners caused impunity in sin, so as that they that were
godly and conscientious were fain in the very beginning or first Ages and
Generations of the world to separate themselves and become distinct Societies.
Hence is that Genesis 4.26. then began men to call upon the Name of the Lord. It
notes a Separation of the Church from the profane world. After this a second
Apostasy followed, that the Church and world were mixed together, even the sons
of God and daughters of men, the Posterity of godly Seth and of wicked Cain,
until such time as the flood came and cleared the world of them, Genesis 6.2* Then
were the inhabitants of the earth in a most corrupt estate, wherefore the
Psalmist (as it seems) alluding to that time, says The Lord looked down from
heaven, to see if there were any that did understand and seek God, every one of
them is gone back, they are altogether become filthy. Psa. 53.2, 3. After
Religion was revived in Noah^s Family, his posterity quickly forsook the Lord,
Cham's Apostasy was (as some learned men observe) about forty years after the
flood: The Church was reformed by his ejection, but within sixty or seventy
years after that the Builders of Babel set upon their wicked attempt, which was
desperate Rebellion against the Lord, although Noah himself was then alive, he
could not by all his Authority restrain his Grandchildren and posterity, but
they would needs become guilty of that Babel defection. After this within a few
Generations the world was overr^n with Idolatry. When that iniquity first began
is hard to say, but it is evident that in Jobs time (who is thought to live
about three hundred and fifty years after the flood) the world was filled with
Idolaters, yea, in Abraham's time there was such Apostasy as that Religion was
almost gone out of the world, only in his Family there was a pure Church
Established: Yet his posterity did quickly forsake the Lord. The Ishmaelites,
Midianites, Edomites, (and other Nations) who were of the Posterity of Abraham
the Father of the faithful, in a few generations lost the Substan^ials of
Religion, and were wholly deprived of their Church estate. The Church was
settled in Jacobs Family: Corruption and Superstition did creep into his
Family, so as that he was ^ain to set upon a work of solemn Reformation, and
that was not two hundred years after the Reformation begun in his grandfather
Abraham's Family. After the Church become National, the Truth and power of
Religion did very rarely continue above on or two generations at the most,
(sometimes not so long) witness that Scripture which was worthily opened and
applied By Mr. MOODEY.
in this place upon the like solemn occasion two years ago, Judge. 2.7.10. And
the people served the Lord all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the
Elders that outlived Joshua, who had seen all the great works of the Lord that
he did for Israel. -- And all that generation were gathered unto their Fathers,
and there arose another generation after them which knew not the Lord nor yet
the works which he had done for Israel. Those that were the Grandchildren of
that generation which was brought out of Egypt, did forsake the God of their
Fathers: Hence is that expression Hos. 10.9. O Israel thou have sinned from the
days of Gibeah; what horrible wickedness was in Gibeah, we may read in the 19.
and 20 Chapters of the Book of Judges, where we have ye story of the Levite's
Concubine, which tho^ it be mentioned toward the close of that Book* yet it is
evident that it happened before the Judges; for it seems yt Jehus (afterward
Jerusalem) was not then taken by the children of Israel Judge. 19.11.12. whenas
that was taken before they were governed by Judges. Chapt. 1. ver. 8. So that
the wickedness of Gibeah and their war with the Benjamites, which followed
thereupon, was between the death of Joshua and the Judges. Moreover, Phineas
the son of Eleazar the son of Aaron was Priest in those days Judge. 20.28.
which makes it very manifest that, that most corrupt Generation were the
Grandchildren of those that were first embodyed a peculiar people, when the
Lord did plant the Heavens and lay the Foundations of the Earth, that is to
say, did build up the Children of Israel as a body politic under
Ecclesiastical and Civil Government, the third generation among that people
proved degenerate and apostate. And when they were under a Theocracy or
Government by Judges, whom the Lord immediately raised up and set over them,
How soon did they turn aside from God, when any of their faithful Judges were
taken from them! Judge. 2.19. So in the days of the Kings: After David's
Reformation Apostasy began in the very next generation, in the days of his son
Solomon, and in the days of his Grandchild Rehoboam all Israel forsook the
Lord, until God by a sad war awakned them to some Reformation. In Jehoshaphat's
time Religion was upheld in some power, but in the very next generation there
was Apostasy. Hezekiah was a great Reformer, but his son Manasseh built up
again the high places which his Father had destroyed, and seduced the people to
do more evil than did the Nations whom the Lord destroyed before the Children
of Israel. After this Josiah wrought a great Reformation, and with him did the
work of Reformation and Religion die amongst the Jews: upon Josiah's death a
flood of Land-destroying sins brake in upon that generation, that within the
space of two and twenty years after Josiah was gathered unto his fathers, the
Jewish State both Civil and Ecclesiastical was quite overthrown. After the
Captivity, Ezra and Nehemiah, and the prophets Haggai and Zachary were great
Reformers; but Apostasy quickly prevailed, witness the Prophet Malachi, who
declares that not only people but Rulers many of them in his days were become
very corrupt: Albeit they were not guilty of that more gross Idolatry, for
which their Fathers were sent into Captivity, yet Covetousness which is a
spiritual Idolatry they were guilty of, whereby they provoked the Lord to send
blasting Providence upon them, there being no greater punishment to a covetous
man than to have the world taken from him. That Generation did not keep
themselves unspotted of the world, upon which account they are by the Prophet
pronounced unclean Hag. 2.13, 14. And when Christ came into the world, he found
the Jews in a most degenerate and corrupt estate: therefore did the Lord call
them an evil and an adulterous, and a viperous Generation.

Furthermore since (...) Church has been by divine Institution Congregational,
in these days of the New Testament, men have been no less subject to apostasy
then in former Ages. The Churches in Galatia were strangely and suddenly
overrun with Corrupt Doctrine: Hence the Apostle says Gal. 1.6. I marvel that
you are so soon removed unto another Gospel. He might well marvel, if the
observation of Capellus in Historia Apostilca.
great Chronologers be true that within a year after Paul was removed from
Galatia to Ephesus, false Teachers succeeded him, and overthrew his Foundation
by endeavoring to advance a mixed Religion consisting of Judaisme and
Christianity. And I remember Jerome In pro^m ad Galat. Lib. 2.
testifies that in his time all Galatia was overrun with damnable Heresies.
And as for the Church in Ephesus they quickly declined, Rev. 2.5. Remember from
whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do^ the first works. It was (as
Historains observe about Twenty years after the Ascension of Christ that Paul
gathered a Church among the Ephesians. And sixty year after the Ascension the
Book of the Revelation was written: So that there had been a Church in that
place above forty years; in which time the first members of the Church must
needs (in probability) as to the body of them be dead, and another generation
of Church members were risen up which were not like the first. The Church in
Thyatira though not so Apostate when the Revelation was written as some other
Churches, yet Ecclesiastical Story mentions how that in a few years after that,
there was no Church in that place; which was one Reason why some ancient [ n]
Heretics denied the divine Authority of the Apocalips; because therein mention
is made of a Church in Thyatira, when as (said they) no Church is to be seen
there, To which the Answer is that there had been a Church there, only the
Cataphrygian Heresy did prevail so, as in a little time to swallow up the
whole Church. In a word, in all those places which we read of in the Scripture,
as having Churches in them, they that are the Successors at this day, are not
like unto them that once were in those very places. In many places they have
only the Name not the truth of Christianity, and in some not so much as the
Name: Albeit, when time was, famous Churches might have been seen in those
places. In former Ages Asia was the Seat of the Church, whenas in these latter
Ages Europe is so* which Mede.
is judged the Reason why the Book of Revelation speaks of ^vents to come to
pass chiefly in Europe; because since the 10 kings arose, there has the Lord
Christ seen meet to uphold and propagate his Church. What shall be said more?
it is evident that in the Apostles days the Mystery of Iniquity began to work
much more after they fell asleep. In the Autumn of the Apostles Age, there was
a great falling of many Professors, Ebion and Cerinthus sprang up whilst the
Apos-Apostle John was yet living. The very next ^ges to the Apostle began to
depart from, and corrupt the Simplicity of the Gospel, in diverse respects that
might be mentioned, Hegesyus
one long since observed, that although the Church continued a virgin unti^l after
the Apostles death, then it was soon Corrupted. It is conceived that Jude lived
after most of the other Apostles were dead, which is judged to be the reason of
his expressing himself as he does in ver. 17. of his Epistle: Now he complains
much of a great degeneracy among those that professed Christianity.

Consider. 3. The present Generation in New England is lamentably degenerate.
As sometimes Moses spoke to the Children of Israel, Numb. 32.14. Behold ye are
risen up in your Fathers stead an increase of sinful men. So may we say, the
first Generation of Christians in New-Eng- is in a manner gone off the Stage,
and there is another and more sinful generation risen up in their stead. We
have in former years enjoyed a Sunshine of prosperity, and that has bin
attended (as uses to be) with great Apostasy. It is an apt Similitude which
some use, that as the heat of the Sun in Summer breeds a multitude of Insects;
so does the warmth of Prosperity a multitude of Apostates. Men are loath to hear
on this ear, but if we should deny it, the Lord does testify against us that
it is so, Joel. 1.2. Hear this ye old men, and give ear all ye Inhabitants of
the Land, has this been in your days, or even in the days of your Fathers
says the Lord. Were there (says the prophet) such judgments formerly as now
there are? you may therefore conclude that you are departed from God, and by
your sins have provoked him so to Punish you. Thus may it be spoken with
reference to our State and Case, and the dispensations of God toward us, you
old men that are here before the Lord this day, what say you to this Question,
did you know such Judgments upon New England formerly, as of late we have seen?
was it so in the days of our Parents? were there such general and killing
Diseases? Such a long continuing war? so many hundreds cut off by the Sword?
yea, so many^hundred Families brought to ruin? Candlesticks removed out of
their places, and Plantations made desolate! In former times we heard of little
besides Settlement of Plantations, and gathering of Churches, but of late
years, instead of that, Ruins have been multiplied, yea, mischief upon
mischief. God has been spending his Arrows* and heaping mischief upon this
Generation. This Generation is not like the first. How many ignorant ones! how
many scandalous ones! There is great Rudeness amongst young ones in this Land;
and in that respect Degeneracy from the GOOD MANNERS of the Christian world.
And such sins as formerly were not known in New England are now become common,
such as Swearing; sinful Gaming, etc. yea, the present generation as to the
Body of it, is an unconverted generation. I would not lessen the grace of God,
I know that through Grace many of the younger Generation are brought home to
God in Jesus Christ, yet in many (I doubt in most) Congregations the number of
sincere Converts is but small, compared with those that remain still in a
natural and unconverted Estate. And as for some that have the Root of the
matter in them, yet they fall much short of their fathers grace. Solomon was a
good man and his soul is now in Heaven, yet he was not like David his Father as
to measure of grace and faithfulness, (...). 11.6. We may see here and there
one (...) much of his blessed Fathers spirit (...) ^^inciples, but how rare are
such among us! (...) the interest of New England is now (...) from a religious
to a worldly interest; (...) this thing is the great radical Apostasy of
New England. Is not this to choose a strange (...) Hence do we see War in the
gates. And the Lord has been letting this generation blood in the right vein,
since he has taken the world away from them. Trade is almost ruined. Farms,
Oxen, Merchandise which things have been sought after in the first place, how
have they failed! New England is not like this twenty years, to be in that
comfortable Estate it was in but two years ago.

Consider, 4. There is sad Cause to fear what will at last come on this
Generation. There is a Consumption on Religion all the World over, as one well
observes v. Fulfilling Script. in Epist. page 2.
the burials of Christians are frequent and their Birth is rare. And as for
what concerns our selves more peculiarly, we may fear that their will be
greater Apostasy, because they that should have prevented it are gone. Many
times the removal o^ a few eminent servants of God in a Commonwealth, or in
the Churches, makes way for great Apostasy quickly to ensue. Was it not so
with the Children of Israel? When they had a good Judge over them, they would
serve the Lord all the days of that Judge, But it came to pass when the Judge
was dead, they returned and corrupted themselves more then their Fathers, Judge.
2.18.19. In Nehemiah's time while he was Governor for twelve years together,
things went well, and God blessed the Land wonderfully, but when he was removed
in one years time, those sins of Opression, Sensuality, Sabbath-breaking, were
become prevailing common Evils Neh. 13.6. Alas! our Nehemiahs are gone, (I
speak it not reflect upupon those that survive, but to awaken from the solemn
Consideration of those Bereavements) our Paul's are likewise departed from
amongst us in which respect we may fear Corruption in Religion will follow Act.
20.29. Deuteronomy. 31.27. Judge. 8.33. Have we not seen it in some places, how that
within a year after the death of such an eminent Servant of Christ, Apostasy to
this day irrecoverably has prevailed? ^urthermore, the heads of the second
Generation, that were most likely to have done good, the Lord has snatched them
away, and (like Enoch) translated them to Heaven in the midst of their days:
Others that are most likely to prevent backsliding, and to be Instruments of
reforming a corrupted Generation are not likely to continue long in this evil
World. yea, and of late, even since the present War, (that we are bleeding
under) began, the Lord has taken away many young ones either by Sword or
Sickness, who were the Hopes of the generation. In many Plantations, they that
have dyed of late, were the most hopeful and desirable young men in the places
where they lived! an Ominous sign that there is some terrible thing which God
will do e're this Generation be passed away.

Consider. 5. How sad it would be if succeeding generations should forsake the
Lord. It is evievident from the Considerations mentioned that it may be so, but
it would be dismal if (...) should be so: New England would of all Land become
the most dark and miserable. How sadly does the Prophet speak of Bethaven! now
what was that Bethaven? even the same that was in former times Bethel i. e. the
House of God, Hos. 4.15. with 1. King. 12.2^ Amos. 5.5. If such places where
the Hou^^ of God has been erected do once degenerate they are like to become
Bethavens, places (...) the greatest vanity and iniquity in the World* Hence is
that Hos. 9.15. all their wickedness is in Gilgal. Gilgal was once famous upon
Religious accounts: There was the Covenant renewed by Circumcision, there was
the first Passover kept by the Children of Israel after their coming into the
promised Land* There did God appear to Joshua, There was to be seen a famous
Monument of the Lord's doing Wonders for his people, There was the Tabernacle
for some time, but in after-generations an Idolatrous Temple was built there,
so as that it was a Fountain of much Wickedness All their wickednesness was in
Gilgal. It seems the Altar of Witness was near that place, which through men's
Corruptions might easily be abused unto much Superstition in after Ages* The
Devil seeks to corrupt those places especially, which once were famous for
religion* As Polan. in. Hos. 9.15.
Polanus observes that Wittenberg in Germany was the Town where the
Reformation in Luthers time began, and therefore the Devil did seek to corrupt
that place especially, and caused it to become the seat of grievous Heresies.
What Land under Heaven has been more noted for profession and Religion, than
New England? If Apostasy prevails amongst such a people, it is like to be a sad
Apostasy indeed: We see it already. Hence there are such sad Complaints of
young men that have been bred and born in New England, when they go abroad into
other Lands that none are so debauched and profane as some of them. If the Lord
should be provoked to pluck up the Hedge of civil government, what a fearful
food of Iniquity would soon break in! How would madded and enraged Profaneness
know no Bounds! yea, this Land would become as Sodom, and then most desolating
plagues will in short time follow Ezekiel. 33.28. What became of Cain's degenerate
race when they were become I know not how many Millions? the flood swept away
every mothers child of them: Wherefore all the children of men that are now in
the world are styled the children of Seth, Numb. 24.17. Belgic Annot.
because as for Cain's Apostate Generation, they all perished in the flood.
When the Old World did Apostatize, after the Reformation in the days of Seth,
that second Apostasy proved fatal. If Churches in New England degenerate, it is
an Apostasy after Reformation. How fatal is such a relapse like to be! will not
the end thereof be with a flood? And truly to be amongst the last Apostates
will be most woeful.

Quest. But what shall be done in order to prevention of Apostasy? What shall
be done that so succeeding Generations in New England may not forsake the Lord
God of their Fathers?

Answ. As I have been meditating an Answer to this Enquiry, I could not but
call to mind that Scripture which some of the chief of the Fathers (at
leastwise those two, My Father Cotton and my Father Mather.
whom I have more reason than any one in the world to think of) have upon the
like solemn ocsion improved many years since, I mean that Scripture Hag. 2 4.
Yet now be strong O Zerubbabel says the Lord, and be strong O Joshua, and be
strong all ye people of the Land. If Zerubbabel, Joshua, and all the people of
the Land, If Magistrates, Ministers and people all do what Duty requires, the
feared Apostasy, together with the unavoidable Calamity coming therewith, may
be prevented, however in great Measure and for a long time.

1. Let me apply my speech unto Zerubbabels, h* e. Rulers in the Commonwealth:
Honored and much Esteemed, The Welfare or Ill-fare of the present, yea, and
following Generation does much depend upon you. Magistrates are in the
Scripture compared to to Corner stones, because where there is a Commonwealth
erected, the Safety of the whole Building under God depends much upon them:
Hence are they also termed Foundations, Psalm. 11.3. If the Foundations be
destroyed, what can the righteous do? If David had perished, Foundations had
been destroyed, and the good people of the Land would have dearly felt the loss
of him. And when in Readiness time there were corrupt Judges and Magistrates, it
is therefore said that the Foundations of the Earth were out of Course, Psalm.
82.5. And the prophet Micah speaking to the Rulers in the Commonwealth of
Israel ^aith, hear ye Foundations of the earth, Chapt. 6.2. It is with you (by
the help of Christ) to lay such Foundations as shall make Posterity either
happy or miserable. David improved the power which God in his providence
entrusted him with, to serve his Generation according to the will of God, Act.
13.36. And therefore was an Eminent Blessing to all that Generation wherein he
lived. If the Sins of the people under your Care Care and Charge should ever
provoke the Lord to leave you in an hour of Temptation you cannot possibly turn
aside from God alone but many others will do so too, 1. Kin. 11 33* and 12.30.
2. Chr. 24.18. and 33.8. Regis (...) Exemplum -- People are apt to follow the
Examples of those in pl^^e. You know it (...) mentioned concerning Rehoboam,
that he within a few years after his coming to the Government did forsake the
Lord and all Israel with him, 2. Chron. 12.1.

Let me then with all due respect to you^ places and to your worth, and yet
with that freedom and Faithfulness which becomes a Messenger of the Lord of
Hosts, propound some Things to you, which concern the Welfare of this, and
after Generations in New England.

1. I pray you in the Name of the Lord, that (...) speedy and Effectual Course
may be taken that the great things that God did for our Fathers i^ planting
these Heavens, and laying the Foundations of this Earth, be faithfully recorded
and transmitted to Posterity. This has been thought of and spoken of long
enough, but why is it not done? If it be neglected till the present Generation
be passed away, the next will be less capable of doing it. The Title of the
Book wherein my Text is, leads me to insist o^ this. Why is this Book called
the Chronicles but because it contains a Record and Relation of the things
which God did for his people in ancient time, yea, from time to time. The
Hebrews have termed it, [ dibre hajamim] words of days probably (as Grotius.
some conceive) taken out of the Royal Diaryes of those times, by divine
direction and inspiration; this Book of Chronicles being an unerring Vatablus.
Epitome of those Chronicles mentioned in the Kings. The truth is that above
half the old Testament is a Chronicle of things done by the Lord for his
people, in the years of ancient ^enerations. You have then Scripture Example
abundantly to encourage, in promoting a work of this nature. Hence we read of
the Book of ^asher, 2. Sam. 1.18. and of the Book of Nathan the Prophet; and of
Gad the Seer, 1. Chron. 29.29. and of Ahijah the Shilonite, and of Shemaiah the
Prophet, 2. Chron. 12.15. and the story of the Prophet Iddo, 2. Chron. 13.22.
There is also plain Scripture precept See Mr. Marshal's Sermon on Psalm. 102.18.
page 35.
as well as Example to move hereunto, see Psalm. 78.5, 6. For he established a
Testimony in Jacob and appointed a Law in Israel, which he Commanded our
Fathers, that they should make them known to their Children, that the
generations to come might know them, even the Children which should be born,
who should arise and declare them to their Children. And again Psalm. 102.18.
This shall be written for the Generations to come. So that this is a duty
incumbent upon present generations, to take care that there be a Record of the
great work of God toward them, for the benefit of the Generations that shall
follow, that so God might be glorified. I perceive that some good men are
afraid lest our to great neglect in this matter, may be one thing that God is
offended at. And there be two Considerations which may cause such Apprehensions
not to seem groundless; one is, That this thing has been formerly urged. See
Mr. Shepard's Election Sermon p. 16.
That faithful Shepard who spoke here in the Name of the Lord on the like
occasion, five years ago, insisted upon this very thing, and yet the matter
remains unfinished to this day. Moreover whilst the Body of the first
Generation whom God planted in this Wilderness was alive, there were Essays
this way, for it See Records of the Commissioners Sept. 9. 1646.
was Propounded to and Concluded amongst the Commissioners of the United
Colonies above Thirty years ago, that there should be a Collection of Special
Providence of God toward his New England People; and that Memorials being
duly communicated, an History should be Compiled according to Truth, for the
bebenenefit of Posterity, that they might see how God had been with their
Fathers, in laying the Foundation of the Churches, and of the Commonwealth;
now that such things should be concluded and yet never done, cannot please God.
Furthermore, how can we testify to Posterity our gratitude toward God, for
the great things He has done for our Fathers, and for us their Children, in
more respects than can be now mentioned, except such a last^ng Record and
Monument as I am speaking of, be brought to perfection. In the Townhouse at
Geneva, is written on Marble Pillars in Letters of Gold, Such a year GOD
delivered this place from the Tyranny of Antichrist, and ^et up His TRVE
RELIGION amongst us, Clark's Examples vol. 1. page 236.
therefore the Senate and People of Geneva have e^ected this Monument that so
they might testify their Gratitude toward GOD. Let me then ^ntreat you that
are Senators of this Colony, that a work of this nature may not be always
delayed; and the rather because you know not whether your opportunity to
Encourage such an undertaking, will be of long Continuance. And this may by the
blessing of Christ be one good means to prevent Apostasy. The Lord therefore
Commanded his people of old to keep a Record of his works and signal
Providence toward them that, so their Children after them might set their
hope in GOD and keep His Commandments, Psalm. 78.7.

2. I pray you in the Name of the Lord, to take care for the propagation of the
Interest of the Gospel, that the good knowledge of the Lord may be amongst the
People under your Government in your time, yea, and after that also if
ignorance overspread the Land, Apostasy will do so too. Hence David here says
know thou the Lord God of thy Father and serve him, but if thou forsake him
etc. intimating that except succeeding Generations know the Lord, they will not
serve him but forsake him. Therefore it concerns the Magistrate to take
Effectual care that the Land be furnished with able and faithful Ministers: So
we read of Jehoshaphat, that he caused Levites to be sent into all the Cities
of Judah, who taught the people 2. Chron. 17.8, 9. and this stands upon Record
to his everlasting Renown. It is not every man that is fit to be employed as a
Public Teacher. Ezra says (Chapt. 8.17, 18.) that he sent unto such and
such, that they would bring unto him Ministers for the House of God, and that
by the good hand of God they brought a man of understanding: He that is
employed in holy things ought to be such an one. Therefore you should endeavor
that the future generation be furnished with a lear-Learned Ministry. The Cent.
2. c. 7. and 3. c. 7.
Writers of Ecclesiastical story inform us, how careful Christ, ians in the
primitive times were, for the settling of Schools of Learning, in all places
where Churches had been planted, that so there might be able instruments raised
up for the propagating of Truth in succeeding Generations. And some have well
and truly observed, that the Interest of Religion and good Literature, has
risen and fallen together. It was Julians policy to pull down Schools among
Christians, that so he might destroy Religion: Read Mr. Reiner of the necessity
of Humane Learning for a Gospel Minister.
concluding that the Cause that should not have an able Defendant would fall.
Therefore let there be a pious and earnest Solicitude about that matter. One of
the famous Kings Elfred vide Clark* vol. 1. page 173.
in our Nation caused a Law to be Established, that all Parents should bring up
their Children in Learning. I know there are good Laws among us respecting
inferior Schools, though I doubt as to Execution there is great defect in that
as well as in other matters. Let me also beseech you to endeavor that what
concerns the College may be Revived, and if it may be in the place where it
formerly flourished, I have nothing to say against that, but much for it
rather; and that greater encouragement be given to those that labor as Tutors
there. Mr. Oaks his Election Sermon page 57.
That was propounded to this General Assembly four years ago, by him that did
then so faithfully declare the Counsel of God to this generation. I would
gladly second a motion of that nature, as supposing that more of the Welfare of
the uprising Generations is Concerned therein than many are aware of.

I remember it is noted concerning the learned Chytraeus, that he prevailed
with the Princes of Megapol to bestow 3500 Crowns of yearly Revenue upon the
University of Rostoch, by which means the interest of Religion was wonderfully
promoved: And it was one of the usual wishes of that Excellent man, Vtinam
Reges ac Potentes rerum Domini, majorem Ecclesiae ac Scholarum curam
susciperent. O (said he) that Magistrates would be more careful to encourage
Schools of Learning, and thereby promote the good of the Church. The Reformers
did in this way, and by this means carry on the Interest of Religion, and
propagate the Truth to after Ages. Calvin therefore persuaded the Senate of
Geneva to erect an illustrious School in that City wherein the Tongues and Arts
were taught, and from whence many worthy Instruments issued forth. And that
excellent Prince Cassimire did the like at Neostad, where Vrsin and Zanchi were
sometimes professors. So the Senate of Grunberg erected a College and chose
the learned Bucholtzer to govern it. The like was done at Herborn by Prince
John of Nassau at the persuasion of Olevian, where also Piscator taught and
flourished. So at Leyden in Holland. And (not to mention more places) the same
Course was taken at Edinborough in Scotland, of which College that Famous and
Holy man, Mr. Rollock was the first President and many Choice Instruments of
God's glory have there been Educated. Wherefore let what concerns this matter,
be among the chief of your Cares and Endeavors.

Further, I entreat you let it be your Care, that none but faithful ones (as
far as men can judge) be employed as Public Preachers: Though the just Liberty
of Churches should not be infringed; yet that every Plantation in the Country
should have Allowance to choose whom they please to labor in the public
Dispensation of the Word, may be in time a great Inlet to ignorance, error and
profaness. Therefore let me humbly propound to you that you would think of some
Expedient, respecting the Approbation of such; as shall be under; a constant
improvement as Public Teachers Yea, and that there be not any Place settled
without such. No doubt but one reason why the Lord has let loose the Heathen
against us has been, because some Plantations have been erected and yet no
public acknowledgement of God amongst them, but they have lived like Heathen,
without Sabbaths, without the Word and prayer, which are moral duties that all
are bound to attend: and it is therefore incumbent on the Magistrates to see
that they do so. People are ready to run wild into the woods again and to be as
Heathenish as ever, if you do not prevent it. Take care also I beseech you for
the propagation of the Gospel amongst these poor Indians: You know it is
expressed in the Patent, as one main end proposed by our Fathers in their
coming into this Wilderness, that so they might endeavor the Conversion of the
Natives, and set up the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus among them. God by the late
war has made way for the Gospel to be entertained amongst them, more than
formerly; should not this be considered?

3. I beseech you in the Name of the Lord, that you would in special manner
beware of that which was the sin of Solomon: and what was that! Truly sinful
Toleration was Solomon's great Iniquity, whereby he did forsake the Lord. It is
said of him, he built High places for Asht^^^h, 2. King, 23.13. because he did
tolerate, and give public allowance, unto those Idolatries: and that sin of
his was the reason why the Lord stirred up Adversaries against him. Do we not
find that all the godly reforming Magistrates, spoken of in Scripture, thought
it their Concern to pull down false worship, as well as to set up the true
Worship of God. It is a most vain objection which some have made, That we do
not read in the New Testament, that the Magistrate did ever punish any, on
account of transgression against the first Table: No more (says Calvin) do we
read in the New Testament that the Magistrate did ever punish men for murder,
or other Crimes, does it therefore follow that he ought not so to do? But
therein it is said that they ought to punish all evil doers, Romans 13.4. 1. Tim.
1.9. And that Transgressions against the first Table are evil deeds, Gal.
5.19.20. Phil. 3.2. 2. Joh. 10.11.

Moreover, sinful Toleration is an evil of exceeding dangerous consequence: Men
of Corrupt minds though they may plead for Toleration, and Cry up Liberty of
Conscience etc. yet if once they should become numerous and get power into
their hands, none would persecute more than they: So the Donatists See Clarks
Martyrology page 89.90.
of old, and the German Anabaptists Sleidan, lib. 10. page 159.
in the last Age. And the Ar-Arminian Remonstrants Voetius Disp. Vol. 3. page
795. and 803. Grotius de Pietat. Ordin. Holland.
in the Netherlands made Hideous Clamours for Liberty of Conscience, and that
the States of Holland were more cruel than the bloody Spanish Inquisitors, yet
when they became potent, they did persecute the Orthodox Professors of the
Truth. And indeed the Toleration of all Religions and Persuasions, is the way
to have no true Religion at all left. That was Julian the Apostate's device, in
order to an extirpation of Christianity. And it is a Solemn Word which Mr.
Cotton (the first and famous Teacher in this Congregation) speaks Mr.
Cotton's Bloody Tenet washed. page 192.
I wish (says he) that Antichrist do not creep in at the back door of
Tolleration. I do believe that Antichrist has not at this day a more probable
way to advance his Kingdom of Darkness, than by a Tolleration of all Religions
and Persuasions, Hence some of the chief of the Popish Doctors Sic Becanus;
Mariana, Harding contra Juellum. Heart in Rainoldum. Sic Bozzius et Rossaeus,
quos vide citatos apud Keckermanum in Polit. page 983. et Paraeum in Romans 13.
have written against the Magistrates power in matter of Religion. But remember
I pray you how God has punished this sin which I am testifying against. Of old
(as some Strong Select Sermons. page, 263.264.
have truly observed) when once the Roman Emperors did indulge and tolerate
Arians, God was provoked to let the Barbarous Goths loose to break in upon the
Empire and destroy it, so as that the Church fled into the Wilderness, and had
like to have been swept away with that flood. And what misery this sin has
more than once brought upon our Land and Nation, I need not tell you. It is a
very memorable Passage which I find related in the Life of that great learned
USHER, when Popish Idolaters were by the Civil State allowed; Well, (said that
Worthy of his time) you shall find that God will punish you forty years hence,
by those very men, whom you have sinfully indulged: And so it came to pass; for
just forty years after that, was the Irish Rebellion. This very sin which God
calls me to bear witness against this day has been subversive to the interest
of Religion in some Christian Nations. The Toleration of Socinianisme has
prooved the ruin of the Churches in Poland and Transylvania. Yet it is far from
my design in speaking this to stir up Magistrates to that which the Scripture
calls Persecution: it were better to err by too much indulgence toward those
that have the root of the matter in them, than by too much Severity. Nay, as to
those that are inindeed Heretical, I can for my own part say with Luther, ad
judicium sanguinis tardus sum, I have no affection to sanguinary punishments in
such Cases. And certainly there are other See Sr. Simond D'Ewes his Primitive
Practice for preserving Truth. p. 6, 7.
ways to suppress Heretics besides Heretic^de, witness what was done by great
Constantine for the suppression of Arianism. Nevertheless, approved Writers
who, are large enough in the point of Toleration, declare, that they, the
principles of whose Religion are disturbant to the Civil State and Constitution
of any place, may not be indulged, (and that therefore Popish Priests and
Jesuits are not to be permitted) Sure then they whose Religion, and whose
Profession does warm in its bowels a fatal Engine, against the Kingdom and
Churches of the Lord Jesus, ought not to be tolerated. Nor is it tolerable for
any sort of men amongst us, to set up a mount Gerizzim that if these or those
are justly cast out of the Churches of Christ, they shall be suffered to set up
an Altar against the Lord's Altar, and (it may be) to take those hands that are
in the Name of the Lord Jesus delivered up to Satan, I say, to take those hands
to administer Phrykta musteria.
the dreadful mysteries of the Kingdom, it is an abomination enough to make
desolate. Certainty (much honored in the Lord) if your blessed Fathers and
Predecessors were alive and in place, it would not be so; If See New-England's
Memorial. page 140.
Winthrop, Dudley, Endicot were upon the Bench such profaneness as this would
soon be suppressed. And if it be so that the spirit of Rulers in New England is
changed, if you do become cold and indifferent in the things of God, departing
from your former love, and zeal for the Name, Truth, and blessed Ordinances, of
the Lord Jesus, I will be bold to speak to you, as once Mr. Brightman said to a
greater man than any of you all, if it be so, you may believe it, God will
change either you, or your Government ere long. I speak it to you with great
solemnity of Spirit, and in the Name of Him that is Higher than the highest.

4. Labor (I likewise pray you in the Name of the Lord) to the utmost of your
power, that the work of Reformation may be promoted in this Generation. I shall
not need to insist here, because this Argument was abundantly and worthily
enlarged on Mr. Torrey in his Election Sermon.
by him that spoke in the Name of the Lord on this occasion three years ago.
Since that, the holy dispensations of God toward this people have been very
dreadful, so that the Lord calls for Reformation now more than ever. If things
should pass away thus, and the Generation that is to come should not see that
some notable thing was done with respect to a Reformation of provoking evils,
it would be sad indeed; and the more sad, in that there have been Essays this
way: And since the late (and to this day not fully ended War) a Committee
appointed by the General Court to enquire into the Causes of the high
displeasure of God which has been manifested, and such and such evils
concluded to be matters of Provocation, and Laws enacted for the suppression of
them, and shall it all come to just nothing at last? shall we dare to dally
with the Almighty in things of this nature? The Lord may respite us for a while
but, except there be a Reformation of provoking Evils, we have no reason to
expect otherwise, but that a worse thing will come unto us, and that He will
punish us yet seven times for our sins. And how is there like to be that
Reformation which the Lord requires, except you that are Leaders over this
people, do your utmost to promote it? Where do you read of any great and
general Reformation brought to pass, except the civil Magistrate did forward
it? It is true, that many times God does make use of his Messengers and
Ministers to set the Wheel a going, but then M^gistrates have fallen in with
them. The Prophets Haggai and Zachary set the work of Reformation upon the
wheel, but Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel (that godly Magistrate) carried on the
work to effect, Ezra. 5.1, 2. Luther began the Reformation in Germany, yet if
some of the Princes there had not engaged with him, the work had never been
carried on with such success. Reed the lives of Luther, Calvin, Zwinglius,
Oecolampadius, Hallerus.
Calvin (and other eminent Ministers of God) exhorted the people at Geneva,
unto Reformation, but if the Senators of that place had not hearkened to the
voice of God in those Exhortations, the people would have remained unreformed
still. Zwinglius by his Ministry was instrumental toward the accomplishing a
great Reformation in Zurick, but then the Magistrates of that place fell in
with the Word of God. Oecolampadius was an happy instrument in the hand of
Christ to reform Basil; but if the Magistrates of that City had not set to
their helping hand, Oecolampadius alone might have labored in vain. The like
is to be said concerning the Reformation of Bern, (not to insist on more
instances) where that learned Hallerus was once a Preacher of the Gospel. I
know you cannot change men's hearts, yet you may do much (if God help you)
toward the effecting an outward Reformation, which will procure outward
blessings and prevent outward Judgments and desolations. There is pride in the
hearts of men, you cannot Reform that, but there is pride in Apparel, which
the Lord has said he will punish for, you may cause that to be reformed. There
is Drunkeness in the sight of God, which does not fall under your Cognizance,
but Drunkeness in the sight of men, and the occasions of it, do; which you may
and ought to remove. I know not any evil, that has brought more misery upon
this Generation than that has, and some that have reason to know it, have told
me that there has been more Drunkenness among the Indians since this war,
than there was before: undoubtedly there is a fault somewhere, that good laws
are not executed upon those that shall transgress in this kind, and that the
Course propounded and enacted by the General Court for the suppressing of this
growing evil has not been duly attended. Again, as for scandalous contentions,
you may do much toward the healing of them. All the world knows that there
has been an unhappy breach between two of the Churches in this great Town; if
every one of you that are in place, shall do what you can, and what the Lord
Jesus would have you do, to help in this case, we may hope, that woeful breach
will (by the help of Christ) soon be healed, and much Sin and Judgment (that
is otherwise like to follow) will be prevented. And the Lord calls aloud about
this matter; The Burn-Burning which he has kindled in this place, the voice of
the Lord in it is, out with your sinful fires, lest I give you burning for
burning. And since that, this Town has been endangered more by fire than ever
it was since the day I knew it. Therefore I come to you in the Name of the
Lord, and beseech you to consider of this matter, lest the Lord kindle another
fire in Boston er'e long that shall burn to the Foundation of the Mounntains:
And I do the rather mention this thing because the subject I am upon, leads me
to it, the welfare of posterity being concerned therein, it may be the sour
grapes which the Fathers have eaten will set your Childrens teeth an edge. I
remember blessed Mr. Buroughs Irenicum page 220.
Mr. Buroughs in his Irenicum takes notice of it, that it is very dangerous
for the Children of the Church to be brought up in the sight of Divisions
amongst Professors. Was there not a young man Abraham Warner in Hartford.
that came to a lamentable End in this Country who professed that the
Divisions which he observed amongst godly men had occasioned his ruin? Let us
remember that Scripture, Jer. 32.39. I will give them one heart to fear me for
the good of them, and of their Children after them. If there be a divided heart
amongst Christians, and these Divisions appear openly; it is a Wrong to their
Children after them. The Lord help us to Consider it.

And now I shall turn my Speech from you that are Z^^ubb^bels among this
people: I doubt not but you Consider that I have spoken these things not as a
friend only, but as in the capacity of an unworthy Ambassador of the most High
God unto you this day. And methinks my conscience bears me witness in the
Holy Ghost, that an earnest desire that the will of God might be done has
caused me thus to express my self: As also a desire that you might have Comfort
both now and in that day when you must give up your account to the Son of God
concerning your Stewardship, which in his Providence he has entrusted you
with; and that your Names might be honorably spoken of in the next Generation
when you shall be in your Graves. It is no honor to Jehu's name that in his
days God began^e cut Israel short 2. King. 10.32. Nor to J^horam in that it is
recorded to posterity that in his (...) Edomites revolted, 2. Chron. 21.^8. Nor
will it ^e for your Honor if the next Generation shall say, Once such and such
Worthies and Pa^riots had the Management of Affairs in New England, and in
their days things wen^ well, God did bless, and build, and prosper the Land;
but after they were gone the Work fell into other hands, and in their days
there was trouble upon trouble, Wars, Sicknesses, Sword Fire, Desolations in
every Corner of the Land, for it thus to be spoken would not be for your
Honor. But now that it should be said, though the Lord afflicted the Land for
a while, you caused the people under your Charge to turn unto the Lord, and
then God did own them and bless them more then ever, this will be to your
honor amongst men in this world, and more to your Joy when you shall appear
before Jesus Christ, than if Crowns of Diadems should be set upon your heads.
The Lord grant it may be so.

2. Let me humbly propose this Exhortation to those that are Ministers in the
House of God. There are many such before the Lord in this great Assembly;

My Fathers and Brethren, The Generation that is Present, and that which is to
come will bless God for us, if we do our utmost to pr^mote their Welfare; We
are many of us e^inently the Children of the Prophets. The ^rophets do they
live for ever, and our Fathers where are they? They are now in Heaven beholding
the Glory of Jesus Christ; And the Lord Jesus who sometimes said to the Angels
of the Churches, I know your works, speaks to us saying, the great affairs of
my Kingdom which once were in the Hands of your Fathers to Manage, are now come
into your hands, they were faithful to my Name, and did acquit themselves as
became them, now let me see what you will do: Follow them as they followed
Christ. Give me leave to mention two or three words, which if the Lord help us
to Remember them, we shall serve our Generation according to the will of God.

1. Let us approve our selves faithful in what Concerns the House of God. And
therefore we ought to be Careful who are admitted there* though others are also
concerned therein, yet in a more peculiar manner that matter belongs to us. We
are in (respect of sacred Office relation before the Lord) Porters that have
the Charge of his House; and we are solemnly charged, Ezekiel. 44. (it is a
Scripture that concerns Ministers of the New Testament) not to bring into the
Lords Sanctuary uncircumcised in heart to be in the Sanctuary to pollute it,
and to eat the Bread of God there. Indeed as for those whom God has admitted
into his House (in any degree) by any Rule of his, we must not turn them out
till the Lord do it. But that which I intend is the Admission of persons into
full Communion, we know what our Fathers have Taught concerning that matter,
viz. that there ought to be an Holding forth Faith and Repentance before
Admission to the Lords Table and it is well said by blessed Mr. Mitchel In
Answer to Apol. preface page ult.
that Laxness in that Point would be a real Departure from our former
Profession. Yet I wish there be not Teachers found in our Israel, that have
espoused loose, Large Principles here, Designing to bring all Persons to the
Lords Supper, who have an historical Faith, and are not Scandalous in Life,
although they never had Experience of a work of Regeneration on their souls, and
live in the neglect of secret Duties, wherein the Life and Power of Godliness
especially consists. Now this would corrupt Churches and ruin all in a little
time. The Dr. Owen de Theol. l. 6. c. 8. p. 504.
neglect of this Principle of Truth, that such Members of the Church as are
admitted to full Communion, ought to be Regenerate Converted Persons, the
Non-attendance unto that did (as a worthy, Divine of our own has well noted)
lay a Foundation to great Apostasy, which the Christian Church has been long
subject unto. Again, if we would be faithful as to what concerns the House of
God, we must endeavor that the Building thereof be carried on to Perfection.
As David in this Context speaks to Solomon, Take heed now for the Lord has
chosen thee to build an house for a Sanctuary, be strong and do it. So has the
Lord been pleased to choose us to be employed in building his house, which has
not been carried on to the desired perfection. Our Fathers did like David, he
prepared Materials for the Temple and then left it to his son to go on with the
building 1. Sam. 22.5.14. So did our Fathers leave us Principles of Truth,
which they did with much cost and pains, dig out of the Rich veins of the
Scripture. We have need therefore to be much in prayer, and Humiliations before
the Lord that so he might vouchsafe to show us the Form of the House and the
Fashion thereof, and the Goings out thereof, and the Comings in thereof.

2. Let us make Converting work our main design. Shall we be content to go to
Heaven alone, and not strive to carry as many of the Generation we live in,
along with us as possibly we can? Alas, Apostasy will prevail, and these
Churches cannot be kept pure long except Converting work go forward. O
therefore let us Preach for this, and Pray for this, and study for this, that
precious immortal souls may be converted to God through Jesus Christ. And to
this end it will be good for us to attend personal instruction of those under
our Charge, as far as time and strength will permit us. I remember it is noted
in the Lives of Chrysostom and Austin, that besides their public Labors,
they did sometimes attend personal instruction of these and those of their
Hearers. When the Ministers Refertur in vita Calvini.
in Geneva did agree to divide the City so as to call each Family to an account
concerning their Faith, more good was done thereby, than by all their Public
Teachings. And some Mr. Joseph Alleins life, with Mr. Baxters Preface. Ames
Cas. Consc. Lib. 4. Cap. 26.
of latter time have been blessed with eminent success as to Conversion of
souls, so as that whole Towns where they have lived have been wonderfully
changed upon taking this course. I know that where there is but one Elder in a
Church (as alas that is now the case of these Churches generally) so much
cannot be done that way as is to be desired; yet if we do as much as we can,
the Lord Jesus will accept of it, and it may be, success will be beyond
expectation. Many an one that minds not a Sermon, yet when he is by a Messenger
of God particularly spoken to, and told, you are yet in your sins; if you be
not new born, better you had never been born; he falls down under Conviction.
And possibly words that we little think any such thing of now, will be
mentioned again to our exceeding joy and rejoicing in the day of Christ, when
we shall see and hear many souls stand forth and bless the Lord Jesus that ever
they knew us, and that ever we spoke to them in the Name of the Lord both
publicly and privately; even in the day when each of us that has been
faithful in his generation shall say, Lord here am I and the Children that thou
have given me. Moreover, if we would Convert souls and be Bless^ngs indeed to
this generation, it concerns us to be very careful of our personal
conversation, and what examples we set before others. If we do not live Sermons
as well as preach them we are not likely to do any great good. For a Minister
of Christ to be a See Dr. Tuckney on Exodus 28.36. page 429. And Dr. Fuller Holy
State, page 268. And Greenhil on Ezekiel. 42. page 334. and Mr. Dury in his
Discourse on that Question, how far a Minister of the Gospel may engage himself
in civil Affairs.
Merchant and entangle himself with the Affairs of this life, against the
express charge of ye Holy Ghost; or for them to be Gospel Lawyers, to handle
the Code instead of the Bible, and study the Statutes of the Land instead of
the Statutes of Heaven; for them to appear as Advocates, and plead Causes in
civil Courts of Judicature it is very uncomely. One of the Ancients observes
that Sacerdos in Foro, et Mercator in Templo is not to be tolerated. Certainly
such preachers are not likely to be instruments of turning many to
Righteousness. Much more do they hinder the Conversion of souls, that shall
call themselves Ministers of Christ, and yet be of a scandalous Conversation.
When the Prophets of Jerusalem are light Persons; Profaneness goes forth into
all the Land. I have read somewhere of one that was grievously tempted to
Atheism on this account: For, (said that poor Creature) I live under a Minister
that will preach good Sermons, but his conversation is not according thereunto;
he will be drunk sometimes, and secretly vile and lascivious, and therefore how
can I believe that there is any God or Devil, Heaven or Hell, or any such
thing? An evil Example in such an one is enough to make those of the Generation
amongst whom he lives to become Atheists.

3. Oh! that our occasional meetings might be improved for the good of this,
and after-generations. Because of the Capacity and holy Relation we stand in
before the Lord, it is expected we should not be like other men, they may meet
together and spend the time in discourses of their own personal Concerns; but
we have the care and Charge of souls committed to us: Yea, (in our measure) the
Care of all the Churches ought to be upon us: Nay more, we must be solicitous
for those that shall come after us. Such a public Spirit well becomes our
public Capacity, and therefore upon all occasions to speak and act
accordingly. And verily the Lord will write down these discourses in his Book
of Remembrance, and we shall be glad to hear of them again at that day. We must
every one of us (Ministers as well as People) appear in a greater congregation
than this, and then we shall not be sorry that we have laid our selves out for
God and for his People; yea, the more we have done for Christ and for the
Generation wherein we live, the greater will our glory be when we shall hear
the Lord Jesus saying, Well done thou faithful servant, enter thou into the Joy
of thy Lord.

If the Lord help us to approve our selves faithful unto the Death, when he the
chief Shepherd shall appear, he will give unto us a Crown of Glory which fades
not away.

Let me in the last place direct my speech and Exhortation in the Name of the
Lord unto the People of this Land. There are here present those that are
Deputed to act in the Name and stead of the people of this Jurisdiction. You
have a great opportunity put into your hands by the providence of God to do
service for this and after generations, viz. by endeavoring the establishment
of righteous and religious Laws in the Commonwealth, that so the Lord Jesus
might reign there. Especially let me propound to you, that you would take some
effectual course that good Laws which are already established may be duly
executed: And that some further care might be taken for the suppre^^ing of that
wickedness that is usually committed the night after the Sabbath, God has
lately kindled a fire in this place, and it was on the night after the Sabbath,
why should we wonder at it? I cannot speak it without some Anguish of Spirit,
there is more wickedness committed usually on that night, than in all the week
besides. Therefore think of some expedient to help in this case. Let me also
mention another thing to you, I have formerly upon a solemn occasion mentioned
it to the Honored Magistracy, and therefore now apply my self to you; it is
this that you would recommend unto the Churches in this colony, a solemn
Renewal of their Covenant with God and one another. That is a great Scripture
Expedient for Reformation. Do not think that this is any new Notion, but it is
a known Principle owned Cartwright, Parker, Ames, etc.
and avowed by the good old Non-Conformists (whose children we are) That
Renewal of Covenant is the way to attain Church Reformation: which Principle
was much Improved by the chief of the Fathers in these New-English Churches
also; (and therefore I the rather insist upon it) this is the way to prevent
Apostasy. The Covenant was renewed in the days of Joshua, when as the
Scripture testifies that in his days the Children of Israel Continued to serve
the Lord, wherefore Divines observe, the Joshua's special Design in putting the
people upon Renewing their Covenant, was that so they might be kept from future
Apostasy. I do therefore in the Name of the Lord, commend this matter to you,
and leave it with you, and God incline your hearts to do that which shall be
pleasing in his sight. And if the Lord intend not further shakings and
desolations amongst these Churches, I am persuaded that this Motion will be
harkned unto and Complied with.

Moreover, there are many others of the people of the Land here, before the
Lord this day, a considerable part of the present Generation is met together in
this great Assembly; A few words let me speak to you. and leave with you, that
so you may not forsake the Lord, the God of your Fathers.

1. Let us labor to be rightly informed respecting Princi^les which our
Fathers owned. There are Mistakes in the minds of some who think that the
Fathers of this Colony, affirmed thus and so, albeit it was far from them so to
teach, or so to think. I shall not (being now in earnest, and desirous to speak
with utmost Solemnity) enter upon things which are more Controversal amongst
us, but certain it is, that our Fathers always owned and avowed this principle
of Truth, That nothing should be admitted into the Worship of God but what
there is Scripture Warrant for, nor any thing neglected which the Lord has
Instituted. The Cause of the Second Commandment was that which our Fathers were
engaged in the Defense of. And as to Church Administrations, That things should
be reduced to the Primitive, Apostolical pattern. An excellent principle,
albeit, that blessed Martyr Clark's Lives, page 493.
Mr. Laurence Saunders was accused of Heresy for asserting it. And I remember
that learned man and blessed Martyr Peter Ramus professes in one of his
Epistles that the deep consideration of this principle vide Petri Rami Epist.
ad Cardinal. Lotharingum page 256, 257.
that the Apostolical age was the golden age of the Church, and that things
should be regulated according to what was then practiced in the Churches of
Christ, caused him to become a Protestant, yea, and for the Congregational way
of Church Government. and indeed the Congregational way truly stated, is that
which our Fathers have steadfastly owned and avowed, that is to say as it is
held forth in the Platform of Discipline, and by Mr Cotton in his Book of the
Keys; they were not for Presbyterianism, nor yet for Brownism. Remember
blessed Mr. Norton's last words in this place, and under this Roof.

2. Keep up the power of Discipline in Churches. When Apostasy prevailed in
the Asiatick Churches, there was the original wound, they did not brandish the
Sword of Discipline, which is Christ's own Expedient, and appointment for the
preservation of Churches in purity; yea, this was a fatal Neglect, which by
degrees proved ruinous to those once famous and glorious Churches. Some learned
Voetius alicubi inter Disputationes.
men have well observed, that the Neglect of Discipline in the Churches of Asia
brought in corruption of manners, and Corruption of Manners was (through the
just revenging hand of God) attended with Corruption of Doctrine, and these
together provoked the Lord to lay those Churches most desolate. And as for the
Children of the Covenant, let Discipline be extended toward them, according as
they are subjects capable thereof. Did not our Fathers come hither in hope that
they should leave their children under the Discipline and Government of the
Lord Jesus in his Church? Has not Christ owned the application of solemn
public Admonitions, etc. to some of them that have been Children of the
Church, (tho not in full Communion) even so as to convert their souls thereby?
why then should disputes about the mode wholly evacuate the Thing, when so much
of the welfare of souls and the interest of Christ's Kingdom is concerned
therein.

3. Look to your Families. Families are the Nurseries for Church and
Commonwealth, ruin Families and ruin all. Order them well and the Public
State will fare the better. The great wound and misery of New England is that
Families Read Mr. Stockton of Family Instruction.
are out of order. As t^ the generality of House-holders, Family-Government is
lost and gone; Servants do not fear their Masters, children do not honor their
Parents, in that respect the English are become like unto the Indians. Let
Christians make conscience of it as their Duty, to rule their own Houses well,
and be careful that Family Instruction be upheld; the Judgment of God should
awaken to this. In some Families the Children have no Father left to instruct
them, in other Families Fathers have no Children left, to be instructed by
them; by these terrible Judgments they that have Families should learn to be
diligent in Instructing of them, whilst they have an opportunity so to do: And
this is the way to prevent Apostasy: For Ignorance is the Mother (not of
Devotion but) of HERESY. Usually they that prove Heretics, are such as were
never thoroughly grounded in the Knowledge of principles, never well instructed
in Catechetical Fundamental Doctrines and points of Religion. The Waldenses
Read the history of the Waldenses.
preserved and propagated the Interest of Religion by diligence in catechizing
their Children. When certain Jesuits were sent among them to entice them from
the Truth to Idolatry, they returned amazed, professing that Children of seven
years old amongst those Waldenses knew more in the Scripture, and of the
Mysteries of the Gospel, than many of their learned Doctors did. Take heed also
how you dispose of your Children, you that are parents look at Religion and the
fear of God in the Disposal of your Children. That blessed man Mr. Dod (the
Moses of his time) would sometimes bewail it, that Professors of Religion
would say, There is a Portion and Civility, and we will hope for Grace; but
(said he) rather make sure of Grace, and hope for Riches, there is far greater
reason for it, since Godliness has the Promises, Riches have none. It may make
us dread to think what is coming, in that it is with us as it was with the old
World, the Sons of God are marrying with the Daughters of men, Church Members
in disposing of their Children look more at Portion than at Piety: If their
Children are like to live well in the World, and their Families to be made
richer, they look no further; a sad sign that Religion will expire, and such
Families be cut off from the Covenant, within a few Generations, and the
branches thereof perish for ever.

4. Pray with all manner of prayer and supplication in the Spirit. Pray as
sometimes the Martyr did, Lord do not thou forsake me, lest I forsake thee.
Pray for your poor Children and posterity, as David did for his son Solomon 1.
Chron. 29.19. give unto my son Solomon a perfect heart. He did not only exhort
and charge his Son to labor after such an heart, but earnestly prayed to God,
that such an heart might be given to him. And truly, if there were more prayers
poured forth before the Lord for the Converting of the rising Generation, we
may hope that there would a blessed Effect follow. I have been told that there
is a Church in N. England that has set days apart only to seek unto the Lord,
for converting grace to be vouchsafed to their Children. O that all other
Churches would do as they have done, even seek unto the Lord by Fasting and
prayer, for a poor, perishing, dying, unconverted Generation.

5. And Lastly. Be faithful in improving of your Civil Liberties. Beware of two
Extremes, of an Issacharian Spirit, to couch under every Imposer: If you
foolishly lose your Liberties, your Posterity, yea the Children that are yet to
be born will rue it. Beware also of a wanton Spirit, lest you provoke the Lord
by bitter Bondage to make you know the worth of Liberty. It is a great
Privilege which you enjoy at this day, that you may choose Rulers from among
your selves. And although as to what concerns the Transactions of this day, it
is almost too late to speak, yet you may hear for the time to come. Freemen,
remember the oath of God that is upon you. I doubt there is lamentable guilt
upon many, who in Elections are acted more by interest and Faction than by
conscience. You know what the Rule is, viz. that you should Choose men that are
just, and that fear God and hate Covetousness. Choose men that shall aprove
themselves (like Eliakim) Fathers to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, Choose men
of Hezekiah's Spirit, who spoke comfortably to all those that taught the good
knowledge of the Lord. In a word, choose those that will be zealous for the
interest of Reformation, and that therefore will improve their power to
suppress Transgressions of the first, as well as of the 2 nd. Table. If you
will choose such (which mercy forbid that ever it should be) under whose
shadow Thorns and Briars shall thrive, and those Weeds of Pride, Cont^^tion,
Heresy shall receive Nourishment, and Encouragement; it will be an Ominous
sign that God will ere long deprive you of your Liberties until such time as
you know better how to improve them.

And now I hope I may say that as to the opportunity put into my hands this
day, I have discharged my Conscience, delivered my soul, and can lay down my
head with peace. I conclude with Moses, Calling Heaven and Earth to record,
that life and death has been set before this Generation. O Generation see the
Word of the Lord, choose Life that both thou and thy seed may live. And God
from Heaven says, O that there were such an heart in this generation that they
would fear me, that so it may go well with them, and with their childdren for
Ever, AMEN.

Tibi Domine.
ECCLES. XII.I. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth.


SOlomon in this Context does apply himself to speak unto Young men, whom he
does, 1. Dehort. 2. Exhort. His Dehortation is in the two last verses of the
former Chapter. And it is

1. Ironically propounded ver. 9. Rejoice O young man in thy youth etc. It is
such another form of Speech as that of the Prophet unto Ahab 1. King. 22.15. Go
and prosper. Cartwright in Eccl. 11.9.
He saw that Ahab was set upon his design, and therefore by way of Irony bids
him go and see what would come of it. Thus Solomon here, I see young man (says
he) that thou art resolved to follow thy pleasures and vanities, whatever the
event shall be, do so, and see what will come of it. Wherefore he adds Walk in
the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes. This is expressly
forbiden elsewhere in the Scripture, Mercer in loc.
A clear evidence that the wise man here speaks by way of holy derision, and
then^^ it is further added, know thou that for those things, God will bring
thee to Judgment. q. d. Though its possible thou may escape Judgment from
men, parents, Magistrates, etc. yet not from the Lord.

2. This Dehortation is plainly expressed in the verse immediately preceding
this Text, Remove sorrow from thy heart. The Hebrew word translated Sorrow,
signifies Anger: q. d. Beware of inordinate passions, which young men are
usually subject unto: And put away evil from thy flesh, h. e. avoid sinful
pleasures. Passions and sinful pleasures are evils which young men are most in
danger of being carried away by; therefore he does in special caution them
against iniquities of that nature: withal adding this reason, for Childhood and
Youth are vanity. h. e. its soon gone, thy time (young man) to enjoy sinful and
foolish pleasures will (...) be past and gone, it abides not, therefore set
not thy heart upon such things.

2. We have Solomon's Exhortation unto young men in this verse: wherein is
expressed 1. The Act that ought to be done, Remember. 2. The Object, thy
Creator. i. e. God for he, and he only is the CREATOR; since it requires an
infinite power to be able to produce a work of Creation. Hebr. [Boreeca] Thy
Creatours: Not that there are more Gods or more Creators than one: But there is
a plurality of Persons in the Godhead. Though the work of Creation be more
especially ascribed to the Father, as Redemption to the Son, and aplication to
the Spirit, yet each of the Persons in the Sacred and Eternal Trinity, does
concur therein. 3. The Time or Season, when this Duty ought to be attended is
expressed. viz. now, in the days of thy youth. not that they that are past the
days of their youth may forget God, or be exempted from this Remembrance of
him, but young men are under special obligations and Advantages to remember Him.

Doctr. That as it is the duty of all, so more especially of young men to
remember God their Creator. Remembering God may not be deferred until old age,
but ought to be attended in the days of youth.

In the Doctrinal prosecution of this Truth, there are three things to be
enquired into, 1. What is implied in this Remembering. 2. How it does appear
that young men ought to remember God. 3. The Reason Why they especially should
do so.

Quest. 1. What is implied in this Remembering which the Text speaks of?

Answ. It is a known Rule, that in Scripture Words of Sense do imply the
affections and actions. So here, it is not every kind of Remembrance of God,
but that which is affectionate and practical, that is intended. Particular^^*

1. This Remembering does Imply, a Turning to the Lord. Psalm. 22.27. All the
ends of the world shall remember and turn to the Lord. Unfeigned Repentance is
Implied in this Remembrance. Rev. 2.5. Remember from whence thou art fallen and
repent. Ezekiel. 6.9. They that escape of you shall remember me among the Nations.
h. e. They shall repent and return to the Lord. And it is a penitential
Remembrance which Solomon here speaks of. Remember thy Creator, that is,
remember to make thy peace with him, and therefore to repent of Sin, and to
turn to God in the days of thy youth.

2. This Remembrance which the Text speaks of does imply Service and
Obedience. Psalm. 119.55. I have remembered thy name, and have kept thy Law. As
they that neglect the Worship and service which they owe to the blessed God,
are said to forget him, Psalm. 9.17. The wicked shall be turned into hell and
all the nations that forget God. that is to say, they that do not serve God.
When the Children of Israel had forsaken the ways and Corrupted the Worship of
God, it was said, Israel has forgotten his Maker. Hos. 8.14. So on the other
hand, The Service of God is noted by that of Remembering him. Remember thy
Creator in the days of thy youth, h. e. Seek and Serve him be^imes. As David
exhorted his son Solomon whilst yet in his youth, 1. Chron. 28.9. Know and
serve the Lord with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind. Hence the
performance of all Religious duties, especially that great duty of Prayer, is
implied in this Remembering which the Text speaks of Jonah 2.7. I remembered
the Lord (says the Prophet) and how was that? it follows, my prayer came unto
thee into thine holy Temple. We read in the Gospel, of children that prayed
unto the Lord, they said Hosanna, i. e. save now we beseech thee Mat. 21.15.
That is implied in Remembering God the Creator.

3. It does also Imply Frequent thoughts and Meditations of God. Psalm. 63.6.
When I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night watches.
Where there is that Remembrance of God which the Text requires, there are
frequent holy Meditations on him day and night. As Solomon exhorts Prove. 23.17.
Be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long. Set God before thine eyes;
wherever thou come think of him, from morning unto night, ever and anon,
let there be awful holy thoughts in thy heart concerning the Omnipresence of
God. And this is to remember him. We come therefore to the second thing to be
enquried into, viz.

Quest. 2. How does it appear that young men ought to remember God?

Answ. 1. The Lord does require this, the Commandment says expressly Luke
10.27. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul,
and with all thy strength. If men are bound to serve God with their strength,
then they must not forget him until those days are come wherein their strentgh
is gone, and they able to do him little service. Of old, God required that the
first born, and the first Fruits should be given to him, Exodus 22.29. Thou
shall not delay to offer the first of thy ripe fruit, the first born shall thou
give unto me. This did intimate that men ought to give the prime of their Age,
the first and best of their strength unto the Lord.

2. The Truth of this Doctrine is evident in that Parents are bound to teach
their Children the fear of the Lord whilst they are young Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. The
words which I command thee, thou shall teach them diligently unto thy Children,
Again, it is said, Train up a Child in the way he should go, and when he is old
he will not depart from it, Prove. 22.6. To the same purpose is that of the
Apostle. Ephesians. 6.4. Ye fathers bring up your children in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord. And according unto this has been the practice of
Saints. The Lord himself does testify concerning Abraham that he would command
his children to keep the ways of the Lord Genesis 18.19. And Solomon does
acknowledge that his father David was careful to instruct him, and put him in
mind of God, whilst he was yet in the days of his youth, Pro. 4.3, 4. I was my
fathers son, he taught me, and said unto me, let thine heart retain my words.
Yea, not only his father but his mother also taught him the fear of the Lord.
Cap. ult. 1, 2. The words of King Lemuel, the Prophesy that his mother taught
him, what my Son? and what the Son of my wowb? and what the Son of my vows? Now
to what end were it to teach Children and young ones to fear the Lord, if they
were not bound to learn and do accordingly.

3. Young men as well as others owe service unto God; He is their Creator as
the Text expresses. Now that one Consideration has great weight in it to
enforce duty and obedience. For certainly all owe service unto him, from whom
they have received their Beings, Psalm. 95.6. O come let us worship and bow
down, let us kneel before the Lord our Maker. HE has made all for himself,
from him and for him are all things. He, as Creator has given unto men
reasonable souls in respect whereof they are capable of knowing and serving the
Lord: and he is able to destroy them: He that made them can destroy them; as it
is said concerning that creature, He that made him, can cause his sword to
aproach unto him. Job 40.19. Therefore it concerns men to fear their Creator.

But to proced to the third Particular, namely,

Quest. 3. Why ought young men especially to remember their Creator?

Answ. For these (amongst other) Reasons,

REAS. I. Because Youth is the fittest season to remember God in: Wherefore it
is added in the Context, before the evil days come, when thou shall say I have
no pleasure in them. Old Age is an evil Time: And therefore (says the Wise
man) thou must remember and serve God in thy good days, if thou would have
him to remember and accept of thee in thy evil days: if thou neglectest God in
the Spring of thy years, what reason is there to think that he will regard thee
when Winter-Age is come upon thee? Moreover it is not easy to turn unto the
Lord in old age: A young Plant is more easily plucked up than an old Tree; So
are young men with less Difficulty transplanted and plucked up out of the Soil
of Nature. than they that are grown old in the ways of Sin. Old diseases are
hardly cured: so when men by a long Continuance in a Course of Sin have
contracted almost incurable Habits of Sin, how hard a work will it be to
convert them* were it not that all things with God are possible, it could not
be. Wherefore the Scripture says, Can the Ethiopian change his Skin, or the
Leopard his Spots? then may you also do good that are accustomed to do evil.
^er. 13.23. When Satan has held possession a long time, it is not an easy
work to out him and dispossess him, we read of one in the Gospel that had a
most terrible Dispos-Dispossession, Mark 9.25.26. Jesus rebuked the soul
spirit, saying, I charge thee come out of him, and enter no more into him, and
the Spirit cried, and rent him sore, and came out of him, and he was as one
dead, in so much that many said, he is dead. How difficult and how painful was
this Dispossession! Why? ver. 21. it is noted that the Father of that young man
being enquired of, how long he had been in that Condition he said, of a Child.
Truly they that spend their Childhood in the service of Satan, If ever they be
Converted are wont to have dreadful Conversions at last. Therefore young men
should turn to God betimes, that so they may escape those bitter pangs, which
otherwise they must expect to undergo if ever Good come of them.

Reas. 2. From the Good and Benefit which does follow upon Remembering and
Turning to God betimes: As it is said Lam. 3.27. It is good for a man to bear
the yoke in his Youth. So it is good for a man to turn to God, and to put his
neck under his yoke in his youth. It was the Saying of one, that if it were
lawful for him to envy the happiness of any, he would envy the happiness of
those that turn to God betimes: because they are freed from a world of Sin and
Sorrow, which otherwise they would become subject unto. And this is the way to
become eminent for God. There is a wretchwretched Proverb in the World viz.
That a young Saint will prove an old Devil. I remember Erasmus says, the Devil
was the Author of that Proverb: For nothing can be more contrary to the
Scripture. The most eminent Saints that we read of there, were such as did
remember God in the days of their youth. As now, Joseph proved an eminent good
man; there is reason to think that all Jacobs children were good men before
they dyed, but none of them to be compared with Joseph: and tho^ he were the
youngest but one, yet it seems evident that he was converted before any of his
brethren who were older than he. Job was an eminent Saint, not a man upon the
face of the whole earth so good as he; and Job was one that made conscience of
his ways even from his Youth, Cap. 31.18. David was a man that attained a
great measure of grace before he died, and he was godly even from his
Childhood: Therefore does he spoke as in Psa. 71.5. Thou art my hope O Lord
God, thou art my trust from my youth. and again, ver. 17. O God thou have
taught me from my youth, and hitherto have I declared thy wondrous works. So
that David had faith in Christ, and was savingly taught of God even from his
youth. Obadiah In pietate juven.

Angelicus Juvenis, senibus Satanisat in annis. vide Heidseldii sphing.
Philosoph. page 395.


was an eminent servant of God, and he could say, I fear the Lord from my youth
1. King. 18.12. Josiah was eminent for God, and of him we read, that while he
was young he began to seek after the Lord God of David his Father. He was truly
converted when he was but sixteen years old, 2. Chron. 34.3. Timothy was an
eminent Minister and, (as Ecclesiastical story reports) at last he died a
Martyr of Jesus Christ; now he was savingly acquainted with the holy Scriptures
[ apo brepheous] from a little child 2. Tim. 3.15. Thus we see how God has
owned and blessed those that have remembered their Creator in the days of their
youth. And for that reason young men should remember God.

Reas. 3. Young men are subject to the stroke of death as well as others Job
21.23. One dies in his full strength. The young man of Naim whom Christ
restored to life, notwithstanding his youth, was subject to Death, Luke 7.14.
And Jairus's daughter was but about 12 years of age, when she lay a dying
Chapt. 8.42. Was not Eutichus a young man? and yet he fell down from an upper
Chamber and was taken up dead, Act. 20.9. Were not Job's Children young men?
and yet they died suddenly. Was not Absalom a young man, and his brother
Adonijah a young man when death surprised them? Did not Eli's sons die in the
flower of their Age? 1. Sam. 2.23. Now if young men remember their Creator so
as to repent of sin, and make sure of an interest in Christ before death
comes, then happy shall they be. As Jeroboams good son though he were a child he
died, 1. King. 14.17. but inasmuch as in him there was found some good thing
toward the Lord God of Israel, death did him no hurt, only he was taken away
from the Evil to come, that his eyes might not behold the miserable ruin that
was coming upon his Father's Family. But if death find a young man in his Sins,
in an unconverted Christless estate woe to him that ever he was born! his naked
soul must appear before God his Creator, and receive a Sentence of eternal
Damnation.

USE. I proceed therefore to improve this Truth by way of Exhortation, O let
young men this day be exhorted in the Name and fear of God to follow the
Counsel of the wise man, even to remember their Creator in the days of their
youth. All you young men that are here before the Lord (and there are many such
in this assembly) hear me this day, that so God may hear you another day, now
turn to the Lord, now repent of sin, now make sure of an interest in Jesus
Christ: And therefore lay to heart some motives and perswasives.

Mot. 1. Consider what special Reason they that are of the younger rising
generation in New England have to remember their Creator. Now there is cause
for it more than ever, in that there are so few that do so. Multitudes of
young men are risen up in this Land, who have been forgetting God all their
days; unto whom the Lord may say as Jer. 22.21. This has been thy manner from
thy youth, that thou obeyest not my voice. And as it was said concerning them
of old the Children of Israel, and the Children of Judah have only done evil
before me from their youth Jer. 32.30. It is true, there are some young ones
that are remembering and turning to the Lord, which ought to be acknowledged to
the praise of his glorious grace, yet it must be said with Lamentation, that
the generality of the youth in this Land, walk in ways of Looseness, Profaness,
Pride, Drinking, Gaming, or in a careless neglect of God, and of their own
souls. Hence the Lord does not seem to take pleasure in many of the youth of
this Country O it is a sad word that is spoken Isai. 9.17. The Lord shall have
no Joy in their young men. How many young men even in New England that have
been cut off either by Sword or Sickness within these two years! Now, shall the
Lord have cause to complain as he does by the Prophet ( Amos 4.10.) Your young
men have I slain with the Sword yet have you not returned unto me. Moreover,
young men in this Country enjoy means of Grace plentifully dispensed, God is
calling from Heaven to them, and striving with them in the days of their youth
and therefore if they forget him they will be left most inexcusable before his
judgment seat. Yea and many are the Children of Godly Parents, and in that
respect under peculiar engagements to seek See the first Sermon 1. Chron 28.9.
and serve the Lord, who is not only their Creator, but the God of their
Fathers, their God not only by right of Creation, but in respect of his holy
Covenant.

2. Consider how pleasing it will be to the Lord if you do indeed remember him
in the days of your Youth. Jer. 2.2. I remember the kindness of thy youth. You
heard but now how the Lord is pleased with first fruits. When Abel brought of
the firstlings of his flock, -- the Lord had respect to Abel and his offering.
Genesis 4.4. We read also how the Lord chose the Almond tree, Numb. 17.8. now
that's the first tree that Blossoms. The fruit of it is ripe in the spring, The
Hebrew word for an Almond tree is Sheked, which comes from a verb signifying
to make haste, Jer. 1.11. because that true above all others makes have to
bear fruit. Floret omnium prima Amigdala mense Januario, Martio vero pomum
maturat. Bochartus. Plin. Not. Hist. Lib. 16. Cap. 25. Drus. Cent. 1. c. 57. R.
Kimchi in verbo Shakad.
Yea (Writers affirm, in the first month of the year: So when young men shall
bring forth the fruit of repentance, Faith and Holiness, that pleases the
Lord. He has a special delight in Young men who truly fear and serve him, Hos.
11.1. When Israel was a child then I loved him. One of the Ancients observes
that Christ loved his youngest disciple best. John was the beloved disciple,
and he is reported to be younger at his first Calling then any of the Disciples
of the Lord Jesus. And we find in Scripture how the Lord blessed little
children when they came to him, or were brought to him Mark. 10.13, 14, 15, 16.
They brought young children to him -- and when Jesus saw it -- he said, suffer
little children to come unto me and forbid them not, -- and he took them up in
his arms and blessed them. You young Ones hearken, would you have the Son of
God to bless you? O come to him now, in the days of your youth and he will
surely bless you, for his Arms are open to receive you. And such are the
special subjects of a gracious promise Pro. 8.17. They that seek me early shall
find me. If you will be persuaded to seek the Lord whilst it is yet early
days with you, Christ has promised that you shall find him, and everlasting
life and happiness by him.

3. Consider the danger of neglecting God in the days of youth. It may be it
will cost thee thy life, yea the life of thy soul for ever. Who knows but
that the time of youth is the only time which the Lord will allow you to repent
and make your peace with God in, through Jesus Christ? If these golden days be
lost, probably thou will be undon forever. I must needs tell you that for the
most part it is so, that men are either converted in their youth, or not at
all. We read of but one that was called at the eleventh hour. If a tree do not
blossom in the Spring it is commonly dead all the year after; So they that are
not converted in the Spring of their age are rarely converted at all. Now and
then one is converted in old age but such examples are exceeding rare
especially it is true with respect unto those that have in the days of their
youth lived under the means of grace, heard many Sermons; experienced frequent
strivings of the Spirit of God with their hearts: if they remain unconverted
until the days of their youth are past and gone, the Lord usually gives them
up to judicial hardness of heart that they shall never be converted, never
saved. Young men think sadly of it in the fear of God.

4. Consider what Examples have been set before you of early conversions. Have
you not read or heard of those that have turned to God in the days of their
Youth? nay that in their childhood the fear of God has been planted in their
hearts, that they have no sooner began to have the use of reason, but one might
disdiscern signs and effects of grace in their souls. There is a Mr. Janeway's
Token for Children.
book which many of you have in your houses that gives an account of thirteen
Children, the eldest of them not above fourteen years old, some of them not
seven years old some not so much, that nevertheless it was evident that the
fear of God and unfeigned love to Jesus Christ was wrought in their hearts. And
there is a printed Relation of John Clap.
a child that died not long since in this country, who for severa^ years
before his death had his heart changed and was made a new Creature. O how may
this shame many young ones that are here before the Lord this day, who are
older then that child was, it may be 15 year old, nay perhaps 20 year old; and
for all that in a natural Christless estate to this day. Lamentable is thy
condition that have lived so long under means of grace, and yet continuest an
unconverted creature. God be merciful to thee and help thee to think of it.

5. Consider, you have a great Work to do before you go out of this world, and
but a little time to do it in. As young as you are, you have much sin to
repent of, and to obtain the pardon of; Original sin thou art guilty of, and
that must be mortified, And who can declare how mamany actual sins thou have
committed in words thoughts and deeds, that have been evil! and all those to
repent of and endeavor that they may be mortified; and but little time to be
attending works of this nature: for what is your life? It is but a vapor that
appears for a little while, and then vanishes away Jam. 4.14. If a man have
a long journey to go in a winters day he had need to set out betimes. Thou have
a long journey to go, is it not a long journey from earth to heaven. and but a
winters day to dispatch this journey? When once the short day of life is
expired, then it will be too late. There is no work in the grave whether thou
art going. O then up betimes be going, be doing, and the Lord be with thee.

By way of Direction.

1. Beware of those sins especially which they that are in their Childhood and
Youth are most subject unto, and apt to be carried away from God by. 2. Tim.
2.22. Flee youthful lusts, h. e. those sins which Youth is mostly exposed unto.
It is infinite mercy to be kept pure from the corruptions of Youth. If ever you
should find grace to repent of the sins of Youth, and so obtain the pardon of
them, yet they will be bitterness and shame to you all your days. Those
vanities of Youth which now thou art so foolish as to delight in, it may be
they will be a trouble to thee forty years hence, should thou live so long.
Does not Job complain, saying, Thou make me to possess the iniquities of my
youth, Chapt. 13.26. And did not holy David pray as in Psalm. 25.7. Remember not
the sins of my youth. And does not converted Ephraim make an humble confession
concerning the sins of his youth, Jer. 31.19. I was ashamed, yea even
confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth. So it is that the
remembrance of the sins and vanities of youth, are matter of reproach and shame
a long time after: yea the very thought of them does fill the soul that is
truly converted, with an holy confusion of face. Beware then of the the sins of
youth. To instance in some particulars: Pride is a sin that young ones are very
much under the power of: hence we see that young people are strangely addicted
to vanity in Apparel: Proud Fashions they must and will follow, there is no
persuading them to the contrary: but beware of that sin. So for stubborness and
Disobedience to Superiors, it is an evil that Youth is very subject unto. You
that are servants, young men and Maids that are here before the Lord, have you
not been guilty of stubborn, disobedient carriages toward your Masters? though
God in his Word tells you that you ought to be obedient to them with fear and
trembling, Ephesians. 6.5. And you that are children have not you disobeyed your
Parents? Thou have been disdisobedient to thy Father sometimes, but especially
to thy mother. Thy heart may ache to think what is like to come on thee if thou
repent not speedily: Did you ever know any dye upon the Gallows, but they
confessed they had been guilty of this sin, and thereby provoked the Lord to
leave them unto those things which have brought them to untimely, unhappy ends?
And this is but according to what the Scripture speaks, Prove. 30.17. The eye
that mocketh at his father* and despises to obey his mother, the Ravens of the
valley shall pick it out and the young eagles shall eat it. Intimating that
such children are like to come unto miserable and shameful deaths at last.
Again, Lying is a sin which Childhood and Youth is for the most part deeply
guilty of, Psalm. 58.3. They go astray as soon as they be born, speaking lies.
How natural is it for Children to commit a fault, and then to excuse it by
telling a lie! Art thou a lying child? then the Devil is thy Father, and except
thou repent of this sin and beware of it for the time to come, when once thy
soul is out of thy body, it must be cast into that lake which burns with fire
and brimstone which is the second death, Joh. 8.44. (...). 21.8. So for
breaches of the seventh Commandment, they are youthful Lusts: Wherefore Solomon
says that he looked out of the Window of his house, and discerned among the
youths a young man void of understandUnderstanding, and he was going to an
Whore house like an Ox to the slaughter, or a fool to the correction of the
Stocks, not knowing that it is for his life, nor considering that her house is
the way to Hell, going down to the Chambers of Death, Prove, 7.7. etc. Young men
whose natures are not changed by the regenerating grace of the Spirit of God,
do usually live in some unclean lust or other. Either Fornication, or
self-pollution or in secret wanton pranks of darkness. You young men whose
consciences accuse you of guilt before the Lord in respect of these evils, I
charge you in the name of God, that you humble your selves deeply in his sight
for past Transgressions, and sin no more as ever you desire to escape eternal
Damnation, Though these cursed lusts may be as dear to you as life and limbs,
yet better to pluck out the right eye, to cut off the right hand, than that thy
whole body should be cast into hell fire, where the worm dies not and where
the fire never shall be quenched.

Again, Sabbath-breaking is a sin which Young ones are often found guilty of
before the Lord. There was a Thomas Savage, who was executed at Ratcliffe-Cross
October. 28. 1668.
young man (whom many of you have heard of) that came to an untimely end, and
the sin of Sabbath-breaking made way to his ruin: when he should have been
hearhearing the word on the Lords day, he would rather go to wicked Houses,
that at last God was so provoked with him, as to leave him to commit a capital
sin, upon the Sabbath day, for which he was brought to deserved execution. And
when in prison he said to some that came to visit him, O wretch that I was, I
studied how I might spend the Lords day in the Devil's work: that time which I
should have served God in, I did most for Satan in it. O (said he) tell young
men from me, that the breaking of the Sabbath is a dangerous and costly sin.

And therefore young men beware of that sin. Remember the Sabbath to keek it
holy, or you will never remember your Creator as you ought to do.

Once more, Sinful Company-keeping is an evil that young men are apt to be
drawn away from God their Creator by. Many an hopeful young man, that has been
well, instructed, that has had great Convictions upon his Spirit, and friends
that wished him well have been comforted in him; yet has afterward fallen in
with bad company, and that has proved the eternal ruin of his soul. I have
known young men that upon sick-beds and deathbeds, have made lamentable cries
O my sinful Company-keeping has undone me for ever! Therefore let young men
remember what the Scripture speaks to them, My son, if sinners entice thee
consent thou not. Walk not thou in the way of them, refrain thy foot from their
path, Prove. 1.10, 15. Again, He that walks with the wise shall be wise, but a
Companion of fools shall be destroyed Chapt. 13.20. Young man, would thou
not be destroyed? then be not a companion of Fools. Remember also what David
says, and follow his Example, Psalm. 26.4, 5, -- 9. I have not sat with vain
persons. I have hated ye congregation of evil doers and will not sit with the
wicked. Gather not my soul with sinners. When thou die, thou would not
have thy soul to be gathered to the place where sinners must be forever; then
sit not with them, hold not Familiarity with them now: for they that are thy
Companions and thy Familiars here, are like to be so to Eternity.

2. Hearken to good Instruction. In the holy Scriptures God himself instructs
you, and therefore let young ones be diligent in reading the Scripture, that is
the way to become like unto Timothy, to whom it was said, From a child thou
have known the holy Scriptures which are able to make thee wise unto Salvation,
through the faith that is in Christ Jesus. 2. Tim. 3.15. And when David had
propounded that Questtion, wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? The
Answer given is, by taking heed thereto according to thy word, Psalm. 119.9. For
the most part it is so that the ways of young men need cleansing. Youth is
commonly the unclean part of a man's Age, but those young men that will make
conscience to order their ways and walkings according to the Word of God,
shall thereby be cleansed. And the Word preached and publicly dispensed, is a
means appointed by the Lord for the instruction of young ones that they may
learn the fear of God, Deuteronomy. 31.12, 13. Gather the people together, men, and
women, and children, that they may hear, and that they may learn, and fear the
Lord your God, and that their Children which have not known any thing may learn
to know the Lord. And therefore mind seriously what the Ministers of God speak
in his name. Mind it young men, lest you mourn at last and say How have I hated
instruction, and have not obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine
ear to them that instructed me! Yea; and hearken to the good instructions which
you receive from those whom God has set over you. Have you not Masters,
Fathers, Mothers, that admonish you, and give you good counsel from day to day?
despise them not. Does not the Scripture say to you, Hear ye children the
Instruction of a Father. Prove. 4.1. And again, My son hear the Instruction of
thy Father, and forsake not the Law of thy mother. Chapt. 1.18. Eternal woe is
like to be the portion of those Children, that regard not what Father and
Mother say to them. Remember Eli's sons, they were proud and headstrong; their
Father reproved them and exhorted them to aamend their ways, it is said,
notwithstanding they hearkened not to the voice of their Father, because the
Lord would slay them, 1. Sam. 2.25. Art thou the young man that wilt not obey
the voice of thy Father when he gives thee good counsel? this is a sign that
the Lord will slay thee: a sad sign that thou art appointed for some terrible
destruction at the last.

3. Remember those things, which if duly thought on, may cause you to remember
your Creator in the days of your Youth. e. g. Think sadly of the Preciousness
of Time, that so you may pass the time of your sojourning here in fear. You
Young men, are exeeding apt to mispend precious hours, nay days in sin and
vanity, but it is because you do not consider how precious time is. Are not
some that were once your companions in sin, dead, and (as there is cause to
fear) dropped down into hell? they would give worlds (were it in their power)
to enjoy that precious time that is lost, and can never be regained. Shortly
your time to remember your Creator in will be past and gone for ever. Remember
also the worth of your own souls, What shall a man give in exchange for his
soul? If he gain the whole world and lose his own soul, what is he profited?
Young men and children do you think of this? as young as you are you have
immortal souls that must either be saved or damned, that when once you are
dead, your souls must go to be eieither in Heaven or Hell to all eternity. And
REMEMBER DEATH which may be upon you ere you be aware of it. Thou know not
but that this night thy soul may be taken from thee. It has been truly said*
Aquinas.
An old man has death before his face, but a young man has death behind his
back, that may overtake him before he thinks of any such thing. Children may
dye as well as others, Rev. 2.23. I will kill her children with death. I
remember, I have somewhere read of a serious godly Child, that would not speak
vain words, like other children, but was careful to improve his time well, and
being asked the reason of his Seriousness, O (says he) I remember that I must
dye: When some replied to him, You are Young, and may live many a fair day,
what should you think of death for? Nay (said he) I was in the Burying-place,
and there I saw a grave that was shorter than I am. So Children, look into the
Burying-place, and there you will see Graves that are shorter than you are:
there you will see that those that have been as young as you are, and younger
too have dyed and bin put into their graves, and therefore it may be so with
you. O then Remember your Creator in the days of your Youth. And remember the
day of Judgment. As Solomon in this Context says, Know, O young man, that God
will bring thee to Judgment. Young men are apt to put the Thoughts of Death and
Judgment far away, and therefore they remember not their Creator. Think with
thy self, I must stand before Jesus Christ the Son of God at the great day, and
what shall I then say to him? and what will the Lord in that Day say unto me?
will he say, Come thou blessed, or will he not say to me, Go thou cursed.

4. Look unto Jesus Christ. O betake your selves to Him. He calls from Heaven
unto you young men and Children, that are before the Lord this day, go to Him
by Prayer, and to God by Him. Some of you, when you are asked that Question, Do
you pray? Answer, I cannot pray: You would do it, you say, but you know not how
to pray. Why, get into a secret place, and there lift up thine eyes and heart
to the Lord Jesus, and if thou can say nothing else, yet say, O thou Son of
God have Mercy on me! O convert me and save my poor Soul! who knows but the
Lord from on high may look upon thee, since the Lord Jesus himself has said,
They that seek me early shall find me.

Tibi Domine.
PRAY FOR THE RISING GENERATION.

OR A SERMON Wherein Godly Parents are encouraged to PRAY and Believe for their
Children.

Preached the third day of the 5 th Month 1678. Which day was set apart by the
Second Church in Boston in New England, humbly to seek unto God by Fasting and
Prayer, for a Spirit of Converting Grace to be poured upon the Children and
Rising Generation in N. England.

The Third Impression.

By INCREASE MATHER. Teacher of that Church.

Deuteronomy. 30.6. The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy
Seed.

2. Sam. 7.27. Therefore has thy servant found in his heart to pray this
prayer unto thee.

Isa. 32.15. Until the Spirit be poured upon us etc.

Fieri non potest ut Filius istarum lacrimarum pereat.

Aug. Confess. l. 3. c. 25. Printed by R. P. Anno Domini. 1685.

To the Reader.
EMinent Blessings do not use to be poured down upon the world, except the
Church of God be first stirred up to pray for them. The Lord who is styled
Shomeang Tephillah, the Hearer of Prayer, delights to give mercy in this way.
And it was never known since the world began, that the Spirit of prayer was
awakned in the Hearts of those that can cry Abba Father, but some grace and
blessed effect did in due time follow: He said not to the seed of Jacob, seek
ye me in vain. O that God would bow the heart of New England, even of all his
Saints in these Churches, as one man, to cry mightily to Heaven, that his
Spirit may be poured on the now risen (a multitude of sinful men that are risen
up in their fathers stead) and upon the after rising Generation. The Lords
People have need of something to comfort them, in this day, when there are so
many doleful Symptoms of approaching wrath and ruin. Now if God say unto his
Praying ones amongst us, Seek ye my face for the rising Generation, and their
hearts answer again, Lord thy face we will seek for them, that will be no small
encouragement to Faith, that the blessed design of our Fathers ( now with
Christ, beholding His glory) who transported themselves into this vast, and
then waste Wilderness, in special with respect to Posterity, that so they might
leave a Seed that shall serve him, and be accounted to the Lord for a
Generation, will not be wholly frustrate. When did any people ask the holy
Spirit of the Father, for themselves and theirs, and yet received no answer?
Shall we be the first that God ever denied?

As for the ensuing, Sermon if the Publication of it shall in the least tend to
set the wheel of Prayer a going, on the behalf of the rising Generation, I
trust it will not be a grief to my self, or others, that I have granted a Copy
of what was delivered, unto such as have Importuned me thereunto. Some years
ago, I mentioned another Now Published together with this Third Impression.
Discourse, relating to the rising generation in N. Engl. then in my thoughts.
I was not yea and nay in those purposes; but have through the good hand of God
upon me, finished (according to the measure of grace received) what I designed.
Nor am I altogether without hope, but that God, who has chosen the weak things
of the world to do his work by, that so the excellency of the power may appear
to be of God, will own that poor endeavor for the good of Souls, when his
Providence shall bring it forth. In the mean time, this being of the same
nature with the former, let the candid Christian Reader accept of it, and help
me also by his prayers that I may serve the Generation wherein I live, and
whereof I am, according to the Will of God.

Boston, August ^2. 1678. INCREASE MATHER.

PRAY FOR THE RISING GENERATION.
Isai. 44.3. I will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed, and my Blessing upon thine
Offspring.


THe Prophet having in the Conclusion of the preceding Chapter, in the Name of
God, denounced heavy Judgment to come upon the apostate Church of Israel, he
does proceed in this Chapter to speak by way of Consolation to the godly
Remnant amongst them; and for that end does put them in mind of a most gracious
and glorious promise; under which we have,

1. The Persons concerned or, the Subject of this promise, viz. The Israel of
God, ver. 1. Yet hear now O Jacob my Servant, and Israel whom I have chosen.
who are described from their political birth, ver. 2. Thus says the LORD that
made thee and formed thee from the womb. The Gatak. in locum English Annotat.
Josh. 3.1.
Children of Israel ^onsidered as a Church state, were born in ^he day when the
Lord brought them out of Egypt they were then formed to be a people for
himself; The Lord molded them up into a proportionable frame of Church and
State: for which cause did the Children of Israel begin their Religious
account, (albeit their civil account began six months before that) from the
time of the year when they came out of Egypt, since that then they seemed to
begin their life. And then they were a Jeshurun; Thou Jeshurun, h. e. a
righteous People as to their Constitution and Profession, according to the
signification of the Name Jeshurun; they were wholly a right seed, under most
righteous Laws.

2. We have the Blessing promised in the 3 d. verse: And it is first expressed,
then explained. It is expressed in the former part of the verse I will pour
water upon the thirsty, (so the verse should be read) and floods upon the dry
ground: alluding partly unto plentiful showers, whereby the thirsty earth is
made fruitful; and partly unto Rivers, such as Nilus in Egypt, the floods and
seasonable overflowings whereof do enrich the Earth. The Promise is explained
in the latter part of the verse, (the words that are before us to insist on) I
will pour out my spirit and my blessing. h. e. that wonderful blessing of the
Spirit: They are spiritual waters which are here spoken of; no other ^owers
than those that come down from the third and highest Heaven. And this promise
is further illustrated from the blessed Extent of it, in that not only Parents
but Children are concerned therein: On thy Seed, i. e. thy Children, and on
thine Offspring i. e. Posterity as some render the word Hebr. [I will pour my
blessing upon thy young spriggs] The Children of Gods Servants, that spring
from them, and must succeed when they are dead and gone out of the world, are
intended by this expression.

Concerning the fulfillment of this promise, this (as well as many other
Scriptures, which are prophetical and promissory) does admit of a Typical and
partial, as also an Antitypical and more plenary accomplishment. The Lords
people whilst in Babylon were like unto dry and desolate ground, but the Lord
revived them afterward, and brought them into a flourishing estate, and there
was a glorious work of the Spirit of God in that matter, Not by might, nor by
power, but by my Spirit says the Lord of Hosts. And there will be a more
glorious accomplishment of this Prophecy and Promise, when God shall pour out a
Spirit of Converting grace upon the body of the Israelitish Nation.

Moreover, the words being a special branch of the Covenant of Grace, which God
has established with his Servants, and with their Children, Gentiles are
concerned therein as well as Jews; for upon them is come the blessing of
Abraham by Jesus Christ.

And indeed the words have special reference unto New Testament times, which is
also intimated by that expression of pouring the Spirit. See Dr. Owen of the
Spirit. p. 87.
God is said to give his Spirit, under the Old Testament, but it is very
observable, that he is not said to pour his Spirit upon men, except in the New
Testament, or in Scriptures that do referr to the days of the Gospel.

The Doctrine which we may take up from the words, is

Doct. That One of the greatest blessings promised in the Covenant of grace,
is, That the Lord will pour his Spirit upon the Children and posterity of his
Servants.

Now for the clearing of this Doctrine, Four things may be enquired into: 1.
What is here meant by the Spirit? 2. What is implied in this pouring the
Spirit? 3. How it does appear that the Pouring of the Spirit upon Children is a
great blessing: 4. The Reason why the Lord has made such a Promise.

Quest. 1. What is here meant by the Spirit?

Answ. The Spirit is not here taken in a personal sense? although it be a glorious
Truth, that the Holy Ghost himself does dwell in the Hearts of Believers, v.
Mr. Cottons Ans. to Bailey. p. 36, 37, 36. Dr. Owen of Perseverance c. 8 and
Burgess on 1 cor. 3. p. 207 208
yet he is not as to his Person said to be poured on men for so he is equally
in all the Saints: whereas this expression of pouring the Spirit intimates a
larger communication of him to some, than to others. Wherefore the Phrase is
Metonymical, that being affirmed of the Cause, which is proper to the Effect.
In respect of his effects and Operations the Holy Ghost is poured forth upon
his Servants.

1. Then by the Spirit here is meant, the Gifts of the Spirit, All spiritual
gifts, especially Illumination in the Mysteries of the Gospel are from the Holy
Ghost: Hence they that have such gifts are said to be made partakers of the
holy Ghost, Heb. 6.4. He that has a gift of Knowledge or a gift of Prayer has
received it from the Holy Ghost, and the Spirit of the Lord is so far poured
upon him. And the gifts of the Spirit, are compared unto Water in the
Scripture, Joh. 7.38, 39. He that believes on me, out of his Belly (i. e. his
heart) shall flow rivers of living water: this spoke he of the Spirit, which
they that believe on him should receive. For as waters do refresh the bodies of
men; so the gifts of the Holy Ghost do refresh their souls. When the Lord did
shower down his Spirit in that plentiful measure on the Apostles, Thousands of
souls were refreshed and revived thereby. This then is partly meant here, when
it is said, I will pour my spirit on your seed, h. e. your Children, shall have
gifts of the Holy Ghost bestowed upon them they shall be taught to know the
Lord, from the greatest to the least.

2. By the Spirit here, Converting, Sanctifying Grace is meant: The Spirit is
put for the graces thereof. Conversion is the special work of the Holy Ghost.
The Conversion of the House of David h. e. the Elect of God is intimated by
that of pouring a Spirit of grace upon them, Zech. 12.10. Grace is wrought in
the soul by no other hand than that of the Spirit. When God sends down his
Spirit to accompany his Word and Ordinances, then converting work goes on, but
if he withhold the efficacious influences of his Holy Spirit converting work
will be at a stand, all means and outward Dispensations notwithstanding.
Wherefore Conversion or Regeneation is called, the Renewing of the Holy Ghost,
Tit. 3.5. These words then, are a Promise and gracious Intimation unto the
Lords people, that a spirit of converting grace shall be poured upon their
Children.

We come to the second enquiry, viz.

What is implied in this pouring of the Spirit, which the Text speaks of?

Answ. 1. This expression does imply, that The Graces of the Spirit are fitly
resembled unto Water: So much is intimated by the Metaphor of pouring, which
alludeth unto the Clouds pouring down rain upon the Earth. Water is of a
purifying nature, so the waters of the Spirit, Sanctifying grace does cleanse
and purify the souls of men Ezekiel. 36.25. I will sprinkle clean water upon you
and you shall be clean from all your filthiness and from all your Idols will I
cleanse you. The guilt of Sin is washed away in the blood of Christ; the filth
of Sin is purged by those blessed waters which do Proceed from the spirit of
Christ, even converting, sanctifying grace: For the same reason Grace is
compared unto fire Mat. 3.11. Metals, Gold and silver are purified unto fire,
other things by water: therefore are the blessed operations of the Holy Ghost
compared both to the one and to the other. Water is of a Mollifying nature; the
Earth that is dry and hard is thereby softened, Psalm. 67.10. Thou visitest the
earth and wateredst it thou greatly enrichest it with the River of God which is
full of water thou make it soft with showers. So does converting grace soften
the dry and hard hearts of the Children of men. That heart which was as hard as
stone before, if once a spirit of converting grace be poured thereon, it does
become soft and pliable like water. Again, Water makes fruitful, showers and
floods do so: thus when the Lord does rain the waters of the spirit or, cause
them to flow over the souls of men, they are made fruitful in the works of
Righteousness Isai. 32.15. Until the spirit be poured upon us from on high, and
the Wilderness become a fruitful field. That soul that was a desolate parched
barren Wilderness, when once the Spirit from on high is poured upon it, does
become like a fruitful field, Ezekiel. 34.26, 27. Fruits of Holiness and
Righteousness are the effect of being watered by the Spirit of GOD; only the
converted man, that has grace in his soul is indeed fruitful, others are
barren and desolate ground. Once more, Water is of an healing nature; So are
the waters of the Spirit, sin is the souls sickness, grace is the souls health,
the wound received by Original corruption is in some measure healed by
converting Grace, Ezekiel. 47.9. For they shall be healed, and every thing shall
live whither the River comes. Those words are a Prophesy concerning the
Conversion of the Gentiles, by means of that healing virtue which does attend
the blessed waters of the Gospel.

2. This Expression of pouring the Spirit does intimate, An abundant measure of
the Spirit, i. e. of the gifts and graces thereof.

Pouring is something more than Sprinkling, as when there comes a plentiful
rain from heaven, enough to satisfy dry ground, it comes pouring down. As
Elihu speaks Job 36.27, 28. He makes small drops of water, they pour down rain
according to the vapor thereof, which the clouds do drop and distill upon man
abundantly. So this pouring of the Spirit notes a great shower of grace, hence
it is said in the context that, floods shall be poured on the dry ground: Now a
flood of grace intimates a great measure thereof. There are many Scripture
Expressions that confirm this, Prove. 1.23. I will pour out my Spirit upon you.
The Hebrew word [ Nabang] which is there translated pour, signifies to spring
up, intimating that the spirit of grace in the souls of believers is like a
fountain, where is an abundance of water, Isa. 32.15. until the spirit be
poured out upon us from on high. The Hebrew word Gnadah signifies to make
bare; so that the meaning is, that there shall be a Manifest, conspicuous
pouring forth of the spirit that all the world shall take notice of it. and
indeed when a soul is converted, there is an abundant effusion of the spirit to
accomplish such a strange thing as that is, to change such a cursed Nature, to
renew such a vile heart, must needs proceed from a plentiful effusion of the
Spirit. Tit. 3.5.6. By the washing of Regeneration, and Renewing of the holy
Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior.
Wherefore when it is said, I will pour my Spirit on thy seed, and my blessing
on thine Offspring; The Lord does graciously promise his Servants, that their
Children shall attain unto an eminency of Spiritual gifts, and unto large
measures of Grace and Holiness.

We come now to the Third Enquiry, viz.

Quest. 3. How does it appear that the pouring of the Spirit upon Children is a
great Blessing?

Ans. 1. In that the Gift of the Holy Ghost is mentioned in the Scripture as a
great and wonderful thing. It is said Act. 10.45. They were astonished because
that on the Gentiles was poured out the gift of the Holy Ghost. Yea, it is
mentioned as such a gift as is equivalent to all good things, Mat. 7.11. Your
Father which is in Heaven shall give good things to them that ask him. Now in
Luke it is expressed, by saying, Your Heavenly Father shall give the Holy
Spirit to them that ask him. Chapt. 11.13. So then the gift of the Spirit is
virutally all good things. Truly if God pour his Spirit upon our Children he
does more for them, than if he bestowed all the good things in the world upon
them. This is the great promise of the Gospel: As the great promise of the Old
Testament was concerning the Coming of the Messiah, so the great promise of the
New Testament does respect a more plentiful Effusion of the Spirit of Grace.
Hence the pouring down of the Spirit, is noted by that Expressiexpression of
the promise of the Father Act. 1. And he is called the Spirit of promise,
Ephesians. 1.13. as being the great gift which God has promised to bestow upon his
Servants.

The Truth is evident in that the Blessing here spoken of, is an everlasting
Blessing. Eternal good things are the Chief: So is this blessing of the Spirit,
upon whom he is poured, upon them and in them, he remains for evermore. The
Hebrew word [ Jatzak] which is here translated Pour, signifies to Fasten, as
well as to Pour: I will fasten my Spirit upon your children. That In-dwelling
of the person of the Holy Ghost in believers, which the New Testament speaks
so much of, is everlasting: He abides with them and in them forever, Joh.
14.16. And the graces of the Spirit which he does pour upon his People are
everlasting: common gifts may cease, but special grace abides to Eternity. It
is a seed of God that is incorruptible which lives and abides forever, 1.
Pet. 1.23. As the Holy Fire (which signified the Holy Ghost his coming down
from Heaven into the Hearts of his People) it never went out; No more shall
Grace dye, or be totally extinguished in a Believing soul: Hence true Grace is
compared unto living ( i. e. spring) water, which never runs dry: yea to great
Rivers in respect of their perennity. Great Ri-Rivers are always running from
the beginning of the World to the end thereof; So is true Saving Grace of an
Everlasting Nature, Isa. 41.18.

3. A Spirit of Converting grace is such a Blessing as never goes alone: That
sets forth the Greatness and eminency of it. If (says the Apostle) God give
us his Son, shall he not with him give us all things? Romans 8.32. So if the Lord
give his holy Spirit to us, and to our children; shall he not with him give us
all things? Godliness has the promise of this life, and of that which is to
come 1. Tim. 4.8. We should not trouble our selves about laying up great
portions, or much of the things of this world for our children, if we can but
prevail with God to pour his Spirit on them, to give Grace to them, they are
sure never to want as long as they live in this world. Is not pardon of Sin a
rich and glorious blessing, which our poor Children because they are our
Offspring stand in need of? Now if the Lord pour a Spirit of converting Grace
upon them, their sins shall be forgiven, Mark. 4.12. Is not eternal Life and
Glory a great blessing? The pouring of the Spirit on the soul is a certain sign
and evidence of one that is designed unto eternal Life in Heaven. Therefore the
Scripture speaks of the first fruit of the Spirit Ephesians. 1.14. If the Lord give
grace to our Children he will give glory too, yea he will withold from them
no good thing Psalm. 84.11.

Quest. But why has the Lord promised to do thus for his Servants?

Reas. 1. From the Exceeding Riches of the Grace of God. That the Lord most
high who has an absolute Dominion over the works of his hands should at all
deal with man in a Covenant way, or make any promise to him, is from grace;
much more that he should deal thus with fallen man: And that he should extend
his Covenant not only to parents but to their Children also; that their
Offspring with them are under the wings of the Covenant. And moreover, that he
should promise so great a Blessing as that of giving his Spirit, and yet more,
that his Spirit should be poured upon them: We may well cry out as they did
Zech. 4.7. Grace! grace! None but a God of infinite Grace would have done thus.

Reas. 2. Because the Children of Gods people do many of them belong to
Election, As it is expressed in the context Jesurun whom I have chosen; That
Election of God is mentioned as the ground of this promise in the Text. The
Elect of God are the proper Subjects of this promise. The Lord in the Covenant
of grace has not only promised that whoever does truly believe and repent,
shall be saved; but as to the Elect there is a promise of the first grace, even
that converting grace should be poured on them, they shall be made to repent
and believe. A new heart shall be given to the house of Israel h. e. the Elect
tipified by the house of Israel, Gal. 6.16. Now God has seen meet to cast the
line of Election so, as that it does (though not wholly and only, yet) for the
most part run through the loins of godly parents. There are, it is true, Elect
Children, who are not born of elect parents, but there are few (if any) Elect
Parents without elect children: Sometimes all the Children belong to Election
as we see in the many sons of Jacob, (however some of them) that the Lord
remembers and establishes his Covenant with. The Scripture does frequently
hint this Truth, that elect children are for the most part cast upon elect
Parents. See Psalm. 103.17. Isai. 59.20. and 65.22, 23. 2. Tim. 1.5. 2. Joh. 1.
And Observation does confirm it. For we see that the Elect of God are not in
all Nations alike, but in some the Lord gathers his Elect to himself from
generation to Generation. And there are some Families that the Lord has Chosen
above others and therefore pours his Spirit upon the Offspring in such
Families successively. In my Sermons on 1. Chron. 28.9.
But of this I have spoken more largely elsewhere and therefore shall not
insist further upon it now.

Reas. 3. That so godly parents might be encouraged to pray and believe for
their Children. It is marvelous pleasing unto God when his Servants pray and
believe not only for themselves but for their Children also. Now a promise is
an encouragement unto prayer: David found in his heart to pray that God would
bless his Family forever, because the Lord had promised that it should be so 2.
Sam. 7.3, ult. Men should not think with themselves, (as some do) if their
Children do belong to God, then he will convert them whether they pray for it
or no, but should therefore be stirred up to the more fervency in cries to
Heaven, for the blessing promised. I (says the Lord) will give a new heart to
you and to your Children, yet you must pray for it. I will yet for this be
enquired of the house of Israel to do it for them, Ezekiel. 36, 26, 37. And a
promise is an encouragement to Faith, as well as unto prayer: As Paul said, I
believe God that it shall be even as it was told me, Act. 27.25. So a Believer
may say, God has told me that he will bless me and my Family, that he will
pour his Spirit upon my poor Children, and therefore I believe God, that it
shall be as he has told me.

USE. Let it be for Exhortation and Encouragement unto that which is the
special ground of our being before the Lord this day, viz.

To pray that a Spirit of Converting Grace may be poured down from heaven upon
our Children, and the Rising Generation in New England.

I would direct this Exhortation,

1. To Parents, 2. To Children.

1. To Parents, Consider,

1. How needful a thing it is to be much in prayer on this account. Converting
grace is of absolute necessity in order to Salvation, and that as to the
Children of Godly parents as well as others, for they are born in Sin as David
confesses, Psalm. 51.5. I was shapen in Iniquity, and in sin did my mother
conceive me: yet his mother was a precious godly woman; and for ought that does
appear to the contrary, his father was a good man too: wherefore such Children
dying in a natural unconverted estate, are liable to Wrath and Death and Curse
and Hell Ephesians. 2.3. We also, even we that are Jews, and not Gentiles only, we
that are the Elect of God: yea, we that are chosen to be Apostles and ministers
of Christ, wereby nature the Children of wrath even as others. So that except
the Lord send forth his Spirit and renew the souls, change the Natures of our
poor Children, they are never like to see Heaven. Verily, verily I say unto you
except a man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of God, Joh, 3.3. You
that are Parents, are you willing that the Children of your own Bowels should
be miserable throughout the days of Eternity? that they should ly burning in a
fiery Ocean as long as God shall be God? yet so it must be except the Lord in
Mercy look upon them so as to pour down of his spirit from on high upon them.

Moreover, Prayer is needful upon this account, in that Conversions are become
rare in this age of the world. They that have their thoughts exercised in
discerning things of this nature, have sad apprehensions with reference unto
this matter: That the work of Conversion has been at a great stand in the
world: In the last age, in the days of our Fathers, in other parts of the
world, scarce Vide Fulfilling of Scriptures. page 416.
a Sermon preached but some evidently converted; yea, sometimes hundreds in a
Sermon: which of us can say we have seen the like? Clear sound Conversions are
not frequent in some Congregations. The body of the rising Generation is a poor
perishing, unconverted, and (except the Lord pour down his spirit) an undone
Generation. Many that are Profane, Drunkards, Swearers, lascivious, Scoffers at
ye power of godliness, despisers of those that are good, proud, disobedient
Creatures, God from heaven pity them! Others that are only civil, and
outwardly conformed to good order, by reason of their education, but never knew
what the New birth means; pray for them that they may not only come near, but
enter into the Kingdom of God.

Consider. 2. That Prayer is a notable means to obtain this mercy. Prayer opens
the windows of Heaven, Elias prayed that it might rain, and Heaven gave showrs:
Prayer brings down the showrs of Blessing in a proper literal sense: but
especially these spiritual showrs which the Text speaks of, wherein the Lord
promises to shower down his spirit upon our poor Children. Assuredly if there
be Prayers and tears before the Lord on this account, they will come pouring
down again in showrs of grace at last. I have read of an eminent Minister of
Christ, that having prayed fervently with some Christian Friends, they in the
next room felt strange illapses of the Spirit upon their hearts, so as that one
said, O what a man is this that can knock down the spirit of God into all our
hearts! Who knows but that we may pray down the spirit of God into the souls
of our Children, Luke 11.9. Knock and it shall be opened to you, ask, and it
shall be given you. What shall then be given? even the holy Spirit to them that
ask him, ver. 13. O then Let us knock hard at Heaven gates this day; certainly
such requests are welcome to Heaven, yea, to God in Heaven, He has showed how
acceptable such requests are to Him by gracious answers: Christ said unto his
Disciples, Behold I send the promise of my Father, (meaning the spirit of
Promise,) upon you, but tarry ye in the City Jerusalem, until ye be endued with
power from on high Luke 24.49. And what were they to do at Jerusalem in the
mean time? no question but (as some have noted) they were much in fasting and
Prayer that this Promise of the Father might come upon them. And not long after
there was a most gracious and glorious effusion of the Spirit. And of latter
times, God has been entreated to send down his spirit abundantly for the
Conversion of souls, Not fifty years ago, at a place in Scotland, Idem eodem
Libro. page 417.
a great number of praying christians met together, when a Sermon was to be
preached the next day, and they spent the night before in Prayer that the Lord
would own the word then to be spoken for the Conversion of souls, and Behold
the Lord went forth with his Word, so that near upon Five Hundred Souls were
wrought upon and Converted by that one Sermon. I have been told of a Church in
New England At Milford.
that set apart a day for this end, that they might by Fasting and Prayer beg
converting grace for their Children; and that since the gospel has bin made
successful in that Congregation so as that a day of public Thanksgiving has
been attended, in that so many of the younger, rising generation have been
brought home to Christ. Now if the Lord awaken a spirit of Prayer concerning
this thing in these Churches generally, there will doubtless be some blessed
effect of it, with respect to the Rising generation: And whereas God has put
it into our hearts to set apart this day, thus to seek unto him, I am Persuaded
it shall not be in vain but that there are a number of souls belonging to this
Congregation, that must have the Spirit of the Lord Poured down on them; sheep
that are not yet brought home into the Lords Fold, that must hear the voice of
the Son of God and live. Since the Time that we agreed thus to set apart this
day, God has sent down plentiful showrs whereby the dry and thirsty ground is
wonderfully refreshed: And is not that a token for good that those blessed
showrs which we are fasting and praying for this day, shall in due time come
down upon the souls of our poor children?

Consider. 3. What encouragement we have to be at this work. The success which
such Pray-Prayers have had (of which something has been mentioned) and much
more might be spoken) should encourage us. As for some of us, our Fathers and
Mothers now in glory, did pray for us when they were in the world, and God
heard them: Did they whom we are sprung from pray for us? and has God heard
them? will he not hear us, if we go and pray for our Offspring, and have we
not already seen some answers? If we look into our Families do we not discern
that as to some of our Children, the fear of God is put into their hearts? And
why should we not look upon that as a first fruits, that all the rest of our
Children shall be converted in due Time? Moreover, the consideration of the
Covenant, and Promises of God respecting Children, are a great encouragement to
pray for them. This is his everlasting Covenant, I will be a God to thee, and
to thy seed after thee. Genesis 17.7. This promise is expressed indefinitely, and
Therefore does encourage godly Parents to plead with the Lord for mercy and
Grace for ALL their Children: As an Holy man once said, (and it was a great
word of faith in him) Vide Dr. Winter of Infant Baptism. p. 105, 107.
If I had twenty Children I would not 'bate God one of them. He has promised
to be a God to my Children indefinitly, and therefore I Will pray for them all,
and believe for them all, And why should it not be so, since the Lord himself
has said, ALL thy children shall be taught of God, Isai. 54.13. And the
Scripture does abound with particular promises respecting the Conversion and
Salvation of the Children of godly Parents. When thou do that which is good
and right in the sight of God, it shall go well with thy Children after thee
forever Deuteronomy. 12.28. There is special mercy belonging to those that are the
seed of the Blessed of the Lord, and to their Offspring with them Isai. 65.23.
Yea, Promises of converting grace to be poured upon them, Zech^ 10.9. They
shall live with their Children, and turn again. The Children of the Lords
People shall be turned from the power of Satan unto God: that is implied in
those words and not only that the Jews and their Children should be returned
from their Captivity in Babylon, whereby this turning again from sin unto God,
h. e. that Conversion which we are speaking of, was mysteriously signified as
in a Type. And in the Book of Psalms we find gracious Promises to the Children
of such as fear* God, Psalm. 102.2 8. The Children of thy servants shall
continue, and their seed shall be established before thee, And again Psalm.
128.3. Thy Children shall be like Olive plants round about thy table. Vide Mr.
Stockton of Family Istruction p. 118.
The Expression may import that they shall be Comforts and Ornaments to their
Parents; Yea that they shall be adorned with gifts and graces of the Spirit of
God. And in special, there is a promise of this Blessing with respect to
Children in the Times of the Gospel, Joel 2.28. It shall come to pass
afterward, h. e. in the last days or times of the Gospel, as the Apostle does
expound the words I will pour my spirit upon your Children. Now these days
wherein we live, come under the last days, we therefore should plead that
Promise before the Lord, and say, These are the last days, Lord, and thou have
said that in the last days thou will pour thy spirit upon the Children of thy
servants. And indeed that fulfilling of the Promise which our eyes have seen is
ground of Encouragement to Pray, and plead, and believe for more. Some of
New-Englands Children have been eminently blessed by the Lord, He has poured
his spirit upon them richly, Plants of Renown have sprung up here, that have
been the glory of the Land where they have had there Education: Yea, some that
whole Nations have fared the better for them: Rivers of water have flowed out
of their souls, whereby Thousands have been refreshed; and there is a blessed
Sprinkling in most Churches, though not that General pouring down of the Spirit
that is to be desired, yet a Sprinkling which we should take notice of, for the
encouragement of Faith and Prayer. I shall only mention that which I have most
reason to know; In this poor Congregation, within this few late years, there
have been of Children born in New England, near upon fourscore Persons that
have come before the Church and declared what God has done for their souls,
and in that way subscribed their names to the God of Israel; besides many that
have come out of other Lands, and when they have been here, the Lord has
Poured his Spirit upon them. I speak it that God might have the glory of his
grace, and that Ministers may be encouraged to preach, and the Lords People to
pray for the Conversion of souls. Moreover, the consideration of what Parents
the Children of this Land are (many of them) sprung from, does afford matter of
encouragement. Paul was induced the rather to hope well concerning Timothy,
because he was descended of such a stock; he had a Gracious Mother and a
gracious Grandmother also, 2. Tim. 1.5. So, many Children with us, are the
Offspring of such Parents, ( Fathers and Grandfathers) as have been eminent
for God in their time, eminent for Holiness, yea and for Sufferings, on account
of Bearing witness to the Name and truth of Christ, Now a special Blessing is
wont to follow the Children of such as have been sufferers for Christ. Our
Fathers were (some of them) eminent Confessors, and in a degree Martyrs of
Jesus, who left a pleasant Land and Fathers houses to follow the Lord into a
Wilderness, in a Land which was not sown. Yea and they came hither partly with
respect unto their Offspring that they might leave their Children under the
special Blessing of God in Christ Jesus. Has not the Lord peculiar Blessings
in store for such Children? Let us pray them down from Heaven above.

Consider, 4. What a blessed thing it will be if we prevail in Heaven for this
Mercy. We cannot pray for a more desirable thing than this Blessing. read Mr.
Hookers Sermon on Hos. 10.12.
It will help all that is amiss among us. If the Lord pour his Spirit upon the
Body of the present rising generation, so as to begin a work of Conversion in
those that are as yet strangers to the Power of Godliness, and to carry on that
work by renewed Conversions in the Hearts of his people, that will save us from
those Judgments which otherwise there is no hope that we shall escape them.
Ezekiel. 39.29. Neither will I hide my face any more from them: Why? for I have
poured out my Spirit -- says the Lord God. And do we not, desire the Eternal
as well as the Temporal Prosperity of our Children? If the Lord pour his Spirit
upon them, it shall go well with them, and that for ever, Deuteronomy. 5.29. You are
thoughtful what will become of your Children after you are gone out of the
world. If you can but pray grace into their souls, they shall do well enough.
As that godly learned Claviger would sometimes express Lege Clavigeri Vitam^
If (says he) I may see the fear of God in my Children, Satis mihi, satis
filiis et filiabus prospexi, I have then Portion enough for my sons and for my
daughters, they are then sure never to want any good thing as long as they
shall live. If the Lord pour out his Spirit upon our Children then shall we
have Joy in them indeed. No greater Joy than that 3. Joh. 3, 4. Prove. 23.24,
25. The Father of the righteous shall greatly rejoice, and he that begets a
wise (i. e. godly) child shall have Joy of him; Thy Father and thy Mother shall
be glad, and she that bare thee shall rejoice. We shall bless God to eternity,
that ever we had such Children: for it will add to the Glory of parents at the
great Day, when they shall behold not themselves alone, but their offspring
with them Partakers of eternal life and happiness, and withal see and know that
their prayers have had an Influence toward the obtaining of all that mercy: We
shall meet those prayers again with exceeding Joy in that day. And in the mean
time our Children, if we can pray down the Spirit of the Lord upon them, will
continue to pray for us whilst we are with them in the world. O what a blessed
thing is that, for a man to have the Children that came out of his own bowels,
praying for him continually A worthy Minister of Christ once said I had rather
have my house filled with my Childrens prayers, then to have my house filled
with gold.

A few things by way of Direction.

1. Let Parents be sure that they be converted themselves. Deuteronomy. 30.6. I will
circumcise thy heart and the heart of thy Seed. If our own hearts be
circumcised, we may pray in faith that the Lord will circumcise the hearts of
our Children otherwise we cannot do it. Parents that have not Grace themselves,
are not fit to pray for Grace to be poured on their Children, nor indeed can
they do it; for the Spirit of Supplication is the Spirit of grace, Zech. 12.10.
nor can they believe for them. An Hypocrite, or unconverted man cannot act
faith for his Child's soul, who never yet did believe for his own soul. Nor
does this promise in the Text belong to other than godly Parents, Psalm. 128.4.
Behold that thus shall the man be blessed that fears the Lord.

2. Parents be Exemplary. Walk before God in your houses with a perfect heart.
Let us be careful in our Families to walk so that our Children may see by our
Examples how they ought to walk and please God: that if they will but be and
do like to their Parents they shall certainly be blessed for ever. There are
many of the Elect of God, that the special means of their Conversion has been
the holy example of their Parents. Many a Chosen vessel, that when he has
beheld his Fathers love to Christ, and Faithfulness to the Interest of God;
Zeal, Patience, Holiness, that has been a special means of Conviction and
Conversion. You know what Elijah said to Elisha See my Brothers Sermon on 1.
King. 3.57. p. 22.
when he desired that he might have ( h. e. comparitivly to what the rest of
the sons of the Prophets had) a double portion of Elijash's Spirit, he said,
Thou have asked an hard thing, nevertheless if thou see me when I am taken from
thee it shall be so unto thee, but if not, it shall not be so 2. King. 2.10.
Even so if your children see you holy and faithful to the interest of God, and
Jesus Christ, and every way exemplary, doubt not of it, but in Gods time, they
shall receive of your Spirit. As on the other hand, there is nothing more
fatally destructive and ruining to the souls of Children than a bad example in
Parents especially if they be such as pretend to Religion: When Cham did but
one time see his Father in drink, it brought a fearful Curse upon him, and upon
his Posterity to this day. There are great Complaints (and to great Cause)
concerning the rising generation in New England; whereas the fault is very much
in Parents, in that they are no more exemplary: your children take notice of
your Pride, Sensuality, wo^ldliness, your unmortified Passions, and that does
woefully scandalize, and harden them against the blessed ways of Christ. O be
careful to walk so, as that your children may not see their fathers nakedness.

3. Let Parents be careful to instruct their children in the fear of God:
Prayer should be followed with suitable endeavors. If Parents must pray that
their Children may have Grace, they must use the means whereby God is wont to
convey grace into the souls of his elect Psalm. 34.11. Come ye children hearken
to me and I will teach you the fear of the Lord. David did so, and Solomon his
son found that those Paternal instructions were blessed for saving good to his
soul, Prove. 4.1. -- 4. also the instructions of his Mother were (through the
blessing of God) a means of much good unto him Prove. 31.1, 2. Fathers and
Mothers should be instilling good Principles into the minds and hearts of their
Children betimes Ephesians. 6.4. Bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord. [ektrephete] feed their souls with spiritual milk as soon as they are
capable of it: Tell them sadly, whilst yet they are children, of their misery
by nature, of the necessity of a new birth, instruct them about Christ, and
Heaven, and Hell and Eternity; charge them with the greatest solemnity to know
and serve the God of their Fathers 1. These. 2.11. We charged every one of you,
as a father his children. It becomes a father to charge his children* and if
Parents be faithful in discharging their duty this way, success will not be
altogether wanting. If you will command your children, they shall keep the way
of the Lord Genesis 18.19. If Parents would spend more time, and take more pains
in instructing their children, and follow those instructions with fervent
prayer to God, he would own them therein, and we should see more young
Converts, and a world of sin and sorrow would such children be prevented and
saved from.

4. Wait on the Lord: Though the answer do not come presently yet continue
praying and believing and let nothing discourage you: say not I have prayed for
my Childrens souls, but no grace no change wrought in them, and now I am e'ne
hopeless and faithless: Remember the woman of Canaan, she cried to the Lord
Jesus for her poor child and yet had repulses one after another, the Lord not
seeming to regard her, this was to try her faith; at last. She had her desire
granted^ who knows but the Lord may deal so with thee? You therefore that
fear God, despair not concerning your children, though at present they may be
stout hearted, and far from righteousness. Austin Le^e Aust. Confess. lib. 3. c.
12.
was a long time a vain, lascivious profane young man, but his godgodly
Mother's prayers and tears did at last prevail in heaven, that he became an
eminent Convert. O continue to pray hard, and believe strongly, and that son
who at present is the grief of thy mind and makes thy soul to be in
bitterness, God can make an Austin of him. And that Daughter which (as Jephtah
said) has brought thee very low etc. the Lord can convert her soul, that thy
heart and thy reins, even thine shall rejoice. I rememember I have somewhere
read of one that had been a very sinful creature, and desperately froward and
rebellious, but her godly Parents continued praying, and entreated diverse
faithful Ministers of God to pray for her, and God heard them, and in answer to
prayer rescued a forlorn soul* out of the Jaws of Satan and Hell, and when that
young woman lay upon her deathbed, she said to her godly friends and Relations
See Clarks Examples Vol. 2. page 360.
For my sake never despair of any one let their case at present be never so bad
and desperate, for you know* how it was with me, and yet see how God has
answered your prayers for me! Think of it you Fathers and Mothers that have
wept and Prayed for the conversion and Salvation of your children full many a
time, and as yet you see it not; though you should never see it, dye trusting in
God, and believing that He will remember his Covenant with your children after
you Genesis 50.24. It was an excellent spirit of Faith that breathed in that dying
Wor-Worthy Philip Morney.
of his time, who upon his Deathbed could say to his children and
grandchildren I know that you shall be blessed, not only with the blessings of
earth but with the blessings of Heaven. Know for your encouragement that your
Prayers will live after you are dead; Prayers dipped in the blood of Christ, are
of eternal efficacy: when your bodies are in the grave, and your souls in
Heaven, your Children may remember how you instructed them and prayed for them,
and ye remembrance of it may then be a means of their conversion: you may hear
of your childrens conversion after you are in Heaven; the Angels of God that
see it, and that rejoice over a sinner that repents, will bring you the
tidings of it, and then there will be joy all Heaven over.

2. Let me Exhort Children that are here before the Lord this day; O do you go
home, and pray earnestly for converting grace. Beg as for your lives that the
God of your Fathers would pour his Spirit upon you: Young ones, hearken! In the
Name of the Lord I speak to you; The Lord can pour his Spirit on you betimes,
then shall you be rich in grace, let this promise encourage you to look up to
God in Jesus Christ. Go into secret corners, and plead it with God, say, Lord
thou have Promised to pour thy Spirit upon the offspring of thy servants, I am
(through thy Grace) among the children of thy Servants, thou art the God of my
Father, the God of my Grandfather, oh, be my God also. If you seek God in
earnest he will be found of you, but if you forsake him and break his covenant
sealed in your Baptism, woe unto you! If you dye and be not first new
creatures, better you had never been born, you will be left without Excuse
before the Lord. Terrible witnesses will arise against you at the last day:
Your godly Parents will testify against you before the Son of God at that day:
and the Ministers of Christ will also be called in as witnesses against you for
your Condemnation if you dye in your sins.

As for many of you, I have treated with you privately and personally, I have
told you, and I do tell you, and make solemn protestation before the Lord, that
if you dye in a Christless, Graceless estate, I will most certainly profess
unto Jesus Christ at the DAY of Judgment, Lord, these are the children whom I
spoke often to in thy Name, publicly and privately, and I told them, that If
they did not make unto themselves a new heart, and make sure of an Interest in
Christ, they should become damned Creatures for evermore; and yet they would
not repent and believe the Gospel. O why should I, who (can appeal to God that
I) long for your Conversion, be your accuser before the Lord Jesus at the Last
Day?

And you that are grown up to years of more discretion and understanding: Young
men, and young women, O be in earnest for Converting grace before it be too
late. It Is high time for you to look about you, deceive not your selves with
false conversions, (as many young men do to their eternal ruin) or with gifts
instead of grace, beware of out-standing the day of Grace, lest the Spirit of
God depart, and your souls become desolate. Death waits for you, there is now a
mortal and contagious disease in many houses: The Sword of the Lord is drawn,
and young men fall down apace slain under it: don't you see the Arrows of death
come flying over your heads? Why then, Awake, awake, and turn to God in Jesus
Christ whilst it is called to day, and know for certain that if you dye in your
sins, you will be the most miserable of any poor creatures in the Bottom of
Hell: O consider of it; to be prayed, wept, preached, Fasted down to HELL! what
an Amazing Thing will it be! Wherefore NOW hear, and turn, and live. As yet
Christ stands and knocks at the door of your hearts; He does so this day, and
by this Sermon, O that you would hear the Lord Jesus calling to you from
Heaven, and saying, Turn ye at my reproof, and I will pour out my Spirit upon
you.

Tibi Domine.

