MILITARY DVTIES, RECOMMENDED to an ARTILLERY COMPANY; At their ELECTION of
OFFICERS, In CHARLS-TOWN, 13. d. 7. m. 1686.

By COTTON MATHER, Pastor of a Church in BOSTON.

Vbi nullus est Militarium Virorum ordo et cura, ibi nulli sunt R. P. Nervi.

Herodot. Plus Togae lascre Rem-Publicam quam Loricae

Tertullian. BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND, Printed by Richard Pierce: And are to be
sold by Joseph Brunning, at his Shop at the Corner of Prison Lane near the
Exhange. 1687.

The preface.
IT was the Observation which judic^ous Capel began a Preface to a good Book
with the mention of, Books are more necessary in a State than Arms. Let it pass
for a Convenience among us in this Scythian Desert, That the Gentlemen who
handle Arms may be also presented with Books accommodated unto their
Instruction and Encouragement. It is reported of an unparalled Soldier, no
less an Hero than Julius Caesar, that being forced to swim for his life in an
extremity, he employed one hand to preserve from the damage of the water,
certain Books which he had a special value for. Nor is it any Disparagement
unto men of a military Disposition or Improvement, that in all ages the most
accomplished of them, have been willing sometimes to make Books the
entertainment of their vacant hours: Even a mighty Alexander must have a Book
under his pillow, or he cannot sleep. Perhaps it is from somesomething of this
Bookish Temper that this poor Sermon preached unto the Artillery of Middlesex,
is by some Members of that worthy Company now desired to be printed; that their
eyes may dwell upon those things which He who gives favor to them that are not
men of Skill made not altogether unacceptable unto their ears. It was a
Soldier that found out the happy art of Printing at first; and it seems that
Soldiers will now and then press the Press into their Service still.

My Education among Libraries, my Concernment only in such a Warfare as Timothy
had recommended unto him, and my impatient Longings for the Revolution of a
Golden Age wherein there shall be (as about the Time of our Lords first coming
it is noted by the Roman Historian that there was) Totius Orbis aut pax, aut
pactio, a general Peace or Truce throughout the whole world, have made me the
unfittest of all men to read Military Lectures* Aelian's Tacticks shall stand
in the Rore of my Authors, and will perhaps be left unstudied by me, till I
have nothing else to do. That military mischievous Invention of Guns, and the
Nitrous, Sulphurous, Charcoal'd matter which they vomit was indeed first hit
upon by a Clergyman, yet one that I never would care to be akin unto. But a
Request from the Honored Persons, at whose Invitation the ensuing Thoughts
have been Spoken and Written, was a strong Summons not to be gainsaid by me,
who ought to count Opportunities of doing Good among the best of all my
Treasures. They asked me to lay before them their Duties, as far as my Armory,
the Bible, would inform me what they are: and I have with brief Hints attempted
to let them know what those Words of Command are which come unto them backed
with a, Thus says the LORD. They have also asked me to give them a Copy of
those Words for the Publication of them; and I considered that this being all,
my case was not so hard as that of the Expedition against Sisera, wherein out
of Zebulon were engaged they that handled the pen of the Writer, Gow^-men
became Swordmen, and Pen-knives (as one says on it) were turned into Swords.
But in this thing they had not found me ready to gratify them, if it had not
been for the sake of Communicating those Meditations in the Close of the
Discourse, which render every man a Soldier, and call upon all to encounter
the invisible Enemies of their own souls. This part of the Discourse is no
Diversion from the work which my Hand finds to do, however the other may: of
this, if I had a voice as loud as the last Trumpet I must say, Let him that
has ears to hear, hear.

Thousands of Praises, whole Ages of praises be given unto a good God, for the
Abundance of peace wherein we in this Wilderness do delight our selves. 'Twere
well if the blessed leisure which Deus fecit, is given by God unto us, were
employed unto spiritual Advantages by us all; and particularly by them that
have a kindness for the affairs of Soldiery. It would be an incredible benefit
to the Church of God, for men to have their houses furnished with Treatises
which shall teach them how to Spirituallize the outward occurrents of their
Occupations, and set Pulpits, and faithful Preachers for them in every Business
that they have to meddle with. I find that the Husbandman, and the Shepherd,
and the Mariner, yea, and the Weaver too, are thus provided for, by the
ingenious Labors of some heavenly-minded men. A Reverend Person among our
selves, has in this way been an Obliging Friend unto the Soldier also; His,
Soldiery Spirituallized, well deserves the Perusal of them to whom it is
directed, and has given a just Super-Sedeas unto those Enlargements of that
kind here which else might have been endeavored. That they who will be
Soldiers may likewise be serious; That there may be Glory to GOD in the
highest, and that there may be Peace on earth, and Good Will among men, is the
grand Scope of this little Essay.

MILITARY DUTIES Laid before A TRAINED BAND 13. d. 7. m. 1686.
It is written in PSALM. CXLIV. I. Blessed be the Lord my strength, who teaches
my Hands to war, and my Fingers to fight.
THat elegant Resemblance of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the close of His last
Letter from Heaven to the Church on Earth, Rev. 22.2. A tree of Life which
bears twelve manner (a blessed variety) of Fruits, the leaves whereof also are
for the healing of the Nations, has been sometimes not unfitly applied unto
the Scriptures, those precious Leaves of the Bible, which testify of Him. There
is in these Oracles of God, a delicious Entertainment for the innumerable sorts
of Readers to whom these presents come; and the Benefit of the Soldier
particularly is not left unconsulted in them. The blessed Suitableness of this
miraculous Book unto the Affayrs and Concerns of all men, is, to be found (as
the Philosopher says, of the Soul in the Body) in every part thereof; but the
Book of Psalms (a Little Bible, as Luther styled it) in peculiarwise, is so
remarkable on this score, that it was no imprudence in old Jerome to bid his
Friend make This his Vade mecum, his constant Companion, it was no folly in the
holy Minister of Constantinople being driven out of that City, to take no part
of his Treasures but This, which was unto him pro et prae Divitiis, instead of
and better than all the Riches of the World; the renouned Basil therefore very
rightly recommended it as A Divine Treasure, and the eloquent Chrysostom no
less appositely reputed it as, a Panoply for the Christian. From this Panoply,
from this well-furnished Armory, give me leave to offer something for the Use
of this Armed, and much honored Auditory. For this cause the name which the
Holy Spirit in a certain place (in Col 3.16.) puts upon these Psalms is that
of spiritual Songs; partly because the Spirits of men are most singularly
suited therein: every man may conceive, as Athanasius long ago observed, That
they speak de se, in re sua, to his own case directly. It Is to be hoped that the
Spirit of the Soldier especially will anon herein meet with what shall not be
impertinent unto him.

That inspired person, whoever he were, that marshalled the Psalms into the
Method wherein we now enjoy them, seems to have had some respect unto the
Affinity of Subjects therein handled, in his doing of it. Hence this
Hundred-and-forty-fourth Psalm, with the rest unto the end of our Psalter, is
employed in that business which we expect at the end of our pilgrimage to be
put upon; even The magnifying of the LORD JEHOVAH. The Penman of this
Composure, is by the Title of it, determined to be David, the sweet singer of
Israel. Indeed some passages of it are by Him again repeated in both h^s first
and his second Edition of the Eightee^^^ Psalm; and if the Primitive Christians
in their Pub^ique Worship, are reported to have had no ^ommon satisfaction when
they heard A^^quid ^^vidi^um, any thing of David, sounded among them, it is to be
supposed, that we shall not therein come behind them. But the Occasion of the
Composure is to be variously guessed at, as an unwritten thing. Those whom we
(upon uncertain grounds) reckon the Seventy Greek Translators, or rather
Interpreters of the Old Testament, have so inscribed it, A Psalm of David
against Goliath; so the Ethiopi^ likewise, and so the Vulgar Latin. And perhaps
David's victory over Goliath, may be one thing referred unto in this Song of
Zion. I find a Jewish Commentary particularly favoring such a Sentiment. But
good old Hilary for one, justly and honestly declames against the foisting in
of this clause, where it should not be. Thus much then is all the Conjecture
for which we have room left unto us: We may apprehend that the amiable David
was now arrived through an Iliad of Mischiefs and whole Seas of Difficulties, unto
a Settlement in his Kingdom over Israel; and that hereupon he now presents unto
the Lord, both his Praises for the Vanquishent of the Enemies who had hitherto
disquieted him, and his Prayers for the Continuance of his Tranquillity, maugre
all future Opposition.

The Rapturous Thanksgivings of the PsalPsalmist begin as soon as was possible;
even at the verse now before us. The gracious Saint is here uttering of his
Wishes that the great GOD may forever be well-spoken of by all the world, and
this on a double account. Something God has been to him, and something God had
done for him.

Firstly, For Something that God was to him. He ascribes to the Lord that
Title, my Strength, or (Heb. Tzuri) my Rock. q. d. The Almighty God has
afforded a better Defense to me in all dangers than the ragged Rocks and Caves
and Thickets did unto my poor Country men, before I by slaying the tall Pagan
occasioned the Routing of the Philistines, who had driven them thereinto.

Nextly, For something that God did for him. He celebrates this Kindness of God
unto him, He ^eaches my hands to war and my fingers to Fight. i. e. The good
God enables me to go through the Military Performances which I am put upon.
These Hands of mine that were once wont to hold the Shepherds Crook, and these
Fingerr of mine which were wont to solace me with their soft Notes upon my
Harp, are now expert in those Martial (...) which God has bin my Teacher in.
There is a divine Teaching herein acknowledged, and the Twofold Subject of it
is taken notice of. The Good man first declares the Subject which received this
Teaching: This was his Hands and his Fingers. These are by a Synecdoche put for
not only all the Members of his body, but also all the Powers of his mind.
These may be singled out, because there is a special Use of these parts in all
warly Encounters. There was so particularly, first in Choosing and then in
Casting the Stone which laid the Philistean Champion sprawling on the ground.
In the Hands also Strength is seated, and Skill is showed by the Fingers. So
both of those Qualifications may herein be glanced at. The good Soul next
declares the Subject which this Teaching was Occupy'd about: This was Warring
and Fighting. The former Expression [ Lakrob] comes from a Root that signifies
to Draw near; the Latter [ Lammilchama] comes from a Root that signifies to Eat
up; because in Warly Engagements, persons first Approach and then Devour one
another.

From hence then the Doctrine which Summons our present Attention is

DOCT.

That The Almighty GOD is to be acknowledged as the Author of whatsoever
Military SKILL or STRENGTH any Children of men do excel in.

THAT the Worthy Company who called me to this place and work, may not be too
long detained from the Field, where no doubt, they love to be, all due Brevity
shall be endeavored, in our present Discourse.

Only two Propositions shall be called upon, to ripen this Doctrine for it is
Application.

PROPOSITION I.
It is the Privilege of some Persons to excel in a Military Skill or Strength.

There is a twofold Military Excellency which some in the world are so
priviledg'd as to reach unto.

Firstly, There are some persons excellent for their military SKILL. There is
such an happy unhappy Art used among Adam's wrangling Posterity in the world,
as that of Tactics, or the Art of War; and here and there we may find those
who have the honor of being excellently well skilled therein. The politic and
most peaceable Monarch of old, made it one of his Aphorisms in Eccl. 9* 18.
Wisdom is better than weapons of War. But some desirable persons there are,
meriting for this to be called Deli^^^ hum^^i generis, or M^^inds Delight, who
at once have Weapons in their hands, and Wisdom in their Heads enabling them to
manage the same unto very good account. There are persons very notable for
Feats of Arms, like David of whom it is reported in 1. Sam. 18.5. He behaved
himself wisely and he was set over the men of war: It seems he was so good a
Soldier, that he was made Captain of the Artillery at Gibeon. Such brave men
were those pious Trans-Jordanites, of whom we have that Description in 1.
Chron. 5.18. They were men able to bear Buckler and Sword, and to shoot with
B^w, and they were skilful in war. And such a Character we also have of several
(...) who were mustered at H^bron, to solemnize David's Coronation there, in 1.
Chron. 12. At verse 33. it is related of the Z^bulonites, that they were (...)
in war, with all Instruments of war, able to keep Rank; ^t verse 35. it is
related of the Danites, and at verse 36. it is related of the Asherites
likewise that they were expert in war. Some such Beauties is the face of the
earth adorned withal; Persons that understand well all the FIGURES or POSTURES
which a Soldier is to use in the Handling of his Arms; persons that are well
acquainted with all the MOTIONS and ORDERS which a Soldier may be called unto,
all the various FACINGS, and numerous DOUBLINGS, and intricate
COUNTER-MARCHINGS, and comely WHEELINGS which are customary, and all the
CHARGINGS which the many sorts and shapes of BATTAILS do admit, with
innumerable STRATAGEMS of War; persons, in a word, who can handsomely apply all
the INSTRUMENTS of Defense which a Soldier may Cap-a-pe be furnished with, and
all the INSTRUMENTS of Offense w^^ch a Soldiers hand can be put unto, from the
Half-pike unto the Granado and the roaring Canon.

Nextly, There are some persons excellent for their Military STRENGTH also.
There is a Twofold Strength which Soldiers are sometimes to be admired for.

Firstly, Some Soldiers have an Admirable Strength of BODY. Such a Soldier
was that renowned Judge of Israel, Sampson, the History of whose Activity (as
well as the signification of his Name) the Heathen have carried into their
stories about their Hercules: It Is storied of Him, in Judge. 14.6. That when a
young Lion roared against him, he rent him as he would have rent a kid; tho the
Oracles of the Lion's Maker have determined him to be the strongest among
Beasts. It Is storied of Him, in Chapt. 16.3. That he took the Gates of a City,
Doors, Posts, Bars and all, and carried 'em away up an high Hill twenty miles
off. It Is storied of Him i^ Chapt. 16.27. that with main force ^he over-sett the
two huge Pillars whereon l^y the stress of a vast Temple, containing many more
^han three thousand people.

There are Soldiers, that for the Strength of their Lamb^, deserve the name
which once a King in England had, even that of Ironside; they may almost affirm,
what Job deni^d, My strength is the strength of stones, and my flesh ^s brass.
We have read of a Scanderbeg who had an Arm that could make his sword strike
through thick Iron, and who encountering a ^igh^y wild Bull that had slain many,
with one only Blow of his Cimitar cut his head clean from his shoulders. We
have read of a Milo, of a Maximus, of some others, men made up of Sinews, that
would hold a club, or keep a place in spite of all possible Assaults, that
would carry Burdens next to insupportable, and in every piece of action scorn a
Match.

Nextly, Some Soldiers have an Admirable Strength of SPIRIT also; their
Courage is mavelous and invincible. Such were those Captains which increased
David's Band, 1. Chron. 12.21. all mighty men of valor* And such were the
Simeonites, (ibid. v. 25.) mighty men of Valor, for the war: and such the
Ephraimites (ibid. v. 30.) mighty men of Valor, famous throughout the house of
their Fathers. There are Soldiers that for their Valor deserve the name of
Caleb, which may signify All-heart, and who, like Caleb are not afraid to look
a bigg son of Anak in the face. They are as undaunted as the Leviathan, (the
Crocodile) which is made without fear; its a mere sport unto them, to outbrave
the King of Terrors, to have Cannon Bullets flying and hissing, and drawn
Swords clashing round about them, and dischargdischarged Pistols hurled at
their heads; they are like fiery metal-some War-Horses clothed with Thunder,
they go on to meet Armed men, they laugh at Fear, and are not affrighted,
neither turn they back from the Swo^d, they shout among the loud Drums and the
shrill Clangors of the Trumpet Ha, Ha! the Thunder of the Captains and the
Shouting only adds Fire to their Magnanimity; and if they are threatened with
such clouds of Arrows as shall darken the very sky, they make no more of it
than the Persian, who replied to such a Menace, I am glad of that! we shall
then fight in the shade. Yea, almost every spot of ground affords a spectacle
of more Fortitude than what appears in Fighting stoutly when Martial Noises do
inspirit men. We may see men whose Blood chills not when they are called out to
die alone in cold Blood; men that with a steady Countenance can take grim Death
arrayd with all its pompous Horrors, by the cold clammy hand, and cheerfully
say, Friend, do thy worst! Such skill! and such Strength many mortals have.

PROPOSITION II^
The Almighty GOD is to be acknowledg^ed as the Author of these Excellences.

All that have such Excellencies are beholden to GOD for them, and ought to own
their being so. Among the Romans, there were those Officers who were called
Campi Doctores, the Doctors of the Field. All true Christian Soldiers will
acknowledge the Ever-living GOD for the supreme Teacher in the field unto them;
they say, He has his chain in the Heavens, who is our Teacher. Shall we speak
of SKILL? Behold, the Blessed GOD, the Father of Lights is the Bestower of
That. The haughty Sennacherib is rebuked for saying of his military Exploits,
in Isa. 10 13. By my wisdom I have done them. We are informed concerning the
Husbandman by the princely Prophet, His God does instruct him to Discretion,
and does teach him. How fitly may that be said of the Soldier too! There is a
GOD that he has his military Discretion from. Shall we speak of STRENGTH? Lo,
This also is to be ascribed unto God, the Rock of Ages. It was a check given to
the Moabites in Jer. 48.14. How say ye, we are mighty and strong men for the
war? As for Strength of Body this is from God. The Psalmist does most
ingenuously confess, in Psalm. 18, 34. It is the Lord th^^ teaches my hands to
war, so that a bow of steel is broken by mine arms. As for STRENGTH of SPIRIT,
this too is from God. When Arrows are to be made Bright, and Shields to be
gathered, it is said (in Jer. 51.11.) that The Lord raises the spirits of men.
That which makes this further evident is, that the Almighty God takes away
military Skill and Strength from men, whenever it pleases Him. This the poor
Canaanites had experience of: The Hundreds of Thousands of armed men in those
mighty Nations, advantaged with Chariots that were plated with sweeping
slaughtering Hooks of Iron, could not stand -- The Lord at once tormented them
with great Wasps, hideously stinging of their Bodies, and with black Fears
weakening of their Spirits, they could not stand before an handful of men, to
whom the Lord had promised in Exodus 23.27. I will send my Fear before thee, and
will make thine enemies turn their backs unto thee. The cruel crafty Indians
among our selves, were to other Day an instance of this too; at a time when we
expected utmost Ruin by their merciless hands, They ^^ll before us like the
leaves in Autumn, and themselves gave this reason of it, laying their hands on
their breasts, Oh (said they) the Englisham's God makes us afraid here. This
there is no question to be made of; no means or helps will make us succesful
Soldiers, if God deny His Smiles: An Host of sorry Mice will render all our
Bow-strings utterly unserviceable, if God say unto them, Go do it. We have
cause to say after the Psalmist in Psalm. 44.6. I will not trust in my Bow,
neither shall my Sword save me.

But the Improvement of these things remains.

USE. I.
There is a strong Invitation to an Attendance on Military Disciplin^ hence
given unto all that are capable ther^^

This Truth should be as good as a Thousand Drums beating of a Troop in your
hearing, engageing of you to repair in your Arms unto a peaceable military
Rendezvous. It is lamentable to see how Military Discipline has begun to
languish among us; to see how few list themselves in military Societies, and
how delinquent in military Services they that have listed often are. I would to
God the Time were come wherein we might have had a seasonable Sermon on that
Text; Isa. 2.4^ They shall beat their Swords, into Plow-shares and their Spears
into Pruning Hooks; for they shall learn war no more. When will men choose
David's Motto, Anishallom; i. e. I am peace? When will those two make bate
Pronouns, Meum and Tuum leave off to set mankind together by the Ears? But
surely, till Gog and Magog are burnt up with slashes of hot Lightening, as
their predecessors, the Assyrians were of old, a fitter Theme to be preached on
will be that in Joel. 3.12. Beat your Plow-shares into Swords, and your
Pruning Hooks into Spears, and let all the men of War draw near. Thanks be to
the God of peace, for the Peace wherewith we enjoy the Gospel of peace. We have
no occasion to kindle Becons, or to stick up a Scoth Fire-cross for the
Summoning of all between Sixteen and Sixty, to oppose an invading enemy. The
thing which our Civil Authority puts us upon this day, and all that I am
concernd to speak a good word for, is, The regard to military Discipline, which
our peace does give us a most happy advantage for. There is this Argument for
the abundant use of military Discipline in the midst of us, now giving
Encouragement thereunto; The Almighty GOD is the Teacher of it. And what! Will
any of you be loath to go-to-School unto the Almighty GOD* Will you play the
Truant from the School of GOD? Let the able Idle Spectators of military
Exercises for shame count themselves concerned to rank and file with their
honest and industrious Neighbors. It Is desirable that all our Trained Bands
might flourish, and become Terrible, as an Army of Banners. And it is
particularly to be desired that our Artillery Companyes may be unto the utmost
countenanced. In Persia once they had an Artillery Company consisting of Ten
Thousand, which they called, The Immortal Company, because whenever any one was
taken off, another was still chosen to supply his place*

May THAT Artillery Company in special which I am now speaking unto, in this
sense become an Immortal Company.

CONSIDER, I.
That Military Discipline is a very lawful thing.

When the Soldiers satt under the Ministry of John Baptist, he said not unto
them, Lay down your Arms; but as in (...). 3.14. B^ content with your Wages;
which was as good as saying* Be content to be Soldiers. The believing
CenCenturion did not look upon himself as obliged to throw up his Commission,
tho it had a Roman Original: and yet of him it was said in Matt. 8.10. I have
not found so great faith, no, not in Israel, as in him. It is recorded of the
Patriarch Abraham, (of that Father of the Faithful) in Genesis 14.14. that he had
a kind of Artillery Garden at his house; an Artillery Company was under his
Conduct, whereto about forty Files belonged. Shall we imagine that GOD will
teach any unlawful thing? No; The ever-glorious GOD Himself is called, The God
of Armies. But He is never called, The God of Thieves, or The God of Murderers;
or the God of any thing that is to be thought sinful. It is indeed said, that
They that take the sword, shall perish with the sword. But this refers to
taking up the Sword without a right Cause, and without a just Call. When men
meddle with Swords without a sufficient Call from both God and man, they are
wont to come off like those Ephraimites which the seventy eighth Psalm sings
of, among other ancient things, who would needs break prison out of Egypt and
sieze upon Palestina, by Force of Arms, before they had a good Warrant for it,
and were slain by the men of Gath, to the great grief of their FaFather, and
the increase of their Servitude. It is also said, Whosoever shall smite thee on
the right check, turn to him the other also. But private, personal Revenge is
the thing forbiden there. It Is to be suspected, that the people who make
Outcries against all Use of carnal Weapons, would (as One ingeniously says)
use the Weapons very carnally, yea, very bloodily, if they had them in their
own Hands.

CONSIDER, 2.
That Military Discipline is also a Needful thing.

It was a true Remark of the ancient Grecian, That, A Commonwealth wherein
there is not a plenty of Military men, is as a Body without Sinews. A Wall of
Stones about a City or a Country is good for little without a Wall of Bones
defending of it. -- Hi sunt Spartae maenia. It is threatened as a very direful
Plague unto a Land in Isa. 3.2. The Lord of Hosts does take away the men of War
therefrom. Why should any of us have an hand in bringing such a plague on the
Land wherein we live.

Don't plead, Its being a Time of peace may Excuse us from being in Arms while
th^se Halcyon days continue. For a Time of Peace is the time to prepare for a
time of War. The prudent King Asa thought so of old. And the want of
Preparation in us, may sharpen the Edge of an Enemies Desire to our Land* Some
West-Indian might have been upon our skirts before now, if the Military
Appearances among us had not dampt them. You are not ignorant of what befell the
Inhabitants of quiet and secure L^ish long ago.

Do not plead, I cannot spare the time to Train. What! not spare time to go to
School to GOD? It Is observed, that the people in this Country with moderate
Diligence make themselves capable of greater Leisures than many in the world.
Besides, Would you serve God with that which costs you nothing? Or would you be
made Soldiers by a Miracle?

Do not plead, There are enough to train without me. How if every one should
plead so? Certainly, people did not thus exempt themselves from the Artillery
Company at Jerusalem, in the days of Jehoshaphat. It is noted (for so I would
understand it) in 2. Chron. 17. fin. That while one man was Leader of that
Company, they were an Hundred and Eighty Thousand: While another, they were Two
hundred Thousand; while another, they were two hundred and eighty Thousand; and
while another, they were no less than Three hundred thousand. There were
Thousands exceeding the Unites in our Artillery Companies!

Should I now pretend to give Directions how Military Discipline may best be
ordered among us, I might justly be derided no less than he that would read
Military Lectures before the Martial Hannibal. Yet there are Two things which I
would presume upon a Liberty to say.

ADVICE. I.
It seems good Prudence to be most Attent on and Accurate in that piece of
Military Discipline which is most Necessary.;

Or most accommodated for the SAFETY of the place which we belong unto. We have
such a Parenthesis in the Preface of David's Elegy over Saul and Jonathan, 2.
Sam. 1.18. He had them teach the Children of Judah the -- Bow. Some take that
Word, the Bow, to be only the Title of the e^s^eing Song. But others thus
conceive of it: The PhiliPhilistines had made fearful Slaughter among the
Israelites by their being curious Archers; and the study of David now was to
have the Israelites out-shoot the Philistines in their own Bow. All that you
shall now hear of this matter from one whose highest military Attainment is
that he counts Military Discipline a thing not to be despised, is only This:
There is a swarthy Generation of Philistines here, the Indian Natives, I mean,
whom alone we are like to have any Wars withal. These Salvages have (not long
since) butchered several Hundreds in these Plantations; in that bloody gloomy
day, when the Alarm of War was heard, and it was said, Sword, go through the
Land, the Canibals had many an Hellish Feast of English Flesh; and the main
thing wherein the wild Creatures out-did us and un-did us was this, They were
very yare Marks-men, and every tree was a Fort from whence they took their
Aims. If ever those now- wounded Chaldeans should make an Attempt again upon
us, there will be few Words of Command used, unless those two, Make ready, and
Give fire. The best Marks-man will then be the best Soldier: The Benjamites
that can shoot to an Hairs Breadth will probably carry the day. How comes it
then to pass, that in our Trainings there seldom are any Marks and Prizes set
up for the promoting of this Accomplishment?

ADVICE. II.
They that give their presence to Military Discipline, should be ashamed if
their Proficiency therein be not conspicuous and considerable.

The Counsil which Paul gave to a Spiritual Soldier is very Proper here, in 1.
Tim. 4.15. Give thy self to these things, that thy profiting may appear unto
all. Do not look upon Training days as designed for mere Diversion and
Recreation; or to do nothing but make Smokes. Be not of them who unless to get
off a Fine would never appear at their Colors; Remember that, As you were, is
not a fit word of Command for you all the year long. Behave your selves always
in your Trainings, as under the Eye of the Authority whom, under His Majesty's
favorable Protection, you are therein Obedient unto, yea, and as if you were
by them also bid to expect the sight of an Adversary. At the End of each day,
be able to make a good Reply unto that Question, Quid profeci? or What progress
have I ma^e this day in military Discipline? Give not you^ Tutors cause to
blame your Non-proficiencies*

USE. II.
The Attenders on Military Discipline should hence be careful to Acknowledge
God in what they do.

Let them act according to that Acknowledgement, The Lord is my teacher.

To particularize:

FIRSTLY.
There are some Acknowledgements due to God from you, WHILE you are using of
Military Discipline.

All the Trained Soldiers among you have these things incumbent on them, as so
many Ackowledgments unto GOD their Teacher.

In the first place, Soldiers should be Gracious men. O get on the Whole
Armor of God; Get gracious Principles into your Souls. Never dream That you
are in all respects fit to war and to fight with any men, till your peace be
made with God. You tha^ may some time or other carry your Live^ in your Hands,
had need always to carry Grace in your Hearts. A very Heathen handling that
Problem, Who is the best Armed Soldier? Solved it so, Integer virae
scelerisque purus: the sincere godly man is the best Armed of any man in the
world. You be n't so fit as you should be to handle a Sword; till you come to
use a Book as well as a Sword; till you govern your lives by the Words of
Command in the Book of God; till you can say with that renowned Soldier in
Psalm. 119.14. I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies, as much as in all
riches. You are poor Soldiers, till you can with all Hilarity say to your own
souls as that dying Ancient Hilary did, Egredere, Anima, egredere, quid times?
or Turn out, O my Soul, turn out; Scorn, Scorn to be afraid of Death; which no
uncoverted man can duly say. After all the Bravadoes which many Hectoring
D^m-mee's make while no body is like to hurt them, it is the Newborn,
heaven-born Christian that will stand the most daringly before the mouths of
Cannons vomiting out Fire and Death; Here, here is the man that is best able to
look the most terrible of all terribles in the face and to scoff at the hisses
of that Rattle-snake. DEATH, saying, Where Is thy sting? I have heard that not
very long ago, In the Low-Countryes an huffing Captain challenged one reputed a
very pious man unto the Fighting of a Duel: the General taking notice of it
said, Pray stay till to morrow, such a Town is then to be assaulted, I Will then
see which of you two can fight best. The Town was assaulted, and a Breach made
in the Wall, Now (said the General to the Challenger) Now do you Enter: To this
the courageous Coward replied with horror, I beseech your Excellency excuse me,
I be^n't fit to die. But the man whom the Changes of Regeneration have made fit
to live, he is likewise fit to die. He that has Christ for his Life, will
assuredly have Gain by his Death; and may fall into Transports of Joy, whenever
the grim Ferry-man shall call upon him, Come away!

Moreover, Soldiers should be Praying men. The illustrious Gustavus Adelphus
was, for a Soldier, the miracle of this last Age; but ^^ar^e any thing more
contributed to his being so, than the Army of Prayers which were ever in his
Service: Hence he would say to his Counselors, The greater our Army of
Prayers, the more assured will be our victory. It is give^ as the Character of
a man worthy to be a Captain, in Act. 10.2. He was a devout man and one that
prayed unto God always. The Emperor Aurelius was blessed with a Legion of such
Soldiers in his Host: When the Army was like to perish for Thirst, this
Christian-Legion withdrew to Prayer, and immediately God sent a plentiful Rain
which relieved them, but sent such fearful flashes of Lightening therewithal
as destroyed their Enemies; from whence this was called the Thundering Legion.
God grant that every Trained Company among us, may be a Praying Thundering
Company! PRAYER, was the great Field-peice of Jehoshaphat; it is said in 2.
Chron. 20.3. He set himself to seek the Lord. Yea, the most of the Prayers in
the Bible were made by a Soldier; The Psalms of David. Our late Indian-War
gave us evidence enough of PRAYER's efficacy and importance, in military
Executions. Luther was wont to style Prayer, the Gunshot of the soul.
Certainly, a Soldiers Weal is enwrapped in nothing more than in the well-
discharging of it.

Furthermore, Soldiers ought to be well- Aiming men. I would say about your
Training, as Paul about Eating and Drinking, in 1. Cor. 10.1. -- Do all to the
GLORY OF GOD. Let all that you do from the Girding on of your Harness, to the
putting of it off, be aimed at the Glory of God, and the Good of His people, to
the just Satisfaction of your King and Country. Let every one of your Weapons
have that Motto which the Lord has provided for the Bells of the Troopers
Horses in Jerusalem, Zech 14.12. HOLINESS TO THE LORD. Let all inferior Ends be
placed by you in a due Subordination hereunto, and not be the main Spring of
your Artillery Motions. As a religious man once at work in the Woods, being
asked, Who are you at work for? very savourily answered, I am cutting of wood
for God. So be you able to say of all your Trainings, That you are therein
Obeying of God, and the Government, which is the minister of God unto you for
good: thus preparing to Fight the Battails of the Lord.

Once more, Soldiers ought to be Sin-hating men. There has been a Scandal
raised upon Soldiers, [Nulla fides pietasque viris qui Castra sequuntur.] that
Soldiers are seldom Christians. The slander has been most happily confuted by
the virtuous Lives which many men of a Military Profession have been exemplary
for. That I may recite one Instance instead of many, give me leave to inform
you of what the Learned Voetius relates in his Ecclesiastical Poli^y, (part.
1. Lib, 2. Tract. 4) concerning a young Scoth Gentleman of his acquaintance,
then a Captain in the Low-Countryes. This devout Soldier was (as Voetius
testifies to the world in his Immortal Writings) a Mirror of piety, Gravity,
Modesty and extraordinary Prudence. He was abundant in Reading the Scriptures,
and sundry Treatises both of Divinity and History, and penning down in his
private papers the memorable passages which he found pertinent and profitable
to himself therein. Yea, it was common with him to spend whole Days in the
Austerities of a Fast. He moreover kept a constant Diary wherein (to use his
own Phrase) he had on one Side, a page For the Old man, on the other side, a
page For the New man; in these he did every day note down on the one side, How
far the Interest of Sin decayed in him, on the other s^de, How far he grew in
his Conformity to Jesus Christ. Doing thus until he dyed. Upon which the
Reflection of that great man is to this purpose, It is fit that many Ministers
of the Gospel should read this, to make them sensible how much a Soldier has
gone beyond them in the Exercises of Devotion. Now let your Accurate
Conversation in like manner promote the Vindication and the Reputation of the
blemished Soldier. Beware of those Sins that Soldiers are most addicted unto.
John Baptist in his Advice to Soldiers Luc. 3.14. has enumerated some of
those hateful Immoralities. It was a Proverb of old, Miles Roman, Aegyptum
cave; Roman Soldiers must be careful to shun Egyptian vices. Many a man is no
less than a Leader unto a Trained Band, and yet so miserable as to be himself
misled by a Foolish Lust. O be so valiant as to Fly (here Valor it self turns
its back) the Fleshly Lusts whereof the Alarms of God have told you, That they
war against the Soul. Abstain especially from the ordinary Epidemical Vices of
Training Days. It is reported of the Carthaginian Soldiers, that they were
not to meddle with any Wine all the time of their bearing Arms. Our Trainings
are too commonly abused unto the contrary excesses of Surfeiting and
Drunkenness. Let the Vanity, let the Rioting, let the pagan profane
Health-Drinkings which are then too usual, be abominable unto you, who have not
so learned Christ.

SECONDLY.
There are some further Acknowledgements due unto God from you, WHEN you are
Thriving in Military Discipline.

If you Thrive under your heavenly Teacher you are to pay unto Him such
Acknowledgements as these.

Your humble, your hearty Praises are first to be rendered unto the Most High
for all your military Endowments. Among the Ancients, when an old Soldier came
to have an honest honorable Dismission from the Camp, he dedicated his Arms
with his Praises unto his Household Gods. Truly there are Praises to be returned
unto our God, when we are made Masters in military Practice. O do as the
Psalmist in the close of his military Psalm, (in 2. Sam. 22.50.) resolves to
do. I will give Thanks to thee, O Lord, I will give Praises to thy (...).

Again, You should now Submit unto any the hardest military Employment that the
Most High God shall call you to. Stand l^ke the Israelites in the Desert of
old, p^^ching every man by his Standard about the ^^^^^nacle of the Lord; and
when you have the full Warrant of GOD and His Vic^-gerents, don't shrugg or
shrink back for any Difficulty that you may be put upon. Let me speak unto you
in the words which the Lord-General of Israel in his military Oration used, (2.
Sam. 10.12.) Be of good Courage, play the men, for your people, and the Cities
of your God. Here you are like the valiant of Israel, all h^^ding of swords,
and expert in war, -- standing about the Bed of Solomon; and if Solomon say the
word, then count that the best way to save your lives will be to lose 'em; and
so the holy Angels may at the first Arrival of your disengaged Souls into the
spiritual world, welcome them with the Salutation which an Angel gave to
Gideon, The Lord is with thee, thou mighty man of Valor.

Finally, When you cannot possibly, or may not lawfully serve God as Soldiers,
be willing to serve God as Sufferers. God knows whether you may ever be put
upon the bearing of any Testimonies to the Truths or Ways of Jesus Christ,
which may incurr the Frowns of all Standers-by. Now it will be a greater
magnanimity to suffer Disgrace and Poverty and Imprisonment cheerfully, than it
is to defend a Fe^^d of Lentiles singly against an whole Army of Philistines,
or to slaughter six hundred of 'em with an Ox-goad. Be ready with a passive
Obedience, to follow Him whom the Apostle styles in Heb. 2.10. The Captain of
our Salvation, made perfect through Sufferings. Soldiers have sometimes had
their Superstitions about Crosses, but most certainly it is the most real
Christianity to take a Cross imposed by the Providence of the Lord Jesus on us,
and to lay the ragged Tree upon our shoulders until it do there bring forth the
peaceable fruits of righteousness. The name that our K. Edward 1. (the comliest
of men) had, when called Crouch-back, because of the Cross which he wore on his
Back, very well befits a Soldier, when Crosses and Trials are carved out for
him by the God of Heaven. Christan Soldiers should be as willing to entertain
Crosses, I mean Sorrows, and Troubles, for the sake of the Gospel, as the
Primitive Christian Soldiers were to throw by the military Crowns which were
proffered unto them. The Ancients have with very eloquent ^^nes celebrated those
Forty Soldiers, who for the professing themselves Christians, were content to
undergo the fiery exquisite Anguish of being Frozen to death. Let every one of
us in like sort be content to endure the bleakest* the most nipping and
peircing winds that can blow upon us for our Faithfulness unto the Son of God.
O be among the Armies in Heaven (...) the Lamb, and if ever you should (thanks
be to God you yet have not) to do with Persecutors, be unto them no otherwise
than as Sheep before the Shearers.

USE. III.
Hence, Men expert in Military Discipline are to be had in high Account by us,
as the great Blessings of the Great God.

If Acknowledgements are to be made unto God as the Author of Military SKILL or
STRENGTH; surely the River of our A^knowledgements, running into that infinite
Ocean, may do well to call at the Banks of Eart^, as they glide along, paying
(...) kindness to the Men that have military Ornaments (...). He that would
say, B^^ssed be God that (...) my hands to war, and my fingers to ^ight* may
also see cause to say, Blessed be God who has made any Hands and Fingers,
expert at Military Discipline in the midst of us. Our Sight of a Trained
Company, but especially of an Artillery Company, should not be perhaps without
some special Expressions of our Value thereof; Since we may say, There march
the Scholars of the Almighty GOD.

Persons well-acquainted with Military Discipline, have Honors and Roses cast
upon them by the blessed God Himself. The most High and Mighty GOD Himself
affects to be called (in Exodus 14.3.) A Man of War. The Lord Jesus Christ also
chooses to be represented (in Psalm. 45.3.) as a Mighty One with a Sword by His
side. The glorious Angels, the bright Inhabitants of the Third Heaven, are
styled in Luc. 2.13. The heavenly Host, or Army. Their Excellent General calls
'em forth by twelve Legions at once, that is, to the number of Seventy two
thousand Footmen, and eighty four hundred Hors-men, the Number which a Roman
Army consisted of. O What matchless Fellow Soldiers all well-qualified
Soldiers have! The Scriptures, these inestimable Treasures of Heaven, are
fill^d with nothing more than Military (...) and Things And among Men have
Soldiers in all ages had most remarkable Reputation. The best Soldiers were
by David in 2. Sam. 23.8. reckoned, the Worthyes of the Kingdom. In Solomon's
time, it is noted in 2. Chron. 8.9. that the Best men in the Land were the men of
war. It was made an Act among the warlike Spartans that no man should have an
Epitaph, or so much as his Name written on his Grave, if he had not been a
Soldier. Some of the chief Dignityes now in the world had a Military Rise: an
Esquire, an Earl, a Duke, and some Orders of Knight-wood owe their Titles to
the Field. Let us then manifest a special Esteem unto the Right Soldiers that
this Country is favored withal.

But let me bespeak your peculiar Acknowledgements for them who Jeoparded their
Lives on the high places of the Field, for us in the late Indian-war. My heart
is toward those Soldiers, and, under God those Saviour^ of this people, who
then willingly offered themselves. It Is just that those Lovers of their
Country, should have extraordinary Marks of Respect from all of us for whom
they exposed themselves; their very Countenances methinks carry Loveliness in
them, and their wounds are Beautyes; If ever any of those dear men should be
reduced to Penury, let all their Neighbors testify more than common Kindness
unto such well-deserving persons. I have the delight of seeing some of them in
this Assembly; and tho I must own unto them, as Tertullian did unto the
Christian Soldiers of his time, Non tantus sum ut Vos Alloquar, and say, I am
too mean a Person to render you the Thanks of your Country; yea tho I must
account no Tertullus able to make a due Address unto them; yet by me let it be
said, Seeing that by you, we enjoy great Quietness, and very worthy Deeds have
been done for this people by your Fortitude, We accept it always, with all
Thankfulness.

Blessed be the Lord for you, Ye blessed of the Lord.

USE. IV.
It is hence the Duty of all men to Acknowledge GOD as the Author of All their
Mercies.

If it becomes the Soldier to say, Blessed be God for my military Skill or
Strength; Surely it is fitting that every man should say, Blessed be God for
every Mercy. It is a Jewish Custom to season all their Solemnities, with a
Baruk Adonai, a Blessed be the Lord. And it sufficiently unchristian also to be
seldom, or scanty in Blessing of a good GOD. The MERCIES of God are on every
side, surrounding every one of us: O where are our HALLELUJAHs? Our Antedatings
of Heaven's Work? Why do not we call upon our own dull Souls, as He in Psalm.
103.2. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all His Benefits: When
Tamerlan the Tartar overcame Bajazet the Turk, He asked his Prisoner, Sir, Did
you ever give Thanks to God, for making you such a potent Emperor? The Turk
answered, No, in Truth, I never thought of That! Whereupon replied the Tartar,
Ah, woeful wretch, don't wonder then that God has made thee a Spectacle of the
most rueful miseries in the world. Should a like Enquiry be made of us; Man,
have thou ever from thy Heart, said Blessed be the Lord, who has given me a
Life full of provisions and preservations? Or Blessed be the Lord, who has
granted me a large Estate? Or Blessed be the Lord, for the Friends that love
me? It is to be doubted, many of us must own, No, This has been quite out of
our minds. O shameful Ingratitude! And Ingratitude, That -- Ingratum dixeris,
(...) omnia dixeris. That is too vile a thing for a Dog to be guilty of. Let
this matter sink down into your hearts this day. The Lord could tell Elisha all
that his man Gehazi had received (how much above Three hundred and seventy five
pound Sterling.) from the Syrian Nobleman. Verily, O Soul, this Lord Jehovah
keeps an Exact Account of what all thy Receipts from Himself have been. O be
not as a silent and a senseless Grave unto the Mercies of a gracious God. Incur
not the Doom foretold by the Apostle when he linked those two together,
unthankful, unholy. Dreadful will be the Danger of such (...)! This Non-payment
of Rent, will procure your Ejectment from all that yo^ take pleasure in.
Christians, you should receive every mercy (they of old would not speak of
their very Affliction^ without a Deo Gratias) with a Blessed be God. And should
it now be a part of your Task every Evening to ne^^ec^ and ruminate on the
Mercies of the Day foregoing? Yea, And it were most proper, I am sure it were
highly profitable, to draw (...) your private Memorials a Bill of the principal
Mercies for which you are indebted unto God; to be subscribed with a, Lord, I
Thank thee; Often affect your selves by Looking into these Grateful Records,
and leave them a^ ^n Inheritance with the Children whom you would bequeath your
God and Christ and Religion to. It would moreover be far from Improper or
Unprofitable for you sometimes to keep whole days of secret THANKS GIVING unto
your Father who sees in secret; Spending the days in Contemplating the
Glories of God and Christ, in enumerating and admiring His merciful
Dispensations toward your selves, and in contriving, what to render unto the
Lord for all His Benefits. One such Day will bring Heaven it Self from on high
into your souls; and it will rarely be any other than a Presage or a
Forerunner of a more than ordinary Addition to your Mercies.

In short, Be ye THANKFUL.

USE. V.
Let every Christian acknowledge GOD for his Teacher in the Spiritual Warfare
which he is called unto.

Among those Monuments of Antiquity, the Works of those gray headed and
Reverend men whom they use to call the Fathers, we may find th^^ Text glossed
with a variety of Allegorical Expositions; we have it represented as the Speech
both of our Lord Jesus Christ on the cursed Tree, combating the Powe^s of
Darkness in their own. Territories; and of every Christ ian also engaged in the
unseen Battails of the Lord against the spiritual Wickednesses which do annoy
them* It is not meet that a Popular Auditory should be amus^d w^^h vain
Quotations from them. But this is as certain as what is most so, That every
Christian shares with his Leader the Lord Jesus Christ, in being (as Austin
well phrases it) a Praellator in^erior, One that has a spiritual Warfare to be
sollicitous about. The Soldiers present, have this day had all the three kinds
of Calls to regard their military Duties. They have had not only, Verba muta,
the military Sights of Ensigns and Weapons displayed before them; and not only
Verba Sem^vocalia, the military Sounds that have been Knocking and Clashing in
their Ears; but they have also had Verba Vocalia, the Articulate Commands of
Man and of God also, to acquitt themselves as good Soldiers* the Lord open
their ears to Discipline!

But having done with Them, for That,

There now remains a very Solemn and Earnest Address to be made unto Them and
Every Person in the Congregation, about a Thing of more Concernment far away.
O Congregation, hear the Word of the Lord!

Well sings the Sententious Poet, Nunquam bella bonis, nunquam certamina desunt*
Et cum quo certet, men's pia semper habet.
i. e. The Godly man is never free
From Wars with some Soul-Enemie.


There is an Holy War which indeed every Soul in this House (or in this World,
is called unto.

There is no professor of Christianity among us all, who is not infinitely
concerned to be in Arms perpetually at War with the Enemies of his never-dying
soul, his everlasting Weal. And how many millions of Woes will overtake the
Soul that becomes not a good Soldier of Jesus Christ, no Tongue can express,
or Heart conceive. Let these Admonitions then excite you and direct you to get
the Help of GOD in Teaching your Heart to War and your Spirit to Fight against
the Invisible Enemies whose Oppressions make you mourn.

For your Awakening here.

KNOW, First,
There are innumerable and very formidable Enemies daily pursuing the
Destruction of your Souls.

It was an Outcry sometimes made for the Rowsing of a sleepy man, in Judge.
16.9. The Philistines are upon thee, man. A more startling thing is to be
signified unto every one of you, Christian, There are Foes and horrible Fiends
all round about besetting of thee. Ever since we were born into the world, we
have lived in the Territories of our Enemies; and we can scarce take a step
without Annoyances from the bloody Murderers of our Souls. It is related
concerning the Prophet's Servant, in 2, King. 6.17. Elisha prayed, and said,
Lord I pray thee open his eyes that he may see; and the Lord opened the eyes of
the young man, and he saw; and behold, the mountains were full of horses and
chariots of Fire. May I now put up such a petition unto the GOD of Heaven in
the behalf of them that I am speaking to*

O our God, our God, open our eyes we pray thee, that we may see the unseen
Enemies which are daily and hourly assaulting of us. Might the most High GOD
pronounce an Ephath^ over our slumbering eyes, we should soon perceive the
Ground about us covered and the Air about us crowded with Armies of Terrible
ones whom our Souls are endangered by* There is a Sarco-cosmo-pneumato-mac^^^ a
War with the Flesh, the World and the Devil, which you are all pressed unto. The
Apostle has in Ephesians. 2.2, 3. given us the Names and Qualities of three Captains
which the infernal Army of our Adversaries is under the Conduct of. It makes an
hott Battle indeed when our Enemies fire by Salves* pouring in scalding
sulphurous Showers of Lead upon us, by fire^ng three Ranks together. Behold
such is the ^ierce Combat which every one of you are put upon. Yea there are
no less than Three mighty Armies fireing upon you all at once. There are Three
most (...)* most w^ly* and most malicious Commanders, who with all their
Hellish forces are attempting to sieze thy immortal Soul, O man; Oh how fain
would they make a Prize of it, and keep it in their horrid Clutches for
evermore! There is a Black Prince who has an unknown Power of Troops, raging,
and ramping and roving, ((...) wild Arabians) within the Atmosphere* of our
Air, (...) which the Vengeance of God has confined them for their Apostasy*
This Gran^ S^ignour of Hell is, as M^hom^^ is called in the Apocalypse, The
Grand Aba^^don or Appollyon of Souls. This Monarch^ (...) the Lapsed Angels
cannot have his Envy a^ man, or his Hatred of God satisfied without enslaving
all the Children of Adam not only: under his Condemnation, but under his
Jurisdiction also. There are vast, hideous multitudes of desolate Spirits
always ready at a minutes Warning to serve him in Spoiling the Happiness of
men by keeping a Distance between God and them. He^ and all this his forlorn
Crew are more unwilling to let any men please God, than Pharaoh was to Dismiss
the Israelites from the Brick-kil^s of their Bondage. David was not more dogged
for his Life by Saul than we are by the^e ^o^ring Dragons of the Wilderness.
Besides these* The Subjects, the devoted Vassals which this ^ly* God has
already gained unto his party, o^ the Humane Race, do set themselves with
might and main to promote his Interest every where, being led captive by him at
his will* and all the Pleasures, all the Profits* all the Preferments of Time,
do afford Weapons to be^ friend this execrable Enterprise. But (...) which
compleats our peril is, that we harbou^ (...) our own Breasts a treacherous
Enemy which ^^des with all these; a Cage of unclean Lusts have lodged
themselves within us which at the first Summons would presently surrender us
into the hands of the bitter and hasty Nation that are gaping for us. All the
Arrows which the spiritual wickednesses in high places do shoot at us, are
headed and feathered from our selves, from our own Sensuality, or Covetousness
or Ambition, and a certain Old man that sleeps in our own Bosoms. If it were
not for this perfideous Inmate, our Enemies would go grudging about the streets
for want of Bread. Alas, we have within our own Bowels, a Sheba tha^ rises up
in Rebellion against our Eternal King. This is our amazing case, and it will be
so until we have fought our way quite through the Field of blood which the
Church mili^^n^ is groaning in. The Omnipotent GOD has fired a Becon before
our eyes, and given us that faithful Warning in 1. Tim. 6.12. That we must
fight a good Fight, or we cannot lay hold on Eternal Life. Such a Voice as that
we have from the shrill Trumpets of God, in Matt. 11.12. That we must like
Soldiers, exert an Holy Force and Violence or be shutt out from the Kingdom of
heaven in howling Anguishes, until the very Heavens be no more. Thus must we
work out our own Salvation; Thus must we strive to enter in a^ the strait gate.
The real Christian is to be pitty'd on the same score that the Bird of prey is
hated, namely, quia semper vivit in Armis; as long as he breathes he never has
it said unto him, Lay down your Arms. O the Besotment, the Lethal Stupidity of
the Soul whom these Intimations will not awaken!

REMEMBER Next
The Engagements which ly upon you to Encounter these Enemies, are many and
very mighty Obligations.

There are Obligations hereunto laid upon you by the Vows of God, which you
are under. The military Oath was called a Sacrament of old. Verily you have
taken Sacraments upon it, and Oaths of Fidelity unto the Lord Jesus Christ that
you will never have any Peace, or so much as any Truce with these Enemies which
would not have Him to reign over you. Were you not Baptized into the Name of
our Lord Jesus Christ? Then, in that day were you listed under the Banner o^
that Potentate; You were bound unto a never ceasing Emnity and Watchfullness
against the ^^mpters which would withdraw you from your Allegiance unto Him.
But, Ah Lord how rarely are any among us duly mindful of our Baptismal Vow!
Souls, if ever after this you submit to the Wills of those A^ominable things
which would build a Partition Wall between God and you, You do then prophanel^
play the Trait^r toward the great LORD whose Mark you have received in your
Foreheads. Be assured, the Waters of Baptism will one day become like the Water
of Jealousy, or more direful than a River of burning Brimstone unto the
Renegadoes that shall thus procure to themselves a Lot among the Fearful and
the Unbelievers. Have not many of you also satt-down at the Table of the Lord?
Verily, when the Lord so erected a B^nner of Love over you in His
Banquetting-ho^se, there were f^esh T^es, rendering all Reconciliation or
Accommodation between you and these A^^^^kit^s the most Dishonest thing
imaginable. The Lord Jesus Christ has there said in plain Visible Words unto
you, -- Behold, I was thus murdered by those very enemies that are lying in
wait for thy precious Life; O never do thou admit any Friendship with them.
Then with a p^etence of as much Affection as the Citizens of Rome discovered
when the Show o^ stabbed Caes^^'s bloody Robes made 'em (...) ^ury to demolish
the Houses of the Assassinate^ you have openly vow^^ never to have so much as a
kind ^ar^y or Treaty with those Destroyers; you have most vehemently professed
against them, with the Indignation which David had against the Injurious man in
the parable, As the Lord lives, I Will ^o what I can that they who have done this
thing may die the Death. And can you find in your hearts after this, thus to
break your Everlasting Covenant? After you have a^e and drank with Jesus Christ
can you sit and side with the Assaylers of His Throne? Yea, these Vows have you
re^^^ed as often as you have made any near Approaches unto God in Jesus Christ;
this has been the Language of every good deed which you have applied your
selves unto; I will even Resist unto blood, striving ag^^nst Sin. Moreover both
the Precep^s of God have enjoined this upon you in 2. Cor. 16.13. Qui^^ (...)
like men, (like Soldiers) and be strong; and all the Providence of God,
whether merciful or afflictive have been so many Spurs quickening of you unto
these Wars of the Lord. O let not all these Bonds* of God be upon you* like
the green Withes on Sampson easily b^^st as^nder.

But there are still further Obligations hereunto laid upon you in point of
Inter^st.

On the one hand, Be assured, if you do Combat strenuously, you shall Conquer
gloriously. You have a General that never yet was overcome, He is the King of
Glory, the Lord mighty in Battle: No enemy can stand before a Look of His.
Veni, Vidi, Vici, A Sight of Him, and a Flight by them, is the constant Tenor
of His Successes. If you will sincerely but let Him bring you on, He will be
sure to bring you off securely. And if you hold on, and hold out, if you
continue Faithful unto the death, O the unparallelable Crowns and Kingdoms,
and inexhaustible Treasures which you shall become the Possessors of!

Est Deus, est ether, precium certaminis hujus;
Haec faciant pugnam Praemia tanta levem.
[Mantuan.] The Lord Jesus Christ will publish all your ^ains in a big
Convention of all the World; in the near Day, the Last and Great Day, when
every Child of man shall stand before the Tribunal of Jesus Christ: He will
then proclaim what you have been and done, and requite it with a Well done,
good and faithful servant. Then shall He as the Chief (the Standard bearer as
in Cant. 5.10. He is dedenominated) among many Thousands, marc^ before you up
unto the Mountains of spices, and you shall in his blessed Army of Chosen and
Called and Faithful Ones, with him enter into the celestial Mansions, where
you shall b^ for ever with the Lord.

On the other hand, Be assured you must either Fight or Dye. This War is like
that of Death, whereof it is said in Eccl. 8.8. There is no Discharge in that
war. When a person once confessed unto one of the Ancients, Nihil Pugnae
sentio in cord meo. I don't feel that my soul is put upon Strugglings with any
Enemies; the good man made this Answer, Alas, then the City gates of thy soul
are open, so that thy enemies d^ what they will without control. Here indeed
the Christian that is not a Soldier, is a perfect Slave, and what a deplorable
thing is that! It was the Speech of a famous Commander unto his Army, when they
were penned up with the Sea on one side of them, and an huge Host of enemies on
the other, Fellow Soldiers, you must now either drink up this Sea, or eat up
these men. Thus, there is no escaping here; you must either beat the Eemies of
your souls, or burn in a fiery Ocean of God's Wrath for ever. If the
Cutthroats of our souls are not resisted steadfastly in the Faith, we shall
become the Captives of those mighty ones; and if they g^t us they will keep us,
^f they subdue us they will torment us, world without end: There will be no
Remedy but we must welter under the Anguishes, the bitter Dolours of
Everlasting fire with the Devil an his Angels. And which of us all is not now
Awakened to ask of God to Teach us to war and to Fight against those
Canaanites which would keep us out of the Land flowing with milk and honey?

But for the Counsilling of you then,

RULE. I.
Let Unfeigned Repentance put an end unto your Warring and Fighting against the
GOD of Heaven.

It is very proper to begin with the Caution which Doctor Gamaliel gave to the
Jewish Sanhedri^, (in Act. 5.39.) Be not found to fight against God. Until men
are brought unto the Experience of a Conversion to and a Covenant with God in
Jesus Christ, all the Affayrs of a Christian Wa^fare will be no less unsuitable
than unacceptable to them. All Unregenerate men which ^ive in KNOWN Sins are so
fa^^ from war^ing and fighting against the Armies of Hell, that they
desperately set themselves in Battle Array against the infinite GOD. The black
Description of every Impenitent Transgressor is that in Job. 15.25, 26. He
stretches out his hand against God, and strenghens himself against the
Almighty, He runs upon Him, even upon his Neck, upon the thick Bosses of his
Buckler. O that these foolish and unwise kind of people would now be persuaded
to bethink themselves! What a prodigious Phrensy is this, for them that lately
came out of the Creating hands to cast themselves into the Avenging hands of
God! The First and the ^^st Direction that can be given to these Children of
Folly, is,

Oh Lay down your Arms, and make your peace with that terrrible God, whom by
your sin you have made your provoked Adversary. The secure Sinner perhaps is
not aware of his own making these daring Adventures. But this must be plainly
told unto every man that maintains a Trade of wilful Disobedience unto the
Commandments of God: Man, thou art Sounding a Challenge against GOD Himself,
thou art every Day Bidding Defiance to the Eternal GOD; Thou art certain of
that which which was only a mistake in Jo^ of old: God counts me for His
Enemy. O that such heedless men and women would sit down in sober sadness to
think on the nonesuch Madness which has possessed them. Are you not every day
( Conscience, do thine Office) Are you not daily allowing your selves in those
things, for which you are not ignorant that the Wrath of God comes upon the
Children of Disobedience? ^f you are not such bold Debauchees as to live in
Swearing, in Uncleanness, in Drunkenness, in Sabbath-breaking; and to make
nothing of a ^ile Chea^, or a flatt Lie; yet do you not make Light of a
Prayer-less Life? and so, of a Faithless and a Christ-less Life? Now every such
Sin of yours has a Tongue in it, a Blasphemous Tongue, that talks against
heaven, and says, I am for the Waging a War and a Fight with God. As they
sometimes said in Isa. 5.19. Let the Lord hasten his work that we may see. Such
an insolent Bravado do you affront the most High withal. The faithful and holy
God has said Cast away from you all your Idols, or I Will break you sore in the
place of Dragons: I will burn you in the fiery bottom of Hell for those
Rebellions. But every unreclamed Sinner now, does as bad as reply Let God do
His worst, His Darts are but Stubble and the shaking of his spear is but to be
^aughed at. Thus the unrepenting and unrelenting Sinner, (...) knows that he
sins, and yet with an high-hand he rushes on, to the doing of those things
whereof the Compassionate God says unto him, O do not those abominable things
which my soul hates. But O venture some unthinking Sinners, consider the
doleful plight which you are in, Consider this ye that forget God, lest He tear
you in pieces and there be none to deliver you. The blessed God has positively
declared unto you, (in Psalm. 7.12, 13.) that He has when His sword and bent His
Bow, and ordained the Instruments of Death against the Sinners who Turn not
from their evil ways; He has declared upon the word of a GOD, (in Psalm.
68.21.) that He will wound the Head of these His enemies, and the hairy scalp
of such (...) one as goes on still in His Trespasses. It was the short and
smart Return which Jehu made unto Joram in 2. King. 9.22. Joram when he saw
Jehu said, is it Peace? and he answered, what Peace, so long as the Whoredoms
of thy mother are so many? Thus, if any unrenewed Sinner ask, Is there not a
Peace between God and me? It must be said unto him, No, such sins as thine are
inconsistent with Peace, thy Sins render God thy dreadful enemy. But O now turn
from all (...) unto God in Christ, Lest ye perish, Cry (...) Q^arter, yea, cry
for Pardon, and Agree quickly with your matchless Adversary. Let that Question
be put unto you (1. Cor 10.22.) Do you provoke the LORD to Jealousy? are you
stronger than he? Surely you cannot presume that you shall make your party good
against God, who can Thunder the whole world into nothing in a moment? It is
said in (...). That one going to war against another, sits down first, and
consulteth whether he be able to meet him that comes against him. Be you
entreated to admit so much Consideration here as Common Prudence will suggest.
I have heard o^ a man in the West Indies a little while ago who being in a Boat
with another when a High Wind made a rough Sea* at his Companion's Expressing
some Concernment about the Issue, which he was disturbed a^, The Wretch slew
out into this outrage of Blasphemy, Let God Almighty blow, let Him blow if He
list, I fear Him not; And behold the words were but just out of his mouth, when
he was blown overboard and drowned, while the other gatt safe to shore. All
Deliberate Sinning ^o^meth out such a Contempt of God, and verily the Event is
like to be no better: the black dead Sea of God's Wrath will swallow up such
Despisers till they perish. It is written concerning Baalam, in Numb. 32.31.
that when he saw a Flaming Swo^d in the hands of an Angel checking of his
motions, it put him to a Stand. Oh how durst you go on in a Course of Sin, when
you perceive the great GOD with Flaming Swords and hott Thunderbolts opposing
of you? Let it not be said that your sturdy Obstinacy in Sin out-goes the stout
Stomach of the very Devils themselves, who believe and tremble, while you sin
and tremble not. It is no less than an Omnipotent Enemy whom by Unforsaken Sin
you incurr the just Revenges of; and wi^^ the sorry Potsherds of the Earth make
light of His horrendous Indignation? It is the Exclamation of the Psalmist in
Psalm. 76.7. Who may stand in thy sight when once thou art angry O Lord! O No
more, No more Harden your selves against this GOD; It is impossible that you
should prosper if you do. You have the Lord of Hosts against you; and while you
have, all the Hosts of the Lord are up in Arms against you too. While you are
thus under the Curse of God, every Creature of God has been crying unto him
against you, as that King unto the Prophet about the hood-winked Syrians, Shall
I smite them, O Lord* shall I smite them? The Earth has cried, Lord, shall I
swallow them up alive? as I did Corah and his Company? The Sea has roard Lord,
shall I run over the heads of 'em, as I did to Pharaoh, and his Followers? The
Clouds have rumbled, Lord, shall we shower down fierce Lightenings upon them,
as we did upon Sodom and Gomorrah? Thus are even all the Creatures of God only
staying for that Word Fall on; and upon that Signal given, they would all join
to Plague you, more than the Sun and Moon did Sisera of Old, when by producing
the Inundations of Kishon they did in their courses fight against him. But
there is that which is more tremendous yet: You must expect that if Repentance
prevent it not, you will at length fall into the Hands of the everliving GOD
Himself, whose Hands it is a fearful thing to fall into. And O how can you bear
the Gripes of those Iron Arms, or the Immedeate strokes wherewith he will one
day dispense his fiery Fury in those Ovens of Hell, the Souls of his Enemies;
Can your hands be strong or can your heart endure, in the day that I shall deal
with you, says the Lord? The Hands of God! Alas those Ireful Hands do splitt
the Everlasting Rocks, and make the very Pillars of Heaven Tremble. I Knew a
very stout man, who in the Anguishes of Death thus expressed himself, I have
been said he) among drawn Swords and Armed Soldiers; I have stood before the
mouths of ro^ring Canons, from whence the Bullets have flown about my ears, and
yet I never knew what it wa^ to be afraid; but now I am apprhensive of my being
exposed to the everlasting Anger of GOD, my heart shivers and fails within me,
at the thought of that. Sometimes when my Visits have been called for by men on
their Deathbeds, perceiving themselves on the Borders of Eternity, I have
found them quaking and there very Beds shaking under them, and their first
Speech has been to this purpose, O Sir, the Wrath of a dreadful GOD makes me
tremble, I tremble, I tremble at it! How full of Hellish Dimness, and Darkness
and Bitterness, will Presumpteous Transgressors then be in the Day of God's
Unmixed Wrath, in the Day when He shall fulfill that Threat in Psalm. 50.21. I
will reprove thee, and set thy sins in Order (in Battle-Array) before thine
eyes? Now let every hitherto-unchanged Sinner count himself concerned to put a
penitent Period unto the dangerous deadly Warfare, wherein he is warring and
fighting against the Almighty God. In this case the Teaching which you have
from God is, Lay down your Arms, O war and fight no more. All the Powers of
your souls, all the Member^ of your Bodies have hitherto been as it is said in
Romans 6.13. The Weapons of unright^ousness. O find out now a better, a fitter
employment for them; otherwise your only Wages or Stipend will be (as the
Apostle ^ith, alluding to the military Stipends of old) Death, Death,
forevermore. Wherefore here make a Pause. O Commune with your selves about what
you have been and done. Now Confess, now Bewail before the Most High all your
p^st miscarriages, entreating that through the Prince of Peace they may be all
forgiven and the Breach be made up between God and you; promi^^ng there-withal,
that for the future it shall be your hearty study to have no more to do with
Idols. O say, It is enough, Lord, I have done Iniquity, and I will do so no
more.

But so much may suffice to be spoken unto them who have not yet known the
wars of Canaan.

More Briefly in what remains.

RULE. II.
Become furnished with that Armor for your Warring and Fighting, which God in
His blessed Word has provided for you.

There is a Tower of Solomon, wherein God has hanged up Thousands of Shields
and all the Weapons of strong men. See to this, that you do only put on the
ARMOR OF GOD, and that you have all your Armor to be both of God's
Institution, and of God's Constitution also. Let GOD be Acknowledged as the
Appointer of all your Weapons. The Will Worship, the fond Amulets, and
Penances^ of the Papists, no less than the Phylacteries of the Jews, are to be
exploded as most trifling Insignificancies, and the Ridicules of those very
Enemies whose Terror they are calculated for. A funeral Elegy for those
wretched Warriors we have in Ezekiel. 32.27. They go down to Hell with their
Weapons of war; they have laid their Swords under their heads, but their
Iniquities shall be upon their bones. You have no need to go down to the Forges
of the Philistines for the Weapons of your Souls. Whatever shall be offered as
a serviceable Weapon for you, which you have (...) the Warrant of GOD for the
using of ^^row it by, as David rejected Saul's cum^^rsome useless Armor. Let
God also be Accknowledged as the Bestower of all your Weapons. It is affirmed
concerning one eminent piece of your Armor in Ephesians. ^.8. It is the gift of GOD.
Let that be your Sentiment of every Weapon which you shall have occasion for,
It will do me no good unless, God be the Framer and Giver of it. Ever account a
Weapon to be of no good Metal, if it come not through the hands of that God,
without whom you can do nothing at all. Unless we look to this, the great
Leviathan of Hell, will esteem our Iron to be but S^aw; and our Brass but as
Rotten Wood.

Consult the sixth Chapter to the Ephesians, as a gloriou^ Magazine wherein God
has set before you all the Accoutrements of a Christ^^n Soldier from Head ^o
Foot. There is a little Cluster of four or five verses in that Chapter, which
are fit to be called Enchiridion Militis Christia^i. You have no Armor there
for the Back, because you must (as the lame Andr^^^id excused his going unto
the Wars) expect to Fight and not to Flee.

You are first to procure a Belt; Now for this get your ^^ns girt with Truth.
^et your Minds have a due Knowledge of, and yield a full* Assent to the Truths
of God: Especially let Four Sorts of Truths be unto you as the (...) of your
(...); Namely,

Fundamental Truths* And T^^th^ immediimmediately referring to Jesus Christ,
and such Truths as enwrap the Covenant, and lastly, the present Laboring
Truths of the Times: unto an Acquaintance with these Truths, adding all
Sincerity Heart, and Integrity of Life. He will be a loose kind of Soldier for
God, who is pore-blind in these Truths; all his Notions and Actions must hang
in much Disorder; here the obscure Proverb will be too much verified, Vn-girt,
Unblessed.

You have then a Breast Plate to take care for: For This, (in imitation of your
General) put on Righteousness as a Breastplate. O labor to preserve the Vitals
of your Inner-man harmless, by endeavoring not only to render all men their
Dues, but to keep a Conscience void of Offense toward GOD as well as toward
man. A work of real thorough Sanctification in the soul of a man, will be as
Aes triplex circa Pectus, as Armor of Proof upon the Heart in an evil day.

A Sufficient pair of Shoes are next to be procured. It is a rough cragged
thorny way that we have to go. Well, Be shod with the Pr^paration of tho Gospel
of peace: The Gospel of God, which is a Gospel of Peace; Bringing the
Intelligence and producing the Settlement o^ a Peace betwixt God and man; This
exhibit unto us those Counsels and those Comforts which will be a good
Preparative against the Worst that can befall us: O lay up a store of these; and
so say, Though War should rise against me, in these will I be confident,

But what shall we do for a Shield? Especially since the Darts to be shot at
us, like those among the Scythians, dipped in the Venomous Gall of Vipers, will
horribly inflame and torment the Souls which they are smitten with. Broad
Shields of Raw Neats-Leather were wont to be held up against the violence of
these. But here now above all take the Shield of FAITH. Let your Faith convey
unto you the Substance of things hoped for* the Evidence of things not seen.
Especially let your Faith put you under the Conduct of the Lord Jesus Christ,
and call in Him* as an able and a ready Savior, always knowing how to succor
the tempted. Here will be a Shield which will stand you in stead to keep off
more than as many Darts (two hundred and twenty) as were stuck in the Shield of
S^eva at the Siege of Dyrrachium.

Thus the Body is defended: But what shall be done for the Head? Lo, an Helmet!
Take ^he Helmet of Salvation, That is, as the Apostle else where has it, the
Hope of Salvation. Let there be in your Souls, a lively Hope that God is your
Friend, that Christ is your Redeemer, that the Promises are your Portion; and
live and die in such a well-grounded Hope; not only say, Dum spiro spero, I will
Hope while I Live; but also Dum expiro spero; I will Hope when I Dye. Thus will
your Heads be guarded against those hard Thoughts of God and Grace, those
Terribilia de Deo, and Horribilia de Fide, which the Tempter would wound you
with.

All these Weapons are Def^nsive only.

At least we must have One to Offend our Adversary with; Where is our SWORD?
This it is, Take the Sword of the Spirit which is the WORD OF GOD. This, our
English Josiah, is reported to have called for, under the Term of a Third Sword
when two Swords were presented him at his Coronation. You are blessed wit^ ^he
free Use of a Bible, which is a spiritu^ ^word word, Shaped by the Inspiration
of the ^ternal SPIRIT. This is a Sword of which I may say, as David of
Goliah's, There is none like it. Here is a sort of Sword, whereof it may be
said unto every man, He that has not such ^ Sword, let him sell his Garment
and buy one. The pious Husbandman who in a Scarcity of such
now-common-sleighted Treasures, gave a Load of Hay for a Leaf of the Bible, for
even a few Filings of this Sword, has justified this Advice. Our Lord Jesus
Christ has by his own Example showed you how to wield this Sword and manage it
unto the Vanquishment of all Satanical Invasions: When the principal Tempter
tried His Overthrow by proposeing to him a Threefold Bait of the same three
Allurements which proved mortal to the First Adam, He still came of a Victor,
by opposeing an, It is WRITTEN, thereunto; and all the Swords or Words of this
kind, used by Him, were fetched out of that one Book of Deuteronomy, from
whence we may collect how rich a Supply for our War the whole Bible then will
afford unto us. Let this be our Method against the joint Fraud and Force of our
wily Enemies. Whenever they urge us to any evil thing, still have some
pertinent Text of the Bible to reply upon them. All the Commandments, all the
Promises, all the Menaces in the Bible are like so many Swords all-Edge to
be-friend you in this Concern. Thus particularly: Are you tempted unto
Vncleaness? Then reply, It is Written, That God knows how to reserve the
unjust unto the Day of Judgment to be punished, but chiefly them that walk
after the Flesh in the Lust of Uncleanness. Are you Tempted unto Revengfulness?
Then reply, It is Written, Avenge not your selves, but overcome evil with good.
Are you tempted unto Distracting and Corroding Cares about the things of this
Life? Then reply, It is written, Cast all your Care upon God, for He cares for
you. Thus may you conquer, as he said, sola unius Syllabae pronunciatione, with
a words speaking. Verily these Writtens will be more ghastly fearful things unto
the Enemies of your Souls, than the Handwriting upon the Wall was to the
Babylonian Monarch. Here are Swords that will be more Fatal to them, than the
Sword of Ehud was to the Moabitish Tyrant. The Captain of your Enemies dare not
stand, when These, against which he has a peculiar Antipathy, are Brandished
against him: A little Resistance of this Kind will make the Field too hott for
him. As the Poet has it, Est Leo si fugias; si sta^, quasi musca recedet.

Or rather as the Apostle has it more certainly, and more divinely, Resist the
Devil, and he will flee from you.

Wherefore, Let it be your daily Endeavor, That the Word of Christ may dwell
richly in you; and that you may have the Texts of it as ready as the Names of
those that dwell in the same Houses with you; or, as ready as that honest man,
of whom Alsted, I think, somewhere says, If all the Bible had been lost, it
might have been in a good measure recovered by that good man's Readiness
therein. Let not a Day ordinarily pass you, wherein you will not Read some
portion of it, with a due Meditation and Supplication over it. The Ethiopian
Nobleman would not omit this Exercise, even when he was on a Journey. And he
that shall accustom himself while he reads in his Retirements, to fetch at
least one Note and one Wish out of every Verse as he goes along, will perhaps
take as speedy a course as any man whatever to become a well-armed Christian.
He was a Soldier and an Emperor too, that wrote out the New Testament with
his own Hand. And that gracious Man, Mr. Thomas Stoughton, asserts that he knew
a young Gentlewoman, who before she was Nine years old, could say it All by
heart. It will be our shame, if this two-edged Sword be not often in our Hands
and Hearts, and become like our Necessary Food unto us. And that Prince of
Transylvania who read over the Bible Seven and twenty Times, will condemn us if
our Eyes are seldom placed on this Heavenly Sword. It was a dark time with the
Church of God, when One was pronounced most Sufficient, at his Commencing
Doctor of Divinity, tho he had never Read the Bible. Sure I am no man can be a
Sufficient Soldier in Christianity, unless This be the man of his Counsil.

These are now your Weapons; O put them on, and go before the Lord Armed for
the Battle.

RULE III.
Let the Sufferings of our LORD, teach you how to war and to fight against
that Lust which gives the most advantage unto all the Enemies of your Souls

Let the Lord here, have the ^^me Signification which in the New Testament it
is wont to have, even the Lord JESUS CHRIST; Now let Him be your Teacher in
this matter. It has been said, Crux pendentis est Cathedra Docentis, -- thus,
while you behold Him hanging on the Cross, let Him Teach you how to War and to
Fight especially aagainst the Sin which does most easily beset you. The
Emperor Valentinian when he was dying, had his Friends comforting of him with
the Remembrance of his past Victories; he told them that he gloried in one
Victory above all the rest, Inimicorum nequissimum vici (said he) Carnem mean^.
I have had a Victory over my Flesh the enemy in the world. Let this be our High
Attainment.

The Enemies of our Souls would, all of them together, be able to do us little
harm, if there were not some peculiar Lust, like Trojan Horse, within us,
assisting of all their Enterprises. It was the Privilege of the Man Christ
Jesus alone to say, The Devil finds nothing in me, when the Legions of Hell
made an Attacque upon him. The Father of Lies uttered a real Truth, when from
the Throat of a possessed man, he said unto Mr. Balsome, If God would let me
loose upon you I should find enough in the Best of you to make you all mine.
And so truly there is in the best of us all, a party of Lusts which would
resign us up unto the power of all our other Enemies if the Grace of God
prevent it not. Let These be well kept under and the Day is yours.

Among the many L^^ts which are of the DeDevil's Faction in us, every man has,
as a sort of Master-Bee in the Hive, one peculiar Lust, which he may call, as
David did in Psalm. 18.23. My own Iniquity. There is in every one of you, a Lust
which above other you are most impatient to have Reproved or Restrained. A Lust
which above other does most Disquiet you and Discompose you in the Service of
God; a Lust which gives most frequent Eclipses unto the Light of God's
Countenance upon your souls. Of This let me say as he about the King of Israel
in 1. Reg. 22.31. Fight neither with small nor great in comparison of This. The
Braining of this Giant is of as much Importance perhaps as any one thing in
your Warr-fare, as having an Influence upon the Prosperity of it all.

However they that write De re Militari, lay this down as a Maxim, Quicquid
tibi prodest, Adversario nocet; Whatever is profitable for you is pernicious
for your Adversary: That This is both, who can make any Doubt?

Now what shall be done in order hereunto? This, Follow the Teachings of the
Lord. Let the Death of Him that is Generalissimo of all the Celestial Armies
teach you what to do; He has Dyed in part for this Reason, that he might
instruct you in the right way of Warring and Fighting against the Enemies whom
His Death has also been the Price of your Redemption from. This then you have
to do. Let your Principal Corruption be put unto such a Death as your Dying
Savior has given a Semplar of. It is said by the Apostle in Romans 6.4. That we
must be dead to Sin, even as Jesus Christ dyed for sin. This is the sanctified
Way of Dealing with that Son of Anack which creates the most War and Evil for
you; Handle it with Severities analogous to those which Jesus Christ was
Crucified withal. O then Receive this Mystery of Warring and Fighting against
your own Iniquity.

Did not the Jews with uninterrupted and unwearied Clamours, urge their
Governor, against our Lord Jesus Christ, never ceasing their Outcries, Let
him be crucified! until they had their Will? Thus do you never leave Seeking
and Sighing and Shouting unto God, Lord, this Corruption is worthy to dye; it
is a Traiter to thy Kingdom in me; O by no means let it Reign and Rave in me
as for^ery: Thus beg until God give Order, The Rebel shall dye.

Furhermore did they dra^ up many heaheavy Indictments against our Lord Christ*
as guilty of Treason and Sedition, and Blasphemy and Heresy, and the most
villainous Impostures in the World? Well, so do you lay unto the Charge of your
Lust all the Dishonor to GOD, and all the Destruction to you and yours, which
it has procured, Say, Thou vile Corruption, Thou art it that have made a
Partition Wall between me and my GOD; Thou art it that have exposed me unto all
the Curses in the Flying Roll; Nothing has done so much wrong to GOD, or to me,
or to all Heaven and Earth, as Thou.

Speak and think the worst of it.

Moreover, Did they offer unto our Lord Jesus Christ all the Indignityes that
possibly they could devise; Binding of Him, Spitting on Him, Jeering at Him,
preferring a barbarous Highway man before Him, and at last hanging Him up
naked? between the worst of Malefactors. In like manner do you cast heaps of
Shame upon your Lust; Upbraid it as the Quintessence of Madness, as the
Exaltation of Folly, as a most Loathesome Object, worthy to be Buffetted by all
Hands, to be abhorred by God and man for ever; and a Swine, in no wise sit to
lodged in the Parlour of you^ Souls.

Once more, Did they withdraw all Refreshment from our Lord Jesus Christ in
His rueful Agonies, and count a Cup of Gall good enough for Him? Just so Do you
withhold from your Lust that Sustenance which may enable it to hold out in its
Insurrections. Be sure to make no provision* for this Flesh to feed upon.
Starve it out, and so Tame it; Keep it under, and keep it bare of those things
which you see to be the Support or Fuel of it.

To say no more, Did they Torture our Lord Jesus Christ, until by the Dolours
of His Wounds they hunted that Hind of the morning, his precious Soul, out of
His Body? Agreeably to this, Do you make your Lust undergo the Pains of an evil
and a bitter thing. Let it Cost you those Prayers and those Tears, and manifold
Austerities which may merely tire it out, and Discourage it from haunting of
you.

By these means cripple that Delictum dilectum, which is your most Darling
Iniquity. And while you are thus in the Field, derive all the Virtue which may
be, from abundant Thoughts on the Death of Jesus Christ. DeDevout Na^^anzen
said, that when hi^ Lusts gave to^ busy molestations to him, he would by
readi^g the Book of Lamentations quickly quell and (...) those troublesome
Guests. How much more ^^^tifying a Spectacle would the Man who is God's Fellow,
hanging on a Tree, be unto us! Let your Thoughts often carry you to Mount
Calvary, and for your War-fare you will soon be among the Worthyes of David.

RULE IV.
Cry mightily to GOD in CHRIST, that by Strength from Him you may be made
Conquerers and more than Conquerers over the Enemies of your souls.

When the Apostle had Armed his Christian Soldier from head to foot, he then
concluded, Pray always, and watch thereunto (a military Order, take not a wink
of^ sleep) with all Perseverance. O cry mightily to God, for the Weapons of
your War-fare are mighty through God alone. The best posture for you, wherein to
War and to Fight against your Soul-Enemies, is (that wherein a wounded
thought-dead Soldier once gave a mortal stab unto a proud Conqueror that was
pleasing himself with a View of them whom he had slain) upon your Knees: in the
midst of your Encounters, use to do as the Emperor Theodosius did in the
Extremities of a furious dubious Battle; betake your selves to importunate
Prayers for Succor from above; be praying Jacobs, and you shall be prevailing
Isreal's. If any Temptation be more than ordinarily violent in besieging of you,
do like those Warriors in 1. Chron. 5.20. Cry to God in the Battle; and
therewithal put your trust in Him: do as Paul says he did in such a case, (in
2. Cor. 12.8.) I besought the Lord thrice; perhaps he kept three days of
Prayer. And O let the Spirit of Prayer cause you to fill your lives with
frequent and fervent Prayers unto God that He wou^d gird you with Strength unto
all your Battles and subdue under you those that rise up against you. I would
conclude my Sermon as the Martyr used his Letters, O pray, pray, pray. You
cannot contrive a more effectual preservative from the Hurts of Temptation than
Prayer; daily, wrestling, Restless Prayer. The infamous Day of Origen's soul
Apostasy, was a day whereon he had been remiss in his morning Prayers. I will
not tell you Nazianzen's Story of what a Devil was forced to own unto Cyprian,
about his inability to work upon a praying Soul, in his days: But* this I am
sure of; The Trumpets of Gideon did not more fright the Midianites, than the
Prayers of the Faithful do all the Devils in the dark Regions. The Devil roars
about the Prayers of the Believer as the Scotch Queen did about Knox's Prayers;
I am more afraid of those Prayers, than of the biggest Armies. Accustom your
selves to Every Sort of Prayer; and so keep your Hands lifted up, like Moses in
the Mount, until the Lord Deliver you from your strong Enemy, and from your
Haters which are to strong for you. Often set apart Whole days, for your thus
rallying your disordered Forces against them; and every day let your private
and Secret Groans be sent up to your Eternal Helper on this Errand; Yea, let
scarce one waking hour in the day pass you without Shooting over the Camp of
them that are strictly beleaguring of you, Requests tied to the Arrows of
ejaculatory Prayer, that God would not be far from you; Happy is the man that
has his quiver full of these arrows. O Pray and plead as he in 2. Chron.
20.12. Lord, I know not what to do, but my eyes are up unto thee. And while you
thus pray without ceasing, Exercise a true Faith on the Blood of Jesus Christ
as the, meritorious Cause of all you^ Successes, which Blood will more dismay
and and confound all the Behemoths of Hell. than the Sight of Blood could the
Elephants in the Maccabees of old. And exercise a strong Faith on the Grace of
Jesus Christ, as both enableing and enclining of Him to succor them that are
Tempted as He once was Himself, which Grace is engaged to be sufficient for
you. Thus Pray and War and Fight, until you come to shout as dying
disconsolate Mr. Welsh did, when the Word Victory came from the mouth of the
person that prayed with him, and he caught hold on it with over-powering
never-ending Joy, Crying, Victory, Victory, Victory now forevermore. Yea, leave
not off, till you come to say with Paul. I have fought the good Fight, there is
now laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness. Amen.

And now, -- Do thou grant unto us, O Lord our God, That we being delivered out
of the hands of our Enemies, might serve thee in Holiness and Righteousness all
the days of our Lives.

Militat omnis homo qui dat sua nomina Christo,
Quique Deo fidit, Militat omnis hom^.

Books printed for, and sold by Joseph Brunning at his Shop at the Corner of
Prison La^^ next the Exchange.
A Discourse Concerning Comets, wherein the Nature of Blazing Stars is enquired
into, by Mr. Increase Mather.

-- An Essay for the Recording Illustrious Providence

-- The Mystery of Christ opened and applied.

-- The greatest sinners exhorted and encouraged to come to Christ, and that
NOW without delaying. Also the exceeding Danger of men's Deferring their
Repentance. Together with a Discourse about the Day of Judgment. And on several
other Subjects.

-- The Doctrine of Divine Providence opened and applied. To which is annexed

A Sermon wherein is showed That it is the Duty and should be the Care of
Believers on Christ to live in the constant Exercise of Grace* by Mr. Nathaneel
Mather, Minister of the Gospel at Dublin in Ireland.

A Practical Discourse Concerning the choice Benefit of Communion with GOD in
His HOUSE, witnessed unto, by the Experience of Saints, as the Best Improvement
of Time. By Mr. Joshua Moodey Minister of the Gospel.

Self-Employment in Secret, containing Evidences upon Self-Examination,
Thoughts upon Painful Afflictions, Memorials for Practice, by Mr. John Corber.

An Arrow against Profane and Promiscuous Dancing. Drawn out of the Quiver of
the SCRIPTURES. by the Ministers of Boston.

ERRATA.
PAge 15. line. 2. read, English-man's p. 36. l. 12. r. Knighthood. p. 64. l.
12. r. which are Smitten with them. p. 70. l. 8. r. the worst Enemy. ibid. l.
12. r. a Trojan horse.


