A DISCOURSE Delivered unto some part of the FORCES Engaged in the Just War of
NEW ENGLAND Against the Northern and Eastern INDIANS.

Sept. 1. 1689.

By Cotton Mather Minister of the Gospel in Boston,

In publico discrimine omnis Homo Miles est. BOSTON Printed by Samuel Green.
1689.

To my Much Honored FRIENDS; The Pious and Valiant COMMANDERS, Of the FORCES
now engaged against our Indian Enemies.
Gentlemen,
A Request from One of you, was that which I esteemed a Command, for my
Preaching of a Sermon filled with Counsils and Comforts to part of the Forces
now under your auspicious Conduct. I was too dull to apprehend it either an
Impudent or an Improper thing for me to do That, While I found a Minister (and
Him none of the Oldest neither) charged with a very great Solemnity, Preach the
Word, Be instant in season, out of season, WATCH thou in all things, fulfill thy
Ministry.

That which most wants an excuse is the Printing of it; which is a Service that
I have not been so much a Voluntier unto. But the Reasons that produced my L
abour in Preaching, which were, my Desire to save the Souls, and mend the
Lives, and promote the Edification of those, for whom my Hearts Desire and
Prayer to God, is, That they may be Happy; and my Ambition to Encounter and
Abolish what I can, the Unchristian Temper of those who take advantage from the
other Difficulties and Entanglements of the Country, to refuse doing them part
in carrying on the Indian War; the same Reasons have procured my Consent to
Printing of this Little Sermon.

As I never can endure that mischievous Impertinency, of making the first or
chief Exercise after our Hearing, to be upon that Question, How did you like
the Sermon to day? So I am not much concerned about the Reception and
Entertainment which may be given to this poor Sermon by the Readers of it. My
not having more than half a day to prepare it in, made it incapable of being
thus Written, till since the Delivery of it; and it is now written, as near as
well could be to what it was when Spoken: without many more Additions, I
suppose, than may somewhat Balance the Omissions made in the Transcription.
The Substaneous and so much Extemporaneous uttering of a Sermon, indeed I am so
far from accounting a matter of Applause, that I do esteem it Evil and Sinful,
and never free from Blame, unless Gods Providence, and not our Election have
made it Unavoidable; nor is any thing in the world more fulsome and nauseous,
than for a Preacher to value himself upon such a Crime, as his not spending
much time in Study. I do therefore beg pardon, that I offer you what is no
better Studied; not without expectations; that whether you pardon me, or no,
there are those that will make me run the Gantlets of their Censures for it;
and yet had I never so much leisure for study; I would not, I could not offer
you a more Needful Thing than the Matter, however I might offer you a more
Curious thing than the Method of this Discourse. Accept the Sermon as a Little
Messenger now sent into the Camp, after my Brethren, with a little parched
Corn, to refresh them, against their Facing of the Philistines; and I beseech
you, let none of them have their Anger so kindled, as to tell me, Why came
thou down hither? I know thy Pride; for give me leave to say it, What have I
now done? is there not a Cause?

Gentlemen! It is the War of the Lord which you are now Engaged in: and it is
the Help of the Lord, that we are at Home affectionately imploring for you. We
have made a fair and just purchase of our Country from the Natives here; not
encroaching on them after the Spanish Fashion, in any of their Properties and
Possessions. Yet they are now molesting of us in the Enjoyment of what our God
( because our Right) has made our own; which my Pen cannot mention without
Jehoshaphats Ejaculation, We destroyed them not, but behold how they Reward us,
to come to cast us out of thy Possession, which thou have given us to inherit.
O our God, Will thou not Judge them? I believe, I am persuaded, and Confident,
He will. But your Wisdom and Courage is now to be Employed in order thereunto;
and we all wish you such large measures of Both, as the matter does require.
You are some of you, such as in the former War, ventured as far as any men
Alive; and the God of Armies then blessed you, not only with safety, but with a
success also, which we should be very unworthy if we should be unthankful for.
As you have thereby learned what a Treacherous, Barbarous, Dangerous Enemy you
have to deal withal; so you are not without a gracious Invitation to Trust in
God for your future preservation; You may animate your selves with such an Hope
as that, The Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the Lion, and out of the
paw of the Bear, He will also deliver me out of the Hands of the Philistine,
Your former Deliverances whereof the Honorable Wounds upon some of you are
perpetual Monitors and Memorials, are a Dish of Leviathans Heads well draft,
for your Faith to feed upon. Feed and Fight now with a strong Faith; By That
you may wax Valiant in fight, and turn to flight the Armies of the Aliens.

Gentlemen! Your Forces are Happy in you; none of you being that Debauched sort
of Captains, which will Drink and Swear and Curse and Profane the Sabbath, and
at the same time give out that Perilous Word of Command, Follow your Leader
alas, whither do they Lead them! But I assure my self that you are such as have
long since Listed your selves under the Banner of the Lord Jesus Christ; [ Let
His Banner over you be Love!] and are concerned that all your men may under
that Banner oppose the Lusts which war against their Souls It Is the design of
this publication that you may be as Happy, in your Forces; and that those For
whom and With whom you are every day pouring out your Prayers to the Lord of
Hosts, may not want Encouragements to any of those Combats, in which you would
see them all Victorious. You are in the Head of Companies, whom you are
generously willing not only to Live, but also to Die withal; and the chief thing
that I am pursuing is, That whether Death join you to them, or part you from
them, You may meet them all e're long at the Right Hand of the Lord Jesus
Christ. I have had many Fears upon my Spirit, lest the wonderful Deafness to,
and Contempt of the Everlasting Gospel found in the Rising Generation here, may
not cause the Lord Jesus to say, That He will not have pleasure in our young
men; but that he will take them off, and lay them waste by the plagues of a
destructive War. To prevent such Omens, may be motive enough unto many such
endeavors as you are here treated with. May These Warnings reach some of them
that had slighted too many others heretofore! I have done when I have told you,
That I hope you have not all your Forces with you; all the praying people of
New England have Embarked themselves with you, and assist your present
Expedition. It was not at all Displeasing unto His Majesty, our most Gracious
and Illustrious King WILLIAM, to hear those words in a Speech made unto Him by
one concerned for us, It may be Humbly spoken to Your Majesty, The very Prayers
of your poor subjects in New England, may do Your Majesty as much Service as an
Army of Forty Thousand Men. 'Twill surely be a satisfaction unto you, to think
what an Army of Prayers (quasi manu facta, as Tertullian expresses it) as every
day besieging and beseeching of Heaven for your Prosperity. We are no ways
tainted with a Popish Fancy, of I know not what, Protection to arise from the
Bodies of the Dead Saints that are inhum'd among us; though a very Rich Crop of
them will be afforded by this little Spot of Ground, at the Resurrection of the
Just. It Is foretold of Antichrist, He shall honor the God of Mahuzim, besides,
( for so I read it) the God which his Fathers knew not, Besides, the Lord Jesus
Christ whom they despise, our Neighbors, the French, like other Papists, have
their Mahuzim, that is, their Defenders, or Guardians; and those are the Saints
Departed. Hence even some of the Ancients ( or shall I call them by a contrary
Name? for, Antiquitas seculi est Juventus mundi) themselves, betimes became so
vain, as to count the Relics of the Dead Saints, the Towers and Ramparts of
the places that Enjoyed them; and the Dead Bodies of two Apostles in the City
made the Poet cry out, A Facie Hostili duo propugnacula praesunt.

But instead thereof, you have the Prayers of Living Saints to increase your
Protection in the worst of your Adventures. I hope they may make you Forty
thousand strong. Our Lively Prayers to the God whom our Fathers knew, will be
the best Mahuzim or Forces for you; if we do but choose and love and serve the
blessed God of our Fathers, and Reform the Sins that have provoked Him to
Avenge with a Sword the quarrel of his Covenant which O that our God would
enable us unto!

Gentlemen, Tho I am neither a Soldier, nor the Son of a Soldier, yet you
will allow me that have heretofore published my concern for Military Persons by
the pressing of Military Duties, to continue my Affection thereunto; and to
perform some part of my Devoirs unto yourselves, by now subscribing my self,

Your Sincere Servant C. Mather.

Soldiers Counseled and Comforted.
It is written in
PSALM. CXIX. 109. My Soul is continually in my Hand; yet I do not forget thy
Law.
WHEN there was made unto the famous and faithful John of old, that Application
whereof we have that Account in Luc. 3. 14. The Soldiers demanded of Him,
saying, What shall we do? We find that He left them not without those Divine
Words of Command which He thought proper and useful for them. It Is in
Conformity to his Great and Good Exemple, that I count my self under
Obligations at this Time to attempt the satisfaction and answer the Expectation
of the Soldiers, those worthy Leader has brought them into Assembly, that they
might hear a short Sermon adapted unto Their peculiar Circumstances. We are
informed in the Sacred Pages, that in the Expedition of the Israelites against
the Canaanites, There came down those that Handled the Pen of the Writer. It Is
the unhappiness of the Expedition which we are at this day concerned in, that
our present and pressing Dangers involve every person some way in it. Even
Scholars must either Accompany or Encourage soldiers; and they that have
handled none but Pens, must either carry or sharpen Swords. We are in the
Briars of a Perplexity, wherein, Omnis Homo Miles est. Every man is in his way
to bear Arms; and Those that I have to assist you with, I must fetch out of
that Christian Panoply the Holy Bible.

It Is there, my Fellow Soldiers, that I find the Copy of a Renowned Soldier,
to suit your Enquiries, when you repair unto me with your What shall we do
Behold in That of the Psalmist, both your own Condition, and your own
Direction. Your Condition is, To have your Lives continually in your Hands.
Your Direction is, To not forget Gods Law.

The Text now offered unto your Consideration, is in the longest, and yet the
sweetest of all the Psalms. It Is in a Psalm, which (as one says) consists of
words, Non tam Legenda quam Vivenda, to be Lived rather than Read or Heard; a
Psalm, which (as another says) is, Quanto trolixior eo prestantior, having an
Excellency transcendent like its Prolixity; a Psalm which the wittiest of the
Ancients in a Dream or Vision had presented unto him, as The Tree of Life in
the midst of the Paradise of God; What shall I say more? a Psalm which well
deserves to be set as the Preface of the Scripture, being the Encomium, and
indeed the Epitome of it all.

A Coherence, and so an Analysis, of the several Paragraphs in the Psalm, is
not sollicitously to be sought: the Regard had unto the Order and Number of the
Hebrew Letters, throughout the whole, giving us cause to look for a Cohaerence
of Letters rather than of Matters in it; however in our Context there seems to
be some Dependence. We have here the Lovely David, that Eminent Servant and
Soldier of the Lord, afferting his own Integrity, against the Temptations of a
Various Assault; an Assault both from Snares and Swords. He was Assaulted one
while by Fraud; and as to the Temptations thereof he says, The Wicked have laid
a Snare for me, yet I have not erred from thy Precepts. He was Assaulted
another while by Force; and as to the Temptations thereof, he says, My soul is
continually in my Hands; yet I do not forget thy Law. Suppose this incomparable
General, now skulking and scowling about the Woods, in the Wilderness of
Palestine; pursued like a Patridge, by that bloody Fowler Saul, with all his
cruel setting Dogs about him. Suppose him now in Arms, and thus Expressing of
himself. Behold in our Text:

First, the Affliction of a great Soldier. It Is, my soul is continually in my
Hand. By the Soul may be meant the Life, which does consist in a Vital Union
between the Soul and the Body. But how may this be said to be. In the Hand? I
remember Austin upon this place, confesses, he could not conceive what the
psalmist meant. But Jerome hits the Nail, by noting that it is an Hebraism, Quo
significatur vitam habere periculo Expositam; signifying to go in Danger of
ones Life. The Graecians have a Proverb, as well as the Hebrews to the same
purpose; (...) He has his Soul in his Hand. To put it out of Doubt, that this
is the Intent of the Psalmist here, we find it elsewhere, that when the Life of
this very person had been obnoxious to an extraordinary Danger, it is thus
deciphered in 1 Samuel 19. 5. He did put his Life in his Hand. And hence the
never enough Regarded and Commended French Translation, so renders the passage,
we are now upon, Ma Vie a este continuellement en Hazard; my Life has been
continually in Hazard. A Soldier must continually look to be Hazarding of his
Life.

Secondly the Affection of a good Soldier. It Is Yet I do not forget thy Law. A
Soldier must indeed Forget all things, but Gods Law, and his own Sword. For
the Object which he is to be Affected with, it is Gods Law, That is one of the
Ten Words, one of which is used in almost every verse of this glorious Hymn, to
denote, The ways and means by which the blessed God reveals His Will unto the
Children of Men; and the Will it self revealed in those ways and means.

And then for the Respect which he is to place upon this Object, it is, Not
Forgetting. But we are to bear in mind, That according to the Received Rule of
Expounding Scripture Phrases to Remember, denotes also, to Know, to Love, to
Do. All That is intended here.

And hence the Doctrine here provided for you is,

That the Remembrance of Gods Law, is a Thing of no small Importance to them
that have their Lives continually in their Hands.

As the little Time given me for Preparation, will not allow me to be very
Accurate and Pertinent in improving my present opportunity, which until too
late yesterday I knew nothing of: so the little strength left me by the
excessive Labors of this morning supervening upon the Languors of a late
Illness, will not permit me to be long, in this Discourse; I have only two
Propositions to entertain you with,

Proposition I.
To have their Lives in their Hands, is a Condition which the Children of Men
are liable unto.

There is indeed a Threefold Condition which brings the Lives of Men into the
Hands of Men, with a Gradual Descent from Generals to Specials, it may be set
before you.

The first Condition of this kind, is, that of All Men: Accordingly our
Observation is,

1. Men have their Lives brought into their their Hands, in point of Mortality.
Our Lives are come out from our Hearts unto our Hands; and they are in a sort
ready to shake Hands with us. Our Lives do as it were take us by our Hands, and
say, Well, I am going, Fare you well.

Our Lives are come into our Hands for the Brevity of them. Once indeed there
was a Longevity in Fallen Man that seemed almost Aemulous of that Immortality,
which Upright man should have had experience of. The Antediluvian Patriarchs
might have broke up Company, with probable Agreements to have met again in the
same Place and Form an Hundred Years afterward. But that LONG LIFE, is by our
Vice, and Gods Curse, now terribly Abbreviated. Our own Corruption has
Enfeebled the principles of Life in our Successive Generations, and Gods just
Malediction has confirmed that Feebleness, whereby we Die before our Time, for
being wicked overmuch. The Sacred Law of God has now Abridged our Lives into
Seventy Years, and the Common Law of Man, into Seve^^ Our Lives are now IN our
Hands, and we have not an Handful thereof. The psalmist could say in Psalm. 39.
5. Behold, Thou have made my Days as an Hands Breadth. In an Hands Breadth may
be grasped the whole of the Lives which we have in our Hands.

Our Lives are likewise come into our Hands for the Uncertainty of them. What
is in our Hands is Extra nos, it is uncertain whether we shall keep it or no.
Our Lives are so in our Hands, that we know not whether they will stay with us.
They may be wrested out of our Hands: and in a Turn of an Hand they are gone,
before we are aware. It Is said in James 4. 14. What is your Life? It is even a
vapor. It is as (...) Vapor, or a Candle, that we bear (not in Horns, but) in
Hands. It Is liable to be Extinguished by every puff of Wind.

The Second Condition of this kind, is, that of Old Men. And so our Observation
is,

2. Men have their Lives brought into their Hands in point of Infirmity. Aged
persons Lean with their Hands; and on their Staves they carry their Lives. The
Life may be put for the whole Man; with the Old Man it is come into the Hands;
his Feet cannot now support him. It Is said of him in Eccles 12. 3. The strong
men, (i. e. his Legs) bow themselves; and so the Trembling Hands must be the
Keepers of the House. All the strength left him, and all his Life is in his
Hands. He does all things with a Staff in Hand, and so with a Life in Hand; as
it is noted of the Gray Headed and Decrepit Jacob, in Heb. 11. 21. He
Worshipped, leaning on the Top of his Staff: When he rose off his Couch to
worship God, he could not rise without a Staff; his Life was relieved and
exerted mostly by his Aged palsy Hand.

The third Condition of this kind, is that of Confessors, and that of
Soldiers. And our Observation upon it is,

3 Men have their Lives brought into their Hands in point of Danger to Loose
their Lives.

It Is the Chaldee Paraphrase upon this place, Anima mea peri^^itatur as si
esset (...) (...) super sicie manus m^ae. Our Lives are sometimes by Dangers
placed, as it were on the Back of our Hands. We have no hold of them, but they
will take wing, and be gone, in the Twinkling of an Eye. We are sometimes to
venture our Lives; and when we do so, We may say, as in 1 Samuel 28. 21. behold I
have put my Life in my Hand. That which is in our Hands, is easy to be Taken
away; yea, What is ready to be Given away, we take in our Hands. In both
respects, our God often calls us to have our Lives in our Hands. We are
sometimes to engage in those things, wherein it is but a Peradventure, whether
we shall ever come off Alive. Yea, we are sometimes not only to Expose our
Lives, but also to Resign them, and let them go out of our Hands, and pour them
forth as a Drink Offering before the Lord.

This is the case of Confessors. They Die Often; they are as it is said in 2 Cor.
11. 23: In Deaths often. Yea, they Die Daily; they can say as in 1 Cor. 15. 31.
I Die Daily. That is, They are Often, they are Daily in Danger in Dying; and so
they have their Lives in their Hands. There is a Number of people in the World,
who profess the Truths and Ways of God, and serve Him according to His Word.
This people are a sort of Army, under the Colors and Commands of the Lord
Jesus Christ; but the Ancient Legend (pardon me that I call it so) of the
Thebaean Legion is verifyed in the usage that they meet withal. They have so
many Hands against them, that their Lives are in their Hands; and from that
Flock of Slaughter, now one, and then another is made a prey to Wolvish
Persecutors; before whose Rabid Violence, they say, Lord, For thy sake We are
killed all the Day Long.

And this is the case of Soldiers too. It was remarked by a notable man of
that Character, in 2 Samuel 11. 25. The Sword Devoureth One as Well as another.
The Hebrews call War, by a Name that signifies, A Devourer. And Soldiers carry
in their Hands, what the Monster feeds upon; the Leviathan devours the Lives of
them who do Encounter him. The Lives of Soldiers are where their Arms are,
even in their Hands; for they know not whether they shall return Alive, out of
the Battles which they are pushed upon.

And it is for a double Reason that our God carves out such a condition for us.

First, It is to check our Worldly-mindedness: It was said unto that good man,
in Jer. 45. 5. Seek thou great things for thy self, seek them not; for --
thy Life will I give unto thee for a prey. When our Life is for a prey, our
Life is then in our Hand; we have it by a mere snatch as it were. This now
prohibits our seeking of great things for our selves, in as much as we cannot
secure to our selves the Enjoyment of That, which alone makes us capable of
Enjoying all other Sublunary Things. By bringing our Lives into our Hands, our
Hands are knocked away from too fast a gripe or grasp after Secular Objects.
When our Life is in our Hand, God has a voice in His Month to this purpose,
Dream not of mighty Things, no, nor of any Things in this Transitory World,
until thou have better Assurance of thy continuance here. The blessed God thus
inviteth us, and obliges us, to look after the glorious Crowns and Joys in
another World. He Inviteth us, and obliges us, To set our Affections upon the
Things which are above; and, To Look at the Things which are not seen and are
Eternal; and to make sure of an Hope in Christ, without which we see (when we
have Life in Hand) our selves to be of all men most miserable.

Secondly; It is to cure our Creature-Confidence. It was said by the Apostle in
2 Cor. 1. 9. We had a Sentence of Death in our selves, that we should not trust
in our selves, but in God, which raises the Dead. A Condemned Malefactor
carries his Life in his Hand, from the Bar. We are sometimes in as perilous a
Likelihood of Dying, as a condemned Malefactor; and we are hereby called upon
to Trust in God alone for the Reversing and Repealing of the Sentence. By
having our Lives in our Hands, we are under a Necessity of Reliance upon God
alone to keep them there. When we have our Life in our Hand, we have also that
call in our Ear, Do not Lean upon any Temporal Visible Interest for the
preservation of thy Life; let all thy Expectations be, as all thy Salvations
are, from God alone. The Lord breaks down the Hedge on every side of us, and we
Ly open to Death every way: it is that we may reserve our Dependence for all
support, and all succor, to be placed upon God alone; it is that we may learn
the Song of him that returned with his Life in his Hand from the maw of the
great Shark; Salvation is of the Lord.

Proposition II.
The Direction proper for them that have their Lives in their Hands, is to
Remember the Law of God.

When you have considered a few Conclusions, your thoughts will rightly
apprehend the Intent and Extent of this Assertion.

Conclusion I.
Their Memories being Fraighted and Stored with Divine Truths, do marvellously
assist those that have their Lives in their Hands.

Our Souls have an admirable Faculty of laying up in themselves the Images of
Things which have made their Impressions on us. This is our Memory. We have
both a Retaining Memory, which is more Sensitive and a Regaining Memory, which
is more Rational: a Memory, that can both keep Safe and fetch Back what Idaeas
we have been Entertained with. This Memory is a Treasury, to be replenished
with such Things as the Law of God affords unto us. It Is Required in Prove. 3.
1. My Son forget not my Law. It Is Resolved in Psalm. 119. 16. I will not Forget
thy Word. The Law of God contains Commandments every one of which are Holy, and
Just, and Good; it contains Promises, every one of which are Great and
Precious; it contains Threatenings, every one of which are Quick and Powerful
and these are all to be Treasured up in our (...). When they have been
communicated unto us, we are to take heed that, Menasseh, or Forgetfulness be
not the Name of our Souls. The Distillations of Gods Law, like Manna, fall
about our Tents from Day to Day: our Duty now is that in 2 Pet. 1. 15. To have
these Things always in Remembrance; and Gods Law will not like Manna, corrupt,
but rather sweeten, by being Reposited until To morrow. The Law of our God is
both Written and Preached among us: now it is declared in Heb. 2. 1. We ought to
give earnest heed unto the Things, lest at any time we let them slip or, Lest
we be like Leaky Vessels thereunto. The Truths, couched in the Law of God are
to be like Nails fastened in our Souls; never to be removed, never to be
displaced. After we have been sitting under the Dispensations of Gods Law, He
will ask of us, as in Heb. 12. 5. Have you forgotten the Exhortation? To which
we should be able to Reply as the Psalmist of old, Lord, I have not forgotten
thy Law. And hence we should Receive the Truths therein offered unto us, with
that Affectionate and Agreeable Ejaculation, Lord, keep it for ever in the
Imagination of the Thought of my Heart!

Now those of you that carry your Lives in your Hands will have this peculiar
Benefit, by having of Gods Laws thus in your Minds.

First, your Memory will suggest Necessary Truths unto you. You cannot always
come at those Ordinances, which are the Wells of Salvation, being driven to
wander in the Dry paths of a Solitary Wilderness. But your well-(...) Memories
will supply you with the words whereby you may be saved, and bring a Little
Sanctuary to you when you are Banished from the Great Ones. They will render
you the Instructed Scribes which will not want Things Now and Old, for the
Repast of your Souls in the Desert which you ^ange forth into. Salvation was to
come unto (...) by your Hearing (...) were here; it may now come unto you by
your Remembering; for the Apostle said, in 1 Cor. 15. 2. Ye are saved, if you
keep in Memory, What I Preached unto you.

And, Secondly, Your Memories will suggest Seasonable Truths unto you. You are
going into a Warfare, wherein you will often have occasion for some Advice from
God. While you were among us, you could seldom labor under any Doubt, or
Snare, but you would have it met withal, in the Ordinances, that you
conscientiously repaired unto; you might say with him, I went into the
Sanctuary of God, then I understood. But your Memories must now be your
Monitors; if they be not Empty, they will not be Silent. It was said by some
that were hurried away from the place where the Institutions of the most High
did use to be maintained, in Lam. 3. 21. I Recall to mind, therefore I have
Hope. So you may quickly have cause to say, I Recall to mind, and I have Life;
and, I Recall to mind, and I have light; and, I Recall to mind, and I know what I
have to do.

Conclusion 2.
It Is a Practical Remembrance of Divine Truths, which they that have their
Lives in their Hands are to be most concerned for. Let Remembering and
Practicing go Hand in Hand, since you have your Life in your Hand. It is said
in Numb. 15. 39. Remember all the Commandments of the Lord, and Do them.
Behold, God has joined these two, and what God has joined Let no man put
asunder. The Best Remembrance is that which produces Repentance. 'Twas said, in
Matthew. 26. 75. Peter Remembered the words of the Lord Jesus; and he went out and
wept bitterly. Thus we should so Remember the Law of God, as to weep for all
our Violations of it; weep and Mourn and Bleed at the Thoughts of our own
Unanswerableness thereunto. And, The Best Remembrance is that which produces
Obedience. 'Twas said, in Psalm. 22. 27. They shall Remember, and Turn unto the
Lord. Thus we should so Remember the Law of God, as to Turn from all our own
Behaviors that are contrary thereunto to Turn from all Sin to God in Christ
for ever. A little of this Remembering will go further than the Largest and
Longest Repetition else. A Pious Person being asked, What do you Remember of
the last Sermon? Replied I don't Remember much; but so much I do Remember that
I shall Endeavor to mend a miscarriage that the Sermon convinced me of. That
was Well Remembered! Though your Memories may serve you like a Sieve that seemed
full while it was in the Water, but has nothing in it, immediately on its
Taking out; yet therein however let them be like the Sieve, that they shall be
made pure and clean by the Waters of Life that are passing thorough them. This
is the Remembrance which you are to be most ambitious of.

Conclusion 3.
Our having our Lives in our Hands ought not to Affright us from any thing that
the Law of God makes incumbent on us.

This is, I suppose, the principal Intendment of the Psalmist here; q. d. Though
I have my Life in my Hand, yet I will do no Indirect Thing, to keep it there.
We should never Warp, never Sin, to avoid any peril whatsoever. When we have
our (...) in our Hands, we are then Tried, whether we will put forth our Hands
unto Iniquity to secure what is in them: But having a clear Call to your
Service, you should say as the Martyr once, If every Hair of my Head were a
man, I would have the Lives of them all sacrificed, rather than desert the
cause I am engaged in. You should be above all carnal motions, or passions, or
Impressions, that may discourage you in the work which you are to attend with
your Lives in your Hands. 'Twas said by that wise man, in Gal. 6. 14. I am
Crucified unto the World. A crucified man has his Life in his Hands with a
witness, when his Hands are Nailed and Hanging on the Tree. You should have no
more Carnal Joys and Griefs, no more Carnal Hopes and Fears, then a man whose
Life is going out at his Hands Gratify not any Enemy, by a Sinful Compliance,
to Escape Danger; for God can Restrain your Adversary. It Is said in Proverb 16.
7. When a man's ways please the Lord, his Enemies shall be at peace with him.
Oftentimes to prevent mischiefs from Enemies our Way does Displease the Lord:
but we then take a Wrong Way! God can make Pharaoh afraid of Moses, and Herod
afraid of John. The Lord has Hornets to buz and sting Terrors into those whom
we may be too much terrified withal. And Gratify not any Corruption upon such a
score; for God will Reward your Fidelity: Said he in Matthew. 19. 27. Behold, we
have Forsaken All; and what shall we have Therefore: Good Sir, All What? Why
All a Net, All a Boat, All a small Craft which they had some Subsistence on.
This was All! yet it follows, Jesus said, Ye that have followed me, shall in
the Regeneration, When the Son of Man shall sit on the Throne of his Glory,
then also sit upon Twelve Thrones. You cannot Receive the Exposition of it: but
-- surely then they that will forsake their very Lives rather than do amiss,
will not miss a most glorious Recompense.

Conclusion 4.
Some people that have their Lives in their Hands, are more prone to Forget the
Law of God, then others that undergo less Dangers are. This may seem an
Intimation, or Insinuation of the Psalmist here; q. d. I been't like other
people who carry their Lives in their Hands. I extremely Value the Law, which
they commonly Forget. It Is very strange, and very sad; but also very True; That
there is often least Grace in the Hearts of those that most have their Life in
their Hands. How it comes to pass, I don't know; but so it is, That they whose
nearest and oftnest Approaches unto Eternity should awaken them to be the Best
People in the World, are frequently the worst of all.

We see it in Sailors and in Soldiers. As for them that follow the Sea, it is
said of them, in Psalm. 107. 22. They Reel to and fro, and Stagger like a
Drunken Man; and are at their Wits Ends. Thus it is with them in regard of
Storm; and when that is over, it is thus again with them in regard of Sin too;
even after they come a Shore, still (and upon a sadder Account) they will many
of them Reel to and fro, and Stagger, not like a Drunken man; but through being
really so. They make deeper Descents toward Hell by their Vice than in their
Ship; and no Sea-sickness will turn into a Sin sickness with them. Tho they may
pray in a Tempest, how horribly will they Swear and Curse, and how filthily
will they Talk, when they are out of their Amazements! It has been doubled,
Whether they were to be reckoned among the Living or the Dead. But the sense of
this keeps few of them, from those Remarkable Extravagancies; which quickly
plunge them down into the Congregation of those that Roar under the Waters for
evermore.

And as for them that follow the Field, Forgive the plain Dealing, my
Fellow Soldiers, if I tell you, That Wickedness, Impiety, Profanity, is one of
the Things that has made their Character Extraordinary in the World. Their
Names are up, for an Acquaintance with an Excess of Rudeness and Lewdness, and
all manner of Debauchery. How rarely have Armies been the Schools of true
Virtue and Honor? but not rather the Nurseries of all those Abominations, that
would render the lowest Hell Visible and Incarnate here. It was complained in
Psalm. 119. 6. The Bands of the Wicked have Robbed me. How seldom do Bands
consist of those who are not, who do not so? It has been of old noted,

Nulla Fides, Pietasque Viris, qui Castra Sequntur.

That Armies, have but few Christians in them. We say, That Laws are not Heard,
where Arms are Clashing. Alas, no Laws are so much drowned and slighted there,
as the Laws of the Holy One of Israel.

USE I
The Improvement of these things remains, and first the Whole Congregation is
concerned in it.
Unto, you, I say, Take heed that your Lives be not snatched out of your Hands
before your Souls are well provided for. Your Souls are not well provided for
without Regeneration; for we are told, Except a man be born Again, he cannot
see the Kingdom of God. Nor without Conversion: for we are told, Except ye be
(...) ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven Nor without Believing; for
(...) Believe not, you shall Die in your Sins. O Look after these Important
things, they all make up The One Thing Necessary. I am to tell you, and I must
loose the Life which I now carry in my Hand, if I tell you not, That Necessity
is laid upon you, and Woe unto you, if you do it not. If your Souls are dragged
away before you have had a Comfortable Experience of these Needful Things, you
are horribly undone; Flatter not yourselves, He that made you will not have
mercy on you, and He that Formed you, will show you no Favor. The Souls which
are now so much in your Own Hands, must then fall into Other Hands, which how
can your Hearts be strong, or how can your Hands Endure at the foresight of?
Your Souls must then fall into the Hands of God, whose Hands (whose fiery iron
Arms) it is a fearful thing to fall into. And your Souls must then fall into the
Hands of Satan too, Who goes about seeking whom to catch and gripe in his cruel
claws. And are these the Hands, that, O ye Souls in peril, ye will rush into?
Hearken to that voice of the Eternal God, which says in Heb. 3. 7. To Day if
you will Hear his voice. What you do for the Welfare of your Souls, must be
done To Day, To Day! Your Souls may have taken Wing before To morrow, I may say
as 'twas once said in a worse case, What thou (...) do quickly! 'T is the
solemn Caution, in Prove. 27. 1. Boast not thy self of To morrow, for thou
know not what a Day may bring forth 'T is not safe, it is a very dangerous
Folly and Phrensy, to leave a Soul miserable for One Day together. A Renewed
man has before now seen cause to say, I would not be in my Natural Estate again
one Hour, for ten thousand Worlds; Lest my Death should come in that Hour, and
carry my miserable Soul away, to the Torments of the Pit belom. O that every
one of you then would this Night set yourselves to answer the Calls of the
Everlasting Gospel; O that you would this Night make yourselves Happy, by
giving up yourselves to God in Christ with an Everlasting Covenant. If any
Person go away, without Resolutions to make Essays (...) unto, I have only this
to add, Thou Fool This Night thy Soul may be Required of thee; and where then
will the wretched L^dgings of it be? Where throughout Eternal Ages?

USE II.
But I behold in the Congregation a part of the Forces, that are carrying their
Lives in their Hands, against the Barbarous Enemies by which the Territory is
at this time Distressed and Invaded, and unto these I shall Address the Rest of
my Discourse, with a very particular Application. 'T is with a very due Respect
and Esteem, that I look upon you, my good Friends and Neighbors; as many of
you as have given cause for that Acknowledgment of you, in Judge 5. 2. Praise
the Lord, for the people willingly offered themselves: and while I am touched
with an Ambition to Assist you (I might have said, to Accompany you) in your
present Expedition, I cannot find a fitter way to do it, than by giving you
that part of a Sermon, which your worthy Commander has asked for you. You may
say like that Soldier, in Judge. 12. 2. I put my Life in my Hands, and passed
over against the Children of Ammon: God grant you may quickly say the rest* And
the Lord delivered them into my Hand. That you may Happily and Cheerfully go
on, with what you have in Hand, a few Counsils, a few Cordials, and a few
Blessings, are to make up the Remainder of our present Exercise.

COUNSILS.
By way of Counsil, give me leave to say,

First, Be sensible that you go forth with your Souls, as well as your Lives in
your Hands. That word, A Soul, A Soul! methinks it sounds bigger than a World.
A Precious and an Immortal Soul; O it is too big a Thing to be thrown away.
Think, That you have every one of you, a Soul, which is a Jewel too valuable to
be Despised: he is a Fool indeed, of whom it may be said, He Despises his own
Soul. Now you are going forth against Indians with your Souls in your Hands,
pray, be apprehensive that you should not make Indian-Bargains about those
Inestimable Souls. The Indians would sell to the Europeans at their first
Arrival in the Southern Regions, the best Jewels, and Metals, for a few
Glass-beads. Let your Thoughts be, that you have Souls not to be so basely
Truckt away; Souls not to be Sold for Songs, whatever the Flesh, the World, or
the Devil may sing unto you. It is wholesome Advice, in Prove. 4. 20. Keep thy
Soul with all Diligence. Consider, That you, have Souls, which will stand like
Rocks in the Sea of Eternity for ever; and O Consider, What will become of them
Souls, if they be not Newborn before their Departure hence. There was a
profane Soldier, who on One side of his Sword, had a Shape of a God, on the
other side the Picture of the Devil, With this Motto under it, Si tu non ^is,
iste rogitat; If He will not have me, here is One will. Hideous Monster! But this
Disjunction is too certain and Awful a Thing to be played withal. If your Souls
are not seasonably interested in the Favor of God, they will be siezed by
those Devils, whose Malice and Fury will inflict worse Tortures on you, than
ever the most brutish Indians do in their Executions of their unhappy
Prisoners. I beseech you, be not prodiga Gens Animi, or unaffected with the
Worth and the State, of your own Souls. No, Take the First Opportunity to
confess and bewayl your many Sins, with a sincere purpose, I will not offend
any more. Take the First Opportunity to Accept and Embrace all the Sure Mercies
of the Lord Jesus Christ, with a gracious Promise, Lord, I will now be thy
Servant Devoted to thy Fear. You must quickly, and you should boldly, look
Death in the Face, with your Souls in your Hands; in order thereunto, Let me
utter that proper word of Command, Make Ready! I say, Make Ready! Get out of
your unrenewed Estate, and Make Ready, that at the first Alarm e're long, you
may have nothing to Do, but, Fight and Die.

Secondly, Let them be none but Pure-hands in which you carry your Lives. We
read in Isa. 1. 15. When you spread forth your Hands, I will bide mine eyes
from you; for your Hands are full of Blood. Even so, there are Hands full of
Luxury, there are Hands full of Injustice; but those Hands are not clean enough
for your Lives to be carried in them. Wherefore as it is said, in James 4. 8.
Cleanse your Hands, re Sinners: Let me call upon you, Cleanse your Hands, ye
Soldiers. Let there be no Uncleanness, no Disorder found in your Hands.
Endeavor to have a pure Camp; and be Like the Host of God. We read sometimes
of a Church in an House; Why should you not as well study a Church in a Camp?
Keep your Camp as free from Swearing, Drinking, Gaming, Rioting, and
Sabbath-keeping, as any Church in the World; and let God be worshipped in your
Camp as frequently, as Devoutly as in a Church This, this will render you
Terrible as an Army with Banners. You may have Military Valor. enough to
conquer an Indian; but you must also have Christian Valor to subdue a Lust.
When Peter had Armed people round about him, how nimbly, how stoutly did he
draw upon them! but presently after a sorry Damosel made him give way to that
which Broke all his Bones O be so Valiant, as to put out of your Hands, all
that may not be Convenient for the Lives which you carry there.

Thirdly. While you have your Lives in your Hands, L et your Ends in your Eyes
be such as they ought to be. Be not acted by Lucre, by Revenge, by any sorry or
Dirty Principles in your present Undertaking but be acted by a sincere Desire
to Defend the people of God, from a crew of Unjust Men, that are skilful to
Destroy, It Is said, in 1 Cor. 10. 31. Whatever you Do, Do all to the Glory of
God. Even in the meanest Actions; the Glory of God is to be the Star to Guide
us, the Spur to move us. A Godly Man, among our first Planters here, while he
was cutting of Wood, being asked, Who it was for? answered, I am Cutting of
Wood for God. If in Cutting of Wood, much more in Killing of Men, you should be
able to say, I am at work for God. Be not the Soldiers of Fortune, as they are
called; but be the Soldiers of Jesus; and let the Account that you may give of
your Concerns be this, I would do all I can, that the Churches of God may have
Rest, and that therefore those may be cut off, who Trouble them. L et every
Bullet be shot with an Eye taking aim at this White, when you are Firing upon
the Blacks in the Swamps of the Howling Wilderness.

Fourthly, Don't part with your Lives out of your Hands, without such
Demonstrations of Courage as may Confound your Adversaries. Let it not be said
at your Death, He Dyed as a Fool Dies, Have Life in your Hands, while you have
Lives in your Hands; and let them be Lively Hands too, in which you carry your
Lives: To run from a Press, is a thing not so generous; and the speedy Rebukes
of Heaven, have been Conspicuously Dispensed unto some that have done it here.
But to Run from a Fight, is a thing too Cowardly sure for any New-Englander to
be guilty of it! Let me Exhort you, in the words of that Famous General, 2 Samuel
10. 12. Be of good Courage, and let us play the men, for our people, and for
the Cities of our God, and the Lord do that which may seem good unto Him. When
the Day of Battle comes, then (to speak Apostolically) Quit you like men, be
strong. It is the Glory of the Horse, and much more is it for the Soldier, his
Rider, So, then to mock at Fear, and not be affrighted nor turn back from the
Sword; but to go on Rejoicing to meet the Armed Men. Your Enemies have made
themselves notorious for this Quality, That as Difficilius est invenire quam
vincere, it is easier to kill them than to find them; so they can rarely Take
any but a shaking Trembling Aim at one that boldly faces them. Face them then,
and when you do it, imagine you have that voice from Heaven sounding in your
Ears; Josh. 1. 9. Have not I commanded thee: [such a Commander have you!] Be
strong, and of a good Courage; Be not afraid, neither be thou Dismayed; for
the Lord thy God is with thee, whithersoever thou go. At the first
Appearance of the Tawny Pagans, then Courage! bray Hearts: Fall on! Fall on
Courageously, with that Assurance in Psalm. 3. 6, 7. I will not be afraid of ten
thousands of the people that have set themselves against me. O my God, thou
have smitten all mine Enemies. Yea, when once you have but got the Track of
those Ravenous howling Wolves then pursue them vigorously; Turn not back till
they are consumed: Wound them that they shall not be able to Arise; Though they
Cry; Let there be none to Save them; But Beat them small as the Dust before the
Wind, and Cast them out, as the Dirt in the Streets. Let not the Expression
seem Harsh, if I say unto you, Sacrifice them to the Ghosts of the Christians
whom they have Murdered. They have horribly Murdered some scores of your dear
Countrymen, whose Blood cries in your Ears, while you are going to Fight,
Vengeance, Dear Countrymen! Vengeance upon our Murderers. Let your Courage, in
the Name of God be daring enough to Execute that Vengeance on them.

But what Cordial shall I procure, which may inspire you with such a Valor?
Let me set before you, a few Thoughts which may raise your Spirits to an
Elevation, beyond what the Rattling Noises of any Drums or Trumpets can fetch
them to.

CORDIALS.
Wherefore, First, Know that your Quarrel is Just. Indeed the Call and Press of
your Superiors; is enough to justify you in doing of your part, for
prosecuting of the War. If the injustice of a War be notoriously Evident and
Apparent, Judicious Casuists then determine, that every private Soldier is to
declare his own Dissatisfaction, and render himself rather Passive than Active
in it, and Suffer, sooner than Engage; like Souls Footmen, when bidden to fall
upon the Priests of the Lord. But where a War is not thus evidently and
apparently unjust, the private Soldier must use an Implicit Reliance on the
Command of the Supreme Power: They must answer for it.

Besides this; Your Superiors themselves have also enough and enough to
justify Them, in pushing on the present War, with the utmost Expedition and
Extremity. Such were the obscure measures taken at that time of Day, that the
Rise of this War, has been as dark as that of the River Nilus; only the
Generality of Thinking people through the Country, can remember when and why every
one did foretell, A War. If any wild English (for there are such as well as of
another Nation) did then, begin to provoke and Affront the Indians, yet those
Indians had a fairer way to come by Right, than that of Bloodshed; nothing
worthy of, or calling for any such Revenge was done unto them. The most injured
among them all, (if there were any such) were afterward dismissed by the
English, with Favors that were then admirable even to our selves; and These
too, instead of surrendering the persons, did (as we are credibly informed)
increase the Numbers, of the Murderers. But upon the Revolution of the
Government, the State of the War, became wholly New; and we are more arrived
unto Righteousness as the Light, and Justice as the Noon Day. When the Helm of
this little Vessel was taken out of the Hands of those whose palpable Enmity to
the Glorious Designs of His Highness the Prince of Orange, added unto the
innumerable Oppressions and Vexations which we had sustained under them, had
made us as Suspicious as we were Ignorant, what Port they intended for; we then
found our selves actually Entangled in a War. A Great Sachim of the East, we
then immediately applied our selves unto, and with no small Expenses to our
selves, we Engaged Him, to Employ his Interest for a good understanding between
us and the Party of Indians then in Hostility against us. This was the Likely,
the Only Way, of coming at those Wandering Salvages; But that very Sachim now
treacherously (by whose Advice, I know not) of an Ambassador became a Traitor,
and annexed himself with his people, to the Heard of our Enemies, which have
since been ravaging, pillaging, and Murdering at a rate, which we ought to
count, Intolerable. The Penacook Indians, of whom we were jealous, we likewise
treated with; and while we were by our Kindnesses and Courtesies endeavoring
to render them utterly Inexcusable, if ever they sought our Harm; even Then did
These also, by some evil Instigation (the Devils, no doubt) quickly surprise a
Plantation, where they had been civily entertained a Day or two before; and
commit at once more Plunder and Murder, than can be heard with any patience.
What can be now said, by any Rational man, against the proceeding of the War?
Shall we permit the whole Province of Main to be overrun by the Indians (and
their Abettors) because the Manners of some people there please us not? But how
can we answer this unto Their Majesty's? or, are we Rich enough to Loose
without Regret, the Best part of the New-English Trade? And are we so fond, so
mad, as to imagine that the Indians will stop there? No, they have already made
their Incursions into Piscataqua and in the Massachusetts too have they been
shedding Blood. Certainly, my Countrymen; It Is Time to Look about us, We are
driven upon a purely Defensive War, which we may now make Justly Offensive to
the first Aggressors in it. If you now ask, as he in Job 13. 14. Wherefore do I
put my Life in my Hand? Behold, there is at Hand an Answer for you. It Is
Because a combination of Ill Men (if such Beasts may be called Men) have,
without any cause Assigned by Them, or Afforded by us, been shedding the Blood
of our Neighbors, whom we are to Love as our selves; and whose Death is
Designed by those Execrable Cannibals, but as a Breakfast, or a Prologue, to
praecede our own.

Secondly, Know that your Service is Good You are Fighting for the Defense and
Succor of the Blessed Thrones which our David, our Jesus has here Erected for
himself. It Is Christo Duce and Auspice Christo, it is for Christ, and with
Christ, that you are concerned. You are Fighting for them, for which the Lord
Jesus has Bled, has Died. It was boasted by that Great General Scipio, That
such was the Love of his Army to him, Every Soldier would even Leap from a
Rock into the Sea after him, if he would Lead them thereunto. O let the Son of
God have as much of your Hearts, in the War now before you; it is Him whom you
are Serving of. 'Twas said, in 1. John 3. 16. We ought to lay down our Lives
for the Brethren. It Is for such Brethren that your Lives are now called for;
here is a Country so replenished with them, that New England the Happy, might
we be called for the Christians here, more than Arabia so, for the Spices in
it. You are Fighting, that the Churches of God may not be Extinguished, and the
Wigwams of Heathen swarming in their room: You are Fighting that the Children
of God may not be made Meals or Slaves to the veriest Tigers upon Earth. To Die
Fighting in such a Service, may pass for a sort of Martyrdom: and if you are
merely for the sake of such a Service, willing to forego your Lives, you may
hope to be found among the Blessed and Holy Ones, that shall have a part in the
First Resurrection. Whether you Die or Live, you shall be Honorable; if you
Escape we will cast Roses upon you for having Acted your part well in our
Tragedies; if you fall, we will write that Epitaph on your Graves, Here Lies a
sincere, and Valiant, Servant of his Country.

Thirdly, Know that your helper is Great. You will be Too many for your
Adversaries; inas much as, you have with you, the Hosts of the Lord; the very
Angels are your Companions in your present Enterprise. An Angel said once to an
Apostle, I am thy Fellow Servants; and many an Angel does now say to you, I am
your FellowSouldier. It Is mentioned as the Employment of the Angels, in Cant.
3. 7, 8. Behold, His Bed, which is Solomon's; the Valiant are about it; they all
hold Swords, being Expert in War; because of Fear in the Night. It is your
Employment also; thus you stand about this Bed, this Church of the Lord Jesus,
and the Angels are with you in it. But what cannot one Angel do? An Army of an
Hundred Fourscore Five Thousand cannot stand before Him. How much more will the
Innumerable Company of Angels associating with you, give you cause to say with
him of old, There are more (...) against us! Yea, and you have the (...)
Himself with you too. You may like (...) the Forty Sixth Psalm, when you see
the Difficulties that you are put upon; and (...) those Clauses in it. The Lord
of Hosts (...) with us; He makes Wars to cease unto the (...) of the Earth.
Know that I am God. I will be Exalted among the Heathen. When some Soldiers
were talking together the Night before a Doubtful Battle, That their Enemies
were thus and so Numerous, but that Themselves had but such and such Forces to
match them with; their Courageous General happening to over-hear them,
surprised them with that Expression, And I pray, how many do you count ME for!
In like manner, when you are anxious about the proportion of your Numbers, to
those that may oppose you, the Blessed God interposes, And I pray, how many do
you count me for? The Confession that New England makes to the God of Heaven,
is, The Lord is my King, my Lord, my Lawgiver. We may add, He will save us.
And you may sing with him, Psalm. 18. 6, 12. The Lord is on my side, I will not
fear. The Nations compassed me about like Bees, but in the Name of the Lord, I
will destroy them all. Though you carry your Lives in your Hands, yet they are
not in your own Hands; no they are in the Hands of that God, without whom not a
Sparrow falls, and by whom every Bullet is directed. You may say, (as the
Syriac version of my Text expresses it) My Life is continually in thy Hands, O
God. The Good God will be careful of your Lives, and your Deaths will be
precious to the Lord.

Know, Lastly That your Success is very probable. Indeed, God may Humble us,
and Abase us, and vex us yet by that Foolish Nation, which he has let Loose
upon us; but we may believe that They shall all shortly perish by the Arms of
His New-English Israel. They! What are they, but Bloody and Deceitful men? And
you may look to be Instruments of Executing what God has denounced on them,
That they shall not Live out half their day. Even They themselves not only may,
but perhaps Do expect utter Desolation, and Extirpation; and they would soon
lay down their Arms, if he that hurried the Swine of old, had not a wonderful
possession of them. That old Sagamore and Conjurer Passaconnoway, whose
Posterity it is (among the rest) that we are now galled by (...) When he lay
Dying about Thirty Years ago, did in a great Assembly of Indians, thus take his
Farewell of his Children, I am ready to Die (said he) and I now Leave this
Counsil with you; Take heed how you Quarrel with the English; for though you may
do them some Hurt, you will yourselves be all rooted out of the Earth, if you
do. I was as great an Enemy to the English at their first coming here, as any
one, and I tried all mays to prevent their Settlement, but I am convinced,
there can be no effecting of it. These Counsils and Commands are Disobeyed by
some of his wicked Children; whose Days we may therefore think, shall not be
Long in the Land. Indeed, They have none to Assist them, but the worst
Auxiliaries in the World; the Devils and the Papists. The Devils have a great
Hand in Exciting and Supporting of them; and hence the last Winter, from the
mouth of a possessed Child among us They gave (I think) a very broad Notice of
the Slaughters which the Summer would produce. That These have had a Long, and
an Old Iinterest in America cannot be reasonably questioned by them that shall
read what was written even before the Birth of our Savior, by Diodorus
Sicul^s, In very Ancient Times says he, the Phenicians tossed with Storms,
after many days, arrived unto this Vast Island (as he calls it) which then had
stately Buildings in it. Hither the Devils did seduce a wretched party of
Mankind, that they might have them out of the Gospels Way when it spread through
the Old World, by the Ministry of the Apostles; and here they have Reigned as
Kings, as Gods, without control, over millions of people for Ages not a few. It
has given a terrible Alarm to them, that the Silver Trumpets of the Gospel,
are now at length sounding in their Territories, and it puts them into a
Flaming Rage, that the Way to Salvation by Jesus Christ, is proclaimed here.
Many are the Wiles which they have used, for the Discouragement of these
Notable Beginnings in which our Lord Jesus is taking the utmost parts of the
Earth for his Possession. Hence it is, that their V^ssais, who have more than
once been disquieting of us in our Properties and Possessions; now have also
taken Arms again to make us miserable. But as these Attempts and Attacques of
Hell upon us, have been all Abortive heretofore, so we may Apprehend that they
will still miscarry. The Barbarians may (as it is by Escaped Captives reported
that they have) by their Diabolical Charms, keep our Dogs from Hurting of them,
but they shall not so keep our Swords from coming at them. Faith and Prayer
among us, has wonderfully made the Devils themselves to fly before it; so
shall These too find unto their Cost. Though the Papists may likewise contribute
what Help they can unto these Miscreants and say Mass with them (as of Late)
after their Little Victories, yet we need not be disanimated; but the rather
from thence prognosticate their Approaching Ruin. For we too much Distrust our
own Observation, if we do not now think, that the whole Papal Expire, (which
was of late replanting a Tabernacle in the Glorious Holy, Mountain between the
Seas) is very near its En^, when none shall help it; and that the twelve
Hundred and sixty Years, during which the people of God, were to be harrassed
by it, are not far from their Expiration. In a word, you may go forth with such
a Triumph as that in Psalm. 20. 7, 8: Some Trust in Chariots, and some in Horses
(some in Satan, and some in Antichrist) But we will Remember the Name of the
Lord our God. They are brought down and fallen; but we are Risen and stand
Upright.

And for a close, Let me mind you, that while you Fight, We Will pray. Every good
man will do it, in secret and in private every day; and public Supplications
also will be always going for you. We will keep in the Mount with our Hands
lifted up, while you are in the Field with your Lives in your Hands, against
the Amalek that is now annoying this Israel in the Wilderness. It was the Watch
Word which a Battle once Commenced withal Now for the Fruit of Prayer! Now for
the Fruit of Prayer. To gather that Fruit will be your Errand into the Thickets
of our Scythian Deserts.

I therefore conclude with a few

BLESSINGS
On you, which the whole people of God in this Land will say, Amen, unto.

We wish, That you may be all good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, and not want the
spiritual Armor which may enable you to withstand Devils as well as Indians.

We wish, That since our Lord says unto you, as he said unto them, I send you
forth as Sheep in the midst of Wolves; this Great Shepherd may preserve you
from them, and with his mighty Crook defend you, when you come into the Valley
of the shadow of Death.

We wish, That your Enemies may not have their Lives in their Hands, but in
Gods Slings; and that God would Sling them out, as out of the middle of a
Sling: While you that have your Lives in your Hands, may have your Souls bound
up in the Bundle of Life.

Finally, we wish That your Heads may be Covered in the Day of Battle; that
you may by the Almighty God be made the Liberatores Party, the Saviors of
your Country; and that if any of you must Breath your last in the High places
of the Field, your Souls may be Received by Him, that has Armies in Heaven,
Clothed in fine Linen, White and Clean.

It Is with these Wishes, that we Bless you in the Name of the Eternal God; and
the Whole Congregation will say, AMEN, AMEN!

At the North Meeting House in Boston 1 d. 7. m. Afternoon. 1689. Benedictus
qui dat Fatigate Robur.
FINIS.

