SERMON Occasioned by the EXECUTION OF a man found Guilty of MURDER Preached at
Boston in N. E. March 11 th 1685/6. Together with the Confession, Last
Expressions, and solemn Warning of that Murderer to all persons; especially to
Young men, to beware of those Sins which brought him to his miserable End.)

By INCREASE MATHER, Teacher of Church of CHRIST.

The SECOND EDITION.

Deuteronomy. 19. 20. 21. And those which remain shall hear and fear, and shall
henceforth commit no more any such Evil among you. (...). 21. And thine eye
shall not pity, but Life shall go for Life, Eye for Eye. etc. Prove. 28. 17. A
man that does violence to the blood of any person, shall flee to the pit, let
no man stay him. Boston, Printed by R. P. Sold by J. Brunning Bookseller, at
his Shop at the Corner of the Prison-Lane next the Exchange. Anno 1687.

To the Reader.
T He Sermons emitted herewith (both that of mine, and that also delivered by
my Son) are published to gratify some, who have been perhaps too importunately
desirous to have it so. The Person that occasioned the Preaching of them is now
incapable of receiving Benefit by them. Whether they were blessed for any
saving. Good to his Soul, the Lord knows; and it becomes us to leave Secret
things with GOD. Late Repentance is seldom true There are who think that many
who perished in the Flood, were by means of that Judgment, brought to true
Repentance. To this sense some interpret that Scripure, 1. Pet. 4. 6. otherwise
we read not of more than one man in all the Book of God, that was brought home
to Christ bnt a few hours before his death. Nevertheless, the Lord knows how to
make the woeful death (as to his Body) of a great Sinner, to occasion the
Conversion and Salvation of many Souls.

If any be awakned by this sad Example, to turn from those sins which proved
the ruin of a miserable man: and if these Sermons ( such as they are) may be a
means to further the work of Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord
Jesus Christ in any that shall read them; the Design of this Publication will
be attained.

As for the Exhortation annexed to these Discourses, it was delivered on the
same day with that Sermon preached by my Son, (whom the Lord Jesus has fixed
in the same Church to which I am related) but in the after part of the day. The
Reverend and worthy Author has not had time to transcribe his whole Sermon,
only that part of it which concerned the then Condemned Malefactor. Many have
earnestly desired that it might in this way be made public. And because it is
most suitable that the Best should come last, it is in this Publication added
to the other Sermons The Lord prosper his Truth, by whomsoever spoken or
written for the Good of Souls.

Increase mather.
March 26. 1686.
NUMB XXXV. 16. And if he smi^e him with an Instrument of Iron so that he die)
he is a Murderer, the Murderer shall surely be put to DEATH.
A Great part of this Chapter is taken up in declaring who should have benefit
by the City of Refuge; and who might not expect advantage thereby. There are
Two sorts of Man-slayers, (1) One may kill his Neighbor Accidentally, tho he
had no design of Hurt to him, nor any Displeasure against him. The City of
Refuge was for such. (2.) A Man may in Hatred or in Passion kill another, and
then then the City of Refuge could not secure or save him from the (...) of
(...) stice; To intimate which is the Scope of the Words which have been now
read: wherein we have two things, 1. A Criminal. 2. The Punishment to be
insticted on such a Criminal.

1. A Criminal, He is a Murderer: There are three Particulars mentioned which
if they (...) the Person is guilty of Murder: 1. If he smites another man, h.
e. if he does so, not accidentally but designedly. 2. If the Instrument which
he smites him with be of Iron, that makes the Murder to be the more evident. In
the Verses following it is added, That if he smite him mortally with a Stone or
with Wood, he shall be accounted a Murderer. The Jewish Writers tell us, v.
Grotium and Ainsworth in loc.
That if a man were slain, there was diligent enquiry made concerning the
Instrument, whereby he was killed: If it was with a Stone or with Wood, they
examined whether the stone or wood were of that Bigness as that the dead man
might probably receive his Deaths Wound thereby: But (they say) if it were with
an Instrument of Iron, (...) enquiry was made as to the greatness of it,
because the least nail of Iron might easily kill. And it is to be presumed,
that a man will not strike another with an Instrument of Iron, except Blood and
Murder be in his Heart. 3. If the Wound prove mortal, then the Striker is
guilty of Murder. Tho a man should smite another, and that with an Instrument
of Iron, if Death does not follow, he is not guilty of that high degree of
Murder which the Text speaks of; but if he smite his Neighbor so that he dye,
then he is a Murderer.

2. Here is the Punishment to be inflicted on such a Criminal. The Murderer
shall surely be put to death. Only Gods Order was to be observed; he was to be
put to death in a Judiciary way. Amongst the Jews, the Avenger of blood was to
be the Executioner; as the 19 th ver. in this chapter shows, where it is said,
that the Avenger of blood himself shall slay the Murderer. The Hebrew word for
the Avenger of blo^d is GOEL, which ^s sometimes translated a Redeemer: The
word properly signifyes one that is near a kin. The (...) Kinsman had right to
Redeem, he also was to be the Avenger of blood: Only before Execution could be
done the Magistrate was to pass a Judgment. The Manslayer was sent from the
City of Refuge whither he fled, unto the place where the Fact was done, there
to have his Trial. If the Magistrates of that Place found him not guilty, he
was returned to the City of Refuge, there to be in safety till the death of the
High Priest, and then to be set at Liberty: But if he was found Guilty of
Murder, he was to be put to death publicly by the hand of Justice.

The DOCTRINE then before us, as suited to the present Occasion is,

That Murder is a Sin so great and heinous, as that whoever shall be found
Guilty of it, must be put to death by the hand of public Justice.

The Explication and Confirmation of this Doctrine may be set before us in 3
Propositions.

Prop. 1. Murder, is when a man does voluntarily and unjustly take away the
Life of another person.

So that there are 3 Things implied in Murders.

1. The Object slain must be one of Mankind. To take away the Life of another
Creature is not Murder. The Sixth Commandment says, Ye shall not kill. The
Hebrew words are, LO TIRTZACH, i.e. Thou shall not Murder. It was a vain
Opinion of the Ma^^chees, whom Austin confutes, That the Life of no Creature
might be taken away because the Commandment of God (...) shall not kill. God
has given express (...) to all the Sons of Noah, i.e., to Mankind that they
should takeaway the Lives of other creatures as they should see cause; only Man
being a more Divine Creature, his Life is to be Sacred: it may not be meddled
with, except in cases where the Great and Sovereign God, who has an absolute
power of Life and Death, has appointed.

2. Capital Murder is wilful. There is a difference between Murder and casual
Homicide, or accidental Manslaughter. If a man shoots an Arrow, or throws a
stone, or the like, not thinking that any one will be hurt thereby; in case it
should happen to kill a man, it is not Murder* If he did it ignorantly,
unawares, and no way sought the harm of the slain man, he is not to be punished
as a Murderer. This we see in the Context, ver. 15. to 26. The City of Refuge
was for such an one; Deuteronomy. 19. 4. (...). And this is the case of the slayer
which shall flee thither, that he may live: whosoever kills his neighbor
ignorantly, whom he hated not in time past; as when a man goes into the Wood
with his neighbor to hew wood, and his ^^^d fetches a stroke with the A^, to
cut down the tree, and the ^e^d slippeth from the helve, and light^ upon his
neighbor that he die, he shall flee unto one of those cities and live. Not but
that a man may ^e guilty of Murdering his Neighbor, tho he did not intend to
kill him; namely, If he did smite him in Anger, or intend to harm him, as the
expression is in the 23. ver. of this Chapter. And it is here expressly
declared, not only that he who shall lie in wait, or watch for an opportunity
to destroy his Neighbor, or that did formerly (...) him shall be judged a
Murderer, but if he smi^e him in emnity that he dy^ v. 21. i.e. in an hostile
way: tho he had no quarrel with him before, if he fall out with him, and in his
passion smite him a mortal Blow, he has murdered his Neighbor, and is guilty
of death. This is presumptous Murder, the heart was in it, nor can it be said
to be done ignorantly. There is another clear Scripture which proves, that if
persons fall out, and in the strife one shall strike the other a deadly blow,
life shall go for life. Ex. 21. 14, 21, 22.

But then 3 dly. In Murder, the Life of a man is taken away unjustly. In some
cases it is lawful to take away the Life of another. Yea, Matters may be so
circumstanced, as it would be a great sin not to do it. There are Three cases
wherein the Life of a man may be taken away, and yet no Sin, no Murder
committed.

1. In case of a Just War. There is a great difference between blood shed in
war, and in a time of Peace. Joab was guilty of Murder, because he shed the
blood of War in peace. 1. King 2. 5. had he killed Abner and Amasa in the
war-time, David had made peace with him, he had not bi^ guilty of Murder; but
because he shed blood after a peace was concluded, he was a Murderer. Sometimes
in War, they that take away lives, do an acceptable service to God. Abigal told
David, that God would certainly bless, him because he fought the Battles of the
Lord. 1. Sam. 25. 28. And we know that Abraham was blessed, after he returned
from the Slaughter of the Kings with whom he had a just war. Heb. 7. 2. In
these cases, the not shedding of blood may possibly expose to a Curse. Jer. 48.
10 Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord deceitfully, and cursed be he
that keeps back his sword from blood.

2. They that are in Civil Authority, may and ought to take away the Lives of
men, that shall commit Crimes, by the Law of God worthy of Death. The Apostle
therefore says concerning the Magistrate, He is the minister of God to thee
for good, but if thou do that which is evil, be afraid, for he ^ear^th not the
sword in vain; for he is the minister of God; a Revenger to execute wrath upon
him that does Evil. Romans 13 4. Private Reveng is evil, but public Revenge on
those that violate the Laws of God, is good. The Magistrate is God's
Vice-g^rent. As none can give life but God; so none may take it away. but God,
or such as He has appointed. It is their work to see that the Lives of men be
taken from them, when God has said, that they shall surely be put to death.
Hence David speaks, as in Psalm. 101. 8. I will early destroy all the wicked of
the land, tha^ I may cut off all the wicked Doers from the City of the Lord.
God had put the Sword into his hand for that end, that so he might clear the
Land of Malefactors, who were worthy of Death, and he was resolved to see
Justice done. But private Persons are not to arrogate to themselves that which
is the Magistrate's proper work. Men must have lawful Authority for what they
do; else in taing away Life, they become guilty of Murder. Suppose a person to
have committed never such Capital Crimes, if a private person, or one that has
no Legal Authority shall take away his Life, he is guilty of Murder. Except

3. In case of a man's own just Defense. So a private person may takeaway the
life of another: The light of Nature teaches men Self-Preservation. If a
Murderer assault him, he may kill rather than be kill ed. We cannot say that
Abner was guilty of Murder when he flew Asahal in his own defense. Alsted,
Theol. Cas. Cap. 15. p. 350.
If a man be, coutrary to Justice, invaded or set upon by another in an hostile
manner, and there he no other way for him to preserve his own life, but by
killing the Assailant; the Law of Nature, and of all Nations acquit him from
the guilt of Murder. But he that has shed blood causless, or that has avenged
himself, is a Murderer. 1. Sam. 25. 31.

Propos. 2. Murder is an exceeding great Sin* It Is an expression in the
Scriptures, he is as if he flew a man, Isa. 66. 3. Implying that to slay a man
is a thing most horrid and hateful: it is indeed the greatest Sin against the 2
nd Table of the Moral Law, and is therefore set in the first place, amongst
negative Precepts therein. God forbids the greatest sin in the first place. It
is a Crying Sin: The Lord said to Cain. The voice of thy brothers blood cry^^h
to me from the ground, Genesis 4 10. In the Original, the word is in the Plural
Number, the voice of thy brothers bloods. Every drop of (...) blood, had as it
were a voice* a tongue in (...) for vengeance against his brother that had
murdered him. But that This is a grievous sin is manifest: 1. In that it is a
most unnatural thing. Creatures of the same kind are not wont to destroy one
another. Naturalists observe concerning Wolves, that though they be cruel
creatures, they will never kill one mother: therefore if Men do so they are
worse than Wolves and lygers: so that Murder is an unnatural and a monstrous
Wickedness. 2. The Vengeance which is wont to follow this Sin, proves that it
is an horrid and heinous Transgression. There is a peculiar Vengeance that does
pursue this sin at the heels of it. The Gentiles had the notion of this fixed
in their minds: hence those Barbarians could say, No doubt this man is a
murderer, whom though he escaped the seas, yet Vengeance suffereth-not to live,
Act. 21. 4. Ethnici Dicen tanquam deam and ^iliam Jovisme tebant in Plut l. de
for a vindict. ^word (...)
The Heathen esteemed [ dike] (the word there used for Vengeance) as a Deity
that would not suffer great Sinners, and in special Murderers to go unpunished.
Temporal Vengeance pursues this Sin. Hence they that have been guilty of it,
seldom live long in quiet. Bloody and deceitful (...) shall not live out half
their days. Psalm. 55. 23. Either they are cut off by the Sword of Civil
Justice, or if their Murders happen to be undiscovered, a secret Curse of God
follows them: Often times they are themselves Murdered, as both Divine and
humane Records do abundantly declare* Nay, tho men should truly repent of this
sin, and are then through the Merit of Christ saved from everlasting Punishment,
yet not from Temporal Judgment. I cannot tell whether ever any man that was
found guilty of this sin, did escape Temporal Judgment at last. When David had
caused Uriah to be Murdered, he did repent of it most deeply and unfeignedly,
yet God punished him severely as to outward judgments; he saw but few
comfortable days after that, the Sword never departed from his house. I have
read of a man that fought a Duel, and murdered his Adversary, who afterward
was very penitent, and for several years an eminent instance of exemplary
piety; but at last he was (...) by the immediate hand of God, so as that Blood
gussied out of all the passages of his Body, and he dyed suddenly. The Relator
notes upon it, that though God forgave him as to eternal, yet not as to temporal
Vengeance. But especially Spiritual Vengeance follows this Sin: The Murderers
Soul is filled with hellis^ ^^^rour of heart; so that he is as it were Damned
above ground, and in hell whilst he is yet alive. The avenger of blood pursues
his soul. Murderers have confessed, that as soon as ever they had com^^ed the
bloody fact, they felt the flames of Hell fire in their consciences: and this
we see in Cain: therefore after he had murdered his Brother, he cried and
roared out that his sin was greater than could be forgiven, his punishment
greater than could be endured. And some think that the mark which the Lord set
upon Cain, was a ga^tly guilty Countenance, that he had Hell and Horror in his
countenance, as well as in his Conscience. And without Repentance, everlasting
vengeance will follow that Sin. Its said, No murderer has eternal life. 1. Joh.
3. 15. that is, without true Repentance. And if he has not eternal life, then I
am sure he has eternal death and Damnation. If the Murderer were only to have
the life of his body taken from him, though in a painful, shameful and accursed
way, that were a light matter; but there is an eternal Curse, a weight of
everlasting vengeance, heavier than Mountains of Lead, that shall press his
Soul to deathpunc; world without end. Murder then is a fearful sin.

Propos. 3. The Murderer is to be put to death by the hand of Public Justice.
And this confirms the former Propositions concerning the greatness of this Sin.
Men may not pardon or remit the Punishment of that Sin. Among the Jews there
was no City of Refuge for a wicked or wilful manslayer; and it is said in the
31 verse of this Chapter, You shall take no satisfaction for the life of a
Murderer which is guilty of death, but he shall surely be put to death. This
sin shall not be satisfied for, with any other punishment, but the death of the
Murderer. There are some Crimes, that other punishment less than Death may be
accepted of, as a Compensation for the wrong done; either by some Mulct or Fine
in their Estates, or some other Coporal Punishment less than death* but in case
of Murder, no Fine or Imprisonment, or Banishment, or corporal punishment less
than death can be accepted; You shall take no satisfaction for the life of a
murderer. And indeed Equity requires this; by the law of Retaliation, it is
meet that men should be done unto, as they have done to others; and that as
limb should go for limb* so Life for Life. But besides that, there are two
Reasons mentioned in the Scripture, why the Murderer must be put to Death.

Reas. 1. That so the Land where the murder is (...) be p^^ged from the guilt
of Blood* (...) Murder is such a sin as does pollute the very (...) where it is
done; not only the person that has shed blood is polluted thereby, but the
whose Land lies under Pollution until such time as Justice is done upon the
Murderer. Thus in the 33. v. of this Chapter, this is given as the Reason why
no Satisfaction might be taken for the life of a Murderer; so shall ye not
pollute the land wherein you are (...) for blood it de^^leth the land, and the
land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of
him that shed it. One Murder unpunished, may bring guilt and a curse upon the
whole Land* that all the Inhabitants of the Land shall suffer for it; So that
Mercy to a Murderer is Cruelty to a People. Therefore it is said concerning the
Murderer, Thine eye shall ^ot pity him but thou shall put away the guilt of
innocent blood from Israel, that it may go well with thee. If the Murderer be
not punished it may go ill with the Whole, all may ^a^e the worse for it; if
the sin be not duly punished, there is a partaking in the guilt of it.

(...). 2. Because man is made in the Image of God. This reason is mentioned
Genesis 9. 6. Whos^ever sheddeth man's blood, by man (i.e. by some man in
Authority, proceeding in an orderly way of Judicature, as the Hebrew Expositors
do rightly interpret the words) shall (...) blood be shed, for in (...) (...)
of God madepunc; (...) him, Hence there is Sacrilegious Guilt in this Sin.
Amongst the Romans Sueton. in Tiber. cap. 58.
if a man did but strike: his Servant near the place where one of their
Emperors lay, he was to dye for it, because that was looked upon as an affront
put upon his Imperial Majesty; so he that shall kill a man that is made after
the Image of God, puts a Contempt upon the DIVINE Majesty, there is Treason
against God contained in the bloody Bowels of this Sin. Upon this account it is
indeed a greater sin to kill a good man that has the Image of God renewed in
him, than to kill a ^icked man. Nevertheless, that also is a Capital Crime; for
all men have something Calvin. Rivet. and Pareus in Genesis 9. 6.
of Gods Image remaining in them: not only in that every man has an immortal
soul, and is in that respect more like the immortal God than any other creature
in the world, and in that men have a dominion over the Creatures, which is one
part of Gods Image; on that account does the Apostle ^ay, that Man is the Image
and Glory of God. 1. Cor. 12, 7. But also, in that the Law is written in the
hearts of men by Nature; Ames. Theol. lib. 1. cap. 14.
though God has executed spiritual death upon Mankind for Adam's Apostasy,
after a dreadful manner, yet he has moderated that punishment; hence men in a
natural estate, yet close with some practical principles of Piety and
Righteousness; as That God ought to be worshipped, that Men should do as they
would be done by: and the like: and many natural men, yet have an image of
Virtue; they have something like Grace, a shadow of it; they hate flagitious
Crimes, and approve of a morally honest Conversation; These things show that
there are some Remainders of the Image of God in men: therefore he that shall
murder such a creature is worthy of death.

But thus for the Doctrinal handling of the Truth before us. I proceed to make
some Application. (1.) By way of Information. (2.) For Exhortation.

Infor. 1. This Doctrine justifyeth the Authority hoar, in respect of the
Sentence of Death which has been passed on the Murderer, who is this day to be
Executed. There is a man standing before the Lord, and among His people this
day, who has done just as my Text expresses, he has smitten his Neighbor,
and that with an Instrument of lorn too, with a cruel Spit made of Iron; the
thing proved by several Witnesses, and the man that was hurt dyed of that
wound, therefore he that has smitten him (...) a Murderer, and must surely be
put to death. Though for a long time ^e denied it, nevertheless since his
Condemnation he has acknowledged it; and yesterday he confessed to me, that he
had in his Rage murdered the man, whose death and blood has ^in said to his
Charge; he told me that the other gave him some ill language whereby he was
provoked, and that he said to him, if he (...) within the door, he would run
the Spit into his Bowels; and he was as wicked as he said he would be, so that
he is guilty of Murder. Therefore none ought to blame Those in Authority for
causing the Murderer to be put to death; Conscience to God, and to the People
under their Charge, and to their own Souls also, has necessitated them to do
what they have done in this matter. Let every one remember that Scripture,
Prove. 28. 17. A man that does violence to the blood of any person, shall flee
to the Pit, let no man stay him; if he has shed blood, to the Pit let him go,
and flee thither; let all convenient Speed be used in the Execution of Justice,
that so the Land may be cleared from blood, and let no man in Authority stay
him, let no private person solicit for him. But let us be thankful to God, that
we are under such Magistrates as will do Justice, and Execute Judgment, and
punish Sin according as the Word of God requires that it should be done.

Infor. 2. Hence, Those Things which have a tendency to, and a degree of Murder
in them, must needs be evil. e.g. Rash sinful Anger is an evil thing, Murder
begins there. 'Twas said of those Brethren in Iniquity, Simeon and Levi, That
Instruments of Cruelty were in their habitations, for in their Anger they flew
a man, cursed be their wrath for it was cruel. Genesis 49. 5. 6. And our Lord
Jesus Christ in His Exposition of the Sixth Commandment, shows, that rash Anger
is a degr^ of Murder, Mat. 5. 21, 22. You have heard that it was said by them
of old time, Ye shall not kill, and whosoever shall kill, shall be in danger of
the Judgment, but I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his brother
without a cause shall be in danger of the Judgment. There is Man's
Judgment Seat, and GOD's Judgment Seat: Murder makes a man be in danger of the
former, sinful Anger exposes him to the latter. Not that all Anger is sinful;
there is an Anger that is good; when a man is angry in God's cause, moved with
zeal and indignation because God is dishonored; that is very good: and a man
may sometimes be angry in his own cause too and yet not sin. Be angry and sin
not. But when men are angry without a just cause, that is Evil. When they are
angry more than they have cause for, that they are all in a flame for a mere
trifle, when (as one well expres^es it) a man shall suffer the (...)
Supplement. cap. 9. p. 368.
Beco^^ of his soul to be set all on fire at the landing of every small ^oat,
that is a foolish and evil thing; or when men shall be angry longer than they
ought to be; an implacable spirit, is a vile murderous spirit. Anger rests in
the bosom of ^ools. Sinful Anger is poison, which as soon as ever a man has
taken it into his mouth, he shall spit it (...) again. And when Anger shall
break out into Curses and wicked Imprecations, that's wicked A^ger. This
condemned man, that stands here, confesses, that he was wont in his passion to
curse all near him. He murdered many a man with his bloody tongue, before he
was left of God to murder any with his hand. His mouth was full of Cursing and
Bitterness, before he shed blood. And when men in their Ra^ge imprecate and
curse themselves, its a very evil thing: there are some that will say, They wish
they might be hanged, if such a thing be so, and many times the righteous
Judgment of God brings that very evil upon 'em.

There is a Printed Relation concerning Sr. Gerv. Elways. mentioned by Mr.
Howel in his Londinop. and by Mr. Ball, of the power of Godliness* l. 4. c. 3.
p. 329. and by Mr. Leigh in his Body of Di^mity. Lib. 4. Cap. 16 P. 445.
a Person of Quality that was hanged for a Crime laid to his charge; and when
he came to dye, he confessed, that he had been mnch addicted to that sinful
Recreation of Card-Playing, and that many times when the Game went otherwise
than he wished for, he would in his passion, wish that he might he hanged if it
were so, and once he wished he might be hanged if ever he played again; and
therefore (said he) God is just in bringing me to such a death as this. And
when Anger shall break out into Blows, Quarreling, and Fighting between
Neighbors that ought to live in peace, there is great Evil in it. This
miserable creature before us, acknowledges that it was so with him. In his mad
passions he cared not who he did strike or hurt. It is not good for them that
have lawful power to strike others, to do it in passion. It is not good for
Parents to strike their children, or Masters their Servants, or Schoolmasters
their Scholars in heat of Anger, lest they become guilty of breaking the sixth
Commandment. A moral Heathen, when his servant had committed a fault that
greatly insensed him, said to him, If I were not angry with thee, I would
strike thee, but I will stay till my passion is over before I punish thee.
Again, a spirit of Revenge is an evil thing: it is Murder in God's ^ight, 1.
Joh. 3. 15. He that hates his brother is a Murderer. Hatred never rests but in
the destruction of the thing hated. To say no more here; Cruelty is a degree of
Murder, and a great Evil: and most of all for men to be cruel to those that
stand in nearest Relation to them (as this Malefactor owns that he has been)
whom they ought to love dearly, is an high degree of Inhumanity. No man that
acted like a man, ever hated his own flesh. To be cruel, tho to a Servant or
Slave, is a very sinful thing. Nay, Cruelty tho to a Beast argues a murderous,
bloody Disposition. The Scripture says, a good man is merciful to his Beast.
They then that make themselves sport with Putting dumb creatures to misery, do
very sinfully* (...) that has been practiced here of later years in the open
Streets, especially on one day of the year. To do it at such a I intend the
Cock-s^alings on Shrove-Tuesday.
Time is vanity and Heathenish Superstition; besides to make sport with
exercising cruelty on dumb creatures, which had never bin miserable had not the
sins of men made them so, it is a wicked thing, and ought not to be among those
that call themselves Christians.

Infor. 3^ If Murder be such a Crime as has been showed, It is then a
sorrowful thing that so many of the Children of men should be found guilty of
this Evil. There are some places of the world where Murder is a common sin. The
dark corners of the earth, are full of the habitations of Cruelty. And there
are many in the world, that call themselves Christians, who nevertheless delight
in shedding innocent blood. Persecutors are Murderers. Bloody Papists are in
the Scriptures charged with Murder on this account: it is said of them, they
repented not of their Murders, Rev. 9. 21. namely of their murdering the Saints
of God for their Religion, for the Truth-sake, and because they would not
comply with their Superstitions and Idolatries. That Mother of Harlots, the
Church of Rome, she has made herself drunk with blood; many Millions of Saints
have been murdered by her. Persecutors are Cain's Children. O how many are
there going up and down the world with Cain's (...) in their hands to this day!
It was Luther's Saying, Cain will ^ill Abel to the end of the world. But
besides this* That which the Civil Laws of Nations make to be Murder, is
frequent in some places. A late Historian reports, that in the the Kingdom of
France, See Trap. on Genes. 9. 6.
within the space of ten years, there were known to be no less than 6^00
Murders committed. And in popish Countries, they have Sanctuaries for Murderers
Vide Corn. a Lapide in Deuteronomy. 19.
A man that has bin guilty of wilful Murder, if he does but run into a Church
(as they call it) or into a Monastery, he is protected in those bloody places
of Refuge. Their Writers plead for this. And tho no convicted Murderer did ever
escape the stroke of Justice in this Land (which is a matter of rejoicing) yet
it is a very sad thing that any in such a place as this should be found guilty
of such a Crime: that men should do so wickedly in a Land of Uprightness! but
so it has been. Diverse have been executed for this sin formerly, and here is
one that is to be executed for it this day. And there have been several Murders
committed among us, the Authors of which are not yet known. Some have bin so
monstrously wicked and unnatural, as to embrew their hands in the blood of
their own Children; who they are God knows, and will find a time to judge them;
and one day (...) and all the world shall know who they are. Besides these,
several others have bin under vehement Suspicion, and tried for their Lives* on
the account of this sin. We have all cause to pray for New England, as the
Lords People of old were directed to do, in case of an uncertain Murder, Deuteronomy.
21. 7. 8. They shall answer and say, our hands have not shed (...) blood,
neither have our eyes seen it; Be merciful, O Lord, to thy people Israel, whom
Thou have redeemed, and lay not innocent blood to the people of Isreal's charge:
and the blood shall be forgiven them. Be merciful, O Lord, to Thy people in
New England, and lay not innocent blood to their Charge!

USE. 2. For Exhortation. There is a double Exhortation before us.

1. Hence men should beware that they do not become guilty of this Sin. It is
in Man's corrup-Nature. Nothing is more natural than a spirit of Revenge: as we
see in little Children; which discovers that the Children of men bring
murderous natures into the world with 'em. Hence the Apostle declaring what men
by nature are, faith, that their f^et are swift to shed blood. Romans 3. 15.
because there is a mavelous Propensity in Man's nature unto this sin. Should
not the Lord either by special or common Grace restrain them, how many would
soon become guilty of Murder it self! Yea, and those too that don't believe any
such thing concerning, themselve^^ When the Prophet Elisha told Hazael what a
prodigious Murderer he would be, What (said he) am I a Dog, that thou should
have such thoughts of me? But in a little time he appeard to be as cursed a
Blood-^ound as ever the Prophet had said to him. O then beware of this sin. And
therefore take heed of giving way to wicked Passions. Lesser sins make way for
greater. And especially take heed of great sins: For many a man by being guilty
of other great sins* has provoked the Holy GOD to leave him unto this sin too.
The poor condemed Malefactor who stands here in the sight of this congregation,
does acknowledge, that he has by living in other sins provoked God to leave
him unto this, which he must now dye for. And he warns others, especially Young
Men, to take heed of those sins, as they love their Lives or Souls. I know not
but that it may be for E^^^^ation, and tend to God's Glory, if I should read in
this great Assembly, what I received in Writing from this dying and distressed
Creature. Its this which follows.

1. James Morgan, being Condemned to dye, must (...) own to the glory of God,
that He is righteous, and that I have by my sins provoked Him (...) destroy me
before my time. I have bin a great sinner* guilty of Sabbath-breaking, of
Lying, and of Uncleanness; but there are especially two Sins, whereby I have
offended the great God; one is that Sin of Drunkenness, which has caused me to
co^^our many other Sins; for when in Drink, I have been often guilty of Cursing
and Swearing, and quarrelling* and striking others: But the Sin which lies most
heavy upon my Conscience, is, that I have despised the Word of God, and many a
time refused to hear it preached. For these things, I believe God has left me
to that, which has brought me to a shameful and miserable death. I do therefore
beseech and warn all persons, young men especially to take heed of these Sins,
lest they provoke the Lord to do to them as He has justly done by me. And for
the further peace of my own Conscience, I think my self obliged to add this
unto my foregoing Confession, That I own the Sentence which the Honored Court
has passed upon me, to be exceeding just; in as much as (tho I had no former
Grudge and Malice against the man whom I have killed, yet) my Passion at the
time of the Fact was so out-ragious, as that it hurried me on to the doing of
that which makes me justly now proceeded against as a Murderer.

Thus does this miserable man confess. But how many are there in the
Congregation, that this may strike terror and trembling into their souls!

O Lord, how many are there in this great Assembly, who have lived, and do live
in those very sins, for which this Man confesses that God has been provoked to
destroy him! Let sinners hear and take warning this day* This man now that the
Terrors of God have awakned his soul, bitterly complains of two Sins
especially; one is that of Drunkenness. And indeed, Drunkenness has bin a
bloody sin; it has bin the cause of many a Murder. The man here, who is now
flying to the Pit, confesses* that in his Drink, he was wont to Curse and
Swear, and to quarrel, and strike those near him; and he acknowledged to me,
that he had made himself grievously drunk the day before he was left of God to
commit the Murder which he now must dye for; yea, and that he had that very
night bin drinking to excess, and that he was not clear of drink at the time
when he did the bloody Fact. And does not the Scripture say, Who has woe, who
has sorrow, who has contentions, who has babbling, who has Rounds without cause?
They that tarry long at the Wine -- etc. Prove. 23. 29, 30. Wicked men when they
are in drink, will fall to Quarrelling; words will bring on blows, and those
blows will cause wounds, and those wounds may perhaps prove mortal: and then,
what Woe and Sorrow follows! O how many have by means of this sin* been guilty
of Interpretative Murder! They have caused others to dye by making them drunk.
There has been an horrible thing done in this place; some wicked persons (who
they are God knows) have given or sold strong Liquor^ to the Indians, and made
them drunk also, and several of them have dyed in that condition Let such know*
that the Lord will ^udg them; yea, He will judge 'em as Men that have shed blood
shall be judged; they must answer for the blood of Souls and Bodies too. Most
wicked and miserable Creatures they are, that to gain a few pence, will bring
upon themselves the guilt of the blood of Souls and of Bodies too! And this
bloody sin of Drunkenness has bin the cause of many a Self-Murder: how many
have made themselves the woeful Martyrs of Bac^ thus thereby. By Drunkenness and
Intemperance, they have brought their Bodies to the Grave, and their Souls to
Hell before their time. It is an unhappy thing that of later years, a kind of
strong Reverend Mr. Wilson once said in a Sermon, there is a sort of drink come
into the country, which is called Kill-Devil, that it should be called Kill-men
for the Devil.
Drink kath been common amongst us, which the poorer sort of people, both in
Town and Country, can make themselves drunk with, at cheap and easy rates. They
that are poor and wicked too (Ah most miserable Creatures) can for a penny or
two pence make themselves drunk, I wish to the Lord, some remedy might be
thought of, for the prevention of this evil. It Is a very sad thing, that so
many Bodies and Souls should be eternally ruined, and no help for it. How ^ew
are there, that if once they be addicted to this vice, do ever truly repent of
it or turn from it. There was a Man, who hearing that his So^ took evil
courses, and that he followed such a vice, well, (said he) I hope he will leave
that and that he was given to another vice, I hope (said he) he will leave that
too; but it was told him that his Son was given to Drunkenness also Nay, then
(said he) I have no hope of him* I will not say (as he did) There is no hope
that ever a Drunkard should repent* but I say, there have been but few such
Instances in the world. How rarely have any of you known a man that has been
addicted to this Body-destroying, and Soul-murdering Iniquity, that has truly
repented of it, or turned from it again! O then, Let Men that have any love for
their Lives on Souls, beware of this bloody Sin.

But the other Evil which this undone Man does especially cry out of, and which
(now that he sees his Soul going into Eternity) he ^aith, lies most heavy upon
his Conscience, is his Despising the Word of God. I do not wonder to hear him
speak so, for I have known several Condemned persons, who have made the same
outcry: O nothing terrifies our Consciences like the thought of This, that we
have neglected the Means of grace; And what think you of Sinners in Hell, who
are wayling for this with tears of blood for ever and ever? whose doleful and
bitter cry, is, O the Sermons which we once heard* (...) might have heard but
would not! Ten Thousand worlds would we give for an opportunity to hear one of
those Sermons again, with any hope of finding Mercy with God. O you that have
lived under the Gospel, but despised it, think of this. Verily I say unto you,
all the sins in the world will not damn like this: Suppose a man to have bin
guilty of Adultry, or Murder, or the most horrid Transgressions against the Law
of God, these will not damn his Soul like that of Despising the Word of God.
For this is the Condemnation, that Light is come into the world, and men love
Darkness rather than Light. And How shall we escape, if we neglect so great
Salvation? They that shall be found guilty of neglecting the great Salvation
offered in the Gospel, cannot escape the wrath of God, to the utmost of it. And
this is true, not only concerning such as have lived under the constant
Preaching of the Gospel, and yet remain, and live and dye in a natural
unconverted estate; but of them also that might hear the Word of God but will
not: concerning Such, Christ says, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and
Gomorrah at the day of Judgment, than for them. Mat. 10. 15. This dying man,
now that his Conscience is awakened, says, It is a terror to him to think, I
might have heard the Word of God preached many a time* but refused it. He
neglected to hear Sermons, not only on Lecture-dayes, but on Lords-Dayes too:
when he was a Servant, he was wont (as himself ^aith) on Sabbath Days, to go
out into the (...), and there to profane the Lords Days, at the very time when
^e might and ought to have him hearing the Word of God: and since he had a
Family, his custom was to keep at home, when others (...) attending the public
Worship of God. And he ^old me, that he did foolishly please himself in
thinking that he had sufficient reason to stay at home, because he had not
clothes good enough to appear publicly in; whenas the money that he misspent in
drink would have procured him Cloatheing. Let others then by his Example be
warned against this evil left they provoke God, and feel sorrow for it, as he
has done. I doubt there are very many in this great Town, guilty of his sin in
this particular, perhaps some* that are professors of Religion, which is
dreadful to think on. I hear some say* that there are many Hundreds, nay, some
Thousands in this place, that seldom hear a Sermon preached, from one end of
the year to the other: if that be so, it is very lamentable. What is like to
become of the souls of such profane persons? If they that are in place of power
(be they Superior or Inferior Officers) can possibly redress this evil, they
will certainly do a Service acceptable to GOD and to our Lord JESUS CHRIST.

But I proceed to the Second Exhortation. If Murder be such a Crime* as (...)
declared (...) whoever has been guilty of this Sin be (...) for it, and repent
of it. As for Interpretative* Murder, many are guilty of that. O how many have
by Debauchery and Intemperance, shortened the lives of themselves or others! let
such repent, and turn from their sins unto God. But I hope there is none in
this vast Assembly, that has bin guilty of that Murder which is by the Law of
God and of the Land a Capital Crime, excepting one man, and one such person
there is here present, unto whom I shall now particularly apply my self. Do you
then hear, that your soul may live. This is the Last Sermon that ever you shall
hear. Time was when you might have heard Sermons but would not, and now you
shall not hear them, though you would* For as God said to him, This night thy
soul shall be required of thee; so I say to you in His Name, This night thy
soul shall be taken from thee: This night your soul shall be in Heaven or Hell
for ever. You are appointed to dye this day, and after death commoth the
Judgment. As soon as your Body is dead, your immortal soul must appear before
the great GOD and Judge of all, and a Sentence of everlasting Life, or
Everlasting Death shall be passed upon you. Are you willing when those Chains,
which are about you, shall be taken off, that your immortal soul should be
hanged in everlasting Chains? Are you willing that when your Body is removed
from the Prison, your Soul should go to the Spirits that are in prison? You
have complained that you have bin in a Dungeon, and had little light there; but
are you willing to go where (...) shall never see light* Are you willing that
when your Body is delivered from this Dungeon, your Soul should go into that
Dungeon, where is Blackness of darkness for ever? If not I charge you in the
Name of God to hear and obey his Word; yea, that Word which you have many a
time despised* I have spoken so often to you in private, since your being
Apprehended, that I shall not need to say much now, only a few words.

1. Consider what a sinner you have bin. The Sin which you are to die for, is
as red as Scarlet and many other sins, has your wicked life been filled with.
You have been a stranger to me, never saw you, I never heard of you, till you,
had committed the Murder for which you must dye this day; but I hear by others,
that have known you, how wicked you have been: and you have your self confessed
to the world, that you have been guilty of Drunkenness, guilty of Cursing and
Swearing, guilty of Sabbath-breaking, guilty of Lying, guilty of secret
Uncleanness; a^ Solomon said to Shimei, Thou know the wickedness which thine
own heart is (...) (...): so I say to you. And that which aggravates your
Guiltiness not a little, is, That since you have been in Prison, you have done
wickedly* you have made your self drunk several times since your Imprisonment*
yea, and you have bin guilty of Lying since your Condemnation* It was said to a
dying man* Dust not thou fear God* (...) Condemnation! Oh what a sinner have
you (...) for since you have bin under Condemnation, you have not feared God.
And (...) have (...) sinned against the Gospel? What (...) what Impenitency
have you bin guilty of (...)

Consider 2. What Misery you have by might upon your self, on your Body, that
must dye an accursed death* you must hang between Heaven and Earth, as it were
forsaken of both, and unworthy to be in either. And what Misery have you
brought upon your poor Children! you have brought an everlasting Reproach upon
them* How great will their Shame be, when it shall be said to them, that their
Father was hanged, (...) for his goodness, as many in the world have him* but
for his wickedness: not as a Martyr, but as a Malefactor, truly so! But that
which is Ten Thousand Thousand times worse than all this, is, That you have
(without Repentance) brought undoing Misery upon your poor yet precious Soul
(...) not only Death on your Body, but a Second Death on your never-dying Soul.
It is said in the Scripture, That Murderers shall have their part in the lake,
which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the Second Death, Rev: 21. 8. O
tremble at that! I remember a Man that was condemned and Executed in this
place* (...) years ago, that had been a Soldier, and as stout a spirited man
as most in the World, who when he came to dye, thus expressed himself to a
Minister that treated with him about his Soul; I (said he) never knew what Fear
meant, though I have bin amongst drawn Swords, and before the Cannons mouth, I
feared not death but now you tell me of a Second Death, it makes my Soul to
shake within me! That Is a Death, the Thoughts whereof may make the soul of the
stoutest Sinner in the world to tremble; for that is a death which is ETERNAL*
The things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are
ETERNAL. The death of the Body, that is seen, and is soon over; but what becomes
of the Soul when a Sinner dies, they that stand by him do not see, but if he
dye impenitent, the Death which is not seen takes hold on him, and it is
eternal. The God against whom he has sinned, lives for ever to punish him. And
a fearful thing it is, to fall into the ^^^nds of the ever- living God. O run
not into the mouth of the Second Death, into the wid^ Mouth of the fiery Pit,
which has devoured Millions of Millions of immortal souls; and know you for
certain, that if you die impenitent, your Damnation will be no ordinary one:
for yo^ have not only transgressed against the Law o^ God, with a high hand,
but sinned against the Gospel too. The Sermons which you have heard formerly,
or might have done, will be as so many witnesses against you, before the
Judgment* se^^ of Christ: the 3 Sermons which have hi^ preached to you in
public, since your Condemnation, the pains that has bin taken with you in
private by one or other of the Lords Servants; all these will aggravate your
Condemnation, when you shall be judged again, before all the world at the last
Day, if you dye impenitent.

Consider. 3. There Is yet a Possibility that your soul may be saved.
Notwithstanding all that has bin spoken to you, don't despair; repent but do
not despair. I would not have you say as Cain did, My sin is greater than can
be forgiven. The Lord is a merciful God. Though Men cannot forgive you, God can;
and He will do it, if you unfeignedly repent and believe on the Lord Jesus.
There is infinite Merit in the Death of Christ: if your bloody soul be washed
in his blood, it shall be made whiter than the Snow. That Sin which you must
now dye for, God has forgiven to others upon their true Repentance. Manasseh
filled the streets of Jerusalem with innocent blood, but when he humbled
himself, and besought the Lord for Mercy, God was entreated of him. O therefore
Repent, and then though your Body must dye, your Soul shall live and not dye.

I have but two words more to say to you, and then I shall take my leave of you
for ever.

1. Be sure what you be sincere in your Repentance. Many times men under Fears,
will seem very peintent* whenas they do but ^latter God with the (...) mouths,
and lie unto him with their tongues. Thus it was with* Pharaoh, and with many a
sinner, whose hard heart was never broken nor changed; we see often, that
sinners on sick beds, when they behold Death and Eternity before their eyes,
will confess their sins and promise Reformation* but if the Lord spare and
restore them, they are the same that they were before. And we have known
Instances among our selves, of men, that when they have bin Captive, and in
Turkish Slavery, they have pretended to a sense of those sins which provoked
the Most High to bring that misery upon them, and have written seemingly pious
and penitent Letters to their Friends, but now God has delivered them they are
as vain (...) profane as ungodly as ever in their lives before nay, some of
them worse. For the Truth is, i^ men be not humbled and converted by such
signal Dispensations, many times they are judicially (...) everlastingly
hardened: They never leave sinning until they have sinned themselves into (...),
past all hopes of Mercy or Recovery. To come nearer to you, I have known some,
more tha^ (...) or 2 or 3, that have bin condemned to dye* and whilst they
remained under that Sentence, they seemed very penitent, but they were pardoned
(for they had not bin guilty of Murder, (...) you have) and since that, have
bin as wicked (...) O then look to your self, that you do not* (...) with GOD
and Man, (...) your (...) soul too. And let not the Fear of Punishment only,
but the Sense of Mercy break your heart.

2. In this way of sincere Repentance, Betake your self to the City of Refuge.
Go to Christ for Life. The wilful manslayer had (as you heard but now) no
benefit by the City of Refuge; so shall impenitent Sinners have no Salvation by
Christ: but they that have a real sight of their Sins, and flee from the
Avenger of blood unto Christ for life, Pie is ready to succor them. Poor man!
has the fiery Serpent stung thy soul? then look unto the Brazen Serpent, look
unto the Lord Jesus that you may live and not dye forever. Build your hopes of
Salvation on Christ and His Righteousness alone. Don't think you shall be saved
only because good men have prayed for you, or for the Confession of your sins
which you have now made, or for the sake of any thing but CHRIST. And I pray
the Son of GOD to have Compassion on you.

The Last Expressions and solemn Warning of James Morgan: As they were in
Shorthand taken from (...) Mouth, at the Place of Execution. Mar. 11. 856.

I Pray God that I may be a Warning to you all, it and that I may be the last
that ever shall suffer after this manner: in the fear of God I warn you to have
a care of taking the Lord Name in v^in* Mind and have a care of that sin of
Drunkenness* for that sin leads to all manner of sins and Wickedness: (mind and
have a care of breaking the sixth Commandment, where it is said, Thou shall do
n^ Murder) for when a man is in Drink, he is re^ready to commit all manner of
Sin, till he fill up the cup of the wrath of God, as I have done by committing
that sin of Murder. I beg of God as I am a dying man, and to appear before the
Lord within a few minutes, that you may take notice of what I say to you. Have
a care of drunkenness, and ill Company, and mind all good Instruction, and
don't turn your back upon the Word of God, as I have done. When I have bin at
meeting, I have gone out of the meeting house to commit sin and to please the
lust of my flesh* Don't make a mock at any poor object of pity, but bless God
that he has not left you as he has justly done me to commit that horrid sin of
Murder. Another thing that I have to say to you, is to have a care of that
house where that wickedness was committed, and where I have bin partly ruind by.
But here I am, and know not what will become of my poor soul which is within a
few moments of eternity. I have murdered a poor man, who had but little time to
repent, and I know not what is become of his poor soul; O that I may make use
of this opportunity that I have! O that I may make improvement of this little
little time, before I go hence and be no more. O let all mind what I am a
saying now I Am going out of this world. O take warning by me, and beg of God to
keep you from this sin which has (...) [His last words were] O Lord, receive
any spirit, I come unto thee O Lord, I come unto thee O Lord, I come, I come, I
come.

THE CALL OF THE GOSPEL APPLIED Unto All men in general, and Unto a Condemned
Malefactor in particular. In a SERMON, Preached on the 7th Day of March. 1686.
At the Request, and in the Hearing of a man under a just Sentence of Death for
the horrid SIN of MURDER.

By COTTON MATHER. Pastor to a Church at Boston in N. E.

The SECOND EDITION.

Psalm. 89. 1. I will sing of the mercies of the Lord for ever, with my mouth
will I make known thy Faithfulness to all generations. Nulla species Peccati
tanta est qua non sit Superior JESUS. Orig. Printed at Boston, by Richard
Pierce. 1687.

To the Reader.
A Ltho' my Consent to the Publication of the ensuing Sermon had no small
Objections to Encounter with: for, First, The short time allowed me for
Preparation after I was (by the little* expected dying Desire of a poor man)
diverted from my spending the whole of the Sabbath with a bereaved Congregation
to which my help was promised; and Next, the Regard to be had unto the
Administration of the Lords Supper, which now in the Absence of an Honored
Relation that kindly answered my Engagement elsewhere I was to keep some Eye
unto both necessitated me to want in this Discourse that Accuracy and that full
pertinency which might recommend it unto the Judicious; Nevertheless, so long
as among all the Faults in it, I found not this, That it was not designed to do
good, and so long as among all the Pleas ( which in a curious and captious age
my (...) to my own repose brought) against the emitting of (...), I never met
with this, That*It was impossible any good should be done by it, I have at the
urgent Importunity of others ventured to deliver it into the Hands of as many
as shall think themsel^^ concerned to peruse it: Praying that it may reach and
touch the hearts of them, to whom (...) Christ should be a Pearl of great
Price, till they LOOK unto HIM and be SAVED.

Cotton Mather,

The CALL of the GOSPEL, unto All the Ends of the Earth; Applied especially
unto a poor man under the (...) ^entence of Death for the Crying Sin of MURDER.
Isai. XLV. 22. LOOK unto M, and be ye SAVED, all the Ends of the Earth.
THESE Words give unto us the most Joyful Sound that ever the Children of Death
had the favor of. Some of us doubtless can with a most Distinguishing and
Experimental Relish, profess concerning this Oracle of God, as some other
persons have concerning some other Passages in the Sacred Pages, We would not
have had this Sentence left out of our Bibles, for the riches of both the
India's Yea, who among us all, at the reading of these glad Tidings unto us,
can forbear joining with the Rapturous shouts of Heaven, with that Angelical,
and Evangelical Outcry, in Luc. 3. 14. Glory to God in the highest, on earth
peace, Good Will toward men* Behold, the Savior of the world is this day
speaking unto you, ye Congregation of the Lord* Arrayed in His white garments,
He looks through the Windows of His bright Ivory Palace, and ^tereth an
Invitation to you, which Blessed are your ears that hear this day.

This 45 th Chapter of (that which we may not ineptly call, the Gospel
according to) Isaiah, seem^ the Close of a Sermon begun at the 40 th chapter of
that admirable Book, whose Gospel-strains (...) so abundant, that in the
New Testament* some have counted perhaps about threescore Quotations from it;
and good old Ambrose* hence advised Austin unto a peculiar frequency in the
Reading of it. Isaiah signifies the Salvation of God; now that very thing,
especially in the more promissory Conclusion of his Prophecy, is very much the
Subject of his Ministry.

The Princely Prophet is predicting, perhaps about 200 years before the
Accomplishment thereof, the Reduction and Redemption of the C^ptiv'd Jews from
Babylon, together with the very name of the Persian Emperor Cyrus, who should
be the Instrument thereof; and thereupon he assigns the several reasons of this
stuperidious Dispensation. One ground thereof laid down is, that the Nations of
the world, far and near, might be brought to abandon their Lying vanities, and
to acknowledge the Only true GOD, with Jesus Christ whom He has sent. At the
mention of this there immediately falls in the gracious invitation to those
Nations which we have now to insist upon: wherein we may observe*

(1.) The Subjects which are called upon, These are all the ends of the earth;
even the Gentiles, in all quarters of the world, whose Vocation is here
foretold; The poor souls whose natural Distance from the Church of God, and
whose moral Distance from the Love of God was exceeding deplorable. (2.) The
Object propounded for these to converse withal. This by that Expression Me, is
determined to be the Lord Himself. But who? Truly, it is God the Savior, it is
the Lord Jesus Christ; a Devotion to whom should come instead of the Homage
which men had (...) wont to yield unto their other Images of God, and
Deliverance by whom is the Antitype of what the Lords people had of old by
other Saviour^* To confirm this Interpretation, I find the Cha^^ee Paraphrase
rendering this Me, by My Word* using the Term of [ Meemar] which belongs to the
2 nd Person in the adorable Trinity. (3.) The Act to be applied hereunto: This
is to Look* namely with an Eye of faith and of repentance. In this Clause,
there seems to be an Allusion to the Looks that the ancient Israelite^ had bin
wont to give unto the Brazen Serpent; which, if that great Reformer Hezekiah
had not made mere brass of it, might, for ought I know be still abused to vain
and vile Superstitions among 'em. (4.) The End of the Whole. It Is said, Be ye
saved; and the intent of that is Double, it is both, be desireous that ye may
be saved, and it is, be assured that ye shall be saved. The twofold End (both
finis Operis, and finis Operani^s) both the Design* and the Event is to be
Salvation* Salvation, SALVATION -- but what a Word is That it is a word that
does contain more than a^^ man can conceive.

From hence then, This Doctrine of GOD you^ Savior does challeng your serious
Attention.

Doct. The Lord Jesus Christ in His Gospel, graciously and earnestly invite^th
all the Children of men to Look unto Him, by Faith upon Him for SALVATION.

When the no less unexpected than un deniabl^ Request of the dying man who now
stands in in this Assembly, that I would allow him this Morning a Discourse
proper for his uncomfortable Circumstances, was yesterday brought unto me; I
cold not suddenly think on any thing more accommodated unto all the Persons and
Services which are before me, than that which have now pitched upon. The Body
of this Congregation cannot hear of a more important thing than this, of Looking
unto Jesus Christ for Salvation. Men and Brethren, This is the One thing
^eedful. The little flock of Communicants, unto whom I am by and by to
administer the Holy Supper, cannot be excited unto a fitter work than this, of
Looking unto Jesus Christ for Salvation. Christians, this is our Errand hither*
The poor condemned Malefactor, who is here ^^^tening to one of the three last
Sermons that ever he is like to ^it under before his Encounter* with the King
of Terrors, cannot be put in mind of any thing that will more tend to prepa^^
him for his near approaching death, than this of Looking unto the Lord of Life,
for Salvation and Life. Poor man, do you hearken, I Will study to make this whole
hour very particularly suitable and serviceable to you; and methinks a man that
knows himself about to take an eternal Farewell ^f all Sermons, should endeavor
to hear with most earnest heed. The God of Heaven grant, that Faith may come
unto you by your Hearing.

It is a very pretions Repast, which is thus brought unto you, O immortal
Souls! It comes from the Land flowing with milk and honey. The ensuing
Propositions may carve it out unto you. The 1 st Proposition that arrests ou^
thoughts is*

1. That, to Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ* is to Look unto Him for
Salvation. These blessed things are equivalent each to the other; and herein,
we have both the Act of Faith, and the End of Faith: fairly suggested unto us.

As for the Act of Faith, that is a Looking* The Faith of God's Elect ^ath in
the Scripture several Bodily Actions, used as the Metaphors and shadows of it.
There is the Action of the Hand, for the sake of which in Joh. 1. 12. Faith is
said to be a Receiving of Jesus Christ. There is the Action of the Mouth, in
Resemblance of which, in Joh. 6. 54. Faith is said to Eat the flesh of Jesus
Christ. There is the Action of the Foot, in ^egard of which Joh. 6. 35. Faith
is said to be a Coming unto Jesus Christ. Thus likewise the Action of the Eye
is here improved, to denote the Christ-ward motions of soul which the Believer
has.

There is indeed a 3 ^old Look, which the believing Soul in its Agonies does
give toward the Lord Jesus Christ. There is a Look of Desire; a Look with a
Wish, yea, with a Groan: a Look with a, Lord help me! Such a Look as the hoarse
Leper gave in Marc. 1. 40. when he came to Jesus Christ, beseeching Him, and
kneeling down unto Him. There is also a Look of Dependence* a Trusting a
Rolling a Relying Look; a Look accompanied with the Language of the Psalmis^ in
Psalm. 25. 2. O my God, I trust in thee. And there is a Look of Acknowledment,
producing both of these. Many things does the Believer discern and confess to
be in that Jesus, whose Name is, Wonderful, Counselor, The mighty God, the
Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. But these 2 things especially: One
thing of which he is sensible is, that Jesus Christ is a mighty Savior, owning
that in Heb. 7. 25. He is able to save to the uttermost them that come unto God
by Him. Another thing whereof he is not unsensible is, that Jesus Christ is a
Merciful Savior, owning that in Joh. 6. 37. Him that comes to me, I will in
no wise cast out. After this manner does the Believer look to the Savior upon
the everlasting (...) from whence (...) all his help. (...) for What (...) Did
of Faith* that is SALVATION. This the Apostle grants in (...) where he speaks
to Christians about the end of their Faith* the Salvation o^ (...) That which
the Believer does purpose to himself by his Addresses to (...) that he may be
^esctied from all the Calamities which his Fall from God has br^^ght upon him,
and that he may be (...) partaker of Benefits contrary thereunto* by the means
of an All*sufficient, and a Compa^^^^nate Jesus the Mediator. There are indeed
especially three things which the Believer does look unto the Lord Jesus for.
His first Look is with that glance in Psalm. 119. 122. Lord, (...) surety for
thy servant for good. He would behold Jesus Christ as the Lamb of God,
appearing before divine Justice in his room* adding unto this cast of his Eye,
this Throb of his heart* (...) Jesus Christ take away all my Sins, with all
(...) wants and ^oes, which thereby I bec^me (...). He would have Jesus Christ
to remo^e all the guilt that lies upon him, to ensta^e him in the Favor and
Fellowship of God, and to procure for (...) all Blessings whatsoever*
especially* spiritual Blessings, the Blessings of the (...) the (...) of the
Covenant, (...) own ^bedience and Intercession. His (...) (...) is with this
sight in Psalm. 25. 4. Show me thy (...) O Lord, Teach me thy paths. There is an
Eye salve which he petitions unto this Lord our hea^er for. He flies and cries
unto Jesus Christ, as that son of sorrow did of old, Lord that I may receive my
sight. He would have Christ to remove all the blindness of his mind, to reveal
unto him the happiness which is not seen, and which is eternal, and to discover
unto him all that he must know and (...) in order to his obtaining of it. His
Look, it with that Aim in Psalm. 119. 5. Oh that my maye^ ^ere Directed to Keep
thy statutes O God! He submits unto the ruling Will of God while he implores
the Saving Grace of Jesus Christ* He reckons that the Most High by saying, I
have sent my Son to bless you, by turning you away from your Iniquities, has
told him of a Blessedness (...) Loving kindness, which he has infinite cause
to say Amen unto. He would have Jesus Christ to remove all the Disorder of his
Will, to inclin^ him so that he may refuse the evil and choose the good, and to
shield him against all the ruining attempts of the World; the Flesh and the
Devil for evermore. This, all of this Faith is beck'nned for in this one word,
Look unto Me.

[And these are the Christward Looks which must be given by you, whose eyes
will be within a few days closed by the cold hands of grim Death, if you would
not roar in outer (wor^^ than* Egyptian) darkness for evermore.]

On the heal of the former, this second Proposition takes hold.

2. SALVATION will most undoubledly be the Fruit of a Believer's Looking unto
the Lord Jesus Christ. The great God, who once said unto upright man, Obey and
live, now says unto lapsed man, Believe and be saved; and truly an Exceeding
great multitude, whom no man can number, have bin happy witnesses to the
Fulfillment of it. It is that which our Lord has ordered to be proclaimed unto
every creature, I mean (as the Hebrews do by that Phrase) unto every man in the
world. Marc. 16. 16. He that believes shall [be saved.] And when a convinced
Jayler was solicitous about his everlasting Weal, the Messengers of heaven gave
him this Testimony (which surely the convinced Prisoner that I have before me,
may very reasonably look upon himself as concerned in) Act. 16. 31. Believe on
the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall [be saved.] Thus also it is represented
as the Property and the Privilege of true Believers, in Heb, 10. 39. We are of
them that believe unto the saving of the soul. Verily, a man does no sooner
look unto Jesus Christ in away of Believing, than a Sentence of Salvation is
passed upon him, and all the (...), yea and all the Attributes of the Eternal
Jehovah are engaged for the execution of it.

Shall we descend unto some Particulars!

Every part of that Salvation which Jesus Christ is the Author of, ever follows
upon Looking and Believing for it. As those three comprehensible and
inexhaustible Treasures of life, in 2. Cor. 13. 14. even the Grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ* and the Love of God, and the Communion of the Holy Spirit, are to
be got by Lo^king. So particularly, the voice, the sweet soul-melting voice of
the Lord Jesus Christ unto Sinners is, LOOK unto Me, and you shall be
Justified. Hence, not to speak of the large Discourses on this point, in the
Epistle to the Romans, concerning whom the spirit of Prophecy foresaw that
they would apostatize from their Orthodox Persuasion and Professions herein: It
is said in Joh. 3. 18. He that believes on the Lord Jesus Christ is not
condemned. No, he is in Christ, and there shall [ no^ one] Condemnation fall
upon him, (as the Appostle elsewhere has it) though he may have deserved a
Thousand Million. He is saved from the horrendous Wrath and Curse of God. The
free Grace of God forgives all his transgressions, and accepts him as
righteous* imputing the Righteousness of Jesus Christ (...) him; the just and
holy God that was once angry with him every day, now ^ayes unto him, Fury is
not in me; Fury is not in me. And he rejoices with such a white stone put into
his hand as that Parahtick had, unto whom it was said, Son, be of good cheer,
thy sins are forgiven thee. Yet again, The voice of the Lord Jesus unto sinners
is, Look unto Me* and you shall be Adopted. Hence is it ave^r'd in Gal. (...):
26. Ye are the children of God, by Faith in Christ Jesus. Thus these blessed
believing Lookers shall be saved from the doleful Family of the Devil, they
shall be taken into the number, they shall have a Title to the Felicity and
Dignity of them that are the s^ns of God; the Angels now call them Brethren:
and the Almighty Magnificent Governor of the world says unto them, Ye are my
sons and my daughters Besides all this, the Voice of the L ord Jesus unto
sinners moreover is, Look unto Me, and you shall be Sanctified, in regard of
this it is that He has said in Joh. 3. 36. He that believes has everlasting
life; the Seed and the Spring of it is in Him. Truly such a man shall be saved
from his slavery to the Enemies of his soul. He shall be renewed in his whole
man after the Image of God, and be enabled more and more unto a dying to sin,
and a living in Grace; his spirit, his soul, his body, his All (...) now under
an enobling Dedication unto the Service of showing forth the praises of God: a
curious Needle Work made by the singers of the eternal Spirit covers him,
adorns him, makes him more excellent than his neighbor. And Oh what peace
(...) even the peace of God that passes all understanding; O what Joy! even
Joy unspeakable and full of glory; Oh what Assurance, Oh what Perseverance in
this life will flow from these unto the saved Believer (...) ^inally the Voice
of the Lord Jesus unto sinners likewise is, Look unto Me and you shall be
Glorified. On this score has the beloved Disciple said in 1. Joh. 5. 13. You
that believe on the Name of the Son of God may know that ye have eternal life.
Oh how firmly is Eternal Life ensured unto Believers! Certainly, those
Christ-prizing Ones shall be saved from the second Death; they shall awake in
the upper world, in the future world* they shall behold the Face of God and
Christ in Righteousness, and be satisfied with His likeness. The Lamb shall
feed them and lead them to Fountains of Living water. they shall enter into the
Joy of their LORD; they shall drink of the Rivers of pleasure, at the right
hand of GOD for ever more: they shall so partly at their Dissolution, they
shall so fully at their Resurrection, they shall so in the Heaven of Heavens,
until the very Heavens be no more. Such is a little of the [ Be ye saved] which
all Believers hear from their heavenly Friend, from their Undertaker on high.
So great Salvation will a Believing LOOK procure.

But that this Gospel may have a sit and full dwelling in your hearts, there is
one Proposition more to be laid into your Understandings.

3. The Lord Jesus Christ in His Gospel does graciously and earnestly INVITE
all men thus to Look unto Him and be saved. That ever-glorious One whom God has
exalted to be a Prince and Savior, to give Repentance unto His Elect with
Remission of sins; He has with a matchless degree of Favor and Fervor too,
advised Mankind about this matter; He has revived a dying world with such
sweet words of his mouth as these, O ye perishing Outcasts, I am a Savior
infinitely able and ready to relieve the Distresses which you are plunged into:
I require you and entreat you therefore, that you don't keep (...) distance
from me. And for this cause it is that in Isa. 65. 1. he makes (according to
the Apostolical Interpretation in Romans 10.) this proffer even to the very
Heathen (O let the blackest blindest Negroe, at the further end of this
Assembly count himself bound to answer such a Call) Behold me, behold me! q. d.
O that you would LOOK at me for my SALVATION. We have indeed a most precious
Bible in our hands [that Book of Life I see in those hands too that must dye
pinioned before many days have rolled away; man do you first look downward
upon that, and so look upward unto Him from whom it comes] it is a Bible
indicted by the Spirit of Jesus Christ, and preserved by His Providence; and the
very scope of this, the principal business of it, is, to come from the Third
Heaven, as a Letter with thy name, and mine, and every man's on the Endorsment
of it, bespeaking the believing looks of every Reader unto a saving Jesus. But
there are likewise many special passages to this purpose, sparkling and
glittering like so many Jewels in the Cabinet of God. It is a Rule which our
Lord Jesus has given about His Exhortations, (...) Ma^c. 13. 37. (...) What I
say to one I say to Al^ And will not the same square to His Invitation^ also?
Yes, the old loving Invitations which were more immediately given to other
people do likewise call upon us upon whom the ends of the world are come. upon
Thee, and thee, and thee Well, we are informed in Joh. 7. 36. That when our
Lord Jesus was Incarnate among the moving Dust-heaps and Potsherds of the earth
here below, once on the eight day of the Feast of Tabernacles, when there was a
vast Confluence of People going to draw water from he Pool of Siloam, singing
the words of the Prophet, (...) joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of
Salvation (...), then He took occasion to stand, that He might be seen, to cry
that he might be heard, and to say, If any man thirst, let him come to me and
drink. (...) then all the needy dying souls of men are still one thus offered;
the only Appointed and Anointed Redeemer of men does thus counsil them, Let me
be it from you whenever and whereinsoever you want Salvation. But how many
other such amazing lines has He also sent down from the Excellent* Glory into a
desolate world! It is the Lord Jesus Christ who has compared the Gospel of
Salvation unto a well-fraught Vessel (...) up a River, whereabout He makes that
^oud and loving Out cry -- O Never, never was there an O yet's vouchsafed unto
the world like (...) This (...) in Isai. 55. 1. Ho, every one (...) steth let
him come and partake hereof. It is the Lord Jesus Christ too, who concludes
this miraculous Book with that remarkable Period -- when He would put a full
Stop to inspired infallible Writings, He does it by exposing His Salvation unto
general Acceptance, in Rev. 22. 17. Whosoever will, let him take the water of
life freely. In a word: For the fuller Inculcation of such a mavelous Thing,
we have this immortal King, laying upon us in the name of Him that is Higher
than the highest, in (...) Joh. 3. 23. A Commandment to believe. We have Him
hence also annexing the Sanctions of a Commandment hereunto, laying Bonds and
Graplings of Iron upon the Consciences of men: We have Him both upon Mount Ebal
and upon Mount God rizzin giving accents to His Look unto Me. He discharges the
dreandful rumbling Thunderelaps of such denunciations as that in Joh 3. 36. He
that believes not shall not see life. And many more such Threats and Menaces
does He roar out of Sion with, wherein the smoke of the Fire and Brimstone
reserved in a hot Hell for the Portion of Unbelievers is blown under the
Nostr^^s of men. Yea, and He presents no less charming Encouragements to
Believing than those in the Preface* to ye Proverbs of Solomon: and one Text
more above all I have ^ound which I must bring to you, an Sam^son did unto his
Relations the Honey (...) he had light upon, it is in Mat. 11. 28. O feed upon
it, every word in it is a drop of Canaans Honey; it is Honey from the Rock. He
was a renowned Person that once said, mallem carere Clbo et Coelo quam ho^
Verbo, I had rather not have a bit of Bread to put in my mouth, I had rather
the Sun in the Firmament should shine no more upon me, than that I should loose
so dear a Word as this. Thus our Lord speaks COME, gr. [ Deute] a most
friendly and familiar Call: q. d. I pray be so kind as to step hither to a
Friend. But unto whom shall we come? Lo, He faith, come unto Me, unto Me that
have all things delivered unto Me by the Father, unto Me that am by Him
empowered and employed to pluck never-dying souls from the devouring Jaws of
every Heath. But who shall come? mark the Answer, Let ALL come. But what if we
have horrible Burdens of Filth and Fear lying upon us? Its no matter, says our
Ever-living and Ever-loving Lord, come all ye that Labor and are heavy Laden.
But what if we do come, shall we not miscarry miserably, and miss of our
Expectations, notwithstanding all? No, no. The Faithful and true witness says
unto us, I will GIVE you REST.

[O let the poor fettered Prisoner recollect himself; James, thy name is not
excepted in these INVITATIONS.]

It is a Feast of Fat things full of marrow, and of wines on the lees well
refined, which the Lord ha^ made in this Doctrine for the ruined Race of sinfuls
men. It remains that we make some Uses of it.

USE. 1. And now Praises, Millions of Praises, an Eternity of High-praises ^e
given unto our Lord Jesus Christ who speaks such things to the rebellious. O
the Admiration, O the Adoration which the never-enough praised Grace of Jesus
Christ should beget in us! At the preaching of this Doctrine we have
unnutterable cause to do as the Jews did at the building of the Temple in Zech.
4. 7. even to shout Grace, Grace, concercerning it, until our Acclamations
reach unto the very Heavens. It is recorded of the poor slaves among the
Brick-kilns in Egypt, Exodus, (...) 31. That when they (...) the Lord had visited
the children of Israel, and had looked on their Affliction, then they bowed
their hands and worshipped: behold, you have this morning heard, that the Lord
Jesus Christ has visited the children of men, and bid them in their
Afflictions to Look unto Himself. O where are the good words, where are the
kind thought^ that we ought to magnify this Redeemer and His Grace withal?
David once in an holy Ecstasie of soul, 1. Chron. 29. 10, -- 14. Blessed the
Lord, and said, O who am I! Verily now, all of us have cause to abound with
such* notes as those, Lord (...) are we, that He who sits on the lofty Throne
of Eternity should send away unto us that ly starving like odious Beggars among
the Ditches and under the Hedges of (...) inviting us to LOOK unto Him and be
SAVED The Pharisees of old aspersed Him with this as His Disgrace, but let us
cry it up in Him as his Honor, This man receives sinners. The virtuous
Elizabeth in Luc. (...). 43. Wondered that the Mother of her Lord should come
unto her: but what a thing is this, that our Lord Himself should Invite us to
Look, yea, to come unto himself! That he who ^its as King for ever upon the
lofty Battlements of Heaven, and charges the very Angels with Folly* should so
far smile upon ^s a company of born-fools wandering about the earth: upon us
who dwell in houses of Clay* (...) ^^undation is in the dust, which are crushed
before the moth; did I say so? Nay this is not the worst of our Character: we
are not only undeserving creatures, but also Hell-deserving sinners. When our
first Father began a desperate War against the Omnipotent God, we were part of
the mad Regiment involved in his perfidious Treason, and our Emnity against our
Maker ha^ from our very Cradles been so enormous, that we should long ere now
have bin Devils-in-flesh, if the checks of Restraining Grace had bin taken
away. And, what unreasonably vicious lives has we been leading ever since a
Rational Soul appar^ntly acted in us! How have we bin every moment sinning
against the Law of God, transgressing every precept of Love to God and to man^
(...) how grievouslly, have we bin sinning against the Gospel too! fearfully
grieving, fleighting, and shamefully affronting a Redeemer that for many a day
besought us to be reconciled unto God! This have we been and done. And Ah Lord,
do thou open thine eyes upon such ones? What if the Lord Jesus Christ had
now only spoken unto us such fiery wrathful words as those in Isa. 1. 23. Aha,
I will ease me of mine enemies, and avenge me of mine Adversaries! or th^se in
L^c. 19. 27. Those mine enemies bring hither, and s^ay before me! Verily I say
unto you, he would be clear in his speaking and just in his judging so. What if
he should appear unto us in the black garments of all-desolating indignation,
with keen Darts and consuming Thunderbolts in his hand? What if he should
appear in flaming fire, to take vengeance on us that have not known God, nor
obeyed his Gospel? Surely this would be no more than a proper and a
proportionable Dispensation. But instead of this, the winning Language, which
with bowels full of such Philanthropy as (this King's wedding a Queen out of
our poor Family) His taking our Nature to subsist in his Second Person, does
evince and incline Him to have unto us) he speaks unto us, is, O Look in^o Me
and be SAVED. Yea, and in this thing he does with a Riddle of Free Grace
distinguish us from, by dignifying us above uncountable Multitudes of our
Fellow Creatures, our Fellow-criminals* If we do look through the earth and
into Hell we shall soon see our selves lifted up to heaven by the Invitation
which our Lord Jesus has given to us to Look unto Him for Salvation. Let us (we
especeally in this Wilderness that that like Gideon's Fleece, enjoyes these
Dewes of Heaven when the rest of the world is dry, may do it) take a view of
all the Visible World and see what incredible Millions in every Generation,
there are that either never had one beam from the Sun of Righteousness falling
on them, but drop down into the Land of Darkness without hearing a word of Him,
or, at least, are by their blind Guides muffled up in such Ignorance as proves
to them the Mother of Destruction, Alas, Alas, -- for the people that perish
for lack of vision, that sit in the region of the shadow of death. But here, in
a little Spot of ground that other day the Devil was worshipped in, there now
are the Colonies, whom the Invitations of Jesus Christ have known above all the
Families of earth. This is much! But take a view likewise of the ^owling people
in the Invisible world, Who are there in the fiery dismal Vault below* There
are vast Legions of Devils in that place of torment; but unto which of those
apostate spirits has our Lord Jesus said, I would have thee to look unto me?
There is an innumerable number of our* Race too gone down into that formidable
Pit but unto none of those does the Lord Christ ever say, Thou may be saved
by me if thou will* No, those Invitations are our Prerogative. Wonderments,
where are you? Halleluiahs, where are you? Syrs, let us place the utmost of
them upon this misterious Love. But we are sottish; our unaffected rocky hearts
are insensible of our obligations to the Lord Jesus Christ; Then wonder, O ye
Angels, give Thanks, O all ye ministering Spirits, Let the Morning stars in the
upper Regions, throughout eternal Ages think honorably of the Savior whom we
are unapt to acknowledge, for his remembering us in our low estate, because his
mercy endures for ever. O how, how shall we enough extol the merciful
High Priest, whose Look unto me and be saved, has bin vouchsaved unto us! Is
this the manner of men, O Lord* No, no. Then, Let the people praise the, O
Lord, let all the people praise thee, since Thy way is known upon the earth,
and Thy SAVING Health among all Nations.

But This is not all the Good-Speech of our Lord Jesus Christ, unto us; There Is
somewhat more that remains to be said unto us all, [and particularly unto that
Condemned Malefactor here who is never to see the Light of another Sabbath in
the world] It was a pathetic word of the Apostle to his Corinthians in 2. Cor.
6. 1. We beseech you that you receive not the grace of God in vain. Wherefore.

USE. 11. O Let every one of us now (...) ^^th Jesus Christ by Faith for
SALVATION* If he say unto us, Look unto me, let not us (...) such prodigies of
madness as to reply* (...) will not look unto thee. It is a sweet in (...)
between God and man, which the (...) prescribes in Jer. 3. 22. where the Can of
God (...) Return ye backsliding (...) backslidings: and the Echo of man is*
^ehold (...) come unto thee, for thou ar^ the Lord (...) God. (...) that there
might now ^e such a Communion between Christ and us. His (...) Look unto Me and
be saved: let our Return (...), should we look unto thee, for thou art the Lord
our savior. Do not, I entreat you, do not give unto the Lord Jesus Christ such
a daring and damning Answer as that in Jer. 44. 16. As for the word spoken by
us in the Name of the Lord, we will not heart thereunto. It is a thing declared
by the Lord Jesus Christ concerning these Gospel times Zech 12. 10. Men shall
look upon me and morn* No shall a like thing be brought to pass with these
walls this day? How shall so great thing as this be gained? A sad part of this
Congregation, it is to be doubted, are too much (...) the Leviathan, Their hearts
are as firm as a (...) as a piece of the nether Millstone: The (...) of him that
Lays at them cannot hold. Alas, (...) shall be done for them? Unto Thoe, O
Lord, (...) my (...); O Father of spirits (...) (...), look down with thy
tender meroies on the spirits of the unperswadeable Children. And O Thou that
have the keys of David in thy hand, Open, open our hearts as thou did
Lydia's of old, and effect by thy mighty power that we may look unto thee and
believe.

God forbid that there should be any Esau-like despisers of Jesus Christ, and
his Invitation, or his Salvation, in the Congregation. God forbid that there
should be one such child of perdition as an impenitent unbeliever among us all
Some persons there are indeed, who make a Scruple of it, May* I venture to look
unto Jesus Christ, notwithstanding all my vileness, my wretchedness, my
unworthiness? To these it may be safely rejoined If you find that God has
wrought your heart to a willingness to close with a whole Christ, you^ should
not let your Unworthiness be your Discouragement against doing of it. The
Invitatitation Look unto me, is enough to embolden you unto believing looks
toward the Lord Jesus Christ, notwithstanding all the damps and doubts which
your misgiving hearts may have about your acceptance in it. Syrs, the Golden
Scepter is held out, you may draw near. When Jesus Christ said unto Peter, you
may come, he presently ran over the dangerous waves of the boisterous Sea unto
Him; Truly so, since Jesus Christ says to you, you may look, let no hard
suspicions and surmises keep you from doing your duty in it. The Canaanitess in
Mat. 15. 27. did, as one of the An^ients expresses it, play the Philosopher
she disputed the case after this rate; A Dog may have Crumbs, It seems I am a
dog; Therefore (an ingenious and a gracious Therefore) I may have crumbs too.
Thus may you Argue prostrate as the footstool of the Lord Jesus Christ, All the
Ends of the earth should look unto thee, O Lord I am one at the Ends of the
earth; Therefore I may look unto thee. Surely He that has his Chair in the
heavens, will deny no part of the Syllogism which shall thus be framed by a
wrestling Faith. Though you have bin as bad as any among the Corinthians were
of old, yet if you have arrived unto a due hunger and thirst after Jesus
Christ, you may endeavor to look unto him, saying as Samuel to Eli, Lord here
I am for thou calledst me; and He will be far from saying to you as Eli to
Samuel, No, I called not.

The Question which some will now be ready to ask, is, (and O that many with an
earnestness like that wherewith Peter's hearers put forth their What shall we
do, would ask such a question)

How shall I look unto Jesus Christ?

About this there are a few Directions to be given.

O set your hearts unto the words that shall be ^^stified among you, for they
are not vain things; your very lives, yea the lives of your souls are concerned
in them.

Know then, that besides your occasional glances toward the Lord Jesus Christ,
which every day ought to be very many, at least as many as the stings which the
infernal vipers do (...) your souls withal; there is a Set-work of this nature
to be solemnly performed both by them whose* died eyes never yet looked to
Jesus Christ, and by them whose dimeyes have cause enough to continue looking
unto him whom they have already seen.

Now there are Two things to be premised concerning this. Let this be the 1 st.
premised.

It is highly expedient that you should speedily set apart a time to make
attempts about the grand work of Looking unto Jesus Christ. It is indeed true,
that an unbeliever has no other Assureance of prospering in his Essays to
break the iron Prison doors of his unbelief, but such an Who can tell? such an
Who knows such an It may it, as the Prophets of old were wont much to insist
upon. If you set your selves to believe in your own strength, the Faith of Simon
Magus is all you are like to attain unto. Yet you may be quickened to do what
you can, from the renowned History of the man with the withred hand in Mat. 13.
13. unto whom Jesus saying, stretch forth thy hand; he tried to do it without
any demurr at the seeming unsuitableness of the Injur^tion, and Behold he
stretched it forth and it was restored.

Let this be next premised. It is extremely ^^qui^^^^ that this rare work of
Looking unto Jesus Christ should be often renewed. Sometimes perhaps the spirit
of jealousy will come upon you, you will be fearing, Alas, I did never yet
aright look unto Jesus Christ! Now the best way to set* the these troubled
waters, will be that which Jonah had, I will look yet AGAIN. And O remember,
that to do this work often, over and over again, is a thing than which nothing
can more tend to your Victory over all the Adversaries of your endless Welfare.
Yea, sometimes if an Half or a Whole of a day, were purposely laid out i^, this
work, the time will be found not to have bin lost when Eternity shall dawn upon
the world. Hence in 1. Pet. 2. 4. they who have already tasted the grace of
Jesus Christ are bid still to come unto him. [Some of us before the sands of
another hour be run out, shall so meet with this King of glory in his Galleries
that we may have a special opportunity to catch hold on the feet of the Lord
who deigns to sup with us, and like Mary cry my Lord, my Lord until we have
renewed the Looks that have hitherto kept ou^ souls in life. O be you thankful
for this, and do with your might what your hands find to do.]

And now, Hear and your soul shall live. (...) that you would ^abour in a wise
Retirement to ^i^t up the woeful eyes of your Hell-stung souls toward the Lord
Jesus Christ after such a manner.

1. Meditate most affectionately on those things which may awaken the
Christ-ward LOOKS of of your souls. It is hinted in Luc. 1. 17. That ordinarily
before persons can look, unto Jesus Christ, they must be a people prepared for
the Lord. Now to promote and produce this piece of Soul-good, there is no
Engine, like to Consideration. O Consideration, what Medicine for soul maladies
is comaparable to That! If we would ^ut let the Angel of CONSIDERATION stir the
Pool, how probably might we step in, and have our unbelieving* eyes enabled to
look unto our dear Helper who longs to be doing good unto us! It Is said of a
Convert in Ezekiel. 18. 28. He considers and he turns, perhaps it may likewise at
last ^e said of us, he considers and he looks. There are then 2 or 3 savory
Meditations, to which if you should give a time and room, you may hereafter
reap the comfort of it. I perceive in Hos. 14. 2. and elsewhere, that the
prophets would sometimes put words into the mouths of them that they were
traveling for the Salvation of: Something of that kind shall now be done by the
bringing of th^se thoughts into your mind which may* comport with the
Invitations of Jesus Christ.

Let your first Head of Meditation be an I Must Think with your selves, I must
look unto Jesus Christ. Say to your own souls about Looking to Jesus Christ, as
Paul did about preaching of Jesus Christ, Necessity is laid upon me, and woe
unto me if I do it not. Bestow one look in the first place on your selves, upon
your own most rue^ul (...) and Fears. O ponder on the hideous doleful plight
which by your Iniquities you have sunk your selves into and with an Anguish of
Soul speak to your selves in such Soli-loquies as these.

Ah, woe is me; In the Fruition of God is enwrapped all my happiness, without
this, O Lord, what will become of me for evermore! But never was there a more
lamentably forsaken Soul than I. The Terrible God, at whose Rebukes the
Everlasting Rocks are tumbled down, and the mountainous Pillars of heaven
tremble, He is such an Adversary to me, that if I do not agree quickly with
Him, never-ceasing Tormentors will take me into their unpittying hands. I have
like a Fool in whom ^olly was exalted horribly provoked him by my* sins that
are as many as the Sands, and as mighty as the Hills that overtop the Clouds.
I am hereupon justly already smitten with spiritual plagues, and justly given
over into the clutches of the red roaring Dragons, and devouring Lions whom I
have most fondly hearkened unto Yes I see the dreadful Gulf below gaping for me,
I see my self ready to be prayed upon by the worm that dies not, and by the
fire which never shall be quenched. Nor can I by any means pluck my self out
from this horrible Pit, this miery clay. Alas, What shall I do? O wretchman
that I am, who shall deliver me?

Let your second Head of Meditation hereupon ^e an, I May. Think with your
selves, I May look to Jesus Christ. O hear him crying to you from the fragrant
Tops of the Spicy Mountains (...) in Hos. 13. 9. O Soul, thou have destroy
(...) self but in Me is thy help. Don't let your Imaginations be, that There is
no hope. No, reserve now another look for Jesus Christ, as the Moses sent by
God to draw you out from black stoods of your perplexities. Now refresh
yourselvs with this* Reflection.

That there is such an one as the God-man Jesus Christ to go unto; and so
(say) ^is possible that I may live. Say now with your selves.

But is there no hope in Israel concerning me? yes, I see a door of hope. My
God may become my Friend, and His Foe MAY become His child yet for all this.
Yet may I glorify Him and enjoy Him forever. The Son of God is become the Son
of man, a Dayes-man between God and man. It has pleased the ^ather that in him
should all fullness dwell, and it has pleased Himself, to engage in the blessed
work of bringing God and man together. Neither will I undervalue Him so* much,
as to count that any of my streights are too difficult for Him to meddle with*
or that any of my Faults will cause him to reject the Supplications that his
Spirit shall help me to come before him with. No, No, when I am* about to say
unto him, Lord, If thou will thou can save me, His preventing Goodness says
to me, Soul, if thou will, I will. Then I will (...) longer pine away in mine
Iniquities, but look unto Him immediately. Having got thus far,

Then 2. Cry to Heaven that you may be Enabled to Look unto the Lord Jesus
Christ* The Case is so that you cannot look unto Jesus Christ until you see
that you cannot look. Never will you aright look, unto Jesus Christ, if you do
it not with Sentiments a kin to that in Joh. 6. 44. No man can come (or look)
unto Jesus Christ except the Father draw him. No, we have bin told by the
heavenly Records, concerning this Look of Faith, that it is the gift of God.
That it is the Operation of GOD, and that it is caused by the mighty power of
God. It was asked of old in Joh. 6. 44. How can ye believe? Such an humbling
Quaere should you put unto your selves, How can I look unto Jesus Christ?
Certainly you can as easily make Iron swim, and ponderous Mountains to fly like
Atoms about the Air, and bulky Rocks to place themselves among the shining
stars in the Firmament of God, as look unto Jesus Christ by any Abilities of
your (...). If you would not have your Faith prove a Cobweb in the day when the
fiery Beesom of Destruction shall sweep the world, you mus^ first say with him
in Psalm. 40. 12. I am not able to look up. Now with a bleeding soul, on the
precipeice of an inevitable Hell, make your moans as the man did in Mar. 9. 24.
Lord (...) my ^^belief. Now say; O Lord I must believe or die, I may believe and
live; but I cannot, O I cannot. Do thou draw me, do thou turn me, or I shall
yet miscarry. Do thou work this work of thine own in me and for me. In the
whole of my Salvation will at length redound to thy Honor. Not unto me, not
unto me, but unto Thee, O Lord will be all the Glory. Hereupon: Labor to look
as well as you can unto Jesus Christ for All that Salvation which He has to
confer upon you. There is a probable likelihood that the issue of your
struggling after faith may be this, That the Lord Jesus Christ will say unto
you, as once unto deceased Lazarus, O thou dead Soul, arise. Watch now to
follow him as Peter did the Angel in Act 12. 9. till you have got out of the
Goal which you have on a Light fire over your heads. It Is possible and more than
so, that Jesus Christ may now do by you as he did to that man in Marc. 8. 25.
when He put His hands upon his eyes, and made him look up. Now, now profess
unto the Lord Jesus Christ, as did Jehoshaphat long ago, in 2. Chron. 20. 12. I
know not what to do, O Lord, but my eyes are up unto thee. O say to him, Lord,
I look unto Thee for for thy Salvation, yea, as the Heart pants after the
water brooks; so does my soul after Thee, O Savior. I do heartily close with
Thee, as the Surety of the New everlasting Covenant which is made between the
First Being and my sou^ (...) and I wait upon Thee for the Communication of all
the sure me^cies which belong unto it.

But in doing thus, have a special Regard to this, That you do not retain a
Prejudice against any part of the Salvation which you ought to be desireous of*
O don't look a squint when you look unto Jesus Christ. Don't divide his saving
Offices His saving Kindnesses; but with a single eye, say, Lord, be all that to
me which thou art to any of thy chosen ones. Has the Lord said of Him, in
Psalm. 110, 4. Thou art a Priest forever! Now do you answer, Lord, I consent to
have Jesus Christ on my behalf a Priest whose Obedience* and Inetrcession shall
take away all Controversies between Thee and me. Has the Lord said of him in
Act, 3. 22. A Prophet shall the Lord raise up unto you* Do you answer, Lord,
let Jesus Christ be my Prophet, leading me evermore in the way wherein I should
go. Has the Lord said of him in Psalm. 2. 6. I have set him as my King upon my
holy hill? Do you answer, Lord, I would have Jesus Christ be my King forever,
Governing, Strengthening, desending of me whilst I have any being. Do this; --
And then labor to rest with glorious Transports and Triumphs now saying, Why
art thou cast down, O my soul? Hope in the Lord, for thou shall praise Him, who
is thy Salvation.

This is the good way, walk therein and you shall find Rest for your souls.
But, O ye souls in peril, what is the Resolution that you intend to go out of
this House withal? Is your answer like theirs in Jer. 6. 16. -- we will not
walk therein? (...) Shall yonder Doors anon bear witness against you, Here
passes by a person that will still neglect to look unto Jesus Christ. Alas has
all this Rain fallen upon the Rocks? Will none of us now with full purpose of
heart, say before the heart*searching One, with him in Marc. 7. 7. I will look
unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of my Salvation. how strangely besotted
must that Israelite have been, who should have declined to have given a Look
unto the Remedy which the Almighty had provided for him, when the mortal
spreading Venom of a Scorpion had set his blood in a torturing flame?
Epecially, when all the world (as I perceive by what the Roman Poet Lucan wrote
many Ages after) could not help to any other cure of the stinging Strokes which
the Tayls of these Presters gave? Every Unbeliever here is to be charged with a
more brutish and stupid Madness. Indeed the Jewish ^almud affirms, that a Look
mith the eye to the brazen Serpent did the people in the Disart no good, unless
there were at the same time a look with the heart unto the heavenly Father
also. (...) assuredly, without your Look unto Jesus Christ, (...) is impossible
that your Souls should do any other than Welter and languish under dolours more
scorching than Rivers of burning Brimstone or of running Bell-metal world
without end. It Is uncertain what your esteem of Salvation is, but surely
Salvation should be worth a Look. My Friend, if the Savior had bid thee do
some great thing, would thou not have done it? yea, thou should have
reckoned Salvation to be worth Rocks of Diamonds. Thousands of Rams, and the
Thousands of Rivers of oil, are not too much to be parted with by him that
would have SALVATION. What an obdurate heart of Adamant must he then have that
shall be disobedient when our Lord only faith LOOK and be saved! You have now a
season to secure Salvation at so cheap a rate; but I may not break off till I
have most vehemently and faithfully protested unto you, that you shall not
always have so. You are here mourning over a man in Irons whose life will be
done before this week be out: and yet who among you can say that your Great
Change is not nearer unto you? but I do with utmost ardour of spirit declare
unto you, That if your souls are found Faithless and Christless when they are
required of you, Woe, woe unto you ten thousand times, -- for infinitely more
than ten thousand Ages. He that made you will not have mercy on you; He that
formed you will show you no Favor. You shall, be banished from the light of
his countenance for evermore. Because you would not look unto the Son of God
while the day of His patience did continue, you, shall miserably perish when
his wrath is kindled more than a little. Then instead of the delightful sound
which the Highpriests Bells do now make, of Look and be saved, or the silver
Trumpets wherewith the Lord Christ does proclaim a Jubilee of (...) to Captives
and opening of the prison to them that are bound, you shall hear nothing but
the Thunder of his exasperated Jealousy. Now you have him offering of Salvation
for a Look, but if you are such deaf Adders as to disregard the same, you shall
hearafter look unto him, and see nothing but Frowns and fierce Lightennings,
and flagrant sparkling Coals of Juniper about him: Alas, in the room thereof
you shall have from him only those bitter angry astonishing Words in Matt. 25.
41. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire. Then, O then all your looks
unto him will meet with such confusion as the Lord speaks of in Zech. 7. 13. It
is come to pass, as he cried and they would not hear, so they cried and I would
not hear, says the Lord. And will you make such a choice as this, ye children
of Folly? You that have a million times bin harkening to the bloody Devil when
he has said serve me and take Hell for thy pains: will you not hearken unto
that* altogether lovely Lord who says unto you, Look unto me, and I with all
my Salvation will be thine Verily, the most black mouthed Oaths, and foul
Uncleanness and filthy Drunkennesses of the vilest Debauchee, will not pull
down forer Punishment than this UNBELIEF will bring upon the UNLOOKING Sinners,
who will thus render themselves as the Fat of Lambs before the JUSTICE of the
Almighty for their contemning the Lamb of God. I pray you Brethren, do not thus
wickedly. O do not for want of a Look make it more tolerable for Sodom and
Gomorrha in the day of Judgment than for you. O that the eternal Spirit would
rend the heavens and come down to rend the hearts which are still shut against
all the motions that Jesus Christ does make unto them. It is foretold
concerning the Day of the Lord's working upon Israel, in Isai. 12. In that day
shall a man look to his Maker. O for the Dawns of such a day upon us, wherein
it may be said, In this day, many a man looks to his Redeemer. O that every
seat within these walls might be full of the believing souls, who at this
moment say unto the Lord Jesus Christ, as he in Psalm. 5. 3. My voice shall Thou
hear, O Lord, and I will look up: and who will evermore keep looking, and
looking, and looking, unto the Lord Jesus Christ, until He do arise and save
them. Amen.

But what is thus said unto All is now mainly to be said unto One. I see a
Condemed Prisoner here, to whom this CALL of the GOSPEL is most particularly to
be directed.

The Message which I have to bring unto You, is like that which the Prophet
once carried unto a better man, O Set thy Soul in order, for thou shall DIE and
not live. It is indeed a very sorrowful thing unto us, to see, that a man in
his early days should thus die before his time for his being wicked overmuch!
That when half the Age of a man has not passed over you, a doelful dreadful
Storm of God does hurry you away from your afflicted family. Yea, that men do
clap their hands at you, and hiss you out of your place. I hope there are no
such flinty bowels here, as do not yern over you: yet the Land must not be
polluted by the sparing of you. You have slain a man to your wounding and a
miserable man to your hurt. You that have been wont formerly to say of the
Sabbath, What a weariness is it? must not now be permitted to draw your breath
until the Revolution of another Sabbath. Behold Now is your accepted time, Now
is your day of Salvation. By that time a few swift hours are flown away, your
precious and yet perishing soul is to be hurried away into Eternity. -- But O
what a (...) soul ga^tring word is that, ETERNITY, ETERNITY! If within 4 or 5
days you have not secured the Salvation of your soul by looking unto Jesus
Christ, your soul, that never-dying Soul of yours, that Spark of Immortality
which yet takes up its lodging in you, must be broken in the place of dragons,
for as many millions of Years as there are stars in the Sky, or drops in the
Sea, or sands on the Shore, and yet be no nearer to ^he end of the Gnawes and
Scalds that shall overwhelw it, than the first moment that they began. (...)
Sips of the cup which is there always in the trembling hands of the Out cast
Ones (...) before now made a man in this world to say* I desire no greater
mitigation of my misery, than that I might ly in the room of the Back-log
behind the fire on my hearth forever. Suerly you don't intend (...) try how you
can grapple with such a Damnation, as you are now upon the brink and the
Border^ of Can your heart be strong, or can your hands endure in the day that I
shall deal with you? says the Lord.

I am glad for the seemingly penitent Confession of your monstrous Miscarriages
which yesterday I obtained in writing from you, and which indeed was no more
than there was need of. But it now remains yet* That you give your dying Looks
unto the Lord Jesus Christ for Salvation* from all your Guilt, and from all the
Plagues in the flying Roll which that does expose you to. The manslayer of old
had a City of Refuge to befriend him; Behold I do this day in the name of Jesus
Christ point you to such an one. O poor soul, LOOK, look up, and run unto it. O
don't sit down on this side a full Resignation of your self unto Jesus Christ,
left the Everlasting and the ever-bnrning Vengeance of the Almighty do overtake
you in your doing so. For your Assistance herein, besides what I have more
privately said to you, since you first writ to me your desires of speaking
with me, I have now only these Requests to make unto you. My (...) Request unto
you is,

That you would at this hour think of an Interest in Jesus Christ, as you will
quickly at the hours of your death and of your judgment. Surely when the
Executioner is laying the cloth of Death over your eyes, the Look with the
Shrick of your* soul will then say, O now a 1000 worlds for an interest in
Jesus Christ! Surely, a few minutes after that, when your naked soul shall
appear before the Judgment seat of the most High, you will again have it over,
An Interest in Jesus Christ is now worth whole mountains of massy gold. O let
this be now the settled opinion of your awakned heart: reckon that if God help
you to give one Look unto Jesus Christ, it will be a greater mercy to you than
if not only a life in this world, but all the Riches and honor and pleasures
of it were bestowed upon you. My next Request to you is,

That you would look upon Jesus Christ, as not only able but willing to be your
Savior. It is true, that you have murdered your own soul many Thousands of
times, by leading a life of most horrid Impietyes. It is true that after all
you have murdered the Body (and no thanks to you if not the soul) of your
Neighbor too. Yea, it is true, (and O that the Rock in your bosom might ^low
with tears at the stroke of such a thought) that you have by sin wickedly
murdered the Lord Jesus Christ Himself, Yet, yet is the Lord Jesus Christ from
yonder heaven this day pleading with you, O look upon Me as one ready to be
thine. He that says, Look unto me all (...) end of the earth, also says, Poor
man, do thou look unto me from thy Dungeon, yea; and when thou shall be at the
end of the Town upon thy Ladder also. Oh Jesus Christ is that Savior who said
once to a Malefactor in the afternoon wherein he was hanged, This day shall
thou be with me in Paradise Christ is that Savior who made a pardoned
Discipile of one from whom he was put to cast out (...) devils, perhaps as many
fiends as your soul has bin the Castle of. Multitudes of such bloody creatures
as the infamous Manasseh was have been taken under the merciful wings of Jesus
Christ. O thou Prisoner of hope, it is not an utterly impossible thing, that
Jesus Christ should take from the Gallows unto Glory.

My Third Request unto you is, That your looks unto Jesus Christ may be very
humble, exceeding sincere, and exceeding earnest. O while you are looking to
Jesus Christ be loathing of your self. Abhor and condemn your self as most
worthy of all the crushes that you can have in the wine press of Omnipotent
Fury, of all the ^owling Torments between the Millstones in the Pit below. And
set every way of wickedness become hateful, yea, more bitter than death unto
you, as rendering you obnoxious hereunto. Nay, set open the Door of your soul
unto the Savior that is knocking at it, for this very thing, that he may make
it an evil and a better thing unto you, to forsake the Lord: for* if you go out
of the world with any (...) morsel in your mouth or with any harbored beloved
l^st of which you don't truly say, Lord, (...) me from it. I do most solemnly
testify unto you, It had bin good for (...) that you never had been born* you
shall becomeas a glowing Iron fully possessed by the hot wrath of God; and you
shall be made as a fiery Oven filled with his indignation, without any Ease,
without any End. Be also most importunate in your Sighs and Cries unto Jesus
Christ for such desirable things, urge hard, (...) for the life of a soul that
shall never die. If the Court should say to you, Beg hard and you shall live.
Oh how affectionate would you be! Soul, the Lord Jesus Christ says that thing
to you, If thou can heartily look and beg thou shall not be hanged up among
the monuments of my vengeance in chains of darkness forevermore. How can you
now be silent or senseless? or not strive in prayer? or not stir up your self to
take hold of such boundless mercy? It was indeed the insolent speech of Pilate
unto Jesus Christ when he had Him at his Barn, Speak thou not unto me?
know thou not that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to release
thee? But it is more fitly spoken by Jesus Christ unto you, Know thou not
that I have power to destroy thee soul and body in hell forevermore? know
thou not that if thou passest a day or two more without a due regard unto me,
thou can not be saved therefrom, though the life of all the Angels in heaven
should be proffered for thy ransom; and speak thou not unto Me? O thou
deplorable soul, speak and seek and look unto Him as for Life eternal (...)

May last Request unto you is, O give and get all the Honor you can unto that
Jesus from whom you look for your Salvation. While you are seeking to look well
unto Him, O see that you speak well of Him, and do well for Him, until you
shall speak and do and be among the living on the earth no more. Surely you
have by presumptions things enough reproached him already. The sharp Ax of
Civil (...) will speedily cut you down; O for a little good fruit before the
blow! Manifest your penitence for your Inequities by a due care to excel in
tempers quite contrary to those ill Habits and customs whereby you have
heretofore blasphemed the worthy Name of Christ and Christianity. Especially
employ the last minutes of your Life ^in giving a zealous Warning unto others
to take heed of those things which have bin destructive unto you. Tell them
what wild Gourds of death they are by which you have got your Bane; point out
before them those paths of the destroyer which have led you down so near unto
the Congregation of the dead. When the numerous crowd of spectators are 3 or 4
days hence thronged about the place where you shall then breathe your last
before them all, then do you with the heart-piercing groans of a deadly wounded
man (...) on your Fellow-sinners that they would turn now every one from the
evil of his way. Beseech of them to keep clear of ill Haunts and ill Houses,
with as much dread of them* as they could have of lying down in a nest of
poisonful (...) Beseech of them to abhor all Uncleanness as they would the deep
ditch which the abhorred of the Lord do fall into. Beseech of them to avoid all
Excess in Drinking as they would not rott themselves with more bitter Liquors
than the Waters of (...). Beseech of them to moderate and mortify all
inordinate Passions as they would not surrender themselves into the hands of
Devils that will hurry them down into deeper Deeps than they are aware. Beseech
of them to Shun idle Swearing as a Prophanity that the GOD to whom Vengeance
belongs will not permit to go unpunished. Beseech of them to avoid Curses on
themselves or others, lest while they like Madmen so throw about firebrarnds
and arrows and death, they bring upon their own heads, as you have done, the
things which they are apt ramly to be wishing of. Beseech of them to beware of
Lying, as they would not be put to need and crave and be denied a drop of water
to cool their tongue* in the place of Torment. Beseech of them to be as averse
to all Stealing as they would be to carry coals of fire into the Nests that
they so feather by their dishonesty. Beseech of them to price the means of
Grace; to sleep At or keep from ^ermons no more; to love the Habitation of
God's house, and the place where His Honor dwells lest God do soon send their
froward barren souls to dwell in silence, where there never shall be a
Gospel-Sermon heard; never, never as long as the Almighty sits upon His
Crystal Throne.

And when you have given these Warnings upon the Leader from whence you shall
not come off without taking an irrecoverable step into eternity; O remember
still you give unto Jesus Christ the honor of LOOKING to Him for His
Salvation. Remember that if you would do a work highly for the honor of Him,
This is The work of God, that you Believe on Him. Even after your eyes are so
covered as to take their leave of all lights below, still continue LOOKING unto
Him whom you have heard saying, Look unto (...) And now let the Everlasting
Savior LOOK down in much mercy on you: O that He would give this Murderer and
extraordinary Sinner, a place among the Wonders of free Grace! O that this
wretched man might be made meet for the Inheritance with the Saints in Light;
being kept from such an unrepenting and deluded heart as (...) fire will find
Fuel in.

And be thou pleased, O Holy Lord God Almighty to sanctify this Example so,
that the Sinners in this Zion may be afraid, and that Fearfulness may surprise
the Hypocrites thereof, and they may all hear, and fear, and do wickedly no
more.

AMEN, AMEN.
AN EXHORTATION To A CONDEMNED MALEFACTOR Delivered March the 7 th 1686.

By JOSHUA MOODY, Preacher of the Gospel at Boston in New England.

Ezekiel. 33. 9. If thou warn the wicked of his way to turn from it, if he do not
turn from his way, he shall die in his iniquity, but thou shall deliver thy
soul. Josh. 7. 19. -- Give glory -- to the God of Israel and make Confession to
Him, and tell me what thou have done. Isa. 55. 6, 7. Seek the Lord while he may
be found, call ye upon him while he is near. Let the wicked forsake his Way,
and the unrighteous man his Thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and He
will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for He will abundantly pardon.
Printed at BOSTON, by R. P. Anno 1687.

To the Reader.
I T was the Motion of many, and the Importunity of some that drew from me my
consent to make this (almost extemporary) discourse thus public. The Prisoner
sent to me on the Afternoon before the Sabbath, a writing under his hand,
wherein he owned the Justice of God in bringing him to this untimely End, and
the Righteousness of the Sentence of Man upon him* together with a Confession
of those sins that he had lived in all his days, of which there is something
spoken in the Sequel: adding 2 Requests, viz. that I would take some Notice of
him in my Sermon, and that I would give warning to those of his Fellow- Siners
that had been guilty of the like evils, left they also become like monuments of
divine Justice. Such reasonable requests especially from a dying man I could
not deny. My Subject that day was Isa. 12. 1. and my Business at that time to
discourse of the necessity, means and marks of the turning away of God's Anger,
which I judged not unsuitable for a person in his condition; accordingly did, as
there was occasion, apply my self particularly to him in my Sermon, which is
not so proper to insert here, What was directly spoken to himself, or to others
at his desire, so far at least as my memory would serve me, is committed to the
Press, and added as an Appendix to those more studied sermons which the Lord
put into the heart of other of His Servants to preac^ for his sake that is
gone, and publish for the good of others that survive. The good Lord follow the
whole with his blessing, and grant that all Israel may hear and fear, so that
there may no more such great wickedness be done in this our Land.

Joshua Moody.

WHat I have to say to the poor condemned Prisoner shall be under these Two
Heads: viz. Something* 1. By way of Conviction and Awakning. 2. By way
Encouragement and Counsel First, To begin with Matter of Conviction and
Awakening, and though I understand he is already somewhat considerably affected
and concerned, yet more of that may be useful for him. And here I shall use all
Plamess and Freedom, taking it for granted, that dying men are past all
expectation of Flatteries or Complements, and that plain dealing, which will do
most Good, will find best Acceptance.

1. Thou stand here before the Lord and his People at this Time, as a solemn
Example of that sacred Text, Numb. 32. 23. You have sinned against the Lord,
and be (...) your sin will find you out. This day is this Scripture awfully
fulfilled upon you. You have owned under your hand that you have lived all your
days in those abominable sins of Cursing, Swearing, Lying, Drunkenness and
Sabbath-breaking, such sins as that the least of them (however you have made a
light matter of them) without deep Humiliation and sincere Application to the
Blo^d of Christ, is enough to exclude you forever from any Inheritance in the
Kingdom of Heaven. 1. Cor. 6, 9, 10. And those that have been acquainted with
you think you have not wronged your self in that Confession. Besides all the
other evils that your own heart is privy to, and many more which the All seeing
God has observed in you. I speak not this to upraid you but further to humble
you, and withal to tell you, that you glorify God by this Confession. Thus you
say you have lived, and these sins you traded in, till now at last the Lord has
lest you to commit that great and horrendous Sin of Murder, in the doing of
which you have even filled up your measure, and all the rest of your sins do in
this one sin find you out and light upon you. You may look at this sin as part
of the punishment of your former and other sins. And it is one of the Lord's
most righteous, but withal most tremendous wa^es of punishing Sin; viz. with
Sin, or by Sin: Lesser sins are punished by leaving men to greater sins. Thus
did the Lord punish the Gentiles, Romans 1. 18, etc. the Apostle there calls it
the Revelation of the wrath of God from heaven, when for their Unthankfulness
and Vanity etc. He gave them up to vile Affections, and Actions, among which
Murder is mentioned as one, v. 18. -- 32. Solomon tells us, Prove. 13. 21 that
Evil pursues sinners, and it is true of the Evil of Sin and the Evil of
Punishment both, that they do pursue sinners, tho there that of Punishment is
properly intended, as appears by the Opposition unto the Good which shall be
repaid to the righteous. You have bin pursuing the evil of Sin, and the evil of
Punishment has been in the mean time pursuing you, and now you are overtaken
and seized thereby.

2. The Great and terrible God is dreadfully angry with you for this sin, and
for all the rest that that have bin previous thereunto. The only Subject upon
which that fearful thing the Anger of God fa^ls, is Sin, and Sinners for Sin.
All His own works are good, his Creatures good, so owned and pronounced in Genesis
1. 31. and therefore the Lord is pleased with them, SIN only that is the Devils
work and Man's work, God is angry with. You have heard something even how of
the nature of God's Anger, but who knows the Power of it. Psalm. 90. 11. And
you are the person against whom this inconceiveable Anger is enkindled; O let
this word sink down into the bottom of thy Heart, and pierce thy very soul. Say
to thy self, I am the man with whom the eternal GOD, the Sovereign of the whole
World is angry. Think on that Text, and let thy heart meditate terror the
while, Psa. 7. 11. God is angry with the wicked every day. While thou were
Cursing, Swearing, Drinking, to excess, etc. God was angry with thee, even
every one of those days was he angry, while thou were wickedly transgressing,
living in a course of open Transgression, He was angry all the while; Thou were
conceiving Sin, and God was conceiving Anger, which is now brought forth, tho
thou tookst no notice of it, nor had any dread of it before. Especially He is
severely angry with thee for this execrable Sin of Murder, for which there is
no expiation but by the death of the Murderer; whereof that Reason is given
Genesis 9. 1. because man was made in God's Image, so that the Killing of a man is
the Destroying of the image of God. Murder is a fill against the light of
Nature; and so heinous that the Barbarians who had no knowledge of the true God,
yet concluded that Vengeance followed the Murderer up and down, so that though he
may escape for a while, however at length it would not suffer him to live. Act.
28. 4. Know then that this is the main thing thou have to think on, this is the
most terrible thing before thee, not so much the pain or shame of the death
thou art speedily to undergo, as the Anger of God that comes with it. This is
the great Concernment of every man at all times, and of thee principally at
this time: How stand matters between God and thee? how is He affected, is He
angry or pleased? Why, I tell thee, That God whose favor is life, and whose
Wrath is Death, He is angry with thee. That Anger of God at which the Heavens
shake, the Earth moves, the Hills quake, the Rocks rend, Hell it self trembles
is now upon thee. The Devils believe that there is a God and tremble, Jam. 2.
16. do thou believe that, and further that God is angry with thee, and tremble
at it.

3. You are by the Law of God and man, for this Sin declared to be a person
whom the earth cannot bent. The Creation groans under you is a common Enemy to
mankind, and one who by the positive and indispensable Command of God must fly
to the pit and no man must stay you, Prove. 28. 17. This is the Decree of God,
and the righteous Sentence of man concerning you.

You are yet but a young man, and according to ordinary course might have lived
many years in this world, had not your overmuch Wickedness brought you to die
before your time, as Eccles. 7. 17. Not before God's time, but before your
time, i. e. before that time which is usual for man, whose days are reckoned
threestore and ten, and sometimes four score years. Ps. 9. 10. Also before your
time which probably you had lotted on, and which men too often do promise
themselves. Such as upon any awakenings of Conscience and Calls to Repentance,
delay and put it off while in their Youth, it is upon a promise of repenting
when they are old, and how many in that sense die before their time!

And here for your further awakning, observe the Lord in his Providence making
good another dreadful word upon you, viz. that (...) and deceitful men shall
not live out half their days, Psalm. 55. 23. Thus you are a son of Death. God
and man have said to thee, Oh wicked man, thou shall surely dye.

4. Your time is numbered and almost finished. Indeed God has numbered all our
times and Years and the number of our months is with him, Job. (...)* 8. But
the number of your (I cannot say month but) days is with your self, you your
self may number your own days; The Lord teach you to apply your heart unto
wisdom while numbering them, Psalm. 90. 12. You are just now upon the very brink
of the Pit, the Grave is ready for you, upon the very Edge of Eternity are you
(I say eminently you) now walking, and will be within the line of it very
speedily.

Job could say, when a few years are come, then I shall go the way whence I
shall not return, Cap. 16. 22. But you may say, Before 4 days are come and
gone, I shall be gone to the place from whence I shall not return till the very
heavens be no more. It made Belshazzar's Countenance to be changed, the joints
of his loins to be loosed, and his knees to knock one against another, to set
the Handwriting upon the wall. Dan. 5. 6. and we may imagine (or at least one
would think you whose very case it is may imagine) how his thoughts within him
were troubled, when the Interpretation laid that dreadful doom upon himself,
that his Kingdom was numbered and furnished by God, and it was meant of his life
and All, which was lost that night. v. 27. 30. It Is true, we have none of us
any lease of our lives, we cannot say what may be^al us this night, and yet (O
amazing Madness and Folly!) how apt are we (if not to boast of, yet) to lot
upon tomorrow! How ready to promise to our selves many year and as the Fool in
the Gospel did! L^^. 12. 20. who well (...) the name of Fool, had it been for
that one evidence of it only.

But for your part, you have your bounds set, and told you, beyond which you
cannot pass; you know at the utmost the Date of your life, and Day of your
Death, you may die sooner, but you must not live longer, your end is in your
view, you have but a few steps thither, and had not need take any vain,
unprofitable or false ones.

You seem to bewail your sin of Sabbath-breaking, well, know that you shall
never have another Sabbath to break. -- The Lord help you to keep this as you
ought. I cannot pass this particular without once more commending it to your
serious Consideration; O chew upon it, dwell upon it, that a few hours hence
you shall cirtainly dye. It Is a very awful thing to us to look upon you, a
person in your Youth, Health, and Strength, Breasts full of milk, and Bones
moistened with marrrow and then to think that within so many days this man,
though in his full Strength must die: and methinks it should be much more awful to
you.

5. Your Death will not expiate your Offense in the sight of God, nor cause the
Turning away of His Anger from you: Its true the shedding of your blood will
take away, the Sin from the Land that it shall not ly there, else innocent
blood should be imputed to the Land; but this does nothing toward the
Satisfaction of Gods Justice In order to the Removal of his wrath from the
Murderer. Punishment makes no amends for Sin, unless it be that which was
inflicted upon Christ as he stood in the capacity of a Surety in behalf of the
Elect, and so bare both their sin and their punishment, but otherwise Hell
torments don't satisfy God's Justice nor quench the fire of his wrath, muchless
can any bodily suffering do it, tho it be the highest, even death it self. Do
not then deceive your self; Say not I have sinned, its (...), but am now to
suffer the Law, and that being undergone I shall then be quitt. It is so indeed
as to any thing that men can do to thee, but thy death does not at all deliver
thee out of the hands of Divine Justice. Nay rather Sixthty,

If you get not this Sin and all the rest of your sins done away, and so the
Anger of God removed, your approaching Death will be but the beginning of
Sorrows to you. However sensually or like a Beast (or worse) you have lived,
you shall not dye as Beasts dye, so as that there shall be an end of you and
all your sufferings together: No, no such matter. Your precious immortal soul
must live forever, and if you get not the fire God's Anger put out, Know that
there is a Fire kindled in his anger that shall burn to the lowest Hell.
Without Repentance into life (which is the gift of Christ, and for your Comfort
I tell you in the midst of all these bitter things I have been speaking to you,
he is freely willing to give it, even to you: Oh look upto Him heartily for the
same, I say unless you get this Repentance unto life) your death is but an
Inlet to the Second death. No sooner shall your guilty soul be forced out of
your wretched body, but it shall appear before God that gave it, there to
receive another manner of Sentence of Condemnation than what you have already
heard from man, by which you were condemned to dye, but there was room for a
Lord have Mercy on your soul, to be annexed, whereas in that Sentence there
will be no mercy upon your soul, for your soul is the principal subject of the
2 nd. death. Separating your soul and body asunder was the aim and will be the
issue of this Sentence, but the death and everlasting, utter loss of your soul
(for which nothing can be given to God in Exchange Mat. 16. 26. I will be the
meaning of this Sentence. Then shall your soul be committed into and left in
the hand^ of the Devil your master, whom you have served, that great Murderer
and Liar (who was so from the beginning, and is the father and lord of such) to
be dragged down by him into the place where your fellow-Murderers and
fellow-Lyars and fellow-Drunkards are, viz. into the lake that burns with fire
and brimstone, which is the second death Rev. ^1. 8. there to be tormented *
with the Devil and his angels, where the Worm never dies, and the fire never
shall be quenched. Marc. 9. 43. 44. You have a scareing Vision, Rev. 6. 8. of
one whose name was Death sitting on a pale horse, that vision is now before you
and it cannot but be very terrible and affrighting, but the main terror lies in
what comes after, Hell follows it, Hell follows Death hard at the heels.
Death is but the door between the two worlds, that lets the soul of a
Christless sinner out of this world into Hell. The Second Death after the
first, is the misery of the first, and the first would be compartively but a
small matter were it not for the second.

7. Finally, Consider you have no time to get sin pardoned and wrath turned
away (if it be not done already) but between this and Death, into the very
Borders, and under the Sentence of which you now are. In the grave there is no
repentance, no Remission, Eccl. 9. 10. Before 4 days more pass over your head
(and Oh how swiftly do they fly away!) you will be entered into an Eternal and
unchangeable state of weal or woe, and of Woe it will be if speedy and thorough
Repentance prevent it not.

Thus far by way of Conviction and Awakning. My 2 nd Word is principally by way
of Counsel. Unto which I shall promise a Word of Encouragement, lost what has
bin said may seem to harsh and severe to a man in his Condition. But the Wound
must be opened and searched before the Plaster be laid on; and there is a
Plaster as large as the sore, the Lord in mercy make it stick. Know then, That
notwithstanding all that has bin spoken, there is Hope in Israel concerning
this thing. There is a way found out and revealed by God for the Turning of His
Anger even from such sinners. The blood of Jesus can wash away the guilt of the
sin of sheddng man's blood, for which no Ransom may be taken by man, yet God
has sound out a Ransom, and does now graciuosly offer thee the benefit of it.
-- (...) Paul was a Murderer and yet pardoned. Manasseh made the streets of
Jerusalem to swim with innocent blood, and yet was forgiven. Nay the greatest
Murderers that ever were in the world, even those that imbrewed their wicked
hands in the blood of the Son of GOD were, many of them, converted and
reconciled to God; and are now in heaven beholding the Glory of that Christ
whom they Crucified, Act. 2. And several others who were under the same
Condemnation, were exhorted in the following Chapter to repent and to be
converted, and were thereupon promised that their sins should be blotted out.
ver. 29.

It is true that no murderer has eternal life. 1* Jo^. 3. 15. and that
Drunkards shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1. Cor. 6. 10. and yet the next
words say ( ver. 11.) such were some of you, but you are washed, sanctified,
justified. If all Sins and Blasphemy against the Son of Man may be forgiven,
Mat. 12. 31. 22. then this Sin against one of the sons of men may be forgiven
too. God can pardon great sins, yea, and therefore or the rather pardon them
because great, Psalm 25. 11. And He does delight, where Sin has abounded to make
Grace super-abound, Romans 5. 20. And so I come to my word of Counsel.

And Oh let my Counsel be acceptable to the^* before thou be driven out from
among men, and put beyond all possibility of hearing or taking counsels.

1. See and be yet more affected with this deplorable condition, and let thy
soul be afflicted at the thoughts of it, and especially at thy sin that has
brought thee into it. I urge this again because thou can not be too much
concerned thereabout.

2. Look upon all thy life past: let this solemn hand of God upon thee bring
all thy sins to Remembrance. Consider how thou have walked is a Course of sin
from step to step, and let all thy Actual sins lead thee back to the Sin of thy
Nature, the evil Fountain from whence all these bitter streams have issued; and
let all put together make thoe vile in thine own eyes, and make thee to abhor
thy self for the same.

3. Beg hard for a broken heart, that may unfeignedly mourn for sin, that being
burdened with it thou may most bitterly weep, and sigh and groan (...) it.
Such sins as thou stand Convicted of call for the deepest Humiliation and
Contrition Its the bane of multitudes of Sinners in the world, that their
Convictions of Sin were but ^^eighty and their Humiliation superficial, and so
their Conversion not real. God will prick thee to the heart, yea and break thy
Heart all to pieces for thy sin if ever he pardon thee. Also bemoan thy self
for all thy Prophanness, Looseness, Sensuality which has exposed thee to this
great sin at last. Bewail all those evils which the holy God has to charge thee
with; thy Rending His Sacred name by Curses and Oaths, wronging His Truth by
Lying, Abusing his good Creatures to Excess, Making thy Belly thy god, and
sacri^^ceing the Lord's Blessings thereunto, which he sent thee for His own Use
and Service; And especially for thy rejecting of his Gospel, of which great and
horrible sin, thou art convicted out of thy own mouth, while thou were
profaning his Sabbaths, and neglecting to give thy Attendance on the public
Worship, and so turning away thine Ear from Hearing the joyful sound by which
thou might have been forever blessed. --

Let all these be remembered, and be as Gall and Wormwood to thy soul.

4. Acknowledge an Holy and Righteous hand of God in leaving thee to this great
Transgression. Confess what thou have done and give glory to God for what He
has done: Say, He is just for I have sinned. Yea, and glorify him for this,
that He can make even this Sin, at least the punishment* Attending it, a means
to bring thee to Repentance for all the rest of thy sins which else thou
might have gone on securely in, unto endless Perdition. This prodigious sin
of Murder, together with thy being brought to Condign Punishment for the same,
may (through the Sovereign Grace of God, who can bring good out of evil) be an
occasion by its loud cry of blood in thine ^ars to awaken thee out of that
sleep from which thou might else have never awakned, till everlasting
burnings had awakned thee. The Lord blessed Manasseh's being brought into
Chains to put him upon seeking the God of his Fathers; and the same God can
bless this Chain with which thou art now bound, as a means to bring thee to
everlasting Liberty. It Is one of the Lords ways of Dealing with men to bring
them to good; viz. when they are bound in Fetters, and holden in Cords of
Affliction, to show them their work and their Transgression that they have
exceeded in, and then to open their ears to Discipline and to command them to
return Jo^. 36. 8. 9. 10. Yea, and he can cause them to return by Sealing
Instruction at such a Time and in such a way. Thus can the Lord bring back thy
soul from the pit though thy body must go thither. It is I confess a strange way
to leave men to undo themselves, thereby to prevent their being everlastingly
undone: But doubtless there have been such Examples in the world, of men that
have been thus saved; and who can tell but thou may make one more?

5. Heartily bless God, and wonder at His Kindness therein, that He did not
suddenly take thee away with His stroke, as He has done many such a sinner as
thou have been. Many a Drunkard has staggered and reeled into the Pit, has
dropped into Hell in a moment, and gone full of Drink into the place where there
is not a drop of water to cool his tongue. Bless Him that he did not choke thee
with a Lie in thy mouth, or make thee fall down dead as soon as ever thou have
vented it. So were Ananias and Sapp^irah served, Act. 5. 5, -- 10. Bless him
that He did not stop thy breath just when some execrable Curse or Oath was out
of the evil Treasury of thy filtthy rotten heart crawling up that (...) of thy
thr^^^. Bless him that he did not strike thee dead in the place when the^ were
profaning of His Sabbaths and for not sanctifying that holy Rest unto God, that
He did not in the twinkling of an eye send thee to the place where thou should
have no rest, night no^ day. O bless him for this time of Patience and
forbearance; for a space to repent that Divine Long-suffering has afforded
thee. Bless Him that He has given thee a longer time of Consideration and
Preparation for a latter end, that that poor wretch had who was by thy cruel
hand hurried away unto Eternity in a little time. When thou gave him his
death's wound, Vengeance might have given thee a fatal stroke, and sent thee to
thy own place before him. But he is gone, and thou art left, and forborne a
little (though but for a very little) longer; -- let the Goodness of God lead
thee to Repentance.

6. See that of thy self thou have no way left to satisfy Justice or pacify
divine Anger. Say within thy self, Wherewith shall I come before the Lord,
before whose dreadful Tribunal I must appear within a few hours? And then say
to thy self, I have no thousands of rams nor 10 thousands of rivers of oil: and
if thou had, hear the Lord saying to thee that they would avail nothing; no,
not would the firstborn of thy Body be an expiation for the sin of thy soul.
All thy confessions* prayers, ^ears will not answer for the least of a Thousand
of those sins, under the guilt of which thy soul is now lying. Should thou
spend every precious moment of thy short time in Confessing Praing, sighing,
groaning, weeping, all that would not do. No, no: Here thou stand, a guilty
Creature, condemned of God and man; and can not strike one stroke toward thy
own Salvation nor deserve that God should do it for thee. God has judged thee,
and men have judged thee worthy of Death, and do thou judge thy self worthy of
Damnation too. A self-judging and self-condemning frame is a suitable frame for
thee to be in this day. (...) Humbly and heartily, like a poor, laborious heavy
lade^, perishing* s^i^tless Creature, cast thy self down at the Footstool of
the Throne of Grace crying and looking for the Mercy of God through the Merits
of Christ unto thy Pardon and Acceptance. And Oh the height and depth and
length and breadth of the Grace of God in Christ! There Is room for a Curser,
Swearer, Liar, Drunkard, yea and a Murderer too, to (...) at that Footstool
with hope. Then fly for refuge to lay hold on that hope that is set before thee
Heb. 6. 18. Flee away to the City of Refuge, and I do assure thee from God that
the Door stands ready to receive thee: and Oh make haste for the Avenger of
blood is at thy very heels. The City of Refuge under the Old Testament was only
to entertain the Manslayer, not the Murderer, him that killed a man
unwittingly and unwillingly, while the wilful Murderer was by express Command
from God to be delivered up: But herein (as in all other things) does the
Antitype out do the Type. Jesus Christ who was and is the Substance of that
shadow invites Murderer as well as Manslayer; and has declared it to be the
Father's Will and his own Resolution that whosoever comes to Him He will in no
wise cast out. Joh. 6. 37. The same Advice which was given to the Murderers of
Christ (as has been hinted to thee Act. 3. 20.) I do now in the name of the
Lord give to thee, Repent and receive Christ, and thou shall be saved. Thou
have sorely angered God already by all that Course of sin that thou have lived
in, and principally by this last great sin that thou art condemned for; now do
not anger Him yet more by neglecting to embrace his Son. Thou have done all
these Wickednesses, now don't add to all the rest that which will be
unspeakably more than all the rest, the reject-of a Savior; yea of a Savior
thus openly, freely, heartily, offering himself to thee, even to thee in
particular in this solemn Ordinance, and that as verily and as really as if He
should by an audible voice call to thee by name from Heaven and invite thee to
come.

Set thy heart to these things that from the Lord I am Testifying to thee this
day, for they are thy life. Hearken then, as for thy life, as for thy last, or
at least that which is next to thy last.

And that which I have to say to thee is this,

Behold Jesus Christ is for thy sake come into this place this day, this
Sabbath, this thy last Sabbath, which should therefore be a great Day to thee,
and here He stands, and cries to thee, that ^f thy guilty soul be heated and
scorcht by God's Anger and made thirsty after Righteousness which may put out
that flame, and allay that heat, and in which thou may be found in that day,
Lo, here it is for thee; Open thy mouth wide, and He will abundantly satisfy
thee. Hear Christ saying to thee, Thou condemned Malefactor, I pity thy case,
my bowels do yern over thee, and that dye thou must by a violent death, as to
the taking away thy bodily life, yet I profess I have no delight in thy
destruction, I have no pleasure in thy death, and (...) thou dye Temporally, I
would have thee live Eternally. Again, hear the same Lord Jesus asking thee and
expostulating the case about thy soul, What do thou mean to do with thy
soul? Whither* shall it go, when it leaves thy body? what care have* thou
taken about it? I Am afraid but little hitherto. Have thou provided a place of
rest for it? Why if thou be at a loss (and it is a good step to thy being found
if thou do feel thy self lost) if thou art afraid lest the devil should get
it at last, whose slave thou have too much bin all thy days and art willing to
be effectually eased of that fear, why then, (faith Christ) Give it me, while
it is yet thy own soul and thou art possessor of it, let me have it alienated
unto Me; it is indeed a silly, sorry, guilty, bloody soul, but be it as it is,
give it me, I know how to take and wash and cleanse and keep and save it. Don't
deny me, I have often asked thy heart and soul of thee, and could never yet get
a grant of thee I ask it once more, and it is one of the last times that I
shall ask it, and I came this day into this Ordinance on purpose to be sp^ke
thy soul that I may have it for my self, and save it for thee. Why thus is
Christ urging, entreating, pleading with thee, and even forceing himself upon
thee by His Importunity. How can thou send Him away grieved for want of His
Errand! Especially consider that if thou do not voluntarily and freely (Oh pray
hard that in this day of power He will make thy soul a willing soul) give thy
soul to Christ presently, the Devil will have it quickly whether thou will or
no.

Thou have then before thee this one great Duty of Believing, and He says to
thee this day, only believe; and that is my great Counsel in His Name.

If thou ask, What is Believing on Christ?

I Answer, It is for a poor, sinning, damned soul that is past standing in
himself, humbly to fall down before him, and prostrate it self at His feet,
that He may save it. It is to commit thy soul into the hands of Christ,
believing that He is able to keep what thou have committed to Him until that
Day.

I am informed that thou did this morning hear a precious Discourse in
another Congregation, from that most suitable and seasonable Text (Isai. 45.
22.) Look unto me and be ye saved all ye ends of the earth. Why that is
Believing; viz. Looking to Jesus for Salvation. Looking to and taking Him as
thy Lord and Savior. One such humble hearty Look will save thee, which if thou
can but do before thou go out of this world, then those that have bin
affectionately and sincerely looking up to God for thee, shall find thee to
their great Joy and Comfort at the right hand of Christ in the day of His
appearing among those sheep that heard His voice and followed Hint, though thou
did never hear him till one of the (...) of his voices, nor follow him at all
unless it were with some of thy latest Steps. And it will be magnifyed Mercy,
amazing Mercy if it be so.

The Lord grant it may be so.

Only remember also, that is no easy matter to believe, no easy matter to
repent, and if thou know ought of the nature of each, thou have experienced
it so to be. Faith and Repentance are the gift of Christ; ask them of Him, and
be well assured that He is more ready to give, than thou art to ask.

And if the Lord help thee now to believe, i. e. to receive and take up with
Christ as thy Lord and Savior, thou shall give glory to God by believing, and
the Lord will account Himself, by the righteousness of Christ, which by Faith
thou laidst hold on, abundantly satisfied for all the Dishonor thou have done
to Him all thy days.

Now if any thing will break a hard heart, sure it is the affectionate warming
yea melting Offers of the Grace of Christ in the Gospel unto a Person so vile
that might be ready enough to fear he had sinned himself into an estate
beneath, and out of the reach of Mercy. And Oh be speedy about this work:
almost all thy days are rolled away in Gods anger, thou may count the few
hours that are left thee, don't lose an hour, a Minute; spend every one of them
seriously in Reading, Meditation, Prayer, good Discourse, Asking Questions of
and Hearing Counsel from any that are concerned for thy soul.

Let it appear to all that look on thee that after so much mispence and loss of
precious time, the scarcity of it has raised the price with thee. Unto thee may
it be most truly said Now or Never.

And because he desires it, bear with me while I offer a Word of Warning and
Council to others. And it is commendable to see such a person desireous to have
his Companions in sin warned.

Are there any that hear me (and I wish there were not many) who are guilty of
Lying, Cursing, Swearing, Drunkenness, let me say to you*

You may not expect to have any come from the dead to warn you, but here is one
that is just going to the dead who bequeathes you this Warning, lest you also
be in like manner hung up as Monuments of God's wrath. God is picking him out,
and seting him forth to be an Example unto you Jude. 7. He might as righteously
have left some of you to have bin examples unto him and others; but unto the
holy Sovereign Counsel of God it has seemed meet to take him and leave you, and
in taking him has left you that solemn warning which if you take it not, shall
be a Testimony against you in that Day. And because he in his Writing desired
me that I would speak something to Young men, I would also desire them
especially to mind what is said, though as it concerns all, let every one take
his portion.

See wither lesser sins will lead you, even unto greater till at last you come
to the Great Transgression. Your frequent swallowing of Gnats will make you not
to stick at Camels. Custom of sin will take away Conscience of Sin; and when
Conscience of sin is gone, what sin is there that you are not ready for?

I shall speak a few words to each of those Sins which he Wills them a Warning
against.

Cursing and Swearing begin to grow common in this Land. It was not so in our
first days. I lived near 20 years in this Country before I heard an Oath or a
Curse. But now as you pass along in the streets, you may hear children curse
and Swear, and take the great and dreadful Name of God in vain. They have
learnt it from elder persons. Woe to those that taught them if they repent not.
The Lord will not hold you guiltless: You shall answer not only for your own
Oaths and Curses and Blasphemings of God's Name, but for the sins of those
Children whom you have taught, yea made to sin. It has always bin the great
design of Satan to debauch the Professors of Religion; hence he suggested to
Balaam the Counsel which he gave to Bal^k to draw Israel unto sin, to debauch
the Youth, and then he need not hire any to curse them because their holy God
would be wroth with them: and its dreadful to think what success the
Instruments of the Devil have had of late years in this Land. Those that vainly
swear, let (...) ^ead what Jesus Christ the Judge of all says, (and He is a
Judge that stands at the door and hears and is ready to judge both the quick
and the dead, (Jam. 5. 9. with Pet. 5. 5.) I say hear Him speaking thus ( Mat.
5. 34.) I say unto you, (and there is a great deal of weight to be laid upon
that Introduction, I say unto you swear not at all. The same is also repeated
by the Apostle James Cap. 5. 12. where note the form of veheinency and
earnestness (as one calls it) in which He propounds it, Above all things, Swear
not, it being a great Sin much in use, and when so, Manton Locum.
it is hardest left: therefore above all things do not swear, and its enforced
from the danger of falling into Condemnation. I remember (...) Herbert says in
his Advice to young men (...) the Swearer has neither any fair pretense (...)
^oing it, nor excuse when done, either from pleasure or profit, etc. and adds,
that if an Epicure he could forbear Swearing.

As to Cursing I shall commend that solemn Text to all that are guilty of it
Psa. 109. 17, 18, 19.) As he loved Cursing, so let it come unto him, etc. let
it come into his (...) like water and oil into his bones. The causeless Curse,
shall not come ( Pro. 26. 2.) unless it be upon the head of him that vented it.
The Apostle James inveighs against it among the evils of an unruly Tongue,
intimating how absurd it is, that out of the same mouth should proceed blessing
and cursing, that we should bless God* and curse men that are made in the same
Image, with the same Tongue Cap. 3. 9, 10. If ever you desire to be blessed, hate
and shun Cursing. God will curse them that curse.

The next is Lying, a Sin that we learn from the Womb, Ps^. 58. 3. and can
hardly leave it when old. Hence David saw need to pray to be kept from the way
of Lying Ps. 119. 27. A sin eminently contrary and so displeasing unto God, as
He calls Himself a God of Truth, and yet I may truly say, a Sin much
predominant among us.

We have had Truths Monthly Market kept of late in this place: and Truth has
solemnly bin exposed to Sale, in that faithful and true witness that has been
born to (...) worth of Truth, from that Text Prove. 23. 2^ and it has bin
offered a very good peniworth; what Buyers there have have bin God knows, and
the Day will Discover: but when the Truth is fallen in the Streets, and men
don't according to the rule Ephesians. 4. 25* every man speak truth to his Neighbor,
I fear they have missed their Market. If Truth be received into the heart in
the love of it, the tongue that speaks out of the abundance of the heart Mat.
12. 34. would be taught to utter Truth. Remember that great Command, love the
Truth and peace, Zech. 8. 19. and if you mean to have the latter you must love
and use the former. Truth and Peace come and go together. Want of Truth in
ordinary Converse, utterly spoils all Conversation here; and he that loves and
frames a Lie, makes a way to himself down to the lake which is framed and
prepared for the En-Entertainment of such Liars, Rev. 1. 8. and is the place
allotted to them all Herbert well advises men to dare to speak truth, and
adds, Vide his Church Porch
that nothing needs a Lie but a Fault, and that needs it least because it is
doubled thereby.

And O you Drunkards! Let Trembling take hold of you, especially you Drunkards
of Ephraim Isa. 28. 1. I mean Churchmember Drunkards, I wish there were none
such that hear me this day, who either are Church Members now, or were till
dismembered for that sin: see (I say) unto what end one of your Companions in
that sin is brought. God sometimes hangs up Drunkards in chains, as Spectacles
to the world, and that by snatching them away by some untimely End: Sometimes
they they fall in the Water, and are drowned, sometimes into the fire and are
burned, and sometimes by other observable Providence He sets a mark on those
sinners, and bears His Testimony against the Sin. And it was that sin chiefly
that exposed this poor creature to the sin of Murder for which he is now to
suffer. Receive Instruction lest Vengeance overtake you when you are least
aware of it.

Sabbath-breaking is likewise a growing evil and therefore to be testified
against. It was that Sin which brought Israel of old unto Desolation. Hear this
person telling you that he feels this sin now lying as an insupportable load
upon him. And believe it, all that are guilty of that sin, shall find it sooner
or later, alike burdensome to them. As men spend their Sabbaths, so they are.
The right Sanctifyer of the Sabbath is a blessed man, Isa. 58. 13, 14. It has
bin observed of old, that Religion lives and dies with the Sabbath. Hear this
dying man bewailing his Sabbath-breaking, and if you would not bewail also when
dying and suffer for it for ever, after you are dead, repent of and reform that
sin. Its worth observing, that this Duty of Sanctifying the Sabbath in the 4th
Commandment, is commended to the care and charge of Superiors and Heads of
Families especially. See that you set a good example, and require all that are
under your shadow to immitate you,

Whether there be any other present that are guilty of the the sin of Murder
God knows. Some Acts of Murder have been done among us sundry years since, the
Actors whereof lie yet concealed, but let them know; if there be any such, that
the Lord will have a time to bring to light all the hidden works of darkness.
The same hand that has delivered up this Murderer to Justice, will also find
out you at some time or other. You may wonder that a just and holy GOD has
suffered you to live all this while. Happy you if this Example may awaken you,
and Gods Forbearance may lead you to Repentance. Otherwise be assured that you
are but reserved to be punished, if not in this world, as usually such sinners
are, yet in the world to come.

To Conclude in a few words more to this Bloody Sinner.

Consider, that all who live under the Gospel, are brought to Jesus the
Mediator of the New Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks
better things than that of Abel, Heb. 12. 24. And thereupon its presently added
ver. 25. see that ye refuse not him that speaks from Heaven. Abels blood cried
for Vengeance upon the Murderer, but Christ's blood cries for Pardon: and
Christ Himself calls on thee to receive and not refuse Him; unto which Call if
thou yield the Obedience of Faith, His blood will speak on thy behalf. Thy Sins
speak bitter things against thee, old sins, sins of youth, a Course of sin, and
this bloody sin cries aloud and speaks most bitterly, but that blood of Christ
can out-speak, outcry all these. It was from Hence that David when under the
Anguish of soul for his Blood-Guiltiness, expected pardon and had it, and so
may thou, Psalm. 51.

Let thy heart leap to hear such Language of this blood. Go thy way and spend
that little time that is left thee in studying the Vileness of thy sins
committed, and the Misery unto which thou art thereby exposed, together with
the Excellence and Preciousness of Jesus Christ, and Him crucified, who is
ready to save thee from Sin present and wrath to come. And though thou art not
able to come, yet the glorious lifting up of Christ in the Gospel, together
with the general Invitation unto all that need Him, are the means appointed and
blessed by God to draw Men to come.

Christ would ^ain have the Honor of saving such a wretched Sinner as thou
art, and be thou well assured that unless thou add unto that Sin of shedding of
Man's Blood, the guilt of Refusing and Slighting of Christ's Blood, thou shall
not perish.

All the sins that ever thou have committed shall not damn thee, unless thou
add Unbelief to all the rest, viz. the wilful rejecting of a tendered Savior.
There is Wrath on thee, but it shall not be Everlastingly upon thee, if thou
Believe; it is Unbelief only that makes Wrath abide, ( Joh. 3. ult.) other Sins
do displease, but this only can destroy.

Look up to Him for the gift of Faith.

The good Lord open thine Ear, that thou may be no longer rebellious, but
help thee so to hear as that thy Soul may live.

FINIS.
The Printer to the Reader.
THe general Usefulness and Acceptableness of this Book, together with the
speedy sale of the 1st Impression, as also some honest gain to my self and good
to others, has inclined me to renew the Impression of it. But to render it the
more complete, I have (yet not without hazarding the displeasure of a worthy
Friend, the Reverend Person who labored for the best good of the Prisoner in
his last hours) procured (utterly against his knowledge, I entreat him that it
may be with his pardon) by an innocent Wile, the true Copy of the Discourse
which passed between himself and the Malefactor from the Goal to the place of
Execution; judgeing it would contain things for the profit of the living: The
last words of dying men being wont to leave no small Impressions on the hearts
of the surviving Spectators; many having bin captivated and convinced, and at
last converted (with the blessing of Heaven thereupon) by a Speech from an
illiterate Malefactor at the Gallows, who have broken the sharp shining Swords
of an Eloquent Divine, and laughed at the Shaking of his threatening Spear: and
it being upon experience found that the Publication of the Prison-discourses
between some other Malefactors and their friends has proved edifying to the
surviving. By a harmless Stratagem I have, as is said, got into my hands a
Transcript of the Sum and Substance of what was spoken: (drawn up, for ought I
know, for the Author's own use, or ye satisfaction of some of his private
friends, who I know have asked him to do it) it is as follows.

R. P.

The DISCOURSE of the MINISTER with James Morgan on the WAY to his Execution.
Min. IN m come hither to answer your desires which just now you expressed to me
in the Church, that I would give you my company at your Execution.

Morg. Dear Sir, how much am I beholden to you! you have already done a great
deal for me. Oh who am I that have bin such a vile wretch that any Servants of
God should take notice of me!

Min. I beseech you to make this use of it, I believe there is not one
Christian this day beholding you, who would not willingly be at the greatest
pains they could devise to save your precious soul: How merciful then is that
Man who is God as well as man! how unspeakably ready is the Ld. Christ to save
the souls of sinners that affectionately look unto him! The goodness and
pittifulness of the most tenderhearted man in the world is but a shadow of
what is in Him. The compassions of any man compared with the Bowels of a
merciful JESUS are but as the painted Sun, or the painted Fire in Comparison of
the real.

Mor. Oh that I could now look unto Him as I ought to do! Lord help me.

Min. Well, you are now a dying man, the last hour or 2 of your life is now
running. You know your self now to stand just on the brink of Eternity, you
shall presently be in a state of wonderful happiness or of horrible misery
which must endure forever: which of those estates do you now count your self
stepping into*

Mor. Oh Sir, I am afraid, but I am not without hope that God may have mercy on
me.

Min. What Is your ground for that hope? O see that your confidences been't such
as God will by'nd by reject.

Mor. I don't know well what to say, but this I hope is a good sign, I have
lived in many grieveous sins, in Lying, Drinking, Sabbath-breaking and evil
Company-keeping; God has made now these so bitter to my soul, that I would not
commit them again, might I have my life this afternoon by doing it.

Min. That Is a great word, God grant it may not be a word only, the good word
of a good pang, without a through chang of heart, as you must have if you would
not perish everlastingly You are not like to have any longer time in this world
to try the Sincerity of your Profession.

Mor. I know it, and I beseech you Sir to help me what you can: I hope the
means used with me since my Condemnation have not been lost.

Min. I would not have the sense of the pain and shame which your Body is about
to undergo, any ways hinder your Mind from being taken up about the
Soulmatters which I shall endeavor to set before you.

Mor. Sir, as for the pain that my body must presently feel I matter it not: I
know what pain is; but what shall I do for my poor soul? I Am terrified with the
Wrath of GOD; This, this terrifyes me, HELL terrifyes me: I should not mind my
Death, if it were not for that.

Min. Now the Lord help me to deal faithfully with you, and the Lord help you
to receive what He shall unable me to offer unto you. Mark what I say: You were
born among ye enemies of God, you were born with a soul as full of emnity
against God as a Toad is full of poison. You have lived now -- how many years?

Morg. I think about Thirty.

Min. And all these 30 years have you been sinning against the holy God. Ever
since you knew how to do any thing, you have every day bin guilty of
innumerable sins: you deserve the dreadful wrath and curse of the infinite God.
But God has brought you here, to a place where you have enjoyed the means of
grace. And here you have added unto your old Sins, most fearful Iniquityes: you
have bin such a matchless, prodigious Transgressor, that you are now to dye by
the stroke of civil Justice; to die before your time, for being wicked over
much. There is hardly any sort of Wickedness which you have not wallowed
in-That sin particularly which you are now to die for, is a most monstrous
Crime. I cannot possibly describe or declare the sins whereby you have made your
self an astonishing Example of Impiety and punishment.

Mor. O Sir, I have bin a most hellish sinner. I am sorry for what I have bin.

Min. Sorry you say: well, tell me which of all your sins you are now most
sorry for: which lies most heavy?

Mor. I hope I am sorry for all my sins, but I must especially bewail my
neglect of the means of grace. On Sabbath days I used to lie at home, or be
ill employed elsewhere when I should have bin at Church. This has undone me!

Min. And let me seriously tell you, Your Despiseing of Christ is a most
dreadful sin indeed. You have, for whole years together had the Call of Jesus
Christ to seek an Interest in him, and you would now give all the world for
that interest, but you would take no notice of him. The Jews of Old put him to
a worse death than yours will be this afternoon, and by your contempt of Christ
you have said, the Jews did well to do so. How justly might ^e now Laugh at
your Calamity? And for these sins of yours, besides the direful woes and
plagues that have already come upon you, you are now exposed unto the Vengeance
of eternal fire. You are in danger of being now quickly cast into those
exquisite amazing Torments, in comparison of which, the anguishes which your
body ever did feel, or shall feel before night, or can ever feel, are just
nothing at all; and these dolorous torments are such as never have an End; as
many sands as could lie between this earth and the Stars in Heaven would not be
near so many as the Ages, the end-less Ages of these Torments.

Mor. But is there not Mercy for me in Christ?

Min. Yes, and its a wonderful thing that I have now further to tell you: Mind,
I entreat you. The SON of GOD is become the Son of Man; the Lord Jesus Christ
is both God and man in one Person, and he is both sufficiently able and willing
also, to be your Savior. He lived a most righteous life, and this was that
such as you and I might be able to say before God, Lord, accept of me as if I
had lived righteously. He died at length a most cursed death, and this was that
we might be able to say unto God, Lord, let not me die for sin, since thy Son
has died in my room. This glorious Redeemer is now in the highest heaven,
pleading with God for the Salvation of His chosen ones. -- And He pours out his
Spirit continually upon them that do believe on him: might you then be enabled
by his grace to carry your poor, guilty, condemned, enslaved, ignorant soul
unto Jesus Christ, and humbly put your trust in him for deliverance from the
whole bad state which you are brought into. Oh then his voice is to you the
same that was to the penitent Thief, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

Mor. Oh that I might be so! Sir I would hear more of these things: I think, I
cannot better fit my self for my death than by harkening to these things.

Min. Attend then: The never dying spirit that lodges within you, must now
within a few minutes appear before the Tribunal of the Great GOD; in what, or
in whose Righteousness will you then appear? will you have this to be your
Plea, Lord, I experienced many good Motions and Desires in my soul, and many
Sorrows for my sin before I died: or will you expect to have no other Plea but
This, Lord, I am vile, but thy Son is a Surety for the worst of sinners that
believe in him; for his sake alone, have MERCY on me.

Morg. I thank God for what He has* wrought in my Soul --

Min. But be very careful about this matter: if you build on your own good
Affections instead of Jesus Christ the only Rock, if you think they shall
recommend you to God, He that made you will not have mercy on you.

Mor. I would be clothed with the Righteousness of JESUS CHRIST.

Min. But you cannot sincerely desire that Christ should justify you, if you
don't also desire that He should sanctify you: those 2 alwdies go together. Is
evry lust that has hitherto had possession of your heart become so loathsome to
you, that is would fill your soul with joy to hear Jesus Christ say, I will
subdue those Iniquities of thine; I will make a holy, heavenly, a spiritually
minded person of thee.

Mor. I would sin against God no more.

Min. But I must deal plainly with you: You have made it sadly suspicious that
your repentance is not yet as it ought to be: when men truly and thoroughly
repent of sin they use to be in a special manner watchful against that Sir
which has bin their chief Sin: one of your principal sins which has indeed
brought you to the Death of a Murderer, is Passion, unmortifi'd and outrageous
Passionateness: Now I have been this day informed, that no longer since than
the last night, upon some Dissatisfaction about the place which the Authority
has ordered you by and by to be buried in, you did express, your self with a
most unruly Passionateness.

Mor. Sir, I confess it, and I was quickly sorry for it, though for the present I
was too much disturbed: 'Twas my folly to be so careful about the place where
my body should be laid when my precious SOUL was in such a Condition. --

Min. Truly you have cause to mourn for it. Secure the welfarre of your soul,
and this (now) pinioned, hanged vile body of yours will shortly be raised unto
glory, glory forevermore. And let me put you in mind of one thing more, I doubt
you have not yet laid aside your unjust Grudges against the Persons concerned in
your Conviction and Condemnation: You have no cause to complain of them: and
you are not fit to pray, much less are you fit to dye till you heartily wish
them as well as your own soul: if you die malicious, you die miserable.

Mor. I heartily wish them all well, I bear Ill Will to none -- What a
lamentable thing is this, Ah this is that which has brought me hither!

Min. What do you mean?

Mor. I overheard a man mocking and scoffing at me when I stumbled just now,
he does very ill. I have done so my self: I have mocked and scoffed like that
man, and see what it has brought me to: he may come to the like.

Min. The Lord forgive that foolish hard-he. te^ creature. But be not too much
disturbed.

Mor. Yonder! I am now come in sight of the place where I must immediately end
my days. Oh what a huge Multitude of people is come together on this occasion!
O Lord, O Lord I pray thee to make my Death profitable to all this Multitude of
People, that they may not sin against thee as I have done!

Min. Amen, Amen ten thousand times; the Lord GOD Allmighty say Amen to this
Prayer of yours! It would indeed be an excellent thing if you could now come to
receive your death with some Satisfaction of soul in this thought, That Much
Glory is like to come to God by it: I am verily persuaded God intends to do
good to many souls by means of your Execution: This is a greater honor than
you are worthy of.

[After the Discourse had been intermitted about a minute or two by reason of
the miery way]

Mor. I beseech you Sir speak to me. Do me all the good you can: my time grows
very short: your discourse sits me for my Death more than any thing.

Min. I Am sorry so small a thing as a plashy Street should make me loose one
minute of this more-than-ordinary precious time: a few paces more bring you to
the place which you have now in your eye, from whence you shall not come back
alive. Do you find your self afraid to die there?

Mor. Sir, If it were not for the Condition that my SOUL must by and by be in,
I should not fear my death at all; but I have a little comfort from some of
Gods promises about that.

Min. And what shall I now say? There are among the last words that I can have
liberty to leave with you. Poor man, thou art now going to knock at the door of
Heaven, and to beg and cry, Lord, Lord open to me! The only way for thee to
speed, is, to open the door of thy own soul now unto the Lord Jesus Christ. Do
this, and thou shall undoubtedly be admitted into the gloryes of His heavenly
Kingdom: You shall fare as well as Manasseh did before you: leave this un done,
and there is nothing remains for you but the Worm which dies not, and the fire
which shall not be quenched.

Mor. Sir, show me then again what I have to do.

Min. The voice, the sweet voice of the Lord Jesus Christ, (who was once hanged
on a tree, to take away the Sting and Curse of even such a Death as yours) unto
all that close with him, His heavenly voice now is, Oh that I and my Saving
work might be entertained, kindly entreated, in that poor, perishing soul of
thine! Are you willing?

Morg. I hope I am.

Min. His Voice further is, If I am lodged in thy soul I Will sprinkle my blood
upon it, and on my account thou shall find Favor with GOD* Do you consent to
this?

Mor. This I want.

Min. But this is not all that he says, His Voice further is, If I come into
thy soul I will chang it, I will make all sin bitter to it, I will make it an
holy heavenly soul. Do you value this above the proffers of all the World?

Mor. I think I do, -- and now, Sir, I must go no further, Look here -- what a
solemn sight is this! Here lies the Coffin which this Body of mine must
presently be laid in. I thank you dear Sir, for what you have already done for
me.

Min. When you are gone up this Ladder, my last service for you before you are
gone off will be to pray with you: But I would here take my leave of you. Oh
that I might meet you at the right Hand of the LORD JESUS in the last Day!
Farewell poor heart, Fare thee well. The everlasting Arms receive thee! The
Lord JESUS, the merciful SAVIOR of Souls take possession of thy Spirit for
himself. The Great GOD who is a great Forgiver, grant thee Repentance unto
Life; and glorify himself in the Salvation of such a wounded soul as thine
forever. With HIM, and with His free, rich, mavelous, infinite Grace, I leave
you; Farewell.

FINIS.

