BY THE GOVERNOR AND COMPANY Of the MASSACHVSETS BAY in NEW ENGLAND AT A
General Court Held at Boston, on Adjournment, Feb. 16th 1685.
AS an Explanation of and Addition to the Law title Wills; Whereas the
Magistrates or Members of the respective County Courts have always had power
to Receive and Record all Probates of Wills, and of Granting Administrations,
etc.

It is further Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that each
County Court within this Jurisdiction, shall have full power and authority from
time to time, as they shall see cause, to Summon an Executor or Executors of
any deceased Persons last Will and (...) Proved and on Record, to appear before
the said (...) Require Him, Her or them to make and exhibit (...) the Court* a
just and true Inventory upon Oath (...) T^^^ments, Goods and Chattels of the
(...) with sufficient Sureties for the paying of all (...) Deceased. And in
case such Executor or Executors shall neglect or refuse so to do for the space
of (...), days next after, or such further time that the said Court shall (...)
limit and appoint; the Court shall proceed against (...) Imposing a fine or
fines upon them, not exceeding (...) Month for every Months default after the
expiration of (...) so appointed. Also upon the complaint of any Creditor
(...), to call any Executor or Executors to render an Account (...) their
Administration.

And it is further Ordered by this Court and (...) that the County Courts
respectively shall have full power to (...) any Information or Complaint from
any Legatary or Creditor (...) the Executor or Executors to the Will of any
deceased (...) the detaining from Him, Her or Them any Legacy or (...) by the
Testator, or Debt due from the Estate of such (...) to grant forth Summons or
Process, together with a Copy (...) Complaint or Information annexed for the
appearance of such Executor or Executors before said Court; the said Warrant
with the Libel annexed, to be served fourteen days inclusively before the day
appointed for Appearance: And it shall be in the power of the Court to Order
the time of Hearing, at their first Sessions, or at any Adjournment of said
Court, as to them shall seem meet: and upon neglect or refusal of such Person
or Persons to appear accordingly, the Court shall proceed to the Hearing of the
Case, and make the^ Judgment or Decree therein, and grant forth Execution for
the fulfilling thereof; likewise to Hear and Determine all Cases (...) unto
Wills and Administrations, and to grant forth Execution upon their Judgment
given therein.

Always provided, that where matter of Fact is controverted, then either
Plaintiff or Defendant, desiring the same before Issue joined, may have a Trial
thereof by a Jury, to be forthwith Summoned by Warrant from said Court, if
there be no Jury then Impannelled; the said party or parties making their whole
Plea or Allegation as to all matters of Fact, at their first hearing and
Answer, that Justice may not be delayed: allowing liberty for any party
agrieved at the Judgment and Determination of the Court, or Verdict of the
Jury, to Appeal to the next Court of Assistants, giving in their Reasons of
Appeal as the Law directs in other Cases. And every Person before his Complaint
be received and admitted, shall give Caution unto the Court to the value of ten
pounds in Money to respond all such Charges and Fees as the Court shall award,
any Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding; Provided this Law
shall not be understood to debar any person or persons from Proceeding in the
former and usual course of Law for the recovery of any Debt, or Legacy due from
the Estate of any Deceased person, expressly determined by Will.

And the Law Entitled An Addition to the Law title WILLS, Made October. 14th.
1685. is hereby Repealed.

By the Court, EDWARD RAWSON Secretary.


