The Way of Isreal's Welfare; OR AN Exhortation To be with GOD, that He may be
with us: As it was Delivered in a SERMON Preached at Hartford on Connecticut in
New England, MAY 13th 1686.

Being the Day of ELECTION there.

By Mr. John Whiting, Pastor to the second Church of Christ in Hartford.

2 Chronicles. 24.10. Thus says God, why transgress ye the Commandments of the
Lord, that ye cannot prosper; because ye have forsaken the Lord, he has also
forsaken you.

Amos 5.15. Seek good and not evil that ye may live, and so the Lord the God of
Hosts shall be with you, as ye have spoken.

Boston in New England; Printed by Samuel Green. Anno. 1686.

Christian Reader,
THe thoughts of the righteous ( Solomon tells us) are right, Prove. 12.4.
Their mouth speaks wisdom, and their tongue talks judg^^ent. What precious
thoughts have the Saints in (...) ages had of the presence of God with them:
Moses knew not how or what to do without it, Exodus 35.15. If thy presence go
not with us, carry us not up hence. Solomon in all his glory is an earnest
beggar for it. 1 King. 8.57. The Lord our God be with us, as he was with our
Fathers, let him not leave us or forsake us. Jeremiah reckoned himself and the
people with him to be in a dangerous, yea desperate condition if God should be
gone, and therefore pleaded accordingly, Jer. 14.4. O the hope of Israel, the
Savior thereof in the time of trouble, why should thou be as a stranger in
the Land, etc. Leave us not, etc.

Doubtless this was right: O that the same mind were in us. It would be our
wisdom and our understanding in the sight of all our observers. Woe be to us
when God shall depart from us, our Judges cannot deliver us, unless the Lord be
with them, Judge. 2.17. Our Proph^^^ cannot persuade us to believe and turn to
the Lord exce^^ his hand be with them. Act. 11.21. Our own strength suffices
not to carry us through duty, John 15.5. Without me, ye can do nothing: or to
uphold us in time of Temptation, 2 Chronicles. 32.31 How be it in the business of
the Ambassadors of the Princes of Babylon, the Lord left him. Our Enterprises
will not prosper except the Lord lend his helping hand, Psalm. 127.1. Except the
Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it. Our employments cannot
benefit or satisfy us, unless the Lord influence them, Mat. 4.4. Man shall not
live by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God,
Hag 1.6. Ye have sown much, and bring in little, ye have eat, but ye have not
enough; ye drink but are not filled with drink; ye cloth your selves, but there
is none warm, etc.

God with us is our safety and our glory: [our safety] Deuteronomy. 33.12. The beloved
of the Lord shall dwell safely by him, and he will cover them all the day long.
If God be for us, who can be against us? Men if not in affection, yet in effect
will be our Friends. The same Divine Wisdom and Grace, that turns the wrath
of man to the praise of God, will turn it to his peoples salvation: It Is our
glory also; Jerusalem had been the perfection of beauty, the glory of the whole
earth, Lam. 2.15. but when forsaken of God, her glory flies away as a bird,
all that honored her, despise her, because they have seen her nakedness, Lam.
1.9.

May the little flock in the Wilderness inherit the favorable presence of God,
it shall suffice: The lines fall to us in pleasant places, Josh. 1.17. Only the
Lord thy God be with thee as he was with Moses; (1.) he had been with Moses,
(2) for his presence in like manner to be with Joshua, was an only thing: (3)
When the people so prize and pray for it, they are not disappointed, as the
Context shows.

A light esteem of God is the danger of New England: he is not wont hastily to
forsake his people. How shall I give thee up Ephraim? But he likes to live
where he is loved^ Had he our hearts, (we should without fail) have his
Company, and although it may be feared, our shadow in this respect is gone back
many degrees, yet did we lament after him, and long for him; could our souls by
any means be quickened to follow hard after him, he would return for his
servants sake, the tribes of his inheritance.

To help in this great case is the scope of the ensuing exhortation* a word
spoken in season, like Apples of Gold in pictures of silver, the worth, beauty,
and pleasantness whereof bespeaks its acceptance at the first view. A Subject
of general concernment, wherein there is counsel for the Ruler, and instruction
to all the people. Hear ye me Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin: The Lord is with
you while ye are with him; a weighty word in which we are not dealt with all
about mint and annis, but life and death are set before us. Moreover the timing
of this instruction seems to carry with it something of particular Remarks*
The message sent us the last year, upon the like day and occasion, was as is
known. Be thou instructed O Jerusalem, least my soul depart from thee, least I
make thee desolate, a Land not inhabited. And now hear ye me Asa, and all Judah
and Benjamin, the Lord is with you while ye be with him, and if you seek him he
will be found of you, but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you. These are
solemn treatments from the God of Heaven: Shall the hope of Israel, the Lord
God of our fathers speak so much about leaving us, etc. and order in the way of
his Providence, that his word be left upon record, and published to the view of
all, and shall not we lay it to heart. Alas should poor New England lose the
presence of God, what would be left us but shame and misery. How precious a
name is Jehovah-Shammah, Honorable enough to be engraven on the gates of
Heaven: has not this been written in legible though in smaller letters, on the
Land on which we live, and shall we provoke the holy God to raze it out and
write upon us Jchabod instead thereof. O foolish people, not wise.

But I know the way of man is not in himself, so perverted are we by nature,
that until a day of power comes down upon us, our hearts will not incline to
God, and yet he needs not to be beholden to us; he can make himself welcome
when he pleases, our hearts are in his hands as the Rivers of waters. He can
prepare us for himself, and dwell with us in abundance of mercy. O Lord though
our iniquities testify against us; do it for thy Names sake.

S. H.

2 Chronicles. 15.2. The Lord is with you while ye are with Him.


TO make a little way to to these Words, with what is intended in and from
them, I will only mind you of some Remarkables the holy Story mentions,
concerning Asa King of Judah, viz. (1.) That he was sincerely godly, a perfect
and upright man: though he had his faults (as there is no man that sins not)
and fell sadly sundry ways, toward the close of his time, as may be seen,
Chap. 16.1, 10. Yet it is said of him in way of commendation, Chap. 15.17.
Nevertheless the heart of Asa was perfect all his days: not only he did that
which was right in the eyes of the Lord his God, Chap. 14.2. but he did it like
a Saint, as did David his Father, 1 King. 15.11. And thence also it stands
Recorded concerning Jehosaphat his Son and Successor, That he walked in the way
of Asa his Father, and departed not from it, doing that which was right in the
sight of the Lord, Chap. 20.32. (2.) That as an effect and evidence of Asa's
sincerity, he was engaged in that good work of Reforming Church and State, or a
diligent endeavor to mend what was amiss in Religious or Civil respects, Chap
14.3, 8. fot he took away the Altars of the strange gods, etc. (3) That he met
with disturbance by the endeavors of some of his evil-minded neighbors, Chap.
14.9. The Arabians, that were near borderers upon the land of Canaan, made War
against him. (4.) That a famous and even full victory was given him against
that multitude of enemies, by the power and goodness of God, Chap 14.10, to the
end. (5.) That in their return from the vanquishment of those adversaries;
there was a solemn and encouraging message sent them; Wherein may be minded,

1. By whom the message was sent, Chap. 15.1. God (the spirit of God) was the
Author, and Azariah the hand that conveyed it.

2. To whom the Message was delivered, ver. 2. Hear ye me Asa and all Judah and
Benjamin; The Leader and the People, etc. the Chief and his followers.

3. The Message it self, or matter of it, which is summarily presented in the
remainder of the second verse, and then is further illustrated and enlarged to
ver. 7. In this second verse, we have the main sum of the message that was
sent: and therein First, a general proposition set down. The Lord is with you
while ye are with him. Secondly, That general is explained and amplified by two
particulars presented, the one in way of promise, If ye seek him he will be
found of you; the other in way of threatening, But if you forsake him, he will
forsake you. It is the middle clause of the verse (or the general conclusion
therein declared) That I intend to propose a few words from, upon the present
occasion: Not to spend time in explaining the terms: I come immediately to the
Doctrine, which may be thus Delivered; DOCTRINE. That while a People are with
God, He also is with them;

Or thus, The Lord without fail is and will be with his People when or while
they are with Him.

The Lord is with you while ye are with him.

The Words (as is observed by some) may be referred to time past, present or to
come; and so rendered indifferently, The Lord has been, is, he will be with you
upon your being with him.

To unfold and confirm the Truth mentioned, three things may be minded as
matter of enquiry, viz. What it is for a people to be with God: and what for
God to be with them? and then whence or on what account He will be with them
while they are with Him.

Quest. What it is for a people to be with God? Two things seem to carry the
sense or sum of it, or there are two ways of a peoples being with God: viz. In
their hearts and in their lives:

First, To be with him in their hearts: when the heart is right in his sight,
and found faithful before him, as is said of Abraham, Nehem. 9:8. And foundest
his heart faithful before thee: There is a fixed heart-adherence to him; as the
good man gave the exhortation, Acts 11 23. That with purpose of heart they
would cleave unto the Lord. That with a steadfast immovable decree of heart
they should stick close to him; that nothing that they were to meet with, might
work a separation, or set them at distance again: And thus to be with him in
heart, is by faith, love and fear.

1. Faith in him. As unbelief separates, holds or sends away the heart: The
direct, natural, proper tendency and work of it is a heart-departure from God,
Heb. 3.12 An evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God; unbelief
makes the heart stand off and go away from God and Jesus Christ; so faith
carries it to him; it is oftentimes called coming, John. 6.35. coming or
believing are mentioned as the same thing; faith is the souls motion or making
out to God in Christ: And then it keeps the heart with him. The propriety of it
some not unmeetly express to be a t^ing by the Heart Strings to him: The heart
so stays upon him as to stay with him, makes its stand there. This was one way
of Asa^s being with God, as the Seer said to him, 2 Chronicles. 15.8. Because thou
did rely upon the Lord: His heart got near to him in a time of need* and so
himself in the same case, 2 Chronicles. 4.11. Help us O Lord our God, for we rest on
thee. He expresses his faith in prayer, which is the proper language of it:
The prayer of faith -- Faith in prayer brings the heart into his presence, but
prayer without faith is like a bird without wings, that cannot get upwards to
any purpose, but falls to the ground: Faith is always a necessary ingredient,
one of the main requisites of right prayer: There is a must put upon it:
Hebrews 11.6. He that comes to God, must believe that he is -- They that would
come to God, so as to be with him indeed, must have faith to lead and lift
their hearts home to him; Faith in his power and grace and faithfulness, James
1.6. But let him ask in Faith: There will be defects q d. do what you can, but
be sure faith be not wanting, as you would get any thing by all your askings:
Let not such an one (that (...) not in faith, that is, think that he shall
receive any thing of the Lord, verse 7.

2 Love to him; heartily and in good earnest to comply with the first and great
Commandment, as our Savior gives it, Mat. 22.37, 38. Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind; this
is the first and great Commandment* That the whole soul in all the faculties
and powers of it, center and terminate upon him, as the alone adequate
satisfying object of it. It is a great and precious promise, that is herein
made, Deuteronomy. 30.6. The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart
of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy
soul, that thou may live.

Blessed things might be obtained, could we improve and press it for our selves
and ours as we ought; The love of all the heart belongs to him alone, and so
not to be laid out upon any other. The truth is, not to love him above all, is
not to love him at all; unless he has best love, he has none indeed; which is
the import of that of the Apostle, 1 John 2 15. If any man love the world, the
love of the Father is not in him. Know assuredly, and believe it always, That
the worlds leavings do not belong to God: It is downright Idolatry (Spiritually
so I mean) when any thing in us of the world is set above him in the esteem and
indearments of the heart; when the choice and chief of man's love is bestowed
upon creature objects, and the refuse only reserved for him, Mat. 10.37. As he
is the chiefest good, so thence also he indispensibly demands highest love, as
always his due; nor will any thing less or lower than that, find acceptance
with him.

3 Fear of him, which as it is his undeniable right: He ought to be feared,
Psalm. 76.11 the only object of religious fear: His right therein arises from
all the discoveries he makes of himself; every letter of his name bespeaks it,
Psalm. 111.9. Holy, and to be feared is his name: In special from his absolute
sovereignty, Job. 25.2 Dominion and fear are with him: dominion upon the
account whereof he is to be feared. As some do, and all should fear him; So
indeed all shall do it one way or other ere he has done; such a day is coming,
as will force the fearless ones to fear, Isa. 2.12, 3.4. For the day of the
Lord of Hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty -- and upon all
the Cedars of Lebanon -- and upon all the Oaks of Bashan, and upon all the high
mountains, and upon all the hills that are lifted up: Not only the little low
shrubs, but the stately Cedars and sturdy Oaks; not only the mole hills but the
mountains; man i. e. in their greatest heights and opposition to him: The Lord
of Hosts has a day to make them all stoop and tremble before him, as it
follows, verse 17. The loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the
haughtiness of man shall be made low -- And verse 19. They shall go into the
holes of the Rocks, and into the caves of the earth, for fear of the Lord, and
for the glory of his Majesty, when he arises to shake terribly the earth:
There is such authority and power appears in all his works as commends fear,
Psalm. 66.3. Say unto, God, how terrible art thou in thy works? And eminently
his dealings with man, verse 5. He is terrible in his doings toward the
children of men: All sorts of men, Psalm. 76.12. He shall cut off the Spirit of
Princes: He is terrible to the Kings of the earth; He is terrible out of his
holy places, in the execution of judgments denounced by his Word, and the
Ministry of it. Thus he is to be feared for his sovereign power, Jer. 5.22. It
is a fearful thing for man, less then nothing man, not to fear the great God,
Jer. 10 7. His excellent greatness (that has all the world at command, to do
what he will, in and with it) and so does his exceeding goodness, Jer. 5.24. --
Hos. 3.5. -- And as fear is his right, so it must be rendered to him: Woe to that
Plantation, Colony or Country, of which it may be said, The fear of God is not
in this place: it may be there are fair houses, large fields, full Shops and
Barns, but if the fear of God be not there among the rest, their condition is
exceeding woeful: Suppose a person or a people to be as rich as may be in the
things of this world, they are poor notwithstanding, miserably poor, if the
fear of the Lord is not their treasure, as the word is, Isa. 33.6 Be there
never so much farming and merchandise, buying and selling, and gain got by it*
it is not such wealth can make us rich indeed, while the fear of God is
wanting: You may see how much weight he lays upon his fear, in that he has
made it one of the main grants of the Everlasting Covenant, Jer. 32.40. I will
put my fear in their hearts -- It is not naturally there, no more than Faith or
Love, nor can all the world lay it in to purpose, that is his peculiar work; I
will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Though
there are warpings of corruptions within, and workings of temptations without;
sin swayes and Satan shams, yet they shall not be carried away; The fear of God
in their hearts so holds them to and with him, that they shall not wickedly
depart, or allow themselves in wandering from him. But that is the first head,
one way of a peoples being with God, is in their hearts, by faith in, love to,
and fear of him.

Secondly, Another way of a peoples being with him, is in their lives; to
follow his work, and walk in his ways, carefully avoiding what is contrary,
and attending what is according to his Word, and the Revelations of his mind
made in it: and that both ways, As to his Will in general, and his Worship in
particular.

1. As to his Will in general, in all the discoveries of it: wherein the
command is explicit and plain, 1 Pet. 1:15. Be ye holy in all manner of
Conversation: not only at sometimes, or in some things, but universally, in
various motions and managements, turnings to and fro, to keep close to Rule:
This is one of the Lessons the Gospel teaches, or lays before us to learn, To
labor a compliance with the Law, not as our title to life and happiness, but
as the way that leads to its attainment, Tit. 2.11, 12. The grace of God that
brings salvation has appeared to all men. To all sorts of men, in the
doctrinal discoveries and offers of it, and that wherever it comes brings
instruction with it; teaching us, That denying ungodliness and worldly lusts
(not to give way or welcome to sin, but shut the door fast against it, flatly
and peremptorily refuse its entertainment, whatever tenders it makes) And then,
that we should live soberly, righteously, and godlily in this present world:
The Doctrine of free Grace is no friend to sin, does not give men liberty to
live as they list themselves, but lays and leaves them under Bonds of duty,
even every way, toward God and men, themselves and others: And herein also the
promise is express, that as it should be thus with the people of God at all
times, so it shall be in his time, Zech. 14.20, 21. In that day shall there be
upon the bells of the Horses, HOLINESS TO THE LORD; And the pots in the Lords
house shall be like the Bowls before the Altar; Yea every Pot in Jerusalem and
Judah, shall be HOLINESS TO THE LORD OF HOSTS. -- Their ordinary occasions and
converses one way or other, managed in conformity to divine command; a stamp of
holiness upon them; not only their hearing and praying, but their buying and
selling their eating and drinking: The Will of God their Rule; and the Glory of
God their end in all that is done. -- This is our duty, and should be our
design, 1 Cor. 10.31^ Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to
the glory of God --

2. As to his Worship in particular. Our Savior says, John 4.23, 24. The true
Worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth. -- God is a
spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth.
However indifferent men commonly are therein; Christ you see mentions it as
matter of necessity: That something may be done in this work indeed, two things
are required, and must concur in it; it is not true Worship if either of them
be wanting, viz.

1. It must be right for the matter, what God has appointed, without addition
or abatement, Deuteronomy 12.32. What thing soever I command you observe to do it,
thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it; neither more nor less as near
as may be at least. Humane inventions are of no authority herein, we may be
attended what ever pretenses are made of their decency, significancy or
usefulness one way or other in his service: Divine Institutions only must
stand, whatever wants* that ^^ump has no warrant for its use: -- Will Worship
has at best but a show of wisdom, Col. 2.23. Which things have indeed a show
of wisdom in worship: It is above the sphere of the wisdom of man to devise, or
the will of man to determine the worship of God, in any the substantial parts
of it; The circumstances of time, and place, etc. are necessarily left to
common prudence, But still it is his prerogative to resolve and order in what
way, or by what means we shall worship him. His Word and the declaration of his
Will made in and by it, is the only direction therein. And thence also
will worship is worth nothing, Mat. 15.9. In vain do they worship me, teaching
for Doctrines the Commandments of men. Though they have a true object of
Worship ( they worship me) yet if the means of Worship be false ( after the
commandments of men) it is in vain, to no purpose, neither acceptable to God,
nor advantageous to themselves.

2. It must be right for the manner too, as he has appointed. In sum, That we
perform it heartily and in his fear: As in all obedience, that is the main; it
was God's wish for them, speaking after the manner of men, Deuteronomy. 5.29. They
promised fair when they were under the pang and impulse of their fear, through
those awful appearances that were made upon mount Sinai, at the delivery of the
Law, ver 27. They said to Moses, Speak thou unto us, all that the Lord our God
shall speak to thee, and we will hear it, and do it, verse 28. The Lord heard
the voice of their words, and said, they have well said all that they have
spoken; they give me good words, Oh that they would do as they say: Oh that
there were such a heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep all my
Commandments always, that it might be well with them and their Children for
ever: To keep such a course, is the way to perpetuate a peoples welfare; And
this is always man 's duty, Eccles 12.13. Fear God and keep his Commandments,
for this is the whole duty of man. But so likewise as to this part of
obedience, in particular, his Worship, it must be heartily attended; heartless
services signify not, Isai. 29.13. This people draw near me with their mouth,
and with their lips do honor me, but have removed their heart far from me. The
body near but the soul a great way off, Ezekiel. 33.31. They come unto thee as the
people comes, and they sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy words
but they will not do them; for with their mouth they show much love, but their
heart goes after their covetousness.

They behave themselves handsomely, with a visible demureness as to the outward
man, in hearing the word, but their hearts in the mean time are in and with the
world. And yet it is certain, That duty one or another, however formal and
specious as to the outside ceremony of them, without the heart, are but a
shadow without any substance, a shell without any kernel; empty things that
want something within to fill them, dead works, the carcass of duty wihout a
soul: And then we must worship in his fear, Psalm. 5.7. But as for me, I will
come into thy house in the multitude of thy mercy; and in thy fear will I
worship toward thy holy Temple -- As the consideration of his infinite mercy
should set faith on work, so the remembrance of his glorious holiness should
make us fear in all our approaches to him. Indeed the fear of God is so
essential to, or in his worship, that it is sundry times put for it, as you may
see by comparing, Deuteronomy. 6.13. with Mat. 4.10 and Isa. 29.13. with Mat. 15.9. We
cannot serve God acceptably, unless we do it with reverence and godly fear,
Heb. 12.28, 9. -- You see that there are two ways for a people to be with God:
To be with him in their hearts, by a fixed adherence to him, in faith, love and
fear; and to be with him in their lives, by a faithful attendance of his will
in general, and his worship in particular,

Quest. 2 The next enquiry is, What it is for God to be with a people? or how
he is with them that are with him.

Answ. There are several ways of Gods being with men. As there is his essential
presence, whereby he is equally in distant from all persons and places: Such is
the immensity of his glorious being, that he is no where included or excluded
-- 1 Kings 8.27. Behold the heaven, and the heaven of heavens cannot contain
thee, Jer. 23.24. do not I fill heaven and earth, (says the Lord. (Again,
there is his general providential presence, in way of powerful efficiency,
preserving and governing what he has made, to the attainment of his own ends.
And thus he is not far from every one of us; For in him we live and move and
have our being: Acts 17.27. In those respects, no man is or can be without God;
for so he is not only with Saints and Angels in Heaven, and with men ( godly
and wicked) on earth, but with the devils and damned too, Psalm. 139.7 -- 10.
Whither shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up into Heaven thou art
there; If I make my bed in Hell, behold thou art there. -- But the thing here
intended is his being with men in a way of favor and good will: his gracious
presence, as it is commonly called, looking after and manifesting his care of
and kindness to them, wherein you may distinctly mind, two or three things.

First, There is the protecting presence of God, whereby he defends his people
against evil: whether it be --

1. By saving them from trouble, preventing it when and how he will, Acts
18.10. For I am with thee, and no man shall set on thee to hurt thee; either
they should not desire it (As Exodus 34.24. Neither shall any man desire thy
Land, when thou shall go up to appear before the Lord thy God, thrice in the
year. God can bind the lusts of men, their pride, malice and covetousness; he
sets what limits he will to their workings) or at least they should not do it.
No man shall set upon thee to hurt thee: You know what was said to the
Philadelphian Church, Rev. 3.10. I also will keep thee from the hour of
Temptation -- When an hour of temptation goes far and wide, carrys a great
breadth with it (As Trajans Persecution, which sundry take to be there
intended, generally reached to all the parts of the Roman Empire, that upon the
account of his largeness, is called all the world, as also it is, Luke 2.1.)
yet the Lord can shelter whom he pleases from sharing in it; Or,

2 By saving them in trouble. That is a way that he oftentimes takes to secure
his people: They suffer, and yet nevertheless safe, Job. 5.19. Psalm. 91.9, 10.
Because thou have made the most high thy habitation, there shall no evil befall
thee, neither shall any plague come nigh the dwelling: In midst of evils, and
yet meet with no evil; none i e. that shall be eventually hazardous to their
main interest: The presence of the chiefest good keeps real evil at distance:
He that dwells in God, or makes the most High his habitation, is out of reach
of ruining danger. The Scripture abounds in the discovery of Gods being with
his people in this way, Isai. 41.10. and 43.2* When thou passest through the
waters, I will be with thee, and through the Rivers they shall not overflow
thee; when thou walk through (...) fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither
shall the flame kindle upon thee; neither floods shall drown, nor flames hurt
them: Psalm. 32.6. There may be waters, great waters, and floods of them, and
the godly man (of whom he there speaks) in them too, and yet surely they shall
nor come nigh him, to his damage or undoing; He may be soaked, but shall not
sink or miscarry there: Of like meaning is the great sight Moses met with,
Exodus 3.2.3. Such a sight (a great sight) is not seldom to be (...) Through the
good will of him that dwells in the Bush, the more it flames the more it
flourishes. Heaviest sufferings (...) his servants are physic and not poison;
not to (...) cure, Isai. 27.9. the worst he means is to (...), Heb. 12.10.
Their evil things are at work for good, Romans 8.28. To exercise their Grace, and
so increase their glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. The soaking of the vessels of mercy in
the waters of affliction, help to widen and fit them for greater measures of
that pure river of water of life, clear as Crystal, proceeding out of the
Throne of God, and of the Lamb, Rev. 22.1.

3. By saving them out of trouble, This is added, Psalm. 37.39, 40. The
salvation of the righteous is of the Lord: He is their strength in time of
trouble; and the Lord shall help them and deliver them: he shall deliver them
from the wicked and save them, because they trust in him. Such a promise was
given the Prophet for his eneouragement in his work, Jer. 1.19. They shall
fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee, for I am with thee
says the Lord to deliver thee: When they have done what they can I will
deliver thee: And so more generally Jer. 29.11. I know the thoughts that I
think toward you, says the Lord, thoughts of peace and not of evil, to givc
you an expected end. Though others know not his thoughts toward them, Mi^h.
4.11, 12. When God sends the daughters of Sion to Babylon to be delivered, ver.
10 They say, let her be defiled, let our eye look upon Sion. But they know not
the thoughts of the Lord, neither understand they his counsel: it is certain his
peoples enemies are not of his council, they know not the thoughts of the Lord,
our his people themselves neither sometimes, yet he knows them; The close of
the greatest day of Jacobs trouble, is, that he shall be saved out of it, Jer.
30.7. Psalm. 34.19.

Secondly, There is the providing providence of God, whereby he suits his
people in their wants: He knows what they need, and sends them a supply, Phil.
4.19. in temporal, and especially in spiritual respects, Psalm. 34.10. nothing
indeed good for them, or conducing to the furtherance of their internal and so
eternal welfare shall be withheld, Psalm: 85:11.

Thirdly, There is his prospering blessing presence; succeeding them in their
works, Genesis 24:3, 23. The Lord was with Joseph, and made all that he did to
prosper. To have God with us, is the way to have all go well; His favorable
presence, brings outward prosperity, in what measure he sees meet. And
succeeding them in his work, that I mean that more nearly concerns them in
relation to him, upon a soul-account, Mat. 28.20. Teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you; And lo, I am with you always, even to
the end of the World. As with Ministers in teaching, so with Churches also in
attending what he requires; to keep his work going, or lift it forward in their
hearts and hands.

Quest. The last enquiry mentioned, is, Whence or on what account will the Lord
be with a people that are with him?

The Answer may be given in a word, either way;

1. Negatively, It Is not from any merit there is in them, or any thing they do.
There Is no such thing indeed: Jacob said it, Genesis 32.10. I am not worthy the
least of all thy mercies. Plain Jacob did not complement, but spoke his heart
in it, He saw and felt what he said, That though he wanted many things, yet not
worthy of any thing. The great-Faith'd Centurion said it, Luke 7.6. I am not
worthy that thou should come under my roof: The Elders of the Jews gave a
high account of him, ver. 4, 5. saying, that he was worthy for whom he should
do this, in that he loves our Nation. -- As if what he had done for them,
deserved what they desired of him: But he was of another mind himself, I am not
Worthy -- Our Savior teaches all his followers to say it, Luke 17.10. When
you have done all those things that are commanded you, say, we are
unprofitable servants; we have done that which was our duty to do: we owe him
utmost obedience, and so he cannot be debtor to us for any thing we do, to whom
all we do is due debt.

2. Affirmatively; It is from his own free Mercy. As it is his Grace that
inables men to be with him; where there is any thing that way indeed, they are
beholding to him for what they have and do in it, Joh. 15.5. So it is Grace also
that ingages him to be with them: Remarkable is that passage to this purpose,
Psalm. 44.17, 8, 9. All this is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee,
neither have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant: our heart is not turned back,
neither have our steps declined from thy way; though thou have sore broken us
in the place of Dragons, It follows, ver. 26. Arise for our help, and redeem us
for thy mercies sake: They do not lean upon, or plead any merit in what they
have done, but look to, and implore his mercy in what they still need to be
done. Redeem us for thy mercies sake.

The Use now follows, and that may be let fall under two Heads, of Information
and Exhortation: --

The first is of Information;

USE I.
The Truth in hand may help to inform us in several things; I will only
intimate two or three, without tarrying on them. --

1. Hence see that the wicked are back friends to the places wherein, or people
among whom they live; and that because they help to drive God from them, which
is the worst and most baneful work they can be busied in: One sinner destroys
much good; One Achan (as the case may be) is enough to trouble a whole Camp. It
is a solemn awful word you have, Prove. 15.29. The Lord is far from the wicked:
For God and his Salvation go together. But Psalm: 85.9. Surely his salvation is
nigh to them that fear him, that glory may dwell in our Land: The World is
commonly weary of such (had rather have their room than their company) they are
not aware, or not willing to own how much they are beholding to them; that they
stand in the gap for them, and help to fend off many a blow that would
otherwise fall heavy. If there be ten Righteous said the Lord to Abraham, when
standing before him in behalf of Sodom, I will spare the City, and not destroy
it for their sake, Genesis 18. latter end. Yea, one righteous Lot kept fire and
brimstone from coming down upon that wicked place, till he was got out of it,
Genesis 19.22. It commonly fares with a People, as righteousness or sin finds
entertainment among them: so says the divine Proverb, Prove. 14.34.
Righteousness exalts a Nation. The righteous Lord loves righteousness, and
loves them that follow after him: His countenance beholds the upright; He is
with them in way of favor and thence they farewell: But sin is a reproach to
any people. To any people, however near and dear they sometimes were to him,
yet sin makes him stand aloof, and then they lower a pace, Jer: 12:7: I have
left my heritage, I have given the dearly beloved of my soul into into the hand
of her enemies, Jeremiah 22.24. --

2. Hence see the rise and reason of the Lords departure from a people, and so
whether to refer his absenting from us, one way or other: Gideon put the
question to the Angel of the Lord, that appeared to him, Judges 6.12, 3. If the
Lord be with us* why then is all this befallen us: And where are all his
wonders which our fathers told us of? may it not be said in our case, If the
Lord be with us, as formerly, why have these things befallen us, what mean such
and such testimonies of his anger? Assuredly we cant justly fault him on any
account, who is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works: The
departure does not begin on his hand; if you forsake him, he will forsake you;
and not else: The blame belongs to and must be laid upon our sins, and our
selves for them, Jer 2.17. have thou not procured this to thy self, in that
thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, when he led thee by the way, and chap.
4.18. -- it is sin pushes God from a people, that he cannot keep them company as
he is ready to do for us: forces him as it were to fall out with them, Jer.
44.22. So that the Lord could no longer bear, because of the evil of your
doings -- He that is slow to anger, of great kindness, and repents him of the
evil, Joel. 2.13. yet Sin (impenitently continued) makes him weary of
repenting, Jer. 15.6, 7. Sin wearies him out of his house, wherein he sometimes
dwelt, moves him to leave his Sanctuary: Ezekiel. 8.6. when they made that
malepert saucy question Isa. 58.3. Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see not
-- murmuring as if there were some wrong done them, that they had not the
deliverance they desired, but were followed with pressures though they had
followed him with prayers: There is a full answer given in it, Isai: 59.2, 3.
q. d. you charge God foolishly, to imagine there is any defect with him; his
hands are as able to help, and his ear as open to hear as ever; he wants
neither power nor pity to do for you; that which wounds you, is at home. But
your iniquities have separated between you, and your God: Let the finger be
laid upon the right sore, you will find that sin is in all the fault. So Jer:
5:25: Your sins withold good things from you; it is sin that turns away good
things, and pulls down evil upon a people, -- And then,

3. Hence see the right way for a people to keep or recover the presence of God:

1. To keep his presence: would you indeed have it continued? do you desire his
abode with you in a way of good will? the text tells you how it is to be
attained, The Lord is with you, while you are with him. Be it never so long, do
not leave him, and he will not leave you: Wherein we have experience to confirm
us: our fathers have found him very near to relieve them in their need, Psalm.
22.4, 5. How solemn and signal were the expressions of his kindness to them:
many a deliverance was sent them, wrapped up in return of prayer. --

But 2. Which comes (it may be) nearer to our case, here is the right way
before us to recover the presence of God, when, so far as it is lost, Zech.
1.3. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, return to me says the Lord of Hosts* and I
will return to to you, says the Lord of Hosts. Could we make work on it in
getting back again to him, he would then (through grace) meet us more than half
the way. Let me speak freely herein, it is sensibly certain, we have got
nothing by wandering, and therefore it is time to give it over: I may
confidently assert in the audience of this Assembly, That scarce (if ever)
people had more cause or call to make that conclusion than we, Hos. 2.7. I will
go and return to my first Husband, for then it was better with me than now.
That is the meaning of the thorn-hedge, and high wall that has been made in
our way, to persuade and even necessitate us to such a resolve? Shall I say, it
was better every where in Family, Church, Town and Colony; and better every
way, we had better peace and plenty, better health and harvests, in former than
later years; it was better for soul and body, better in spirituals, less Sin;
and better in temporals, less sorrow: Oh that New England might yet say it in
good earnest, and do accordingly: I will return to my first Husband, for then
it was better with are than now: The recovery of first love and first works,
would be our glory: let me bespeak it in those words, Hos 6.1. Come let us
return unto the Lord, for he has torn, and he will heal us; he has smitten,
and he will bind us up. Were such a mutual excitation well pressed and warmed
upon our own and one another hearts, to an awakening real and practical
attendance of it, it would be a precious salve for our sore. This is the way to
recover the presence of God, to return to him, and therefore turn from all sin,
Ezekiel. 18.30. The terms are fair and just: Only be sure you are real and
through in it, Jer. 4.1. stand no where till you come to him; or the words may
be read. If thou will return to me, return, dully not, but do it indeed: Let
your hearts fall out with Sin, and fall in with God and Christ: the contrary is
complained of, Jer. 3.10. Her treacherous sister Judah, has not turned to me
with her whole heart, but feignedly says the Lord. Pictures of repentance will
not pass in Heaven, it is vain to dissemble with him that cannot be deceived.
For men to feign or counterfeit a conversion only, is but trifling and
treachery in his esteem, whatever it stands for with others: but be hearty and
home with it, and then hold it too; so turn as to tarry with him; take heed of
Flashes and Flattery, fast and loose, off and on with him, Hos. 6.4. Your
goodness is as the morning cloud, and as the early dew that passes away, a
thin, impertinent thing, that has no substance or stability in it: soon
vanishes whatever show it makes: And truly if our goodness toward him (our
repentance and reforming) be as the morning cloud, what can we look for but
that his goodness toward us should be as the morning cloud too; which seem to
be the sense of, Hos. 13.3. Therefore they shall be as the morning cloud* and
as the early dew that passes away; their welfare and comfort, quickly wasted
and consumed; look to it, you be fixed and steady here, to get to, and stay
with him: Isa. 30.15. Hos. 3.3. --

USE II.
The main use I would make of it, is in way of exhortation* and invitement to
all among us, that they observe and do their duty herein: Hear ye me Asa and
all Judah and Benjamin. The Lord is with you while ye are with him: my work
here is to press it upon the hearts of all, rich and poor, high and low* to
take this course for the attainment of the end mentioned, to be with God, that
he, may be with us: --

In prosecution of it, I will turn the exhortation in particular three ways,
and then render a few words of general advice upon it. --

The exhortation herein may be particularly laid before and left with three
sorts.

First, Magistrates: civil leaders in their several stations of subordinate
power.

Honored Sirs! Suffer me to say, Be you with God, and he will be with you: As
there is direction given in his word, for the work of an Election-Day, who are
to be chosen to such place and employment, Exodus 18.21: Provide out of all the
people, able men, such as fear God; men of truth, hating covetousness, and
place such over them, to be Rulers of thousands, and Rulers of hundreds. --
Plainly implying that none but such are desirably furnished for any place of
Rule among the people of God* Men of God, and men for God; able men, (men of
wisdom and courage) such as fear God, men of truth, (men of piety as well as
parts, fearers of God, and faithful to him and his interest. Those are some of
the best qualifications required to fit men for public Rule, Neh: 7:2: And
hating covetousness; not merely or so much seeking their private wealth (though
it is not meet they should serve for naught; it is the wisdom and duty of a
people, according to their capacity, to afford an honorable acknowledgment to
them that attend such heavy work) but mainly seeking the public welfare,
Nehem. 2.10. Esther 10.3. -- But as there is a directory left for choosers
(whom it concerns to attend their work therein, not as matter of indifferency
or carnal design, but with care and conscience to discharge that mighty
betrustment, which also the free-mans Oath directly obliges to) so likewise
there is the duty of the chosen expressly set down. The general sum of it is
declared in that of David, 2 Samuel 23.3. The God of Israel said, The Rock of
Israel spoke to me; He that rules over men, must be just, ruling in the fear
of God: To be managed by the fear of God in administering Justice to men: their
work lies either way, toward God and toward man; I mean now, they are set to
keep both Tables; as far as may be to secure those under them in an undisturbed
practice of duty therein; that they may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty. --

1. In matter of Religion, it belongs to such, not only to serve God
themselves, and be faithful and fervent in it, that their hearts be lifted up
in his ways, 2 Chronicles* 17.6. But to see that his worship be publicly maintained
and managed in all places under their power; That none in that sense, be
without the true God, and without a teaching Priest, and without law, which is
pointed at verse 3. as in part the intendment of the text: This was a main work
Asa was busied in before this message was sent him, 2 Chronicles. 14.3, 4, 5. To
reform Religion, and set things to rights therein according to the direction of
the word. And this also he went forward with afterward; as may be seen verse 8.
of this chapter: And though he did not fully reach what he would, yet he went
as far as he could in it: verse 17. As did Jehosaphat after him, chap. 23.33.
Howbeit the high places were not taken away: For as yet the people had not
prepared their hearts unto the God of their Fathers -- A people sometimes, not
very seldom clog and hinder the design of godly Rulers; there is no persuading
them to amend to purpose unless God put it into their hearts: However Leaders
must perform their part, whatever opposition or impediments they meet with: As
they are called Gods (Psalm. 82.6.) so it concerns them very nearly to take care
of the things of God; without which, how can they expect he should be with
them, or their work be Rewarded. --

2. In matter of Righteousness, their work is large; In general, a faithful
endeavor to do every man right without favor or fear, 2 Samuel 8.15. David
executed judgment and justice to all his people: Such an account Job gives of
himself as to his behavior in his public ruling-capacity, Job. 29.14. I put
on righteousness, and it clothed me; my judgment was a Robe and a Diadem.
Righteous Judgment is both necessary and adorning to Rulers, their clothing and
their Crown: The best and most beautiful robe they have to array themselves
with, as such: In particular to relieve the injured, as it follows, Job.
29.15.6. I was eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame, I was a Father to the
poor. The meaning of those metaphors (says Mr. Caryl) is that his care to
defend them in their just cause, was extensive and effectual: And then to quell
wrong doers; wherein they need a quick and watchful eye, to find out sin in its
coverts ( verse 16. The ways which I knew not, I searched out) and a steady
weighty hand, to follow sin home, according to its desert: verse 17: I brake
the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out of his teeth. -- it is said of
secure* Laish, Judges 18.7. There was no Magistrate (no master or heir of
restraint) in the land, that might put them to shame in any thing. The lusts of
men will easily run wild, if there be no restraint laid upon them: Some men
(and not a few neither) will without fail do shamefully, if there be none to
put them to shame for what is done. They that have not conscience enough, must
have somewhat else to curb them: -- This is the design and duty of Rulers, Romans
13.3, 4. The sword of civil power is put into their hand by divine appointment,
as to reward them that do well, so to wound evil doers; not to strike with it
at a venture whoever comes in their way, much less to turn the edge toward the
innocent. It is their wisdom to make the wicked feel the wheel, Prove. 20.26. to
crush their wickedness, or weary them out of their unclean, intemperate, and
unrighteous courses. -- Let me crave the patience of a few plain inoffensive
words in this plot, I particularly propose that a through care and course may
be taken, to prevent or suppress that woeful trade of Indian drunkenness;
whe^^in doubtless it may be said that such as find the matter or fuel for it,
are deeply guilty of that fearful excess, and the fatal mischief that so
commonly falls upon it, If there be any that need and conscientiously desire a
resolution in this case, viz. whether selling strong drink to the heathen, as
things are circumstanced, be sinful, or moral evil, and as such to be avoided?
I will turn aside so far as to tender two words that way:

1. -- It is against the law of God; which by common consent of Divines,
commands not only to avoid the gross acting of this or that evil, but
temptations to and incentive of sin in our selves or others: It is a good
general rule that is given for the right understanding of the Commandments;
That where any sin is forbidden all the degrees, causes, means, occasions, and
appearances of it are forbidden also. Let it be seriously pondred, and
conscience sadly questioned upon it in the case mentioned; Is this to abstain
from all appearance of evil? 1 These 5.22. yea, is it not a direct means to
further the commission of sin? what less is done by this practice, then to put
the bottle to them, and make them drunken also, as the expression is, Hab*
2.15. Is it an innocent thing now adays, to deliver a sword into a mad man's
hand, suppose he proffer money for it; or is it no sin to lay a stumbling block
in the way of the blind? Romans 14.13. That no man put a stumbling block or an
occasion to fall in another way. Those two words ( as is observed) intend such
offenses, whereby others are either grieved or encouraged to sin: By this
course are not the people of God grieved, and the heathen hardened in their
wickedness, and so helped to hell? Again, by such things is not great occasion
given to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme? do, or will they not learn to
say, their Religion is no better than ours, they will do any thing for a little
money:

And again, Is there not Covetousness in feeding their Lusts for filthy lucres
sake, and unrighteousness in wringing that little they have out of their hands,
by excessive and so dishonest gain: -- In a word, Those that enable the
Natives, to sin against God (which in this way they would not do, without the
sellers assistance) are they not accessory in his account, of all the
Drunkenness and Murders that by this means abounds among them.

2. It is against the Law of Man; and that also adds to the evil of it: it is a
violation of a just and good Law, made on purpose to prevent sin against God,
and provocation to the eyes of his glory by it.

But to return; I am bold to say, That this evil among many others may, yea
must be effectually declared against, lest the Land be defiled with blood, and
so pity to some particulars, prove cruelty to the public. -- The Lord grant
our Leaders may never cause us to err one way or other; or bring more wrath
upon Israel, so much as by a connivance at that which is openly and apparently
evil. That downright daring wickedness may not walk the streets among us (as it
does too commonly in some places) for want either of wholesome Laws* or home
execution of them: I only add here, what they sometimes said, in the case then
before them, Ezra 10.4. Arise, for this matter belongs to thee, we also will be
with thee; be of good courage and do it. May I not say in the name of all the
tremblers at the words of the God of Israel among us (saving at least some
particular mistakes and temptations) This matter (much honored) belongs to
you, we also will be with you; Be of good courage and do it: however, should
men fail never so much fear not but God will stand by you in his work, 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7. And Jehosaphat said to the Judges, Take heed what you do, for
ye judge not for man but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment:
wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do it; for
there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking
of gifts: It follows, ver. 11. Deal courageously, and the Lord shall be with
the good. --

Secondly, Ministers; My Brethren, and my Fathers, give me leave to say, Let us
be with God and he will be with us: The Lord has made us Watchmen, to watch
for souls, as those that must give account. And therein our work is, to receive
the word at his mouth, and give warning from him, to deliver his mind and
message plainly, Jer. 23.28. He that has my word, let him speak my word
faithfully: What is the chafe to the wheat says the Lord. To awaken men from
sin, and warn them to a Savior, by both Doctrine and Conversation, to lead in
the way to heaven: The Lord give wisdom to win Souls; so assist and succeed in
his work, that his word may run and be glorified; and, if it be his holy will,
prevent the coming of such a woeful day, that from the prophets of this
Jerusalem, profaneness should go forth in the Land, or that word be made good
against us, Michah 2.11 if a man walking in the spirit of falsehood do lie,
saying, I will prophecy to thee of wine and strong drink, he shall even; be
the prophet of this people.

Thirdly, The Lords People, the bulk or body of them I may say here also, Be
you with God and he will be with you: -- Take heed of forsaking him; you have
seen and felt some of the sad effects of it, See Isai. 9.12, 13. For all this
his anger is not turned away, but his hand stretched out still, for the people
turns not to him that smites them: if we want more woe, that is a sure way
to find it: it is not so much what some particular persons do (the Lord always
has a mourning remnant) but how the generality of a people demean themselves
toward him: Oh look to your work, and labor to do it well, and that is duty
to God and man.

1 st Duty toward God, 1 Samuel 12.24. Only Fear the Lord and serve him in truth
with all your hearts. -- Certainly, however common such a course is among men,
it is contempt that cannot long be born with, to set the World above God, to
say (though never so secretly) of his service, what a weariness is it? When
shall the new moon be gone that we may sell Corn, and the Sabbath that we may
set forth Wheat, Amos 8.5. Such things make way for the worst of Famines, ver.
11. The Lord sees not as man sees, man looks on the outside appearance but
the Lord looks upon the heart, 1 Samuel 16.7. He desires truth in the inward
parts; the heart to be with him, and at work in attendance of his will. But
whither are our hearts gone? how familiar and yet fatal is it, to have Lamps
without Oil, seems of Religion without sincerity a name to live without the
thing: can it be a little matter to make light of the great motion of the
Gospel (forgiveness and salvation, grace and glory therein tendered upon
fairest, freest terms) and go one to his Farm, and the other to his
Merchandise, Mat. 22:5. How shall we escape, Heb. 2 3. What more provoking
vileness can there be, than for lost, ruined, wretched sinners, to cast a
Redeemer his riches and righteousness at their heels, with all the love and
bowels held forth by him. To refuse the shelter of his wings, and shake off his
Government, not to be won by his wooings, nor welcome him with all his
Treasures, while many a trifle in mean time, finds entertainment: Think of it
sadly a thousand times, will it not be bitterness in the latter end, to prefer
other things before the kingdom, to mind the body more than the soul, earth
more than heaven, a moment more than eternity? what account can be given, or
apoligy made for men's behavior herein? to love pleasures more than God, 2 Timothy
3, 4. Creatures more than Christ, Mat. 10.37. Oh that wisdom may be given from
above to build sure; rest no where short of God, choose his favor as your life,
his fellowship as your happiness, his bosom as your resting place. -- Seek not
Ordinances merely, but to meet with God in and by them, let that be the mark
that is aimed at, that nothing may satisfy without its attainment: here is the
mantle but where is God? what does it avail to dwell in Jerusalem, and not see
the Kings face: an empty Sanctuary can never fill Souls, Psalm. 63.1, 2. Prize
his patience, and press after it, his convincing, humbling, converting patience
as infinitely better than the best in the World. We are gone if the Lord give
us miscarrying womb, and dry breasts on this account. That few should be born
again (by soaking repentance, and unfeigned Faith, sent from heaven into their
hearts) and those that are born weak and dwarf-like, little growth and progress
gained: the things that remain ready to die, Rev. 3.2. In a low, lazy,
languishing posture: some life it may be, but little liveliness:

Learn (if possible) to value things as they are; and so let interest in and
enjoyment of God stand high in your esteem; communion with God in Christ, to be
begun, and as may be carried on by ordinances here, and then completed, and
everlastingly continued in heaven. Let this (this) be the one thing needful in
your eye, Luke 10.42. the alone matter of absolute necessity; And as such the
one thing of your endeavors, Psalm. 27.4. Nothing desired comparatively to
them, and nothing absolutely but this. And thence also the one thing of your
endeavors Phil. 3.13, 14. -- never near enough till as near as may be, get
quite home to an immediate filling vision and fruition of God blessed for ever.

2 ly. Duty toward man: How is the faithful City become an Harlot; It was full
of Judgment, righteousness lodged in it, Isai. 1.21. It is exceeding dangerous
for the noble vine, to degenerate in such plain things. -- Is this the fruit of
all the cost, care and kindness bestowed upon us, to disappoint him of his just
expectation, Isai. 5.7. He looked for judgment, but behold oppression, for
righteousness but behold a cry: If that be the case (as how much and far it is,
the Lord sees) what can we look for, but to be laid wast, Isai. 5. -- It is
mentioned as the Standard Rule of righteousness to render to all their dues,
Romans 13:7: As to God the things that are Gods (his fear and honor and
obedience) so to man the things that are man's: (Owe no man any thing but to
love one another, ver: 8:) And among the rest to Superiors in particular, what
by divine law belongs to them.

As constantly to pray for them, 1 Timothy 1, 2. That supplications -- be made for
all men; for Kings, and for all that are in authority: so conscientiously to
submit to them: The command is peremptory, Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject
unto the higher powers, and ver. 5. Ye must needs be subject, not only for
truth, but also for Conscience sake, Tit. 3.1. Obedience to Magistrates is a
moral duty that all men should mind, yet many need to be minded of it, 1 Pet.
2.13, 14, 17. Fear God, honor the King. The high ones of the earth are to be
honored, according to the place wherein they stand, still reserving that fear
and homage that belongs to the most high that is in Heaven: Humane power to
command is limited to things lawful, consonant and not contrary to the will of
God; for in that case the conclusion stands fast, and we may and must stay upon
it, Act. 5.29. We ought to obey God rather than men.

That which now remains, is to mention two words of general advice, about the
matter before us, viz. To fasten the necessity that so it must be, and then
follow the suit that so it may be. --

1. Fasten the necessity that so it must be. It were well if we could believe
it in earnest, or feel the weight that lies upon us herein. -- And that is,

1. We must have God with us: For

1 st. Our condition is exceeding woeful if he withdraw from us. Nothing more
fatal can befall a people, than for God to forsake them, Jer. 23.33. What
burden? I will even forsake you says the Lord, that is a burden heavy enough,
to sink men into all manner of misery, Hos. 9.12 Yea, woe also to them, when I
depart from them: it is as it were all woes gathered into one.

The worst condition in the world with God, is better than the best that can be
without him: Exodus 33.15. If thy presence go not, carry us not up hence: They
were then in the wilderness, a land of deserts and pits, of drought and of the
shadow of death; and they were going to Canaan a plentiful Country, the glory
of all lands, (Ezekiel. 20.6.) you see what Moses said upon it, If thy presence go
not -- A waft howling wilderness with God, better than a land flowing with milk
and honey without him: yea, earth with him, is better than Heaven without him.
Alas, if our rock sell us, we are ruined: All is lost if God leave us: -- only
(as you have sometimes heard from another, better hand) let it be remembered,
That as a peoples forsaking God is not wont to be all at once, but by sundry
steps they go away: though sometimes fearful haste is made in it. -- Judge.
2.17. They turned quickly out of the way which their fathers walked in, obeying
the Commandments of the Lord: but they did not so. Look into families and other
societies, is there not too visible and general a declension; are we not turned
(and that quickly too) out of the way wherein our fathers walked? we have a
form of godliness, but how far from that life and power of it, that was found
with them: profession we make, but practical religion and righteousness, how
low does it run with very many. Is not our wine at least mingled with water. --
But I say, as the common course is, for a people gradually to slide and steal
off from God, until (if infinite grace step not in, to bring them to a stand)
they are gone far away, it may be to an irremoveable distance; so likewise his
departure from a people is by several, (and sometimes more secret, undiscearned
degrees; there are many removes made of the glory; and by that means he may be
gone a great way, before they are aware. --

2. Our welfare is wrapped up in his being with us, Romans 8.21. If God be for us,
who can be against us? sometimes there are many against them that God is for,
and yet always there are more with, then against them; for himself alone is
more than all: As there is no wisdom against the Lord, Prove. 21.30. For the
foolishness of God is wiser than men; so there is no power against the Lord,
for the weakness of God is stronger than men: 1 Samuel 14.6 There is no restraint
to the Lord to save by many, or by few, 2 Chronicles. 14.11. let a people be never
so few and feeble, and their enemies never so many and mighty, If God be with
them, all will be well, Zech. 12.3. Thus we must have God with us:

2. To that end, we must be with him; Ezra. 10.12. As thou have said, so must
we do: absolute necessity lies, upon it: we must trust in and obey him, we must
fear and follow him, we must depart from evil and do good we must fall in with
his will, and walk in his ways: And then, Prove. 16.7. when a person, and so a
peoples ways, please the Lord, he makes even their enemies to be at peace with
them He will change their hearts, or chain their hands, or some way work that
they shall do them no real damage. --

2. Follow the suit, that so it may be both ways: 1. That we may be with God,
or that he would powerfully persuade us from our wanderings; heart and life
distances from him; that is a prayer that is very proper in our case, Lamen.
5.21. Turn thou us to thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned: renew our days as
of old. -- However hard the work is, impossible to men and means, if thou will
undertake it, it shall be done. The Prophet mentioned it among his
acknowledgments, Dan. 9.12. All this evil is come upon us, yet made we not our
prayer before the Lord our God, that we might turn from our iniquities. -- They
had their praying times in the captivity; the fast of the fifth and seventh
month, but they did not lay weight enough ( at least the generality of them)
upon that of converting grace to be granted them. May not, yea, must not we say
after them in it: All this evil is come upon us (evils of suffering of so many
kinds and degrees) yet we have not made our prayer that we might turn from our
iniquities; not followed that petition with such sense and earnestness, as is
suited to it: we had need mend them, and make better work on it: Hos. 10.12. it
is high time, Oh let it be taken while it lasts, lest it be too late ere long.
A rain of righteousness, soaking showers of converting sanctifying grace sent
from heaven into our hearts, will do the business for us, and indeed nothing
else: And,

2. That God may be with us; The Gospel Story tells us, Luke 23.28, 9. He made
as though he would have gone further, but they constrained him, saying, abide
with us: pressing importunity is the way to prevail with him; It would be sad
indeed; should it be said of us, as Isai. 64.7. There is none that calls upon
thy name, that stirs up himself to take hold of thee, not absolutely one,
but comparatively few: no wonder it he be gone, if we can find but few hands or
hearts to hold him with us: wrestling Jacob got the blessing, Genesis 33 26, 28.
Surely he will not leave us, without our own consent, if we cannot be willing
to let him go: we were a happy people, could we heartily join to send that
great request to Heaven, which Solomon sometimes made in and for the
Congregation of Israel, 1 Kings 8 57, 58. That whatever we want, he would be
with us, to incline our hearts to himself, to close with him by says, and
cling to him in obedience; that it may be well with us and our children after
us: Oh let every soul put to its hand to lift up such a request, pray heartily
and pray hard, and give not over till you have got this blessing, and then
shall the name of our Jerusalem be the Lord is there.

FINIS.

